Page 6

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST

August 15, 1980

OPEN FORUM

LIBERTARIANISM and FEMINISM

by Sharon Presley

If a woman said to you, “I want to be
free from the domination of men,” but
turned to a tyrannical husband not only
for financial support but for decisions
about her own personal and social life,
you would undoubtedly consider her in-
consistent. Yet that is what many femin-
ists are doing on a political level. They
say they want to be free of the domination
of men but ask for favors and handouts
from a government of men (for example,
government day-care centers). They say
they reject the authoritarian ways of
thinking and acting that have characterized
men throughout history but turn around
and advocate the same old authoritarian
methods that men have always used (com-
pulsory taxation, more government con-
trols, etc.).

But there is a non-authoritarian alterna-
tive — a philosophy that not only has goals
compatible with the psychological goals
of feminism but methods more compatible
with these goals than the alternatives
usually touted by feminists. So it is parti-
cularly appropriate that the first woman
in history to receive an electoral vote —
Tonie Nathan — and the first woman to
run for mayor of New York — Fran
Youngstein — are both advocates of this
philosophy: libertarianism.

Some libertarians advocate a strictly
limited non-coercive government; others
are anarchists. Some advocate voluntary
communism; others are individualists and
advocate a totally free market (as distin-
guished from the corrupt State corporate
capitalism that we have now). But what
unites them all is the belief that all social
interactions should be voluntary, that no
one has a right to rule another, that indivi-
duals have the right to live their lives as
they see fit as long as they don’t initiate
force against others.

Feminists want women to be free
psychologically — free of the domination
of men, free to control their bodies and
psyches as they see fit. Libertarians want
all individuals to be free — politically as
well as psychologically — free to make
their own decisions about their own lives
independent of the coercive political
domination of others.

Libertarians believe that we can't
achieve a non-authoritarian society by

A BOOKSHOP

FOR GAY MEN & GAY WOMEN

authoritarian methods. If our goals are
personal autonomy and individual free-
dom, we can’t achieve these goals by
taking away individuals’ rights to choose
for themselves. If we pass laws that force
our values on others, we are no better than
men who have forced their values on us
through legislation. We merely substitute
our tyranny for the tyranny of men. A
Brownmiller advocating obscenity laws is
no better than a Buckley advocating
abortion laws.

Libertarians refuse to play political
power games. They want to repeal laws,
not pass them. They are not interested in
stopping people from smoking pot, having
abortions, or from spending their money
as they see fit. Libertarians just want to
leave people alone. They believe that there
are voluntary non-authoritarian alterna-
tives to coercive government services and
institutions that can work, even in a com-

plex society. The alternatives that many feminists
advocate — Liberalism or Socialism or

Marxism — are just variations on the same
familiar theme: power over others. Taking
decision-making out of the hands of indi-
viduals and putting it into the hands of a
centralized, bureaucratic State. Liberals
would let you smoke pot (government-
regulated, of course), but think they
know better than you how to spend your
money and will take it from you by force.
Some even want to equalize the oppression
by having a Compulsory National Service
for women as well as men. What they are
advocating is the worst sort of paternal-
ism. Socialists think they’ll make us free
by doing away with the power of business
monopolies by substituting one big mono-
poly instead — the government. Marxists,
as Murray Bookchin points out, have
(party structures that are) every bit as
centralized and authoritarian as the
ideologies they criticize.

All are based on the same authoritarian
model as the sexist patriarchal family.
Decision-making is centralized in an
authority figure. In one case, the father;
in the others, the politicians or central
committee. Involuntary means are used
to induce obedience — either psychologi-
cal or cultural pressures or the threat of
physical force. The rationale for the role-

ALL FROM NAIAD PRESS
Muse of The Violets

At the Sweet Hour of
Hand In Hand

Retreat As It Was

A Woman Appeared to Me

The Black And White Of It

Berrigan

The Latecomer

All True Lovers

Lesbiana

The Lesbian in Literature,
A Bibliography

WE ALSO DO SPECIAL ORDERS:

behaviors is essentially the same — that
it serves “the good of the whole,” whether
it be the family or society.

Setting aside the moral question for a
moment, consider the practical. Some
people think that we must turn to govern-
ment for solutions to our social problems.
Space doesn't permit, but millions of
examples of government inefficiency,
boondoggling, and corruption could be
given to show that government solutions
don’t work. But just consider one
example — public schools. They are the
purveyors of the worst male-dominated
traditional values, which, because schools
are compulsory, are forced on most chil-
dren in this country. Public schools
demonstrate nicely that there are always
strings attached to government money.
Finances and final control is in the hands
of the administrators and politicians, not
parents. Worse yet, public schools give
government frightening power over the
lives of children — witness the compulsory
drug program for hyperactive children. As
for government day-care centers, govern-
ment officials explicitly intend that these
“child development centers” will be places
where young children can be psychologi-
cally conditioned to what the administra-
tors think are healthier attitudes. Other-
wise known as brainwashing.

What the government finances, it con-
trols. There is absolutely no historical
basis for assuming that government is sud-

denly going to be any different with a
new crop of politicians. The system is in-
herently authoritarian and no Liberal
palliatives or Socialist edict can change it
in any basic way.

But libertarians believe that people
have the intelligence and ability to develop
more creative, less authoritarian alterna-
tives if only they will try. Turning to force
is a cop-out. We need to develop these
alternatives both as a substitute for
government institutions and services and
as an example to others that voluntarism
does work. Schools, day-care centers,
clinics, even protection already exist on
both private and voluntary community
bases now. Libertarians believe that many
other services can also be provided volun-
tarily.

Feminists, because of their acute
awareness of the destructiveness of
authoritarianism, should be eager to join
with libertarians in exploring non-authori-
tarian, non-coercive alternatives to govern-
ment. We are learning to break free of Big
Brother politically as well as psychologi-
cally. We don’t need him either way.

Reprinted from the “Majority Report,”
May 2, 1974.

Association of Libertarian Feminists
41 Union Square West, Suite 1428
New York, New York 10003

(212) 274-5059

NDAR_

Sept. 2: Betsy Hearne, children’s editor of
Booklist, speaks on choosing good books,
from picture books to novels for young
adults.

Sept. 9: Reading specialists Lois
Catrambone and Claire Small explain
some of the ways in which parents can en-
courage their children to read.

Sept. 16: Fairy tales — their uses and im-
portance — is Mado Spiegler’s topic.

Sept. 23: Patty Horsch talks about particu-
larly good children’s books and how they
can be a lead-in to storytelling.

Sept. 30: Non-sexist books are the issue.
Iris Yipp discusses non-sexist and alterna-
tive role-model books for young children,
and Judith Goldberger points out the cur-
rent trend away from sexist elements in
children’s books, a trend she sees in large
presses as well as small ones.

Children’s Concert

Ginni Clemmens entertains, engages, and
enchants us all with her children’s songs
Sunday, September 14, 12:00 noon. If you
have children, bring them and give them a
treat; if not, come anyway and treat your-
self. Admission is $2.00 for individuals,
$5.00 per family.

Story Hours
Story hours for children accompanied by
adults are scheduled for the following
times:
Saturday, September 6, 11:00 a.m.
Saturday, September 13, 11:00 a.m.
Sunday, September 21, 12:00 noon
Sunday, September 28, 12:00 noon

ROOMMATE WANTED for two bedroom
townhouse in suburb near Wilmette for
Sept. 1st. Your share $185 + security de-
posit. Near public transportation and El.
441-7847.

CATALYST NEEDS WOMEN with cars to
help with distribution in the middle of each
month. Call Judith Berns at 476-5275.

COUNSELING ASSOCIATES. Feminist
therapy, individuals and couples. Fees
negotiable on basis of income. Insurance
and DVR assignments accepted. North
Suburban location accessible by public
transportation. Lin O'Malley Butler, M.Ed.,
Audrey Borth, Ph.D. 234-2668. (please
note corrected phone no.)