6 FEBRUARY 1980

__OPEN FORUM____

WOMEN ORGANIZE FOR

REPRODUCTIVE CHOICE  
by Pat Rush

The right to control our bodies has  
long been recognized as the key to  
women controlling our lives. In par-  
ticular, the freedom to choose if and  
when to have a baby directly affects a  
woman's other choices about jobs,  
housing, education and relationships.

The legalization of abortion by the  
Supreme Court in 1973 was felt by  
most of us as the crucial victory which  
would now surely lead to a further  
broadening of women’s rights. Instead,  
the past three or four years have  
shown that reproductive rights and  
women’s rights in general are under a  
new, even more vicious attack. Since  
1977 the Hyde Amendment to the La-  
bor-HEW Appropriations Bill has  
blocked the use of Medicaid funds  
for abortions for poor women. This  
precedent has since been extended to  
prevent abortion coverage for most  
public employees, women working  
for or dependents of the military ser-  
vices, and many group private insur-  
ance policies. Although vetoed by  
Governor Thompson, the 1979 Illinois  
State Legislature passed the “Lemke  
Bill” which virtually outlawed all  
abortions (public or private) unless  
medically necessary and went so far  
as to give the father (married or not)  
the right to prevent the abortion—  
even if the “father” was a rapist.  
Meanwhile, the number of steriliza-  
tions of young women continues to  
grow, particularly in Chicago’s Span-  
ish-speaking, Black and Native Amer-  
ican communities.

Women across the country have  
recognized the need to organize to  
preserve and expand our rights.  
Groups like the National Abortion  
Rights Action League (NARAL) and  
the Religious Coalition for Abortion  
Rights (RCAR) have made important  
contributions to the fight, particularly  
in lobbying and other legislative-elect-  
oral work. More recently, many wom-  
en and groups including N.O.W. have  
come to feel that the “single-issue”  
approach needed to be expanded to  
address the other inseparable parts of  
reproductive choice.

In February of 1979 over 20 wom-  
en’s health groups from Boston, New  
York City, Cincinnati, Washington, St.  
Louis, San Francisco and other cities  
joined to form the Reproductive  
Rights National Network (R2N2). The  
unity of R2N2 is based on the “Bill of  
Reproductive Rights”: support for the  
rights and access of all women to  
abortion; opposition to all forms of  
sterilization abuse; access to good,  
safe birth control and sex education;  
support for each person’s right to det-  
ermine her/his own personal and  
sexual relations; recognition of the  
role of economics in reproductive  
freedom therefore demanding equal  
wages for women, decent housing  
and health care, quality childcare, a  
home free from violence and a safe  
workplace. Among other things, in  
1979 R2N2 sponsored a petition cam-  
paign to defeat the Hyde Amendment,  
helped organize a national demon-  
stration to protest the “Right-to-Life”  
convention in Cincinnati, and co-  
sponsored the Abortion Rights Action  
Week (Oct. 22-29, 1979).

In Chicago, Women Organized for  
Reproductive Choice (WORC) was  
formed in Spring of 1979 out of a co-  
alition of women’s health groups. Al-  
though WORC itself is new, many of  
its members have worked in the Chi-  
cago Women’s Health Task Force, the  
Chicago Women’s Health Center, Em-  
ma Goldman Clinic and the Chicago  
Sterilization Abuse Project. WORC is  
a member of the Reproductive Rights  
National Network and has particularly  
focused on the question of repro-  
ductive hazards in the workplace,  
pregnancy disability, teenage sexual-  
ity and pregnancy, and sterilization  
abuse in minority communities. Mem-  
bership includes over 80 people, of  
whom at least 30 are active on work  
committees. The upcoming 1980 elec-  
tions and the increasing threat of the  
Right to Life candidates at every level  
of government has spurred the forma-  
tion of the special committee on WORC  
to consider what role the women’s  
health movement should play in the  
electoral and legislative arena.

WORC urges all women to join the  
fight to defend our rights and expand  
our reproductive freedoms. Member-  
ship is open to any person who agrees  
with our principles of unity. For more  
information contact:

Women Organized for Reproductive  
Choice (WORC)  
1032 West Altgeld  
Chicago, Illinois 60614

ARTIST-A-MONTH RECORD SALE

5.95  
Willie Tyson  
Margie Adams

922 W. ARMITAGE: CHICAGO:

CHILDREN FIRST

RAPE: CHOICES AND  
REALITIES  
by Karen Harlander  
special thanks to Kendra Reinshagen

The purpose of this article is not to  
endorse or oppose these candidates,  
but to raise pertinent questions in a  
broader context.

On January 18 the Women’s Rape  
Services Network, composed of  
representatives of several women’s  
groups in Chicago, met with State’s At-  
torney candidate Edward Burke.  
Alderman Burke is the initiator of  
“Blow the Whistle on Rape” program.  
During the meeting he made the  
following points: 1) Rape is going to be  
a campaign issue. 2) If elected, he  
would form a special sex crimes  
bureau which would operate under  
vertical prosecution, meaning that one  
State’s attorney would be assigned to  
a case as opposed to the present struc-  
ture in which the victim gets a dif-  
ferent attorney at each level of pro-  
secution, i.e. felony review,  
preliminary hearing, grand jury, and  
trial. The advantage is that, under the  
latter system, the attorney gets to  
know the facts of the case and the vic-  
tim and attorney get to know each  
other in order to work together. Nine  
thousand requests for whistles have  
come into his office over the past few  
months, according to Burke. The  
package includes a letter from Burke,  
a whistle and a list of self-defense tips.

Burke’s opponent is State Senator  
Michael Daley. Daley was responsible  
for holding back important rape  
legislation back when he sat on a  
Senate judiciary committee. The  
legislation sat in committee for five  
years before being passed. He also  
voted against the rape shield bill,  
recently declared constitutional by  
the Supreme Court, that protects a  
woman from revealing her past sexual  
activities during testimony.  
Now the whistle program and sex  
crimes bureau are all well and good in  
themselves. At least the issue of rape  
is getting some attention. But is a whis-  
tle going to protect a woman against a  
gun or a knife? Isn’t it possible that the  
sex crimes bureau will become just  
another cog in the wheel of a system  
that is oppressive to women, the poor,  
blacks, Latinos, gays and others? The  
root of the problem lies elsewhere.  
What is ever said about the elements  
that pervade this society which allow  
and encourage rape such as the re-  
warding of male aggression and fe-  
male passivity, the depiction in  
media of women as (sexual) objects; or  
the myths that women enjoy rape and  
that rape is an impulsive act of sexual  
gratification. Rape is a crime of  
violence; an act of hatred and domina-  
tion.

The office of State’s Attorney is a  
responsible and influential position  
embracing the potential for creating  
progressive policy changes within the  
criminal justice system. Men have  
always held this office and this situa-  
tion is not going to be any different  
after the upcoming election. Be  
assured that rape will receive atten-  
tion so long as it remains a newsworthy  
campaign issue. Do these men really  
care about rape and other forms of  
woman abuse? When will the changes  
come? When women have the power.  
Right now we can make choices and  
vote, but eventually the balance of  
power must shift in favor of women.  
These facts have to be faced. Much  
work is needed in this city in the area  
of rape. Services do exist for victims  
but what is urgently needed is a  
24-hour feminist rape crisis line, with  
paid, trained advocates. We must take  
the issue into our own hands. Now is  
the time; women, fight back!

Catalyst hopes that this section will  
be used by diverse women to communicate  
values, attitudes and concerns to other  
women. Any woman, regardless of her  
politics, affectional preference or race, is  
welcome to write to the community  
through Catalyst.

The staff of Catalyst will maintain  
minimal editorial control. We firmly be-  
lieve that all women must have the right  
to speak out. We hope in OPEN FORUM  
women will use this right for the benefit  
of the entire community.

Please call 281-4831 with any ques-  
tions or suggestions.