CATALYST 3

WOMEN IN HERSTORY

by Pinkie Onbekent

I chose to write about the following
six women’s lives in view of the fact
that February marks Black History
Month as well as suffragist Susan B.
Anthony’s birthday.

ANGELINA & SARAH GRIMKE

The Grimke sisters opened the door
to public speaking and enabled wom-
en to reach large numbers of people
directly. This achievement was the
outcome of a rapidly growing stream
of social development. They were the
first women to speak publicly for the
abolition of slavery in the U.S. The
Grimkes were cultured and well edu-
cated and came from South Carolina
with firsthand knowledge of the con-
dition of the slaves. Angelina wrote a
lengthy address urging women to as-
sume their responsibility to work ac-
tively to free the Blacks.

Their lectures elicited violent criti-
cism, as it was considered improper
for women to speak out on political
issues. As a result of this criticism the
Grimkes became acutely aware of
their own oppression as women and
began to address that issue also. A
severe split developed in the anti-
slavery movement, with some aboli-
tionists arguing that it was the
“Negro’s hour and women would have
to wait.” Refusing to accept this, the
Grimkes insisted on arguing for the
equality of all.

Around 1836, the American Anti-
Slavery Society invited the sisters to
speak at small parlor gatherings of
women in New York. The response
was overwhelming. More than 300
women attended the first meeting,
which had to be transferred to the
parlor of a church. The Grimkes’ elo-
quent description of slavery aroused
so much interest that the next meet-
ing was called in a church itself to ac-
commodate all who wished to attend.
A man slipped in, and was promptly
ushered out.

From New York they were invited
to New England, where local anti-
slavery societies sponsored meetings
in innumerable small towns and where
tremendous gatherings were held in
Boston. Meanwhile a storm of contro-
versy broke out. The opposition came
from the churches, which denounced
their behavior as unwomanly and un-
Christian.

Such attacks took a heavy toll on
both women. They constantly found
themselves at odds with the traditions
of decorum in which nineteenth cen-
tury women were bred. But even
though they suffered deeply, they
also gained insight from the opposi-
tion they encountered. They began to
answer their critics, linking the two
issues of slavery and the position of
women. Angelina did so in her speech-
es and Sarah, in a series of articles in
the New England Spectator on “The
Province of Women,” which were is-
sued as a pamphlet entitled The Equal-
ity of the Sexes and the Condition of
Women which was widely circulated.

Sarah became a major theoretician
of the women’s rights movement. She
challenged all the conventional be-
liefs about women’s place and, ad-
dressing men, said: “All I ask of our
brethren is, that they will take their
feet from off our necks...”

FRANCES HARPER

Frances Ellen Watkins was a noted
poet as well as an anti-slavery lec-
turer of national repute. Her novel
about the Reconstructed South, Iola,
Leroy, or Shadows Uplifted (1892),
was the first book published by a
Black American. Born of free parents,
she was self-educated. She worked as
a nursemaid, seamstress, needlework
teacher, and writer, producing ten
volumes of poetry, her novel, and
many articles.

Harper toured as a lecturer, advo-
cating abolition and women’s rights
at the 1866 Women’s Rights Conven-
tion and at the 1869 meeting of the
Equal Rights Association. When the
schism developed between white ab-
olitionists and feminists, she sided
with Frederick Douglass, who felt that
the issue of race had priority over
that of sex. Nonetheless, Harper con-
tinually worked for black women and
founded the National Association of
Colored Women, serving as its vice-
president until she died.

Grace Greenwood, one of the most
popular feminine writers of the day,
wrote of Harper, “She has a noble
head, this bronze muse, a strong face
with a shadowed gleam upon it. She
stands quietly beside her desk and
speaks without notes, with gestures
few and fitting. Her manner is marked
with dignity and composure. She is
never assuming, never theatrical.”

LUCRETIA MOTT

Lucretia Mott was a major figure in
the early organization of the women’s
suffrage movement in the United
States and a leading abolitionist. She
taught school, opened her home as a
station on the underground railroad,
and, in 1833, founded the first inte-
grated anti-slavery society in the Unit-
ed States.

Mott and Elizabeth Stanton, un-
able to gain power in the world anti-
slavery convention held in London
because they were women, organized
a convention and formed a society to
advance women’s rights. In 1848, the
historic Seneca Falls Convention con-
vened. Mott addressed the conven-
tion concerning the social, civil, and
religious restrictions placed on wom-
en. It was resolved there that “it is the
sacred duty of the women of this
country to secure for themselves their
sacred right to the elective
franchise,” a right that would be with-
held for another 72 years.

In an age abounding in stormy per-
sonalities that continually clashed,
even if the aims were common, Lu-
cretia Mott was widely beloved. She
never shrank from the conclusions
which a fearless and rational mind im-
posed on her. Her contribution in
helping to free the gifted and eager
mind of Elizabeth Cady Stanton was
an incalculable one, for the younger
woman was destined to be the lead-
ing intellectual force in the emanci-
pation of American women.

MARY CHURCH TERRELL

Mary Terrell was of mixed descent
and came from Tennessee. Her moth-
er had been a slave. She was a leading
black educator, lecturer, writer, and
activist, and was an influential leader
in the suffrage and civil rights move-
ments. After graduating from Oberlin
College she taught school and be-
came the first Black woman to serve
on the District of Columbia Board of
Education. She worked actively for
women’s rights, speaking at several
national suffrage conventions. She
was the first president of the National
Association of Colored Women. She
was also an accomplished linguist,
who electrified the International
Council of Women, meeting in Berlin
in 1904, by addressing it successively
in English, German, and French.

HARRIET TUBMAN

Harriet Tubman at first glance was
five feet tall with piercing eyes that
looked out from always swathed her head; it was worn to conceal a deep scar in her skull, left by an iron weight an overseer had thrown at her when she was 15 years old. All her life she suffered from spells of unconsciousness as a result of that blow. She was born into slav-
ery in 1822 on the eastern shore of
Maryland. When she married a free
Black man, her own status was un-
changed. Later when her master’s
death in 1849 made it seem likely that
she would be sold, she begged her
husband to go North with her. When
he refused, she chose freedom with-
out him, and made her hazardous
way to Pennsylvania, and freedom,
alone. She became a “conductor” on
the Underground Railroad. During a
period of ten years she made 19 jour-
neys northward. Tubman was compli-
mented by slave-owners who put a
price on her head which mounted
steadily with the years until it reached
the high figure for the day of $40,000.
Yet she was never caught or harmed,
and she never lost a “passenger.”
Some saw a mystical source for her
infallibility, linked with the spells of
unconsciousness which occasionally
overtook her even when traveling
with a group of runaways. But aboli-
tionists who knew and worked with
her recognized her gifts of sagacity
and courage, which in a person of an-
other race and sex, would have
brought her fame and public recogni-
tion. Instead, although she rendered
service as a military scout and nurse
to the Union army during the Civil
War, Harriet Tubman spent most of
her later years in straitened circum-
stances, often in dire need, struggling
for a pension which a grudging Con-
gress finally awarded her, in the
amount of $20 a month, when she was
80 years old.

Like Sojourner Truth, Tubman
spread her beliefs in freedom and lib-
erty by speaking, organizing, and in-
spiring others. In her later years she
attended women’s suffrage conven-
tions and helped organize the Na-
tional Federation of Afro-American
Women (1895).

Neglect such as that of Harriet Tub-
man’s struggle for a pension was the
usual lot of the Black abolitionist,
particularly the women, and while
Tubman and her contemporary, So-
journer Truth, are dignified with oc-
casional mention in history books,
nothing whatever appears of the
many other Black women whose
names were known far beyond the
confines of the abolition movement.

FRANCES WRIGHT

Born in Scotland in 1795, well-
schooled and widely traveled, Wright
edited a newspaper in the Utopian
colony of Harmony in the Indi-
ana frontier, and later her own paper, The Free Enquirer, in New
York. 

In 1828, she spoke publicly in sup-
port of women’s rights and education,
an event signaling the beginning of
women’s rights agitation in the United
States.

She became interested in the slav-
ery issue and being unsuccessful at in-
tegrating Blacks into American so-
ciety, she accompanied freed slaves
to Haiti and gave them money for a
new life there.

She achieved further notoriety by
pioneering as a woman lecturer and by
her radical philosophy, of which her
advocacy of equal education for
women was an integral part.

Her influence was enduring and no
woman in the first half of the nine-
teenth century who challenged tradi-
tion escaped the effect of Frances
Wright’s leavening thought; nor was
its impact limited to women alone.
The lectures which she delivered in
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore,
Boston, Cincinnati, Louisville, St.
Louis, and elsewhere were largely be-
fore audiences of workingmen, who
also read accounts of her addresses in
the active labor press of the day; they
helped feed the rising popular de-
mand for free education.