IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

taken up the abortion issue: Christie  
Hefner held a pro-choice fundraiser at the  
Playboy mansion supported by the Illinois  
Pro-Choice Alliance. And it is a mere mat-  
ter of time before conservatives descend  
upon the anti-porn campaign, deflecting  
attention from violence against women to  
censorship of nudity, using the issue to  
concretize their own goals. In such a de-  
velopment masculinism will prevail as  
liberals and conservatives play feminist is-  
sues against each other, warping, coopting  
and burying feminist vision: The pornog-  
raphers may be pro-choice (though I  
doubt even that), but they are not pro-  
autonomy; the marriage of violence and  
heterosex or homosex requires a victim.  
Conservatives also require a victim, a  
phantasy to protect; thus when addressing  
rape they silence the radical feminist take-  
back-the-night focus of reclaiming our  
space not only from predators but also  
from protectors. (Masculinism has always  
required victims, in one form or another,  
without which it makes no sense.)  
As the economic recession gains mo-  
mentum, those in power will offer the  
usual choice between “survival” and jus-  
tice. Middle class feminists will thus be  
tempted to dull our vision in order to jus-  
tify focusing on individualized job security.  
And as male terrorism increases, those in  
power will justify increasing masculinism:  
control in the name of strength, nuclear  
madness in the name of energy, sanc-  
tioned murder in the name of peace, un-  
employment in the name of prosperity,  
oppression in the name of civilization.  
Further, it is possible that this world of  
men who create and control nuclear power  
will not last another decade. Life has never  
been one of their priorities; currently they  
instead produce cancer victims who feed  
the medical conglomerate and who are  
urged to cope with “their” problem.  
It is vital that feminists use our varied  
privileges to bring their reversals into focus  
while sustaining our visions. It may seem  
easier to turn our backs and seek numb-  
ness through therapeutic assimilation with  
its studious focus on the self devoid of  
economic, historic and political context.  
But to survive we must keep our anger  

clear and visible, focus it outward, be out-  
rageous. Most importantly, we must keep  
the choice of resistance clearly before us  
(the vision will become more difficult than  
the act), re-cognizing that a war is on, that  
it has been and continues to be fought in  
the names of love, security and protection,  
and that it is shifting gears. I would like  
to see another wave of CR/study groups,  
not for those new to feminism particularly,  
but for feminists to affirm our percep-  
tions and keep our visioning alive. This  
does not mean ignoring our differences. It  
is imperative that middle class feminists  
struggle with class awareness while white  
feminists face racism and educate our-  
selves to the sexism debate emerging in  
the Black community. But the goals of  
the 80's must include continuing to realize  
connections among our Selves as women.  
If we do nothing more than keep our glim-  
merings alive for those who come after,  
we will have succeeded. The goal of our  
lifetimes, not merely the 80's, is the end  
of the silence and the survival of a female/  
lesbian, life-celebrating, gynocentric  
vision.  

Barbara Emrys, writer and teacher (author  
of Wild Women Don't Get the Blues) reads  
all the science fiction she can get her  
hands on.  

Science fiction writers never pretend  
to predict the future, but the futures they  
are able to envision indicate the expecta-  
tions and assumptions that readers absorb  
from or reflect into science fiction writing.  

In terms of general sexual politics, for  
instance, you can take your pick: a) no-  
thing changes; b) things get much worse;  
c) new circumstances override sexism. The  
circumstances may be harsh survival con-  
ditions (as in The Outcasts of Heaven Belt  
and Dreamsnake) or easy change of sex  
making gender irrelevant (The Ophiuchi  
Hotline, The Left Hand of Darkness) or  
personal rehabilitation (The Kin of Ata).  
Both men and women write a) and c), but  
b) seems to be written only by women  
(Walk to the End of the World, The  
Female Man).  

Many writers show a split attitude of  
acceptance/rejection toward lesbians and  
homosexuals. In most of these books the  
main characters are heterosexual. Several  
women have written convincingly of les-  
bian-only societies (The Female Man,  
Motherlines).  

Although rape and mate aggression are  
most completely eradicated by plagues  
that wipe out all men (in When It Changed  
and Houston, Houston, Do You Read?),  
many writers see effective self-defense  
training for women becoming common.  
(The Shattered Chain). A second frequent  
defense is psychic power, which is general-  
ly held out as a hope for humankind (The  
Wanderground).  

It’s almost a commonplace in science  
fiction that humans are going to blow up  
the earth, but a notable exception is  
Woman on the Edge of Time, which under-  
lines how our actions can choose a positive  
future. So if your choices are none of the  
above, try producing your own version in  
words and action. You can write the  
future as well as read it.  

Elementary School Workshops on ASSAULT  

By Pam Charney and Yvone Lutter  

There are two types of assault, sexual  
and non-sexual. Being young doesn’t pro-  
tect women against sexual abuse. In fact,  
one in four American women have experi-  
enced sexual abuse before the age of eigh-  
teen. A new approach to this problem has  
been developed by Women Against Rape  
(WAR) in Columbus, Ohio. Last year a  
local school principal contacted the group  
after the rape of a second grade student.  
The principal requested WAR send a  
speaker to talk with students about sexual  
assault and its prevention. WAR formed a  
task force including members experienced  
in education, rape prevention and social  
work. By April, 1978, after review of re-  
search, resources, and interviews with  
social agencies and mental health person-  
nel the group established the Child Assault  
Prevention Program (CAPP). The program  
has developed into three major compo-  
nents: a teacher/staff inservice, classroom  
workshops from kindergarten through  
eighth grade, and evaluation and follow-up  
services.  

Children grow up facing verbal and  
physical harassment in many areas of  
their lives. A survey in New York City re-  
vealed that in 75% of reported child abuse  
cases the attacker was a member of the  
child’s household and 11% were related  
to the child by blood or marriage, although  
not living with the child at the time. For  
these children there is often a continual  
threat of violence in the home, as well as  
at school and in the streets.  

Establishing one’s own identity sep-  
arate from the surrounding violence re-  
quires withdrawal for many children. Of-  
ten the victim feels that their actions have  
caused their abuse — an attitude the at-  
tacker often fosters. Support from adults  
external to the situation can provide im-  
portant validation to the child’s sense of  
self.  

The Child Assault Prevention Program  
focuses upon detection and caring for  
childhood assault victims. The project is  
in any given school approximately two  
weeks leading workshops for teachers and  
then later for children.  

The teacher workshops allow mem-  
bers of CAPP to explain their methods,  
provide referral information and discuss  
abuse and its ramifications with staff.  
Yvone Lutter, a member of the project,  
states that in Columbus, “Teachers are re-  
quired to report any incidents either to  
the police or to the (Franklin County)  
Children’s Services.” Many teachers do  
not do so, Ms. Lutter states, “because they  
don’t want to be out on a limb. We want  
to build up a support network for teach-  
ers. The workshops provide staff an op-  
portunity to talk about their experiences  
reporting child abuse, fears they may have  
for the safety of the children involved as  
well as their expectations of their school  
administrations and the social service  
community.”  

The individual classroom workshops  
are voluntary, requiring parental consent  
for participation. The students can leave  
the classroom at any point if they are un-  
comfortable. Arrangements are made in  
advance for a supervised alternative, for  
example the library. So far only two chil-  
dren have chosen this option — one was  
a boy whose sister had been raped.  

Following an initial discussion about  
“rights” the students watch volunteers role-  
play various forms of assault. For exam-  
ple, peer to peer assault, adult stranger to  
child assault, and intrafamily assault. After  
each role play there is a discussion and  
following each discussion the role play is  
redone using the strategies and suggestions  
of the class. In some cases, children volun-  
teer to participate in the second role play.  
Yvone Lutter states, “In many cases we  
have to do these role plays over and over  
again because everyone wants to partici-  
pate.”  

In the peer to peer assault, a play-  
ground bully is trying to take another  
student’s lunch money. “After the first  
one,” Yvone continues, “we talk about  
‘rights’, did the older child have the right  
to try to take the money? We talk about  
how the victim felt, the importance of  
telling someone about the incident.”  

In the adult stranger to child assault,  
an adult approaches a paper boy and tries  
to trick him into his car. The child is con-  
fused and goes with the man. Afterwards  
the volunteers and students do yelling ex-  
ercises and discuss basic self-defense. In  
almost every class a child will suggest get-  
ting the license plate of the car.  

These two role plays are in a way only  
a build up for the third called Uncle Harry.  
In Uncle Harry a member of the family  
enters a room where a child is watching  
T.V., turns the set off, offers a bribe to  
give Uncle Harry a kiss and then threatens  
the child not to tell. Yvone Lutter reports,  
“Dead silence usually develops in the room  
during this one. There is no question in the  
children’s minds that what is happening is  
wrong. Kids understand the child's right  
not to be touched in a way she doesn’t  
like. They’re aware of the manipulation.”  

There is a fourth role play where the  
child in the ‘Uncle Harry’ scene goes to a  
teacher or principal with her fears, Yvone  
Lutter stresses, “Children are told of the  
need to assess risks, of their right not to  
be touched in ways they do not like, and  
of the importance of telling someone they  
trust. The importance of the fourth role  
play is for the children to see how their  
real life classroom teacher would respond  
in this situation. It shows the child that  
they can go to their teacher, that there is  
a link.”  

Although CAPP is a prevention pro-  
gram it is inevitable that it will encounter  
real crisis situations. Frequently following  
a classroom workshop children will ap-  
proach workshop leaders with questions  
about their own experiences or fears. In a  
few cases the child is verbalizing their ex-  
periences for the first time. In these situa-  
tions CAPP’s staff would meet with the  
child and her teacher. First and most im-  
portant is the immediate safety of the  
child.  

Funding for the program came from  
grants provided by the MS. Foundation in  
New York and the Columbus Foundation.  
The group has been to four schools and  
one church and will visit four other  
schools by the end of February. They are  
currently attempting to obtain funding  
that will enable the program to continue.  

This concept of primary prevention  
and education with elementary school  
children on the issue of assault is a rela-  
tively new phenomenon. There are two  
comparable programs in the country. One  
is in Los Angeles and the other is in  
Minneapolis. For information write:  
Yvone Lutter, Child Assault Prevention  
Program, c/o Women Against Rape, P.O.  
Box 4784, Columbus, Ohio 43202.  

This article was written with assist-  
ance from Yvone Lutter and an article by  
Jenice Jordan that appeared in the  
Columbus Dispatch, June 24, 1979.