vote  
after  

4 pm  

Women Have Clout  

On the 16th anniversary of their first vote  
in a national election, U.S. women are  
being urged to show dramatically the po-  
wer and potential of their ballot. Women  
are being called upon to vote after 4 pm  
on election day, November 4, 1980. This  
will be a visible demonstration to the pu-  
blic and politicians of the voting power  
women hold in this country. Women of  
every political and religious persuasion,  
on either side of social and economic  
issues can unite and help mount this cam-  
paign to bring attention to women’s  
issues. Join Now! Make your vote have  
impact. Unite and Vote after 4:00 pm.  

For more information call or write:  
B’nai B’rith Women Land of Lakes Re-  
gion, 30 N. Michigan, Suite 819, Chicago.  
(312) 332-7113.  

= IWPC  
Illinois Women’s Political Caucus  

The Illinois Women’s Political Caucus  
has announced its endorsements of candi-  
dates for the Illinois General Assembly  
for the November, 1980 General Election.  
These candidates have completed a ques-  
tionnaire and interview with the Caucus.  
They are endorsed on their positions on  
issues affecting women.  

Endorsed candidates include: Susan  
Catania (R-22nd), Woods Bowman (D-  
11th), William Marovitz (D-12th), Daniel  
O'Brien (D-13th), Elroy Sanquist (R-  
13th), Howard Carroll (D-15th), Alan  
Greiman (D-15th), Larry Bullock (D-  
22nd), Carol Moseley Braun (D-24th),  
Barbara Flynn Currie (D-24th), Richard  
Mugalian (D-2nd), Eugenia Chapman (D-  
3rd), Anthony Basile (D-3rd), Richard  
Sass (D-3rd), Anne Willer (D-6th), Dan  
Walker, Jr. (D-6th), Terry Steczo (D-5th),  
Daniel Pierce (D-32nd), John Hallock, Jr.  
(R-34th), Ben Polk (R-36th), Ruth  
Kennedy (D-39th), J. Glenn Schneider (D-  
41st), Helen Sattenthwaite (D-52nd), Jim  
McPike (D-56th), Kenneth Halt (D-57th),  
Helen Harshberger (R-42nd), Don Wooten  
(D-36th), Sheila Hooper (D-35th), Harold  
Keitz (D-1st), Miriam Batanoff (D-30th),  
Bernard Hughes (D-10th), Monica Stewart  
(D-29th), Beverly Fawell (R-41st),  
Douglas Kane (D-50th), Wyyetter Young  
(D-57th), Harold Byers (D-55th), Virginia  
Frederick (R-31st), Wayne Miller (R-9th),  
Diana Nelson (R-6th), Ellis Levin (D-  
12th), Arthur Turner (D-21st), Lisa  
Learner (D-36th).  

Qualified on ERA position only:  
Michael Getty (D-10th), John Burian (D-  
9th), Gene Hoffman (R-40th), Celeste  
Stieh (R-57th), Bruce Richmond (D-  
68th), William Harris (D-59th), John  
Sharp (D-49th), Jim Reilly (R-49th),  
Ralph Dunn (R-58th), Samuel McGrew  
(D-47th), Jill Zwick (R-33rd), Dollie  
Hollstrom (R-1st), Josephine Oblinger  
(R-50th), Sam Wolfe (D-56th), Joe Reich  
(D-32nd), Michael Pollack (D), Larry  
Gomberg (D-4th), Betty Lou Reed (R-  
32nd), Steve Knapp (D-54th), John F.  
Dunn (D-51st), Lawrence Murphy (D-  
39th), George Didier (D-34th).  

For further information, contact Joan  
Mondlock at (312) 748-5248.  

NOVEMBER 1, 1980  

THE LEAGUE OF  
WOMEN VOTERS  

by Daphne Daume  

Editor of the Chicago Voter, the monthly  
newsletter of the League of Women Voters  
of Chicago, and editor of the Encyclo-  
paedia Britannica Book of the Year.  

I still remember vividly my first contact  
with the League of Women Voters, on a  
spring afternoon when I was in North-  
western’s school of journalism. Those were  
the war years, and all of us, male and  
female alike, knew that we were destined  
eventually to become foreign correspon-  
dents. But the school — sensibly, perhaps,  
given the state of the job market in those  
unenlightened days — insisted that all wo-  
men take a course known as Editing the  
Woman's Page.  

One of the sessions was given over to  
familiarizing us with the major women’s  
organizations, in the persons of members  
of the Evanston chapters. They came in a  
flutter of rayon prints. As the eyes of the  
future foreign correspondents glazed over,  
the ladies spoke of play reading and flower  
arranging. They described self-improve-  
ment and good works and gardening. One  
told how her maid lorded it over the  
neighbors’ maids because her mistress was  
a clubwoman. Finally, last on the list,  
came the representative of the League of  
Women Voters.  

She was a sturdy woman, in a suit and  
sensible shoes. She strode purposefully  
across the platform, drew a square on the  
blackboard, turned to us with the air of a  
missionary confronting the benighted,  
and demanded: “Do any of you know  
how to mark a ballot?”  

It was probably then that, in the back  
of my mind, I determined that the League  
was my kind of organization. And that  
first impression was not deceiving. From  
its beginning, the League has been con-  
cerned not with status or culture or even  
self-improvement but with the nuts and  
bolts of government and how to bring citi-  
zens into the political process.  

The League grew directly out of the  
women’s suffrage movement. It was born  
in Chicago in February 1920, at the last  
convention of the National American  
Woman Suffrage Association, which for  
some 70 years had led the battle to secure  
the vote for women. Sensing victory — al-  
though the 19th Amendment was not  
finally ratified until August — the NAWSA  
metamorphosed itself into the National  
League of Women Voters. (The “National”  
was dropped from the title several years  
later.) Its purpose, according to the first  
president, Maud Wood Park, was to pro-  
vide “training for citizenship.” It also pro-  
vided an outlet for those activist women  
who, through years of struggling for the  
vote, had become skilled in political action  
and had begun to recognize their own  
power.  

Even in those early days, the three  
areas of League work were clearly visible:  
voter education; study of governmental  
issues; and action to secure needed legisla-  
tion. Voter education — voters service in  
League jargon — was the first priority. Not  
all women had been eager for voting  
rights, and many still considered politics  
a man’s province. The League's first order  
of business was to encourage women to  
exercise their political rights and to  
instruct them in the mechanics of voting.  
That was what my visiting Leaguer was  
doing many years later, and Leaguers are  
still doing it today, although the concept  
was soon expanded to include the educa-  
tion of all citizens. The League motto is  
still “To promote political responsibility  
through informed and active participation  
of citizens in government.”  

Voters service is the most visible of  
League activities and the one most people  
identify with. Today it encompasses a host  
of pursuits, from demonstrating voting  
machines in schools to the publication of  
literature on politics and government —  
some of it in languages other than English  
— to the presidential debates. Television  
has added a new dimension, but candi-  
dates meetings, forums in which candidates  
for office confront the public and each  
other, have been organized by the League  
at all levels of government for decades.  
The technical sponsor of the presiden-  
tial debates is the League of Women  
Voters Educational Fund, a separate foun-  
dation set up in 1957 to conduct educa-  
tional activities. The Education Fund and  
its Illinois counterpart, the Citizens Infor-  
mation Service, are tax deductible. The  
League itself is not, because it lobbies for  
legislation and critically monitors the per-  
formance of governmental agencies. Which  
brings us to the other two areas of League  
work: study and action. The two must be  
considered together because study, in the  
League, is never carried on for its own  
sake. “Study without action is abortive,”  
said one early League president, and  
“action,” in League terms, means action  
to influence government. One of the  
criteria for choosing a subject of study is  
whether it represents a problem that can  
be affected by government, and the aim  
of study is to determine what governmen-  
tal actions should be supported or op-  
posed. The organization of the League re-  
flects this concern. Local, state, national,  
and, in some cases, county Leagues work  
on subjects peculiar to their own govern-  
mental levels. It should be noted, however,  
that technically the League is not a federa-  
tion but an “association of members.” By  
joining a local League, an individual be-  
comes a member of the League at all levels.  

What sort of issues does the League  
work for? The first League program listed  
69 proposals for legislation. Many of them  
were identifiably “women’s issues” —  
wages on the basis of occupation and not  
of sex; uniform marriage and divorce laws;  
independent citizenship for married  
women; jury service for women. But even  
at that early date, many — wage-hour  
legislation, for example; pure-food laws  
and a merit system for government hiring  
— were not. The League has continued to  
champion women’s rights, and ardently  
supports ERA today, but it has tended to  
approach the subject more from the stand-  
point of human rights in general than as a  
specific women’s advocacy group. Perhaps  
it would be accurate to say that, rather  
than turning away from women’s issues,  
the League soon discovered that all issues  
are women’s issues.  

Certain strains are discernible in League  
programs through the years. It has sup-  
ported measures that will help bring citi-  
zens into the governmental process and  
protect the integrity of the vote: perma-  
nent registration, reapportionment on the  
basis of one person-one vote, provision  
for absentee balloting. One of the earliest  
League stands, still on the agenda today, is  
voting rights for the District of Columbia.  
Related to this is an interest in structural  
governmental reform. The Illinois League,  
for example, was instrumental in bringing  
about revision of the antiquated state  
constitution of 1870. An interest in citi-  
zenship rights led naturally to an interest  
in human rights and civil liberties. The  
League was one of the early voices to pro-  
test the excesses of the McCarthy era in  
the ‘50s. On the international level, the  
League favored U.S. entry into the League  
of Nations in the ‘20s and has continued  
to support international cooperation,  
both political and economic.  

Two other things need to be said about  
the League. It is nonpartisan and it is  
democratic. Nonpartisanship is one of the  
League’s more visible attributes and it is  
jealously guarded. The League never en-  
dorses parties or candidates. Even a League  
member running for office must do so  
without the organization’s sponsorship. It  
is this reputation for being politically  
above reproach that has helped to give the  
League an influence beyond its actual  
numbers. At the same time, however,  
individual members always have been en-  
couraged to take an active part in politics,  
and at times this has led to conflicts of  
interest. The rule of thumb is that mem-  
bers may engage in partisan work or even  
oppose League positions, but they must  
do so as individuals and not in the name  
of the League. Officers or others who are  
publicly identified with the League should  
refrain from partisan activity as long as  
they retain their League positions.  

Democracy has to do with the way  
League study and action are carried out,  
and this has led to some misunderstanding.  
Subjects for study are proposed by  
individual members and adopted in the  
form of a program, by conventions at the  
state and national levels and, at the local  
level, by each local League’s annual meet-  
ing. Once adopted, a subject goes back to  
the members for study, and the aim of  
the study — in another piece of League  
jargon — is to reach consensus. Reaching  
consensus does not mean unanimity, but  
neither is consensus achieved by a strict  
majority rule. Consensus means that most  
of the members have reached a certain area  
of agreement. Only then can action be  
taken.  

This has advantages and disadvantages.  
It means that some issues may be resolved  
before they are even proposed as subjects  
for study. To the person who asks the  
League’s position on the latest question  
of the day, the Leaguer must often answer  
that “we haven’t studied it yet.” The plus —  
and it is a big plus — is that when the  
League does act, an informed membership  
is behind it.  

And what of the League today? Like  
many other organizations, it has been  
undergoing something of an identity crisis.  
Part of this has to do with the restriction  
of membership to the female sex. As the  
Movement for sexual equality snowballed  
in the ‘70s, members asked, quite logical-  
ly, how can we demand entrance into  
men’s organizations and still exclude  
them from our own? At the same time,  
historically the League has served as an  
arena where women could hone their  
leadership skills and as a training ground  
for the wider world of politics. Women  
were not yet so equal that such an organi-  
zation was no longer needed. The problem  
was solved by opening the membership to  
men but retaining the name. Currently,  
about three percent of the national mem-  
bership is male. No census has been taken,  
but observation indicates that most are  
politicians who find it expedient to join  
and members’ husbands.  

A more fundamental crisis arises from  
the rapid changes in women’s roles. Al-  
though it is theoretically an inclusive or-  
ganization open to all women voters (and  
now to all voters), in practice the back-  
bone of the League — as of many other  
women’s groups — has been relatively  
affluent women whose children had  
grown and who were seeking a new outlet.  
Now, many of these women are returning  
to the job market. Others, impatient with  
the League’s methodical ways and its ten-  
dency to work patiently and persistently  
behind the scenes, have thrown their ener-  
gies behind trendier causes. Far from being  
a single-issue group, the League has, in  
fact, avoided issues that have viable advo-  
cacy groups of their own. Furthermore,  
the whole concept of volunteerism has  
been called into question. And if there is  
not womanpower — or if you wish,  
personpower — to study, lobby, monitor,  
and educate, there is no League.  

But volunteerism is one thing if it  
means doing something that would other-  
wise be done by paid staff, and something  
quite different if it means doing what  
otherwise would not be done at all. The  
League is unique in its broad spectrum of  
interests and in its goal of educating itself and  
others for greater participation in the  
democratic process. Adjustments will no  
doubt be made, but the League believes it  
has carved out its unique place and that  
that place will continue to be filled.