BOOK REVIEW: OUR MOTHERS’  
DAUGHTERS  
By Judith Berns  

Our Mothers’ Daughters is successful  
in bringing to light how society in general  
and the patriarchy and nuclear family in  
particular distort and drown the souls of  
women. Yet this same book, though effec-  
tive in showing us how we suffer and why  
we suffer, has solutions which are too often  
only poetic-like language plugged into  
political nightmares. The book offers no  
solutions at all. It offers a choice but no-  
thing to choose from.  

What Judith Arcana does do and does  
well in Our Mothers’ Daughters is to un-  
cover the myth of motherhood by sharing  
with us the experiences of many daughters  
who often become mothers themselves.  
Arcana is careful to show varying experi-  
ences, but most are disturbing enough to  
cause any woman to thoroughly question  
whether or not her future will include  
marriage and children. “If women were  
not programmed to sacrifice ourselves to  
maternity, it, and the species, would  
cease.” Perhaps the most crucial thing  
that the book does is it finally gives  
women the need to make a choice. Mar-  
riage and motherhood are not what we  

have been led to believe, and the book is  
successful in providing some of the reality  
in most women’s lives. It is a disturbing  
book, especially for women who are used  
to lies and fairy tales.  

"We seek the revolution in our  
daughters, forgetting that many of our  
mothers sought their escape in us, and  
that we hated them for it, forgetting that  
our daughters need models, and that what  
we must do is make the revolution in our-  
selves.” What does Arcana mean by this  
revolution? She briefly mentioned some  
of the consequences of the revolt: women  
who are drugged, alcoholic, and/or in  
mental institutions.  

THE CATALYST INTERVIEWS  
JUDITH ARCANA WHOSE BOOK,  
OUR MOTHERS’ DAUGHTERS,  
WAS RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY  
SHAMELESS HUSSY PRESS  

Interview By Susan Schleef  

C. How has your own growth process  
been affected by writing the book?  

A. It's made a tremendous difference in  
my life, of course, in every way. When I  
began teaching again, I taught women’s  
studies because that was where my life was.  
I didn't make much money but was able  
to make a reputation. I began to become  
“this woman" as opposed to “that  
woman,” the woman I had been when I  
was married. I made my life in a way of  
actually constructing something with my  
hands, actually weaving something. In  
WILLING THE DOG - I was all very single-  
minded; I said I was writing a book and  
that was all. But about six months into the  
process, I came to realize that I was also  
making my life in a new way. That was  
definitely very conscious for me after  
those early months.  

I am also in a women’s group which  
has met every week for three years. That  
group has strengthened me in being able  
to know myself as a woman in a society  
where being a woman is no good. So all  
of that has gone on at the same time, but  
the book was my main focus.  

C. Can you give some examples of how  
the writing changed you?  

A. The first real crisis came about five  
or six months after I started the book. I  
thought “Am I really a writer? No, I’m  
not a writer; I’m just a person who's wri-  
ting a book.” For a long time I thought  
that was because I had no reputation and  
had not been published. But soon I began  
to understand that part of my doubt was  
also because I was a woman and a writer  
is supposed to be a man.  

That was a year and a half after I'd  
had myself sterilized, and one of the things  
I was really conscious of with the steriliza-  
tion was that I would never again make,  
create, or form something in the way that  
women are supposed to. Anything I would  
make, that would come out of me, would  
have to be a product of my spirit and my  
mind and my body as this unified, full-  
woman person. That was a very heavy  
symbol for me about what it meant to be  
a creator and to be a woman, and that  
moved in my head for a long time in the  
beginning of writing the book.  

A long time ago, when I was about  
thirteen, I had used to think that maybe  
someday I would be a writer, but I had  
never done anything about it. As I began  
researching the subject of mothers and  
daughters, I said, “This will make me a  
writer, as I should have been long ago but  
never was because I got married, supported  
my husband through law school, had a  
child, and so on.” Now I feel really compe-  
tent. I feel that I am in charge of my life  
and that I have created myself the way I  
want to be.  

C. Tell me a little about how you got  
started with the book.  

A. I was teaching women’s studies at  
Columbia College at the time. Lots of  
times we would end up talking about our  
mothers. Also, I was, and had been for  
years, very actively engaged in the struggle  
with my own mother. When I thought  
about actually writing something on the  
subject, I didn’t say anything to anybody  
until I felt certain I was going to do it.  
Then I started telling everybody I knew  
that I was writing a book about mothers  
and daughters. I thought if I told every-  
body, then I couldn't back out. I even told  
my students, which was the hardest of all,  
because I thought that was really making  
it public. People took me seriously and  
that was really useful.  

I was invited to speak on college cam-  
puses, which made a big difference in my  
sense of myself as an expert in my field.  

People would call me up from magazines  
and I would think, “It's because you've  
been studying this for three years, you  
dummy.” When other people didn’t take  
me seriously, I was greatly offended, but  
it took me a while to take myself seriously,  
to see that this was, at least for now, my  
work with a capital “W.”  

C. Did you see right from the beginning  
that you would publish your work?  

A. Yes, there was never any question. I  
didn't know if people would accept it, but  
that was my goal. Once when an acquain-  
tance of mine was asking about my pro-  
gress with the book, he said, “Do you  
know what you want?” I said, “Yes. I  
want to write this book and complete it  
and be proud of it. I want it to be pub-  
lished. I want other people to read it. I  
want people whose opinions I care about  
to say that it is of value. And I want to be  
able to live by my work.” He said, “Oh, is  
that all?” But, of course, that is what I  
want, and why shouldn't I? So far, al-  
though I haven't made any profit, I feel  
that I have made a great deal of progress  
towards those goals. I now have a contract  
for a second book, and I think I will be  
able to make a living for a while. I don’t  
flatter myself that I will always have a  
contract, but right now I do. The book  
was always referred to by my mother as  
“your first book, honey.” I really appre-  
ciated that she knew immediately that  
this was not the end. She was the first per-  
son who ever said that and I loved it.  

C. Have you gotten favorable criticism  
of the book from those people, as you  
said, whose opinions you value?  

A. So far, yes. It was important to me  
that people would read my book and say  
that I write well, not just that I want to  
write. It’s not like I was born with a pen  
in my hand, but I work at it and I think  
I'm good at it. It’s important to me that  
other people say that to me. I don’t think  
I need it constantly or in heavy doses,  
but I do need it. Also, it’s real important  
to me who the people are: women whose  
politics approximate mine, people whose  
words in a blurb on the back of a book  
jacket are not just “Well, who's this?”  
but somebody who has worked in a field  
that's similar to mine and can say, “I think  
you are working in the right direction.”  
Then there's also another sort who may  
or may not be feminists, or even women,  
people who judge art, because I have an  
attitude about standards.  

In Holly Near’s song, Riverboat, and  
in the explanation on the back of the al-  
bum, she fantasizes about being famous  
in the establishment world. Sometimes I  
say to myself, “What if I were reviewed in  
the New York Times?” and “What if they  
thought I was good?” The first thing you  
have to remember is that if they think  
you're good, something's terribly wrong.  
I think about the books that get accepted;  
for instance, Nancy Friday's book with all  
that distribution and all that money. The  
reason is, of course, that what she says is  
just woman-oriented enough to make it  
look like the book is worthwhile, when it is  
just horrible and really anti-woman.  

C. What makes your book different from  
Friday's and from Adrienne Rich's book,  
Of Woman Born?  

A. Well, I’ll give you two different an-  
swers. Friday's book is purportedly dealing  
with the same subject. Her book is very  
strongly based in interviews with gyne-  
cologists and psychiatrists and other pro-  
fessionals. Lots of them are women; after  
all, she is no fool. She knows that if she  
writes a book filled with men’s words she's  
going to get nowhere. But many of these  
women are quite male-oriented and not  
only subscribe to some basic Freudian  
tenets, but in their own lives, based on  
what she quotes them as saying, clearly  
are not interested in making serious  
changes. Also, her main thrust was sexual,  
not women or even motherhood or the  
mother-daughter relationship without that  
sexual focus. That's very Freudian, of  
course. I'd say another thing about  
Friday’s book is that she does not couch  
the mother-daughter relationship in any  
social or political context. It’s as if it's just  
this thing that happens and isn't it strange.  
History, the form of the nuclear family,  
and the position of women over the cen-  
turies do not get called in by Nancy Friday  
as having any influence on these women  
who raised us, on us, or on women we may  
be raising. I resent that terribly.  

Adrienne Rich’s book is really about  
a different subject. I regard her book as  
the basic text on urban American mother-  
hood in this time. Her book was very use-  
ful to me in many ways. It's probably the  
book that I footnoted most often in my  
own book.  

I see certain books coming together:  
Nancy Chodorow’s book, Reproduction  
of Mothering, which is about how women  
learn to mother, Rich's book about what  
motherhood is and the distinction about  
motherhood as institution and experience,  
Phyllis Chesler’s old book, Women and  
Madness, and possibly her new book,  
Tangled Vines, by Lin Lifshin which is a  
collection of poems about the mother-  
daughter relationship, and Nor Hall's  
books, Mothers and Daughters, about  

But where were the other women?  
The women who recently marched in the  
Loop to take back the night, and the  
thousands who marched in Washington D.  
C. for Lesbian and Gay rights? Where  
were the strong women who saw alterna-  
tives and made their choices?  

There is a chapter of revolution that  
follows the last chapter of Our Mothers’  
Daughters. It will take another woman to  
write it.  

Footnotes  

1 Our Mothers’  
Arcana, Page 93.  

2 Page 178.  

Daughters. Judith  

Demeter and Persephone and the Elusin-  
ian mysteries and what the mother-  
daughter relationship is mythically. All of  
these books are the sort of stuff women  
are putting out now about what it means  
to be a mother, what it means to be a  
daughter, have a child, and so on, from  
our point of view. These women see the  
fact of their womanhood as being central  
to their lives.  

C. Would you say then that the unique  
feature all these books share is that instead  
of just stating what goes on between  
women, they get down to the roots of  
why and look for what needs to be  
changed?  

A. Oh definitely. They’re much more  
radical than previous books. They are  
seeking something, not like Friday's book  
which is almost a cover-up. She had the  
anguish that so many of us feel, but she  
accepted all the pat answers.  

Continued on page 8  

NEW FEMINIST BOOKSTORE  
By Susan Schleef  

In November, the north side of  
Chicago saw the opening of a new women’s  
bookstore. Women & Children First is lo-  
cated at 922 West Armitage. The owners,  
Anne Christophersen and Linda Bubon,  
have set up an attractive and well-stocked  
store. Rather than try to stock all the  
books by everyone as they had first hoped  
to, they have tried to select books people  
would not be able to get elsewhere or  
would expect to find here and be disap-  
pointed if they didn't. In addition to  
these subjective guidelines, the two women  
researched bibliographies from other femi-  
nist bookstores around the country,  
women’s studies programs, and the  
women’s collection at Northwestern  
University, to help them establish their  
own bibliography.  

There has been a lot of other work  
needed to get the store from the idea stage  
a year ago to its present state. Anne and  
Linda were both teachers at Circle when  
they began talking about combining their  
interests in books and feminism. When  
they found a place for their store in  
August, the hard work started. Together  
they set up their business, contacted pub-  
lishers, decorated the store, built book-  
cases, etc. They both feel that part of the  
excitement has been doing all sorts of  
jobs. Doing the carpentry, advertising,  
marketing, and such, “took the mystery  
out of traditional male jobs.”  

Women and Children First hopes to  
start a lending journal library, on a sub-  
scription basis to help cover the cost of  
purchasing the many available women's  
journals.  

Linda explained that doing the store  
was a way of strengthening their friend-  
ship, but it has also tested it. They had  
their first big argument, and some things  
seem to be unresolvable. But they are  
learning to balance each other's energy  
levels and patterns and to trust each other  
so they don’t both have to control every  
job.