NOVEMBER 1, 1980

%: Catah

“Chicago Womyn’s Paper V

Sisterhood is powerful, BUT ...

Lack of community support may force

Women in Music to close.

by Thelma Norris
Women in Music

Last week I produced the Sweet Honey
in the Rock concert in a hall expecting
1400 people. Eight hundred and fifty
people came. The result is the loss of
$2,460. On October 5th we lost $300 on

the Mary Watkins/Linda Tillery concert.
If by the end of our winter season this loss

is not recouped and enough money made
to stay in operation, Women in Music will
have to close.

Facing the end of six years of work is
very difficult. I have continued what is a
60 hour work week producing women’s
music concerts and distributing records
because music has always been my life, I
firmly believe in the power of women’s
music to affect change for women, and
because bringing audiences together is the
most challenging work I have ever done.

I ask you to consider how your money
is spent. If you have complained that
ticket prices are too high perhaps you
should know that Madison, Wisconsin
audiences paid $8 for Sweet Honey in the
Rock and $6.50 to $10 for Meg Christian's
concert. Perhaps you should consider
how much you spend on mass media —
mainstream artist concerts which start at
$7, movies, plays — none of which exist
to serve you. Maybe you should think
about how much money you spend in
one night at a bar. Is $5 or $7 too much,
or is women’s culture a low priority?

Consider what our lives and the gay
and women’s movement would be like
without our music and literature cultures.

One of the most political actions you
can take right now is to think before you
spend your money. If you shop at major
supermarkets, or buy books at Kroch’s —
you are choosing against the survival of
alternative and women’s businesses and
choosing in favor of companies which
would exploit you or ignore you.

Women’s music musicians and promo-
ters risk their careers and live barely mini-
mally. By not supporting their concerts,
and bringing friends, you are forcing
them to abandon their music. Two major
performers — Willie Tyson and Linda
Tillery — are no longer performing and
more will have to stop, or will go to main-
stream record companies. And when is the
last time you heard any women’s lyrics
from Warner Brothers?

As a producer and promoter of
women’s music, I love women’s audiences
and other audiences we have outreached
to for the concert. It is a joy to welcome
women at a concert. It is the time in my
life when I feel most alive.

It is a privilege to do the demanding
work, to deal with the hassles of unions
and halls; to struggle with reluctant
officials, and to constantly make the point
that women, and especially lesbian and
gay women, are legitimate, respected con-
cert audiences, deserving of sitting in
some of the finest performing halls in the
city. We must not confine our music to
church basements. We must bring new
women to our music. And we must not
have done all this work and made all these
sacrifices so that men can begin presenting
artists such as Holly Near and taking
money away from our culture.

In a panel once the men from JAM
Productions were asked to describe what
it is like to be a concert producer. “It is
just like sex” they said. “It builds and
builds — and then, bam, bam, bam, — it’s
over.”

My response was no — it was like child-
birth. You work for months with the idea
and the details of the show, then the
rhythms build and build, and you deliver
it into the arms of the audiences.

That is the difference. I urge you to
lend your support to Mountainmoving
Coffeehouse, Women with Wings, and
Women in Music so that that vital differ-
ence isn’t taken away from us.

It is very difficult to ask for money,
but if everyone reading this sent $1, the
concert losses could be minimized and
our survival more possible. Support us by
sending contributions to Women in Music,
1810 W. Pratt, Chicago, Illinois 60626.

The next events are Wallflower Order
produced by Women with Wings, Novem-
ber 6 and 7, Meg Christian November 21st,
and the New Year's Eve Ball. Call for
ticket information, 761-8765.

NOILSs OG UIE Hicssuge
well received; to be

THE MUSIC FLOWED LIKE
SWEET HONEY IN THE ROCK

by Susan Schleef

Sweet Honey in the Rock delighted
their audience Saturday night, October
25th, at Medinah Temple. Their powerful
ahey atricd were,

“precise, the
audience seemed enthralled.

Sweet Honey in the Rock is a unique
group — in its broad appeal, in its music,
in its tremendously talented singers, and
even in its costumes.

In their songs and in their introductions
and explanations, the members of Sweet
Honey make clear their commitment to
fighting racism and sexism. Through sing-
ing about Fanny Lou Hamer and remind-
ing us of the people who gave their lives,
sometimes literally, for the civil rights
movement, and in Bernice Reagan’s call
for people to make use of their right to
vote in November, she urged Blacks to
stand up and demand their rights.

The women are less vocal about their
feminism, but the message comes through
in their commanding presence on stage, in
their brightly colored androgynous cos-
tumes. Their stance is solid and firm, yet
they are movers and shakers, they flow
with the music. They are powerful
women, determined and independent.

Two themes seemed to be present
throughout the evening’s performance:
independence and unity. Sweet Honey's
style is independent; it defies classifica-
tion. These women refuse to be fit into
neat categories, musically as well as in
their personal lives. They take what they
like from various musical traditions and
tailor it to their unique situation. They
can “break all the rules” and sing the
songs the way they choose.

This independent spirit was brought
out in one spiritual with the line “I'm
gonna lay down this world, I’m gonna
shoulder up my cross.” Bernice explained
that this old song speaks to people, like
her, who aren’t willing to just do what
they’re told to do, people who are willing
to struggle to lead their own chosen lives,
to be for themselves.

The second theme of unity was appar-
ent in many aspects of the concert. The
audience was far from homogeneous; the

_VOL.1 NO. 10

A message to our readers and to
our advertisers from the Journey
Womyn/Catalyst Staff:

We regret the delay in bringing out the
paper this month. The re-organization fol-
lowing the merger has been more of a
struggle than we'd anticipated. And so,
this issue is dated November 1st instead of
October 15th. We hope to continue pub-
lishing JW/C on the first of each month,
but we will need your help to do that. We
need help with layout and paste-up, re-
porting of community news, art and
photography, and advertising solicitation.
The Collective is open for prospective
new members and contributors at this
time. Call now — 477-2541 or 475-5968.

S

musical selections and styles were varied.
One of the main points that Bernice talked
about was the necessity of combining our
efforts, of different groups seeing each
other as partners, of ‘waking up to our
common cause” as the lyrics of one song
stressed.

Even the musical style of Sweet Honey
illustrates this idea. Their singing is
harmonious, yet sounds all at once. Each
singer is independent and creates her own
vocal line. When these various sounds are
put together, they blend to make a total
musical sound — and a powerfully exciting one.

Women in Music must be credited for
organizing this event, and for placing it in
a setting appropriate to its significance.
The atmosphere of Medinah Temple
helped to focus all eyes on the women on
stage, and created a sense of expansiveness
that included the audience in the singers’
aura.

Although the audience was not as large
as I had hoped, those that were there were
enthusiastic and supportive. I believe we
all came away not only entertained by the
fine music, but encouraged to go on with
our struggles for change, knowing that we
are not struggling alone.