REFLECTIONS ON THE  
TOULOUSE-LAUTREC EXHIBIT  

By Judy Berns  

The Art Institute is stuffed with  
people yet it somehow feels hollow. I look  
around at the sophisticated, well educated,  
well dressed, well feasted, well intentioned  
crowd. I listen to their comments, those  
of the electronic tour guide, and my own  
inner murmurings. One woman looks to-  
ward her husband with a look of displea-  
sure and says “I didn’t know it would be  
so risqué.” A younger woman tells her  
friend she doesn't like them, the “weird  
shades of green and disturbing strokes.”  
Most of the audience would rather have  
Renoir's charmingly depicted women in  
soft rainbow shades hanging in their dens.  

Toulouse-Lautrec was no more de-  
formed or handicapped than the 19th  
century Paris he painted nor the soph-  
isticated audience he has drawn today at  
Chicago's Art Institute.  

He was an artist who lived his work.  
He described his work as “outside the law”  
and that it was. He painted with an em-  
pathy toward women that few male artists  
will ever be able to do. As a woman identi-  
fied woman, I set out to identify with the  
women in his paintings; the mother who  
he loved and who had financially and  
emotionally supported him, the prosti-  
tutes, dancers, and circus performers,  
who he considered fellow artists, of 19th  
century Paris.  

From the brothels where he lived for  
periods of weeks come portrayals of the  
prostitutes. Toulouse-Lautrec was more  

“Domestic Scenes”: An Exhibition Show-  
ing From Dec. 15, until Feb. 2, 1980, at  
In A Plain Brown Wrapper Art Gallery.  

What a beautiful way to spend an  
afternoon with hot spiced wine, a fire-  
place, and fine art. Stewart Wilbur, the  
owner of In A Plain Brown Wrapper is  
ready to greet each person who enters his  
gallery. Though we had never met I felt  
like a personal friend in his home. He too  
was very much at home in the alternative  
gallery he had created where works of  
well known artists share space with un-  
known artists.  

Finally I could come home to art  
scenes which shared in my own identity —  
our own identity — because tenderness and  
gentleness are universal. These Domestic  
Scenes go beyond color, sex, and other  

interested in their relation with each other  
than with their clients. “Interior in the  
Rue des Moulins” (1894) depicts prosti-  
tutes in a setting like those reserved for  
goddesses. There is a large Greek-like pillar  
in shades of red and lavender. The woman  
in front wears green stockings. In other  
paintings a woman has a green face and in  
another a green blouse. The color theories  
of his time equated particular emotions  
with individual colors. Lavender and green  
are the colors of the gay movement.  
“Abandon, or the Two Friends” (1895)  
and “The Two Friends” (1894) show a  
dreamy, tender quality of two women in  
bed together.  

In his painting of a woman clown one  
is hit by her as an isolated outsider. “The  
Dance Hall at the Moulin de la Galette”  
(1889) captures a similar theme of isola-  
tion which the three working class, drably  
dressed women must feel sitting on a  
bench while the others dance. And once  
again this same theme of isolation, loneli-  
ness, being an outsider accompanies the  
single woman drinking alone at café tables.  

These are the moods along with the  
ugliness, arrogance, anger, and determina-  
tion of some of the women that most of  
the audience would not want in their  
dens, and the men would certainly not  
want in the women they accompany. This  
is where the genuinely crippling deformity  
shadows our lives; because these are the  
moods in all women no longer intent on  
staying ignored. As an artist before his  
time Toulouse-Lautrec had the courage  
to uncover what otherwise would have  
lied buried.  

arbitrary, relative dictates society shackles  
us to. The photos, paintings, ceramics and  
other diverse expressions in the Domestic  
Scenes Exhibit enter the world of art be-  
cause they free us by showing what counts.  
Our alternative lifestyles count.  

Much of the art in Domestic Scenes  
made me want to return to it again and  
again as I would return to the home of a  
good friend. Nancy Fried using baked  
dough and acrylic had created detailed,  
colorful, small scenes. Some were entitled  
“I Love You” (two women embracing),  
“Midnight Comfrey Bath” (two women  
bathing), and “If You Go Away” shows  
a woman looking out her window into  
the night. Through the show “Domestic  
Scenes” In A Plain Brown Wrapper has  
offered itself as a home to artists who  
may have otherwise been orphans.  

By Judith Berns  

Alternative Art Galleries  
By Judith Berns  

Artemisia and ARC: Artists, Resi-  
dents of Chicago are both cooperative,  
non-profit art galleries operated by  
women artists for themselves and lesser  
known artists. They are both at 6 West  
Hubbard St. and currently participating  
in 6/6 which is an exhibition of Illinois  
artists sponsored by 6 different locations.  

At Artemisia I spoke with Margot  
Bergman, a member of the eleven women  
cooperative. Artemisia is more than a gal-  
lery, they also have a provocative studies  
program. Two of the several programs  
offered include: Money and the Woman  
Artist and Women and Technology in  
Contemporary Sculpture.  

Both Artemisia and ARC provide dy-  
namically refreshing alternatives in  
Chicago. At Artemisia and ARC you'll  
discover new artists and new art expres-  
sions. Last year Alice Neel, a painter in  
her late seventies who had worked in  
isolation, had her first show. It was held  
at Artemisia. She now has shows in many  

“Just for the record ...”  

Since Pam without you — .  
It's been said I feel  
I cannot write creatively.  

And the question of length of time  
gone past  

Since I've spent some time with you  
is still asked.  

There are also those that claim my pride  

In honor of my rejection of you.  

Others ask when I will confront you again;  

How long it will be that I can go on with-  
out you.  

Well, I am writing now  

And what time has passed is not the issue.  

The pride expressed is not important,  

Though the fact remains you do still come  
to mind,  

And our confrontations are not so few.  

But each of them that says these things,  

Are missing you vicariously for me.  

And there, my “friend,” is where my  
comfort lies.  

Pinkie  
12/3/78  

major museums in the country.  

In January Artemisia is starting the  
New Year with a uniquely personal artistic  
statement. The members of this coopera-  
tive have invited other artists to exhibit  
their work. These are artists whose lives  
have touched Artemisia’s members and  
works they greatly respect.  

Cross the street and you're in ARC.  
Kathleen Hart, a member of the 22 women  
cooperative, expressed it well, “We pick  
who’s busting loose and in need of a gal-  
lery like this.” Ms. Hart's exhibit at ARC  
includes HYDROSCULPTURES, I looked  
through her photos and have rarely seen a  
more innovative art style. If you missed  
her exhibit it is good to know she has  
“busted loose into the Museum of  
Science and Industry.  

At ARC Joan Lyon and Twin Rocker  
will bring exhibits and slide shows on  
“Humanism in the Arts” and “Paper  
Making” beginning Jan. 2 through Jan. 26,  
1980.  

In Artemisia and ARC you'll partici-  
pate in an artistic experiment and have  
competent women artists to share it with  
you.  

REVOLUTIONARY DREAM  

“I used to dream militant  

dreams of taking y  

over America to show  

these white folks how it should be  
done.  

“I used to dream radical dreams  

of blowing everyone away with my  
perceptive powers  

of correct analysis.  

“I even used to think I’d be the one  
to stop the riot and negotiate the peace,  

“then I awoke and dug  
that if I dreamed natural dreams  

“of being a natural woman  

“doing what a woman  
does when she’s natural  

“would have a revolution.”  

Nikki Giovanni