journe  
Womyn-e LULL %

AUGUST 15, 1980

Like spaghetti and meatballs, summer  
and sand, Gertrude Stein and Alice B.  
Toklas: there are some things that seem  
destined to be together. That is why we,  
the staffs of Catalyst and Journey-Womyn  
are happy to announce the merger of these  
two women’s papers into one: Journey-  
Womyn: The Catalyst.

Our collective is organized on the basis  
of mutual respect of each staff member  
for the ideologies and goals of the others.  
Eight months ago both papers started  
with the idea of addressing the various  
groups within the community and each  
paper had ambitions of, in some way, re-  
moving the divisiveness, the non-cohesive-  
ness that characterized the women’s com-  
munity. What both papers overlooked  
was that, by our singular existence, we  
were only exemplifying the same divisive-  
ness that we had set out to combat.

Now, after many months of publication  
and many changes on both staffs, we find  
that together perhaps we can accomplish  
what we could not do alone. As much  
through our differing ideologies as through  
our common beliefs in the Chicago  
women’s community, we are intending to  

"Cala  

Chicago Womyn’s Paper  

MERGER: TOWARDS A  
COHESIVE COMMUNITY  

satisfy the need for a medium of communi-  
cation for women in Chicago.

In so doing, we hope to not only bring  
to the women of Chicago information on  
what is happening in our city and what is  
of interest to the various groups within the  
community, but to provide a means for  
you, our readers, to express your varied  
opinions and interests to us and to each  
other. We hope to act as an open forum  
and as a medium of exchange of ideas  
within the community.

As one staff, we feel that working to-  
gether will be the key to keeping Journey-  
Womyn: The Catalyst in publication. But,  
we do need you. Without your support  
we are spinning our wheels, kicking up a  
lot of dust and accomplishing absolutely  
nothing. In truth, unless a women’s news-  
paper is important to you there is no  
reason for us to exist. It is you who will  
put life into the paper through your sup-  
port and your contributions of ideas. We  
feel the consequence of our working to-  
gether and your support will provide  
Chicago with a stronger women’s com-  
munications network.

ALL THE NEWS THAT’S FIT TO PRINT  
(but not necessarily true):  
LESBIANS OPPOSE PORCUPINES IN THE CLASSROOM  

by Janice J. Ableman  

The results of a new study, to be pub-  
lished this fall in the Journal of Porcupine  
Studies, reveals that a whopping 97% of  
all Lesbians interviewed disapprove of por-  
cupines teaching in the public schools. The  
study culminated three years of research  
by Dr. Laura Bradley, who heads up the  
Laboratory for Gay-Porcupine Relations  
at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

Dr. Bradley's interest in this area dates  
to 1976, when she and three other Les-  
bian sociologists were lunching at the  
Belden Corned Beef Center, and overheard  
two straight couples discussing gay rights.  
“One woman just came right out and said  
that she’d rather have a porcupine than a  
Lesbian teaching her kids,” Dr. Bradley  
recalls. “At first, I thought it was a pretty  
stupid remark, but when I told my lover  
about it later, she thought we ought to  
take a closer look at the question.” At  
that point, Dr. Bradley and her lover, Dr.  
Christine Konstantos, an urban anthro-  
pologist at Northwestern University, ap-  
plied for funding, and received generous  
grants from The National Science Founda-  
tion, The National Gay Rights Task Force,  
The American Academy of Porcupines,  

ee Heterosexual  
Subjects vs. Porcupine  

Heterosexual  
Women  

Which would you rather have teaching  
your child, if the choice was...  

Lesbian vs.  
Porcupine  

96% Het. 3% Les. 0% Les.  

4% Porc. 97% Porc. 100% Het.  

Lesbian 97% Het. 100% Les. 98% Les.  

Women 3% Porc. 0% Porc. 2% Het.  

Porcupines 0% Het. 0% Les. 88% Les. 100% Porc.  
100% Porc. 100% Porc. 12% Het. 0% P. Dog  

Prairie 23% Het. 19% Les. 90% Les. 0% Porc.  
Dogs 77% Porc. ~ 81% Porc. 10% Het. 100% P. Dog  

and The Great Ace Hardware Store at  
Clark, Diversey and Broadway.

Drs. Bradley and Konstantos interviewed over 3,000 Lesbian and hetero-  
sexual women. The interviews were de-  
signed to determine what the preference  
for classroom teachers would be between  
heterosexuals, Lesbians, and porcupines.  
A control group of prairie dogs was also  
interviewed, and the option of having  
prairie dogs as classroom teachers was  
added to the choices. The results of the  
study are summarized in the chart below.

“As you can see,” Dr. Konstantos told  
the Catalyst, “heterosexuals give a 97%  
edge to porcupines over Lesbians. Interest-  
ingly enough, they are almost evenly split  
between porcupines and prairie dogs,  
though Lesbians clearly prefer porcupines  
to prairie dogs by 71% to 29%. Porcupines  
choose porcupines over any others, but if  
they have to choose between Lesbians  
and heterosexuals, you can see Lesbians  
are strongly preferred. The same is basic-  
ally true for prairie dogs. One thing we  
don't understand is why 18% of the  
prairie dogs preferred Lesbians over porcu-  
pines.”

Lesbian vs. Porcupine vs.  
Heterosexual Prairie Dog  

53% Porc.  
47% P.Dog  

71% Porc.  
29% P. Dog  

ys  

VOL.1 NO.8  

Black Woman Heads New Human  
Rights Department  

Illinois’ new Department of Human  
Rights began working in August to guaran-  
tee freedom from discrimination in em-  
ployment, housing, financial credit, and  
public accommodations.

The new department is the result of  
the consolidation, ordered by Governor  
Thompson, of the Fair Employment Prac-  
tices Commission, the Illinois Department  
of Equal Employment Opportunity, and  
the Human Rights Commission.

The cases investigated by the new  
Human Rights Department will be turned  
over to a newly expanded 9-member bi-  
partisan Human Rights Commission for  
hearings and decisions on the complaints.

Joyce Tucker, a Chicago attorney and  
the first Black woman to be named to a  
cabinet post in the state government, has  
been named to head the new department.

Tucker is an affirmative-action official  
who learned about discrimination the  
hard way.

Tucker, a Black, had been passed over  
for promotion at a hospital in 1973 in  
favor of three whites with less seniority.  
She filed a job discrimination complaint  
with the Fair Employment Practices Com-  
mission (one of the agencies her new de-  
partment will take over), but the commis-  
sion delayed investigating her complaint  

“and her union won her the promotion in  

the meantime.

Tucker also knows firsthand the frus-  
tration of housing discrimination. Denied  
a Lake Shore Drive apartment while in  
law school in the early 1970s for no  
apparent reason but her race, Tucker sued  
the landlord — and won.

Those experiences might easily have  
made Tucker bitter. But she said she  
thinks they’ll only help her in her new  
job.

“It makes you more sensitive to the  
seriousness of it (discrimination),” she  
said, “But I’m not out to get anyone. I’m  
ready to stop discrimination, not hold  
grudges.”

Tucker said merging the state’s three  
civil rights agencies will increase their  
effectiveness. Efficiency is the biggest  
goal, said Tucker, who would be making  
$44,000 a year in her new post.

She plans additional training for in-  
vestigative staff, and a better procedure  
for keeping track of cases so deadlines  
aren't overlooked and cases dropped.

Though Tucker ranks race discrimina-  
tion as “the biggest problem” for her de-  
partment, sexual discrimination and dis-  
crimination against the handicapped are  
“close seconds.”

(This article adapted from the Sun-Times,  
June 27, 1980, and the Tribune, June 25,  
1980.)

Working With Children From  
Violent Families  

Part II  
by Mimi Lewin  

When children first come to the Green-  
house, they have just gone through a crisis  
—a violent crisis. They have left a familiar  
place and entered a new space with lots  
of strangers, none of their own toys, and  
no one even knows their name. They also  
know that their mother is upset, and often  
physically hurt as well. We need to act  
very fast to give them something to trust,  
to feel good about, and to establish their  
identity. The first thing that we do is to  
let the children know that the Greenhouse  
is a safe place, a place where people care  
about them and value who they are. We  
also make sure they understand that  
everyone here has experienced some of  
the same things they have, and that it’s  
OK to talk about the violence and about  
their feelings. Many children, we’ve found,  
have been cautioned not to tell about the  
violence, thereby preserving the privacy  

Drs. Bradley and Konstantos are hesi-  
tant to speculate on the meaning of their  
results until further study can be com-  
pleted. They are, however, troubled that  
in a choice between a porcupine and a  
Lesbian, 97% of all the heterosexuals in-  
terviewed actually prefer their child's  
education to be in the hands (or paws, if  
you will) of a porcupine if the only other  
alternative is a Lesbian. Said Dr. Bradley,  
“Obviously we need more public educa-  
tion on this issue, and greater political  
awareness. Lesbians cannot afford to take  
a back seat to porcupines. Why we con-  
tinue to tolerate this kind of oppression is  
a pretty prickly question all right.”

Myron fim frome fpponen fin  

ip comeclifosmnclipoomnctpemmodifies  

of the Family. There are often a lot of  
confused feelings, and sometimes the  
children even blame themselves for the  
problems between their parents. We listen  
to them and give them support to share  
the ambivalent feelings they have for their  
parents. One day, I held and rocked  
Melissa, age 8, for over an hour while she  
sobbed and screamed that she hated her  
Daddy, and that she wanted him back.  
I’m sure that she felt as guilty for loving  
him as for hating him. I let her know that  
both feelings were valued. It’s also impor-  
tant for the children to be able to say  
that they’re mad at their mothers — for  
leaving the home/not leaving the home,  
going back/not going back, loving/hating  
the father, and even for not paying enough  
attention to them. At the same time, how-  
ever, the children are helped to understand  
that this is a hard time for their mothers  
too, and to respect both their mothers’  
needs and strengths.

In my last article, I mentioned that a  
primary focus of our program is the rela-  
tionship between a mother and her chil-  
dren. The children’s activities are planned  
and implemented with the mother, and  

Problems in the house that related to the  

children are resolved with staff, adult resi-  
dents, and the children themselves. At no  
time, unless a child’s welfare and safety  
are threatened, do we as staff supersede a  
mother’s choices in regard to her children.  
Instead, we create opportunities to talk  
about children and how we relate to them.  
Mother's Meetings are a good time to ex-  
plore different attitudes and values and  
to recognize what kinds of messages we  
give to our children.

Carmen and Robert were both 5. They  
loved to play together, but were both  
dealing with a lot of angry feelings. Often,  
during a game, one of them would become  

Cont. on page 7