CALENDAR

® Regular Events:

Suburban Lesbian Rap Group meets bi-
monthly. Call Marsha at 620-0514 for
where and when.

Gay Horizons Womyn’s Union meets
every Thursday night at 3225 North
Sheffield.

A.A. Women's Discussion Group meets
Thursday evenings at 7 p.m. at the Parish
of Reconciliation, 1653 W. School St.
Something about the way Spinstersister
keeps mentioning services for/by alco-
holic women seems to make a large num-
ber of her readers uncomfortable. Think:
why does it make you uncomfortable?
The Michigamea Feminist Alliance, an
anti-nuclear group, meets on random
Tuesdays. Leave a message for them at
427-2533 and they will return your call.

® Radio:

Northeastern Illinois University and vici-
nity — “Womyn With Wings” on WZRD-
FM, 88.3, Sundays from 6 to 10 p.m.
University of Chicago and vicinity —
“Fine Wimmin and Song” on WHPK-FM,
Saturdays from 5 to 6 p.m.

® Special Events:

January

19. Marie Kuda’s slide show will be pre-
sented tonight at Mountain Moving
Coffeehouse for Women, 1655 W. School
St. at 9 p.m. The slide show is
“Women Loving, Women Writing” and is
a benefit for the Lesbian Community
Center.

21. LEC “Swim Night” at the Wells Park
Swimming Pool, Sunnyside and Lincoln.
Interested women should meet at the
Lesbian Community Center, 3435 North
Sheffield, at 7:30. There is a small fee,
and remember your swimming gear!

If you haven't dropped by LCC re-
cently, you definitely should. They are
selling women’s music and dyke magazines
that aren’t available elsewhere. They also
have lots of new books in their library,
which should start to fill the gap left by
the parting of the New Alexandria Lesbian
Library.

Speaking of NALL, Betty and Diane
— the caretakers of the Library — asked
Spinstersister to tell you that they and the
Library have safely arrived at their new
home in western Massachusetts. They got
tired of struggling to keep Be-ing in Death
City. They will have a separate building
for the Library in their new location and
hope to start a new Lesbian museum even-
tually. The MuseRoom. You can reach
them at New Alexandria Library, P.O.
Box 111, Huntington, MA 01050.

24. The University of Chicago Women’s
Union has tentatively scheduled a forum
on women and nuclear power. A slide
show and speakers will highlight the event.
Call Joann at 241-6182 for up-to-date in-
formation.

26. Diana Dewey at Mountain Moving.
Original Folk music, vocal and guitar. Sets
at 8:30 and 9:45 p.m.

February

2. Michelle Brody, Lesbian storyteller
and rhymer. Sets at 8:30 and 9:45.
Mountain Moving.

Q. Teresa Trult and Julie Homi at
Mountain Moving. Rather well-known
women. Sets at the usual time, but house
will be cleared so that more will be able
to see them.

You know, compared to Fall there
seems to be very little happening. Or is
Spinstersister just uninformed? Send list-
ings you'd like to see publicized to her
c/o Catalyst, Joan Ballas, 829 W. Wolfram,
Chicago, IL 60657.

LCC CALENDAR

@ LCC Benefit January 19th at Mountain
Moving Coffeehouse. Marie Kuda will pre-
sent her slideshow “Women Loving,
Women Writing”, an overview of Lesbian
Literature from 1928 to now. A donation
will be requested.

® LCC games night is held every Friday
night in January. On Jan. 18th the fea-
tured games will be Scrabble and Mono-
poly and on Jan. 25th, Charades. Besides
these features, other games will also be
available.

@ The LCC General Rap Group meeting
will be held Jan. 8th and 22nd from 7 to
9 p.m. for women who just want to talk.
® LCC will sponsor a Swim Night at the
Wells Park Pool near Sunnyside and
Lincoln on Monday, Jan. 21st. Interested
women should meet at the LCC at 7:30
on that day. A small fee will be required
by Wells Park at the pool.

@ Another 8-week coming out group will
be held beginning Feb. 1st (Thursday)
from 7 to 9 p.m. at LCC. A sliding fee
scale is available. For more information
call 788-1317.

SPORTS

continued from pg. 5

C. How did writing the book affect your
relationship with your mother?

A. I think my relationship with my
mother benefited tremendously. Partly be-
cause of the exploration I did; that gave
me a context into which to place my re-
lationship with my mother. Just like other
women victims, such as incest or rape vic-
tims, battered wives, and so on, often
think they’re the only ones, many women
think that their relationships with their
mothers are singular and different, because
we're almost reluctant to see that there
are universals in this situation. The other
factor that affected our relationship was
that we worked together on the book, so
we did something together besides just be
related to each other. We talked about
something that really mattered on an in-
tellectual and spiritual level. It was work
that we did together and together we ex-
plored the mother-daughter relationship
and saw the context of that relationship.
It was a very important education for both
of us, and going through it together was
part of the education.

Also she just loves that I’m doing this,
you know, my daughter's a writer and
she’s writing about women and there's a
picture of me on the cover of the book,
etc. She doesn't actually say these things,
of course, but she loves it. I think to a
certain extent my mother feels that it's
too late for her to make serious changes
in her life and so she can get a big hit off
of the things that I do. The resentment that I feel about that is a flash of resentment, but if she can get a hit off what I'm doing, let
her have it. It doesn't cost me anything;
I don’t lose by her gain. I didn't use to be
able to see that. But I do wish that she
would have her own... and she is devel-
oping her own... something. She is
painting now and she’s good; I look at her
paintings and they're art. They're not just
something that is inflicted on elderly
women by a local YWCA trying to keep
them calm. The woman is serious and she
practices and tries to have a discipline in
her life. She struggles against all the forces
around her that are trying, consciously or
not, to prevent her from doing meaning-
ful work.

C. What about the new book you're
working on?

A. At this point I can’t say very much
about it because I haven’t been doing it
for that long. But it’s again about women
in family relationships. Like the first book,
which came out of the struggle between
my mother and me to relate to each other
as real people, it has come out of my de-
sire to raise my son in a way that will help
him to be, for one thing, whoever he real-
ly is and also not be a beast about women.

THE GAY TASK FORCE
By Judith Berns

The issue most definitely is human
rights. The gay task force, 427-4064, is
active in state legislation; quizzing of can-
didates and publicizing their views, work-
ing with non-gay media on distortions of
gay happenings and is currently working
with Prairie Cals. Prairie Cals is a custody
action loan fund which loans money to
gay parents who are going through custody
battles for their children.

Donna Zelli is one such case in South-
ern Illinois. She won in the lower courts
but is now being fought for custody by
the child's father in a higher court. If Ms.
Zelli wins in the Appellate Court this could
establish a precedent in Illinois for future
cases.

Support human rights by supporting
Donna Zelli. Send donations to Prairie
Cals, 802 West Illinois #1, Urbana, Illinois
61801.

Two things are happening to me. One is
that I am studying men now and I have
not studied men for ten years. I hardly
ever even read books by men or listen to
music by men. Now I’m reading not only
books by men but books about being
men, by men, which are not all that com-
mon. Of course, you know, they can’t
shut up talking about women but they
don't have too much to say about them
recently some men have begun.

ed in doing something differ-
ent; so there are a lot of shit and some
are struggling desperately and bloodily,
if I may say here I am men and it’s
just real hard for me to make myself do it sometimes because I would rather read Susan Griffin and Mary
Daly. When I wrote the first book, every-
thing I picked up fit right in. Now a lot of
what I read is offensive to me. On the
other side, I’m gaining an incredible sym-
pathy, especially for them as small boys
because of the terrible way they are tor-
tured to become what they become. I’ve
always said everyone’s oppressed — but
women are oppressed more and I still be-
lieve that, but now I can see their oppres-
sion.

I have a little boy, and his first eight
years haven't been easy. It’s hard for him
to be decent, loving, sensual, open, tender,
compassionate, sympathetic, sweet,
homey, all the things that people call
“women things.” It's hard for him to be
those things even now, in public. When
he’s sixteen I can’t imagine the contor-
tions he'll have to put his psyche through.
I fear that I'll lose the fight, and, of
course, what that means is that he'll lose,
because I’m only one person and, even
though my friends and my life have a great
impact on him, the world is so powerful.

X-COUNTRY
By Mary Donaldson

There’s nothing like it! Swooshing
along on top of powdery snow. It’s quiet
like you've never experienced before. All
you can hear is a light breeze through the
branches, a bird or two, and the sound of
your skis gliding across the snow.

Cross-country skiing is good for your
health and easy on your pocketbook.
What could be better than that except
that it’s also easy to do! Some say, ‘If
you can walk you can x-country.”

Of course, it will take some time be-
fore you reach the bottom of that hill up-
right on your skis but it doesn’t take
much practice at all to take short sprints
over flat terrain.

Cross-country gives you a healthy
glow in your cheeks and a sparkle in your
eye. It will increase your stamina tremen-
dously, strengthen your heart and tone
up your body. And you can have all this
for a reasonable price.

The best way to find out which kind
of ski is for you is to rent for a while and
try different kinds. The older x-country
skis were all made of wood but many to-
day are made of fiberglass, which is even
more durable. There are many different
brands and prices but, if you shop around
you can find a good x-country package
(meaning skis, poles, boots and bindings)
for about $100.00.

When you compare that $100.00 for
x-country equipment to $250.00 or more
for downhill equipment, it’s obvious just
how reasonable x-country is. There are
more advantages to x-country. Such as,
once you buy your x-country skis, you
don’t have to pay ten to fifteen dollars
every time you want to ski, or drive an
hour to an hour and a half to a ski resort,
as with downhill. You will also never have
to stand in long lines or hassle with any
huge crowds.

So add it up and compare. Maybe
you should give x-country a chance. If
you have never tried x-country, get out
there and try something new. I guarantee
it will make winter more fun and you too
will “think snow!”

CHICAGO HUSTLE SCHEDULE

(HOME GAMES)
SAT. JAN. 19.
FRI. JAN. 25
TUES. FEB. 12
FRI. FEB. 22
SUN. FEB. 24
FRI. FEB. 29
WED. MAR. 5
FRI. MAR. 7
SUN. MAR. 9
FRI. MAR. 14

7:30 P.M. VS. NEW YORK STARS (DePaul vs. Det)
7:30 P.M. VS. HOUSTON ANGELS
7:30 P.M. VS. DALLAS DIAMONDS (DePaul vs. NIU)
7:30 P.M. VS. IOWA CORNETS
2:00 P.M. VS. WASHINGTON METROS
7:30 P.M. VS. MINNESOTA FILLIES
7:30 P.M. VS. MINNESOTA FILLIES
7:30 P.M. VS. ST. LOUIS STREAK
2:00 P.M. VS. MILWAUKEE DOES
7:30 P.M. VS. ST. LOUIS STREAK

* DOUBLEHEADER GAME WITH DePAUL LADY DEMONS AT 5:30 P.M.
ALL HOME GAMES ARE PLAYED AT DePAUL UNIVERSITY

Alumni Hall
1011 W. Belden
Chicago, IL 60614

STAFF: JOAN BALLAS, JAN BARRY,
JUDY BERNS, RANDI BRILL, KAREN
BUCKLEY, PAM CHARNEY, MARCIA
DONALDSON, KAREN HARLANDER,
PINKIE ONBEKENT, JOYCE SCHILTZ,
SUSAN SCHLEEF, JUDY SEALE,
CINDY WHITE.