Page 4

( —=cg  
wh i  
we |

GOD HERSELF:

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST

HE  
KOHELE

[. -«E =

The Feminist Roots of Astrology

By Geraldine Thorsten  
(Doubleday, $14.95)

by Diane Wallenbecker

Reading God Herself is like reading Ms.  
Magazine; you know that underneath all  
the slick writing and broad appeal to the  
masses there is some feminist analysis; it  
is just a question of whether or not it is  
worth one’s time to try and find it.

The book is divided into twelve chap-  
ters, one for each sign of the zodiac. These  
are then subdivided into a section on the  
history of each sign and also a section  
specifying personality characteristics of  
persons with that sun sign. Covering so  
much material necessitates a very general  
view of astrology, and I do find fault with  

the overall superficiality of the book. But  
in attempting to cover such a broad range  
of material, the divisions between histori-  
cal facts and personal characteristics do  
make sense.

The historical sections are by far the  
best part of the book, tracing as they do  
our matriarchal herstory “from every part  
of the globe and from all different stages  
in time.” The author discusses an amount  
of material that seems impossible to docu-  
ment in terms of original sources, but puts  
to good use the more modern and second-  
ary sources such as Robert Graves,  
Elizabeth Gould Davis, Evelyn Reed, Erich  
Neumann and many others who have writ-  
ten at length about our proud female an-  
cestors. The amount of territory she  

covers in the “historical” sections (a mis-  
nomer if there ever was one!) is vast:  
Crete, Egypt, China, India, North  
America, and the British Isles in the times  
of the Celts — just to name a few. While  
often referring to several cultures to eluci-  
date a particular aspect of our herstory  
and that of the zodiac, she usually concen-  
trates on one particular culture as the main  
embodiment of a certain trait. For in-  
stance, in dealing with bull symbolism  
and all that it represented in the develop-  
ment of the sign Taurus, she concentrates  
on Ancient Crete where the Bull repre-  
sented the masculine principle which was,  
although important, clearly quite second-  
ary to the feminine principle exemplified  
by the Goddess.

Astrology, quite clearly, was so inter-  
twined with religious principles in its in-  
ception that it is difficult to separate one  
world view from the other. And the reli-  
gion of which it played so large a part was  
the worship of the Great Mother, the  
Goddess, the She whose names are too  
numerous to recount. One of the most  
fascinating aspects of the information in  
the “historical” sections was the matri-  
archal basis for so many of the rites and  
traditions of modern male-oriented  
religion.

Christianity seemed to be especially re-  
presented as a religion which derived much  
of its ritual and a great deal of its dogma  
from the Ancient Religion venerating the  
Goddess. There were many, many exam-  
ples of this sprinkled throughout the book  

August 15, 1980

but I will illustrate my point with the con-  
cept of the Holy Trinity. In Catholicism a  
central belief is that God consists of a Holy  
Trinity composed of God the Father, God  
the Son (Jesus), and a rather vague sort of  
being called the Holy Ghost (or more con-  
temporarily, the Holy Spirit). Very long  
before Jesus Christ and the religion He en-  
gendered ever appeared on this earth, the  
believers in the Ancient Religion spoke of  
the three forms of the Goddess: the young  
maiden, the mother, and the ancient wise  
woman. One of the most surprising revela-  
tions about this correspondence concerns  
the Holy Spirit. In speaking of the sym-  
bols that our foremothers used for the  
deity, the author notes, “Many of these  
symbols did their job so well that they re-  
main with us, evoking the same essential  
ideas, although they've been adapted to  
the ideologies of other, later religions. One  
instance of this is the bird, which appar-  
ently is the most satisfactory symbol for  
spirit that we’ve come up with yet. Birds,  
especially the dove, symbolized the God-  
dess as the Holy Spirit, who dwelt every-  
where in all things, who transcended space  
and time, and who ruled the heavens as  
well as the earth.” This is one of many  
direct correlations between the ideas and  
icons of the religion of the Great Mother  
and Christianity even as we know it today.

The historical sections were a fascina-  
ting treasure trove of feminist inspiration  
and herstory. The power, strength and  
beauty of those women is constantly ex-  
pressed. Their culture strove to perfect the  
feminine ideal that they saw exemplified  
in the Great Mother. Menstruation, child-  
birth and breastfeeding were seen as  
another sort of Trinity — three manifesta-  
tions of women’s awesome power. The  
Goddess's ability to bear a child, a being  
totally different from herself, from her  
own body was seen as an extraordinary  
feat and thus was portrayed frequently in  
religious art as an example of her special  
powers. Earthly women were no less  
venerated for their procreative powers.  
Throughout each chapter there is ample  
cause for celebration in the ancient stories  
being told. However, the author’s “Linda  
Goodman-ish” lighthearted style of  

writing, while making these stories more  

accessible is somewhat out of place given  
her material. Reading the tales of the  
Amazons in the Sagittarius chapter, they  
became transformed in her words to a  
struggle worthy of “I Love Lucy.” If per-  
haps the readability induces women who  
are put off by more scholarly books to  
learn their herstory, then I think there is  
some virtue inherent in her style. I have  
never been ambitious enough myself to  
read Evelyn Reed or Helen Diner in the  
past; now however, I feel inspired to inves-  
tigate their books. I do wish there were a  
compromise between their scholasticism  
and Geraldine Thorsten’s slick journalism.

The author's style is just one of the fac-  
tors which leads me to wonder just whom  
she is addressing; the context also lacks  
consistency. She is clearly not addressing  
astrologers, as the dearth of astrological  
information amply testifies. Nor is she  
addressing a politically informed feminist  
market, as demonstrated by her hetero-  
sexism and her tone of “you can make it  
in a man’s world” (rather than challenging  
the basis for patriarchy) which she pre-  
sents in the personal sections. Indeed, it is  
the personal sections which are the most  
disappointing. I had been hoping for some  
general interpretations of sun signs (she  
gets into astrology no further than sun  
signs and transits of the moon) that were  
fresh and innovative and reflective of a  
feminist consciousness. But this is where  
her policy of adapting to the patriarchy is  
the strongest. The writer's classist and  
heterosexist views also surface strongly in  
these sections, particularly in the segment  
she presents on careers and relationships  
within each chapter. Her assumption is  
that her readers are all white, upwardly  
mobile (preferably from the middle class),  
heterosexually married women. Since the  
beginning of the book contained referen-  
ces to “partners” and used the construc-  
tions “she/he” or “her/his” several times,  
I had erroneously anticipated a more  
open view of relationships.

Despite these many faults, it is a good  
book for what it is — popularly matriar-  
chal herstory and popularized astrology.  
It is readable and enjoyable. However, the  
faults outlined above and the lack of depth  
would cause me to recommend that  
readers include this one on their entertain-  
ment shelf rather than reference.

Cont. from page 3

For The Honeysuckle, Josefa does not be-  
come poison to destroy it. Her life is  
created so as to escape it. Though she lives  
apart from her town, she is also loved and  
admired by it.

In the play we learn that Alysea is  
leaving Josefa and is in love with  
Edwardo. It is as unfair for the reader to  
assume that Alysea will turn into Clara,  
Edwardo’s last lover (Clara has turned to  
alcohol and madness in his absence) as it  
is unfair to make assumptions about all  
that we do not see in the year-long rela-  
tionship between Alysea and Josefa.

Further ambiguity is presented in how  
Alysea and Josefa feel about their rela-  
tionship together. The “more” that Alysea  
hopes for is not the “more” that Josefa  
wants. Josefa sees the magicians, Alysea  
does not, and for Clara they appear face-  
less. It is at the lake where the magicians  
give Josefa light and birth. Josefa acknow-  
ledges, “The magicians created me.” As a  
young woman she did not join the others  
in the San Lorenzo festival where young  
virgins bathe in the lake and dream of  
husbands. Josefa did not share their  
dreams or hopes; she had distinct desires.  
The magicians gave her light and it is that  
very force, at the end of the play, which  
returns her to her birthplace, the lake.  
Ironically the town is planning that Josefa  
lead the San Lorenzo festival procession;  
yet in her youth she did not join and she  
will not join now. Her magicians have  
created her destiny. It is her destiny that  
she must live and die alone. Though the  
swallows come in multitudes, Josefa des-  
cribes their journey to Clara as lonely. “I  
said lonely, Clara, because finding direc-  
tion... is lonely . . . it is too personal a  
thing.” 

In Recast, another of Portillo’s plays,  
she writes, “Magic is needed to protect  
vulnerability.” Josefa is vulnerable to  
David who “caught” Josefa and Alysea  
making love. For Josefa the terror was  

outside her relationship with Alysea, but  
for Alysea “His eyes told me. You and I  
were all the terror in the world.” Josefa  
cut out David's tongue attempting to  
“silence the world from reprimand . . . this  
house of light . . . must be preserved.”  
Though Josefa is self-justified, Alysea does  
not see the same light. Josefa confesses  
for the violent act of cutting out David's  
tongue, but she does not consider her rela-  
tionship with Alysea to be a sin, as some  
reviewers have claimed.

In the play we see how much Josefa  
loved Alysea, took care of her, and provi-  
ded for her with a haven. Josefa cared for  
Alysea as she did for an injured swallow.  
But she did not try to imprison them;  
she let Alysea go. Above all else it is the  
“house of light” that Josefa wants to  
preserve.

Josefa cautions the Priest and cautions  
readers, too. We cannot see her exclusive-  
ly in that moment of violence with David.  
There is much more to Josefa. The Priest  
thought of her like the silence of a cathe-  
dral with stained glass windows for her  
soul. It is the awesomeness of a cathedral,  
the light and beauty of Josefa’s presence,  
that the play revolves around and ends  
with.

We must see to it that the literature of  
Estela Portillo Trambley and women like  
her is not “inevitably doomed” to remain-  
ing unpublished and/or inaccessible. These  
are some of the problems, along with re-  
views indicative of a world which is not  
receptive to human differences, especially  
woman-identified women. These are the  
consequences of a literature that defies  
stereotypes.

Send $3.50 plus postage to:

Tonatiuh International Inc.

2150 Shattuck Ave.

Berkeley, California 94704

for Rain Of Scorpions, published 1975.  
Though the book may be unavailable,  
your interest may make a difference.

Great American

An Exhibition

Lesbian Art Show

& Performances

Celebrating Lesbian Creativity

Aug 29 — Sept 28

Opening Reception Party — Fri. Aug 29  
6—10 pm

3347 N. Clark, Chicago

Entries due Aug 25, for  

info  

call  

LCC (549-4370)