——

_ SHULE YA WATOTO

by Gayla Bell

The Shule Ya Watoto (School for Children) is a Pan-African Nationalistic preschool dedicated to the building of Black Nationhood through the use of education. The school’s philosophy is based on the ideas of self-reliance and pride in African heritage.

In 1972, the Shule was created by Harold Charles, a Chicago public school teacher. After eight years of struggle, the Shule has established a successful school whose purpose is to counteract the effects of white institutional racism on Black children by instilling pride in being Black.

According to Shule’s director and founder, Brother Hannibal Afrik (Harold Charles), “We are not here to make smart Black children, we already know they are smart, we are here to create Black leadership. This leadership must come from our children.”

Therefore, this past October, Shule Ya Watoto purchased from the Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago the convent home of St. Thomas Aquinas Church, located at 127 North Leamington Avenue on Chicago’s west side.

Consequently, Shule is in the process of renovating the 26-room building, as well as attaining a state license that would legitimatize Shule’s existence as a preschool for children ages 2-6. The $44,000 budget that was adequate for this year will have to be raised to $60,000 so that Shule can make the necessary repairs to bring the building up to code specifications for a preschool. Shule Ya Watoto accepts pledges and money from only non-white sources to fund its project. Self-reliance is one of the organization’s major goals.

August 15, 1980

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST

Page 3

Disgust with the public school system is the main reason parents enroll their children at Shule. They are drawn not by Blackness but with an educational promise.

“We believe in educating the family and we try to promote a family atmosphere. Our children’s parents are encouraged not to smoke, drink, have abortions or use any chemicals,” stated Brother Hannibal... they must participate in the organization.

Without the contributions of work and time donated by the parents, Shule’s staff would be overwhelmed by the labor required to run the school. The parents also attend lectures, seminars, and an orientation program. Both mothers and fathers are given a reading list. And much of the homework the children receive is geared so that parents have to go over it with their children.

Helping to select the teachers is also a part of the parents' activities. The parent governing committee and the director interviewed Folami for her job as Head Teacher. She and the three other teachers manage the 30 children who are enrolled at Shule. Every teacher who comes to Shule must attend a Council of Independent Black Institute teacher training program every summer before going on staff.

In addition, the teachers are responsible for preparing the dietary menu for the children’s lunch. Each parent receives a copy of each month’s menu master. The Shule has a vegetarian philosophy and the children are not allowed to have candy. The children receive a nutritious and balanced meal minus junk and processed foods.

Finally, the teachers are required to follow a dress code. One part of their body must be dressed in African-style clothing.

It must be stressed that Shule Ya Watoto is not a babysitting service. “We are training our children for productive hard work,” declared Folami. “By the time a child is 2-6 years old they have internalized their concept. They have a mindset of their position in the world.”

At Shule it is not all work and no play, but even play is structured. The children play games, sing songs, and do activities that are non-competitive. Anti-competitiveness is strongly enforced at Shule. According to Folami, “Competition helps define bright children for the elite. These children are picked out by competition. Shule Ya Watoto is for everybody, not just the smart children. The teachers find games in which everybody wins. If one child is a winner then there are 20 losers. Most of the games are team games, games where everyone pulls together.”

All of the teachers at Shule are women. Yet, a lot of the philosophy behind Shule’s ideology sees women primarily as wife and mother. Nevertheless, I was told the sisters are involved in the operations of Shule and can go wherever their abilities take them. Shule’s governing body (The Gavery Youth Service) has a majority of women on its board. The women at Shule raise funds and participate in every aspect of the organization. They even formed themselves into a Sisterhood.

The Sisterhood is used as a sounding board and informal support system for the women at Shule. Within the Sisterhood, the women come together to share feelings, find answers to questions about economics, physical development, and politics. The sisters are in the position of redefining their role, in an effort to blend the traditional African woman's role with the role Black women have had to take in this country.

I asked Folami if Feminism plays a part in her life or in Shule’s Sisterhood group. She explained, “Feminism is essentially a family fight. We (Black women) are not part of that family. White women have perpetuated racism, i.e. throwing rocks at school children. They have been in the front lines of race hatred... it is a family squabble and we (Blacks) are the servants listening to the fight. I personally don't see Black women devoting our time to the feminist cause. It diverts our attention from more important things. I can’t see how white women can help us in our relationship with our Black men.”

Yet, Folami thinks that the women in the Shule limit themselves. She referred to the security guard position at Shule that is held by a man. “The sisters lack the desire to do this job,” declared Folami.

Not all the teachers at Shule agree with Folami. Shule Ya Watoto doesn’t have a set position on Feminism. Other teachers are more pro-feminist and are involved in other organizations outside of Shule.

Still, much of the support of Shule comes from women. The Community Resource Council, one of Shule’s sister organizations, is headed by a woman. And even the little girls enrolled at Shule are allowed to participate in the Tabura, a military drill, defined as an unarmed self-defense exercise.

The leaders of Shule feel everybody, regardless of sex, has an active role in self-defense and the defense of the ideology Shule expounds. Whether or not one agrees with what the Shule Ya Watoto is promoting, one has to admit there are a lot of people committed to Shule and all the ideals it stands for.

DEFYING STEREOTYPES

A Mexican American Writer Takes Her Identity Into Her Own Hands

by Judith Berns

Major bookstores, university libraries, and perhaps even the publisher, do not have Rain Of Scorpions. It is an anthology of literature written by Estela Portillo Trambley. Published in 1975, this could be the only book written exclusively by a Mexican American woman. This article will discuss two plays by Portillo, Day Of The Swallows and If It Weren’t For The Honeysuckle. They can be read in El Grito Del Sol, a journal of Mexican American literature.

The works of Portillo are not readily accessible and Rain Of Scorpions was published in limited edition; but these should not be used as excuses for an ethnocentric women’s culture. Feminism, every woman’s right to self-definition, is not the exclusive discovery of white, middle-class, North American women.

Portillo is dynamic in taking the literature of Mexican American people a step forward. Historically, Mexican American women were more often used than given genuine characterization or purpose by Anglo or Mexican American male writers. Thankfully there are exceptions. Rudolfo Anaya’s Bless Me Ultima is a novel about a curandera, a woman healer. Raymond Barrio’s novel, The Plum Plum Pickers, is a perceptive account of the migrant workers' nightmare.

Portillo does more than take Mexican American literature into a zone where women define women characters. She is able to do this eloquently while weaving her characters through the aspirations of feminism: their right to independence, their unified struggle, and lesbianism. No wonder discovering the works of Portillo is not easy. It is dangerous to leave the decision of reprinting works like this solely in the hands of mainstream publishers.

Perhaps it is easier to find reviews of her work than the work itself. One anthology, La Chicana, is particularly valuable for its chapter on Chicana feminists and the history of Mexican American women in literature. Unfortunately, when we come to the part concerning women writing about other women, as with Day Of The Swallows and If It Weren’t For The Honeysuckle, the review does more to uncover the reviewer’s homophobia than to analyze Portillo’s plays.

As in most exceptional literature, Portillo's characters are sometimes ambiguous and always multi-dimensional. Within her works we will not meet stereotyped women compartmentalized within a simple good woman/bad woman dichotomy. Portillo exposes us to women characters who have several things in common; the most vital characteristic that they share is their desire to create loving, artistic, peaceful lives without men. Let me introduce you to these characters and the ways they cope with male interference.

Beatriz, the protagonist in If It Weren’t For The Honeysuckle, is financially self-sufficient and built the house in which she lives with Sofa and Lucretia. Beatriz, like Josefa, the protagonist in Day Of The Swallows, is characterized as a woman who knows something that others do not. While Josefa creates her order in lace, Beatriz is a gardener, creating order in the honeysuckle. Beatriz, too, is described as a calm woman, even within this horror story.

The central theme in If It Weren’t For The Honeysuckle is the man-as-poison motif. The poison is portrayed in Robles, who with profound horror exposes man’s cruelty which Josefa speaks of in Day Of The Swallows.

Robles oozes with the characteristics of a sick animal who rapes women of their right to selfhood. In the play, Beatriz thinks to herself, “Woman... the victim... woman... the victim. Why? It had no order.” Beatriz, Sofa, and Lucretia make up Robles' property, along with the land on which the house is built. Robles physically and emotionally cripples Sofa. He destroys her cat, the one thing she loves. “He was a swollen poison with an evil smell.” Sofa is more married to Beatriz than to Robles; Sofa lives in terror of him. The law is on his side. Beatriz must act if fourteen-year-old Lucretia’s future is not to be poisoned by Robles as Sofa’s was. Beatriz is not afraid. The women bond together to destroy Robles. The women use three poison mushrooms found in the honeysuckle to kill Robles. Portillo identifies the women with the mushrooms because it is as if to kill poison they, too, must become poison. Ironically, in the review mentioned earlier, the reviewer stated that this play is more triumphant than Day Of The Swallows. The reviewer also considered Josefa, the protagonist, as being “inevitably doomed,” unsuccessful in both her relationship with Alysea and in expressing “the wiles of men.” Is Josefa less triumphant because she won't let in a Robles to terrorize her life? If that review must speak of triumph, it should speak of Portillo’s ability to create women characters who see the light and live accordingly. Day Of The Swallows is not a play of “inevitable doom.” In the end, it is light and beauty that Josefa leaves behind. The creative energy inherent in Josefa’s lace work is also inherent in the writing of Portillo.

Josefa creates a haven set apart. For Josefa, the poison hit when she was a girl. Boys were stoning and killing the swallows. The boys nailed Josefa to the ground and let the dying swallow’s blood drip over her face. Unlike Beatriz in If It Weren’t For The Honeysuckle...

Cont. on page 4

9

We Need Your Support!