TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME,  
TAMPONS, AND SPONGES  

by Nancy Vinson  

Since the middle of September an  
article has appeared almost every day in  
the newspapers on the connection between  
Rely tampons, which entered the market  
in 1975, and a mysterious disease called  
toxic shock syndrome (TSS).  

TSS is a newly recognized disease.  
Symptoms of the disease usually affect  
women during their menstrual cycle. The  
symptoms begin suddenly, and more than  
likely begin with the onset of menstru-  
ation; they include high fever, vomiting and  

watery diarrhea with rapid progression to  
severely low blood pressure and eventual-  
ly shock. Some women die. The publicity  
from Rely tampons brings to public atten-  
tion a problem which may well exist for  
other tampons. According to a 1980 study  
by the Center for Disease Control (CDC)  
in Atlanta, out of 50 women who were ill  
with what looked like TSS, and whose  
symptoms first appeared with the onset  
of menstruation, all 50 used tampons.  

TSS is a mysterious disease. We don’t  
know what causes it, why it is so severe,  
nor why it comes on suddenly. We don’t  
know how long it has been around,  

CLASSIFIEDS  

Wanted: Publicity Co-ordinator for  
LCC — 6 month commitment re-  
quired. We are searching for a wo-  
man with organizational abilities,  
writing skills, and the ability to  
work with both co-ordinating  
the writing, publishing and distri-  
bution of our Monthly Newsletter;  
writing weekly press releases (when  
applicable); designing posters, flyers  
etc. for upcoming events; and de-  
signing brochures to explain the  
Center's ongoing activities. Time-  
wise — about 2 days per month are  
necessary. Women interested in  
sharing their time and skill — come  
to our Nov. 3 Monday meeting at  
6:45 p.m. or call the Center prior  
to 11/3. Leave your name and  
number or write LCC (attn: Deb-  
bie/Rita).  

Roommates Wanted: One or two  
women wanted to share large beau-  
tiful house in Logan Square area.  
Rent approx. $150. Call 235-0997.  

Sale: corner set, bookcase, wall  
unit, large cream rug, curtains,  
stove, refrigerator. More info. call  
477-3599 7:00 p.m. Mon., Wed.,  
Fri., wk. ends.  

NOVEMBER 1, 1980  

whether it is as old as menstruation or as  
new as Rely tampons. However, we are  
beginning to learn a little about it. Earlier  
this year, another CDC study showed the  
presence of a bacteria called Staphylococcus  
Aureus (S. Aureus) in the vaginal  
cultures of women who were ill with what  
looked like TSS. It isn’t known what pro-  
portion of women without TSS have posi-  
tive vaginal cultures for S. Aureus at the  
time of their period. Some researchers  
estimate that only 2% of women in the  
general population have S. Aureus in their  
vagina and cervix at any point during their  
cycle; other researchers put this figure as  
high as 15% (“Follow-up on Toxic-Shock  
Syndrome,” Morbidity and Mortality  
Weekly Report, June 27, 1980, Vol. 29,  
No. 25, pp. 297-99.)  

The risk of TSS is low. A recent  
Wisconsin survey showed that 3 women  
per 100,000 per year get sick with the  
syndrome. The rate for women under 30  
rises to 4.1 per 100,000 per year, and the  
rate for women over 30 drops to 1.2 per  

100,000.  

The Rely scandal seems to indicate a  

connection between TSS and tampon use.  

This is supported by the limited scientific  

evidence, which shows a striking associa-  
tion between menses and the syndrome.  
The heaviest suspicion falls on tampon  
use, but it cannot be the only cause, for  
in rare cases men are known to become ill  
with TSS. No studies have yet been done  
on what could cause TSS in men.  

Theatre Improvisation for Women: A one  
day acting intensive, exploring roots of  
theatre, shamanism, trance, possession  
and innovative theatre games. No acting  
experience needed. Just courage. Nov.  
2nd. 10 to 4. Links Hall. More info.  
call Donna. 463-1234. Keep trying.  

Equal Rites for Women: 7 week  
class on the Great Goddess, feminist  
spirituality, and the Old Religion.  
Rediscover a spirituality that honors  
women’s lives. Academic and exper-  
iential. Phyllis Wilson, 337-8100.  

Feminist Therapist: Hyde Park area  
clinical psychologist, sliding scale,  
can take insurance but not green  
card, leave message at 924-5057.  

The women at Jane Addams  
Bookstore were originally  
interested in carrying  
sponges to make them  

more available in Chicago,  
especially in response  

to anxiety about tam-  
pons. After considering  
serious doubts about the  
safety of sponges expressed  
by feminist health workers  
and the news media, they  
are hesitant to sell  

them at this time.  

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST  

I have a theory that might explain how  
tampon use could cause the syndrome. It  
is consistent with all the data we present-  
ly have, but has not yet been scientifically  
tested.  

S. Aureus is a pathogen, which is an  
agent of disease. Pathogens enter the  
body through five areas: the respiratory  
tract, gastrointestinal tract, skin and  
mucous membranes, genitourinary system,  
and the blood. The last two areas bear  
more on TSS than the others. S. Aureus  
produces a toxin, or poison, that causes  
the disease. (“Toxic Shock Cases: A Staph  
Syndrome,” Science News, May 31, 1980,  
p. 343.) This toxin can be absorbed by  
the bloodstream, in this case the blood  
vessels of the vaginal wall. There is an  
abundance of very small blood vessels in  
the vaginal wall, close to the surface,  
which can be exposed by a very slight  
abrasion or irritation.  

Tampons might promote absorption of  
the toxin into the bloodstream if some  
abrasion occurs to the vaginal wall. Abra-  
sions could occur in a number of ways.  
The vaginal wall does not have secreting  
glands. The walls of the vagina are lubri-  
cated by mucous from the cervix. The walls  
of the vagina may be anywhere from very  
dry to very moist. The degree of moistness  
depends on whether one is in one’s repro-  
ductive years, the stage of the menstrual  
cycle (heavy or light stage), and the level  
of sexual arousal. The lubrication keeps  
the vagina clean, infection-free, and acidic.  

Commercial tampons are large, hard,  
and disastrously dry. They don’t conform  
to the shape of the vagina, which is usually  
collapsed. I think that the dryness, hard-  
ness, and unnatural shape of the tampon  
could cause micro-abrasions to the vaginal  
wall, exposing micro-vessels, and allowing  

S. Aureus toxin to enter the bloodstream.  
This is more likely to occur on those days  
when the vaginal wall is particularly dry.  

But women have an alternative. The  
unnatural, commercial tampon is not the  
only available internal method for the  
collection of menses. For centuries some  
women have used natural, unbleached  
pieces of sponge. There are different types  
of menstrual sponges available to women,  
grass and hardhead.  

Grass sponges are very softly textured  
and comfortable to use. In the 1930s  
dancers and other athletic women used  
grass sponges and called them “plugs.”  
Hardhead sponges are very dense, absorb-  
ent, and durable. Both are natural sponges  
and come unbleached from the Bahamas.  

The menstrual sponge has none of the  
pathogenic characteristics of the tampon.  
Sponges conform to the shape of the  
vagina; they are soft and wet. Women  
control the size and shape of the sponge  
by cutting out a piece which is suitable to  
their flow at the time. Moreover, the  
natural surface of the sponge which comes  
in contact with the vaginal wall is soft at  
all stages of use, whereas the outer surface  
of the commercial tampon frequently con-  
tains synthetic fibers, chemicals and other  
abrasive irritants. So if my theory is cor-  

SUBSCRIBE NOW !  

Journey Womyn-  
Chicago Womyn's  
Support !  

The  

Catalyst  

Page 7  

Women in Music presents  
Olivia Recording Artist  
MEG CHRISTIAN  
with special guests  
Jochle &  
Trish Alexander  

Lori  

Friday  

November 21st  
8 p.m.  

$5  

Stages Music Hall  
3730 N. Clark  
Chicago  

Free parking  

rect, then sponges should be preventives  
against toxic shock syndrome, at least to  
the extent that tampons are causes, but  
there is not yet data to support this.  

Sponges are healthier, more comfort-  
able, and more politically desirable than  
tampons. They are reusable, and hence  
our menstruation won't add profits to  
companies like Procter and Gamble that  
spent 18 years and millions of dollars de-  
signing, manufacturing and promoting a  
tampon which injures and kills women.  
(Abrams and Rotbart, “Tampon Alert  
Jeopardizes P&G’s Rely,” Wall Street  
Journal, September 17, 1980, p. 27).  

Menstrual sponges are less foreign than  
tampons to the environment of the vagina.  
They are designed by nature to maximize  
absorption, not by men to maximize  
profits. The use of sponges is one more  
way for women to take control.  

Women can order sponges from:  

— Women Take Back Control  
P.O. Box 30063  
New Orleans, LA 70190  

— Lesbian Community Center  
3435 North Sheffield  
Chicago, IL  
549-4370  

— Women and Children First Bookstore  
922 West Armitage  
Chicago, IL 60614  
871-7417  

PRINTING! Omega Graphics is looking  
for a woman with or without printing  
skills to become a partner in our collective.  
We are a worker-owned and managed  
collective. If interested, call Rhiannon,  
David, Rick or Jerry at 454-0870.