THE McRAE DECISION

by Rhonda Copelon

from her speech to the New York Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights, July 8, 1980.

Tonight we can see it is much different to look forward to a decision on McRae than it is to look back on it. The split in the Supreme Court was a sharp one. And although it reflects the sharpness of the split in our society, we lost.

McRae is significant for many reasons. Until 1977, one-third of all abortions in the U.S. were done for poor women, many of whom were teenagers. What McRae means is that there is no longer a right to abortion — in practice, in guarantee — for one-third of the women in this country who need abortion. Yet beyond the assault on our constitutionally protected right to choose abortion, the actual language of McRae undermines the very concepts of public health care, freedom of religious expression and civil rights in general.

Tonight we are here because we are angry. As we look back at McRae we must also remember our fight in the 60's and early 70’s to make abortion legal. We won because we were militant, we were tireless, we committed our every energy to winning this essential right to control our bodies. That commitment is now demanded of us again by this moment in history.

To give a bit of historical information, McRae was a nationwide class action suit on behalf of all Medicaid-eligible women, in the name of Gora McRae who was denied a Medicaid abortion in 1976. It challenged the constitutionality of the Hyde Amendment to the HEW Appropriations Bill which restricted Medicaid reimbursement for abortions.

When we first started this appeal in 1976 when Hyde was first passed by Congress, we thought it was an easy case. We thought that there was no question but that in the matter of a fundamental right, like the right to choose abortion, that Medicaid would have to pay. That the denial of Medicaid was in a sense forcing poor women into giving up their rights and giving them only the option of childbirth.

We thought it was a simple case and we were naive. We were naive as legal people and as political people. None of us had realized what was happening politically around the abortion issue.

In the beginning, years ago, we decided to make part of the case against Hyde a documentation of just what it meant to deprive poor women of abortion in situations that doctors would call medically necessary. Over a year we made a huge court record. We thought that if we really demonstrated what abortion meant to the lives and health of women and children, maybe that would make a difference. Maybe if we just spread those devastating consequences before the Court, they would recognize that rights without access actually put the health of the women at stake.

The Supreme Court chose to ignore every consequence of denying abortion to poor women. By acting as if there was not one fact before the Court about the impact on women’s health, they said that real life impact is irrelevant. Irrelevant because the legislature may control public funds irrespective of the consequences. As Judge Brennan said last week, “the right to abortion is only a right not to have the state affirmatively interfere with your choice or interfere with the legal availability” of “abortion.” Funding they say is different. Funding is the problem of the woman, not the concern or the responsibility of the state.

In my mind, McRae represents a complete abandonment of the duty of the Court to preserve a constitutional guarantee of equal justice. Because fundamental constitutional rights are in controversy (as all constitutional rights always are), public funding for services can be denied. It becomes a constitution for those who can pay.

That night, of course, the first bribery allegations were vented on WGN-TV. The source was Rep. Hanrahan and he finally backed up his Wednesday evening charges Friday, May 16 at a 2—p.m. press conference. (His allegations involved Rep. Gary Hannig and an alleged $10,000 bribe.)

The next week (when, unsurprisingly, press scrutiny of the whole issue was fading because Hanrahan could not substantiate his charges), Rep. Nord Swanstrom came forward with his charges. The next week the papers were full of articles that had very little information but intense speculation and big headlines. One Sun-Times article alleged the person involved was a ranking NOW officer.

Finally, Wanda Brandstetter was named and one of the speediest Grand Juries I or other observers have ever seen was convened. Wanda was indicted and tried and convicted in a matter of slightly over 2 months — a process that usually stretches six months or longer.

The really unfortunate thing for Wanda is that she happened to carry ERA Ratification Project cards, which bore the inscription “coordinated by the National Organization for Women.” I do not think Wanda would have ever stood trial if it were not for that.

Wanda’s actions were never really the issue. To me, it is clear Deuster and Hanrahan, with the help of Swanstrom and Republican leadership, coordinated an attack designed to destroy the credibility of NOW, break the momentum of the campaign and stop cold what had become an extremely effective grassroots campaign for ratification.

Most news pieces I’ve seen on the whole issue also ignore the fact that Rep. Gary Hannig received a note from Phyllis Schlafley the day of the non-vote which said, in part, that the “returns” on the Moral Majority anti-ERA advertisement (which appeared in any Illinois paper of any size before the May 10 March) had been “great.” “Stand firm and we will stand with you.”

The Moral Majority ad very clearly and specifically solicited money. (Incidentally, they were not registered with the state and got their hands slapped for soliciting funds without prior clearance, via a letter).

The potential impact on Medicaid as a whole and public health is devastating: Health care is returned to the status of a privilege, instead of a right. Hospitals and clinics now have open license to close their doors to poor women needing an abortion. The lack of funding weakens the public hospitals to which we look to make abortions available to every woman in this country. Poverty is the fault of the poor.

Refusal to fund services becomes the punishment.

I think we have to take a position about the McRae decision which is very much like the position that the abolitionists took after the Dred Scott decision. The Dred Scott decision said that Black people are not citizens. It is frequently invoked, erroneously, by the “Right-to-Life” movement when they claim similarity between fertilized eggs and Black people — an outrage in itself, comparable to their heinous analysis of the Nazis and the pro-abortion movement.

After the Dred Scott decision, the abolitionists said: We do not accept this decision as the law of the land. We do not accept the authority of the Supreme Court to say what the Constitution means.

The Supreme Court decision on McRae is a tremendous boost to the Right Wing plans for a constitutional amendment outlawing all abortions. The call for a constitutional convention (now passed in over twenty states) aims to rewrite the whole Constitution as well as eliminate the Bill of Rights.

It is often said that a crisis is needed for us to mobilize. This is the crisis. It is time to recognize the major message of McRae: the rights of all women to the rights of the poor. We must put our energy and our anger into what it takes to win back such essential rights for us all.

We do not accept this decision as the law of the land.

Rhonda Copelon, from the Center for Constitutional Rights, was one of a group of women lawyers who argued McRae in front of the Supreme Court.

Reprinted with permission from the Reproductive Rights Network News.

Now, granted, Schlafley’s note was a bit more subtle, but it would take a certified idiot not to catch the drift.

As I said, it seems clear to me Wanda was framed. She was no neophyte — she was one of many, many people who were literally going for broke on the ratification campaign. And she was in the wrong place at the wrong time against an enemy that makes a cobra look friendly.

The real lesson from this, I think, is that we are just now beginning to see how much we'll all have to give for the simple goal of justice. Wanda has become to me the symbol of every woman fighting for equality — just when you think you might be gaining, someone comes along and smashes your knees with a brick bat.

Upon the sacrifice of people like Wanda Brandstetter we all stand, a little more free, with a little more hope — because once again the right wing has shown itself and we shall rise.

Sincerely,

J. Lea Pierce

210 S. Grand Ave. West  
Springfield, Illinois 62704