NOVEMBER 1, 1980

Page 6

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST

WOMEN'S CULTURE

FILM REVUE

JANET COOLING
EXHIBITION ARRIVES

by Cynthia Staples

From October 17 to November 12
Janet Cooling’s wit, poetry and spunkiness
will be on display in her paintings and
drawings at the Nancy Lurie Gallery. This,
her second one-person exhibition in
Chicago, features large acrylic paintings
and colored pencil drawings. Cooling is
one of the few contemporary artists to
treat erotic love poignantly and spiritually
as well as frankly.

As she says: “The theme I am dealing
with is erotic love as experienced in the
eerie emotional space of contemporary
culture. I have lived in large industrial
centers for the past 10 years, and this ex-
perience has crept into my work. The
lack of facility, strange look and raw in-
tensity correspond to the spiritual primi-
tiveness of our times. My work is not
magical, meant to evoke power, but also
mystical, direct and concerned with my
particular idea of beauty. The lawlessness
and freedom in every level of the work re-
late not at all to exhibitionism, but rather
to the fundamental meaning of eroticism,
which is my work’s content.”

Opening festivities on Friday, October
17 from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. at the Nancy
Lurie Gallery, 1632 North LaSalle Street,
are free to all. Visits to the exhibition
during gallery hours (Tuesday - Saturday
11 a.m. to 5 p.m.) are also free. For addi-
tional information call 337-2882.

“Night of the Living” by Janet Cooling,
1980. Courtesy of Nancy Lurie Gallery.

A FEMINIST NAMED
HITCHCOCK?

by Sandra Wayne

But, what about that scene from Psycho
when Janet Leigh gets stabbed in the
shower?

Well, what about it? Fifteen years later
I can still see blood mixed with shower
water running in diminishing circles down
the drain and that knife swinging in a long
arc, back and forth, back and forth, fol-
lowed by the close-up of Leigh's open,
pain-distorted mouth. However, Hitch-
cock never showed the knife actually
penetrating flesh and therefore, what we
fill in with our imagination is far more
horrible than anything he could have
chosen to depict on the screen.

Letting the audience do the work is an
ancient trick practiced by the Greek
dramatists, from whom Hitchcock ap-
parently learned his lessons since he utili-
zes these techniques throughout his films.
That is his charm. We never know what
delightful, scary surprise he has next in
store, but we also know Hitchcock's safe

... we'll be frightened but we'll recover,

usually in the next scene with a joke of
some sort. Even Psycho has its share of
joking, but on the sick side. Hitchcock is
a clever mischief maker who forces us to
laugh at our own gullibility at being taken
in by that now obvious trompe l’oeil. It
is the laughter of relief.

But, why depict woman as victim?
This is a moving concern for all women
and they are victims in Hitchcock films
often enough. But here, too, Hitchcock
observes dramatic principles that can’t
be faulted even if they don’t always
agree with sexual politics. Still, in our
minds, that blood mixed with shower
water is going down the drain and we’re
thinking about frail-appearing Janet Leigh
being attacked in the cruelest, most
mindless fashion. How can Hitchcock be
called a feminist if he, too, depicts
woman as perpetual victim?

Any murder is senseless and produces
feelings of disgust and loathing, but aren’t
these emotions heightened in direct pro-
portion to the vulnerability of the victim?
Would our pity and fear have been
aroused if Anthony Perkins assaulted
some macho jock hunk showering after
football practice? We have to assume
Hitchcock was familiar with Aristotle’s
poetics or placed out of the course
because he mastered the principles of
catharsis. Doesn’t this explain why later
on in the film when Martin Balsam comes
to investigate Leigh’s disappearance, he,
too, is killed by Perkins and we are
shocked, but his murder is less terrifying
because Balsam is not as vulnerable.

How, then is Hitchcock a feminist?
If one of the victims in Psycho is a
woman and women in other films are in-
tended victims, Hitchcock more frequent-
ly shows women as heroic protagonists

like Dame May Whitty as a counterspy

in The Lady Vanishes, Ingrid Bergman

portraying a psychiatrist in Spellbound or
Grace Kelly bravely doing James Stewart’s
investigative legwork because he has
broken his leg and can’t pursue the killer
himself in Rear Window.

Even when Hitchcock uses that arche-
type of insipid femininity, Doris Day, she
is altered by his vision. In The Man Who
Knew Too Much Hitchcock implies that
Day’s hysteria after her son is kidnapped
is really connected with the repression
that resulted when she was forced to
abandon her singing career for marriage.
The general attitude toward working
wives when that film was made in the
1950s was overwhelmingly negative, so
this psychological suggestion was innova-
tively bold for the times. And, “Que Sera,
Sera!”

His films have consistently depicted
women assuming assertive behaviors that
went against prevailing mores. Conversely,
he is wise enough to cast women occasionally as villains, too, as he did in To
Catch A Thief, or as a malignant enigma
in Vertigo with Kim Novak playing dual
roles.

If there is anything that can be called
stereotypical about Hitchcock's films, it
is his habit of casting willowy blondes
(whether they are victims or heroines).
From Joan Fontaine in Rebecca and Sus-
picion to Tippi Hedren in The Birds, the
list including Grace Kelly, Doris Day,
Janet Leigh, Eva Marie Saint and Kim
Novak reads like a Clairol ad.

Hitchcock’s films are personally
absorbing because he makes us an inti-
mate member of the scene like partici-
pants in a ménage-à-trois; his is an excre-
mental vision which capitalizes on human
foibles, one of which is that tendency to
think the worst.

If politics make strange bedfellows it’s
no surprise art and sexual politics often
conflict. When an aesthetic absolute rubs
up against a sexual political bias it’s
hardly erotic and frequently what's sus-
pect is the political idea. Art should sup-
port and further political causes as Goya's
sketches did, as Picasso’s Guernica did;
but they are concerned with all humanity,
not just women or men. Art for just one
sex, no matter which one, is constrained,
limited, ultimately disappointing and will
not endure.

It’s doubtful Hitchcock had a con-
scious sexual bias or even a culturally in-
doctrinated one that influenced his artist-
ic decisions; too many of his films feature
women as protagonists and heroines. Con-
versely, he did not deify women either,
since none of them are Madonnas. Who
but Hitchcock would make a villain of
Claude Rains’ elderly mother in Notorious?

The real question is whether or not art
ever can be happily wed to politics. At
best, it’s a marriage under a strain. Films
that show women realistically, as active,
aggressive and successful human beings
(as in the recent Australian women’s
effort My Brilliant Career) are becoming
popular, and if Hitchcock were still
around he would be making such movies.
The more than fifty films he made in the
past are still worth seeing, even if they
were not created in the advantageous glar-
ing enlightenment of Equal Rights.

The past summer and early part of
the fall have provided few films worth
seeing. Because of this dearth I find
myself more often at The Parkway, The
Varsity, Facets Multimedia and other
local theaters which feature old classics
that satisfy the way new films seldom do.
Hitchcock is often featured, for good
reason. My personal favorites are The
Thirty-Nine Steps, Notorious, Spellbound,
To Catch A Thief, Vertigo and Rear Win-
dow. What special qualities do his films
possess that they survive thirty, forty and
even fifty years later? I urge you to find
out for yourself the next time you have
an opportunity.

SORRY.

In our September issue, Judy
Markowitz’ interview with Ruth Todasco
about her woman’s dictionary, Sharpening
the Mother Tongue, was mistakenly
credited to Angela Van Patten. We regret
the error, and note here that Judy’s skills
in Linguistics and word interpretation
gave a dimension to the article which
would not otherwise have been possible.

HAPPY
BIRTHDAY

WOMEN &
CHILDREN!

FIRST

AD PRICE LIST

Full Page (16 x 10) 240.00
Half Page (8 x 10) 120.00
Quarter Page (8 x 5) 60.00
Eighth Page (2½ x 8 or 4 x 5) 35.00
Column Inch (2½ wide) 6.00
Layout Charge

CLASSIFIED ADS

The Journey Womyn/Catalyst Clas-
sified Ad Section offers ad space at
$5.00 for 30 words or less. Anyone
who wishes to place an ad or an-
nouncement about anything from sell-
ing your furniture to advertising skills
and services can mail a typed or legi-
ble copy along with the money to:

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST
CLASSIFIED
3151 N. Southport Apt. 1CH
Chicago, IL 60657

The Journey Womyn/Catalyst res-
erves the right to categorize, edit, and
refuse ads.

SUBSCRIPTIONS
Name
Address —
City +

6 Months $6.00 [1]
1 Year $10.00)

Mail to:
JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST
3151 N. Southport Apt. 1CH.
Chicago, IL 60657