ioe ie

Page 2

ENERGETIC CROWD AT
WRITERS’ CONFERENCE

by Debbie Zucker

Hundreds of women had to be turned
away at the doors from what was a very
crowded Chicago “first: the Chicago
Women Writers’ Conference, held
Saturday, September 13 at the Chicago
Public Library Cultural Center.

The day-long conference was a high
quality (if confusing) mixture of no-
nonsense “go get ‘em” techniques, quietly
powerful networking and radical social-
change feminism. Jane Addams Bookstore
and the Artists-in-Residence Program of
the Chicago Council on Fine Arts co-
sponsored the day's offerings.

Workshops and panels included Women
and Humor, Feminist Literary Criticism,
Latina Writers, Writing for Children, and
Writing for Radio, TV and Film. There
was a Lesbian Writers workshop, a work-
shop on “How to Get Published by a Large
Press," a workshop for Black Women
Writers, and one on Women and Science
Fiction. Self-produced theater pieces,
readings of poetry and fiction, and scenes
from plays by Chicago women playwrights
were offered as well.

“The success is killing us,” said one
conference organizer smilingly as she
herded the large “Networking” workshop
out of the scheduled conference room
and onto the floor of staff offices at the
Center. The move didn’t faze the 100 or
so rapt listeners sitting on the carpet, eyes
glued to speaker Carol Kleiman (author
of Women’s Networks).

Kleiman suggested that women must
think in terms of networking (information-
sharing) in our professional lives,
rather than isolating ourselves with a com-
petitive, economy-of-scarcity mentality.
As long as we are isolated from each
other, she said, women will not advance
as a class in terms of influence, status and
pay. And fewer and fewer women will
have the “privilege” of being a token as
the economic situation makes it harder
for women and men to find good jobs
and good pay.

Barely waiting for Kleiman to wrap up
her presentation, her audience spontane-
ously began networking — making
announcements, exchanging phone num-
bers and information.

The Free Lance Writing workshop fea-
tured writers Joanne Koch and Hortense
Leon, who shared their personal experi-
ences as free-lancers. Among their most
valuable recommendations: put yourself
on press release lists of organizations and
agencies that interest you; don’t overlook
potential stories (even in junk mail); keep
a clipping file; invest in a tape recorder.
Koch reasoned that the tape recorder
won’t become distraught in a less-than-
smooth interview, but will quietly and in-
differently record what you may later be
able to see as significant information or
silence.

Some of the leaders of groups I sat in
on seemed to underestimate the partici-
pants’ sophistication and experience.
There was some unnecessary apologizing,
such as “this may sound awfully cold-
blooded, but publishing is big business.”
Treatment of the subject matter was
sometimes frustratingly cautious and too
generalized. Several women commented
that the most helpful approach for them
was to hear other women’s personal
accounts of specific successes and failures.

Much of the information I heard in
workshops was geared toward survival,
“packaging yourself,” and, in some cases,
getting as much money and power as pos-
sible in the specific field being discussed.
A genuine slice of Women’s Movement,
this day exposed us to the full spectrum
of options. There were spiritualist
approaches and collectivist values as well
as the “forget about ‘assertive,’ be aggres-
sive” outlook.

The tone of the conference was practi-
cal, energetic and encouraging. One
woman said she felt that “if these women
could do it,” she could, too. Another said
she was impressed by what she felt was a
deliberate attempt to create a non-
judgmental atmosphere. She was right.
The women who gathered to educate and
share with each other were of all ages,
many races, both Lesbian and not, and of
varying degrees of feminist militancy.
Their contributions to and reasons for
attending the conference were widely
varied.

I did not see any of the theater or
poetry readings, but from all accounts the
conference was tremendously successful. The evaluation
forms will no doubt clarify both the strong
and weak points of the day, and help in
the planning of next year’s — did you
doubt for a minute?! — Chicago Women
Writers’ Conference.

The concluding benefit dinner at the
Loop Center YWCA was prepared by Chef
Karen Richardson and served by the
women of Journey Womyn/The Catalyst
collective. It was a delicious and delight-
ful way to wind down after a packed day.
Scanning the sign-out sheet upon leaving
the YWCA, I was pleased to see that a
“Gertrude Stein” had made it her business
to dine with us. She picked a great crowd.

sumava
ASINIWSa

TU-S 11-7 SUN 12-6
871-7417

NOVEMBER 1, 1980

Kathleen Barry talks about
her book —
FEMALE SEXUAL SLAVERY

by Angela Van Patten

“In this book, I am talking about
actual slavery, not symbolic slavery,”
Barry told an audience at Women and
Children First Bookstore, Sunday, Octo-
ber 5. “It’s easy to say ‘we are all en-
slaved,’ she went on, “but we must get
beyond this rhetoric if we are to address
the core issues."

Back in the 60's, Barry, ‘til then un-
aware of the magnitude or even the exist-
ence of the international traffic in women,
began clipping brief and occasional articles
from newspapers after someone in her
women’s group came across a book docu-
menting actual cases of women who had
escaped from the prostitution networks
of the world. “Like everyone else,” she
told us, “I thought this sort of thing hap-
pened in the 19th century. I was appalled,
just appalled.”

“It started to fit together into what we
were learning about sexual oppression —
about rape, and the woman being held
responsible for her own victimization. And
all of it formed a kind of clear crystaliza-
tion of what misogyny is all about.”

Finally, it seemed inevitable that she
would have to do a book.

Barry outlined for us her definition of
sexual slavery; her premise for the
material included in this important new
book: “Any situation that a woman can-
not get out of: forced prostitution, abuse,
sexual exploitation, literal slavery.”

Rapping with Sarah Hoagland, teacher
of Feminist Philosophy at Northeastern
University, Barry discussed her interviews
with jurors and officials in the Patty
Hearst case, and finally with Hearst her-
self, “... so much more horrible than any-
thing that was in the newspapers.” She
spoke of its haunting effect on her life —
“I couldn’t sleep; I still have nightmares
sometimes.” In the end, she came to her
conclusions by putting herself in the
place of the victim, feeling the effect of
the experience: “Then I understood it,”
she said. “I thought ‘how did she go to
the bathroom, how did she meet simple
needs like something to eat locked there
in that closet?’”

Barry also spoke of taking on the inter-
national “Boy’s Club mentality” — the
international police organizations, and
the men who run them. One interview was
interrupted by the arrival of a woman
battered and beaten by her pimp. The
Interpol officer told Barry, “Look, I have
to go now; this woman is lacerated on
every part of her body. I have to get her
to a hospital.” And yet, the next day
when Barry returned to continue the
interview, the officer insisted, “Oh, no,
they’re not forced. She did it for love,
don’t you see, she loves him.”

“Women have to start realizing a new
sexuality — one that will not accept any
of these terms under any conditions. I’m
not talking about lesbian and straight
now, it’s beyond that. We can well con-
sume the rest of the women’s movement
in this century combatting the people
listed on the jacket of this book: pimps,
procurers, members of syndicates and free-
lance slavery gangs, operators of brothels
and massage parlors connected with sexual
exploitation entertainment, pornography
purveyors, wife beaters, child molesters,
incest perpetrators, johns (tricks) and
rapists. And we don’t need to spend an
ounce of time on other women’s backs.”

“In saying that I will not interfere with
a woman’s right to go into prostitution, I
am also not saying under any terms or by
any standards anything like ‘It is better to
earn money in prostitution than give it
away in marriage’; I am not saying ‘some
women are just like that’; I am not saying
that it’s better to do prostitution than to
be a secretary. Because in making those
decisions I have to go back to putting
myself in the position of the woman who
is working on the streets in Chicago today,
and the guy pulls up in his car, you know,
for 15 minutes for $20, and she gets in
the car and has to do a blow job on him.
Can we really say that it’s better to be a
prostitute than a secretary?”

Barry is a new kind of dynamite... militant, strong, powerful and sure... strengthened she says by writing this book. And so may we all be by reading it.

“It has to come from us,” she says, “opposing the worst leaves us free to go for the best."

Barry, Kathleen. Female Sexual Slavery. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 1979.

Barry also discussed her book at Jane Addams Bookstore, 5 South Wabash, Saturday, October 4.

LESBIAN FEMINISM IN
THE TURN OF THE
CENTURY GERMANY
Faderman & Eriksson

SAPPHISTRY: THE BOOK
OF LESBIAN SEXUALITY
by Pat Califia
illustrated by Tee Corinne

THE LESBIAN PATH
by Margaret Cruikshank

THE WOMEN'S
RESOURCES 1981
CALENDAR

THE GAY ENGAGEMENT
CALENDAR FOR 1981

AND
Also now in stock:

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR
HANDKERCHIEF?

"WE ALSO DO SPECIAL ORDERS