August 15, 1980

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST

Page 5

WOMEN'S CULTURE

by Sandra Wayne

The film opens with simple white let-
ters flashing upon a silent, black screen.
I'm always more suspicious of the motiva-
tion behind modestly stated movie credits.
It’s as if the audience is commanded to
concentrate against our will. The loud
message on the mute screen is ‘this is a
very arty, serious film, so pay attention!”
But, I assume this is just another of direc-
tor Alan Parker’s conceits. Despite this
off-putting beginning, Fame soon picks up
a marvelous energy sustained throughout
the film. Forgivable occasional lapses
occur when it strains too hard for plot
and subplot. This is an outstanding
example of when less certainly would have
been more.

Isn’t the story of talented, racially
mixed youngsters sweating their way
through New York's High School of the
Performing Arts enough of a plot?
Apparently scriptwriter Christopher Gore
doesn’t think so and his contrived stories

don’t make it. Worse, these lame, clichéd
departures actually detract from the in-
herently rich plot.

The beguiling quality of Fame is the
genuine charm of these energetic and
talented young students. Energy burns
from every pore, eyes flash, bodies fly
through the air. The film is charged and

electric in every frame, but particularly so
in the dance sequences. Parts of Fame are
so delicious I wanted to eat the film to
sustain my high.

We are in the process of writing the
music for the show and plan to open it in
New York next year. Ticket prices for
this preview have not been set yet, so call
922-8530 for further details.

Ten years ago on August 8th, the grave
of Bessie Smith, famous blues singer, was
finally marked with a headstone, more
than thirty years after her death. Rock
singer Janis Joplin and nurse Juanita Green
were responsible for this tribute to the
“Empress of the Blues.” The event has
been commemorated by poet-songwriter
Dory Previn on her album, Mythical Kings
and Iguanas.

September was the birth month of
several important composers. Amy Beach
was born on September 5, 1867. Probably
the most recognized American woman
composer, Beach was commissioned to
write the music for the opening of the
Women’s Building at the World’s Colum-
bian Exposition in Chicago in 1893. She
wrote piano concertos, cantatas, string
quartets, an opera, a symphony, and hun-
dreds of choral works.

Clara Schumann was born on Septem-
ber 13 in 1819 in Germany. A renowned
concert pianist, her compositions consist
of 23 opus numbers, mainly piano works
and songs. After the early death of her
husband, composer Robert Schumann,
she supported herself and her seven chil-
dren by concertizing and teaching at a
conservatory.

On September 16, 1887, in Paris, one
of the prime forces behind modern Ameri-
can music was born. Nadia Boulanger, al-
though a prolific composer in her own
right, is most remembered for her training
of countless American composers like
Aaron Copland and Virgil Thomson. Until
her death last year, she was a highly re-
spected figure in modern music.

As this issue of Catalyst comes off the
press, I will be on my way to the Michigan
Womyn’s Music Festival; my report will
appear in this column in September.

This year’s Chicagofest brought many
women musicians to its stages — folk
singer Kristin Lems, and locals Kyle Nash
and Amy Levin; the tough blues of the
Vanessa Davis Band; and jazz by Shelly
Torres and the Pan Drews Quartet, Denise
Osso and her band, Faith Pillow, Gloria
Morgan, and special guest Joanne
Brackeen.

Our city now has a Women’s Chorus.
After two months of organizing and
gathering members, they are now rehears-
ing regularly on Tuesdays from 7:30-9:30
p.m. at the Church of the Holy Covenant,
935 W. Diversey. The chorus is planning
to make its first appearance at Mountain
Moving Coffeehouse sometime in October.
Music being practiced includes pop songs
like “Save the Country” by Laura Nyro
and “God Bless the Child” by Billie
Holiday; the music selection committee is
searching for works by classical women
composers. The chorus is looking for an
accompanist and is open to new members,
especially sopranos.

A songwriters’ workshop will be on the
schedule for the Chicago Women Writers’
Conference on September 13. The work-
shop will feature a panel, led by Paula
Walowitz, with Tricia Alexander,
Georgette Harper, and myself as the other
panelists. The day’s events will begin with
a performance by Ginni Clemmens. An
“open mike” is being arranged by Paula
Walowitz.

Looking ahead to October 6th (I want
to tell you now so you can start saving for
this rare treat), a preview performance of
a new musical, Eleanor, will be given at
George’s as a fund-raiser for the Midwest
Women’s Center. The play, based on
Eleanor Roosevelt's early adult life, will
be performed by Nancy Ford and
Gretchen Cryer, recent star of “I’m Get-
ting My Act Together and Taking It On
The Road.” Cryer and Ford wrote the

interjecting adults into the kids’ lives just -

Fame speeds along neatly divided into
sections beginning with the nervous expec-
tations of the applicants at auditions and
then runs through from freshman year to
graduation. The culminating number in-
volves the entire student body using their
various talents in “I Sing the Body
Electric,” a musical version of Walt
Whitman’s poetry that he certainly would
have enjoyed.

But, will anyone ever make a film musi-
cal production number that isn’t self-con-
scious? Probably not! Fame has two of
these. One takes place in the school cafe-
teria, one of the darkest, most dismal
places ever captured on film. It’s a good
thing the overworked students at PA have
only half an hour a day in the place. They
allegedly spontaneously jam over Sloppy
Joes in a scene that must have required
the intricate choreography of a classical
ballet. Never was a room as crowded or
more bodies in potentially explosive
motion than neutrons bombarding an
atom, but it is done so good-naturedly
and with such verve I couldn’t help but
enjoy it enough to forgive the craft that
showed too much.

The other production number requires
an even greater suspension of disbelief
since it takes place outside the high school
on a busy New York street. Keyboard
genius Bruno’s overproud cabdriver father
mounts loudspeakers on his cab and plays
his son’s tapes so the world can discover
him. Students pour from the building and
begin dancing in the streets, holding up
traffic, hopping on car roofs and creating
a happening about as original as corn
flakes. But, I forgive you, director Parker.
This is only your second musical (Bugsy
Malone) and perhaps you still think musi-
cals need giant production numbers.
Someday, some really imaginative, original
director will make a musical without one,
when the songs are sung in a way that
doesn’t make us think they are being
poured down from the clouds, but are
coming from the earth, from real people.
Occasionally people do break into song in
real life, but generally without the benefit
of a hundred union musicians in the back-
ground!

THE NAME OF THE GAME IS FAME

And, can we ever have a show business
movie without show business stereotypes?
Fame is rich in tired stereotypes and
ethnic jokes beginning with a Jewish stage
mother who could give Gypsy Rose Lee's
mother a few lessons in chutzpah as she
elbows her way through the crowds,
flashing bulbs as she photographs her
daughter’s every step.

All minorities seem to be equally
stereotyped and “defamed” mildly, so
there should be equal resentment from all
for Puerto Rican Ralph (Barry Miller) who
overcomes his rampant homophobia even-
tually by befriending shy, open-faced
Montgomery (Paul Crane) whose gayness
is presented as a bequest from his often
absent actress mother, as interpreted by
Montgomery’s psychiatrist. Doris,
(Maureen Teefy) a nice Jewish girl from
the Bronx completes the triangle as this
triumvirate works its way through four

tough years at NYHSPA.

Quite predictably the WASP princess
played by Antonia Franceschi seduces
Super Spade (Gene Anthony Ray) and
they dance off into the night. But, Gene
Anthony Ray steals the picture and is so
good we forgive the soap opera romance
that intrudes. His sexy dance audition sets
the screen on fire and is sufficient reason
to run out and see Fame before the movie
catches on and the lines get too long.

I left the theatre feeling light-hearted,
happy, bouncy and full of enthusiasm for
the rest of the day. Fame is definitely an
upper I plan to take again and which I
recommend to all who enjoy music,
dancing and free spirits in action.

HAPPY
10th

BIRTHDAY

GRAY
PANTHERS

Val’s halla

@Val’s halla
Records

POP • FOLK • CLASSICAL • JAZZ

• New and Used Records Bought and Sold

24 Hour Special Order Service (No Extra Charge)
• We Respect Your Preference in Music

• Low Prices and Knowledgeable Sales People

7232 South Boulevard • Oak Park, Illinois 60302 • 312/524-1004
(Across from the Lake Street “L” at Oak Park Avenue) 
Hours: M-F 10-9 Sat. 10-6

Val’s halla

@Val’s halla