Working With Children  
From Violent Families  

Cont. from page 1  

furious and begin a fight, which would al-  
ways end with someone getting hurt. The  
adults in the house were aggravated with  
all the fighting, but generally responded  
to it in a kind of “laissez-faire” manner.  
One day, however, someone found Carmen  
and Robert very quietly and gently ex-  
ploring each other’s bodies. The reaction  
was extreme: the children were yelled at,  
threatened, spanked, punished, and told  
that they were bad. Being determined and  
resourceful, the children simply sought  
more secret places for their new games.  
Most times they were discovered, and the  
reaction was the same. We had a Mother's  
Meeting to discuss the message that the  
children were being given: violence is  
something we don’t get too upset about,  
but touching gently, when it can be called  
sexual, elicits a response of punitive anger.  
Each of us then, staff and residents, began  
to remember back to our own childhoods  
and the negative conditioning that we re-  
ceived from our parents. We all agreed that  
none of us wanted our children to experi-  
ence the same kind of fear, guilt, and con-  
fusion that we had felt about sexuality.  
We made a decision to respond differently  
to the children: their fighting would be  

August 15, 1980  

confronted and they would be encouraged  
and supported to find less hurting ways  
to resolve conflict. If they were relating  
sexually, this would be seen as natural  
curiosity, and they would be responded  
to in a caring way, a way that would not  
frighten them or mystify them or make  
them feel bad about themselves. We hoped  
this would also allow them to feel free  
and comfortable enough to ask questions  
about their bodies. We also agreed to  
make all of our reactions as consistent  
and dependable as possible. We all felt  
good about the results; the fighting de-  
creased, the children talked more, sneaked  
around less, and even began to ask some  
questions. We also felt good about the  
process we had used with each other, and  
with the children.  

Sexism and racism are other attitudes  
that we make every effort to confront. Be-  
cause these attitudes polarize people and  
limit their choices, they also contribute  
to the violence in our culture. Our staff  
and volunteers are diverse in terms of race,  
age, sex and lifestyle. The things that we  
do, and the ways in which we relate with  
others, are one means of refuting stereo-  
types. The children have an opportunity,  
for example, to see Jon rocking the baby  
to sleep and Judy installing a whole new  
shower. In addition, we inherited some  

~ Put a book in their hands ~  

VISIT OUR NEW  
CHILDREN’S BOOK  

ROOM  

OPENING SEPTEMBER 2  

922 W. ARMITAGE - CHICAGO  

SPECIAL STORY HOURS AND LECTURES  
ALL MONTH  

TU-SAT 10-7  
SUN 12-6  

CHILDREN FIRST  

THE  

MACHINE  

CHICAGO'S NEWEST ALTERNATIVE  
CLOTHING STORE  

PRESENTS  

SERVICE  

FANTASIES & FETISHES  

ALTERATIONS & REPAIR  
LEATHER & SUEDE CLEANED  

RECYCLED JEANS & LEATHER  

CLOTHING  

AT 2ND CYCLE  
3534 N BROADWAY  

excellent children’s literature from the  
library of the Cornelia Whealon Task  
Force on the Socialization of Children.  
These books were selected for the non-  
racist, non-sexist, and humanistic values.  

These values are reflected in our play-  
ing too. Bill knows a whole repertoire of  
cooperative, non-competitive sports and  
games. During the winter, we made people  
and animals out of homemade play-dough,  
giving us a chance to act out all kinds of  
conflicts, heroics and fantasies. When our  
play loft becomes a ship, a house, or a  
veterinary hospital, we all take turns in  
different roles. Even horsing around at  
the beach is a way to break down barriers  
between the children, and to show that  
experiences can be shared and enjoyed by  
people of different races, ages and sexes.  

Working and living collectively is a part  
of our philosophy at Greenhouse. One of  
the things we’ve discovered is how impor-  
tant it is for the children to be given  
responsibilities in the house. Many of the  
children have had so much happen to  
them and around them that it's very sig-  
nificant for them to have some sense of  
participation and control. We’ve begun to  
attribute some of their testing and “acting  
out” behavior to a need for control. It  
used to frustrate me that the children  
would invade the kitchen during prepara-  
tions for lunch. Finally, in desperation, I  
began to enlist their help. Not only has  
this made the preparations easier, but also  
the children learn something about meal  
planning, cooking, nutrition, and working  
cooperatively. They also eat better when  
they are involved in the process, and we  
all have a good time together. We are plan-  
ning to create a chart which will list the  
children’s responsibilities, and a space for  
some positive feedback when they've  
accomplished them.  

Our Children’s Program includes four  
staff people — Mary, Barb, Bill and me.  
We've also begun to incorporate the  
adults’ counselors for periods of time, as  
a move in the direction of viewing the  
family as whole. We have a number of  
good volunteers as well. Because of the  
wide age range of the children, and the  
fact that people come and go and have  
special needs at various times, it’s difficult  
for us to plan many activities in advance.  
We have seen, however, that since the  
children have recently gone through some  
chaotic changes in their lives, they need  

JOURNEY WOMYN/CATALYST  

Page 7  

some structure and things that they can  
count on. Our days are divided into  
morning activity times and lunch, followed  
by quiet time and afternoon activity time.  
Within this framework, we allow for a lot  
of flexibility. If you stop by the Green-  
house one day, you might find me playing  
in the wading pool with five little ones,  
Mary and several mothers playing base-  
ball in the yard with a few of the older  
children, Bill talking with Alicia about  
her daughter's fears at night, and Barb  
making puppets with one or two children  
on the porch. When Josh and Joey were  
going through a particularly difficult time,  
I found that a bubble bath gave them the  
space and attention they needed to calm  
down and relax. One day they got into  
that tub five times!  

In addition to the activities that I’ve al-  
ready mentioned, we do a lot of drawing  
and other art work. This is a wonderful  
means of expression, and putting a child’s  
picture on the wall does a lot to affirm  
her presence and value and integration  
into the house. We also participate in as  
many free or inexpensive community  
programs as possible, partly to give fami-  
lies some ideas and resources they can  
make use of when they leave the Green-  
house. We go swimming for free every  
Friday evening at Gill Park, are involved  
with some of the Education Resource  
Center Programs, and go to parks, zoos,  
libraries, concerts, museums and beaches.  

Since we do a lot of talking with indivi-  
dual children and in children’s groups, we  
are always learning new things. Our vision  
remains the same: that we, including chil-  
dren and adults, should be able to relate  
to each other without using power and  
violence (physical or verbal); that people  
don’t need to be divided by sexism,  
racism, classism and ageism; and that we  
can live and work effectively and coopera-  
tively without losing our sense of unique-  
ness. Everything in our society tells us  
these ideas are impossible, unworkable.  
We remain committed, challenged and  
look to the children for insights, as they  
have been less conditioned than we.  

If you'd like to know more about what  
we do with the children at the Green-  
house, or if you have time, good energy,  
donations, or special skills and interests  
to share with us, please call the Chicago  
Abused Women’s Coalition Office at  
786-9013.  

Chicago Women  

Writer’s Conference  

Saturday, September 13, 1980 — 10 am to 5 pm.  
The Chicago Public Library Cultural Center  

78 E. Washington  

THE CONFERENCE DOES NOT END AT 5:00  

There will be a dinner immediately  
following at the YWCA.  
37 S. Wabash  

Please come and celebrate the Chicago Women Writer’s  
Conference. All women are invited (you don’t have to be a  
conference registrant). Karen Richardson, the YWCA’s  
chef, will be cooking and the staff of the Journey Womyn/  
Catalyst Newspaper will be hosting the dinner.  

Dinner $4.00  

FOR RESERVATIONS:  

Wine Additional  

Fill out the form below and mail (by 9/7) with the money to:  
YWCA, 37 S. Wabash, Chicago, IL 60603  
Attn: Karen Richardson  
Please make checks payable to the CATALYST.  
Reservations will be held at the door.  

NAME  

Phone  

Please reserve ____ places (@ $4.00) amt. enc.