RAP GROUPS: AN INTERVIEW  
WITH CARLA CHRISTIANSEN  

By Pinkie Onbekent  

P. What can you tell me about your  
background educationally/professionally  
that you feel helps you with rap groups as  
a facilitator and organizer?  

C. Well, the Oasis Facilitator Training  
Program and my doctoral training in  
Social Psychology. The doctoral training  
is rather academic though.  

P. What is the main job of a facilitator?  
The Oasis Program trains mainly for en-  
counter groups. Do you try to gear your  
meetings around an encounter group for-  
mat?  

C. First of all, a facilitator is an indivi-  
dual that works at keeping the channels  
of communication open between members  
of the group. I do not use an encounter  
group format with my rap sessions. These  
groups are mainly for women to step out  
of isolation and begin to communicate  
with other women.  

P. How did you get involved in facilita-  
ting rap groups?  

C. Maybe seven or eight years ago when  
I was working for an advertising agency.  
I was trained for doing consumer groups.  
I would travel and have a group of, let's say,  

Standard Oil dealers which I would sit with  
and ask them how they felt about the  
gasoline crunch or I would present to a  
group of mothers the prospect that Gerber  
baby food was coming out with a new  
product. I was in market research. I liked  
it very much. Then about five years ago  
there was a rap group on the South Side  
that was advertised in the Reader. It was  
a rap group for Lesbian and bisexual  
women. It launched my career as a Les-  
bian and after it was over I thought, “I  
can't let this stop.” The leader of that  
group helped us to start our own. I then  
started doing groups at the Lesbian Femi-  
nist Center or LFC. Since that time I have  
received formal training at the Oasis  
Facilitator Training Program. That’s how  
I started doing it and have been doing it  
ever since, almost seven years now.  

P. What kind of rap groups have you or-  
ganized for Lesbians?  

C. The rap groups that I’ve organized  
have been general Lesbian rap groups and  
a group that I call Lesbian Singles Group.  
In the singles group we talk about how to  
meet women, where to meet women,  
maintaining intimacy, and techniques for  
attracting new friends/lovers. That’s been  
a very popular group.  

P. How long do these groups usually  
last? How many sessions do they consist  
of?  

C. The Lesbian Singles Group lasts six  
weeks and the general rap groups last for  
nine or ten weeks.  

P. How many women usually participate  
in each rap group?  

C. For a rap group I don’t like to have  
any more than ten women.  

P. When you're going to organize a rap  
group how do you go about it?  

C. I put an ad in the Reader. There’s no  
need to put up flyers because there's  
enough women with the ad to fill a group.  
Often a previous member of a group will  
join the next group offered.  

P. What kind of goals do you set for  
yourself before you start each rap group?  
Is there any one specific thing you'd like  
to see happen?  

C. I'd like the women to really get to  
know each other. Getting together is really  
what it’s all about. The groups are not  
necessarily political. I suppose if a mem-  
ber was a non-feminist and kept calling  
the women “girls” someone would say,  
“Do you suppose you could stop that?”  
They're that political. I think the groups  
have a feminist perspective but they’re  
not separatist. Although I am somewhat  
of a separatist, most of the women are  
not. You don't have to be a radical, Les-  
bian feminist to be in a rap group. I think  
that’s an important thing because some  
people still associate rap groups with poli-  
tical consciousness. These are not CR  
groups. My goals? For the women to  
meet each other. Therapy is not my ob-  
jective. I go out of my way not to be a  
therapist or do work of that sort. So, feel-  
ing better is another goal. The women will  
feel better having people to talk to about  
being a Lesbian and the problems involved  
in being a woman. Just to raise the level  
of self-esteem and self-confidence.  

P. What do you get out of it personally?  
Does it make you feel better about your-  
self?  

C. Definitely, but it is not all altruism.  
I like myself when I'm organizing. I'm an  
organizer. My friends tease me about it.  

With these groups I get to organize and  
lead them in a way. Although the women  
talk to each other, in some ways, I con-  
sider myself their guide.  
P. Do you have any suggestions for  
women who are interested in forming their  
own rap groups?  
C. They can get in touch with me at the  
Evanston Women’s Center. I’d be glad to  
help them in any way. They should call  
me at 475-4480.  
P. How does someone go about becom-  
ing a member of one of your rap groups?  
C. Call the Evanston Women’s Liberation  
Center. The same number I just gave you.  
P. Are you planning any new groups in  
the near future?  
C. Yes, in January I'm planning a general  
Lesbian rap group. We will have three  
social activities as well. I am now doing a  
diet workshop for women on Wednesday  
evenings. It is concerned with breaking  
the compulsive eating/compulsive dieting  
chain. The group's focus will be dieting  
from a feminist perspective. We will focus  
on eating as a coping mechanism for self  
protection. We will discuss assertiveness,  
shyness, and love among other things.  
Those are the two workshops that are open  
at this time. Anyone interested can call  
me at the Evanston Women’s Liberation  
Center.  
P. We are going into the 1980s. What  
would you like to see happen in the next  
decade or become a reality for women?  
C. I hope to see better communications  
between women. I hope to see movement  
towards depolarization which would  
allow all women to talk freely with all  
types of women.  

If you would like to learn more about  
fat as a feminist issue read Susie Orbach’s  
FAT IS A FEMINIST ISSUE, published  
by Berkley Publishing Corporation, 1978.  

Also, Carla would be interested in  
starting a Lesbian mother’s group if  
enough women would show interest. Call  
475-4480 and put your name on the Les-  
bian mother’s group list if you would like  
to participate.  

IDA BARNETT-WELLS:  
“Voice of a People”  

Ida B. Wells was the daughter of slaves.  
She was born in Holly Springs, Mississippi,  
on July 16, 1862. Six months later,  
Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation  
Proclamation. From an early age Ida was  
taught that black people were no longer  
objects to be bought and sold. They had  
freedom now, and dignity, and the right  
to live and work where they pleased.  

Ida had completed two years of high  
school when her parents and their young-  
est child died in a yellow fever epidemic.  
Ida was left to support herself and the  
five surviving children. Although she was  
barely sixteen, she assured the school  
superintendent that she had just celebrated  
her eighteenth birthday and obtained a  
job teaching school for $25 a month. When  
the Wells children were old enough to  
look after themselves, Ida moved to  
Memphis and found work teaching in one  
of the city’s black schools. Her parents  
had promised their children equality, but  
in the post-Civil War South, equality for  

blacks was rapidly becoming a meaningless  
concept. By the time Ida arrived in  
Memphis in 1884, the network of repres-  
sive laws and customs had already been  
built up by southern racists.  

Ida had encountered little discrimina-  
tion in Holly Springs. When she moved to  
Memphis, however, she became bitterly  
aware of the indignities to which black  
people were subjected. The system made  
a mockery of everything she had ever  
heard about equality from her parents.  

Ida’s first encounter occurred when  
she took the Chesapeake and Ohio Rail-  
road from Memphis to Nashville. Ida had  
paid for a first-class ticket, but the con-  
ductor informed her that Blacks were not  
allowed to ride first-class; she would have  
to ride in the smoker. When Ida refused  
to move, the conductor summoned two  
baggagemen who threatened to throw her  
off the moving train. Ida finally retreated  
to the smoker, but she got off at the next  
stop, took another train back to Memphis,  
and instituted legal proceedings against  
the railroad.  

Ida won her case in the circuit court  
and was awarded $500 in damages. But,  
the decision was later reversed by  
Tennessee’s Supreme Court. Furious, Ida  
widened her fight against racial injustice.  
She began writing articles about race and  
politics in the South under the pen name  
“Lola.” Eventually she bought a partial  
interest in one paper, the Free Speech. Al-  
though she continued to teach school, her  
summer vacations were devoted to travel-  
ing around the South drumming up new  
subscribers and signing up correspondents  
to send in local news. She also continued  
to write. Her articles were so good they  
were regularly reprinted in black news-  
papers around the country. Ida never shied  
away from controversial subjects. In an  
era of “separate but equal” schools, Ida  
decided to write an article on a subject  
she was well informed on — Memphis's  
black schools. Ida’s article appeared in  
the Free Speech unsigned, but everyone,  
including the Board of Education, knew  
she had written it. When the list of teach-  
ers for the coming year was announced  

later, Ida Wells’ name was conspicuously  
left out.  

As a result, Ida decided to become a  
full-time newspaper woman. Soon she was  
earning enough to buy half a share in the  
Free Speech. Her partner, J. L. Fleming,  
served as business manager while Ida han-  
dled the editing and subscription depart-  
ment. Free Speech originally had a circula-  
tion of about 1500. After Ida took over,  
it jumped to 4,000.  

The Memphis Free Speech became  
more and more outspoken on the prob-  
lems of southern blacks. Finally, Ida took  
on a subject that everyone, black and  
white, was afraid to discuss: Lynching.  

Ida Wells was an outstanding figure  
in the movement for the arrest and pun-  
ishment of lynchers. When in 1892, her  
paper, Memphis Free Speech, exposed  
some of the forces involved in the lynching  
of three black businessmen in Memphis,  
her offices were demolished by white  
hoodlums and she was driven from the  
city of Memphis.  

T. Thomas Fortune offered Ida a job  
on the New York Age. One of her first  
articles was a seven-column front page  
story giving the names, dates, and loca-  
tions of several dozen lynchings. Her story  
caused a sensation in black communities  
around the country. The issue sold 10,000  
copies, 1,000 in Memphis alone.  

In the wake of the enthusiastic re-  
sponse to her articles, Ida took the lecture  
platform. She traveled to every major city  
in the country, talking about the evils of  
lynching and organizing anti-lynching  
societies. The age of the investigative re-  
porter had not yet come about, but Ida  
Wells hastened its coming. Ida traveled  
throughout the South from Texas to  
Virginia, asking white and black men to  
tell her the facts and details of dozens of  
lynchings. More than once, Ida thought  
she would need to use her small pistol in  
self-defense. Ida returned with enough  
ammunition from this fact-finding expedi-  

tion to start a war against lynchers. No one  
ever refuted the mass of evidence she had  
accumulated. Often reporters in the audi-  
ence squirmed when Ida condemned white  
newspapers in the North for complacently  
accepting the false stories put out by  
southern editors to excuse the lynchings.  

In 1895, Ida married a Chicago attor-  
ney and militant race leader, Ferdinand  
Barnett. Both became active in the  
National Equal Rights League. Ida pub-  
lished the first authentic account and sta-  
tistical record on lynching in 1895, also.  
This account, The Red Record, gave full  
details of three years of lynchings in the  
U.S. To ensure its acceptability, she took  
all her data from white sources, and in  
most cases, described the incidents in the  
exact words of white journalists.  

Ida B. Wells served as chairman of  
the Anti-Lynching Bureau of the Afro-  
American Council, a national protest or-  
ganization that was a forerunner of the  
NAACP. She was also a member of the  
delegation that called on President  
McKinley in 1898 to protest the lynching  
of a black postmaster in South Carolina.  
In 1909 she went to Springfield and urged  
Governor Charles Deneen to reinstate the  
sheriff who had tried to prevent the tragic  
lynching of a black man in southern  
Illinois. The Governor did so and thus put  
an end to lynching in Illinois.  

In an era where both blacks and whites  
were reluctant to speak out against the in-  
justice of lynchings, one woman, Ida B.  
Wells, had the courage to stir the country’s  
conscience. Thanks to Ida Wells’ efforts,  
lynchings, which had reached an all-time  
high at the beginning of the 1890s, gradu-  
ally tapered off. The NAACP was ready  
to take up the crusade when the lynch rate  
began to rise again after World War I, but  
it was Ida B. Wells who pointed the way.  

Sources/further reading:  

Women of Courage; Margaret Truman;  
Wm. Morrow and Company, Inc. New  
York, 1976.  

A Pictorial History of the Negro in  
America; Hughes and Meltzer; Crown  
Publishers, Inc.; New York, 1968.  

Black Foremothers, Three Lives; Dorothy  
Sterling; Feminist Press.