Cata

January 1980

Vol. 1 No. 1

WHO WE ARE

With the merge of Blazing Star with Gaylife, a group of women from B.S. agreed that Chicago needs an independent women’s paper. Other women joined us to begin to organize the Catalyst. We want other women to understand who we are, what we want in the Catalyst, and our purpose in putting all this energy into the paper.

We agreed that we didn't want to define ourselves as Blazing Star did. Our politics are important to us as individuals, and we wanted to offer space for diverse views and articles. We will try to span the issues concerning women.

Any articles in this paper may be supported by individuals of the Catalyst, but do not necessarily present the views of us all.

We are working as a group to have diversity. Editorial decisions reflect the group process together in the Catalyst: what advertising involves, how to support ourselves financially, and how to publish a paper of importance to women. This challenge is open to other women in our community; come join us.

SARA RE RENEE TO oe

Catalyst*

Chicago Womyn's Paper

Join us for a benefit on February sixteen, from 7:30 to 1:00 pm at the Metropolitan Community Church, 615 West Wellington Street.

Dinner will be served at 7:30, consisting of vegetarian or meat chili, cornbread, apple juice and/or tea. Entertainment will begin at 9:00. Suggested donations are $3.00 for dinner only, $2.00 for entertainment only, or $5.00 for both. Come and enjoy!

$3.00 for dinner only

¢ FEMINISM IN THE 80's ¢

FEMINIST VIEW OF THE 1980's
Compiled by Susan Schleef

Catalyst asked some local feminists for their views on feminism in the 80's.

Nancy Finke, Co-owner, Jane Addams Bookstore; Active in Movement for a New Society and Feminists in Alternative Businesses

I see a continuing and growing awareness by women of who they are and what they want to be. The "Take Back the Night" movement will increase. Women standing up for themselves and saying they deserve to be safe and respected by everybody all the time is part of that. Demanding better jobs, better pay and respect in the work we do is a part of that also. Women are taking charge in their own work, in starting alternative businesses and organizations. The 80's will continue to see feminist businesses springing up all over the place.

Women are moving into the forefront of environmental concerns. That is a very good outgrowth of our concern for life and the earth and for Mother Nature and her people. In the 80's this will be evidenced by growing feminist leadership in the anti-nuclear power movement.

Rebecca Sive-Tomashevsky, Executive Director, Midwest Women’s Center; feminist activist and organizer

My personal point of view is somewhat depressing. Many women see the gains of the women’s movement to date as having eliminated job discrimination and opened the options for alternative lifestyles. But, for the majority, there doesn't seem to be a sense of political struggle left. The continuing issues such as abortion and the ERA have almost ground to a halt. Because of the media coverage of the movement to date, the average person assumes the victories have been won. Inquiries to the MWC revolve around employment questions, retraining options, new jobs, etc.

The first line of women who were changed by the women's movement ten years ago are burning out. The women coming along have to be educated to the political issues, the issues that go beyond their personal lives. They must see beyond their better jobs, beyond the fact that their marriage is more equal than that of their parents or that they can come out of the closets, to renew their commitment and energy to the work that still needs to be done on the big political issues. We must realize that there hasn't been a significant piece of Civil Rights legislation in Congress in the past four years, that Pro-choice and ERA issues are at a standstill.

The value of the Center, and I see that as continuing, is that it has brought together women from traditional organizations with some really radical women for action on specific issues. My little fantasy is that everyone who calls the Center will work for us. My vision was: women being served by women using women’s services and putting energy back into the movement. I hope this can be realized in the 80's.

Thelma Norris, Women In Music record distributor, booking agent

We promote women’s culture by distributing women’s music and albums. Women’s music is ready to move into other performing forms — theatre, comedy shows, full-scale musicals. In the 80's, people in general will take more control over their lives. Women will become more aware that as audiences they can influence mass media. For example, they can get the music they want to hear played on the radio, at concerts and on T.V. Calling stations and asking for certain performers or songs has a definite effect. Stations keep a careful record of such inquiries and will begin providing the music their callers want to hear. We will continue our efforts to promulgate women’s work by producing cultural events by women in the 1980's.

Julie Zolot, Women’s Graphics Collective

Graphics is a collective of women who design and hand silk screen posters about women's causes which we sell by mail. We also teach silk screen and occasionally hold workshops on various parts of the process. In the 1980's we hope to establish ourselves more firmly as a viable women’s business spreading women’s culture, words and art through the graphic media. We are always creating — new posters spring from new ideas, new causes.

Marcia Alpert, Women Against Rape

Our hope for the 1980's would be the elimination of rape. Realistically, we will continue our community education and training to reduce rape and the adverse effects of rape on the individual. We will continue to solicit and train volunteer professionals from various social service agencies to assist in free counseling for the victims of rape. We will continue to be Pro-choice and Pro-ERA.

Maria Heinz, Mujeres Latinas en Accion

Ours is the only organization for Hispanic women in the Midwest. We are a community-based multi-service, feminist organization. We have counseling and referral programs for victims of domestic violence, community education workshops, a food co-op, an after-school recreation and tutoring program, programs for runaway youth, etc. For the 1980's we will continue our work and encourage others to start their own similar self-help programs.

JoLynn Doerr, Chimera, Inc., Self-Defense for Women

In the 80's, women’s interest in self-defense training will continue to grow. Women’s image as strong and independent people will gradually improve, reflecting the reality of American women, but backlash — retro fashions, brutality in porn and media, “liberated enough to be a sex object" propaganda — will be a continuing problem. However, the issue of the depiction and acceptance of violence against women will receive serious attention and will become a major focus of the women’s movement.

Chimera’s goals for the 80's are: to make self-defense classes available to all women, through community classes, schools and in the workplace; to train enough new teachers to teach those classes; to expand into other states by developing an out-of-state teacher-training program; and to develop a network of self-defense supporters — Chimera Associate Members — to be mobilized on related issues.

Sarah Lucia Hoagland, Department of Philosophy, NIU, Feminist educator

Masculinism will endure the cancerous spread of conservatism during the 80's, raping and silencing feminism even more than it has in its liberal, humanist manifestations. During this process, liberals and conservatives will quite likely seize upon feminist issues for their own purposes. For example, pornographers have already...