ALIVE

KNOWING, CARING, HEALING  
By Pam Sabo, BSN, RN  

Why Knowing, Caring, Healing? Why  
another women's health column at all? So  
much has been written, so much advice  
given. Why more? In this first column I'd  
like to answer these questions and give  
you some things to think about.  

From years of reading, training, prac-  
tice and just plain observing, I’ve learned  
that health care is not mysterious and that  
each of us can heal ourselves given enough  
knowledge and desire. It's time now to  
take back our own powers, to develop our  
abilities, and to reach out and share our  
discoveries with our sisters and our chil-  
dren. You have the power if you care to  
learn. You are responsible for your body  
— please don't treat yourself as some  
people treat their cars — with a ‘Here, fix  
this for me” attitude.  

What is being healthy, anyway? Prob-  
ably one idea will be important to you.  
Namely that health is a positive thing:  
feeling good rather than merely “not feel-  
ing bad.” Now maybe you'd like to make  
a list of the differences between how you'd  
like to feel and how you do feel. Let's look  

Alcoholism  

We at the Catalyst believe alcoholism  
to be a problem within the community,  
that must not be ignored. Lesbians, in par-  
ticular, for many years had few alternatives  
other than to socialize in the bars. We  
hope to encourage women to seek out  
these alternatives and to talk to each other  
about the problems and solutions of alco-  
holism in our community.  

ALCOHOLISM  
By Sue C. and Marcia Donaldson  

Recently I became reacquainted with  

Sue, a woman I knew years ago. I didn’t  
like her then, I like her now. We talked  
about alcoholism and what it does to  
women. Sue knows all about it, she is an  
alcoholic.  

An alcoholic is a person who has lost  
the choice over whether to drink or not.  
Alcohol controls them, they do not con-  
trol their alcohol consumption.  

Alcoholism is finally being treated as  
a disease by mental health professionals  
in many areas of the country. Alcoholism  
is a disease that is not easily understood  
and can exhibit different characteristics  
in each person. It is oversimplifying a  
complicated disease to state that one drink  
triggers a craving for more but that is es-  
sentially what happens to the alcoholic.  
If an alcoholic stops drinking but later de-  
cides to take just one drink, that one drink  
will trigger the physical craving for alcohol.  
So the circle begins again.  

Denial is an essential part of an alco-  
holic’s life — it enables her to survive.  
How many of us have listened to our  
sisters say, “I can't be an alcoholic be-  
cause . . .”? Denial stops when an alco-  
holic concedes to her innermost self that  
she is an alcoholic and is not in control of  
her life.  
Many alcoholics hold their feelings in-  
side and only speak of the innermost part  
of their being when drunk. Tragically,  
however, when the moment to speak ar-  
rives she will begin to contradict herself  
and become confused. Usually this hap-  
pens with the active alcoholic because she  
does not know what she thinks, wants, or  

at some of the many routes you have  
available to get you where you'd like to  
be.  

Preventive health care and holistic  
medicine may seem to be new terms to  
many of us, but actually it’s only been a  
short time in a long history that medical  
care has been focused on curing symptoms  
of an illness, rather than preventing the  
body as a whole from becoming dis-eased.  
By working with our body, mind and  
spirit all in view we remain in harmony;  
no one part of us needs to scream out for  
attention. Traditional medicine certainly  
has its place — serious infections, certain  
complications of childbearing, severe in-  
juries are all cases where “trauma medi-  
cine” becomes truly life-saving. No con-  
scientious health care giver would ever  
deny that. But there are many other times  
where herbs, diet, massage, or some form  
of emotional therapy/support is what is  
really needed. All this is available to help  
us, but the power and responsibility of  
healing is within us.  

Let's see what can be done to keep  
body, mind and spirit a little more com-  

Keeping warm is important, and MS.  

&  

magazine (December 1979) has an excel-  
lent article on how to do it. I'd like to add  
the importance of color — both for keep-  
ing our bodies warm and for keeping our  
spirits up. It’s been proven that the wave  
length of colors has a definite effect on all  
living things. Red and yellow (and to some  
extent, orange) actually make many  
people feel a whole lot warmer than, say,  
blue or green. Try a pair of red thermal  
longjohns and see what I mean! Bright  
colors of any hue keep the blahs away,  
certainly a good defense for any Chicago-  
an.  

Keep warm and keep moving. Exercise  
of any sort is vital now to keep your  
energy up. Give yourself what you need  
to keep moving by increasing your intake  
of fresh fruits and vegetables. These are  
natural sources of vitamins and minerals,  
and along with any supplements you  
might care to take (such as vitamin C  
which has been shown to increase resist-  
ance and help rebuild the body) should  
help keep you from that run-down feeling.  
Whole grain cereals (the less processed the  
better) are great winter warmers and keep  
your energy level up for long periods of  
time.  

My eyes aren't open yet, but I'm try-  
ing to wake up. I can hear voices from  
across the room. There are more than two  
people over there and none of the voices  
are familiar to me. My stomach feels like  
a garbage can. Maybe if I don’t move,  
I won't throw up. Oh Jesus, where are my  

clothes? Wait a minute, there's a body in  

this bed with me. Thank God, it’s a  
woman. But who the hell is it? Memories  
are going through my mind of being in  
bed and having sex with someone. I don’t  
remember her name, but I recognize her.  

Now what? I can’t get out of bed be-  
cause I’m naked and there are all those  
people in the room. I roll over and take a  
closer look at the people. There’s an old  
man and two middle-aged people, a man  
and a woman. From pieces of their con-  
versation it sounds like the two men are  
somehow related. My being in bed with  
this woman doesn’t seem to phase them  
at all.  

The old man says something like “So  
you're finally awake. I thought you were  
going to sleep the whole day.”  

The woman beside me wakes up and  
I say, “Who are those people?”  

“That's just Ed.”  

“Does he live with you?”  

“I live with him. This is his house.”  

“Where am I?”  

“Rosemont.”  

“Rosemont?”  

“Rosemont, Indiana.”  

“How did we get here?”  

“Mari drove us last night.”  

The man and woman are getting ready  
to leave. Good. Now I can get up and try  
to find my clothes. As I come out from  

An alcoholic hits bottom when she  
gives up hope of ever being anything other  
than a drunk. The day dawns when she  
realizes that the problem is within herself,  
she is the one responsible for her drinking.  
On this day the alcoholic runs out of  
scapegoats.  

Alcoholics Anonymous may be her  
only hope. A.A. suggests living one day at  
a time. Suggests ways in which an alco-  
holic may find in each day a measure of  
comfort, serenity and a sense of achieve-  
ment. A.A. discourages dwelling on past  
errors and disappointments and sees the  
future only as a series of new days.  

In A.A., an alcoholic learns she is not  
a bad person trying to become good, but  
a sick person striving to get well. She  

“Dusty” the woman I was in bed with  

WELL  

Artificial heating tortures our skin  
with its incredible dryness. Drinking  
water, plain or as teas such as rosehip,  
peppermint or whatever is your favorite  
will keep your skin moist from the inside.  
Saunas are wonderful for a lift. A humidi-  
fier or a pan of water on each radiator is a  
real necessity. Avocados are skin friends  
also — either in a salad or mashed up as a  
10-15 minute facial mask. Use a good, cold  
processed oil such as avocado, almond or  
olive (maybe with a few drops of pepper-  
mint oil for a nice scent) all over your  
body to prevent itchiness — a sure-fire  
cause of winter misery. Maybe you can  
share the oil with a friend and exchange  
massages. Good company has always been  
one of the best ways to help survive a  
long, cold winter.  

I want and need to hear what you  
think, what you're interested in hearing  
about. This is your column and what you  
want to know is what I want to write  
about. You can write to me at:  

Pam Sabo  

c/o Joan Ballas  

829 W. Wolfram  
Chicago, Illinois 60657  

under the covers, the old man looks at me  
and smiles a dirty smile. Oh God, how do  
I get myself in these things? All I want to  
do is get the hell out of here but I don’t  
have the slightest idea where I am or how  
to get home. And, of course, no money.  

has gone off to the bathroom or some-  
where and I’m alone with this creep. I ask  
to use the phone and call a friend of mine  
who lives in East Chicago. “Bobbi? This is  
Bets. I’m in Rosemont and I don’t have  
any way to get home. Can you come and  

get me? Look. I know it’s a long way to  
come. There’s no transportation and I  
don't have any money. Damn it Bobbi,  
you'd better get the hell out here and  
pick me up or I’ll knock the shit out of  
you. You got that? You just get over  
here right now.  

Ed says he wants to talk to me for a  
minute. “What's your hurry?” he says,  
“I like girls like you. Dusty wants to  
move out and I'd like you to live here.”  

“I don't like men, only women.”  

“That's OK,” he says. “You only  
have to take care of me sometimes. You  
don't have to fuck me, you know, just  
kind of talk nice to me and touch me.”  

“No man, I have a place to live and  
money. I don’t need you.”  

I'm so glad when Bobbi honks for me  
outside that I run out the door. She was  
pretty pissed that I made her come out  
here but I don’t care. I feel scared and  
sick. I’m so hung over I can hardly talk.  
“Never again,” I say to myself. “Never  
again.”  

Betsy Streightif  

learns to live, truly live, she learns to look  
at life differently and above all she begins  
to see herself differently. Slowly the alco-  
holic begins to replace alcohol with people.  
Slowly the alcoholic, in the words of  
Matthew Arnold, will “Resolve to be thy-  
self and know that he who finds himself  
loses his misery.”  

Reach out sisters the next time you  
see an alcoholic in despair. Remember —  
we are all from the same fine, female  
mold.  

A.A. Womyn's Discussion Group  
Every Thursday Evening, 7:00 p.m.  
The Parish of Reconciliation  

1663 W. School St.  

Chicago, Illinois 60657