7

oa et on

VIEQUES — THE WIND
BEFORE THE STORM FOR
INDEPENDENCE

Catalyst hopes that this section will
be used by diverse women to communicate
values, attitudes and concerns to other
women. Any woman, regardless of her
politics, affectional preference or race, is
welcome to write to the community

through Catalyst.

The staff of Catalyst will maintain
minimal editorial control. We firmly be
lieve that all women must have the right
to speak out. We hope in OPEN FORUM
women will use this right for the benefit
of the entire community.

Please call 281-4831 with any ques-
tions or suggestions.

BILLBOARD BLITZ/
COUNTER BLITZ

By The Madison Billboard Brigade

The fight against the U.S. Navy on the
Puerto Rican island of Vieques has dra-
matically escalated in recent months,
marking a qualitative transformation in the
overall struggle for Puerto Rican indepen-
dence and socialism. Since 1898, when
U.S. military forces invaded the island and
established colonial rule, Puerto Rico has
been a nation intervened and at war with
U.S. imperialism. Vieques is the sharpest
example of the genocidal conditions this
colonial domination has meant for the
Puerto Rican people as a whole. And the
resistance of the Viequense people against
the Navy has been an example of the
Puerto Rican people’s historic fight to
maintain and save their nationhood, to
defeat the illegal invaders — the U.S. In
the last month alone the state of war has
tremendously sharpened, with the attack
on the Navy transport bus by armed clan-
destine fighters, near San Juan. The fight
against the Navy in Vieques has now be-
come the wind before the storm in the
struggle for Puerto Rican independence.

Vieques is a small island located off
the eastern coast of Puerto Rico. The U.S.
maintains part of the huge Roosevelt
Roads Navy base complex, on over 80%
of the land and waters of Vieques. Tens
of thousands of the Viequense people were
forced from their homes and the island
when the U.S. occupied their land. Today,
the 8,000 Puerto Rican people who re-
main on Vieques live under intolerable
conditions. Coastal fishing waters, the life-
line of the people, have been virtually de-
stroyed by the Navy operations. The
women of Vieques have been subjected to
the brutality and abuse of U.S. armed ser-
vices personnel. People have been killed
and maimed from stray bomb fragments
from the military maneuvers. Based in the
white supremacy of imperialist control
and the U.S. Navy personnel themselves,
the human rights of the Puerto Rican
people are violated and denied.

From the base on Vieques, irreplace-
able to the U.S. for its strategic military
location within the Caribbean, the U.S.
Navy, with joint NATO forces, carries out
war games, laying land and water mines,
bombing, strafing, and exercising bomber
and troop deployment operations. From
Vieques, the U.S. has the military capabili-
ty to control the waters in the South
Atlantic, the Caribbean, and Latin
America, to potentially launch military
attacks against Third World nations strug-
gling for their liberation in the region.
From the base on Vieques, the Navy in-
sures and protects U.S. hold on Puerto
Rico itself. In many ways, the genocidal
attacks on the Vieques people is an indica-
tion of what is coming for the whole
Puerto Rican nation. The U.S. plans to
turn Puerto Rico into a complex of mili-
tary/industrial areas by the year 2020, and
is pushing for complete annexation of the
island into the body politic of the U.S., as
the 51st state.

Several years ago, the fishermen of
Vieques began to successfully obstruct
Navy maneuvers by blockading the har-
bors with their small fishing boats. Today,
the Navy’s role in the domination of
Puerto Rico has become so sharpened that
the fight against the Navy in Vieques has
become the center of the Independence
struggle itself; the U.S. will be forced to
leave all of Puerto Rico when the Navy is
forced to leave Vieques. The fight against
the Navy includes both mass militant sit-
ins at the Navy base, demonstrations and
blockades of the Navy ships, and actions
carried out by the armed clandestine
movement against the Navy. Since the first
actions of the fishermen, the anti-Navy
fight has gained international recognition
and island-wide support. The militant
stand against the U.S. has taken in actions
by the armed clandestine forces has given
concrete leadership to the overall struggle.
The attack on the Navy transport bus by
joint clandestine forces last month which
left 2 Navy personnel dead and 10 wound-
ed, advanced the entire movement by
clarifying the existence of the escalating
state of war between the Puerto Rican
people and U.S. imperialism — that be-
cause of the brutal nature of imperialism,
and the military occupation of the island,
People’s War is necessary to win indepen-
dence.

This action was in specific retaliation
for the murders last year of two young
independentistas, Arnaldo Dario Rosado
and Carlos Soto Arrivi, and the murder
last month of Angel Rodriguez Cristobal,
leader of La Liga Socialista Puertorriquena
and the Vieques struggle. After being
arrested last spring at a demonstration in
Vieques, Angel declared himself a Prisoner
of War, asserting that the U.S. has no legi-
timacy in trying Puerto Rican people in
this war. Because of his revolutionary
stance and political perspective that
People’s War is the only true road to inde-
pendence, he was murdered by the authori-
ties while serving a six-month trespassing
sentence in exile at the Tallahassee,
Florida federal prison. The over 8,000
people who attended his funeral in Puerto
Rico expressed the message that his assas-
sination would be avenged by kicking the
Navy out, and by Independence.

The U.S. Navy, in the face of this es-
calation, has asserted that it will never
willingly leave Vieques. For those of us in
the colonizing power itself, specifically
white people, we have the responsibility
and power to oppose the genocide —
attempted destruction of the Puerto Rican
people as a nation, and to support the re-
volutionary forces, particularly the clan-
destine forces, both on the island and the
Fuerzas Armadas de Liberacion Nacional
(FALN) here in the U.S.

Opposing our own government's
armed forces — by targeting the U.S. Navy
and by agitating and demonstrating —
builds a militant opposition in this country.
As women we should support the struggle
because it is a key fight against genocide,
and gives concrete direction to the over-
all fight against this exploitative and in-
humane system. The people of Vieques
show us that justice, peace and freedom
can only be won by fighting for them,
against imperialism.

During the Week of Solidarity,
February 24 - March 1, there will be acti-
vities and demonstrations throughout the
U.S. directed against the Navy, as it starts
its next round of maneuvers in Vieques.
The Week of activities is organized by the
New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto
Rican Independence and Socialism, which
operates under the leadership of revolu-
tionary Puerto Rican forces, specifically
the Movimiento de Liberacion Nacional,
to organize solidarity among other white
people for developing People’s War in
Puerto Rico. In March, the New Move-
ment will sponsor a country-wide speak-
ing tour of the National Committee for

Successful urban guerrilla tactics were
used by over 100 Madison, Wisconsin
women and several men to counteract a
$10,000 anti-abortion billboard blitz of
Madison. The billboards were paid for by
the Wisconsin Citizens Concerned for Life
during September and October when the
State Legislature was debating the call for
a Constitutional Convention for a “pro-
life” amendment.

The offensive billboards showed a pic-
ture of a 2-month-old baby with the cap-
tion “Kill Her Now... It’s Murder. 3
Months Ago... It’s Abortion.” Twenty-
five billboards were placed at the entran-
ces to the city and on all the main thor-
oughfares of Wisconsin’s capital and
second largest city. Similar billboards had
been placed in other Wisconsin cities, but
nowhere else did feminists react with such
ferocity.

During the two months the billboards
were up, fifteen out of twenty-five were
defaced at least once a week, costing the
billboard company between $300 and
$500 per week. Defacements occurred so
often at some locations that eventually the
company stopped replacing the signs.

The main force behind the anti-bill-
board campaign was the Billboard Brigade,
an impromptu group of over 50 Lesbians,
non-Lesbian women and men organized
into affinity groups of 4 to 5 people each
(according to one member, a conscious
effort was made to reach and include men
in the community who supported abortion
rights and were willing to act on it. The
men who responded formed their own
affinity groups). The Brigade planned so
well that no one taking part in Brigade
activities was ever arrested during the 5
different occasions the Brigade went into
action. Two women, working on their
own, were arrested but were never charged
due to lack of evidence.

Word of mouth spread quickly in the
women’s community to plan the first ac-
tion. Before the second meeting at 2:00
a.m. people had organized themselves into
groups and scouted out assigned billboard
locations to determine how the billboard
could be reached with paint and how safe
a location it was. Billboards near police
stations or high on top of buildings were
rejected. Each group was then responsible
for deciding how to deface its sign and for
bringing its own supplies. Some used rol-
lers with extension handles or ladders.
Others threw baggies full of paint, which
was very messy. The most successful was
paper cups with tempera paint covered
with lids. Balloons were not successful.

All the teams went out at approxi-
mately the same time and returned to the
meeting place so that we could be sure
everyone returned. Coffee and cookies
were available to make things sociable.
One person stayed at the meeting place to
take phone calls if people got arrested. A
bail fund was started by passing the hat,
and two local bands promised to do bene-
fits if we needed money for legal fees. The
Brigade organizers did preliminary legal

the Defense of Vieques, the organization
coordinating the struggle of the Viequense
people to expel the U.S. Navy from their
island. For more information on these
activities and the New Movement, contact
P.O. Box 295, 2520 N. Lincoln Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60614.

research on the level of potential charges
we might expect so everyone understood
beforehand what could happen if we got
caught. Two lawyers volunteered to do-
nate their time if anyone got arrested.

The first night was a resounding suc-
cess. No one was caught, and we defaced
ten billboards! As time went by we be-
came more streamlined. By the last week,
we did 15 at once. We went out a differ-
ent night and a different hour every week
to keep the cops guessing. We always
went out well after bar time, when the
cops were likely to be drinking coffee
somewhere. We decided the night and
meeting place for the next week at the
end of each action in order to limit the
amount of phone calls. If people had to
use the phone, we talked about “decorat-
ing parties.” To minimize the time we
had to meet before and after actions, only
the captain of the team signed in and out
and acted as liaison with her team. The
rest of us could then sleep later and go
back to bed earlier. We decided to contin-
ue going out together on the same night
because it made us feel more powerful
and it made it more difficult for the police
to get us all.

When it was possible, teams tried to
include a political message, rather than
merely deface the billboards. To do that
people painted messages on shelving paper,
flour and water paste to the board with a
brush, and rolled the pre-dampened paper
over the board. Most effective were select-
ed word changes that made our message
out of theirs. This was difficult to do,
however, as the billboards were 30 feet
high! Each team decided by itself if it
was safe enough to deface its billboard art-
fully or whether speedy paint tossing was
safer.

As the actions accumulated, so did
letters to the editors of local papers, radio
calls and editorials about “private proper-
ty” and “free speech.” To present our
view we had a media committee which
kept up a correspondence with the papers
and gave radio interviews.

The final action planned by the
Brigade in coalition with other groups was
a rally and open civil disobedience. Some
300 people marched a mile and a half
from the capital building to a billboard
near the University of Wisconsin. Everyone
threw styrofoam cups of tempera paint,
and three brave souls shinnied up a 20
foot pole to throw a pre-prepared banner
anchored with bricks, over the billboard
in full view of TV cameras. When the
police arrived, the marchers gathered un-
der the billboard until the people placing
the banner came down. They then blended
with the crowd. No one was arrested. We
had legal observers present in case of
trouble.

The Madison Billboard Brigade