Afeeé

PORTLAND'S ONLY WOMEN’S NEWSPAPER

The Changing Woman

PORTLAND, OREGON

FEBRUARY 1975

feminism ’75

Panel members were announced this week for
the opening discussions at Feminism ‘75, the
statewide women’s conference slated for March
7-9 at the Marylhurst Education Center. They
are Dr. Sue Gilmore, psychology professor at the
University of Oregon, who will present the per-
sonal aspects of women’s power; Helen Hayes,
Multi-Service Center, who will talk about Black
women and the Feminist movement; Jane Record,
economist, the economic aspect; and Rep. Norma
Paulus, state legislator, the political aspect. The
panel is scheduled after the Diversity in the
Women’s Movement rap sessions Saturday morn-
ing at 8:30 a.m., when the two-day work sessions
of the conference begin.

Although we reported in The Changing Woman
that the registration fee was $5.00, it was changed
to $3.00 with the $2.00 difference available for
refund or applied to the purchase of The Anthol-

ogy of Oregon Women 1975. ‘Anybody wanting to

submit material in clean, dark typewritten form --

up to 5 pages maximum, single spaced -- for printing

in The Anthology is asked to send or take it to
Ling Education, 1633 SW Park, Portland, Oregon
97207 -- by February 15.

Programs and registration forms were mailed
early last week to over 1,000 women, and it is
urged that early registrations be mailed to Marilyn
Lakey, Rt. 1, Box 420, West Linn, Oregon 97068,
no later than February 28. Some funds have been
made available for waiver of registration fee and
sleeping accommodations in cases of need. Child
care will be available.

Also mailed were invitations to the presidents
of over 30 women’s organizations, some state-
wide, inviting them and their members to partici-
pate in the conference, to contribute material to
The Anthology and to list their organization name
on the program as a participating organization if
they so desire.

owe,

economic

political

personal

Workshop conveners are still needed in each
of the personal, economic and political power
areas. (See page 2 of The Changing Woman for
incomplete program listings.) Workshop pref-
erences expressed on the registration forms by
those attending will determine the actual work-
shops to be held. The final workshops will be
decided at a meeting on March 1, at 10:30 a.m.
at the YWCA by the women who have partici-
pated in the planning sessions.

Diversity in the Movement (small rap sessions
scheduled from 8:30-10:00 Saturday) seeks to
take a positive approach toward women’s differ-
ences. Previous women’s conferences have held
like sessions.

At the OWPC Convention

The Oregon Women’s Political Caucus met in
convention at Willamette University, Salem, on
Saturday, February 8th. The theme of the 1975
Convention was ‘Lobbying, Of, By and For Women
Women,’ dedicating the Caucus members to the
tasks before them in this new legislature.

Sen. Betty Roberts sounded the keynote theme
when she said, ‘Losing one election in a democ-
racy does not foreclose the next one, and women
must prepare now for participation in the coming
elections in 1976.’

In the past, there have been occasional elections
in which women have run for statewide
positions and won--but the participation of
women in all areas of the political scene, local,
state, and national, not only as elected legislators
but on the party level and as appointees to com-
missions and boards is essential for strong influ-
ence in the political arena.

Sen. Roberts also discussed S.B. 206, intro-
duced by Sen. Cook, which has passed the Senate
and was referred to the Revenue Committee in
the House. This bill would allow the same tax
credit in the off-election year, provided the candi-
date has filed, and there is a special election in
that year. The bill would also double the pres-
ent amount of $25, which would conform to the
national election law.

Nancy Tuor, president of Oregon Women’s
Political Caucus, stressed that the three purposes
of OWPC are to: (1) Get more women involved
in the political process by getting elected, taking
responsible roles in the process, and supporting
the political party structure, (2) Lobby at the
National level, now going on in two areas -- pub-
lic financing of campaigns, and child care; (3)
Participate in the appointment process at the
state and local levels.

NONPROFIT ORG.
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID

Portland, OR
Permit No. 1443

25c

a

VOL. 3, NO. 16

march 7, 8, 9
marylhurst
oregon

The Feminism ‘75 planning sessions have
brought together women from different back-
grounds, lifestyles and political beliefs, making
everyone aware that all of us are not alike and are
not going to agree unanimously on each women’s
issue. This kind of diversity in the movement has
the ability to splinter and destroy our movement
or to add power to the movement. Multiracial
schools present a similar dilemma. They face the
choice of either enriching each other with their
respective culture/experiences or playing on those
differences to create fear/distrust and hatred. We
in the women’s movement face a similar choice.

The purpose of the small groups (15-20) is to air
differences; to discuss differing lifestyles and feel-
ings about those lifestyles; to talk about fears/
mistrust/defenses, etc., that women have of women
different from themselves; to try our best to drop
our defensiveness toward other women and really

we hope to accomplish an atmosphere of openness so that all
of us may work more effectively together throughout the remainder of the conference.

Facilitators are needed. No experience neces-
sary. You don’t have to ‘run a group.’ The group
should run itself after a brief explanation of pur-
pose and possible content of the session. We'll
need about 40 women, so please give it some
thought.

If you wish to act as a convener or a facilitator,
write or call Robin Remaklus, 3926 SW Marigold,
Portland, Oregon 97219, phone: 245-2598, or at
her office in Salem, 378-3298. Or call Marcia
Mulvey, YWCA staff, 223-6281, Ext. 49 until
1:00 p.m. weekdays or Mary Beal at the Job
Bank, 223-6281, Ext. 67, between 1:00 and 4:30
p.m. weekdays.

Passed unanimously was a proposed bylaw
change raising dues to $15, which includes $10
to national, $2.50 allocated to the state OWPC,
and $2.50 to the local group. If there is no
local group, funds are held at the state level to
provide seed money to start local groups.

Morning discussions were led by Dorothy
Anderson of the League of Women Voters, who
discussed “How To Lobby.” Find out where
the bill has been assigned. Let the sponsor(s)
know your position. ‘Butter up’ the committee
clerk, so she will call you about any last minute
schedule changes on hearings, etc. Get in con-
tact with the research person. When the bill is
about to come before the committee, start talking
to the committee members (about a week be-
fore) about your interest in the bill, the reasons
for your position, and to get attitudes of the com-
mittee members for guidance in writing your tes-

(Continued on Page 2)