page 4

CHILDCARE TASK FORCE

Childcare is a major priority of the women’s
movement. The welfare of children, and thus
ultimately future adult adjustment in society
has always been a primary concern of women as
mothers, as teachers and social service personnel
and as individuals. Today more women than
ever are heads of households and must work to
support themselves and their families. More
educated and skilled women expect to work for
their own satisfaction. However, with generally
low-paying jobs, most women are not in the po-
sition to pay for good private care for young
children, nor is private individual care neces-
sarily the best for children. Group experience
can be invaluable after the age of three; middle
class nursery schools have proven it.

Present conditions are a calamity and much
needs to be done to rectify the situation. I shall
enumerate several aspects of the problem:

—the holy 40-hour week, 50-week year which
has always drained men (who come home to a
wife, a drink and supper, the newspaper, and an
evening of TV—according to the happily-ever-
after myth) is unbelievably punishing to a person
who also runs the household and is responsible
for raising children. (How can one have any
strength or patience for little ones left over?
Children have the right to a family; after all,
they get just one start.)

—the cost of at-home care, which is the least
disruptive to the child, is phenomenally expen-
sive. Most women don’t clear enough to pay any-
one the minimum wage for 9 hours a day, every
day for infants. For some, for instance, where no
institutional care exists for handicapped or re-
tarded children, at-home care is an absolute nec-
essity. The present tax deduction status allows
less than a businessman can claim for a phone, a
car and similar expenses necessary for him to
work.

—private part- or full-day care exists for in-
fants and pre-schoolers to a limited—and fairly
expensive—degree; it is inadequate to the total
need.

—publicly supported centers or day care
mothers for clients determined by criteria of
economic need is even more limited in scope and
availability. It is viewed as a means to get mo-
thers off welfare rather than as a system to al-
low all mothers to be able to work or study.

—for school-age children the scene is a disas-
ter: before- and after-school hours unsupervised
or in a hodge-podge of makeshift, more or less
temporary arrangements. Working mothers cite
unreliable childcare as the major reason for their
higher absentee rate than men show.

—consider the plight of the day care mother,
who takes children into her home: what is it
worth to give up one’s own privacy, holidays
with one’s family, the freedom to come and go
as one pleases? Children need and deserve at-
tention, pleasant surroundings, and opportuni-
ties to learn useful things. Day care mothers
wear out rapidly, which causes frequent changes
for the child and upset for all concerned.

Various patchwork suggestions have been tried:

for instance, industry nurseries. One of the best
was here in Portland at the Kaiser shipyards dur-
ing the war. Normally they can only provide
for infants because of their distance from schools,
and they involve traveling at difficult hours with
babies and their paraphernalia. It is a temporary
solution for some, but what is really needed is a

Amy Pesak

well-designed, widely dispersed system of qual-
ity developmental childcare, available to all and
at all hours, for children up to 14 years of age.
Perhaps it is necessary to define our terms in
stating these NOW goals in childcare:
1) Developmental means cognizant of children’s
growth, maturation and needs for experiences
which will encourage in each his/her developing
interests, social interaction, and readiness for
learning.

A. health and social services ought to be pro-
vided as well as educational opportunities.

B. for school-age children, unsupervised time
or passive custodial care should be replaced by
such possibilities as sports and games, hobbies
and skills, reading and study time, arts and
crafts, located either close to a school or at
school sites.
2) 24-hour availability: infants, pre-schoolers,
and school children have different needs in terms
of hours covered and location of facilities; also,
full- and part-time employed parents are not con-
fined to daytime, five days a week.
3) Ultimately, every child should be eligible, re-
gardless of economic status. While childcare di-
rectly benefits women and children, in the long
run, all of our society profits. Can we afford to
waste womanpower by allowing half the popula-
tion only one endeavor for fifteen to twenty
years of their lives? Then, at 40, they are “un-
skilled” in the labor market!

Childcare is a preventive social measure, cheap-
er than a war, a source of job opportunities, and
non-polluting. Quality day care needs to be seen
as a right like public education. It is truly in the
public interest. The alternatives are insupporta-
ble: unattended children, women trapped in wel-
fare dependency, women who cannot afford to
arrange to study or work.

2th Sherwood--625-7556  192nd Portland--665-!
Williams Jas Doris 5220 SW Elm--646-'
4 Williams Jas E Jr at :

Jas Lt
2345 SW Jenkins Rd--644-
Wen SW 165th Ave--649-

Johnnie L

4125 SW 185th Aloha--649~
S L B Rt 2 Box 683---663-
June 17710 NE Davis (P)--665-
Williams K Rt 1 Box 28 C Boring----
Williams Ken S 4325 SW 96th----646-
Williams Kenneth

425 NE Highland Dr Sherwood--625-

Williams Kenneth

SW Bar 231 SE 196 Portland--665-
Box 2232- Williams Kenneth J
and 13625 SW 24th Ave--646-
Williams Kenneth J

Williams Kris’ 340 Lincoln, Beaverton 265:
ms 340 I
Victory Club Ave--665-9505 Williams L Bayard
PHONE TREE

There will be times during this legislative ses-
sion when NOW will need to contact you im-
mediately regarding help in pressing for the pas-
sage of feminist legislation such as changing the
rape law, etc. Most likely we would be asking
you to write letters or send telegrams when need-
ed at crucial times. If you are willing to be on
the telephoning tree, whether receiving or making
calls, please call Jane Gehring, 646 6775 or fill
out the coupon and send it to NOW, Box 843,
Portland 97207. If you would only be inter-
ested in working on certain aspects of feminist
legislation, please indicate this. If you live out-
side of the Portland area, don’t hesitate to con-
tact us—we need you too!

NAME

ADDRESS (include zip)

Phone

Please return to NOW, Box 843, Portland 97207.

AWOL S NAIC
Ssvavo 0 saver

11N2y3S “7 Neve.

(CIN WE X9 S061 3H

SIX YEARS OF SEX/RACE BIASED TEXTS

AHEAD

In spite of carefully researched evidence that
women and minorities are grossly under-repre-
sented in the content of reading and language
texts being considered for adoption, the Board
of Education of School District No. 1 agreed to
purchase basic reading texts from Holt Rinehart
and Winston; Houghton Mifflin and Scott Fores-
man. According to the educational experts of
the school district, new textbooks are essen-
tial to the academic progress of its students. The
skills development programs of these texts are so
much improved that children throughout grades
one through six should not be deprived of the
benefits, they claim. (It should be noted by the
reader that children learn to read by the same
basic processes that they have always learned to
read. The old familiar methods are simply pre-
sented in new combinations and in newer, bright-
er packages).

Gwynneth Britton showed that in 1323 stor-
ies, 1067 major roles were assigned to males
while females were presented in 256 major roles.
In the same number of stories, 308 minorities
were represented in major roles. Her data was
considered too subjective. How does she define
Major Role? Response: ‘A protagonist who
generates the main action in a story or is the re-
cipient of that action, with whom or about whom
or from whom the primary dialogue is centered.”
Several evaluators concur in this judgment.

Presented to the publishers the reply was: ‘We
think we did a pretty good job.” (An objective
statement!?) Dr. Blanchard presented the one
example of overt discrimination he had discov-
ered in screening the texts and indicated that
he had communicated with the publishers about
this. He had discovered no other material that
he considered harmful to children.

School district administrative staff members
and a few teachers who were involved in mak-
ing the choices were present in force to make a
strong case for the adoption of the total series
without compromise. Citizens representing the
NAACP, the Governor's Commission of the Sta-
tus of Women, the American Indian Movement,
the Women Lawyers Caucus, Oregon Council for
Women’s Equality, a child psychiatrist, a career
counselor and a teacher’s group opposed the
adoption.

Pressure for immediate adoption was heavy.
Frank McNamara should be commended for his
perception of the situation and responsible ac-
tion. When no compromise could be developed,
he voted against adoption. Board member Phyllis
Wiener was not present.

A decision concerning the adoption of reading
and language arts texts for grades seven through
eight will be made at a later board meeting.

POWER
by
Alice Armstrong

POWER is talking, having them listen to you
POWER is moving, having somewhere to go
POWER is thinking, of worlds yet to see
POWER is knowing, the things that can be
POWER is hoping, to grow and to find
POWER is feeling, there is no limit to life
POWER is having, self-worth and a plan
POWER is being all this without being a man.