Page 2

OWPC Convention

testimony; then, concentrate on the waverers. Find out the rules of the committee from the committee clerk about when you sign as a person who wants to give testimony, the deadline for submitting written testimony, and the number of copies required - say, 15, one for each committee member, plus some for the press, plus other interested people. Attend all work sessions to learn about trends and attitudes of the committee members, see the professional lobbyists at work, and let supportive committee members know you're there so that they can ask questions. Don’t get paranoid about sudden changes in schedules—it happens to everybody; and don’t bug the research assistant, but keep in touch. If the bill is in trouble, let the sponsor know it's in trouble—the sponsor may not be on the committee. Be realistic and prepared to accept compromises—that’s the name of the game. Remember that there are two houses of the legislature, and if you lose in one, you might recoup in the other. Look at your efforts in a positive way. Think positive, be persistent, and be polite.

Maridale Gale, Eugene environmental lobbyist, discussed how to give testimony before a committee. Keep your statement short and well organized. Stress only a couple of major points, and gear it to the concerns of the committee. Practice before you go there—before a mirror. Make a polished presentation. Speak directly to the legislators. Do not read your testimony. Keep to the subject, and focus on the bill being considered. Be sure to present factual material, graphics or a chart. Make adequate copies of your testimony. Sign up on the signup sheet at the head table, indicating whether you are for or against.

When you testify, sit down and take a deep breath before you start to talk, then state your name and address so that they get onto the tape recording. Speak to the members of the committee, and don’t grandstand to the audience.

Be flexible. Be prepared to correct previous misconceptions brought out in other testimony, but don’t overdo it. Be able to answer questions during the course of your testimony, then continue. Don’t be repetitive. When you're finished, ask the chairman if there are questions which you may answer. If you don’t know the answer, offer to get the information—rather than to make a generalization which may hurt you.

Work with the press—give them your testimony ahead of time. For instance, give them a copy in the morning if the hearing is scheduled for the afternoon by dropping it by the press room; in the afternoon, leave it at the press table before the hearing starts so that reporters may have it while they are taking notes or writing their story.

The Caucus’ afternoon workshops, which were well attended and extremely informative, are as follows:

Legislative Issues Workshop: Rep. Mary Burrows, who spoke on Child Services Bureau decisions; Rep. Mary Rieke, on Education and the Inheritance Tax Reform Bill; Eleanor Davis, Department of Labor, on employment practices; Margie Hendriksen, law student representative.

Appointments Workshop: Len Bergstein and Debbie Payseno, both of the Governor's Staff, urged that women who want to sit on some of the more than 2,000 state commissions and boards as advisors make themselves available by submitting their availability. This can be done by sending a resume with background, both professional and volunteer services, and their preferences directly to the above two conveners at the Governor's office or to the Oregon Women’s Political Caucus, P.O. Box 3575, Portland, Oregon 97208. The Caucus offered to screen these resumes and submit them to the Governor's staff people. A list of commissions and boards, including the dates on which present terms expire, can be obtained by writing to the Governor's office.

A method for announcing and publicizing commission and board openings three months in advance is in the works. It is, however, urged that if you want to serve on a state commission or board, you send your resume to either of the above.

The Legislative Process Workshop, conducted by Kathleen Beaufait of the Legislative Council Committee at the Legislature, dealt with the pipeline through which any proposed legislation must pass—from the original idea through approval or veto by the Governor. Of every 100 bills dropped into the legislative hopper, approximately 45 emerge for a vote. This workshop, although only an hour long, was extremely informative to the women who were not familiar with what happens to a bill.

The nuts and bolts of lobbying workshop was conducted by Gretchen Burbidge, who could not be present in the afternoon because of a prior commitment, and Nina Cleveland, lobbyist. Both Gretchen and Nina led a lively session of very hard-core pointers on lobbying.

Resolutions presented and passed at the afternoon session were: (1) To support efforts at state and federal level to procure the release of Joanne McDaniels from a Turkish prison; (2) To exact full disclosure from the Governor's office of the reasons for cancellation of the Women’s Studies program at the prison (resolution presented by the Women’s Prison League); and (3) To support full funding of a community-run program for the Women’s Transitional Living Center, a women's work release center in Eugene.

Four legislative issues to which the Caucus lends its support are: changes in the rape law; ways to address the child care crisis; ending sexism in education; and equal opportunity in employment.

Rep. Norma Paulus as a closing speaker stressed the importance of the Caucus working with other women’s organizations on women’s issues. She also pointed out that the Governor's office has taken strong action in appointing women to important positions.

Members of the Oregon Women’s Political Caucus Steering Committee are: Nancy Tuor, president; Alberta Heffron, vice president; Margaret Patoine, representative to National Steering Committee; Jeanne Dost, past president; Gretchen Kafoury, Portland; Barbara Colburn, Eugene; Lisa Tippin, Medford; Jean Williams, Albany; Mary Klonoski, Eugene; Margie Hendriksen, Eugene; Jean Schieber, Albany; Mable Armstrong, Eugene; Helen Hartman, Executive Director. The address of the national organization is: National Women’s Political Caucus, 1921 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006.

“The task of sheltering woman from the fierce storms of life is the sheerest mockery, for they blow upon her from every point of the compass, just as they do on man, but with far more fatal results, for she has been trained.”

The Co-Respondents, a feminist reader’s theatre trio of two actresses and a vocalist-guitarist, will present their program Fun & Games on Saturday, February 22, 8:30 pm at The Old Church in Portland.

The subject of Fun & Games is women and marriage: The dreams of courtship, the effects of roles, the loss of illusions. The program contains excerpts from a wide variety of historical and dramatic material, as well as original songs by the vocalist-guitarist. It focuses on basic questions relating to women’s discontent.

Actresses Patricia Larson and Sandra Nisbet and vocalist-guitarist Denise Livingston have combined experience in the performing arts and an awareness of feminist concerns to produce programs which believe in “good theatre with a message.” They feel that drama and music are a powerful way of expressing important ideas about the women’s movement.

Since their formation in the spring of 1979, The Co-Respondents have given both performances and workshops in eleven states for a wide variety of audiences which include colleges and universities, women’s groups, libraries, Army bases, and in May, 1974, the national conference of the National Organization for Women in Houston.

They are joined by Denise Livingston, vocalist-guitarist, and composer of most of the songs in the programs. Ms. Livingston has sold the use of one of her songs for a CBS documentary on the women’s movement, and recently had a song published in Paid My Dues, a women’s music quarterly.

Tickets for the February 22 Portland performance are available at Meier & Frank Co., downtown, or at Stevens & Son, in Lloyd Center.