6

Continued from: Page 5

a baby. When she is forced to resign for a year or two she loses her place and must start all over, often in another school system. Some school systems and even state certification boards accord the part-time teacher no status. Since a woman must often combine housekeeping and motherhood with a job she may only be able to work part-time for a few years. Although it has been proven in industry that the part-time worker is often more energetic and efficient than the full-time worker, part-time teachers must often do more than part-time work with less pay. Some states require part-time teachers to continually take expensive courses to “keep their experience recent” since part-time work does not count. The teachers working under such oppression in addition to facing impossible working conditions are fast becoming a frustrated, demoralized lot. Administrators, aware of the psychological

an energetic, stimulating teacher, then hire only those persons whose hostility is most successfully suppressed. Controlled aggressiveness, a quality needed by a leader of change, is eliminated in preference of oppressed mediocrity. Small wonder that an intelligent child chooses to reject educators, education and, finally, all adult authority figures!

Somebody had better climb up to the top of the schoolhouse and start shouting for help. Are you parents of school-age children? Is there some child you want to see grow up right? Then you had better start paying attention to what is going on in our schools, voicing your opinions and doing something to change conditions!

We wish for more
mn lift rather
than more of it

Please . . .
DON’T SCAB!!!
DON’T BUY ICEBERG (HEAD) LETTUCE:

Thousands of farm workers are depending on your actions. Their struggle must become yours if their union is to be recognized.

The lettuce workers of California and Arizona are fighting to organize and have the UNITED FARM WORKERS, AFL-CIO, recognized as their bargaining agent on ranches controlled by huge corporations. Since strikes have been declared illegal (in the Salinas Valley, where most of the workers are), we must boycott the produce of these growers—LETTUCE—and put the issue before the people of Portland.

Remember . . . you are not supporting a large wage increase by honoring our picket lines . . .

The people who put food on your table have waited long enough for needed social change. The Farmworkers Union means dignity and freedom from servility for the working poor. The men and women who work lettuce in the Salinas Valley and elsewhere want to be part of this union. The agribusiness giants know it and wish to suppress the will of these people as they have many times in the past...

NOW YOU CAN SPEAK FOR THE FARMWORKERS WITH YOUR ACTIONS...

DON’T BUY ICEBERG LETTUCE -

To donate labor or materials, or for more information, call 282-8057.

consumer
sexism

by Judy Pence

Sexual discrimination in the Portland area takes many forms, but one of the subtlest is in consumer credit policies of many retail outlets in the community. A single woman or wife may not be aware of how this affects her because she generally does not have access to the information which makes discrimination apparent. She probably is not sure of the criteria for establishing credit in retail stores, and in fact, those criteria may not be articulated. Often, they depend largely on the

businesses. The divorcee may be more aware of the situation, simply because discriminatory policies hit her hardest of any woman. She will find, for example, as this writer was told by Mr. J. W. Carroll of the Portland Retail Credit Association, that a wife has no established credit rating in her own name unless she specifically requested that accounts be in her name during the time she was married. Since most all retailers, home furnishing dealers, department stores and others discourage this practice, and regardless of the fact that both husband and wife are held responsible for debts, only the husband is likely to have “established credit” in this city. Widows are in somewhat the same position, though credit managers seem to be more favorable to widows than divorcees. The biggest problem is that each decision seems entirely arbitrary and extremely variable from one retailer to the next.

The other, not so obvious, but more far-reaching point is that a woman’s buying power is judged and defined by the relationship she has to a man. Her marital status alone is more important than what she earns or what she owns. A woman’s ability to provide for herself is almost never recognized.

Department Stores

All major department stores in the Portland area discourage wives from establishing separate accounts in their own names. Arrangements are made according to the “discretion” of the credit manager. Some stores, notably Lipman’s and Rhodes, cater to professional women who may or may not be married, but have their own incomes and are not making purchases for the family. Where a family or couple is involved both parties are considered responsible for debts, but the person still considered as the primary breadwinner is the husband, whether or not this is the case. Joint accounts are automatically billed in his name. A woman’s income is generally considered irrelevant until a divorce becomes final.

One assistant credit manager interviewed by this writer said “off the record” that a married woman’s income could not be considered because she might become pregnant at any time, and not only forfeit her paycheck, but create a greater financial burden for the family. This is despite her being at a high-level position, and despite all her statements of intent to remain childless. The woman’s choice in childbearing is simply not recognized, nor her ability to return to work after childbirth.

Usually, single women can establish credit on the same basis as men, but a married man’s dependents are not counted as liabilities, so that in fact he is credited with more buying power than a single woman with the same income or assets.

Divorcees are regarded as high credit risks, because their financial situation is unstable. They can open accounts if their joint accounts had a very good rating while they were married. But here the divorcee must depend on the good wishes of the credit manager. She has no legal ground to stand on, no way to prove she has paid her bills. She is often penalized for the bad buying habits of her ex-husband.

Contract Buying

Requirements for contract buying of furniture or appliances seem more specific than those of the department store revolving account, though again, they vary a great deal from one store to another. Many stores ask that a husband co-sign on all contracts for his wife’s purchases, whether she has an income or not. It follows that she cannot make such a purchase without his knowledge and consent; her economic freedom is sharply curtailed. Even businesses which use finance companies or banks for all contracts may require co-signing on applications for credit.

According to Charles Harmon, anyone can buy on credit: male, female, married or single, if they have adequate income or assets. He said there is no need for husbands to co-sign, or even know about, contracts for their wives’ merchandise. If husband and wife wish to own something jointly, then they co-sign, the breadwinner first (whether the man or woman) and then the spouse. These policies seem very unusual and enlightened among businesses this writer contacted.

It is apparent that standardization of credit policies among retailers in this area is badly needed. Consumer protection agencies seem largely unaware of the problem, on local, county, and state levels; so is the public. The first step is to gather all possible information that is available and make it known. Since criteria for opening accounts vary so widely from one business to the next, those criteria must be specified and published for consumers by each store. That in itself would necessitate some self-examination on the part of credit managers. If policies were to be known by the general public, they would have to be less arbitrary. Patterns of financial responsibility need to be explored, as do those related to the reliability of single men as opposed to women, working men and women, male and female heads of households, and so on. If it can be shown that women are no greater credit risk than men in similar situations, retailers might deal with women more equitably.

Finally, assumptions about the number of women who are not serious wage-earners need to be wiped out with statistics if they are to be dislodged from the credit policies in retail stores. If proof were available that job mobility is no greater among women than men of a particular age group and field of employment, or that marital status is no indication of credit rating, perhaps businesses would stop penalizing women for personal choices unrelated to their solvency.

Obviously, much work needs to be done, many facts need to be publicized and brought to the attention of voters and legislators in this state. At least on that level, it may be possible to effect some change, to establish some regulation of the policies which help determine whether or not women can choose to be responsible for themselves financially.