LAUREL—to Cyndi Meserve who is the first wo-
man to play in a National Collegiate Athletic
Association basketball game. She is a freshman
at Pratt Institute, majoring in fashion design.

LAUREL—to the International Labor Organiza-
tion for calling on husbands to shoulder their
share of the household chores to ease the burden
carried by married women who work. The ILO
said that “overworked wives are a serious prob-
lem the world over. A more equitable sharing of
the burden of housework and the care of child-
ren between men and women is one of the pre-
requisites of sexual equality.”

REP. WHITING PROMOTES POPULATION
PLANNING BILL

Rep. Pat Whiting, a strong supporter of family
planning and the right to choose, will introduce
into the legislature a bill to create a State Popula-
tion and Growth Advisory Commission. Accord-
ing to a January 16, 1975 Capital Journal article,
Rep. Whiting stated, “This commission would be
set up to develop studies showing demographic
patterns in the state, where people live, how
they relate to employment and the availability of
natural resources such as clean air and clean wa-
ter.” She continued, “The commission would
not be designed to force population redistribu-
tion, but would ‘help supply data’ related to
population and environment factors that would
influence where people move.” In addition, “If
we know how many people the land can support
we can prevent a lot of problems.” The commis-
sion would be composed of the administrators
of the State Health Dept., Dept. of Environmen-
tal Quality, State System of Higher Education,
Land Conservation and Development Commission,
Economic Development Dept., the public utility
commissioner, and seven other members appoin-
ted by the governor.

This proposed commission might even get into
the area of improved sex education for young
people to discourage teenage pregnancy and mar-
riage. Please write Rep. Whiting a letter expres-
sing your support of her State Population and
Growth Advisory Commission bill, State Capi-
tol Bldg. 410-E, Salem, OR 97310. These letters
can be used as testimony. Your letter could be
addressed to the importance of the bill from one
of several aspects—over-population, food short-
age, ecology, despoilment of the landscape, fu-
ture lack of natural resources, energy problem,
education, Californication of Oregon, etc.....

WOMEN'S RIGHTS PROJECT OF A.C.L.U.
APPOINTS LOBBYIST

Anne Kelly Fenney has been officially named
as lobbyist for the Women’s Rights Project for
the 1975 session of the Oregon legislature. Ms.
Kelly-Fenney will be living in Salem during the
session and thus will be easily able to follow the
progress of feminist legislation. She can be
reached at 581-9120 from 1:00 to 3:00 pm and
in the evening or contacted by letter at 895 Cot-
tage, N.E., Salem, OR 97308.

DART—to the mayor of Westport, Washington
for demoting the town’s policewomen when he
discovered that the town would have to pay their
policewomen the same as the male police officers.
He told the women to turn in their badges. The
five women are now civilian clerk-dispatchers.

LAUREL—to Nancy Breitsprecher for deciding to
fight the mayor's decision to demote her. She
has been on the force six years. She was the sen-
ior sergeant in the department and second-in-com-
mand until she and five other women were de-
moted. Nancy was the most experienced officer
on the force. The demotion of the five women
is a waste of the training these women had put
in to learn their jobs. We should write Nancy
and let her know that we are behind her. We
should also write the mayor and let him know
what we think of his action. Write to Nancy
Breitsprecher, Westport, Washington. The mayor
is Bill Wade, Westport, Washington.

REPORT ON NOW BUSINESS MEETING

At the business meeting on January 28, NOW
members made two important decisions:
1) Officers for 1975: Carolyn
Eckel, president; Linda Tozer, vice-president;
Alexis Dow, treasurer.

2) We chose legislation for our current chapter
priority. As long as the state legislature remains
in session, we will put all our energies into work-
ing for the passage of feminist bills.

WOMANPOWER NEEDED

The Portland NOW Chapter needs both a pub-
licity chairperson and a fundraising chairperson.
If you'd like to acquire some valuable experience
in either area, call Judy Stoel, 636-6806 or Caro-
lyn Eckel, 223-1510.

LAUREL—to Sue Shea and Kay Delaney of
Scarsdale, NY. They interview and video-tape
the interviews for playback fees. They were hi-
red by the National Football Foundation and
Hall of Fame to tape some events for its archives
at its annual awards dinner. They have their own
company, Video Way.

LAUREL—to Sen. Packwood for nominating two
women to military academies presently closed to
women. Susan Wells, 17, had been nominated to
the US Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md. Leeann
Pierce, 18, has been nominated to West Point.
Ms. Wells has agreed to file suit if she is refused
admission to the Naval Academy on the basis of
her sex.

LAUREL—to Bernadette Harland, an eighth
grader in Eugene. She is a wrestler on her school
wrestling team. She recently competed in the
city’s junior high championships. She lost in the
second round. She has won the admiration of
the other team members. They think of her as
just a team member.

LAUREL—to Russel Sadler of KXL radio for his
commentary on Jan. 23 at 7:15 am on the Right-
to-Lifers’ appearance in Salem with their pick-
led fetuses. They would deny others the right of
choice, which is guaranteed by the Supreme
Court decision, and force their religious beliefs
on all of society.

LAUREL—to the Supreme Court for ruling that:
women cannot be automatically excused from
jury duty. Justice Byron W. White said, for the
court, “It is untenable to suggest these days that
it would be a special hardship for each and every
woman to perform jury service or that society
cannot spare any women from their present du-
ties.”

LAUREL—to Jean Gretsch for going back to
school in 1967 at the age of 45 to become a med-
ical doctor. She didn’t let her age deter her
from what she wanted to become. A laurel also
to her family for helping her to go by maintain-
ing the home while she went. Dr. Gretsch has
this advice for those considering a late-starting
career: “Forget your birthday. You’re every
bit a person at 50 as you were at half your age.
Go after what you want to do so that you re-
spect yourself as an individual. But you shouldn’t
do it casually—you have to really burn with
desire for that career. And don’t ever think
that making it will be a snap.”

LAUREL—to the Congressional Democrats for
elevating Blacks, Women and newcomers to
seats on the powerful committees. Among the
appointments were the naming of two freshmen,
two first-termers and a returning former congress-
person to the Appropriations Committee. One
of the first-termers is the only woman and one
of two Blacks. A woman will be the only fresh-
man on the tax-writing Ways and Means Commit-
tee.

LAUREL—to President Ford for appointing Bet-
ty Southard Murphy Chair of the National Labor
Relations Board. Ms. Murphy is presently ad-
ministrator of the Labor Department’s Wage and
Hours Division. She will be the first woman on
the five-member board since it was created 40
years ago. She is a lawyer who in private prac-
tice has represented both unions and employers.
Her approval by Congress is expected to be put
through quickly.