Page 6

calendar of events

Saturday, February 15

Karate Exhibition—benefit for Everywomen’s Co.  
8:00 pm to 10:00 pm at the Contact Center. Call 222 5821  
for more information.

Sunday, February 16

NOW officers workshop at Judy Stoel’s home, 752 Eighth  
Avenue, Lake Oswego, 7:00 pm. 636 6806.

Elizabeth Cotton at Euphoria, a local nightclub. Call them  
for the time and price.

Wednesday, February 19

Meeting with Berna Plummer, new Multnomah County  
Affirmative Action officer. She would like to meet with  
NOW members and other interested women to get our  
input on Affirmative Action Resolution which will be finalized soon. 8:15 pm at Linda Tozer’s home, 1415 S.E.  
Bidwell. 232 1440.

Friday, February 21

Female Sexuality, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.  
Deadline for all untyped articles.

Saturday, February 22

Men and Rape Conference, Friends Meeting House, 4312  
S.E. Stark, 9:30-4:00 pm. For advance registration, call  
Men’s Resource Center at 235 3433. For more details, see  
article in this issue.  
The Co-Respondents in Fun and Games at The Old Church,  
8:30 pm. $3.00 a ticket. To get tickets in advance, contact  
Larry Copeland, 1017 S.W. Morrison, Rm. 204, Portland  
97205, or Bennae Reeves, P.O. Box 679, Camas, WA 98607,  
206 835 5556 (work), 206 834 5197 (home), or at M&F,  
downtown, Stevens & Son, Lloyd Center.

If you’ve already seen Fun and Games don't pass up this per-  
formance. The original program has been rewritten, and  
you'll see a new one.

Tuesday, February 25  
Friday, February 28

NOW program meeting, Sunnyside Methodist Church,  
3520 S.E. Yamhill, 7:30 pm. Childcare available.  
Female Psychology, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.  
Deadline for typed articles.

Friday, March 7-  
Sunday, March 9

Feminism ‘75 at Marylhurst Education Center. The theme  
of the conference is ACTION! If you would like  
to attend, clip the coupon in The Changing Woman. There will be  
childcare available.

Friday, March 7  
Friday, March 14

Rape Panel, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.  
Women in Man’s World, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.

Friday, March 21

Women’s Groups in Portland, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.

Friday, March 28

Cultural Program, PCC, Sylvania Campus, ST bldg.,  
Rm. A-7, 7-9 pm.

June 23-July 4

International Women’s Conference, Mexico City. For travel  
information contact Maida Chocron, Travel Coordinator,  
Public Travel Service Corp., 1225 Lexington Ave., NY 10028.  
212 737 7474.

BILLS TO PROHIBIT DISCRIMINATION IN  
EDUCATION

A large area of sexism in education is the un-  
equal allotment of monies for athletic programs—  
the boys get more. There are several bills which  
deal with this issue including HB2131 and the  
bill Rep. Mary Rieke supports, HB2132. Rep.  
Rieke needs letters endorsing the stand against  
discrimination in education. Rep. Howard Cherry  
apparently is not too favorable toward the  
issue and needs to hear from us also.

VICTORY! DALKON SHIELD REMOVED

A.H. Robins Co. is pulling off the market all  
Dalkon Shield IUDs of the type involved in 14  
deaths and at least 219 cases of infected abor-  
tion. The firm said it took the action volun-  
tarily.

Robins said it has dispatched its salespeople  
to pick up an unknown number of old, unused  
Dalkon Shields from wholesalers, physicians,  
hospitals and family planning organizations and  
give refunds. The same offer will apply to the  
U.S. Agency for International Development for  
all Dalkon Shields still remaining in this country  
which it purchased for distribution in impover-  
ished nations.

“I know all about the birds and bees, Dad. What I  
really want to know is how do I get to be a  
corporation president?”

NEW NOW OFFICERS

Carolyn Eckel is a caseworker with the Child-  
ren Services Division. She has been active in the  
Human Rights Coalition, a group of people who  
are interested in the right to choose. She has  
been the NOW chairperson of our Abortion Task-  
force for the past year. She has also been sup-  
porting the Farm Workers Union boycott of  
grapes, lettuce and Gallo wine. She is the new  
NOW president of our local chapter.

Linda Tozer was the former Employment  
chairperson and past treasurer of our local chap-  
ter. She was one of the Job Bank founders. She  
is a lumber trader for a Portland Lumber whole-  
saler. Her special interests are single parenthood  
and employment. She is our new Vice-president.

Alexis Dow is a C.P.A. with a local firm. She  
has recently moved here from the east coast.  
She is our new treasurer.

The people who were nominated for the office  
of secretary are Peter Stoel and Gabriel Shannon.  
There will be a special election at the business  
meeting, March 25, for this office.

Drawing from SPAGHETTI CITY VIDEO MANUAL

LAUREL—to Joni Huntley for winning the Hay-  
ward Trophy as Oregon’s outstanding amateur  
athlete of 1974 and the Johnny Carpenter high  
school athlete-of-the-year award. She is the first  
person to win both trophies in the same year,  
and the third woman to win the Hayward award  
in 27 years.

LAUREL—to Mutual of Omaha for showing wo-  
men insurance agents in their advertising on the  
Wild Kingdom Show.

LAUREL—to Robin Herman of the New York  
Times and Marcelle St. Cyr of CKLM radio. They  
went into the locker room of the Boston Bruins  
after their victory in the National Hockey League  
All-Stars game January 22. Most of the players  
were not dressed in their uniforms. They were  
not dressed in their underwear; they did not have  
a towel around them. In fact, most of the play-  
ers were not dressed in anything. After a few  
seconds of dead silence, there was a rush for the  
showers. Marcelle said, “It was harder on us  
than anyone else. Because the players made such  
a big deal of it, it was a very difficult thing to do.  
We knew it was a premiere, the first time such a  
thing has happened, that women have gone into  
a locker room. It was important for us to do  
this thing—as Bep Guidolin said, ‘without any  
men, there wouldn’t be any women.’ We must  
have the same rights to a story as men.” Write  
on, Marcelle and Robin, we salute you!