SENATE DIST. 12—HOUSE 22 & 23

Senate 12  
Vern Cook—D  
Marvin Hollingsworth—D  
Bill Johnston—R  

House 22 (Outer E. & N. Portland)  
Harvey Akeson—D  
Ralph Woods—D  

+5 Bob Adkins—R yes favors pres. law  
+8 Robert Teague yes some restrictions  
House 23  

Glenn Otto—D  
+14 Frank Roberts—D yes yes  

James Lock—R  

SENATE DIST. 13—HOUSE 24 & 25 Lake Oswego &  

Milwaukie  
(Senate 13 not up this year.)  
House 24  
Chuck Mendenhall—D  
+5 Tom Monaghan—D yes yes  

Roger Martin—R (voted to table SB 308, public  
accom., in last session.)  

House 25  

+14 Rick Coleman—D yes yes  
James Jaggers—D  

+4 Stuart Mockford—D yes  
Glen Whallon—R  
George VanBergen—R  
Bud Curtner—R  

favors pres. law  

fellow victims.  

‘The Celebration +5 really  
of the Generation of 05 0:  

~~ President  

Position No. 1: EILEEN CROSIER  

Schools need change...  

Part II by Elizabeth  

The schools are failing because we ask more  
from them without giving more to help to get  
the jobs done. The schools will be a disaster area  
until some big changes are made. Voting for a  
couple of million or more dollars for a school  
budget will not help enough. It will only prolong  
the time until the crisis must be faced on a  
national level. With the limited funds made avail-  
able to locally controlled public school systems  
they cannot succeed. Controlled by local politics  
they are not accorded proper importance in our  
nation’s welfare. More is expected from them yet  
they are not given funds to meet the demands.  

Under present conditions our public schools  
will continue to fail until they give up entirely.  
Unless our schools receive far greater importance  
we may be faced with finding another way to  
educate our children. One alternative would be  
the establishment of many small private school  
systems. The schools might operate something  
like a doctors’ clinic in which equipment and  
aids are shared, but the student's parents would  
apply with the individual teacher. Since teachers  
are actually trained to manage their own organi-  
zation and curriculum planning the old system  
of highly paid administrators supervising teachers  
would be wasting money needed for equipment.  
The teachers themselves would be held respons-  
ible for judging the qualifications and suitability  
of their peers to teach. Parents would get exactly  
what they paid for. More expensive education  
would involve equipment, experiments, field  
trips and better teachers. Those children whose  
parents could afford to spend little on education  
would have few materials available from which  
to learn.  

The second alternative to locally controlled  
and financed education would be national, govern-  
mental control of education. National organization  
would permit a standardization of education  
guaranteeing all children of the same type of  
schools equipped with similar materials. National  
enforcement would include adequate funds al-  
located to the schools. The money would be  
taken from taxes despite local opinions regarding  
school funding. The amount of funds would be  
decided on the basis of the schools’ importance  
in protecting the American way of life. Maybe it  
must take the failure of the public education sys-  
tem as we know it to realize that our educational  
system is as important to our national survival as  
our national defense.  

Position No. 2: STANLEY HOLM  

The direction in which we are heading at pre-  
sent is toward total governmental control of edu-  
cation. Through special education programs federal  
funds are made available to schools for certain  
designated projects and activities. Forced by inade-  
quate local funds to accept the government’s help  
the schools run the risk of becoming increasingly  

* dependent on governmental aid. Should the local  

community feel their children need different know-  
ledge from that approved by the governmental  
agencies funds could be withheld until the local  
school system complied with the governmentally  
approved program.  

The average teacher is perfectly aware of the  
school crisis, but I have yet to hear teachers shout-  
ing it from the rooftops where they should be.  
Why? Poor planning and forethought on the part  
of educational administrators has created a false  
teacher surplus. The surplus is false because if  
crowded classes were broken down to size there  
would be more classes needing teachers. It seems  
incredible that education counselors could not  
foresee the surplus coming and advise potential  
teachers to reconsider teaching before the field  
became flooded. However, now that it exists it  
has enabled school administrators to intimidate  
teachers into silence on threat of losing their  
jobs without any possibility of getting another.  

The male-dominated world of educational ad-  
ministrators prefers to play the political game of  
appeasement and compromise instead of demand-  
ing immediate change. As has been proven already,  
only one percent of top educational administrators  
are women. Men chosen for administration jobs  
must be chosen over more qualified women  
simply because they are men. On the educational  
level, male administrators are often plucked from  
the ranks of teachers before they have had suf-  
ficient experience to give them a real understand-  
ing of the children and their educational needs.  
Female teachers with more experience are then  
threatened to remain silent and “cooperate” or  
be fired.  

Women teachers can also be prevented from  
gaining positions of power or voice in educational  
planning by rules which are prejudiced toward  
women's particular needs and requirements. By  
not permitting pregnancy leaves a woman can be  
prevented from having her experience count to-  
ward promotion because it was broken by having  

Continued on Page 6  

Position No. 3: BOB SMALL  

VOTE YES—ON BALLOT MEASURE No. 21 (INCREASING THE TAX BASE FOR PORTLAND SCHOOLS) WHEN YOU GO TO THE POLLS  

ON MAY 23rd...  

AND TO INSURE THAT THE MONEY IS SPENT WISELY AND YOUR CONFIDENCE IS RESTORED IN THE SCHOOLS,  

PEOPLE FOR SCHOOL BOARD. Contact the Committee for School Board Reform, PO Box 12211—  
Portland 97212—For More Information.