‘The following is a letter to the editor of the  
Oregonian of which we received a copy.)

To the Editor: After reading Francis Murphy's  
Jan. 5, TV column and then watching “Of Wo-  
men and Men,” I disagree strongly with his atti-  
tude and most of his comments about the pro-  
gram.

Although some of the segments were inappro-  
priate, most of the special depicted accurately  
the new direction in which sex roles are moving—  
toward full equality for women and men in all  
human endeavors.

Sexism has had the same debilitating, de-  
grading effects on women as racism has had on  
blacks. Just as rising social consciousness of the  
need for human justice has caused a widespread  
rejection of racism, now fully backed by the  
law, most people now are also rejecting sexist  
attitudes and practices in all areas of life. This  
program, in general, simply portrays many of the  
more interesting sides of this revolution.

Mr. Murphy is accurate when he attributes his  
feelings to “hidden (I would say blatant) vestiges  
of male chauvinism.” Male chauvinism is about  
as admirable and acceptable as racist bigotry,  
hardly something to be proud of.

I want to see women hockey players “battle  
each other to the ice grinning as they hold their  
broken skulls and smashed noses” about as much  
as I want to see men doing the same thing. The  
gender of the person involved makes it no more  
or less acceptable. The point is, both men and  
women should have equal opportunity and  
equal encouragement to realize their human po-  
tential in sports, in the job market and in the  
home.

You say, “Most of the male population of the  
United States would ascend through the roof” if  
TV scripts were written with women and men in  
equal roles. I am one male that explicitly disa-  
grees, and the NBC polls on this program clearly  
show that I am not alone. The polls show that  
the majority of males are opposed to sexist dis-  
crimination. It is Mr. Murphy, not the NBC special that is sexist and  
out of step with the majority and the future of  
our country.

Peter Stoel  
752 Eighth St.,  
Lake Oswego.

LETTER TO THE EDITOR:  
Dear Friend:

The regular 1973 session of the Oregon Legi-  
slature enacted some significant gains for women’s  
rights. Much of the credit for these gains belongs  
to the Equal Rights Alliance and its concerned  
supporters who contributed both time and money  
to its legislative efforts.

As you may recall, the Alliance was formed in  
late 1972 by representatives of the ACLU of Ore-  
gon, the Governor’s Committee on the Status of  
Women, the Oregon Council for Women’s Equality,  
the Oregon Women’s Political Caucus and the  
Portland Chapter of NOW. The purpose of the  

Alliance was to coordinate the legislative efforts  
of all of these groups in working for sexual equal-  
ity.

This year, the Alliance has changed its name  
and become part of the Women’s Rights Project  
of the ACLU of Oregon. The reason for this  
change is to provide the Alliance with office  
space, office equipment, telephone lines and lim-  
ited assistance from the ACLU Executive Direc-  
tor, Stevie Remmington. While receiving these  
benefits, the Alliance will remain free to solicit,  

receive and expend its own funds. This “mer-  
ger” will not change either the purposes of or the  
participants in the Alliance, but should make it  

a more effective organization.

Despite our new association with the ACLU, we  
still very much need the continued financial sup-  
port of you and other individuals who are our  
sole source of revenue.

In 1973, the Alliance raised enough money to  
hire (at starvation wages) a full-time lobbyist,  
Gretchen Kafoury. With her able assistance, we  
succeeded in obtaining ratification of the Equal  
Rights Amendment, passage of one of the coun-  
try’s most comprehensive laws prohibiting sex  
and marital discrimination in admission to cer-  
tain vocational and trade schools, housing, credit,  
insurance and other forms of public accom-  
modation; additional funding in the amount of  
$50,000 for the Bureau of Labor and enforcing  
affirmative action programs in state agencies;  
and repeal of a statute which required married  
women insurance agents to have their husbands  
bonded.

Other Alliance proposals met with failure, and  
we have added these to our “to be accomplished  
list” for 1975, which includes the following:

1) Passage of a name change bill providing  
that upon marriage, either party may continue  
to use her/his previous name; and upon dissolu-  
tion of marriage, the court shall, upon request,  
restore to a woman who has adopted her hus-  
band’s name, her maiden name;

2) Passage of a bill assuring every woman the  
right to establish a domicile separate from that  
of her husband. At present, a married woman  
assumes her husband’s domicile, so that, for ex-  
ample, a woman who is an Oregon domiciliary  
and married to a man who resides in Oregon but  
is domiciled elsewhere (such as a student) loses  
her status as an Oregon domiciliary even though  
she continues to live here;

3) Revision of the Oregon rape laws to pro-  
hibit admissibility of evidence of the victim's  
prior sexual conduct unless the conduct is with  

STRONG POSSIBILITY OF STATE FAMILY  
PLANNING SERVICES NOT RECEIVING  
ADEQUATE FUNDING

According to Planned Parenthood and others  
active in the family planning field, there is a  
great danger that in trying to save money in  
balancing the state budget that the legislators  
may not vote sufficient funds for birth control  

services. If this happens, then some family plan-  
ning clinics will have to close and/or cut back  
services. Since these clinics serve a very young  
population (teens and early 20's), a population  
which does not have adequate access even now  
to birth control information, this will work a  
great hardship on these young women and un-  
doubtedly up the rate of abortion in the 14 to  
24 age group. Please write a letter to your state  
Senator and Representative urging her/him to  
make sure that the various family planning clin-  
ics have sufficient funding to maintain the current  
level of service. Do it now!

Also urge your Congresspeople to vote for the  
bill which would legalize the sale of condoms in  
retail outlets other than pharmacies. This is  
based on the idea that sometimes people don’t  
plan their sexual activity to coincide with the  
hours that pharmacies are open, and need easier  
access to birth control methods regardless of  
how early or late it is.

Write the state Senators and Representatives  
in care of the State Capitol, Salem 97310.

in-camera

determination by the judge that the evidence is  
relevant;

4) Support of the Bureau of Labor’s request  
for additional funding and for legislation prohib-  
iting employment discrimination on the basis of  
marital status and providing a private right of  
action for employment discrimination;

5) Support of the Governor's Commission on  
the Status of Women’s bill to provide legislative  
funding to the Commission;

6) Support of legislative action to eliminate  
sex discrimination in education;

7) Passage of legislation to guarantee female  
prisoners equal access to vocational, recreational  
and educational programs available to male pri-  
soners;

Each of these issues should be of vital con-  
cern to you, whether it affects you directly or  
indirectly, as a supporter of equal rights for all  
persons.

Unfortunately, we cannot accomplish our  
goals without funds with which to hire a lobby-  
ist and communicate with our supporters. Please  
help us by pledging your support on the form  
below.

THE WOMEN’S RIGHTS PROJECT OF  
THE ACLU OF OREGON, by  
Carol A. Hewitt  

MEN AND RAPE CONFERENCE TO BE HELD  

SATURDAY FEBRUARY 22  

What are the masculine attitudes that support  
the continuation of rape? What is rape? Are  
sexual fantasies a kind of rape? How frequent is  
rape within marriage? Why is rape thought of as  
a woman’s problem? Are rapists different from  
other men? What can concerned men do to work  
toward stopping rape?  

These and other questions will be discussed  
at a conference on Men and Rape Saturday, Feb-  
ruary 22, 1975, sponsored by the Rape Relief  
Hotline and the Men’s Resource Center.

The conference will be held at the Friends  
Meeting House, 4312 S.E. Stark beginning at  
9:30 am and continuing until 4:00 pm. A lunch  
will be prepared by men. Cost for the conference  
and meal will be paid by donation at the con-  
ference.

The conference will include showing a film  
with interviews of rape victims as well as scenes  
of a therapy session for rapists in which the men  
talk about their feelings about rape. Much of the  
day will involve small group discussion, beginning  
with separate men’s and women’s groups in the  
morning. In the afternoon there will be small  
mixed groups of both women and men as well  
as a chance for the entire group to come to-  
gether.

The committee is putting together a good re-  
source packet and is hoping that the conference  
will involve serious and honest discussion that  
will give us all a better understanding of men’s  
attitudes about their responsibility for rape.  
Primarily to aid meal preparation, there will be  
an advance registration for the conference. If  
you plan to attend, call or write the Men’s  
Resource Center office. Childcare will be  
provided.