24 Ree

yi

PAT WHITING, FOR STATE REPRESENTATIVE  
DEMOCRAT, DISTRICT 7  

Pat Whiting, activist, leadership coordinator,  
and speaker is a Democratic candidate for Washing-  
ton County, District 7 for state representative. For  
the past 14 years Pat has been active in grass-root  
activity supporting defense of alienated youth,  
collaborating for care of our neglected elderly, pro-  
moting the effort to voluntarily prevent unwanted  

births, ecological balance for a healthy environment  

and the survival of wildlife and wilderness.  

Pat was born and lived in the heart of Chicago.  

She then lived in California and later she attended  
and worked at Oregon State University. While con-  
ducting her campaign, Pat is just as active speaking  
and participating in environmental and social  
concern activity. March 13, 1972, she was a key-  
note speaker at the First International and 37th  
National Wildlife Management Institute's Natural  
Resources Conference in Mexico City. Pat, a speaker  
at the General Session who shared the platform  
with Durwood Allen of Purdue University, Starker  
Leopold of Berkeley, and Norman Borlaug, Father  
of the Green Revolution, proposed a four-step  
policy regarding environmental and population  
concern. Pat's presentation served as the theme  
in the official Conference Summary prepared by  
Robert McCabe of the Wisconsin University Dept.  
of Ecology.  

Following the Conference, she was asked to  
confer with United Nations representatives and  
local organizations in Natural Resources, Wildlife  
survival, and grass-root activity in family planning,  
use of contraceptives, and sex education.  

Pat, when asked what effort is being developed  
on the local scene in Mexico City, said, “Disen-  
chanted physicians, students, working people, and  
a few governmental officials of Mexico are very  
active translating books on family planning, sex  
education, and environmental studies. My last  
evening in Mexico City we congregated in a small  
home and shared as much as possible in the time  
allotted. We wrote a song dedicated to interna-  
tional peace and ecology. One verse in particular  

remains in my heart:  
When everyone is related  

to children planned—then created,  
there'll be more love in our living,  
and less neglect and misgiving.....  

Some of Pat's activity includes:  
--Chairman of the Oregon Democratic Fund of  

Washington County.  

--Leadership coordinator for the O.S.U. 1970  
Earth Week in Corvallis.  

---Counselor and tutor for delinquent and deserted  
youth.  

---Active member of the Oregon Environmental  
Council, Izaak Walton League, and Z.P.G., and  
also the National Wildlife Federation.  

--Familiar with the state legislative process, having  
testified throughout the 1971 session before  
formal committees of the Oregon Senate and House.  

Pat is supporting tax reform—to correct the in-  
equity that exists in favor of those who can afford  
to avoid taxes; programs responsive to the prob-  
lems of our elderly and our young including the  
inequity of “taxation without transportation,”  
and environmental balance.  

“The industrialist, the business tycoon, and the  
stockholder can no longer ignore the hazards of  
their GNP index of advancement philosophy pro-  
moting production without protection of the  
worker, the family of the inner city, and the di-  

m  

PHOEBE FRIEDMAN-WRITE-IN CAMPAIGN  

The write-in campaign in my behalf, to oppose  
Edith Green in the Oregon Democratic primary,  
is in itself a manifestation of the deep-seated dis-  
satisfaction which many of us in this district have  
felt concerning her votes for us in Congress. A  
write-in vote for Phoebe Friedman will therefore  
be a vote against continued war appropriations,  
against repressive legislation, and for a full pro-  
gram of people-needs.  

Ms. Green’s record in Congress has been an anti-  
humanist record in many respects in recent years.  
Most disheartening, in addition to voting for all  
recent war appropriation measures, she voted  
against the OEO and Child Development Program,  
against extended unemployment insurance for  
those in high unemployment areas who had used  
up their normal benefits, and for such repressive  
measures as funding the House Internal Security  
Committee (formerly the Un-American Activities  

Committee) and extending the Subversive Activities  

Control Board.  

A vote for Phoebe Friedman has to be written  
in (with indelible pencil available from the elec-  
tion officials in each precinct) and then the blue  
dot must be stamped in front of the name, so  
that the write-in can be recorded by the electronic  
counter. Such a vote will therefore represent a  
specific and extra effort, and any evaluation  
would have to give more than normal weight to  
such votes.  

A vote for Phoebe Friedman will be an expres-  
sion that we want NO MORE WAR, no more spy-  
ing on legitimate citizen activities, no repressive  
labor or civil rights legislation. It will be a vote  
for reallocation of our tax monies for human  
needs; for education for those who need it; for  
assistance to the old, the sick, the disabled; for  
adequate child-care facilities and viable child de-  
velopment programs; for good health care for all  
who need it; in short, such a vote will be an ex-  
pression that we want to build for life, not spend  
for death, and that we want representatives who  
will live up to the responsibilities to which they  
were elected.  

HEH  

“WOMEN'S RESOURCE CENTER"  

A new Women’s Center is being formed at the  

Portland YWCA which will recognize and encour-  

age the current needs and issues of particular con-  

cern to women.  

The Center will be a focus for groups and acti-  

vities of service to women. It will consist of:  

--A multi-purpose office and information  
center, providing information on meeting  
times and purposes of women’s groups in  
Portland.  

---A Women’s Research Library.  

---Providing meeting space for Women’s Groups.  

--A forum for Women’s issues and concerns by  
providing an opportunity for women’s groups  
to form a Women’s Council so that their acti-  
vities and committees of these groups can be  
coordinated.  

The Center will be primarily run by volunteers  

from the YWCA and from the participating Wo-  

men’s Groups with the assistance of a staff mem-  

ber and a liaison member from the Board.  

It is up to each of us to change the current priorities  
of the illegal war in which we are engaged, man-  
generated effluence into the earth’s life support  
systems, and the unavailability of a chance for  
hope, creative living and learning for all peoples.”  

“I am seeking political office to implement  
change in the areas that are blatantly ignored, re-  
pressed, and opposed. It is now time for represen-  
tative government.”  

Community grassroot activity should have an  
acknowledged voice in the process of state deci-  
sions—where a freeway is developed, what kind of  
transportation options are desired, and how many  
children, if any, a person wants or can care for.  
Direct control and repression are not adequate  
solutions; creative and open interaction is the key  
to aesthetic and physical harmony. Such is pos-  
sible, but only if elected officials represent the  
interests of society and not their personal profit  
as is now, in many cases, the norm.  

I intend, with your help, to change such  
inequities.  

North Chautauqua Blvd.  

The Honorable Mercedes F. Deiz, District Court  
Judge, is a candidate for the position of Judge of  
the Circuit Court in the Department of Domestic  
Relations for the Fourth Judicial District. Judge  
Deiz will seek the new judicial position of Depart-  
ment No. 18 recently approved by the Oregon  
Legislature.  

In addition to several years experience as a  
lawyer specializing in family and juvenile matters,  
Judge Deiz served as Pro Tem Circuit Court Judge  
in Marion County’s Court of Domestic Relations  
during the summer of 1971, and more recently in  
Multnomah County.  

Mrs. Deiz went to public schools and Hunter  
College in her native New York City. While em-  
ployed as a legal secretary, she earned her law de-  
gree at Northwestern College of Law in Portland.  

She became a permanent Oregon resident in 1948  
and married a Portlander, Carl Henry Deiz, business  
manager of the Northwest Regional Education  
Laboratory.  

Following her admission to the Oregon State  
Bar in 1960, she served on the Youth Commission  
of Portland and has been active in innumerable  
community affairs. In the state Bar, she has been  
secretary and then chairman of the Minor Courts  
Committee; a lecturer for Family Law Seminar;  
and in legal service to the 1967 Legislature.  

In Portland, she was secretary-treasurer of the  
Multnomah Bar Association and served on its exec-  
utive committee.  

Her community service work currently includes:  
Chairman of the Oregon Advisory Committee to  
the U.S. Civil Rights Commission; Board of  
Trustees of Lewis and Clark College, of Good Samari-  
tan Hospital, of the Parry Center, and of the  
Oregon Museum of Science and Industry; mem-  

ber of the Urban League, NAACP, and the Family  
Counseling Service. Judge Deiz was recently  
appointed by Governor McCall to serve as one of  
four judicial representatives on the Commission on  
Judicial Reform, and on the Commission on Human  
Rights.  

Mrs. Deiz has three children: a daughter at the  
University of Oregon, her youngest son, Adams  
High School graduate, and her oldest son attending  
law school at Lewis and Clark while working as a  
radio newscaster. Mr. and Mrs. Deiz reside at 9144  

As a Judge of the Court of Domestic Relations,  
my concern will be with adults in matters of dis-  
solution of marriage, separation, non-support,  
commitment, and other family-related matters. The  
objectives of the court are additionally to protect  
the community, persons, and property from illegal  
and antisocial acts of minors, to rehabilitate child-  
ren on probation, to protect children and to further  
justice.  

In Family Law the issue is always our children.  
My abiding concern is at all times to do that which  
is in the best interest of the children.