PAGE 2 CHANGE __. March 1971

Mailer  
vs. Millet  

Norman Mailer’s 47,000-word response to Kate  

Millett and women’s liberationists in general appears  
in this month’s issue of Harper's. At best it is another  
tedious visit into Mailer’s psyche; at worst it is a  
detrimental and insulting bit of verbal hocus-pocus.  

Covering a wide variety of opinion and homespun  
sexual wisdom, Mailer is at his most amusing on the  
subject of birth control. Disregarding all rational argu-  
ments both for and against birth control, he would  
lead us to believe that somewhere in women’s collec-  
tive subconscious there is a primitive ability to select  
and reject sperm during intercourse as the woman  
sees fit. If women were only to conjure up this lost  
art once more the subjects of overpopulation and  
birth control would be passé.  

Fortunately, he does mention several times that he  
doesn’t always mean what he says, but on one issue  
he stands firm: and this is in his personal conviction  
that he is a revolutionary. In making this claim, he  
ceases to be amusing.  

Mailer uses 47,000 words to “discuss” women’s  

liberation and not once does he approach this strug-  

gle from any other viewpoint but a sexual one.....  

and not to discuss cultural change and social revolu-  
tion, may sell magazines, but it sure ain't revolu-  
tionary.  

Like so many other intellectual liberals, he can  
only be a detriment to social change in this country.  
Women are oppressed economically, culturally, intel-  
lectually, and sexually, but the sexual oppression is  
only a part of a greater problem. To nit-pick and  
exploit this one area only serves to misinform and  
divide women.  

Mailer is abusing his talents and our sensibilities by  
dwelling on this one issue of the struggle and ignoring  
the others. What might have been an opportunity for  
some constructive criticism of Kate Millett and the  
women's movement ultimately degenerates into an  
ego-stroking session for Mailer.  

While dissecting Millett’s literary criticism of D. H.  
Lawrence, Mailer, in a description of Lawrence, may  
well have been describing himself when he wrote,  
“...for one senses in his petulance and in the spoiled  
airs of his impatient disdain at what he could not  
intellectually dominate that he was a momma’s boy,  
spoiled rotten, and could not have commanded two  
infantrymen to follow him...”  

If you're not part of the solution, Norman baby,  
you're part of the problem.  

Sisterson!  

What About  
Black Kids?  

Hi~ Had to write you and tell what I just came across  
in Scientific America, January, 1971, that shows an-  

other clear example of genocide.  

Research on human diseases in the U.S. is largely  
supported by grants from the Government and pri-  
vate organizations that raise funds by public sub-  

scription. Right! So, here we go.  

Sickle-cell anemia is almost exclusively a disease of  
our Black children. Grants by the National Institute  
of Health in 1968 for research in the three main  
diseases of white children totaled 172 — there were  
22 grants for sickle-cell anemia. Twenty-two grants!  
In the same year private fund drives collected more  
than 9 million dollars for diseases of white children  
(this was for research on cystic fibrosis and muscular  
dystrophy). But groups in Los Angeles, New York,  
Washington, Richmond and Memphis only were able  
to raise $50,000 for sickle-cell anemia. There are  
1,115 estimated cases per year of sickle-cell anemia in  
U.S. Robert B. Scott of Virginia Commonwealth Uni-  
versity, writing in The Journal of the American Medi-  
cal Association brought this out in the open recently.  
Commenting on Scott's findings, I can only add,  
Women of the World, UNITE.  
Educate each other!!  

Francoise Gonzalez  

Injustice  
in America  

Sisters:  
In August of 1970 I was arrested for arson. My  

house burned down and I lost everything I owned.  

Two days later my mother called the police and told  
them she “feared” I set fire to the house.  

After finding out a few facts concerning my back-  
ground, (I have a nine-year juvenile record for run-  
away, and have recently served three years in federal  
prison for a stolen car) the Novato police came to my  
job and took me to the station on the pretext of a  
“routine” fire investigation. I was interrogated for 5½  
hours, and at the end of that time they practically  
had me convinced that because of my record I was  
insane, and therefore burned down my own house.  

I was placed in the Marin County Jail on $5,000  
bail. The next day in court, the District Attorney  
insisted on a no-bail status, and told the court that I  
was a DANGEROUS person to the community and to  
myself. The bail was finally re-set 3 days later--a  
“reasonable” $10,000.  

After spending two months in the County Jail,  
I had a dismissal hearing in Superior Court, and the  
judge dismissed my case because of NO evidence. The  
District Attorney (who was running for JUDGE)  
came over to me in the courtroom and re-arrested me  
on the same charges.  

My public defender then got my bail reduced (not  
even bothering to question the legality of the District  
Attorney's right to re-arrest me) and I was released on  
$2,500 bail.  

I am being tried for my past record, for which I  
have supposedly “paid my debt to society.” I did not  
do this thing called Arson, but because I have no  
money, and am a woman with a record, I have no  
hope of getting a fair trial and for all practical pur-  
poses have already been convicted. I cannot just de-  
pend on a Public Defender, as he is busy with a trial  
until the first of March, and my trial is set for March  
8. The “People of California” are the ones who are  
trying me; if I don’t get help from the PEOPLE, I  
have no alternative but to be convicted without the  
money and name that means “justice” in our courts  
today.  

I have contacted Terry Hallinan for legal represen-  
tation and he is willing, but we need money and  
support. They really want to keep the poor in jail. If  
you can offer HELP--either by sending money, giving  
publicity to my case, or coming to court, please  
contact me—PATRICIA at CONNECTIONS, 330  
ELLIS STREET ROOM 208, SAN FRANCISCO,  
CALIF. 94102.  

Your sister, Patricia  

At Christmas my  
brother would get  
trains and chemistry  
sets and I would  
get dolls and  

rriagés..-:  
Cee PHD  

is sowerfa  
g  
When my  
husband and I  
come home at night I cook  
supper and wash the dishes I while  
he watches discs.  

My brother  
would go out  
to play while  

he had to help  
my mother.-- ra  
L eno)  

as  

Same marks  
as mine went  

on the jobs while I  

became a  
secretary.