PAGE 3 CHANGE March 1971

Ella May Wiggins: herstory

The following is a slightly edited version of an article
by B. Joyce of the Ella May Wiggins Memorial Collec-
tive.

When Ella May Wiggins was murdered, she had worked
sixty hours a week for ten years in the North
Carolina cotton mills, supporting nine children and
an invalid alcoholic.

Somehow she learned to read and write, and found
time to turn her musical talent into a source of inspiration for her co-workers. When the National Textile Workers Union organized her mill, she joined, worked on strike committees, and soon became famous as a leader of the tumultuous 1929 Gastonia textile workers’ strike. For this she died a martyr before she was 30.

At a meeting in Gastonia she once told the mill hands
about her life, which was no different from that of
thousands of other working women in the South:

“I never made no more than nine dollars a week, and
you can’t do for a family on such money. I'm the
mother of nine. Four died with the whooping cough. I worked then and asked the super to put me on day
so’s I could tend ‘em when they had their spells. But
he wouldn’t. He’s the sorriest man alive, I reckon. So
I had to quit and then there wasn’t no money for
medicine, and they just died. I couldn't do for my
children any more than you women on the money we
got. That’s why I came out for the union, and why
we all got to stand for the union, so’s we can do
better for our children, and they won't have lives
like we got.” Ella May was a small dark-haired woman,
prematurely aged - like the other mill women - by a
lifetime of undernourishment, hard labor, and child
bearing. Those who knew her as a girl remembered
that she had been pretty, with a clear voice and
strong sense of rhythm. The voice and musical talent
survived her life of poverty.

When Ella May was a child, her family moved down to a camp in Andrews, North Carolina, where her father worked in the logging industry. The family supplemented her father's income by washing bachelors’ laundry - scrubbing it in tubs outside their flatcar shanty.

At the age of sixteen, Ella May married. At seventeen
her first child was born. Before the second child
arrived, a log fell on its father, crippling him for life,
but bringing no workmen’s compensation money.
The Wigginses moved to a cotton mill town so Ella
could spin to support her growing family. Her husband deserted her after their ninth child was born.
The Southern textile industry had fallen on hard
times, and the men, women, and children who worked
in the mills bore the brunt.

The labor of women and children was key to the mill
owners’ control of their workers. The mills hired each
family as a unit, knowing that no one member could
earn enough to support the others. The labor of the
children took the place of retirement pay and unem-
ployment insurance for their parents. No other jobs
were available in the mill towns. Workers’ families
lived in company houses, ate company food bought
on company credit at company stores, and even prayed
in company-built churches presided over by com-
pany-paid ministers.

Seventy percent of company houses had no indoor
plumbing; health care depended on the company’s
generosity; secondary education was virtually un-
known for the millhand’s children. The mills were
ed night and day, and women and children worked
shifts as often as the men, whooping cough or not.

The mill worker's average yearly earnings in 1929
were $671.

The depression hit the Southern textile industry half
a decade before the rest of the country. The bosses
took their losses from the pockets of the workers.

Wages and working conditions deteriorated; there was
the “stretchout”: harder work at longer hours for
less pay due to the current system.

Workers around the South began to respond with
spontaneous walkouts (often led by women) and at-
tempts at union organizing - at a time when no laws
protected this as a right. Into this explosive situation
stepped a “red” union, the National Textile Workers
Union, connected with the Communist Party, USA.
The organizing drive began.

The NTWU consistently fought discrimination against
women and Blacks (there were only two Blacks in the
Gastonia Mill). Its ability to communicate with local
people was not always good, but its militancy seemed
to fit conditions in Gastonia in 1929. The workers
decided to strike before the NTWU organizer felt
they were ready, so tense was the situation at the
mill. The strike demands included: a 40-hour work
week; abolition of stretchout and other improvements
in conditions; equal pay for equal work by women
and children; $20 per week minimum wage; and un-
ion recognition.

If the workers were determined, so were the mill
operators and their friends. Amid inflammatory
newspaper editorials and fiery sermons, mob violence
broke out against the strikers. Mobs led by prominent
Gastonia business and professional men raided union
headquarters, destroyed strikers’ food, attacked a
demonstration, and beat up organizers. The company
evicted sixty-two families, who set up a tent village.
Ella May Wiggins lifted morale among these tent dwellers with nightly concerts of mountain-style ballads
describing their troubles.

Finally an exchange of gunfire during a police raid
on the union hall resulted in the death of Gastonia’s
police chief. Thirteen men and three women were
charged with conspiracy to murder.

The trial which followed won national attention. The
prosecution's theatrical tactics included display of the
weeping widow and a wax dummy representing the
bloody corpse of the police chief. One of the jurors
went insane with fear and the judge declared a mis-
trial. Angry anti-union mobs responded immediately
by raiding the union hall again, surrounding the jail,
and threatening the defense attorneys.

The following week, as Ella May Wiggins and a truck-
load of other union members drove towards a meet-
ing, a mob ambushed their truck, turning it over in
the road. The mob fired several shots, mortally wounding
Ella May. Her sister workers believed that she had been singled out because of her leadership and her songs.

Ella May Wiggins’ murderers were acquitted by the
same jury that tried her comrades, although more
than fifty witnesses had been present at the shooting.

I come from a town away down South
Called Sandersville, by jove
And I worked in the mill with the rest of the trash
As we're often called, you know.

While standing there beside my loom
All dressed in lint and strings
They call us fools and factory trash
And other low-down things.

Our children they grow up unlearned
No time to go to school
Before they even learn to walk
They have to learn to spin and spool.

The folks in town who live so fine
And spend their money free
Will hardly look at a factory hand
Who dresses just like you and me.

Oh, let them wear their watches fine
Their rings and pearly strings
But when the day of judgment comes
We'll make them share their pretty things.

Let’s Get It Together!

CHANGE was created by women working to alter the
established social and political structures which have
too long oppressed women.

Ironically, the very society which had hoped to divide
us, now is bringing us together in a common struggle.

But we must struggle TOGETHER. We need all the
support we can get to put out CHANGE and have it
serve your needs. Send us any articles, letters, sugges-
tions, or criticisms you have. Perhaps you could help
us with editing articles, assist with mechanics, sell
copies, or even raise funds. At least come to one of
our meetings and rap.

A change is only gonna come if we all work for it
together! For information about CHANGE, call or
write: Change, c/o Debbie Guyol, 45 Albion, San
Francisco, phone 626-7978.

This issue was put out by Ellen, Jay, Ann, Lothian,
Laurel, Debbie, Nancy O., and Nancy C. Gak.