PAGE 8 CHANGE March 1971

Job hunter’s resolution

No more type casting

I first came to San Francisco two and a half years ago seeking fame and fortune. I had never really considered the problem of what I would do after college. I had a naive faith that once I was out in the world everything would fall neatly into place: my role in society would reveal itself to me and I would step into it.

My first unpleasant realization was that I had to make the first move--I had to step out and show the world who I was and where I was. I was reluctant to do this, but I was still sure that once my existence was known, people or institutions, aware of my value, would seek me out.

My second realization came more slowly. I was a college graduate, after all, with certain intellectual abilities, a certain creative flair, why was my employment agency sending me on interviews for “file clerk,” “junior typist,” “figure clerk?” To Brooks Brothers, Dean Witter, the Stock Exchange? The woman obviously didn’t understand--I was clearly meant for better things. But I was poor at the time and decided I would take anything I could get. When I was a little more financially secure I would look for something better.

Still there was a problem. I was fairly bright and I couldn't type very well. Overqualified. “I've got this darling girl here,” the woman at the agency would say. “Why don’t I just send her right over?” On my first interview I learned that I had to lie. “Now really, tell me what you want to do with your life. Have you ever thought of being a teacher? Don’t you think you'd be bored just typing all day?” I knew I couldn't say yes, but I wasn’t used to lying so I couldn't give a straightforward no either, and I was taken in by the man’s friendly, understanding tone. Only after the interview was over did I realize that I had blown it completely.

After several unsuccessful interviews I abandoned my employment agency and found a job as an Xmas extra at the Emporium. Two months. It would keep me eating a little longer and give me time to collect my thoughts. They liked me there and asked me to stay, which I felt was quite presumptuous of them. I emerged from my experience much wiser, ready to tackle the employment agencies again.

This time, I thought, I'll be very firm with them. None of this clerk-typist nonsense. “I’m just not interested in those jobs,” I told the woman at my new agency. “Please don’t even send me out on interviews for them.” She nodded. She understood. 

I took the typing test and the “aptitude” test. She remarked on my unusually high “aptitude” score and suggested that I take care never to get all the answers right. “No one will ever hire you.” As it was, one prospective employer refused to interview me altogether, another interviewed me only reluctantly. But wait a minute--these were the same old jobs! Same old places--Bank of America, insurance companies. I wanted a creative job! Patiently I explained my situation again to the woman at the agency. “It’s ridiculous to send me on these interviews. They don’t want me and I don’t want them.” For I must confess the awful truth: I never learned to look an interviewer in the eye and say, yes I love to type, no I never want to go back to school, yes I think I'd be happy in this job. The woman nodded again, but the interviews she offered me were too familiar. I decided to try another agency.

I was tired of explaining my position. I was tired of trying to find a balance between my own integrity and honesty and a line that would convince a prospective employer I would stay more than a couple of months. Completely disillusioned, I let my new “counselor” tell me to brush up on my typing, assure me that if I wore a little more make-up and took off my rings (all two of them), this next exciting job would be mine. I could hardly even smile. I knew it was hopeless.

Luckily I had a cousin with a small freelance typing business. I started working for her. I was paid by the page, which at 50 words a minute isn’t much, but I could wear t-shirts and levis and didn’t have any bosses to impress. I was more or less my own woman.

I took a vacation and, having been away from downtown over six months, decided to try again. This time I was offered a job almost immediately, the only job I ever found through an employment agency. Dictaphone typist at an insurance company. I managed to stick it out for three months, sustaining myself with fantasies of what I would say to my bosses on my last day at work.

You'd think I would have learned by this time, but I was still sadly deceived in the possibilities San Francisco held for a young woman of my talents. I decided to try again.

This time I really had it all together. I went to the right agency and found myself a real gung-ho “agent.” Creative job, right? This means, for a young woman with my talents, a secretary or typist at a TV or radio station or advertising agency.

I went on interview after interview. I could type 70 words a minute by this time, was slender, attractive, and bright. Everything an employer could want! So why didn’t anyone hire me? I’m afraid it was my inability to lie. I invented a hundred stories I could tell that would (should) convince the interviewer I was serious without forcing me to come out and say I liked to type. I tried the frank approach; “I can’t say I love to type, but I'm realistic about the opportunities open to me.” Or, “There are other things in my life: I don’t expect my job to fulfill all my needs.” Or, “I don’t mind doing a boring job if the atmosphere is exciting.” (Like the creative ferment of an ad agency or radio station.) Nothing worked. I was rejected time after time, and I finally learned my lesson, I'm back in my cousin's typing service, working part time.

One of my employment agents said this to me, to cheer me up in the face of my many failures. “You know, you're lucky. You have the right look. You're slender, you're cute, you have nice clothes. Appearance is very important for these jobs. Now I have another gal, I’m gonna have a real hard time placing her. She’s older, but she has five years experience, five years at the same place, and if you knew how unusual that is! But you know, her appearance. She’s kind of overweight, looks kind of sloppy. Real nice gal, but she just doesn’t have the right look.”

What I found most degrading about job hunting was this confusion of values. I was put in the position of having to rely on my appearance, which I had no confidence in, and my typing ability, which I was not proud of. My intellectual and spiritual qualities, the bases of my self-respect, I was asked to play down or betray or transgress.

I was very discouraged, then, to be rejected time after time, for I thought there must be something wrong with me. The employers wouldn’t accept me as I was, and apparently the ability to present yourself as something other than what you were was necessary to survival in society. Now, nearly a year after my last dreadful interview, I'm proud of myself. Bobby Seale figures he must have done something right to have been thrown in jail. I figure I must have done something right to have been rejected by all those worthy employers. Thank god I didn’t fit their image of the ideal secretary! I know I’m lucky to have an alternative to those jobs. I'm very happy now to be able to earn my living in a capacity which, while it doesn’t make use of my unique talents, at least doesn’t demand that I be a cute, dumb, miniskirted yes-woman.

When you’re driving, pick up a sister.