PAGE 6 ‘CHANGE March 1971

image

If Helen Gurley Brown were not claiming that her
Cosmopolitan Magazine was directed toward liberated

women, we could just pass it by as another “How to”
women’s magazine. (How to dress... How to make
up... How to make dinner... How to make love, etc.)
But in her claims that she is a modern, liberated
woman, we are seduced into believing her magazine
will reflect this philosophy.

Helen and her staff of Fifth Avenue mannequins
are not interested in helping women deal with their
oppression. Basically, the message seems to be how to
get laid.

One quick glance at the advertising in the current
issue of Cosmopolitan substantiates this claim quite
well. With a few exceptions, all advertisements are
directed toward making yourself a more attractive
object. From bust-building to “How to cook for a
man,” we are barraged with graphics and copy en-
couraging personal superficiality and consumerism. It
seems that if we spend enough money and time on our
appearance and male-pleasing skills, we will be ful-
filled.

One article in the current issue entitled, “Turned
On (One Girl's Misadventures in Pot Land)” is a good
illustration of the editorial directions of Cosmopoli-
tan. It is assumed the message is not to smoke mari-
juana — but it is incorporated into a very tedious
story involving bars, booze, and married men and a
woman with no sense of self whatever. The interes-
ting part is only one paragraph long where our mis-
guided heroine explains the practical realities of her
life; that she has not been able to find a job in San
Francisco for three months. Apparently, this area of
her life is not of much importance to the editors
because we never hear another word about this very
real problem.

What Helen Gurley Brown has forgotten is the 12
or 15 hours a day when women struggle as human
beings with the practicalities of life. How does one
find a job in San Francisco? Or more encompassing,

where does a woman find a job which represents more
than an ego-extension of the male dominated mana-
gerial class?

The whole orientation of the magazine is towards
pleasing men... on the job, in the kitchen, or in the
bedroom. For all her posturing about women being
independent and self-fulfilled, Helen Gurley Brown is
perpetuating the myth of “Woman as Object” in
every issue of Cosmopolitan.

The least we can do is not buy it!

<ASTANIS.

Oppression in Focus

The Women’s Film
shows where it’s at

Women in American society today have been ignored,
isolated and made to think that their problems are
personal—that they evolved out of their own indi-

vidual shortcomings.

THE WOMAN’S FILM tells a different story. The
women interviewed feel that their problems are
caused by the very social structure of our society.
They are oppressed as women—socially, economi-

cally, psychologically.

The interviews in this film are with women who work
on jobs outside and inside the home, welfare mothers
and young women. They discuss the personal prob-
lems they have encountered as women at home and
on the job. They speak out on issues which affect

their lives: the war, welfare, marriage and men.

The film allows women to identify with the exper-
iences and feelings of the women in the film and to
gain a solid understanding of the solutions they have
chosen. It conveys the idea that women are strong
when united, and when they work together and sup-
port each other, they have the power to bring about
meaningful and necessary changes in this country.
THE WOMAN’S FILM is especially unique in that it
was scripted, filmed and edited entirely by women.
See THE WOMAN'S FILM—it is not only an oppor-
tunity to see a creative and instructive bit of film
making, but also gives us a chance to support our
sisters who are working with film to present the
legitimate grievances and demands of women.

MONDAY, MARCH 8, and TUESDAY, MARCH 9, at
Glide Church, 330 Ellis, San Francisco. Shown at
both 7 and 8:30 PM. Donation $1.50.

Underground Hits Oil

THE STRANDED OILER is an underground paper

published anonymously by oppressed employees of

Standard Oil Company of California. Much of the
material is by and for women, and includes a feature
column written by an alleged “Aunt Thomasine”,
who professes to teach her female audience the prop-
er ways for “gals” to behave in the sexist, racist,
ecologically disastrous totalitarian institution that is
Standard Oil. Below are some excerpts from her col-
umn.

1. First of all, be a “gal”, not a human being.

2. Always be in early so that when the clock strikes 8
your hands are poised over the typewriter ready to
strike the keys.

3. Always be back in time from your 45-minute lunch
“hour”. Never mind the big executives upstairs who
take two hours for a lavish lunch on their enormous
salaries while you have to satisfy yourself with a tuna
fish on rye.

4. Never discuss your salary with anyone! Remember:
Your first loyalty is to da massah—uh, I mean—the
boss, not to the other slaves on the plantation—uh, I
mean, the other “gals” in the office. So what if some
gals are getting more money for the same work? If
you discussed it, horrible things might start to hap-
pen; like, a lot of salaries might have to be raised!

5. Love typing and shorthand! Develop a penchant
for detail! Be cheerful if it kills you! So what if the
heavies upstairs are making 20 times your salary and
working 1/20th as hard?

6. Believe what they tell you about how easy your
work is compared to the great burden of responsibili-
ty they have, even if it isn’t true. After all, you're just
biding your time until you get married, right? So
what if you'll probably be back some day at the same
slave wages and the same unbearably boring work?
What do you care?

AUNT THOMASINE’S LITERARY COLUMN

APPROVED BOOK LIST

EXECUTIVE SECRETARY'S MANUAL

YOU CAN BE A SECRETARY!

HANDBOOK OF ADVANCED SECRETARIAL
TECHNIQUE

SECRETARIAL STUDY GUIDE

OFFICE PRACTICE

PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY OF TYPE-
WRITING

SPELLING DRILLS AND EXERCISES

THE STENOGRAPHER

TYPEWRITING TECHNIQUES

TYPING FOR BUSINESS

etc., etc., etc.

UGLY, SHITTY, ECHH, BANNED BOOK LIST

SEXUAL POLITICS, Kate Millett. Exposé of famous
writers’ sick attitudes towards the female sex.
SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL, Robin Morgan, ed.
Calculated to stir dissent among the ugly, echh masses
(that’s you, in case you didn’t know).

CHANGE IS GONNA COME, IT AIN’T ME BABE,
MOTHER LODE, OFF OUR BACKS, RAT,
COMMON WOMAN, EVERYWOMAN. Some of those sim-
ply ridiculous Women's Liberation newspapers, haha-
ha, hohohoho (choke, gasp, cough).

FORTUNE. Blacklisted for clerical help only, because
you'd be demoralized if you ever found out how
things really work in big business and who's really
controlling your lives. Besides, all those big words
would make your little brains spin, since you couldn't
possibly have the intelligence to understand them.
WALL STREET JOURNAL. Same reason as above.
STRANDED OILER. Yellow journalism printed on
cheap paper, as opposed to our official slick, expen-
sive counterpart, The Standard Oiler.