A 15¢  
u NGE IS GONNA COME  

Volume I Number 3  

March 1971  

ghee  

Fighting Irish woman  

Supports  

Bernadette Devlin recently gave the BEST speech  

I have heard in my life. She related what is happening  
in her homeland—Northern Ireland—in a clear and  
simple manner which, unfortunately, is difficult to  
replicate, but the following gives a sense of it.  

Bernadette Devlin spoke at the University of San  
Francisco on February 21. She was introduced by a  
USF professor, who claimed to be introducing ‘the  
American people’ to Bernadette, and informed us and  
her that the violence in America made the Northern  
Ireland disturbances look like a riot in a flea circus.  
Bernadette opened her speech with the proposition  
that just because Northern Ireland's ‘problems’ were  
perhaps less complex and on a smaller scale than  
those of the United States it didn’t make them any  
less real or less important in the context of the  
worldwide struggle for liberation.  

She explained that religious issues are not the basis of  
the oppression and retaliation in Northern Ireland:  
“You will find Catholic bishops and Protestant bishops  
sipping tea in each other's parlors, and you will  
not find people fighting each other over the Virgin  
Birth. Rich Catholics and rich Protestants go to the  
same golf clubs and the same cocktail parties; more-  
over, they exploit the same people—the poor and  
working people.  

Unemployment in Northern Ireland is severe. Average  
unemployment is 10%—7.4% is considered a good  
time. In the nonindustrial areas like Derry unemploy-  
ment is sometimes as high as 50%. If you are lucky  
enough to find a job, wages are extremely low. One  
dollar an hour is considered good pay for a skilled  
male worker, while women work for 50 cents an  
hour. Since the pay is so low, people must work  
overtime in order to feed themselves. This means that  
fewer people do more work, thus unemployment  
rises. Employers can get away with paying slave  
wages—if their employees don’t like it they can quit;  
there will always be plenty willing to take over their  
jobs. There would be one-half the unemployment if  
no one worked overtime. On the other hand, the  
weekly wage of a skilled garment factory worker—12  

revolution  

pounds (about $25)—compares unfavorably with the  
weekly sum allotted to one who is unemployed or  
unemployable—15 pounds.  

Bernadette spoke of the guilt of the ruling class in  
terms of the 10 commandments: ‘To steal is a sin, the  
priests tell us, but while deploring the thievery the  
poor engage in simply to feed themselves, the Church  
does not recognize the far greater thievery of the rich,  
who clothe themselves in furs off the profits of some-  
one else’s labor.’ Similarly, the commandment against  
killing is an excuse for preaching law and order. But  
the murder of poor children—in the form of things  
like tuberculosis brought about by inhuman living  
conditions—is not even considered to be a crime.  

A point that Bernadette emphasized was that 5% of  
the people control 85% of the wealth. Ninety-five  
percent must share 15% of the 100% which they  
produce. ‘We're 85% short,’ she said, ‘and we didn’t  
give it away—someone stole it. Neither of the two  
political parties really means to redistribute the wealth:  
their game is trying to convince the people they  
are handing out the 15% more fairly.’  

Does Bernadette approve of “violence”? That de-  

pends on your definition. She does say violence is not  

only guns; violence is one person taking away another  
person’s dignity. The existence of Harlem means  
there is no peace in America or in the whole world.  
She feels it is as violent to lie down and let yourself  
be walked over as to stand up and defend yourself. In  
the first case, you are passively allowing violence, in  
the second you are trying to stop violence from being  
done. For working people to stand up and demand their  
rights as human beings is to put an end to the violence  
being done. ‘The working class should have  
control not only of the wealth that the 5% now  
controls, but of the power, the means of production  
of this wealth. The working class of Ireland should  
control the means of production of Ireland; the work-  
ing class of the world should control the means of  
production of the world. The peoples of the working  
class are the only people with the right to control the  
means of production. They must start the revolution  
that will free Ireland and free the world.’  

Hai ig) fut  
Ys“ , a  

WOMEN  
will have  

their day  

WOMEN’S STEADY MARCH ONWARD AND HER  
GROWING DESIRE FOR A BROADER OUTLOOK  
PROVE SHE HAS NOT REACHED HER NORMAL  
CONDITION, AND THAT SOCIETY HAS NOT YET  
CONCEDED ALL THAT IS NECESSARY FOR ITS  
ATTAINMENT.  

(Introduction, A History of Women Suffrage, 1889)  

Though it started with poor women in America,  
today few Americans realize that March 8 is cele-  
brated around the world as International Women’s  
Day. The first Women’s Day event took place 63  
years ago, in 1908, when hundreds of poor women on  
the East Side of New York City came out from the  
factories and slum tenements to demonstrate in the  
streets for better working and living conditions.  

Poor women had been working in factories, making  
approximately one-fourth the wages men earned,  
since the early 18th century, and had been organizing  
their own strikes and their own unions since 1824.  
Wealthier women had been fighting for women’s suf-  
frage for some forty years. And on March 8, these  
issues came together when women demonstrated for  
the right to vote as well as for decent housing, a  
minimum wage, and protective labor laws.  

Two years later, in 1910, the International Social-  
ist Congress adopted a resolution to make March 8 an  
international women’s day.  

EVENTS  
are listed  

Bernadette Devlin