Here Comes  
the Groom  

(Reprinted from THE VILLAGE VOICE, Feb. 11, 1971)  

(This article will soon be published in Modern Bridegroom, the magazine for young men.)  

Oh, lucky you! You are finally the bridegroom to the woman of your dreams! But don’t think for a minute that you can now relax and be assured automatically of marital happiness forever. You will have to work at it. While she may have eyes only for you now, remember that she is surrounded every day by attractive young men who are all too willing to tempt her away from you. And as the years go by, you will lose some of the handsome muscularity of your youth; you will have to make up in skill and understanding what you will lack in the bloom of youth. It will be up to you to make your physical relationship so exciting, so totally satisfying to her, that she won't be tempted to stray!  

Yes, boys, we are talking about SEX. Don’t turn away in embarrassment. For if you are to HOLD that wonderful woman, you will have to practice and work hard at making her sex life as marvelous as it can be.  

But how?  

Here is what you need to know and do to succeed in your marriage, your greatest challenge in life - and the one that will be utterly essential to your wife’s future happiness and thus your own.  

1. Let’s start in with the essentials. You should always be available to your wife whenever she wants you. It is of course your husbandly prerogative to say no, but you will be wise never to do so unless you are really ill, for that may tempt her to turn to other men to fulfill her essential needs. She cannot do without sex, so you as a smart husband should always be ready to provide it.  

2. That means that you should never let yourself get too tired to perform. The cardinal sin for a husband - and a good way to lose the wife you love - is to fail at your duty to achieve a good erection and sustain it until your wife is fully satisfied. So never let your work or anything else get in the way of plenty of rest each day, regular exercise, and plenty of protein in your diet - and stay away from excessive alcohol.  

Remember that women’s sexual needs vary. Some need it more often than others, and some (lucky you if you are married to a real woman like that!) can achieve multiple orgasms in a single night of love, if you can do your part!  

3. “But how about ME?” you may ask. “How about MY sexual needs and satisfactions?”  

Now men’s passion, of course, often does not equal that of women. But you have a wonderful surprise in store for you, if you concentrate your efforts on your wife’s pleasure and don’t worry selfishly about your own. For sooner or later you will discover the ecstasy of truly mature male coital orgasm that can be induced only by total surrender to the exquisite sensations of a woman’s orgasmic contractions.  

This type of mature male climax will be attainable by you when you learn to inhibit the juvenile tendency to ejaculate prematurely, and await your wife’s orgasm while sustaining your erection. Be glad if it is a long wait, because this will prolong and intensify her pleasure.  

4. Because your juvenile sexuality is centered in your penis, you may think that the central act in intercourse is the capture of your penis by your wife’s vagina. Don’t make that common mistake! Always remember that the secret of the successful sex act - the one that brings about the wife's orgasm which in turn triggers the husband's ejaculation - is the excitation of the wife’s clitoris.  

There are of course many techniques of clitoral stimulation. I need not go into them here because they are readily available in marriage manuals; they also give information that will be helpful to your wife in assisting you to your full erection. She should understand that she, too, should not be too selfish in her concentration on her own pleasure!  

5. Remember that your first duty is to your wife. So if you fail to satisfy her (and yourself, too) in the above-described natural way, you should talk to a good psychiatrist who specializes in this kind of problem. She will help you if, for instance, you have not yet fully accepted the natural masculine role that will bring you the joy of selfless service to others instead of the futile envy of women’s natural leadership role.  

6. But you may find that sometimes you do not achieve the ejaculation that usually comes in response to your wife’s orgasm, especially if your wife is one of those who have multiple orgasms. Don’t worry too much about this - many husbands have the same problem. Your wife should be patient with your failures, and understand that men’s passion sometimes does not match that of women. Don’t be embarrassed - TALK with her about it. She may be able to help with a little more foreplay to help stimulate you.  

It should not be necessary, in a happy and loving marriage, for a man to resort to husbandly artifice in feigning an ejaculation that does not actually take place. But do keep in mind that her female ego does depend on her believing that she satisfied you fully and deeply, so beware of bruising her self-image by any word or action that might lead her to believe she does not completely meet your sexual needs.  

7. Now for a practical matter: Assuming that you, like most modern couples, want to limit and space the growth of your family, your wife and you should decide together what method of contraception you wish to employ. Most likely, you will choose one of the fine methods available to the modern husband. Consult a qualified urologist. She will explain to you several methods, their advantages and drawbacks, and you and your wife can make the final decision.  

One widely used method is the insertion of sperm-killing liquid into the urethra before intercourse. She (your doctor) will show you how. You may find it awkward and uncomfortable the first few times, but soon you will get the knack. If you are a truly considerate husband, you will do this routinely every evening as you prepare to retire, so that you will never have to keep your wife waiting while you make your preparations. A drawback of this method is that it does occasionally fail. And some wives - especially busy, successful ones for whom the time required for the abortion is a hardship - blame the husband for the slipup, thinking that perhaps he did not take the proper precautions.  

The other widely used method is of course the Capsule, a powerful formulation of various hormones that render you infertile so long as you take it without fail. There are minor undesirable side effects in some men: you may gain weight around the abdomen or buttocks, get white pigmentless patches on your face (which you may be able to conceal with beard or face-bronzer), or suffer some morning nausea. But be patient - these effects often decrease or even disappear after a few months. The one serious drawback of the Capsule is that you are several times more likely than otherwise to suffer eventually from prostate cancer or fatal blood clots. But these ailments are relatively uncommon anyway, so that many couples consider it worth the risk, especially since this is the one method that is 100 percent effective.  

So talk it over with your wife: this is one of the first and most important decisions for you to make together as woman and husband.  

8. Now for a subject that may seem trivial: your appearance and dress. Don’t overlook it - it is a vital ingredient in marital happiness.  

Every woman likes to be proud of how attractive her husband is, so dress to please her. If she likes you to show off your youthful figure, by all means do so! Broad shoulders can be accentuated by turtleneck jerseys (with shoulder pads if needed), as can the well-tapered waist. Small, firm, well-shaped buttocks (very much in fashion this year) can be set off by well-cut clingy stretch pants.  

And if you need the help of corsetry (as many do, especially as the years go by), today’s well-constructed corsets make a good figure within the reach of almost every man. And they can be surprisingly comfortable, even for wear all day long. They can help you attract those wonderful compliments from your wife and her friends that are music to every man’s ears!  

One last piece of advice: the time may come - hopefully not for many years - when you can no longer provide your wife with all the sexual satisfactions that are her birthright. Your potency will decline, while her sexual appetite will increase well up into her 50s and 60s. That is the time that attractive younger men will tempt her. Build up the nonsexual as well as the sexual aspects of her life with you, so that even if she strays to others from time to time, she will happily return to you and the warm and affectionate home that you provide for her.  

If and when that time comes, do not nag her or make her feel guilty; remember that she has strong sexual needs that must be met, and as long as she does not hurt any young men by deceiving them that there is hope for a permanent relationship, your home can still be a happy one. You are hers forever, and knowing and appreciating that, she will always come back to you.  

If you do your job well - for husbandhood is the true career for all manly men, worthy of all your talents - you will keep your wife happy and hold her for the rest of her days. Remember that marriage, for a man, should be Life’s Great Adventure. So relax - relax - relax - and enjoy it.