I, Martha Quest

(Review of Doris Lessing's
Children of Violence, a 5-

novel series: Martha Quest,

A Proper Marriage, A Ripple

from the Storm, Landlocked,

The Four-Gated City - in paper-
back. )

Martha Quest is the story of the
socialization of a young female.
I can't think of any other novel

that captures so well the exper-
ience of the girl-child, fighting
for survival against parent and
society that want her to be a
"normal" obedient little girl. 
Increasingly aware of the crip-
pling limitations of the roles 
that are planned for her, Martha 
faces up to the hollowness of 
both the Party and her second 
marriage. But during this 
bleak period, Martha also finds 
the only love she is ever to 
know. It is precious in itself, but also because it heightens Martha's awareness 
of herself; moreover, she is 
aware of her purpose in the uni-
verse, (A hint: Martha's acute 
perceptions were never acciden-
tal but part of a normal evolu-
tionary development of sensory 
awareness--also called extra-
sensory perception--an aware-
ness that society's rulers try 
to destroy.)

In Landlocked, Martha, never 
able to deceive herself long, 
because of her ability to see 
clearly and listen critically, 
is secretary, housekeeper, 
substitute mother to a dozen 
children. But she is something 
else, too--something she doesn't 
understand completely until she 
is quite old and the book is al-
most over. 

Four-Gated City completes 
Martha's development as a 
woman searching for self, but 
it also flowers out to the 
development of self in humanity. 
City is psychology, politics, 
science-fiction, history, sa-
tire, social criticism, vision, 
prophecy.

Martha remarries, this 
time to a man who is a revolu-
tionary (at least verbally) and 
a refugee from Hitler's Europe.

The book ends on the 
eve of her first marriage, she 
knows she's doing the wrong thing, 
yet she does it anyway. (Doesn't 
everyone marry?)

In A Proper Marriage Martha lives 
through the roles of understanding 
helpmate, politically respectable 
wife of a rising civil servant, 
devoted mother, respectful daughter-
in-law, and young-wife-returning- 
home-to-mother-who-doesn't-want-her-
either. Martha rejects all of 
these roles but does not discover 
who she is or what her purpose 
may be.

A Ripple from the Storm. Martha 
becomes a Communist, trusting 
the party will answer her political 
questions and implement her de-
sire to change the hell that is 
Africa. 

Some other themes of Children 
of Violence: parent/child con-
flict; male/female relation-
ships; African black/white re-
lationship; waiting (for what?); 
purpose; repetition; related 
patterns of human behavior; iden-
tity and role-playing; and the 
children of violence--are they 
murderers or are they garden-
ers?

Whats Happening

Birth Control, Pregnancy and The WOMEN'S CENTER is at 1380 Howard (by Tenth St.) in S.F. Call 661-2114 afternoons for free birth control and pregnancy tests; no appointment needed; open 9 am to 4 pm Monday through Friday and 6 pm to 9 pm on Tuesday; 1580 Valencia; 647-6766 

Women's Costume Party Saturday, APRIL 17 at 8 pm at the Women's Center. 

The S.F. Art Museum will show an exhibit of Georgia O'Keeffe paintings through APRIL 25. She paints abstractly from nature. The museum's hours are 10-10 Mon.-Fri. 10-5 Sat. 12-6 Sun. For more information call 863-8800.

Lunch Bag Lecture series on women at the YWCA (620 Sutter) on Thursdays will close with examination, pills, jelly, foam, diaphragm fitting free to residents of S.F. (no IUDs and you must purchase the diaphragm); pregnancy tests have a $4 lab charge; must make appointment about a month in advance.

Mission 5568-3905

Western Addition, Haight, Marina 558-3256

Hunters Point, Outer Mission, Alemany, Ingleside 468-3664

Chinatown, North Beach, Central City 558-3158

Sunset, Richmond, Parkside 558-3246

Planned Parenthood birth control and help in getting therapeutic abortions; fee determined by income; 2340 Clay; 922-4477

the Women's Center. $1.00 donation for the Women's Bail Fund. Bring your own bottle.

Gay Women's Liberation wants to invite newcomers to their regular Friday meetings at 8 pm at the Women's Center. For more information contact Chris at 567-2236.

Women's Picnic Sunday, APRIL 21 at Lands End. Meet in the Cliff House parking lot at noon. Sponsored by Gay Women's Liberation. All women invited.

Women's Soft Ball Games happen the first and third Sundays of every month at Rolph Park (Army & Potrero in S.F.) at noon. Bring friends, mitts, and lunch.

two final sessions:
APRIL 22 Black Women

APRIL 29 Final Discussion open 11:30-1 lecture 12-12:30 soup and coffee for a small fee.