April 1971

Picking up the Wrench  
You Should Fix Your Car Yourself

Last issue I promised you a tune-up. But I realize that before you're gonna want to know how, you'll have to answer WHY you want to work on your car yourself. Why should you spend the time when you can get someone else to do it? And why should you put out the money for tools? There's one thing for sure -- you gotta want to learn about your car.

But why want to? Let me tell you a story. This man I know used to be a professional mechanic over in Oakland. One day a woman drove in and said that she had spent over $400 in the last year and a half just on tune-ups and maintenance repairs. And she had saved all of her receipts. There were bills for all sorts of new parts -- plugs, distributor, gaskets, etc. -- in addition to labor costs.

When the mechanic looked under the hood, he found that she had gotten not one single new part. Doesn't it make you cringe a bit just thinking how easily that woman could have been you?

The catch. You know nothing about cars, right? And the whole thing seems really complex and just beyond you. Well, I'm not going to deceive you. Cars aren't simple machines -- even though they work on simple principles. In fact, they're even potentially dangerous. But the more you know about your car and the more you can fix it yourself, the more control you'll have over it. For example, you feel your brakes give just a bit, and you know how to adjust them (which is an easy job). It saves you waiting till you crash into something head-on for lack of stopping power to decide that you need a major brake job. Another thing, it's just a lot more fun if you learn and work with someone else. A possible hitch -- a man usually assumes he has more “natural ability" dealing with cars. All I can say is it's not true. Working with other women might do much more for your confidence. You can do it. I know. I can. I just can't let you know how good I feel -- as a woman -- about working on my car.

About tools. You gotta have ‘em. The initial outlay might be $50, but that isn't much over the cost of one tune-up. Sears and Penny's have good tools. You can usually count on American cars using the

NOTE: find out the size of the oil plug (check manual). If one of the wrenches in the set or the spark plug wrench won't fit it, then get one that does.

a gap gauge $1  
a screw driver set - include a big one (18" to 24”) $3  
2 pliers - thin nosed and fat nosed. $2  
timing light $5  
flash light - one with a magnet is useful $2  
compression tester $4  
a point file $1  

That's only $29.00!!

But... given the condition of your engine and the number of tools you already have lying around the house, you might need a couple of other tools. Also parts... you might need new plugs, points, fan belt, and for sure you'll need oil. But we'll get to those as we get to them... next time.

and foreign cars using the metric system - 9mm, 16mm, etc. - Check your manual.

Before you decide to do a tune-up, get a repair manual for your make and model, a book you'll have to have. A good rule to go by... the less the manual assumes you know about cars, the better it'll be. It should have pictures and diagrams. It will also have the specific information like gap and torque measurements that vary from car to car. If you have a VW, the best by far is How To Keep Your Volkswagen Alive.

For a tune-up (and many other jobs) you'll need:

a spark plug wrench (same for all cars) $3  
1/2" drive ratchet $5  
2" extension $2  
13/16” spark plug socket $2  
a box-open wrench set - long handles are better, they'll be about 6 to a set. $5  
6mm to 17mm for metric  
3/8" to 3/4" for inch.

Before a woman becomes grown if she's black and poor She learns that the world is cold ready to rape you of everything if a black girl child wants to ever become free she has to really struggle like we did thru shouts of hatred and screams of Amerikan misunderstanding prison can make you look back on a lifetime of bitterness... handed-down clothes cold winter nights for whites only colored served here memories only other black women could understand fully of trying to be what ain't of trying to see what's not of trying to rid ourselves of what never was of men crying of children dying of abortions just because... memories that harsh and cruel of alleyways where people live of 'police' who not only attack with weapons but with words (which you cannot combat) -- if you're black and poor and female like my mama like me and my sisters