PAGE 4 01 CHANGE March 1971

labor
ores

doctor

The following personal account of one woman's en-
counter with the world of male doctors shows the
lack of respect and compassion with which we are
often subjected in our search for good medical care.

My pregnancy had been easy and entirely uneventful
so I anticipated little difficulty with labor and de-
livery. I had confidence in my doctors, although I
was only under their care for two months due to a
change of cities. (They were highly recommended.)

My husband and I had practiced the Lamaze method
of prepared natural childbirth faithfully for four
months and were familiar with the various stages of
labor and how to recognize and control discomfort
associated with contractions. Therefore, after visiting
my doctor’s office after labor had begun, I was not
surprised when he said I would probably deliver that
night or the following morning. That evening when
contractions became more intense I again called my
doctor but spoke to his partner who was “on call” at
the time. He told me, “You Lamaze gals are all alike”
and proceeded to say that I was jumping to con-
clusions about my labor, that I should forget about
my contractions, and “go read a magazine.”

As it turned out I went to the hospital the next day
and labor had to be induced since I did not dilate
naturally beyond a certain point. At that point I was
exhausted after more than two days of labor and
decided not to use my Lamaze training for delivery.
Whether or not I could have been induced earlier,
been less tired, and could have had natural childbirth
is not the main issue as I see it. The issue is rather
that my doctor’s partner, who was responsible for my
care while “on call,” did not consider me as an
individual but rather lumped me into a category
(“You Lamaze gals are all alike”).

In contrast to this treatment by the doctor, my
three-day hospitalization after delivery at UC Medical
Center was pleasant and enlightening. It was my first
experience as a patient and I found the nurses to be
most helpful and not at all condescending in their
attitudes towards new mothers. I got the impression
that a real camaraderie existed among the nursing
staff and I was unable to distinguish RNs from LVNs
from aides. All seemed to share in patient care on all
levels, were supportive of each other, and most im-
portant of all were flexible. This last attribute is
rarely granted to nurses who are generally categorized
as rigid in the way they carry out their duties. It
seems that in my case it was the doctor who was
rigid!

Hopefully my little daughter—now four months old—
will not have to be treated in this manner—Hopefully
she will not be intimidated by a male doctor who tells
her that she is jumping to conclusions and should go
and read a magazine when she is in labor.

What you should

know about

You're on your way to work, or to the store.
You're alone, or maybe with your children. Suddenly
you notice a strange knocking from under the hood,
or the brakes give out, or the car stalls altogether, or it
just wouldn’t start in the first place. You're helpless,
right? You have no idea what's wrong, but you do
know you'll probably have to pay through the teeth
to get it fixed: Somehow or other you get it to a
garage. The mechanic tells you what's wrong — and
you have no idea what he means. Then he tells you
what it will cost. You cringe. But there’s nothing you
can do. The mechanic knows that. Once you have a
car you need it, and you've got to get it fixed. You're
still helpless.

You're not alone. This happens to women every
day. A woman isn’t “supposed” to know anything
about cars, so when something happens to the auto
that she depends on, she’s at the mercy of some man.

And women and men both are at the mercy of the
auto manufacturers who make cars to break down in
a few years so they can make money on repairs and
parts as well as newer cars. So it’s not the mechanic
but those rich guys back in Detroit who are really
raking in the money.

The purpose of this series is to help you — a
woman — learn about the car you drive so that you
can take care of yourself when something goes wrong.
And maybe you can end up beating the costs a little
by knowing what you or the mechanic is doing.

The best way to take care of your car is to care for
it. Just as your body is less likely to get sick if you
eat the right foods and get enough rest and exercise.
Like the medical industry, the automotive industry is
not aimed at helping you keep your car running well
but at getting money for itself when your car gets
“sick”.

WARM UP YOUR CAR IN THE MORNING. The
greatest wear is done to your engine when it’s cold,
let’s say the first five or ten minutes you're driving it.
So, in the morning, go out and start the car and let it
run while you go back for your coat and purse or last
cup of coffee.

USE THE RIGHT KIND OF GAS. If your car
needs high-octane (which most newer American cars
do), pay the three cents extra a gallon for it. VW's
and similar cars can take regular or economy. WARN-

ING: Don’t use Shell gasoline. The “platformate” it
boasts about might give you a bit extra mileage, but it
builds up carbon in your engine, which clogs it and
breaks it down.

TAKE YOUR OWNER’S MANUAL OUT OF
YOUR GLOVE COMPARTMENT AND READ IT. It
will probably have a picture of your engine with
names of all parts. Open the hood of your car; take a
look around. It’s a good way to get to know it. If
you’ve lost your manual or never had one, call up the
proper car dealer — he might have one for your make
and year.

MAKE SURE YOU’VE GOT ENOUGH OIL AND
THAT IT’S THE RIGHT KIND. The Owner’s Manual
should tell you what type of oil your engine needs
(weight and whether detergent or not). Use only that
kind. If possible, use the same brand that is now in
your car at least until you have your oil changed
completely.

On the stick the gas station attendant uses to check
oil there are two lines: enough oil means somewhere
between the two. If it’s under the lower line, add a
quart. But don’t add more oil until it is down to at
least that lower line. If you do, you'll have too much
oil (oil is sold a quart at a time). This puts too much
pressure on your engine, which can blow your seals —
a bad thing.

IF YOU HAVE A SHIFT CAR, DRIVE IN THE
RIGHT GEAR. This means don’t drive too fast in low
gear (over-revving) or too slow in a higher gear (lug-
ging). In any car, don't drive too fast. The faster you
go, the faster your engine works. The engine gets
hotter, which means more wear on your cooling
system. 75 or 80 on a freeway is fast enough. Cars
can go faster, but remember: they’re not built to last
anymore — not even for a few years. And in city
driving, don’t get into the habit of going fast for a
block and then having to stop quickly for a stop sign —
this destroys your brakes.

EVERY THREE THOUSAND MILES YOUR CAR
NEEDS A TUNE-UP. That’s when you check the
parts and make little adjustments which keep you
from later making huge ones.

NEXT TIME...I’ll tell you about tuning up a car. I
did it. It’s not only worth it, it’s really fun.

On watch

Dear Sisters,

I have read your first A CHANGE IS GONNA COME
and related to it so easily. “Drowning in the Steno
Pool” and “We Demand Equality and Respect”
flashed me to a poem I was “inspired” to write while
working for the man. If appropriate, please use it.
Best of luck with the paper!

Jennifer Hall.

FINANCIAL DISTRICT

to die heart banging
to the shove and sweat of the frantically cool

fat bellied people
is to die. 

defiant morning faces,

glares that shout “fuck you I’m happy”
no time to say hello

goodbye

scared red, white and blue rabbits
with watches as big as their fears

no time
no time to live

nine to five shrouds
the American way