Po

‘Wants 2.

It's important for me at various times and
stages of dancing that I can think of a good be-
ginning. Trying to begin in the middle of the
end results in chaos and uncontrollable absurd-
ity. It happens in sequence or it doesn't happen.
The beginning always happens first. Today there
are sentences pictures paragraphs conversations letters
running around loose all over the forest for all
the Amazons to grab a few at a time for proper
usages. Mancy quietly claimed some of the letters
whole. Ilka grabbed the paints and chalk and tal-
ents so she could grab the pictures some of the
words said. Barb saw an animal forest with
all the animal noises voices sounds. Carla has a
camera and makes up the rest and Kelley has more
tools than I can imagine. Last night she said
she needed another drill because one day she used
it for a hammer because the tool made as a ham-
mer was lost someplace in the 9 room big oak tree.
When Nancy put away the letters for a while she
discovered a lonely paint brush longing for its
home in the bucket of wild sun yellow orange
paint and now the dark room is a wild sun orange
room that has one black window and one open
breezy window, an occupant with porcupine quills.
Meanwhile Kelley and Doe bent over frontwards
picking up bundles of stray sticks in our forest
backyard to pile them where our bebop landlord
walks because he's never around to do anything
and we bet he will be now because he can't get
to where his waterbed is which is where he som-
etimes wants to be. Kelley can't get to where her

—notorcyelé is either because his torn up MGs

take up more than their allotted space even though
she pays $5 for it not to be. So she piled the
bundles of stray sticks on the steps to the base-
ment doors. This isn't all that happened this
week but it's part of it. Some of the rest of the
time we sat huddled on the giant bed dreaming
into the sunset of dances and parades and giant
chains of Amazons. Cile wants to make a giant
chain for the gay parade. Nancy said one end
should be hooked to a wagon pulling me but I
don't think so unless there are a million
cameras surrounding me so you couldn't tell

the I from the eye or the lens from the specs.
Think of a thousand eyes clicking endlessly to
the end of the parade. Besides all this chatter
last night we read, digested, dissected the fascinat-
ing babbling gurgling the rightful air to the
throne which was deciphered diabolically by 3
looneys in the asylum. Yours truly reading about
rock people which now reminds me somewhat of the
song Big Rock Candy Mountain. The rock candy
stone blown people having a meeting stationary
someplace underground. Spring may have sprung stone blown into the wild blue
growing wilderness rodeo. Greta asked me some
time ago if I liked working for Kool-Aid and I
said that Kool-Aid is hardly the place you like
working for. Usually I tell people it's an ex-
perience because once you've worked for Kool-Aid
you can work for anybody because you've seen
about everything there is to see if you look at
it long enough. Regarding money that is. Greta
said she guessed you could find out the state of
economic affairs by watching Kool-Aid in general
it's the worst place to work, I found that out
rapidly so after a couple of mind-blowing boredom
years a great prayer rose to our great lesbian
goddess on high and she sent Cile so we could
save some of the sorries around us. Straight
Taurusine said she plans on getting a piano so

she and Cile can do a duet and then said they'd

invite everyone over to watch. She could have
said HEAR instead of watch but she told Cile
later she said that for my benefit because she
knows how I like to hear things meaning two ways.

planned

parrothood

Ev has

Clep arrived ...

earlier. I told Taurusine that when we moved
to the 9 room big oak we found a road sign that
said one way and the landlord wanted to throw
it into the garbage but I said save it and we'd
put it over our bed and he said why would I
want to limit myself. It's not exactly that.
More like elimination which is not the same
thing at all. Besides all that I thought about
playing baseball with all the Amazons. Spring
reminds me of summer which reminds me of baseball
which reminds me of what spring reminds Barb of
which is sex. I remind baseball. I thought a
about having my turn at bat 2 outs last of the
ninth score tied bases full and I didn't do my
pregame batting practice when I was a kid I al-
ways did my pregame batting practice and exer-
cises and all that. Now you can buy machines
that tie on your body and move your muscles for
you so you don't have to do it all yourself.
When I was a kid I had to do it all myself. Any-
way it's spring and even the losers win when
it's spring. It's just that sometimes nobody
knows when they win. Of course we don't always
know when we lose either. Once I had a friend
who showed up at her fancy office work one day
without her blouse. She didn't know it until
some man told her so she had to go back home
and get her blouse so she could be proper and
well-dressed. Once I had another friend who
wore her apron to church but nobody cared about
that because it meant housework so what could
you expect from a housewife but to wear her
apron to church. It's hard sometimes to get
rid of some things and harder sometimes to

keep other things. When you have to be proper
you forget what's important and especially when
it's either or always never like in England.
There will always be an England spring and Jill
and up the hill. Oh by the way I'm thinking
about writing a letter to Lavendar Woman. A kind
of letter to the editor retracting all my before
written words. Something like dear Lavendar
Woman I wish to retract it all. I never meant
any of it it was all a joke that got carried
away but then Greta told me folly folly all is
folly. Folly wants a backer. Tell them any-
thing. It doesn't matter. No maximum feasible
understanding. So folly folly all is folly.
Folly wants a backer. It seems to me that the
tiger from the east voice has the right idea.
One letter to everyone of her friends and enemies.
Once is enough. All the news that's fit to
print. Of course some other words might have
to be said to some other creatures but if so
what. So much for the Lavendar Woman letter.
On the other hand I could apologize like sorry
your feelings hurt from standing up to vote me
down it should have been your head hurting
instead. Cile said after lunch she wanted the
revolution to start right away and decided she
would go to CLL to see if she'd change her mind.
This was after the 90th day of Julieann salads.
Taurusine said from now on they should split a6
Julieann and it would be cheaper. That's before
Cile said she wanted the revolution to happen
today. Who can blame her? Too many Julieanns
and it's all over. The diet becomes the not.
Greta says planned parrothood has arrived but
few could recognize it for its true value.
That's what the LW people say. No one recog-
nizes them for their true value. True value
shoppers shop at true value. We're leaving all
that for the great explorations of priestesshood.
Come fly with us sometime into the lavender
clouds of heroines. Spring and Jill and up the
hill. Folly wants a backer.

Betty Peters