REJECTED 

GREETINGS from the far southside branch of  
Chicago Lesbian Liberation. Gee, it was swell  
of north side guys to reach out your hands  

to us southsiders so we can join you in your  
march onward to eco  

Where? The Bradbury?  

As the Ancient Prophet said (I don't  
remember her name) beware of what you pray  
for, you might get it.  

Let me tell you how it is down here. We  
are quiet people, most of us, working quiet  
and hard, while you guys always seem to be up  
in the clouds above us, discussing such important  
things like "we've got to get organized"  
and "what bar shall we go to tonight?" At least  
we always know what bar we're going to because  
it's close to where we live and work, and we  
don't have to travel all the way to Alaska to  
get there, and it is owned by a Lesbian, and  
a friend. Meanwhile we are building our houses,  
our lives, our mousetraps, our drinks, etc.  

As an expatriate, sort of, of the north  
side, I've been coming around the group that  
now calls itself CLL for a couple of years. I  
hear that Betty Peters has written a herstory  
of the group (already we have a Bible?) Well,  
I've been there to see a number of stellar  
attractions and I imagine if I put my mind to  
it, I could write a herstory too. It's kind  
of a 3-Ring Circus with a new full-scale  
Messianic act every so often.  

First there was Mighty Mouth Marge-the  
Barge and her sidekick (yours truly)  
at their place on the south  
side and fed you tea and oranges that came all  
the way from Jewel if you could sort it out  
from the garbage. Then there was Wild Raella  
W. (I use first names so nobody will sue me)  
with her speedy entourage howling at the moon  
and chasing devils. Then there was Betty P.,  
basically a bright and sensible sort of person  
who was going to teach you all the Alphabet  
from A to L, but you kept going ABC... QSTHAU,  
I guess all that teenage adulation  

made Betty giddy in the head and she got carried  
away with herself, but she seems to be  
growing even though she writes kind of like  
Marge S. without punctuation and periods who  
was really imitating e.e. cummings who was prob-  
ably imitating Gertrude Stein our great grand-  
mother, who teaches us the value of the absurd  
that is, if you make too much sense, everyone  
will call you crazy.  

Would you believe all these people thought  
at one time or another they were the Messiah,  
and they are all intelligent, educated people?  

So it shouldn't surprise me to see Linda  
S. and the so-called Family of Woman staging a  
comeback for the old messianic hope that some  
inspired prophet is going to lead us the way  
to liberation. But this one takes her cue from  
Bob Dylan, Rod Stewart, Mick Jagger and the Who's  

beneath the sun-stained lavender skies  
sore-callused hands busily working hard  

removing all hills and cutting down mountains  
building rapidly a nation for all of our own  

hot sun's rays bring the sweet sweat down  

falling on the ground molding the foundation  
pulling wells of liberation that will meet the sky  
a home we have made by ourselves for our own  

the time has come for a lesbian empire!  

Barbara Doe  

Here I found myself in the auditorium of Ida  
Noyes Hall, in the midst of a noisy, enthu-  
siastic mob of women (save for a handful of  
men who had come to jack off and pinch asses)  
and most of them were buying her act. You  
would not believe it. Black women bebopping  
to a Hebrew lament. That's sheer magic. Next,  
Linda was telling me she could transform that  
marvelous sexist song of Bob Dylan's "Ain't  
That Just Like a Woman" into Pure Feminism  
by changing the word "but" to "and." Gee  
Linda, that's wonderful, how do you do it?  

I was just recovering from these wonders  
when I heard a woman in the row behind me  
telling the news that CLL has formed a  
Steering Committee. A Steering Committee?  
Did I hear right? Let me think, where have I  
heard this one before? Who would have the  
audacity to try to steer CLL? I bet I can  
guess, and I bet it isn't a low-class, low-  
profile group either, only the best, white,  
middle-class stock, and maybe a black token  
thrown in (please, spare me naming a token).  

But now back to the concert in progress.  
Linda is now telling everyone, don't worry, she  
is working on her ego thing, she's going to let  
other members of the group speak out. Isn't  
that impressive folks? Next, she's welcoming  
her groupies that came all the way from Cham-  
paign and Bloomington. Isn't that marvelous?  
More applause. Pardon me folks, but I'm be-  
ginning to get warm under the collar and the  

armpits. This looks like your old Superstar,  

Rock and Roll, sexist-fanatic, Idolization -  
Fantasy, in which we are supposed to go waltzing  
off to Nirvana arm in arm with Tommy Shear  
leading the way "hear me, feel me, see me,  

touch me..." complete with amplifiers and  

canned applause.  

Not revolutionary feminism.  

This Hollywood Muzak is so hypnotic, I  
could almost go to sleep. But I look around and  
there are some holes in the scenery. There  
are a couple of black women, and their eyes are  
narrow and mean, like they're wincing in dis-  
belief. And my partner looks uncomfortable and  
bored. She's looking mean too. Maybe there is  
some hope.  

Linda, a couple of months ago you and I  
were talking about Betty, how we thought she  
was crazy because she was trying to live out  
some of her fantasies. Who are we to judge  
Betty? Your Rock and Roll Superstar thing is  
a fantasy of yours, from the best sexist  
tradition. At least Betty's revolutionary  
fantasy isn't a sexist rip-off. She's lip-  
synching Gertrude Stein while you're lip-  
synching Rod Stewart.  

Susan Moore