Dear Sisters: THE SWEET 16 WIND BLOWN BUTCH PILGRIMAGE

Awhile back, the Amazon Nation mailed numerous letters for the purpose of compiling information for a WHOLE LESBIAN CATALOG. To date, we have had many replies, but we feel that those replies are by no means representative of the lesbian community. And those people who have not yet sent us information have not yet recognized the potential of such a publication or the importance of setting up nationwide communication channels.

In a sense, we view this catalog as a survival manual rather than merely lists of this and that. We are interested in receiving information about any woman or group of women who have pooled their various talents and are engaged in jewelry, pottery, printing, art, publications, study groups, collectives, car mechanics, literary groups....the list goes on.

Hopefully the WHOLE LESBIAN CATALOG will evolve into a resource manual with a list of publications and people to contact to exchange ideas. This catalog, with your help, could be more than a few stapled sheets of paper. We want to make a permanent book of utility, something every lesbian could use to find information, order products and publications made by women for women. Right here in Chicago we have printing collectives, artists, musicians, a theater group, two newspapers, a literary group who is currently publishing an anthology, etc. etc.

But this is only a partial list for one city. Imagine the possibilities for a catalog if we can get the same information from all the major cities in the country! Therefore, to put this idea into motion, we need your help. Help us get this publication together by taking the time to send us information about yourself and/or your group. We would also appreciate it if you would pass this information on to other women. Remember that no group is too small or insignificant to be included!

We hope to hear from millions of you in the very near future!

laurie mcdade is

betty Peters
barbara Tipe
jeanes —
cara hitdry dolinka

address all Correspondence,
to: Cries from Cassandra.
S/o The Amazon Nation

A216 N Burling
Chicago, IL 60607.

© June, 1973 by The Amazon Nation