After carefully reading the last issue

of Lavender Woman, I tossed it aside, ex-
tremely disappointed and discouraged; a
feeling many of those close to me also ex-
pressed. Physically I suppose it rated four
stars. You know the old adage, “if it looks
good it must be." Unfortunately, the LW
looked good, but content-wise left everything
to be desired.

Aside from consistently using the term
lesbian, the LW could pass for a straight
newspaper. To many women, a good newspaper
must mean that it should have a little of
this and a little of that but not too much of
either, and of course, be careful not to in-
clude anything of controversial importance
because it might offend someone. However, the
end result of such an attitude was a wishy-
washy potpourri of a newspaper highly imita-
tive of straight society and definitely lack-
ing in any strong political feminist state-
ment.

We are unfortunately taught that too

much controversy is naughty...something to
be avoided, especially where the press is
concerned. So the IW group publishes a paper
that is supposed to be representative of what's
going on in the community. To an extent that
goal was accomplished. The only trouble was
that the paper said zero.

Authors in the paper preached about loving
your sisters, let's be nice to straights and
they'll be nice to us, get your shit together,
don't be insolent to anyone under 66, blah blah
blah—Isn't it gratifying to know that most
are still on the political protest, monogamy,
racism etc. level? My god, how relevant we've
become! Unfortunately again, it's an imitation
of what straight society sees as relevant.

Articles were even rejected for this last
issue in favor of meaningless space-filling

trivia like a whole page on the evils of that
horrible holiday St. Valentine's Day. One par-
ticular article dealt with the Family of Women
evocative Superstars as well as making some
vital historical statements. It was turned
down because LW thought it trashed people and
hence was too controversial which is, of course,
another straight conclusion since no one bothered
to really read the article.

In fact, the LW reminded me drastically of
the Monday night meetings and CLL in general.
When someone is lost, they automatically have
been trained to take a well-traveled road to
be found instead of forging through a hitherto
unexplored jungle. Women at CLL constantly
adopt straight patterns of behavior, and meetings
usually bore on and on in the following enlight-
ening fashion:

First we figure out what bar to go to, then
we get a charter that says we're legal, then we
hassle about dues, take time out to listen to a
woman rant and rave about how we're all racist
pigs and we should DEAL with it. Sometimes, if
everybody's good and no one disrupts, we get
cookies and can play games in the basement. The
final scene of this horror flick was to devote
a meeting discussing men. My lord, the amazon
queen must be rolling over in the sky.

Obviously the problem is that we constantly
forget who we are and who we don't have to be
anymore since closets are quickly becoming obso-
lete. We are and can be strong, vital, surviv-
ing, creative dykes. We don't have to live as
if the local country club or employer is only
two steps away. There doesn't have to be a set
pattern of behaviors; we can make our own.

Women stop their dreams at point C because so-
ciety has taught them to. They fashion their
meetings and newspaper according to the straight
world's rules of correct parliamentary procedure
and code of good journalistic ethics because

they're afraid to look beyond what's happening
next month. We are conditioned to imitate not
to create.
When many women have this namby-pamby
straight attitude, it's no wonder women with
different ideas, dress, mannerisms, you name it,
are squelched by women in CLL in a very crude,
un-intellectual manner because straight society
condones ostracizing "weirdos" or in their
terms "queers."
Some women, though few and far between,
are at least beginning to realize that this
minority group does not have to disintegrate
into a cheap imitation of the world outside,
and that setting a goal like legalizing gayness
by picketing city hall or Ann Landers is the
result of a straight myth that says that's the
way to get anywhere. All it does is keep
women's minds from exploring life in an origi-
nal creative manner.
The same applies to this "love your neighbor
deal with straight society" bullshit. We're not
living in Utopia, UA where problems are solved
by passing out flowers and saying peace and love
to strangers on street corners. (that's slightly
reminiscent of the flower children era and of
course, another imitation.) It's demeaning and
disgusting to hear gay women discuss "our prob-
lem with straights" when the problem is that
straight society exists around us like the bubonic plague.
The Lavender Woman has the potential to be
a vital part of the movement, if not the strong-
est of print media. But to date, Monday meet-
ings and IW have degenerated into poor imitations
that disguise and suppress our strength and come
off making everyone look like they're afraid to
stand on their own two feet. Women are still at
point C on the growth level and are afraid
to look into the mirror and tell themselves the
sky's the limit for fear that mirror might
crack.
With such sad plagiarism among us, it be-
comes increasingly difficult for many of us who
don't walk around blankly asking "does CLL
have goals?" (probably getting 'the center!'
as a reply) to move past this idiocy and begin
to build a Lesbian Nation...a nation of
mighty dykes who have discovered the worth
and strength and power in each other, and who,
instead of succumbing to imitations, are all
off to see the wizard, goddammit.

Cartons Lightfoot
FOR MARGARET ROSE
From Rita “ae

God, but people love you
when you write poems of pain.
Weep and wail
And the critics are yours.
Well, Sisters
I've been up the road
And I've been down the road
And damn but the sun shines once in a while
And I do love that sun
I love this earth
And I love myself,
Hell, I'd love you too
If you folks would pry yourselves
out of that existential time warp.
And while I'm testifying
Let me tell you this
in lusty red and thunderous black
Honey, this child not only is going to survive
This child is going to triumph.
So sister can you love me strong
Can you love me joyful, outrageous and without shame?
Until you can love my power, woman
You ain't got a movement
And you ain't got me.