ULTIMATE COMPLIMENTS:

Tuna Tale

Why I love tuna fish. First of all, it  
is not tuna fish but a tuna sandwich. It is  
not plain tuna fish in which I'm in love with,  
but tuna with real mayonnaise. It has to be  
on white bread toasted to a golden brown.  
Then smeared with a layer of mayonnaise,  
to be munched up all in good taste.

When I was very small, I used to live in  
a valley with a town that had only 17 people.  
All the people in the town were old and there  
was no one to play with. The town was sur-  
rounded on three sides by huge mountains.  
On the fourth side, there lay a never-ending  
river. The river was a mystifying river in  
which everyone feared. The river had no end  
and anyone that fell into it was carried away  
and never heard from again. So for years on  
end I was trapped in this valley with no one  
to talk or play with.

After years of everyone telling me never  
to go by the river, my imagination of the  
river got bigger and bigger. I used to picture  
a dark green river with whirlpools in every  
corner. It had sharp cliffs on the sides that  
used to reach out and eat animals. I remember  
dreaming up an old, small ugly half pig, half  
ape creature that lived in the side of the  
mountain. The side of the mountain lay right  
next to the ugly river. The small ugly creature  
used to howl with hunger when the nights were  
cold and the stiff winds blew through the  
waters. I was now very much in fear of ever  
going near the wicked river or the ugly creature.

So the years of my life still continued on.  
The only thing that time did for me then was  
to make my hair grow longer and me taller.

I woke up one day with a strange feeling.

I ran to look out of my small window hoping to  
find out why. There before me was the largest  
sunrise ever. Its rays came flying into my  
room and all over me. I knew that something  
was going to happen that day. So I ran  
and brushed my teeth and made sure that my eyes  
and ears were extra open.

But the day wore on and nothing happened.

I still kept hoping and looking around corners  
and under rocks. Then it happened. Far out  
into the sunset on a small rock sat something  
small. It was someone I had never seen before  
and was very strange. Ah—it was a fisherman.  
I had never met a fisherman and was enchanted  
by her. She started telling me stories of  
where she came from and how she got there. I  
asked her billions of things because it was so  
exciting. She didn’t come from a town like  
mine at all. She had a true friend and an  
everlasting supply of happiness and love.

Then she told me she came down the river.

My eyes dropped open and I had to stare and  
think. The same river with the ugly green  
water and the horrible little creature that  
lives there? It was the fisherman's turn to  
be shocked for she didn't think it was ugly  
at all. The matter of fact was that she  
thought it was the most beautiful river ever  
in the whole creation. And soon we became  
the very best of friends. She took me down to  

see the river that I never saw before. All  
that I had heard before about the river from  
the town was the opposite of what I saw. It  

was such a fine and pretty river that I  

wanted to jump in and swim away. I asked the  
fisherman why the people in the town thought  
of the river that way and she said that they  
have sunglasses on and will never understand.

And the time passed on and it did more  
than get my hair longer and me taller. It now  
made me much more wiser and happier.

On the bottom of the river lay a whole  
lot of tuna sandwiches just the way I love  
them. That's why I love tuna sandwiches.

Then

on

hummingfly—

Betty

Dear to me

You gave me once a rainbow smile

and I followed you not knowing where  
you'd take me.

You gave me once a winding road

of truth and you.

You knew I would believe  
I reached the end.

You gave me once a worth and trust.  
You polished up my rusty smile.

You worked me harder the more

I gave the more you took  
the more I gave the more  
and still you gave.

You made me strong.

when

I took

kelley

porcupines view

I must have dreamed I was in heaven last  
week. Shady green lawns with lavender meadows  
full of smiling lady angels singing and dancing  
hummingbirds and mountain goats and forest  
animals playing together.

But my lavender armband also showed me  
other faces in the clouds. The martens seemed  
sceptical when some robins excited a wasp  
colony but an Irish caterpillar hummed them to  
sleep again. Half a dozen chameleons were  
caught between colors and blamed for bad  
weather. Lightning and thunder followed by  
winds and then rain.

When the sun shone through in misty  
morning, many groundhogs and ostriches did  
not open their eyes. Cricket songs grew  
louder with the sunrise, a grapevine bore  
fruit before me. I visited starfishes  
at seashores with a mermaid. An honest  
brown doe eyes taught me about sparks and  
underground busy burrows with miniature  
poetlands.

After flying home to nest my quills,  
trusting the owl to know who will ask for  
directions, I strongly support sanctioning  
specific forest preserves. Certain special  
animal agents are more responsible for  
carrying on forest activities for the  
benefit of all. I suggest for the time to  
come we make reservations for particular  
priorities to protect our territory from  
outside interference.

Nancy Boothe

Naprapsath Founding

Holy Amazonians!  
Oh say can you see?  
The rocket is launching

on the lavender lawn out front,  
invisible to the naked eye of Andromeda...  
cloaked with subtle safety barbs of confusion...  
rammed from 12 billion depressed centuries, and  
developed with pride by the Indians,  
though oft robbed of its identity.

Sudden eclipses of marriages  
after the dawn of womankindred

built the craft...  
and now from the east they spunkidly come,

traveling via fast car  
la la... killing enemies at toll booths...

to see, to see, to see.

And the rocket is launching on the lawn.  
(It's getting better all the time.)

Barbara Lightfoot