Alerb

Editorial:

P.O. Box 10302 Elmwood, CT.  
Business and Circulation P.O. Box 437, Middletown, CT. 06457

ALERT PHONE:  
203-728-0341

Women's Legislative Review  

Vol. 111, No. 3  
May 1975

VOTE DUE ON LEGISLATION

Many Bills Affect Women  
And Equal Rights

Media Reform

by Rita Towsner  

NEW HAVEN—In response to the negative portrayal by so much of the major media today, ALERT and eight other Greater New Haven area groups have organized to form the Feminist Committee for Media Reform. In addition to ALERT, the groups are: the American Association of University Women (AAUW), the League of Women Voters, the National Organization for Women (NOW), the Connecticut Women’s Political Caucus, the Black Women’s Caucus, Women in the Media, the Coalition of Labor Women’s Educational and Legal Fund, Inc. (CWEALF). 

The first project of the Feminist Committee with respect to WTNH-TV and other media institutions is to negotiate with the local television station, WTNH-TV, Channel 8, to eliminate the sexist language that pervades its programming. Joan Steffens, NOW’s representative on the committee, stated: “Our monitoring, particularly of the entertainment shows and the ads, showed that women are restricted to a very limited range of stereotyped roles. Basically, women are portrayed either as happy homemakers or unhappy hookers. Rarely do we see a realistic portrayal of a working woman, even though women comprise more than 40 per cent of our labor force. Even more rare is the opportunity to see a woman as a person with a wide range of interests and concerns, not just for her household but for her total environment,” Attorney Hill stated.

Approximately fifty women monitored Channel 8 during the week late in 1974. The results of the monitoring were statistically compiled and analyzed. In the area of news, 80 per cent of all newscasts, both local and national, were dominated by men as newsmakers, anchorpersons, and reporters. According to the court rulings around the country, 90.5 per cent of the commercials used male voices. During the past few months, various courts throughout the United States have rendered decisions which affect or could affect women’s rights. These decisions are in areas such as sex discrimination under a state or federal law, sex discrimination in employment, abortion, and the use of names.

The most recent, and most important, decision rendered in the Stanton v. Stanton, handed down in mid-April by the U.S. Supreme Court, specified that a greater age of majority for males than for females violated the equal protection provisions of the 14th Amendment to the Constitution. The Stanton case involved an earlier court order for child support which required that the father provide child support until each child reached majority. The trial court applied a Utah statute which provided that the age of majority for males is 21 and for females, 18 in determining when the father no longer had to support a daughter. The Utah Supreme Court had upheld the statute against a challenge as to its constitutionality, stating that there was “a reasonable basis for the statute,” and then referring to what it called “old notions...that generally it is a man’s primary responsibility to support the family.”

The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Utah court’s decision and held that there was no rational reason for the statute’s distinction. The Court, however, declined to decide whether sex classifications are inherently suspect, which finding would have made it harder to justify legislation with a sex classification. (The Court has previously held that classifications based on race are inherently suspect but has repeatedly declined to extend such holding to sex classifications.)

In rendering the decision, the Court also stated that the “old notions” no longer give rationality to the distinction in the statute. Furthermore, the Court stated that “(n)o longer is the female destined solely for the home and the rearing of the family, and only the male for the marketplace and world of ideas....Women’s activities and responsibilities are increasing and expanding. Coeducation is a fact, not a rarity. The presence of women in business, in the professions, in government and, indeed, in all walks of life where education is a desirable, if not always necessary antecedent, is apparent and a proper subject of judicial notice. If a specified age of minority is required for the boy in order to assure him parental support while he attains his education and training, so, too, is it for a girl. To distinguish between the two is to perpetuate an outdated and unjust stereotype.”

The fate of most of the bills with great potential impact on women will be decided in the next three weeks. The accompanying chart displays the bills most likely to be voted on during the period from May 12 to the end of the legislative session, June 4.

Letters, telephone calls, and visits to the Capitol can have a critical impact on the passage of these bills. Communicate with your representative and senator as well as House and Senate leaders listed below. Write Governor Grasso and ask her to support and sign legislation you care about. Appropriate requests to legislators include asking them to “Support, speak to their colleagues about, speak out on the floor about, and vote for Bill Number... because....”

Very brief three or four line letters or postcards are effective. Personal anecdotes describing how the legislation will affect you are helpful.

Bill Number and Title

SB 1655 An Act Establishing an Office of Child Day Care

HB 7263 An Act to Expand Family Planning Services

This issue of ALERT has been  
Please turn to page 4

Supporting Information

Creates an office of advocacy to develop new models, compile existing information and studies, search for innovative funding ideas, support parent involvement—PCSW report identifies 147,000 minimum need vs. 7,000 currently licensed spaces.

Appropriate $25,000 for family planning that gets 90% match from federal funds — $250,000. In 1974 less than 1/3 of women received service; the government saves $2.50 for every $1.00 spent.

HB 7376 An Act Increasing the Shelter Allowance for Persons Receiving Public Assistance

SB 1476 An Act Concerning a Sex Crime Analysis Unit

SB 1519 An Act Concerning Sexual Assault and Related Offenses

HB 8274 An Act Concerning the Name of Married Women on Voting List

SB 1370 An Act Concerning Loitering in Bars by Females

HB 5259 An Act Providing for a Presidential Primary

Helps shrink gap in rental allowances and actual costs. Recent Welfare Dept. study shows 70% of recipients receive inadequate allowances for food, clothing and basic necessities, forcing them to choose between rent payment and other essentials.

Creates a unit to compile information and educate and sensitize the public regarding sex crimes.

Implements task force recommendations from the PCSW; relieves burden of proof on victim; simplifies prosecution.

Prevents inequality of treatment by individual registrars. Important for women running for office who must use name on list on ballot.

Removes “dark ages” statute prohibiting “loitering by females.”

Devises a system of candidate sponsored caucuses followed by a presidential preference primary. Requires national convention delegates to reflect choices of all citizens.

SB 1466 An Act Concerning Equality of Educational Opportunities

SB 1312 An Act Concerning Discrimination in Education on Account of Sex

SB 1693 An Act Concerning Posting by Banks and Creditors of Notice Concerning Discrimination

SB 1426 An Act Concerning Admission of Veterans of Both Sexes to Veterans Homes and Hospitals

SB 516 An Act Requiring Parental Consent for Abortions for Minors.

Adds sex, religion, or national origin to existing anti-discrimination portion of statute.

Provides civil remedy as well as complaint procedure in redress and prevention of discrimination in education because of sex.

Requires posting on premises of discrimination laws. Informs consumers and employees in a visible way of rights.

Eliminates exclusion of female veterans who should have equal access to benefits provided male veterans.

OPPOSE. Recent Court decisions in Mass. and Colorado affirm the right of all women to equal access to medical treatment.