Photo by Annette Palaez, Copyright 1985

CONFERENCE

strengthening strategies that would
help to further the advancement of their
concerns.

For some women, just being able to
meet as many women from around the
world who shared similar views and
concerns was enough of a reason to get
to Nairobi.

The Forum organizers put out a
daily newspaper highlighting the
events of each day, offering “forum”
space for articles by different women
activists from various parts of the
world and publishing upcoming events
or changes in the programs.

There was a separate space set aside
for Tools & Technologies where build-
ings housing various technologies from
fish smoking to batiking were dis-
played. There was on-site honey can-
ning as well as brickmaking, solar
collectors, and several different kinds
of ovens using indigenous fuel effi-
cient sources. There were booths for
nutrition information and a display of
what prison industries make.

Yes, the Kenyan government ap-
parently was proud of what their
people in prison could do for the
Kenyan economy.

And there was a peace tent which
was a space intended to foster sister-
hood where meetings, songs, dancing,
and speak-outs and just plain old-fash-
ioned sharing on the one-to-one went
on. In the Gandhi Center building on
the University grounds, there was a
cultural center established which was

operated by the French. I’m not sure
how the French managed to control
the Cultural Center, but it had me a
little worried that the French might
have learned some lessons from their
colonization of parts of Africa and the
rest of the world. It smelled a little
paternalistic to me.

There was also a healing circle on
the grounds which was intended for
just that, to heal. And it did feel
good, with participants such as Edwina

FALL/WINTER 1985

Photo by Annette Palaez, Copyright 1985

her wonderful healing rhythms.

Sweet Honey and the Rock gave an
evening concert that was packed and
enjoyed by all.

And there was the National Theater
where some films which managed to
“pass the censors’ guidelines” were
shown.

Some 7,000 women were housed in
the University dormitories and
thousands of others were housed
throughout Nairobi. It was quite a
pleasant sight to see women from all
over the world on the streets of
Nairobi. Craftswomen had made
special fabrics with the design com-
memorating this historic conference,
which were being sold all over the city.
In fact, there was a merchants blitz of
Forum ‘85 Decade of Women logos on
all sorts of items.

Yes, and now some of the highlights
of controversy—“The Lesbians.” That
is how the press in Nairobi referred to
lesbians at the conference. There was
a conflicting report that Dame Barrow
had not wanted lesbians to participate.
Well, the next day there were articles
in the papers declaring that there must
have been some confusion because, as
she said, “Everyone is welcome at
Forum ‘85.” It did seem that way.
That is, if you could get there in the
first place. But yes, lesbians were
quite a curiosity, especially to men.
Some lesbians actually did talk to the
men (who seemed the most interested)
and told them what lesbianism meant.
One lesbian had to assure a man that
even in the bush there could be
lesbians and that, no, being a lesbian
did not require electricity; lesbians do
not always use vibrators.

And naturally mirroring the world’s
conflicts, there were recurring confron-
tations.

Representatives from Iran and Iraq
were present at the conference and
each delegation tried their best to
show what the other delegation’s
country was doing to them. At one
point at a workshop on Native
Americans, an Iraqi woman was dis-
tributing flyers about Iran’s chemical
warfare when an Iranian woman, ob-
viously upset, took off her prosthetic
leg and waving it in the air asked, “Is
this peace?”

There was also the continuing con-
flict between Israelis and Arabs. At
one workshop, there was a talk given by a
Jewish woman from America (who
was an Israeli citizen) and a Palestinian
woman. They discussed the need for
both the Israeli government and the
PLO to make concessions. Of course,
it was a lot more emotional than I des-
cribe, but the continuing need for
dialogue about the issues kept the
Arab-Israeli “conflict” at the forefront
of Forum ‘85, alongside the issue of
South Africa’s apartheid.

And looking back from my room in
New York, there was the same issue
we deal with day-to-day here in the
United States. Racism in America by
Americans to Americans and everyone
else in the world.

Women of color from the United
States were a strong voice in Nairobi
but, in Nairobi as in the States,
women of color had to deal with the
stereotypes people harbor, from other
(continued on page 17)

PAGE SEVEN