All of them don’t make it either. It’s just more of them out there. There are not a lot of women pursuing the market as far as getting on the stand and working.

Black artists always have a few problems. The problems of: If I had’ve been white and been singing like I’m singing it would’ve happened for me a long time ago. But since I’m Black and I’m not the kind of person that they can control, they’re not even going to think about trying to do anything with me. I do have an agent who is white but he’s been around Black people all his life. He knows about us, we’re no surprise to him, our thing and our attitudes, our whole thing.

In today’s market, because of the influx of the Beatles it’s hard. When they came over and announced where they’d gotten the flavor of their music, which was from Black musicians like Chuck Berry and a lot of the traditional blues singers, because a lot of that music was played in Europe and wasn’t being played here on the radio, that gave permission to a lot of white folks who’d been wanting to do this kind of music for years, like Elvis Presley, who just never had the guts to program and show them the right way. Pick the right tunes for them and stage their act for them. Some people need this, and if they need it, there are people out there for this, so it’s okay if they need it. If it gets them to the audience, then that’s what they needed to do.

Be-bop at that time was only supported by Blacks. It wasn’t until the festivals came along that Be-bop really stretched out to the white audience. I never felt ‘I don’t want to go to Philadelphia and work.’ It’s my thing.

Q: A lot of people depend on their albums to gain them popularity.

A: Depend on their albums?! What do you mean? They don’t go there? You know why they don’t go there [tour]? The record company. It’s not that they don’t want to go. It’s the record company saying, “Well, we'll see if the album breaks in Philadelphia. We'll see if the album breaks in Baltimore, Washington, and then we'll go.” It costs money to produce somebody and nobody knows about them. So they want an album first. A record to get pushed in a particular town so they can drum up some demand and then off goes the artist to fill up the house. They go ‘cause they know we want them. That’s what it is. It has nothing to do with they don’t want to tour. They’re going to have to tour if they’re going to stay in business.

Q: What instrumentation do you prefer in your band?

A: The one I got. The rhythm section [piano, bass, and drums]. I have worked with other instruments. I can say that I worked with horns but nothing electric.

Q: In what setting are you most creative?

A: You can’t do it in your house. That’s all a part of it. What are you joining this business for if you don’t plan to get on the road and do something. Everybody knows that from the beginning of time, show business was on the road. You can’t do it in one city and expect people to come there from Houston to see you. You got to go to Houston. You got to go to Europe. That’s a part of it and this is the freedom of being a jazz singer. You can change anytime and all the time. You can be on the concert stage, it changes. You could be at a nightclub, it changes. You could be outdoors, it changes. Now, myself, I like nightclubs. I like concerts, too. But, I like nightclubs for different reasons. Nightclubs are smaller, it’s closer. The concert hall is more sophisticated. You're up there on that pedestal.

Q: Do you have a statement that you would like to make? A motto, poem, or philosophy that keeps you keeping on.

A: That’s it. You just said it yourself. Just keep on keepin’ on, trying to do. I just wish that more people would do what they want to do and not what somebody else wants them to do. Individualism is so rare these days. We're getting carbon copies of everything. I guess I would like to see more individualism in music. In the arts of all kinds.

Photo by Marlene Marshalleck

Afua Kafi-Akua is a freelance writer, a poet, and a musician. She is a musician with IBIS, a women’s jazz/funk group, which has performed throughout the United States and Europe. She is also the Music Editor for Between Our Selves.

SPRING/SUMMER 1985

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE SEVENTEEN