WHVTVTVUVITITOTO NT VINUTVT TTT UU TT UNTNTD TIN TTNTTT TTT NNT UNTNTT TT TTIIT TTT TU TTT TUNTTTOT TUVTOTTT INT TUT T TUTTI TPT TUTTI ITTY TTT TUTTI TTT ITTV TINT TTT TTT TTT TTT

Byllye Avery: “What in your life has moved you to activism?”

Byllye Y. Avery, director of the Black
Women’s Health Project in Atlanta,
Georgia, presented the following speech
at the Plenary Session - “Health, Edu-
cation, and Economic Survival of Afri-
can-American Women of the 1985 and
Beyond Conference, Baltimore, MD.

What is that work that we have to
do to become solid? This is what we
are learning through the Black Women’s
Health Project. When this project was
conceived as a dream in 1980, we

thought that it would be a project that

would organize Black women to sit
around in self-help groups and talk
about high blood pressure and diabetes,
and get rid of all of that. This is a part
of the purpose, but as we started going
out into the dusty roads of Florida
and Georgia, and South Carolina, and
to urban cities like the Bay Area and
Philadelphia, we found that we as
Black women have got another agenda;
even in terms of what health issues are
important to us.

I could stand here and give all the
statistics of high blood pressure and
diabetes and cancer. If anybody is
burning to know this see me after-

wards, because I am not going to use
twenty minutes to talk about the kind
of thing that y’all can go and read in a

book and that you can think about
yourself,

and your daddies and think about the
people who live on your block. Think
about the people who live in your
community. We know the statistics
because we been living them. We all
grew up in communities. Everybody
had bad nerves and high blood pres-
sure.

When we started getting Black wo-
men together in small groups to talk to
each other—and a lot of it is done by
the work of a sister here called Lillie

Some of the things that the sisters
are saying that are real issues and not
only are the sisters saying that “This
movement is for me,” they are saying
that it needs to be for all of you. You
ain't in it for me! You're in it for
every one of yourselves. It is a per-
sonal one, and I’m gonna talk publicly
about it because it is through these
testimonies around issues that make
people know what’s happening in the
world.

ON VIOLENCE

Let’s deal first with the num-
ber one issue. Violence. Sisters
can’t move because they are being beaten.
The children are being victims of in-
cest by their daddies, their stepdaddies,
uncles, and any old body who wants
to lay their hands on them. Women
are being raped inside the marriage,
outside the marriage, on the streets, in
their beds—anywhere. Wholesale being
taken advantage of.

I grew up in a home where my mo-
ther was abused. My momma was
beaten and my momma was an edu-
cated woman who is a wonderful soul.
I didn’t know how I was going to go
off to college because I didn't know
how I could leave home, leave her.

My daughter was raped in Decem-

ber

Take Back the Night speaker in Atl
anta, by three men who were running a
teenage prostitution ring. Do y'all
know that our daughters are so close
to that victimization process?

I want you to make this movement
a personal one. What has happened
in your life that can move you to
activism? What has happened in your
life that can move you to stop this
horrendous stuff that's happening?
And I know some of y’all in there are

“... [it’s important to deal with everybody's issues.
Lesbian issues. Poor women’s issues. Men's issues.
International issues. We’re part of that giant plan.”

Allen, who has that magical way of
helping us reach down into our souls
and pull out them secrets that been in
there for seventy-five years and we
ain’t never told nobody—when women
have started opening up, we have
rearranged what the agenda on Black
women’s health issues are. Sure we do
have the chronic diseases, but let's
look at the mental health issue.

One statistic—and I can remember
the day I read this information, I
threw the book down when I found
out Black women have the highest
rates of admission to inpatient psychi-
atric facilities. I know we ain’t crazy.
What do they do to us? They bring us
in, give us some pills and we use that
time to cool out to get rid of a little
stress and we end up going right
back home to that same old stuff we
left—nothing accomplished until the
next time.

Many of y'all in here have been
going through the same struggles.
Many of y'all in here have been
beaten. Many of y'all been battered.
This is not for anybody else. This is
for us. Make no mistake about it, we
have to deal with the violence. In the
state of Georgia, the number one killer
in three age groups—Black male and
Black female—is homicide. We are
playing into the oppressors' hands.
They have us on self-destruct. It is
important for us to become unified
and that means serious growth.

ON INFANT MORTALITY

Another insidious statistic that we
live with is infant mortality. Is any-
body caring about these black babies
that are dying? All these right-to-life
crazies. Do you know what they
talking about? They ain’t talking

Graffiti downtown Washington, D.C.

about our babies. They talking about
white babies, why don’t they go and
help all these women whose babies are
dying—women who want their babies?
That seems to me like the first place to
start. That’s life!

We're also playing into this idiocy
that the doctors are carrying on. I
don't know the national statistics but
in Georgia, for instance, there are 36
counties that have no doctors. All
the doctors are clustered up in Atlanta.
Ain’t nobody doing nothing for
them sisters in the rural areas. Do you
think they want midwives to practice?
They (doctors) got it all tied up.
They think they own health. Every-
thing has to be validated through
them. A midwife can practice if she
can do fifteen births with a doctor.
Of course, there ain’t no doctor who
will do fifteen births with a midwife.
So, why have this law saying they can
practice?

ON TEENAGE PREGNANCY

We need to start looking at return-
ing to some of the old holistic, caring
ways to do things. Another issue that
white men have been studying up to
yang-yang and the thing is getting
worse, is teenage pregnancy. When
you think about it—just stop and think
about it now—here you got a problem
happening with a segment of the pop-
ulation. Does it make sense to go and
get the people who are the farthest
away from the experience to come up
with an answer? Teenage pregnancy is
not a medical issue. It is a social issue.

It has very little to do with medicine.
What it does is put into the hands of
men, who do research on a regular
basis—a whole new population to deal
with.

Photo by Raymina Y. Mays

thirty minutes a day. That’s gonna be
the best thing to keep us from getting
so much high blood pressure and all
these other kinds of stress-related
diseases. When you go to somebody

“Do you know we are in a serious movement?”

They got all kinds of stuff. Stuff
they can stick in your arm, stuff they
can put any kind of way under your
arms, in your veins and they still can’t
come up with a good condom for men.
Don’t put nothing else up in me!
Birth control is a function of the mind
and you can pile a table up with pills
and if my mind don’t tell me to take
them, you can put out the diaphragms,
the whole nine yards and you don’t
have anything. I come back to all of
this because there is some above
ground and underground work we
gotta be doing.

ON STRESS IN OUR LIVES

Most of you don’t take hardly
any time for yourself. “I don’t have
time to do this for myself, but I got
time for this person and that person.
I run over here and I run over there,
but I can’t take 30 minutes a day out
of 24 hours.” You can’t take 30 min-
utes a day to do something for your-
self. I’m not talking about spending
money. Go out. Go walk in the park
somewhere! Go be by yourself for

and they tell you, “We don’t know
what's happening, we don’t know why
this is.” You know why you have it.
Take charge and start doing something
about relieving stress.

ON ORGANIZING

We as conference organizers—I have
to say it. We can never have anymore
mono-issued conferences. We have got
to have everything on the agenda.
We don’t have much time. Do you
know we are in a serious movement?
Are you aware of how serious this is
that we're doing? Every time I meet
with those in the Project, it's the first
question I ask. That means as we start
to change there are a lot of people who
have got to come along with us.

We have to stand in solidarity with
Black men. Y'all bring your black
men with you to these things. They
have got to be hearing what we saying.
They got to be growing and changing
with us. Many people are related to
these folks on a daily basis and we
can’t be over here talking about ABC

and they talking about XYZ. Let me
tell you that they want to change, too.
They just don’t know how. They got
to start talking with each other and
they got to talk not up here, but down
here in the gut. They got to start
talking about real things just like
we are. There's got to be some coming
together. We who are the women, we
have got to start training our boys and
our girls how to have respect for each
other. Ain’t no sense for no boys in this
generation to start beating up no
women when they get twelve and
thirteen years old. We have got to as-
sume some of the responsibility for
that. Men, we ought to encourage
them so when they sitting around the
corner and they talking about, “That
bitch so and so,” and, “If you can’t
rape your wife, who can you rape?”,
you got to confront this shit and say
“Hey, cut it out,” because in silence
you give consent.

I'm telling you, we are destroying
each other. We are on self-destruct.

We are meant to be together. That’s why we are sent
here. Think about it. It seems real
simple but it’s very complex.

ON LITERACY

For those of us who can read, we

“When you're dealing with oppression you've got to
take the whole circle. You can’t leave nobody

Outs

ON THE ABORTION STRUGGLE

Now I want to talk a little about
the underground and above-ground
work. The abortion struggle. The
above-ground work is the national
campaign to restore abortion funding.
Some sisters are up against some hard-
ships... When abortion becomes a
decision they have to make, it’s a very
difficult one. There’s also the other
side of that. The joy of when they can

“What has happened in your life that can move you

to activism?”

and you'll have to understand how
internalized oppression works. Then
you'll understand why it’s important
to deal with everybody’s issues. Les-
bian issues. Poor women’s issues. Men’s
issues. International issues. We're part
of that whole giant plan. It'll start to
make sense, hang together for you,
for us. That's the work that we have
to do and we are talking about change.

We have to help our sisters who are
poor. You got to get them buses and
you got to go into those areas. If
you're in a city, there are plenty poor.
Get them buses because if you're in a
city, you ain’t got to get no airfare to
bring them in. Haul in a bus and go

sakes ASO 1 10. a child. But
you have to un-eat. I’ve watched

both ends of it. There are times with
many poor women when having a
baby is not a joy. When she’s hungry
and she already has two or three
children, and she’s got to make a deci-
sion when she’s pregnant to feed the
other children and that means she
can’t eat. That’s why a lot of women
are having problems, they're not get-
ting enough food. These women have
no choices. I worked in the abortion
clinic and my other sisters who work

in abortion clinics can tell you that we
saw plenty of twelve-year-old kids that

“...there is some above ground and underground

work we gotta be doing.”

tell the sisters, “Yes, we want you here.
We're having a conference. We'll be
here at such and such a time to pick
you up. What do you need me to do
to facilitate your getting there?”

When you're dealing with oppres-
sion, you've got to take the whole cir-
cle. You can’t lock nobody out, be-
cause you're going to have to come
back and do it all over again. What
you find when you do that—take the
whole thing in—that’s when the magic
comes and that’s when we learn the
biggest lesson that we have, the hard-
est thing, our one task on earth. That
is, to learn how to work and play and

had been raped and victims of incest
who had to have babies. You have to
realize that this ain't a perfect world
we living in, and it ain’t going to get
perfect. We can try to make it better.

That's the above-ground work. The
underground work is that there has got
to be some of you who got two
quarters that you can rub together—got
to get together and come together and
come up with some money for sisters
who need abortions who can’t pay for
them. I don’t see no other way
around it. There are too many women
in too much trouble who are put in
this situation.

We have got to go and help our sisters
learn how to read. I directed a CETA
program and the goal was to bring in
Black women up to age twenty-five
who had children. Do you know that
most of these women were reading on
a 4th grade level? Do you know you
can’t get no job? We supposed to
bring them into college job training.
Do you know that most of us can’t
read enough to pass the test? It don’t
matter if they have equal employment
programs if we can’t get the informa-
tion to them. A sister said to me last
night that she wanted to do a literacy
program. That’s what we got to do.
Go where the sisters are and take them
one-on-one and help a sister learn how
to read. That’s the above-ground stuff.

OUR FUTURE

Finally, work with those sisters
who are teenagers who are locked
out. When we are working with them,
we got to start them to dreaming.
Most of these kids are getting pregnant
and saying, “I wanted to have a baby.”
These white folks are saying that we
don’t have to do nothing for these kids
because they are saying, “I want to
have a baby.” That ain't it! The
mouths are saying but that ain’t it.
They don’t have dreams. One of the
things that kept me from getting
pregnant when I was a teenager was
that I knew I was going to school.
Also, I knew my mother would have
killed me. We've got to start dream-

ing.

That’s what we really have to do.
It’s up to us... Just remember the ten
little words, ‘We are the people who
we have been waiting for.”

[Black Women’s Health Project, Martin
Luther King Community Center, 450
Auburn Avenue, N.E., Suite 157,
Atlanta, GA 30312.

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE EIGHT

WINTER 1985

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE NINE