Nairobi, Kenya—Forum 1985

By Annette Palaez  
Copyright 1985

It took me five days to get to  
Nairobi from New York; for some  
others it took longer. A severe case of  
mismanagement on the part of air  
carriers such as Egypt Air, who over-  
booked their flights, left people  
stranded from London to Nairobi and  
back again.

Mismanagement, fraud, and unscru-  
pulous doings on the part of some  
travel agents and some government offi-  
cials all contributed to get Forum ’85  
off to less than an exciting start.

In many ways the Kenyan govern-  
ment headed by President Moi con-  
tributed to the difficulties at the Fo-  
rum with imposed censorship of films  
and video tapes and setting a security  
net which, though perhaps unfamiliar  
to the personal experience of some  
westerners, clearly illustrated to all  
some of the forms repression can take.  
From the machine gun-wielding  
armed forces on the streets to the stick  
toting guards on the university  
grounds, one was constantly reminded  
that if one stepped over the govern-  
ment-made line of “decorum,” things  
could get a lot more than messy.

In the backs of some of our minds  
were the stories we heard of how a  
1982 attempted coup of the Moi  
government led to slaughter on the  
University grounds and also how the  
Moi government rounded up about  

Photo by Turtle-Bear, Copyright 1985

Delegates included local Masai women (right) - Forum 1985, Nairobi, Kenya

600 homeless people on the streets of  
Nairobi in order to “clean up” the city  
for the conference.

Whether each of these reports was  
accurate was not the issue; the reality  
of speaking to local Kenyans who told  
of their fear to speak openly and of the  
wandering ears of security forces  
which were everywhere was enough of  
an indictment of the government. Too,  
there were the local newspaper reports  
of how people were shot down in the  
streets for such things as suspicion of  
burglary. I don’t want to paint a  
picture here that all this is different  
from what goes on in our own backyard,  
but given the Kenyan government's line  
of its “support” of the advancement  
of women, clearly the Forum would  
be headed for some very serious and  
much-needed debate about the politics  
behind oppression and repression of  
women everywhere and how that re-  
pression and oppression affects the  
children and the men of these women.  
So, yes, politics was not ignored. The  
conference headed straight for the  
root of problems being discussed.

It seemed to be fairly well under-  
stood by many women attending the  
conference from “third world coun-  
tries” and agreed to by many people  
from “first world countries” that the  
United States and its allies have been  
behind much of the hardships people  
all over the world have been victims of.

From U.S. companies' sale of unsafe  
birth control devices to the sale of  
chemicals and food products banned  
within the United States, economic  
policies supported by the military  
complex are governing the lives and in-  
deed the deaths of people (half of  
whom are women) around the world.

This was no bit of news for many  
of the delegates there, yet there seemed  
to be a disconnect between “first worlders” and “third worlders” alike. Also, there were some women, though  
surprisingly few, who complained  

about the political tenor of the con-  
ference. All were met with a barrage of  
information and/or evidence that con-  
tinually proved the connections of U.S.  
policy to oppression around the world.

Item: SWAPO workshop: The U.S.  
supports the South African regime and  
the South African regime sends its  
troops into Namibia to destroy the in-  
dependence movement there.

Item: Israeli/Arab dialogue: Israel  
has bombed Lebanon, exiled, im-  
prisoned and killed Palestinians, sold  
weapons to South Africa, Guatemala,  
and El Salvadoran governments, all  
which were indirectly financed by the  
substantial economic aid it receives  
from the United States.

Item: Workshop of Guatemalan  
women: The U.S.-backed dictatorship  
continues to bomb villages, rape,  
mutilate, and kill women and children;  
coerce the men into civil patrols by  
offering death should they refuse.

These were some of the topics  
discussed alongside other workshops  
which spoke about the status of wo-  
men in Iran, India, and Japan; which  
spoke about homophobia around the  
world; women battering and sexual  
assault; dowries, clitoridectomies,  
agriculture, industrialization, famine;  
just about everything that affects  
women, which means just about every-  
thing in the world.

Naturally, if the Forum was going  
to discuss just about everything, it had  
to speak to the differences and  
conflicts between women of varying  
ideologies, classes, races, and religions.  
And that it did. Women held caucuses  
to address particular concerns of par-  
ticular groups. Caucuses included a  
Native women’s caucus, women from  
India caucused, Latina women  
caucused, Black lesbians caucused, and  
there also was a Lesbian caucus with  
all the colors present. Women wanted  
to get together so they could come to  
understand where they were as a group  
and how to keep connected while  

Photo by Annette Palaez, Copyright 1985

Indigenous Women’s Caucus -- Forum 1985, Nairobi, Kenya

PAGE SIX Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper FALL/WINTER 1985