Living Room — fire and illumination

LIVING ROOM  
New Poems by June Jordan  
Thunder’s Mouth Press  
New York City 1985  
softcover $6.95  
hardcover $14.95  
By Carol Haddad  
Copyright 1985  

134 pp.  

June Jordan is not a poet who con-  
templates the world from the solitude  
of a seaside resort or mountain retreat.  
Nor is she an armchair liberal who  
critiques the world from the safety of  
her living room. June Jordan is of and  
among the people. The words that  
flow from her heart and through her  
pen are those of a woman who loves  
humankind, and who wishes that  
humans would love one another.  

June Jordan boldly calls attention  
to the real-life dramas that others  
choose to ignore on their way to news—  
paper comic strips and sports pages.  

flowing. . .  

She is the voice of the Guatemalan  
girl with no arms...  

She is the voice of the Palestinian,  
cluster bombed and rendered homeless  
in the name of “peace” and “self de-  
fense”...  

She is the voice of Palestinians  
called “beasts with two legs” by  
Israelis, “exterminated” and “mopped  
up,” but whose “massacre remains  
invisible” because their skin is not  
white.  

June Jordan is fire and illumina-  
tion. She is a woman of passion, and  
her passion is her power. June Jordan  
dares to write about Arabs in general  
and Palestinians in particular, and has  
paid a price for speaking “against the  
natural order.” But as her sisters in  
Soweto have demonstrated, truth can-  
not long be silenced. June Jordan’s  
voice will continue to be heard until  
there is living room for all peoples on  

NOTES TOWARDS HOME  

My born on 99th Street Uncle when he went to Canada  
used to wash and polish the car long before coffee  
every morning outside his room in the motel  
“Because,” he said, “That way they thought I lived  
around there; you ever hear of a perfectly clean car  
travelling all the way from Brooklyn to Quebec?”  

My mother left the barefoot roads of St. Mary’s  

in Jamaica for the States where she wore  
stockings even in a heat wave and repeatedly  
advised me never to wear tacky underwear  

“That way,” she said, “if you have an accident  
when they take you to a hospital they’ll know you  
come from a home.”  

After singing “God Bless America” Kate Smith  
bellowed the willies out of Bess This House O ©  
Lord We Pray/Make It Safe by Night and Day  

but my cousin meant Lord keep June  

and her Boris Karloff imitations out of the hall  
and my mother meant Lord keep my husband out  
of my way and I remember I used to mean Lord  

She is the voice of the oppressed and this earth.  
the conscience of America.  

She is the voice of women in the  
midst of child custody battles, whose  
mothering abilities are upstaged by  
Hollywood’s “Hoffman”...  

She is the voice of Black men whose  
thirst for freedom caused them to be  
cut down for saying “Death to the  
Klan”...  

She is the voice of Chileans whose  
blood flowed to keep their copper  

Gathering. . .  
(continued from page 18)  

If we know we’re on a river that has a  
name, we have some awareness. If we  
know where the mouth of the river is  
and we can name it, we have a sense of  
culture.”  

In “The White Horse Cafe,” we  
meet Rebecca, a Black woman, travel-  
ing in the South with three white wo-  
men. Stewart’s story gives such vivid  
details of the fear and meanness of  
racism that it reminds me of my dread  
of going into strange roadside cafes  
since one never knows what kind of  
hatred you will have to face. This  
story makes me ask just how far must  
we go to survive.  

Gathering Ground is a “start... a  
beginning, and as the editors so aptly  
put it in the preface; “we were in a  
perpetual state of discovery.” I’m sure  
this state of discovery did not end  
with publication. This anthology is  
truly “a celebration for us all.” For  
we can all enjoy the validation this  
gives us as women of color writers and  
artists.  

Windy Sky is a media-communication  
student living in Oakland, California.  

IWOMANEWs  

NYC FEMINIST NEWSPAPER AND CALENDAR OF EVENTS  

FALL/WINTER 1985  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

“The gay movement’s newspaper of record.”  

Black and white  

Mail to GON Subs, 167 Tremont Street, Boston, MA 02111 mature  

Gay Community News  

just pretty please get me out of here!  

But everybody needs a home  

so at least you have someplace to leave  
which is where most other folks will say  
you must be coming from  

— June Jordan  
Copyright 1985  

— The Village Voice  

Gay Community News is the national political newsweekly  
on the cutting edge of sexual politics and liberation.  

In times such as these, issues such as the direction which our move-  
ment takes, its actions and reactions, who makes the decisions and for  
what reasons, are critical. For over ten years Gay Community News  
has been dedicated to the principle that an informed community is  
our strongest asset.  

Each week GCN brings you current, informative news and analysis  
about lesbian and gay liberation. News of the events which chart our  
movement's course. News of the struggles which mark our successes  
and failures. News of disagreement about which road to take.  

Because we are a non-profit membership corporation with a tradi-  
tion of paid and volunteer staffs working together, GCN has suc-  
ceeded in becoming much more than a mouthpiece for any one in-  
dividual or organizational viewpoint within our incredibly diverse  
community. We are proud that our opinion pages have won a reputa-  
tion for being provocative, lively and controversial.  

GCN is supported primarily by subscription revenue. Get  
on the cutting edge. Subscribe today.  

Subscriptions are available for $29.00 for 50 issues (1 year) and $17.  
for 25 issues.  
Send check or money order to: Gay Community News,  
167 Tremont Street, Boston, MA 02111.  

GCN is published by the non-profit Bromfield Street Educational Foundation,  

Name I would like to contribute  
towards a free subscription  
$42 first-class mail  
$45 supporting  
$20 business/institution  

Name ——— City State Zip  
Please charge my  
Address  
1 year $29.00 25 weeks $17.00 Acct. #  
These rates are for subscriptions within the USA. Exp Date  
Please add 50% for foreign, including Canada.  

PAGE NINETEEN