WOMEN WHO WORKED ON THIS ISSUE: Members of Between Our Selves  
Kentucky:  

Between Us  

Dear Sisters and Friends,  

EDITORIAL  

The name Between Our Selves is taken from the title of a collection of poetry by  
the same name, written by Audre Lorde, Black lesbian feminist poet and activist. We  
can think of no better name than Between Our Selves to symbolize what we are try-  
ing to do.  

Between Our Selves was announced by co-founders, Aida S. Wakil, Arab-American  
activist and Raymina Y. Mays, Black fiction writer, who were both living in Durham,  
North Carolina. Aida and Raymina typed and xeroxed Between Our Selves’ first  
flyer, which was distributed at a reading to celebrate the publication of Home  
Girls: Black Feminist Anthology, ed. Barbara Smith. At the reading, in November  
1983, Between Our Selves was given its first donation of $50. Our first pieces of  
office equipment were donated by the Feminary magazine collective, of which Aida  
and Raymina were both members. In 1984, Teresa Jones, Japanese American  
mother, and Barbara Banks, Black fiction writer and feminist, from Durham, North  
Carolina, joined Between Our Selves.  

Since our beginnings in 1983, response to Between Our Selves has been encourag-  
ing. Most of the 400+ pieces of mail that we’ve answered since the fall of 1983 have  
been letters of encouragement, early subscriptions, and very generous donations from  
those of you who believed in the newspaper long before ever seeing a copy of it.  

We’ve heard from you nationally and internationally.  

Between Our Selves is a forum for us as Afro-American, Arab-American, Asian  
American, Latina, Native American—all women of color—to discuss our thoughts, acti-  
vities, report on our organizing strategies, further Third World Feminism, talk about  
our herstories and dreams. It is up to all of us to keep this newspaper alive so that  
we will not have to mourn its loss as we have done for so many of our efforts, most  
recently Onyx, Black lesbian newsletter, Berkeley, California, and Women of Color  
News, Milwaukee-based women of color newspaper, both of which folded in 1984.  

As you read this first issue of Between Our Selves, think about what it means to  
have a national feminist newspaper for we women of color to share that is just ours,  
by, for, about, and between us. What will you do for the continuance of this news-  
paper and what can Between Our Selves do for you? Write us and let us know!  

In sisterhood,  
Aida S. Wakil  
Raymina Y. Mays  
Teresa Jones  
Barbara Banks  

District of Columbia:  

Raymina Y. Mays, Co-founder  
Aida S. Wakil, Co-founder  

Barbara A. Banks  

North Carolina:  

Teresa Jones  

Editing: Raymina Y. Mays and Aida S. Wakil  

Typesetting: Raymina Y. Mays  
Layout and Design: Aida S. Wakil  

SPECIAL THANKS TO:  

Donna Allen  
Minnie Bruce Pratt  
Joan E. Biren  
Betty Powell  

Elly Bulkin  
Sandina Robbins  

Jan Clausen  
Barbara Smith  

Kate Ellison  
Resist Foundation  
Mary Farmer  
The anonymous donor  
Lynne Geltzer  

Katherine Hall and  

Gladys Horton  

Winnie Huston  
Annette Pelaez  

BETWEEN OUR SELVES  
Women of Color Newspaper  

Between Our Selves is a quarterly  
feminist newspaper by, for, and about  
women of color. We will carry news  
and feature stories and provide a  
forum for women of color. Articles,  
photos, and graphics on local, national  
and international topics are welcome.  

B.O.S.  
P.O. Box 1939  
Washington, D.C. 20013  

Deadline for Spring/Summer Issue:  

March 30, 1985  

All of you who gave money, mailing  
lists, advice, and encouragement.  

LETTERS POLICY  

Between Our Selves prints letters of  
general interest to the community.  
Anonymous letters are not printed; we  
will withhold the author’s name on re-  
quest. Letters over 3 typewritten pages  
will be returned for editing. Please en-  
close a return address or phone num-  
ber with all material submitted (not  
for publication). Correspondence ad-  
dressed to authors will be forwarded  
to them for response.  

IN THIS ISSUE  

Din’e Elder Resist relocation: “People on the land are like grass holding the earth.”  
by Maya Chumu  

Asian Lesbians of the East Coast: Breathing fire of resistance  
by Katherine Hall  

Sisters Speaking, Photos by Annette Pelaez  

CONFERENCES  

1985 and Beyond  

Dessima Williams speaks of her country since the Invasion  

Black Lesbians protest exclusion  

Byllye Avery: “What in your life has moved you to Activism?”  

Palestine Aid Society  

“Together We Better Serve Our People” Three Palestinian women speak  
by Raymina Y. Mays  

BOOK REVIEWS  

Audre Lorde: Transforming poetry into theory, by Gina R. Rhodes  

A different kind of calendar, by Terri Jewell  

FICTION CORNER  

Clean Cut and Monday, by Barbara Smith  

MUSIC  

photo by Annette Pelaez  

NETWORKING  

PUBLICATIONS  

All articles appearing in this issue are copyrighted by the individual authors. All  
photographs are copyrighted by the photographers. All other material is copyrighted  
by Between Our Selves unless otherwise noted. No articles can be reprinted without  
prior permission.  

PAGE TWO  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

WINTER 1985