Audre Lorde: Transforming Poetry into Theory

By Gina R. Rhodes

Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches  
by Audre Lorde. Trumansburg, NY,  
Crossing Press, 1984, 190 pp., $7.95

“The Women of Dan”

I do not come like a secret warrior  
with an unsheathed sword in my mouth  
hidden behind my tongue  

slicing my throat to ribbons  

of service with a smile  

while the blood runs  

down and out  

through holes in the two sacred mounds  
on my chest  

--The Black Unicorn, p. 14  

In their capacity as exposed, exam-  
ined, extended images, the essays of  
Sister Outsider stretch across the de-  
fined lands of poetry and “theory.” In  
one of the essays included in the pres-  

ent work, “Poetry is Not a Luxury,”  
Lorde writes: “Poetry is not only  
dream and vision; it is the skeleton  
architecture of our lives. It lays the  
foundation for a future of change, a  
bridge across our fears of what has  
never been before.” (p. 38)  

No doubt some will welcome the  

publication of Sister Outsider as the  

author’s awaited entrance into the  
“legitimate” and expanding field of  
Third World Women theorists. For  
many others, however, essays like  
“Scratching the Surface: Some Notes  
on Barriers to Women and Loving,”  
“Sexism: An American Disease in  
Blackface,” “The Transformation of  
Silence into Language and Action,”  
“The Master’s Tools Will Never Dis-  
mantle the Master’s House” are living  
out second lives, having first been  
born as poems.* This exemplifies/exten-  
uates poetry not only as bridge, but as  
nucleus and source.  

At the heart of virtually all of these  
pieces is the idea of difference--how the  
white, male, racist, sexist, homophobic  
power structure maintains its control  
by exploiting the oppressed’s unwilling-  
ness to embrace each other in all our  
differences to form coalitions of resist-  
ance against that power.  

Much of the work involved in forg-  
ing such a coalition is developed in  
“Eye to Eye: Black Women, Hatred,  
and Anger”--the examination of those  
hatred areas of self. Lorde identifies  
internalized hatred as a major barrier  
erected against Black women relating  
more lovingly toward one another. She  
speaks of “that societal deathwish di-  
rected against us from the moment we  
were born Black and female in Amer-  
ica.” (p. 146)  

For Lorde the manifestations of  

that hatred are childhood experiences  
where she learned early on that there  
were no prizes being given for the Black  
girl that she was. For instance, her  
mother rubbing lemon juice over the  
dark areas of her body; a librarian  
chastising her for being “too sensitive”  
when she finds no humor in a class  
reading of “Little Black Sambo”; she  
and a white friend having water at a  
luncheonette--hers in a paper cup, her  
friend’s in a glass.  

Whatever the variations of these les-  
sons are in our own lives, the point asks  
very little--as Black women, our lives  
have been chiseled out of rock. The  
cost of this survival has often been a  
surrendering of childhood: “Racism  
and sexism are grown-up words. Black  
children in America cannot avoid these  
distortions in their living and too often  
do not have the words for naming them.  

As this “metabolized” hatred ema-  
nates outward it follows that eventually  
every human interaction becomes  
tainted with the negative passion and  
intensity of its by-products--anger and  
cruelty.” (p. 152) And, too often  
those by-products are directed toward  
those who are equally suffering: “We  
do not love each other. Because we see  
in each other’s face our own face, the  
face we never stopped wanting.  
Because we survived and survival  
breeds desire for more self. A face we  
never stopped wanting at the same  
time as we try to obliterate it.” (p.  
155)  

Because it is as deep, circular and  
complex as that, it is considerably  
easier to deal with each other in modes  
of forbearance rather than of nurtur-  
ance. For while parts of us stretch  
toward the connections and bonds  
between us as African women, the  
language of here and now is: Who does  

she think she is? She thinks she’s cute  
with her skinny, yellow, pimple-faced,  
etc., self. Thought is not given to the  
fact that these are the same nooses/  
judgments the oppressors hung about  
our necks. And the question is asked  
into the wind: “How are you judging  
me?...Whichever, I am going to be  
found wanting in some way...” (p. 170)  
Wanting in some way to achieve a  
future based on communication and  
community out of the current world  
of hatred and blood, Lorde urges an  
examination into the roots of hatred.  
Such an examination exposes anger:  
“a passion of displeasure that may be  
excessive or misplaced but not neces-  
sarily harmful.” (p. 152) And this is  
recorded as a beginning, a searchlight  
into the tangle of our differences.  
Tomorrow may not find us, as  
Black women, as people dancing  
around a flame of love, but some of  
the meaning behind “The Women of  
Dan” is: To search for power within  
myself means I must be willing to  
move through being afraid of whatever  
lies beyond. If I look at my most  
vulnerable places and acknowledge the  
pain I have felt, I can remove the  
source of that pain from my enemies’  
arsenals. My history cannot be used to  
feather my enemies’ arrows then, and  
that lessens their power over me.”  

- (p. 146)  

*See for example poems like “A  
Litany for Survival,” “A Song for  
Many Movements,” “Sister Outsider,”  
“Scar” from The Black Unicorn, W.W.  
Norton & Co.  

Gina Rhodes is a Black lesbian poet,  
residing in Queens, N.Y.  

A Different Kind of Calendar  

by Terri Jewell  

Tracking Our Way Through Time: A  
Lesbian Herstory Calendar/Journal  
edited by Janet S. Soule. Sandpiper  
Books, P.O. Box 268139, Chicago, IL  
60626-8139. 1984. $10.50.  

After four and one-half years of re-  
search and compilation, Janet Soule  
has presented us with a spiral-bound,  
260-page diamond-- Tracking Our Way  
Through Time: A Lesbian Herstory  
Calendar/Journal. This is not another  
tiny “cold fact” feminist appointment  
book that you will discard once the  
year is over, but a hefty sampler of our  
Lesbian herstory: news, notes, hu-  
mor, legends, photos and graphics,  
poetry and quotes. And there is ample  
space for recording your own song  
lyrics, conference dates and found  
words. The timeless sense of Soule’s  
work is enhanced by entries being  
noted by month and date only, thus  
allowing use of TOWTT outside the  
restrictive one- or two-year format.  
One of the hundreds of intriguing  
pieces of Lesbiana offered in TOWTT  
is:  

Cocopa berdache (French for people  
departing from gender norms) were  
described as ‘warhameh’ (women who  
cross-dressed)...They were observed  
to spurn the attentions of young men  

but rather to dress their hair, pierce  
their noses and carry themselves in  
non-traditional manner. Many war-  
hameh married women and established  
households as they lived their lives as  
warriors for the Cocopa. (1933)  

Lesbians who are physically chal-  
lenged, mothers, gourmet vegetarians,  
woodcutters...are all in TOWTT, cele-  
brating in their “womoonselves.”  

Lesbians of color in particular can  
rejoice in the many, many references  
made to their pasts and presence:  

Masahay Matkwisu (girl’s shadow or  
soul), Mohave Lesbian in the late  
1800s....  

Z. Wong speaking: ...I worked with  
Asian studies for six years and I was  
pretty much in the closet until the last  
three years...  

In bold 2 1/2 inch letters, the Septem-  
ber issue of Essence sensationalizes  
Black lesbian/feminist — Chirlene  
McCray’s simple statement that she is  
a lesbian...  

* Juana Maria Paz hosts her first ‘Wo-  

men’s Show’ on KUAF - 89 FM in  
Fayetteville, Arkansas...  

Unfortunately, there are so many ex-  
cerpts from the works of Audre Lorde,  
Beverly Smith and Barbara Smith that  
there is little room for showing more  
diversity of Black Lesbian literary and  
political thought.  

Tracking Our Way Through Time  
leads you through the vast magnitude  
of the Lesbian experience and reminds  
us all that there is much yet to learn  
about our lives, much to fight for and  
preserve. It is a dykey hug that brings  
a strong sense of power, strength and  
love. And, as if all this were not  
enough, Janet Soule invites you mid-  
way through the calendar/journal to  
engage in careful thought about your  
own herstory. She provides two  
blank pages upon which you may  

“preserve moments of Lesbian Her-  
story in a safe place.”  

The “Sharing Women Notes” and  
resource listings in the book renew our  
connectedness and present the reader/  
journalist with opportunities for fur-  
ther investigation and discussion/in-  
spection/sharing. Each entry is proof  
that we hold within each of us the  
jewels of herstory, that our fore-  
fighters/forelovers/foreteachers are al-  
ways with us, that our Lesbian lives  
flash and sparkle like diamonds.  

Too bad the calendar year has only  
365 days!!!  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

WINTER 1985  

PAGE FIFTEEN