IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Apartheid U.S.A.

By Audre Lorde  
Copyright 1985  

New York City, 1985. The high  
sign that rules this summer is increasing  
fragmentation. I am filled with a sense  
of urgency and dread: dread at the  
apparently random waves of assaults  
against people and institutions closest  
to me; urgency to unearth the con-  
nections between these assaults. Those  
connections lurk beneath the news-  
paper reports of teargassed funeral  
processions in Tembisa, and the  
charred remains of Baldwin Hills, CA,  
flourishing Black neighborhood leveled  
by arson.  

I sit before the typewriter for days  

and nothing comes. It feels as if un-  

derlining these assaults, lining them up  
one after the other and looking at  
them squarely might give them an un-  
bearable power. Yet I know exactly  
the opposite is true—no matter how  
difficult it may be to look at the reali-  
ties of our lives, it is there that we will  
find the strength to change them. And  
to suppress any truth is to give it  
power beyond endurance.  

As I write these words I am listen-  
ing to the UN Special Session consider-  
ing the ‘state of emergency’ in South  
Africa, their euphemism for the sus-  
pension of human rights for Blacks,  
which is the response of the Pretoria  
regime to the increasingly spontaneous  
eruptions in Black townships across  
that country. These outbursts against  
apartheid have greatly increased in the  
last 11 months since a new South  
African constitution further solidified  
the exclusion of 22 million Black  
majority from the South African  
political process. These outbreaks,  
however severely curtailed by the SA  
police and military, are beginning to  
accomplish what Oliver Tambo, head  
of the African Nationalist Congress,  
hoped for in his call to make South  
Africa under apartheid “ungovernable.”  

So much Black blood has been shed  
upon that land, I thought, and so  
much more will fall. But blood will  
tell, and now the blood is speaking.  
Has it finally started? What some of  
us prayed and worked and believed  
would—must—happen, wondering  
when, because so few of us here in  
America even seemed to know what  

was going on in South Africa, nor  
cared to hear. The connections had  
not been made, and they must be if  
African-Americans are to articulate  
our power in the struggle against a  
worldwide escalation of forces aligned  
against people of color the world over;  
institutionalized racism—grown more  
and more aggressive in the service of  
shrinking profit-oriented economies.  

And who would have thought we’d  
live to see the day when Black South  
Africa took center stage on the world  
platform? As Ellen Kuzwayo, Black  
South African writer would say, this is  
where we are right now in the world’s  
story. Perhaps this is how Europe  
must have felt in the fall of 1939, on  
the brink. I remember that Sunday of  
December 7, 1941 and the chilled  
certainty that some threat endured on  
my six-year-old horizon had been  
finally made real and frontal. August  
6, 1945. Hiroshima. My father’s tears  
who I had never seen cry before, and  
at first I thought it was sweat—a 46  
year old Black man in his vigor yet  

only seven years away from death by  
overwork. He said, humanity can now  
destroy itself, and he wept.  

That’s how it feels, except this time  
we know we’re on the winning side.  
South Africa will be free, I thought,  
beneath the clatter of my waiting  
typewriter and the sonorous tones of  
the United Nations broadcast, the  
USA delegate, along with the one from  
Great Britain, talking their rot about  
what ‘we’ have done for Black South  
Africa.  

South Africa. 87% of the people,  
Black, occupy 13% of the land. 13%  
of the people, white, own 85% of the  
land. White South Africa has the  
highest standard of living of any  
nation in the world including the USA,  
yet half the Black children born in  
South Africa die before they reach the  
age of five. Every 30 minutes six  
Black children starve to death in South  
Africa. In response to questions about  
apartheid from a white USA reporter,  
a white South African reporter retorts—  
‘you have solved the problem of your  
indigenous people—we are solving ours.  
You called them Indians, didn’t you?’  
Apartheid—South Africa’s Final  
Solution patterned after Nazi  
Germany’s genocidal plan for European  
Jews.  

Every year, over 500 million  
American dollars flow into the white  
South African death machine. How  
many of those dollars do you control,  
as you sit reading this? Where do you  
bank? Buy your gas? What pressure  
can you bring to bear upon companies  
doing business in South Africa? 500  

million dollars a year. Divest-  

ment. The withdrawal of American  
financial support from South Africa.  
Those who counter that divestment  
would mean additional suffering for  
Black South Africans are either cynical  
or misguided or unaware of the extent  
to which Black South Africans suffer  
every day of their lives. For any  
South African to even discuss divest-  
ment in South Africa is considered an  
act of treason against the state. Do  
you even know which companies your  
money supports that do business in  
South Africa? You won’t find that in-  
formation in the New York Times nor  
the San Francisco Chronicle nor in  
GQ. But you can obtain that informa-  
tion and more from the African  
Nationalist Congress Weekly News  
Briefings ($15./yr.) from ANC,  
801 Second Avenue, NYC, NY 10017,  
or from the American Committee on  
Africa, 198 Broadway, New York, NY  
10038.  

We are Black lesbians and gays,  
fighting many battles for survival, we  
are also citizens of the most powerful  
country in the world, a country which  

stands upon the wrong side of every  

liberation struggle on earth. African  
Americans control 200 million dollars  
in buying power annually. As African  
Americans we must learn to use our  
power, to establish the connections  
instantly between consistent patterns  
of slaughter of Black children and  
youth in the roads of Sebokeng and  
Soweto in the name of law and order  
in Johannesburg, and white America’s  
not so silent applause for the smiling  
white vigilante who coolly guns down  

four Black youths in the New York  

City subway, or the white policemen  
guarding the store of a Middle Eastern  
shopkeeper who kills three Black  
children in Brooklyn in a dispute over  
one can of Coca Cola. The  
multicorporate financial connections  
are a matter of record; it is the  
emotional ones which must become  
inescapable for each of us.  

Made more arrogant daily by the  
convenience of the U.S. Dollar and the  
encouragement of the U.S. policy of  
constructive engagement, South Afri-  
can police jail and murder six-year-  
old children, kick 12-year-old  
Johannes to death in front of his  
garden, leave 9-year-old Joyce bleeding  
to death on her granny’s floor.  
Decades of these actions are finally  
escalating into the world’s conscious-  
ness.  

How long will it take to escalate  
into our consciousness as Black people  
that this is us, that it is only a matter  
of location and progression and time  
and intensity from the Molotov cock-  
tails that were hurled into brush in Los  
Angeles starting the conflagration that  
burned out Baldwin Hills, well-to-do  
Black neighborhood—53 homes gone, 3  
lives. In California, USA, where the  
Aryan Brotherhood and the Posse  
Commitatus and other white racist  
survivalist groups flourish rampant and  
poisonous, fertilized by a secretly  
sympathetic law enforcement team.  

Eleanor Bumpers, 66, Black grand-  
mother, evicted from her Bronx, New  

York Housing Authority apartment  
with two shotgun blasts from NYC  
Housing police.  

Allene Richardson, 64, gunned  
down in her Detroit apartment house  
hallway by a policewoman after she  
was locked out of her apartment and a  
neighbor called the police to help her  
get back in. It is ten years since a  
policeman shot 10-year-old Clifford  
Glover early one Saturday morning in  
front of his father in Queens, New  
York, eight years since another white  
cop walked up Thanksgiving Day to  
Randy Evans while he sat on his stoop  
talking with friends: and blew his 15  
year old brains out. Temporary  
insanity, said the jury that acquitted  
that policeman. Countless others since  
then, Seattle, New Orleans, Dallas.  
This summer, Edmund Perry, 17,  
Black, graduate of exclusive white  
schools, on his way up via Stanford  
University and a summer job in  
banking, judged by an undercover  
policeman’s bullet in his chest. Our  
dead line our dreams, their deaths be-  
coming more and more commonplace.  

How does a system bent upon our  
ultimate destruction make the un-  
acceptable gradually tolerable? Observe  
closely, look around, read the Black  
press. How do you get a population to  
accept the denial of the most rudimen-  
tary freedoms this country is supposed  
to be about, to over 12% of that pop-  
ulation, and we know that Black  
Americans are only the beginning, just  
(continued on page 5)  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

PAGE FOUR  

FALL/WINTER 1985