Baltimore, MD - On August 9-11, 1984,  
500 women gathered at Morgan State  
University to develop an African-American  
agenda for the 1985 World  

Conference on Women in Nairobi, Kenya.  

Among the issues discussed were South  
Africa, world peace, militarization, Cen-  
tral America, the Caribbean, the Afro-  
American family, economic survival,  
education, and religion.  

The following are three presentations  
made during the three-day conference. For further information write:  
Salima Siler Marriott, conference coor-  
dinator, African-American Women’s  
Political Caucus, P.O. Box 11897,  
Baltimore, MD 21207.  

Grenada Today  

Photo by Raymina Y. Mays  

Dessima Williams speaks of Her Country  
since the Invasion  

Dessima Williams, executive director  
of the Grenada Foundation and for-  
mer Grenadian ambassador to the Or-  
ganization of American States was a  
workshop participant at the 1985 and  
Beyond Conference.  

First I should say that it is really a  
pleasure to be at a conference such as  
this, coming at a time when there is  
need for more public organizing and  
more public protest to be made on a  
number of important issues at home  
and abroad that affect women—women  
of color—women internationally. In  
the case of my own country, Grenada,  
it’s really an honor for us to be able to  
put that on the agenda of progressive  
organizations and progressive life in-  
side the United States.  

You are well familiar, of course,  
with the legal and immoral foray led  
by Ronald Reagan and some Caribbean  
leaders violating Grenada’s sovereignty.  

The invasion of Grenada, October  
1983 by Ronald Reagan has meaning  
for Black women in this country. It  
was undertaken in the name of “saving”  
American lives, and at the same  
time over sixty percent of the soldiers  
who were put in the front lines to face  
a well-trained Grenadian army were  
minorities. Once Grenada was secured  
after the six-day battle, that racial  
balance changed, and sixty percent of  
those taking charge of Grenada were  
white. This is just one example where  
you see the interests of racial minori-  
ties and women being linked between  
the illegalities of the current U.S.  
administration, and loss of our rights  
in Grenada.  

Many of you may be wondering  
what is happening in Grenada, a  
country that was invaded to supposedly  
“save” us from ourselves. Grenada  
continues to be occupied. There are  
over 600 foreign military troops in  
Grenada. The vast majority are from  
the United States. This is of course in  
violation of United Nations resolution  
387 and it is in violation of world pub-  
lic opinion.  

I think women have to become ac-  
tive in the foreign policies of their  
country wherever we are; whether  
it’s foreign policy that fights for  
an anti-imperialist platform; whe-  
ther it’s a foreign policy that fights for  
better economic conditions for the  
vast majority of mankind and woman-  
kind. All of those issues on one level  
impact on us, and at the same time  
impact on others.  

Photo by Raymina Y. Mays  

The things that you fear might  
happen in Central America have already  
happened in Grenada. The invasion  
you fear, the loss of U.S. lives have  
already happened, not only in Grenada,  
but in Beirut and in other parts of the  
world where there is illegal military  
presence that doesn’t contribute to  
keeping the peace but really contri-  
butes to keeping certain power bal-  
ances in the interests of those who  
are against your basic interests at  
home.  

I think it is very important as wo-  
men that we look at the question of  
politics. Who controls our lives, and  
how do we take power and how can  
we keep power in the interest of ad-  
vancing the cause of women world-  
wide.  

There are probably two major  
realities in Grenada today. One is  
continued occupation. Grenada con-  
tinues to be occupied by the military,  
diplomatic, and police forces of the  
U.S. government, as well as those of  
the Caribbean countries who were part  
of the invasion. Those governments  
are the government of Jamaica,  
Barbados, Antigua, Dominica, St.  
Vincent, St. Lucia. The entire popula-  
tion is under military intimidation,  
repression. In fact the New York  
Times reported that the military  
presence in the country is not contri-  
buting to peace and stability as it had  
been proclaimed from the White  
House in October.  

The other thing that is happening is  
the fact that the people are being  
organized and they are resisting. This  
is clearly represented in the formation  
of a Maurice Bishop patriotic move-  
ment which is the new popular politi-  
cal force in the country, organized to  
fight for Grenada’s sovereignty, to  
fight for the right to build our own  
political process, our own social and  
economic lifestyle as is in our choosing.  
That is meeting more and more success  
though it is a limited success because  
of the heavy military presence in the  
country.  

I think it is important for you to  
know that one of the things that we as  
Grenadian and Caribbean women are  
concerned with is the rampant rise of  
prostitution between Caribbean wom-  
en and U.S. soldiers. This is a phe-  
nomenon, for example, present in the  
Philippines and Puerto Rico in places  
where the U.S. military raises its pre-  
sence, crushes all other economic op-  
portunities for the populations—cer-  
tainly in our case for women who  
came from the bottom of the eco-  
nomic rung under the dictatorship,  
and are not as multi-skilled as others  
in the society.  

This is something very painful for  
our country and certainly for all wom-  
en. As we fight for peace, I think  
we can realize several other gains in  
the elimination of the military threat  
of this administration.  

Black Lesbians Protest Exclusion  
at 1985 and Beyond Conference  

Black Lesbians were excluded from  
the 1985 and Beyond conference a-  
genda and delivered the following state-  
ment at a plenary session.  

Black lesbians participate in this  
conference because we believe justice,  
an end to racism, and capitalist exploi-  
tation, and an end to the oppression of  
all Black people require the full parti-  
cipation, dedication, and commitment  
of us all. As active members of a  
wide range of progressive organizations,  
Black lesbians have always been in the  
forefront of many progressive struggles  
in the anti-klan movement, the anti-  
war movement, the movement against  
police brutality, against sexual harass-  
ment, against violence, the anti-apart-  
heid movement, and the whole range  
of international struggles.  

We like our heterosexual sisters are  
oppressed by sexism, racism, and the  
militarism of this anti-people system.  

As lesbians, oppression is deepened.  
Our children are taken away, we are  
denied housing and jobs. Often we are  
paid the lowest wages. We become the  
particular target of police brutality.  
We are subjected to harassment and  
violence. Our relationships and human  
commitment are denied. To that  
extent, sisters, our oppression is a pub-  
lic and political reality which hurts all  
Black people.  

We are aware of the harassment  
and the lesbian baiting which this Con-  
ference and other women’s confer-  
ences have been subjected to. We’re  
also aware of the many ways which  
our common enemy has used lesbian  
and gay people as scapegoats to cause  
division and to disrupt feminist and  
anti-imperialist movements. We know  
that the fear and terror of being la-  
beled lesbian is used to keep many  
women in line. However, the key to  
fighting oppression is not invisibility.  

We Black people must never submit to  
any form of intimidation.  

We as activists will continue to  
work as organizers and leaders in the  
wide range of progressive struggles to  
which we are deeply committed. Our  
activist work will naturally carry us to  
Nairobi and beyond. We will continue  
to stand in solidarity with all move-  
ments for liberation and justice.  

Our solidarity does not depend on  
being accepted or tolerated, however;  
the self-determination of all Black  
women and men will never be achieved  
until all sisters and brothers stand firm  
in the face of our common enemy.  

Read by Gwendolyn Rogers  

WINTER 1985  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

PAGE SEVEN