Spiderwoman Theater

Photo by Annette Palaez Copyright 1985

Eleven thousand...

(continued from page 3)

busy and stifling. We met a friend of Seung-ho’s friend, who was very friendly. He studies Mechanical Engineering (and he’s twenty-one). He was too tall for my taste, but we danced, anyway. We even slow danced, which is bold for Korean me... I wish you were there dancing with me instead of him. Then, I danced with Seung-ho, or rather I led because he didn’t know how to slow dance. I don’t think he’s ever danced with a woman before—he was tripping all over. I found it all very endearing. I bought a flash for my camera, some cassette tapes, and twenty-five postcards. It’s 9:24 A.M., Boston time, Tuesday. My first day in Korea is about to close. I tried to ask Seung-ho about homosexuality, but it isn’t listed in my Korean dictionary, and “gay” in this edition means “happy” and “fun.” I'd like to ask Mi-ja about it, but I fear she’s homophobic, since one of the first questions she asked me was whether I had a boyfriend. I didn’t know what to say.

10:30 P.M.: Wednesday. What a day. We went to the Holt office at ten (I’m getting paid for this) and stayed only until 11:45, meeting all of the social workers and document processors, not unlike myself, the secretary general of Holt/Korea, and the president of Holt. We (Mi-ja, Mr. Kim, who is in charge of American adoptions), and I had ginseng tea in the president’s elaborate office. Mi-ja told me that everyone was happy when she informed them that I’m working for IAL. We took the subway to Mi-ja’s university in Suwon—the ride took forever. I was very uncomfortable because I was decked out in my suit and pointy little shoes with my tights. We were both cold and we had to walk forever to get to her friend’s house. We ate Chinese food (which was too greasy), which was ordered by take-out, and kimchi, for lunch. Then, we walked around the campus to another classmate’s office (he’s a professor now), and he gave us a ride to the subway. We rode the subway into the city and stopped at the post office. I bought postage stamps for 8,000 won, and mailed my postcards. I was so tired when we got back to the hotel, I fell asleep and dreamed wild dreams. I finished “Zami” on the way home on the subway. This book made me eager to read more Audre Lorde. We got back around six and woke up three and a half hours later. We walked down the street to a mandu (Korean ravioli) house, and bought sah-gwa (apples) back to the hotel to eat. It’s 9:01 A.M., your time. Wondering whether you got my letter yet.

9:45 A.M.: Happy Valentine’s Day! We just finished a totally decadent meal at the Lotte Hotel, den of capitalism and sheer elegance. Breakfast was buffet-style, all you can eat. I think I went back for fourths. Now, I’m going shopping.

2:30 P.M.: I’m sitting on the step of this building which is surrounding the heart of East Gate Market, where you can buy a hot meal for fifty cents, and a pair of trousers for three dollars. Stalls and stalls of bundled up women of all ages—the old ones look older and the young ones look tired. Some of these faces are so beautiful... so tragic and so spent looking, like they have just sat outside too long, probably because they have. Their voices cry out to me with a plea to buy something as they shove their wares and a wet towel to wash your hands; it pains me. An incredible smorgasbord of anything is selling. I know people are looking, staring, gawking, because I dress differently, I talk differently, I carry a camera—a visible sign that I am a tourist. Men ride on their bicycles and motorcycles, ringing their bells and shouting to move. I almost got run over because I wasn’t quick enough. All sorts of fruits, dried fruit, vegetables... there are a group of men and one woman surrounding me because I am writing. They are very amused. I told them I am Han-guk (Korean)—Mi-guki (American), and I am left-handed. I’m a doubly strange bird. I wrote out my Korean name in Korean, which one guy has verbalized frequently. They are asking questions I can’t answer either in Korean or American. I’m an oddity—especially here, and in America, but the difference is, in America, I can explain and defend myself, although I resent it. I’m cold, sitting here, when I should be walking around, exploring. The men have left, and a woman has walked up and commented about my left hand. They are looking at my handwriting—Koreans are not shy. They walk right up and start talking to you, regardless of the privacy one might want. Anyway, I saw pigs’ heads, pigs’ feet, squid, dried fish, live turtles, octopus, sharks, soups, fabrics, cloths, silverware... I now have a new audience of women our age. I’m interesting to them—East meets West. When you go to China, you’ll feel this way, although, fortunately for you, you'll be able to talk to them, lucky you. The visual effects are incredible, the images, intense. I’m going inside the building now to look around.

New York Women Against Rape A Movement of

New World Women

On June 7-9 and June 14-16, the Women of Color Caucus of the New York Women Against Rape held a women of color only conference entitled “A Movement of New World Women.” The conference included a variety of workshops, support groups, presentations, and cultural events on battered women, rape, incest, self-defense, sexuality, and more. The Women of Color Caucus is composed of Black, Latina, Native American, and Asian/Pacific women who are primarily counselors and Board members of NYWAR. The purposes of the Caucus are: to provide a support system for Women of Color in NYWAR; to research and compile literature on Women of Color and sexual assault; and to respond to the specific needs of Women of Color survivors throughout NYC.

5:15 P.M.: Mi-ja just got back to the hotel. East Gate Market was an experience. I met a woman from California. It was nice to talk with someone easily. I bought two silk blouses. Before I went to the market, I walked towards what I thought was East Gate, but I got lost and miraculously, I ended up at the national YMCA. It took a lot of verbal stumbles to try to get you Y information. The pamphlets are in Korean. A woman helped me find a taxi to get to East Gate. I’m resting now for dinner with friends of Mi-ja... listening to Korean music.

9:15 P.M.: Just returned from dinner at a restaurant called “Forget Me Not,” a place with Korean traditional folk village decor—rustic, with live folk music, authentic food, and waitresses in a time warp, wearing red mini skirts and yellow sweaters... bizarre. I’m going to try to call you at midnight, 10 A.M., your time.

8:20 A.M.: 6:16 P.M., your time. Oh, it was great to hear your voice. I had tried to call you a few times in the night.

9:30 A.M.: Saturday, the 17th, and last entry. 7:28, Friday night, your time. Well, this is it. The fun is over. I don’t know how I'll feel when those crying and weeping foster mothers hand me their babies, knowing they will never see them again. I don’t know whether I’ll turn off my emotions like the last time, or whether I'll weep with them. Playtime is over. From here on in, everything will be intense. Yesterday, I didn’t have time to log the day. After breakfast, Mi-ja and I walked with a friend of hers to a large underground bookstore. I hung out in the foreign books section and picked out three books in an effort to educate myself. I had to restrain myself from taking half the shelf of the Women’s Section. We sat and had a soda and then I took a cab to Itaewon, and bought some more things. After Itaewon, I came back to the hotel and rested. I fear I’m a bit homesick. Last night, after we chatted with Mr. Kim and Miss Chun (from Sung Ro Won), we had dinner with Mr. and Mrs. Yuen, from Holt. They shoved pulgogi down our throats. I never ate so much in one sitting. (If you refuse, they consider it rude). I felt so sick. At 8:15, I met Mrs. Park (my host family’s mother), in the hotel lobby. She came up to meet Mi-ja, and Seung-ho arrived soon after. Then, I left with them to their apartment. Two of Seung-ho’s friends were there. They sat and drank wine, typical teenage/college, the let’s-see-how-silly-we-can-get mentality. Mrs. Park disappeared after Mr. Park came home. She went to cut his hair, which left me to be entertained by Seung-ho, who is incredibly sweet, and his dorky friends. Seung-ho showed me about a thousand (2 huge, thick stacks) photos of his trip to Europe. Almost every single photograph has Seung-ho posing as the charming tourist; it was all quite endearing. Most of the pictures were mainstream postcard content, but some, actually, were quite beautiful. Then, he showed me a drawing he did of Beethoven. It was okay, very labored, very meticulously done, but didn’t display much talent, other than the ability to copy. This, however, inspired me to draw, so Seung-ho sat still while I whipped up his portrait in forty-five minutes. Seung-ho and his family were very pleased. I gave it to them to express my appreciation for their hospitality. We took a taxi home, with me wedged in the back seat between Seung-ho and one of his buddies. Thus, the events of my last day here, where I feel like I’m leaving, I want to do it now. I’ve done what I’m supposed to do, and now, I want to leave. I felt the language barrier even more this time, because in June, I had an excuse. I was with a tour group of Americans with Korean faces, bananas, each and every one of us. But, being here alone, with a Korean who speaks fluent Korean, and stumbles with the English language, enhanced the language barrier. In the eyes of the Koreans I have met, each and every one of them, even Mi-ja, I wasn’t supposed to have forgotten Korean. I resent that. This expectation which they do not hesitate to express, is a blatant insensitivity. It just leaves a sour taste in my mouth. From here on in, I leave you now. My schedule: lunch at noon with Holt, 3 P.M., I meet the babies and leave for the airport. 5:20 P.M., departure, I hope.

P.S. The flight home was exhausting and long. All but one of the five infants (ages three to seven months) were very calm and comfortable. The overwhelming emotions I felt when I handed those babies over to their new parents is still too difficult, and too painful to describe. I didn’t want to talk with them, but I’m anxious to hear about the babies, and to see how they are doing. Oh, these feelings are something I must cope with. I hope reading this all gave you a feeling of this strange and wonderful place, where part of my heart will always remain. I love you. - i

en aN TT se eS I Sn rw ar eT call

Between Our Selves: Women of Color, Newspaper

PAGE EIGHT

FALL/WINTER 1985