Eleven thousand miles between

By Anne Mi Ok Bruining  
Copyright 1985

This article was written as a result of  
the seventeen entries I wrote in a daily  
journal. I wrote these feelings down  
with the intention of sharing them  
with the friend who asked me to write  
for the five days I spent in Korea.

Eleven Thousand Miles Between. . .

Dear...

8:45 A.M.: We just took off into the  
wild blue yonder. I’m sitting by a  
window in a cramped and crowded  
plane. There’s a child nearby--pretty  
cranky. The flight attendants are  
white, bleached blonde, and get this,  
they have perms, which makes their  
hair look like stiff, yellow cotton  
candy--yuck.

I’m tired because I only got about  
two hours of sleep last night. Richard  
(my housemate) drove me to the air-  
port. We arrived in record time, with  
almost a half an hour to spare. I miss  
you already, like you wouldn’t believe.  
I had to restrain myself from calling  
you up at the airport, but I knew that  
neither you nor your housemates  
would have appreciated an early, rude  
phone call, especially at 6:30 in the  
morning.

10:30 A.M.: Arrived in Minneapolis -  

we fly to Tokyo. This will be a first  
for me. I slept an hour. Feel a little  
better. Minneapolis is an hour behind  
Boston.

11:45 A.M.: I’m listening to a rock  
station with earphones. We have good  
seats—first row, right behind first class  
(we’re economy class), so we have all  
this space to stretch our legs, even  
though mine are short. Let me tell  
you a little about Mi-ja Kim (the other  
escort). She’s neat. She’s over forty,  
but she’s very youthful looking. We  
have a language barrier, but it’s not  
too difficult to communicate with  
each other. She’s told me about her  
two daughters—Joanna, eleven, and  
Rebecca, ten. Becky is artistically  
inclined. Mi-ja wants me to teach  
Sunday School to the Korean children  
who speak English in a Korean church  
in Brookline. I’ll probably attend one  
service to see what it’s like, although I  
doubt I’ll get anything out of it since  
it is all in Korean without translation.  
I told Mi-ja that I’m teaching an art  
class in Chinatown. Her husband  
teaches Korean every week at church.

Mi-ja wants me to learn from him.

We'll see.

I just read an article by this Korean  
born American man who is twenty-  
eight. His parents also live in the  
States. He wrote about his Asian  
identity, and the stages he went  
through—the process of his coping  
mechanisms; denial, indifference,  
acknowledgement, confrontation,  
acceptance, and finally, involvement.  
He’s now executive director of many  
Korean Heritage camps for Korean  
adoptees and American-born ado-  
lescents and teenagers. I’m going to  
write for information. I’d be  
interested in participating in one near-  
by. After reading this article about  
this fairly young (he’s only four years  
older than I) person who has done so  

much, I realize how much I have to,  
must, and want to do.

There’s a short article about the  
Chinese New Year in this airline’s  
magazine, which I found interesting.  
The article explained that this is the  
Chinese New Year 4683, the zodiac  
system was developed in 2637 B.C.  
One legend has it that Buddha invited  
all the animals to a celebration and  
only twelve showed, so Buddha  
honored them by using them as the  
signs of the zodiac. The order that  
they arrived at the party is the order in  
which they appear in the zodiac (which  
includes the Rat, the Ox, the Tiger,  
the Rabbit, the Dragon, the Serpent/  
Snake, the Horse, the Ram, the  
Monkey, the Rooster, the Dog, and  
the Boar). This should be particularly  
interesting to you—for you are the  
Year of the Ox, which means that this is  
your year—to shine and succeed. Any-  
way, this article said that the  
significance of the Ox to the Chinese is  
illustrated by an old legend: the Ox  
was sent as a messenger from Buddha  
to his subjects that if they would be  
rewarded with food three times a day.

For causing trouble, the Ox was  
remanded to Earth and consigned to  
help produce food. That is why it has  
been regarded as a valuable draft  
animal. I’m unsure of the accuracy,  
but I thought it was interesting,  
nonetheless.

1:40 P.M.: We’re here in Seattle. It’s  
4:40 P.M., Boston time. I’ve been “on  
the road” now, either sitting in an air-  
port, or in flight, for eight hours. I’m  
wondering what you are doing. We’ve  

been served breakfast (before landing  
in Minneapolis) and lunch (right  
before Seattle), m-m-m, m-m-m.  
Audre Lorde’s “Zami” is incredible.  
There are some flight attendants of  
color on this flight (to Tokyo). The  
continental flights have all the white,  
pasty, Barbie Doll lookalikes, and the  
international flights have Asian women  
appropriately so.  
8:20 P.M.: Just finished watching  
“Country”. . .had fish for dinner,  
before the movie. It’s strange, that it’s  
evening, but outside, it’s bright and  
blue, and covered with white, puffy  
clouds. . .it’s 11:20 A.M., your time.  
Wondering what you are doing, and  
missing you madly, which frightens me  
in some way. We arrive in Tokyo in  
about four more hours, and then, on  
to Korea, the Land of the Morning  
Calm.  
4:43 P.M.: It’s 3:00 A.M., your time.  
We’re in the Japanese time zone, now.  
Monday afternoon. Looking out, it’s  
gorgeous over the Sea of Japan, or  
some body of water. The clouds are  
thinning, and the blue is softer than  
before: I can see minuscule dots of  
boating vessels below. A couple of  
hours ago, we were served a croissant  
and orange juice for breakfast (in the  
afternoon).  
6:35 P.M.: We're sitting in the Tokyo  
International Airport, where I’ve never  
seen so many different Asian back-  
grounds represented in one place.  
Taipei, Shanghai, Manila, Korea,  
Bangkok, Hawaii, and Osaka. Our  
delay until 7 P.M. will have us waiting  
here for three hours. So, this is Japan.

I feel grungy and I probably have  
horrid breath. I never was and will be  
a pretty traveler.

8:15 A.M.: (Tuesday morning in  
Korea). 6:10 P.M., Monday, your  
time. I feel better, now, having break-  
fasted on pineapple, cinnamon toast,  
orange juice, and tea in the hotel.  
Slept okay and showered. Waiting to  
go to Sung Ro Won Babies Home, and  
later, I’ll see my host family. We  
finally arrived at the hotel at about 11  
o’clock last night. . .waiting forever for  
our luggage, going through customs,  
and catching a taxi.

1:35 P.M.: Sitting in the office at Sung  
Ro Won Babies Home. My camera is  
on the blink, so I doubt my photos  
will turn out. Mr. Kim, Mrs. Kim and  
Miss Chun (director, his wife, and the  
head bomo, person in charge of the  
children) took me out for lunch. We  
went down the street to a cozy res-  
taurant where we sat in a room with a  
heated floor. I really wanted to eat  
with the children, but I don’t think  
visitors in general do that. It was good  
to eat real Korean food again. The  
kids are adorable. This is a babies  
home, not an orphanage, as I had pre-  
sumed. Children ages five and under  
live in babies homes, and over five;  
they go to live in orphanages. Babies  
live in babies homes if they don’t live  
in foster homes, instead. There was  
this tiny precious three-day-old, the  
youngest, an eight-day-old, and then  
up. Those two must have been picked  
up at the hospital. A few are sick (un-  
known as to how sick). I wrote the  
chart down for information. Mr. Kim  
told me that they placed over three  
hundred children last year to IAI.  
This place is nice and the staff in-  
cludes many volunteers, bomos, and  
mothering ladies (for infants), all  
women, except for the director, Mr.  
Kim. In the playroom, Mr. Kim  
photographed me with the children  
who (four I think) are going to Boston.  
. . I’m back at the hotel. Mr. Kim and  
Miss Chun dropped me off. The Kims  
live in Yoido (where my host family  
lives), also.  
They gave me two  
calendars and a brass key chain. I  
signed the guest book where Vicki,  
Phyllis from IAI, Guy (friend from  
Rhode Island), and other names I  
recognized are listed. I’m trying to  
perceive this all. . .when I was in that  
playroom with over twenty children,  
two to five years old, they sang  
“Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star” in  
Korean and English, and “Kumbaya”,  
and I think a few other songs with a  
piano playing. Their voices were so  
sweet, and they stood and made arm  
movements in unison, it was charming,  
and quite touching.

1:00 P.M.: I just arrived back from  
being with Seung-ho (my host family’s  
son) and his friend who chain smokes  
and drinks OB (Oriental Beer).  
Seung-ho has learned how to smoke—  
it’s amusing. We took a cab to a little  
French cafe and had Korean-style  
American food. I had a sandwich with  
lettuce and shreds of cabbage, very  
light and very country club style, with  
a 7-up. . .just enough to eat for danc-  
ing later. Then, we walked to the dis-  
cotheque (they don’t call it a bar, be-  
cause they don’t serve liquor, and all  
you do is dance). It was incredibly  
(continued on page 8)

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

FALL/WINTER 1985

PAGE THREE