Apartheid. . .

(continued from page 4)

as the moves against Black lesbians and
gays are just the beginning within our
communities?

In 1947, within my memory,
apartheid was not the state policy of
South Africa, but the supposedly far-
out dream of the Afrikaaner
broederbond. Living conditions of
Black South Africans, although bad,
were not yet governed by policies of
institutional genocide. Blacks owned
land, attended schools. With the 1948
election of the Afrikaner white
supremacy advocate Malan and the
implementation of apartheid, the step
by step attack upon Black existence
was accelerated, and the dismantling
of any human rights as they pertained
to Black people. Now, white South
Africans who protest are being jailed
and brutalized and blown up, also. 
Once liberal English-speaking white
South Africans had to be conned into
accepting this dismantling, lulled long
enough for the apparatus which was to
insure all white privileged survival to
be cemented into place by H. Verwoerd,
its architect and later SA Prime
Minister.

Now Johannesburg, city of gold,
sits literally upon a mountain of gold
and Black blood. After a Sharpeville,
why not a Soweto? After a Michael
Stewart, young Black artist
beaten to death by transit police, why
not a Bernard Goetz? After a New
York Eight Plus, why not a Philadelphia,
where the Black mayor allows a white
police chief to bomb a houseful of
Black people into submission, killing
eleven people and burning down a
whole Black neighborhood to do it.
Firemen refused to douse the flames.
Seven of those killed were children.
Police pinned them down with gunfire
when the occupants sought to escape
the flames. Making sure these Black
people died. Because they were dirty
and Black and obnoxious and Black
and arrogant and Black and poor and
Black and Black and Black and Black.
And the Mayor who allowed this to
happen says he accepts full responsi-
bility, and his is Black, too. How are
we persuaded to participate in our
own destruction by maintaining our
silences? How is the American public
persuaded to accept as natural the fact
that at a time when prolonged negotia-
tions with Arab freedom fighters can
effect the release of hostages, or termi-
nate an armed confrontation with
police outside a white survivalist
encampment, a mayor of an American
city can order an incendiary device
dropped on a house with seven
children in it and police pin down the
occupants until they perish? Yes,
African Americans can still walk the
streets of America without passbooks,
for the time being.

In October 1984, 500 agents of the
Joint Terrorist Task Force (see what
your taxes are paying for?) rounded
up eight middle-income Black radicals
whose only crime seems to be their
insistence upon their right to dissent,
to call themselves Marxist-Leninists,
and to question the oppressive nature
of this US society. They are currently
imprisoned, and being tried in a Grand
Jury proceeding that reads like the
Star Chamber reports, or the Spanish
Inquisition. 22 months of round the
clock surveillance has so far not pro-
vided any evidence at all that these

Black men and women, some grand-
mothers, were terrorists. I am re-
minded of the Johannesburg courts
filled with cases brought against Black
clericals and salesgirls accused of read-
ing a book or wearing a t-shirt or
listening to music thought to be sym-
pathetic to the African Nationalist
Congress. Two years hard labour for
pamphlets discovered in an office desk
drawer. How is the systematic erosion
of freedoms gradually accomplished?

What kind of gradual erosion of our
status as US citizens will Black people
be persuaded first to ignore and then
to accept?

In Louisville, KY a Workman’s
Compensation ruling awards $231
weekly disability payments to a 39
year old sanitation supervisor, white,
for a mental breakdown he says he
suffered as a result of having to work
with Black people.

A peaceful, licensed march to the
Haitian Embassy in New York to
protest living conditions on that
and the imprisonment of three priests,
is set upon by New York City mounted
police and trained attack dogs.
Sixteen people are injured, including
women and children, and one man,
struck in the head by hooves, may lose
his eye. This next day, no major
newspaper or TV news station carries a
report of the incident, except for
Black stations.

In New York, the self-confessed
and convicted white ex-GI killer of at
least six Black men in New York City
and Buffalo is quietly released from
jail after less than one year, on a tech-
nicality. Christopher had been
sentenced to life for 3 of the murders
and never tried on the others. White
men attack 3 Black transit workers in
Brooklyn, NY, stomping one to death.
Of the three who are tried for murder,
two are sentenced to less than one
year in prison, and one goes scot-free.
So the message goes, stock in Black
human life in the USA, never high, is
plunging rapidly in the sight of white
American complacencies. But as
African Americans, we cannot afford
to play that market; it is our lives and
the lives of our children.

The political and social flavour of
the African American position in the
80’s feels in particular aspects to be
analogous to occurrences in the Black
South African communities of the 50’s,
the postwar construction of the
apparatus of apartheid, reaction, and
suppression. Reaction in a large,
manipulated and oppressed population,
particularly one where minimal
material possessions allow a spurious
comparison for the better to one’s
neighbors--reaction in such a popula-
tion is always slow in coming, pre-
ceded as it so often is by the preoccu-
pation of energies in having to cope

does not wish to remedy it. Better to
wipe them out, blow them away.
African Americans are increasingly
superfluous to a shrinking economy.
A different stage exists in South Africa,
where a cheap labor pool of Blacks is
still pivotal to the economy. But the
maintenance of the two systems are
closely related, and they are both
guided primarily by the needs of a
white marketplace. Of course no one
in the United States government will
openly defend apartheid, they don’t
have to. Just support it by empty
rhetorical slaps on the wrist and solid
financial investments, while honoring
South African orders for arms, nuclear
technology, and sophisticated com-
puterized riot control mechanisms.
The bully boys stick together.

I remember stories in the 60’s
about the roving growing bands of
homeless and predatory tsotsis,
disenchanted and furious Black youths
roaming the evening streets of Sharpe-
ville and Soweto and other Black
townships.

The fact that African Americans
can still move about relatively freely,
do not yet have to carry passbooks or
battle an officially named policy of
apartheid, should not blind us for a
minute to the disturbing similarities of
the Black situation in each one of
these profit-oriented economies. We
examine these similarities so that we
can more effectively devise mutually
supportive strategies for action, at the
same time as we remain acutely aware
of our differences. Like the volcano
which is one form of extreme earth--
change, in any revolutionary process
there is a period of intensification and
a period of explosion. We must be-
come familiar with the requirements
and symptoms of each period, and use
the differences between them to our
mutual advantage, learning and sup-
porting each other's battles. African
Americans can wield the relative
power of our dollars--for better or
worse. We control millions annually,
and we have the ability to affect South
Africa where it lives, financially,
through our support of divestment for
companies doing business in South
Africa. Black South Africans have the
base of their own land upon which
they operate. We lack that as African-
Americans, suffer the rootlessness of a
hyphenated people. But within those
differences, we can join together to
effect a future the world has not yet
conceived, let alone seen.

For no matter what liberal commit-
ment to human rights is mouthed in
international circles by the US govt.,
we know it will not move beyond its
investments in South Africa unless we
make it unprofitable to invest in South
Africa. For it is economic divestment
not moral sanction that South Africa
fears most. No one will free us but
ourselves, here nor there. So our
survivals are not separate, even though
the terms under which we struggle
differ. African Americans are bound
to the Black struggle in South Africa
by politics as well as blood. As
Malcolm observed more than 20 years
ago, militant free Africa is a necessity
to the dignity of African American
identity.

The mendacity of the US
Ambassador to the UN as he recited all
the ‘help’ this country has given to
Black South Africans is matched only
by the cynicism of the South African
president who self-righteously
condemns the spontaneous violence
against Black collaborators in the
Black townships, calling that the
reason for the current state of
emergency. Of course, it is the picture
of Blacks killing a Black that is flashed
over and over across the white world’s
TV screens, not the images of white
SA police firing into groups of Black
schoolchildren, stomping 12 yr. old
Johannes to death, driving over Black
schoolgirls. And I think about my
feelings concerning that Black mayor
of Philadelphia, and about Clarence
Pendleton, Black man, Reagan-ap-
pointed head of the Federal Civil
Rights Commission and mouthpiece of
corruption, saying to young students
at Cornell University, “the economic
pie is just too small for everyone to
have a fair share, and that’s not the
function of civil rights.” Eventually
institutional racism becomes a ques-
tion of power and privilege rather than
merely color, which then serves as a
blind.

The connections between Africans,
and African-Americans, African-Euro-
peans, African-Asians, is real, however
dimly seen at times, and we all need
to examine--without sentimentality or
stereotype--what the injection of
Africanness into the socio-political
consciousness of the world could mean.
We need to join our differences and
articulate our particular strengths in
the service of our mutual survivals, and
against the desperate backlash which
attempts to keep that Africanness
from altering the very bases of current
world power and privilege.

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

FALL/WINTER 1985

PAGE FIVE