PUBLICATIONS.

Africa Network serves as a clearing-
house and educational outreach center
for information, resources and action
on apartheid South Africa. Mbira
NewsNotes of Troubadour Press, pub-
lished quarterly, serves as an organ of
the Network to help disseminate the
resources, news, and literary informa-
tion about South Africa. The Network
also has copies of the films Discarded
People, Six Days in Soweto, Genera-
tions of Resistance, and Flash of Light
(on South Africa’s nuclear threat).
For more information, write: Africa
Network, P.O. Box 59364, Chicago, IL
60659, or call (312) 677-7416.

Steppingstones, a literary anthology
toward liberation is calling for manu-
scripts. They welcome work from
both new and established writers who
wish to contribute. Essays, criticism,
drama, poetry and fiction will be con-
sidered. Their June 1985 publication
focuses on Gwendolyn Brooks. The
annual liberation issue to be published
in the Fall 1985 is now accepting
manuscripts. All material submitted
should include a self-addressed,
stamped envelope. Mail to: Stepping-
stones, P.O. Box 1986, Harlem, NY
10027.

No More Cages, a bi-monthly women’s
prison newsletter, is in desperate need
of new members to keep this necessary
publication alive. Work involves read-
ing and talking about the articles, po-
etry, and works received from women
in prison, and production work such as
layout, proofreading and typing. Wo-
men in prison are never seen and often

THE 10th
MICHIGAN WOMYN'S
MUSIC FESTIVAL

AUGUST 8, 9, 10, 11, 1985
Hart, Michigan

forgotten by feminist communities.
Please help keep NMC strong. Our sis-
ters behind bars need us! Write: No
More Cages, Women Free. Women in
Prison, P.O. Box 90, Brooklyn, NY
11215.

African Women Rising is a quarterly
newsletter produced by the Interna-
tional Council of African Women.
ICAW was formed in 1982 to promote
the worldwide networking and de-
velopment of African women. The
newsletter is now featuring informa-
tion and plans for the upcoming world
Conference for Women in Nairobi,
Kenya, July 8-26, 1985. For more in-
formation write: International Coun-
cil of African Women, P.O. Box 8676,
Washington, DC 20011.

Sapphire Speaks is a monthly news-
letter produced by Sapphire Sapphos,
Inc. for and by Third World lesbians.
They print information, ideas, poetry
and thoughts geared toward Third
World lesbians. They would like to
hear from you and your organization.
Please address your comments, sugges-
tions, and articles to: Sapphire Sap-
phos, Inc., P.O. Box 50583, Washing-
ton, DC 20004.

The Berkeley Women of Color News-
letter is a production of the Berkeley
Women of Color Collective. Their pur-
pose is to address the omission of
women of color from scholastic re-
search. Through this newsletter they
seek to correct the focus of research
on women’s issues, especially feminist
theory, by including the experiences

of women of color. The Collective’s
meetings are open to new members
and visitors. Also, they are interested
in articles for the Fall issue of their
newsletter. BWOC is interested, not
only in scholarly pieces on theoretical
or political issues, but also in personal
articles about what it means to be a
woman of color and how women have
resolved issues in their personal lives.
For further information, write: Berke-
ley Women of Color, c/o Institute for
the Study of Social Change, 2420
Bowditch, Berkeley, CA 94720.

Central American Women Speak For
Themselves is a dossier published by
the Latin American Working Group, is
comprised of translations from news-
papers, pamphlets, documents, inter-
views and prints of already-published
material focusing on the participation
of women in the popular movements
and revolutionary organizations which
are so important at this moment in
Central American history. The docu-
mentation has been selected to allow
women to speak in their own words
and through their own experiences.
Central American Women Speak for
Themselves, which was published
October 1983, is still available from
Latin American Working Group, Box
2207, Station P, Toronto, Ontario
M5S 2T2 Canada.

Southpaw is a newsletter produced as
a networking and contact effort for
the Southeastern Friends of the Bear
Tribe. Art Horn, editor, provides in-
formation and sources for people in-
terested in the teachings and activi-
ties of Sun Bear and Native American
spiritual and cultural ways. For info,
write: Southpaw, c/o Al Horn, 997
Frontier Trail, Marietta, GA 30660.

“The gay movement’s newspaper of record.”

Gay Community News

Gay Community News is the national political newsweekly.

Madre Speaks/Madre Informa is the
newsletter of Madre, the friendship
committee, organized for the purpose
of stopping United States intervention
in Nicaragua, all of Central America
and the Caribbean by developing a
true exchange between people there
and people here. Write: Madre, 853
Broadway, Room 301, New York, NY
10003.

Frontline, a newspaper to popularize a
Marxist-Leninist perspective within the
U.S. is published by the Institute to
Social and Economic Studies. The bi-
weekly newspaper works toward build-
ing a united working class movement
that promotes peace, equality and
socialism in unbending opposition to
war and racism. Write them for info:
Frontline, P.O. Box 2729, Oakland,
CA 94602.

The Grupo Libertario Homossexual
(GLH), a group of “women in action,”
has published their first issue of
Amazonas, which is published in por-
tuguese and is available from the group.
Write: Grupo Libertario Homossexual,
Caixa Postal 2446, Salvador, 40.000,
Bahia, BRASIL.

Sister of Invention, a report of the
Asian and Pacific Women’s Small
Technologies and Business Forum held
in Manila, Philippines on November 21-
27, 1983, is now in circulation. The
report contains the proceedings of the
meeting attended by 49 women from
16 countries, who came together to
investigate and assess technologies at
the Technology for the People Trade
Fair. Write to editors, Anu Bose,
World YWCA, 37 Quai Wilson, Geneva
1201, Switzerland, or Ruth Lechte,
World YWCA, Box 633, Fiji.

— The Village Voice

Make Womyn’s History! If you've ever been a part of the cutting edge of sexual politics and liberation:

Michigan Womyn's Music Festival—this is the year to come
and celebrate the culture we've built. If you've ever thought
of coming to Michigan for The Festival, this is the year to
share the riches that The Festival offers.

NUCLEAR AGE

In times such as these, issues such as the direction which our move-
ment takes, its actions and reactions, who makes the decisions and for
what reasons, are critical. For over ten years Gay Community News
has been dedicated to the principle that an informed community is
our strongest asset.

Each week GCN brings you current, informative news and analysis
about lesbian and gay liberation. News of the events which chart our
movement's course. News of the struggles which mark our successes
and failures. News of disagreement about which road to take.

Because we are a non-profit membership corporation with a tradi-
tion of paid and volunteer staffs working together, GCN has suc-
ceeded in becoming much more than a mouthpiece for any one in-
dividual or organizational viewpoint within our incredibly diverse
community. We are proud that our opinion pages have won a reputa-
tion for being provocative, lively and controversial.

We've moved onto our own land —the most beautiful

womyn's camping festival grounds we know. We've grown to
three full stages of music (including our new Acoustic Stage
with dance and theater) and this year over eighty musicians
will be at The Festival to perform for the Ten Year anniversary.

You'll be joining Ferron, Holly Near, Teresa Truff and Barbara Higbie,
Linda Tillery, Ronnie Gilbert, Casselberry and DEUCE, Alix
Dobkin, Maxine Feldman, Therese Edell, Somethin’ Special, Woody
Simmons, Kay Gardner, Mary Watkins, Debbie Fier, Nancy Vogl, Toshi
Reagan, Hunter Davis, Lucie Blue Tremblay, Chevere, Edwina Lee Tyler
& A Piece of the World, Deidre McCalla, Adrienne Torf, Diane Lindsay
and Sue Fink, Rhiannon & Althea Whites, Make It Mime, Lillian Allen,
Judy Sloan, Musica Femina, Robin Tyler, Kate Clinton, SunWornyn
Ensemble, Sista Boom, Susan Freundlich, Ruth Barrett & Cynthia

Smith, Laurie Lewis, Nancy Brooks, Gayle Marie, Kamala Platt.

Women come together from every state and a dozen different
countries to create a womyn’s community like none other.

“So come if you love womyn’s music, and be ready for
dancing, workshops, campfire sing-a-longs, new games,
women’s crafts; roomy wooded camping, movies under the
stars or just talking and having fun with lots of other womyn.

GCN is supported primarily by subscription revenue. Get
on the cutting edge. Subscribe today.

Subscriptions are available for $29.00 for 50 issues (1 year) and $17.00
for 25 issues.
Send check or money order to: Gay Community News,
167 Tremont Street, Boston, MA 02111.

GCN is published by the non-profit Bromfield Street Educational Foundation.

Name I would like to contribute
towards a free subscription
for a lesbian or gay prisoner $

Bring your friends, travel safely —and we'll see you in Michigan!

Please charge my [name] [Visa]:
For tickets & info send S.A.S.E. to: 1 year $29.00 25 weeks $17.00
W.W.T.M.C. 1501 Lyons Street Mt. Pleasant, MI 48858

Mail to GCN Subs.
Signature

PAGE FOURTEEN Between Our Selves. Women of Color Newspaper SPRING/SUMMER 1985