CONFERENCES

Palestine Aid Society: “Together We  
Better Serve Our People” |

Three Palestinian Women  
speak at Nat’l Convention

The Palestine Aid Society of  
America was founded in 1978 and  
began to organize throughout the  
United States by August 1980 when  
they had their founding convention  
and became a national organization  
with a national office in Detroit, Mich-  
igan. Today the Palestine Aid Society  
has more than 20 chapters with over  
3,000 members.

Highlights of the Society’s 3rd  
National Convention, which was held  
in Chevy Chase, Maryland, September  
7-9, 1984 at the National 4-H Center,  
include a press conference held by the  
president of PAS Anan Ameri Jabara;  
a report from Fadia Salah from the  
Women’s Work Committee, a mass  
based women’s organization established  
in 1978 in the occupied territories;  
and a report from Leila Zakarta from  
Association Najdeh in Lebanon, sister  
organization of the Palestine Aid Soci-  
ety.

Anan Ameri Jabara

At a press conference held in the  
office of Atty. James Abourezk, for-  
mer senator from South Dakota, in  
Washington, DC, Dr. Anan Ameri  
Jabara, national president of PAS dis-  
cussed the crisis facing refugees in  
South Lebanon and outlined some of  
the goals of the Society, which are to  
“contribute towards the steadfastness  
of Palestinian people primarily in  
Lebanon, through alleviating some of  
the human suffering by supporting  
Association Najdeh; and to contribute  
to the maintenance of the independent  
Palestinian nationality and culture.

Jabara noted that over half a million  
Palestinians have been arrested in the  
seventeen years of the Israeli occupa-  
tion of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  
“When you talk about a population  
that is one million [in occupied terri-  
tories],” she said, “You're talking about  
almost every adult having visited  
the jail or having been arrested on  
some charges because they oppose  
occupation.” There are 3.5 million  
Palestinians scattered throughout the  
world, “about half a million live in  
Lebanon,” Jabara told reporters.

Addressing a question about Pal-  
estinian organizing in the United  
States, Jabara said that as a result of  
the Palestinian Liberation Organization  
there has been a change in the attitude  
of Palestinians all over; more self-aware-  
ness and a rise in national identity. In  
the last twenty years, “the Palestinian  
Community contributed a lot to or-  
ganizations in Lebanon,” she said.

About the occupation, Jabara  
stated, “You find the whole United  
Nations, almost every country in the  
United Nations recognizes that the  
solution to the problem in the Middle  
East is to give the Palestinians their  
national rights and the right of inde-  
pendence like any other people. To  
come and reinforce the idea, as the  
United States government does, that  

PAGE TEN

Anan Ameri Jabara

Palestinians will not have a state, will  

not have self-determination, that does  

not help to curb oppression.”

Jabara pointed out two major as-  
pects of the West Bank, Gaza Strip  
occupation that concern PAS. “One,  
there is the economic oppression,” she  
told reporters. “They flooded the  
market with much cheaper products.  
This happened in the West Bank at the  
beginning of the occupation. You de-  
stroy the local industry so that they  
cannot compete with you, then you  
raise the prices. Palestinians became  
the cheap labor of Israel. Every morn-  
ing they line up and they bargain and  
they pick up the cheapest worker.”  
The second area of concern is political  
oppression. “It is against the law to  
resist occupation. They come and  
destroy our economy, put people in  
camps, and you are not supposed to  
resist. If you resist they are ‘retaliat-  
ing’, ‘protecting’ themselves.”

Jabara ended the two-hour press  
conference by saying that between  
1948 and 1967 there was no organized  
armed resistance among Palestinians  
“and the world recognized them as re-  
fugees. Now, the Palestinians have  
carried arms and said ‘We’re going to  
have our land and our state.’ If you  
think of the Palestinians as human  
beings like you,” she said, “‘nobody  
likes war. Nobody likes to see their  
children killed. If anybody is tired of  
war and violence, it’s the Palestinian  
people. They abhor it. But you can-  

not oppress people and make refugees  
out of them and tell them ‘Don’t fight’.”

That evening Reverend Jesse Jack-  
son was keynote speaker at a rally for  
Palestine Aid Society. He was asked  
to speak, Jabara told reporters, “because  
as a Palestinian community, we  
feel that Reverend Jackson is one  
figure in this country who is suppor-  
tive of Palestinians and of all liberation  

movements.”

Fadia Salah

WOMEN ORGANIZING IN  

OCCUPATION

On the second day of the Palestine  
Aid Society convention, Fadia Salah  
from the Women’s Work Committee, a  

mass-based women’s organization  

established in 1978, represented the  
organization in the place of the or-  
ganization’s elected head, who Ms.  
Salah told the audience of about 300,  
was undergoing her fifth year of town  
arrest in the city of Jerusalem.

Salah gave a general outline of the  
aims, objectives, and the structure of  
programs for the Women’s Work  
Committee in the occupied West Bank  
and the Gaza Strip. She described the  
Women’s Work Committee as an or-  
ganization “aimed at unifying and  

attracting the widest possible number  

of Palestinian women in controlling  
their destiny and becoming an effec-  
tive force in the national movement.”  
The Women’s Work Committee be-  
gan with a handful of women in the  
cities of Ramallah and Jerusalem in  
1978. By 1983 WWC had 1,400 mem-  
bers and 33 committees throughout all  

of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.  

Salah told the audience that by March  
1984 the Women’s Work Committee  
had 2,430 members and 40 committees  
located in the towns and villages and  
camps—Jerusalem, Ramallah, Jenin,  
Tulkarm, Nablus, Bethlehem, Hebron,  
and Gaza.

The structure of WWC is that the  
general membership holds “all decision-  
making powers. The women hold  
yearly elections for a committee of  
seven or more, which is responsible for  
overlooking all the programs and  
coordinating the activities of the spe-  
cific center. Salah added that each re-  
gional committee elects two or more  

members to what is called the Higher  
Secretariat. The executive committee  
of the WWC has the responsibility of  
coordinating with other national  
institutions, charitable societies, pro-  
gressive Israeli anti-Zionist women’s  

organizations and progressive interna-  

tional organizations.

Salah reported that during the  
poisoning of the school girls in 1983,  
the Women’s Work Committee played  
a central role in mobilizing national  
organizations and medical staff to at-  

tend to the crisis. Another example of  

the work of the Women’s Work Com-  
mittee was mobilization and organiz-  
ing with other international support  
groups to support, mobilize and pub-  
licize the struggle of the Palestinian  
women prisoners held in Neve Tertza,  
who were on a hunger strike for hu-  
mane and fair treatment. After months  
of struggle and support, the prisoners  
regained their rights in prison. The  
activities of the Women’s Work Com-  

mittee also include running child care  

centers, vocational training for women  
and literacy programs.

Salah told the audience, “It is our  
belief that the social liberation of  
women and their natural roles in the  
process of social, economic, and politi-  
cal change constitute some of the most  
important issues facing our society to-  
day. We further believe that a society’s  
social liberation, development, inde-  
pendence, progress only to the extent  
which women achieve greater social,  
economic, and political rights. The  
liberation of any society is measured  
by the extent of the liberation of  
women and the development of wo-  

men’s freedom. This constitutes a gen-  

eral principle of all national liberation  
and social progress.”

“The Women’s Work Committee,” said  
Salah, “will continue to try to give  
women all over the occupied territories  
an opportunity to develop, learn  
organizational skills, vocational skills,  
to become active participants in the  
political and economic struggle for  
(continued on page 11)

Palestinian  
Resolutions  
vetoed

The UN Assembly adopted Decem-  
ber 12, four resolutions on the question  
of Palestine and Palestinian political  
rights. The United States and Israel  
vetoed all four resolutions.

The strongest resolution endorsed  
the Palestinian right to self-determina-  
tion, to return and to establish an in-  
dependent Palestinian state. The vote  
was 127 to 2 with 20 abstentions. The  
resolution asked the UN Committee  
on Inalienable Rights of the Palestini-  
an People to continue its cooperation  
with international organizations to  
promulgate information related to the  
Palestine cause.

WINTER 1985