Sister...

{Continued from Page 8}

straight Black woman ‘totally silent and ineffective is the suggestion that she might be a Black lesbian.

If someone says you’re Russian and you know you're not, you don’t collapse into stunned silence. Even if someone calls you a bigamist, or a childbeater, and you know you're not, you don’t crumple into bits. You say it’s not true, and keep on printing the posters. But let anyone, particularly a Black man, accuse a straight Black woman of being a Black lesbian, and right away that sister becomes immobilized, as if that is the most horrible thing she could be, and must at all costs be proven false. That is homophobia. It is a waste of woman energy; and it puts a terrible weapon into the hands of your enemies to be used against you to silence you, to keep you docile and in line. It also serves to keep us isolated and apart.

I have heard it said that Black lesbians are not political, that we have not been and are not involved in the struggles of Black people. But when I taught Black and Puerto Rican students writing at City College in the SEEK program in the 60’s I was a Black lesbian. I was a Black lesbian when I helped organize and fight for the Black Studies Department of John Jay College. And because I was 15 years younger then and less sure of myself, at one crucial moment I yielded to pressures that said I should step back for a Black man even though I knew him to be a serious error of choice, and I did, and he was. But I was a Black lesbian then.

When my girlfriends and I went out in the car one July 4th night after fireworks, with cans of white spray paint and our kids asleep in the back of the car, one of us staying behind to keep the motor running and watch the kids while the other two worked our way down the suburban New Jersey street, spraying white paint over the black jockey statues and their little red jackets too, we were lesbians.

When I drove through the Mississippi delta to Jackson in 1968 with a group of Black students from Tougaloo, another car full of redneck kids trying to bump us off the road all the way back into town, I was a Black lesbian.

When I weaned my daughter in 1963 to go to Washington in August to work in the coffee tents along with Lena Horne making coffee for the marshalls because that was what most Black women did in the 1963 March on Washington, I was a Black lesbian.

When I taught a poetry workshop at Tougaloo, a small Black college in Mississippi, where white rowdies shot up the edge of campus every night, and I felt the joy of seeing young Black poets find their voices and power through words in our mutual growth, I was a Black lesbian. And there are strong Black poets today who date their growth and awareness from those workshops.

When Yoli and I cooked curried chicken and beans and rice and took our extra blankets and pillows up the hill to the striking students occupying buildings at City College in 1969 demanding open admissions and the right to an education, I was a Black lesbian. When I walked through the midnight hallways of Lehman College that same year, carrying in Midol and Kotex pads for the young Black radical women taking part in the action, and we tried to persuade them that their place in the revolution was not 10 paces behind Black men, that spreading their legs to the guys on the tables in the cafeteria was not a revolutionary act no matter what the brothers said, I was a Black lesbian. When I picketed for Welfare Mothers' Rights, and against the enforced sterilization of young Black girls, when I fought institutionalized racism in the New York City schools, I was a Black lesbian. But you did not know it, because we did not identify ourselves, so now you can still say that Black lesbians and Gay men have nothing to do with the struggles of the Black Nation.

And I am not alone.

When you read the words of Langston Hughes you are reading the words of a Black gay man. When you read the words of Alice Dunbar-Nelson and Angelina Weld Grimke, poets of the Harlem Renaissance, you are reading the words of Black lesbians. When you listen to the life-affirming voice of Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey, you are hearing Black lesbian women. When you see the plays and read the words of Lorraine Hansberry, you are reading the words of a woman who lived women deeply.

Today, some of the most active and engaged members of ART AGAINST APARTHEID which is making visible and immediate our cultural responsibilities against the tragedy of South Africa are Lesbians and Gay men. We have organizations such as the National Coalition of Black Lesbians and Gays, Kykes Against Racism Everywhere, and Men of all Colors Together, all of whom are committed to and engaged in anti-racist activity. Homophobia and heterosexism mean you allow yourselves to be robbed of the sisterhood and strength of Black lesbian women because you are afraid of being called a lesbian yourself. Yet we share so many concerns as Black women, so much work to be done. The urgency of the destruction of our Black children and the theft of young Black minds are joint urgencies. Black children shot down or doped up on the streets of our cities are priorities for all of us. The fact of Black women’s blood flowing with grim regularity in the streets and living rooms of Black communities is not a Black lesbian rumor. It is a sad statistical fact. The fact that there is a widening and dangerous lack of communication around our differences between Black women and men is not a Black lesbian plot. It is a fact that becomes starkly clarified as we see our young people becoming more and more uncaring of each other. Young Black boys believing that they can define their manhood between a 6th Grade girl’s legs, growing up believing that Black women and girls are the fitting target for their justifiable furies rather than the racist structures grinding us all into dust, these are not Black lesbian myths. These are sad realities of Black communities today and of immediate concern to us all. We cannot afford to waste each other’s energies in our common battles.

What does homophobia mean? It means that high-powered Black women are told it is not safe to attend a Conference on the Status of Women in Nairobi simply because we are lesbians. It means that in a political action, you rob yourselves of the vital insight and energies of political women such as Betty Powell and Barbara Smith and Gwendolyn Rogers.

(Continued on Page 20)

PAGE NINETEEN

Can the women’s movement reach you?

NATIONAL WOMEN’S MAILING LIST

INDIVIDUAL REGISTRATION FORM

Sign up if you would like to receive mail in any of the following areas:

A. Black B. Native American C. Latina/Hispanic D. White E. Jewish F. Other

Yes, I am a U.S. resident only. 

(Choose two categories) A. Health/Medical B. Legal C. Teaching/Librarian/Educational D. Mental Health, Counseling E. Office Worker F. Factory/Industrial Worker G. Skilled Trades (carpentry/plumbing) H. Political Worker (organizer/networker) I. Social Services J. Unskilled Worker K. Military L. Management/Administration M. Business Owner N. Other Professional O. Services (restaurant, haircutting, etc.) P. Retired Q. Student R. Performing Arts S. Other (specify)

The NATIONAL WOMEN’S MAILING LIST is the national feminist technological resource and provides a new communications channel for women’s organizations. Because networking is essential to the survival of the women’s movement, you may indicate your interest in the following areas:

A. Women-only Organization B. Organization with mixed membership/staff (women and men) C. Individual registrant D. Women’s & mixed organizations (no individuals)

WHO CAN MAIL TO YOU?

A. Individual women and women’s organizations (no men) B. Everyone C. Women’s organizations only (no individuals) D. Women’s & mixed organizations (no individuals)

POLITICAL CANDIDATES

A. Yes, I will allow access by political candidates B. No

WOMEN’S CULTURE

A. Women’s Studies B. Women’s History/Literature Programs C. Women’s Psychology D. Women in Graduate Programs E. Film/Video F. Dance and Theater G. Painting & Drawing H. Crafts I. Women’s Presses J. Prose Writing K. Photography L. Spirituality M. All of the above

HELP BUILD THE NETWORK, REGISTER TODAY.

MAIL ENTIRE PAGE TO: Women’s Information Exchange: 1195 Valencia Street - San Francisco, CA 94110.

ORGANIZATIONS: Send for organizational registration form or for information about using the mailing list.

SPRING/SUMMER 1985

SEEING IMPAIRED: Write for larger form.

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

But you did not know it, because we did not identify ourselves, so now you can still say that Black lesbians and Gay men have nothing to do with the struggles of the Black Nation.

And I am not alone.

When you read the words of Langston Hughes you are reading the words of a Black gay man. When you read the words of Alice Dunbar-Nelson and Angelina Weld Grimke, poets of the Harlem Renaissance, you are reading the words of Black lesbians. When you listen to the life-affirming voice of Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey, you are hearing Black lesbian women. When you see the plays and read the words of Lorraine Hansberry, you are reading the words of a woman who lived women deeply.

Today, some of the most active and engaged members of ART AGAINST APARTHEID which is making visible and immediate our cultural responsibilities against the tragedy of South Africa are Lesbians and Gay men. We have organizations such as the National Coalition of Black Lesbians and Gays, Kykes Against Racism Everywhere, and Men of all Colors Together, all of whom are committed to and engaged in anti-racist activity. Homophobia and heterosexism mean you allow yourselves to be robbed of the sisterhood and strength of Black lesbian women because you are afraid of being called a lesbian yourself. Yet we share so many concerns as Black women, so much work to be done. The urgency of the destruction of our Black children and the theft of young Black minds are joint urgencies. Black children shot down or doped up on the streets of our cities are priorities for all of us. The fact of Black women’s blood flowing with grim regularity in the streets and living rooms of Black communities is not a Black lesbian rumor. It is a sad statistical fact. The fact that there is a widening and dangerous lack of communication around our differences between Black women and men is not a Black lesbian plot. It is a fact that becomes starkly clarified as we see our young people becoming more and more uncaring of each other. Young Black boys believing that they can define their manhood between a 6th Grade girl’s legs, growing up believing that Black women and girls are the fitting target for their justifiable furies rather than the racist structures grinding us all into dust, these are not Black lesbian myths. These are sad realities of Black communities today and of immediate concern to us all. We cannot afford to waste each other’s energies in our common battles.

What does homophobia mean? It means that high-powered Black women are told it is not safe to attend a Conference on the Status of Women in Nairobi simply because we are lesbians. It means that in a political action, you rob yourselves of the vital insight and energies of political women such as Betty Powell and Barbara Smith and Gwendolyn Rogers. 

(Continued on Page 20)

PAGE NINETEEN