Linda Tillery finds her own voice

By Evelyn C. White  
Copyright 1985

The singer, a quarter note shy of six  
feet tall, stood on stage in a flowing  
turquoise tunic and dark blue draw-  
string pants. The setting was a com-  
munity center in ever-progressive  
Berkeley—one that can be used for  
yoga classes, protest meetings, child  
care, or in this instance, for a private  
birthday party. With her left hand,  
the singer grabbed the mic, eyed her  
drummer and began to belt out  
“Mustang Sally.” The party guests be-  
gan to dance instantly and enthusiasti-  
cally joined Linda Tillery in each funky  
chorus of “ride Sally ride,” as though  
they’d been singing Wilson Pickett’s  
soul classic all their lives.

“People love to hear live bands play  
old songs,” said Tillery during her  
break. “It gets them dancing and  
remembering the good times in their  
lives.”

Though music has historically been  
an unstable, insecure, if not near  
dangerous profession for Black fe-  
males, it is safe to say that these are  
good times for Linda Tillery. Rare is  
the day when the 36-year-old Oakland-  
based singer is not negotiating a book-  
ing at a jazz club, concert hall, college  
campus or indeed a private party, in  
just about any city from San Francisco  
to Syracuse. But what most excites  
Linda Tillery, whose voice a Washington  
Post music critic recently hailed, “of  
nearly Mahalia Jackson dimensions  
and also a lullaby,” is the recent re-  
lease of her third solo album,  
Secrets on her own label, 411 Records,  
and makes its debut a full seven years  
since her last release, Linda Tillery.

“I believed in it, I nurtured it, I  
persevered, I suffered and I made  
Secrets happen,” said Tillery, speaking  
in her mother’s apartment after Sun-  
day dinner. “I think it reflects my  
talents as a musician in the best  
possible way.”

Though perhaps later than Tillery’s  
many fans would have liked, Secrets is  
the latest in a long list of musical  
achievements stamped with the seal  
of a truly independent and creative  
artist. Like many of her role models  
from Aretha Franklin to Stephanie  
Mills, Tillery also sang in the church.  
However, in a career twist that perhaps  
remains unparalleled by other Black  
female singers, Tillery, also a classically  
trained bass player, first gained recog-  
nition during the late 1960s as the lead  
singer for The Loading Zone, a San  
Francisco psychedelic rock band.

Ray Obeido, a Bay area guitarist/  
songwriter who has worked with Linda  
Tillery in various bands and is the  
producer of Secrets, described the first  
time he heard her sing, approximately  
15 years ago—“It was at the Winterland  
where big rock groups like Cream,  
Jefferson Airplane and Jimi Hendrix  
used to play. Her band blew out all  
the electricity except for two work-  
lights. But Linda just kept on singing.  
She made herself heard in a room of  
four thousand people. Her voice was  
incredible.”

And how did Tillery, who was 19 at  
the time and had been working as a  
sorter in the post office, come to front  

a band of eight “long-haired hippie  
freaks?” “I read an ad in the paper  
and auditioned for the band,” she said  
nonchalantly about her unusual past.  
“It was during the Haight-Ashbury  
flower children era, and the whole  
scene fascinated me because freedom  
of expression was something I could  
relate to.”

While performing with the Loading  
Zone, Tillery shared the stage with  
talents such as Janis Joplin, B.B. King  
and was introduced as a local V.I.P. to  
“the Queen of Soul,” after Aretha  
Franklin’s much acclaimed concert at  
the Fillmore West.

However, CBS Records soon lured  
Tillery away from the Loading Zone  
to record a solo album, Sweet Linda  
Divine. “It only sold about 20,000  
copies. Becoming rich and famous got  
nipped in the bud real quick,” she said  
lightheartedly.

Thus began what Tillery referred to  
as her “dues paying time.” Yet like  
many singers before her, she gasped,  
but did not totally give up. “I sang at  
wedding receptions, bar mitzvahs,  
debutante balls. I'd play gigs with  
four sets and go home with $15,” she  
said. Eventually things got better as  
she began doing studio work for  
Santana, Boz Scaggs, Lenny White and  
Coke Escovedo, uncle of current rock  
sensation Sheila E.

During the mid-70s, Tillery was in-  
troduced to the then nascent women’s  
music movement. Working with pio-  
neers Teresa Trull, Chris Williamson  
and Black musicians Mary Watkins and  
Vicki Randle, Tillery established her-  
self as a singer, drummer, composer  
and producer who could be counted  
on to challenge her peers to give their  
best.

Randle, who sings background  
vocals on Secrets has been playing  
percussion with George Benson for the  
past five years, spoke about that era,  
“I thought Linda Tillery was the most  
powerful and intelligent musician I’d  
ever met in my life. Being in her pre-  
sence was an inspiration. She’d sing  
and I’d be in absolute awe. It was an  
honor to be asked to work on her  
album.”

Tillery said she started working  
toward recording a new album during  
the latter months of 1983. By that  
time she’d been awarded a Bammie  
(Bay Area Musicians Award) for best  
independently produced album (Linda  
Tillery), a JAMMIE (Bay Area Jazz  
Award) for the best female jazz vocalist,  
and had participated in the historic  
1982 all women’s concert at Carnegie  
Hall.

“I'd been touring successfully all  
year with Adrienne Torf and things  
were really happening for me. But I  
knew I wanted to reach a more diverse  
audience. I wanted to do more that  
reflected Black musical traditions,” she  
said.

So in a little over a year, by circu-  
lating fund-raising flyers at her gigs  
and through word of mouth, Tillery  
raised the $30,000 she needed to pro-  

Photo by Irene Young, Copyright 1985

duce Secrets, which is distributed by  
Redwood Records.

“It’s maybe a tenth of what some-  
body like Rod Stewart spends on an  
album,” she said. “But the end result  
is a record representing where Linda  
Tillery is today.”

Secrets clearly indicated that Linda  
Tillery is an exciting and sensual  
interpreter of contemporary music.  
The album is a tightly mixed and  
sophisticated presentation of her many  
vocal wares. On the title track, Tillery  
sings in her seductive lower register  
about an unfaithful lover. On “I  
Suppose,” a Mary Watkins tune, she  
harmonizes with her background  
vocalists in a way that can only be de-  
scribed as “purely angelic.” “Basin  
Street” is a “techno-pop” composition  
of haunting echoes and synthesizers.  
And “I’m So Thankful,” a song she  
wrote herself, is sung in a rhythmic  
gospel style that will harken listeners  
back to the church pew on Sunday  
morning.

Talking about the sessions, which  
were recorded in San Francisco last  
November, producer Obeido said,  
“Linda really changed and utilized all  
of her voice for each tune. It was  
amazing to watch how she set up for  
each song and made sure that she was  
miked appropriately. After all these  
years, she still impresses me with her  
talent and sheer musicianship.”

Tillery expressed similar admiration  
for Obeido, as well as for all the  
other musicians who perform on  
Secrets. “Ray is the best rhythm  
guitar player I’ve heard anywhere,”  
she said. “He really understands the  
function of a guitarist—that it’s not al-  
ways to be louder or busier.”

Linda Tillery

She may not want it in her musical  
arrangements, but busy is exactly what  
the upcoming months for Linda  
Tillery are going to be. Although the  
schedule has not been finalized, Tillery  
said she will tour this Fall and that she  
is “constantly working” on new  
material to add to her repertoire.

Among the many talented  
musicians who will be working with  
her is biocoastal Oakland/New York  
pianist, Julie Homi. Homi said she was  
“absolutely thrilled” to tour with  
Tillery last Spring, and that she ad-  
mires her for constantly challenging  
feminist audiences to grow. “I think  
that by doing things like using men in  
her band, Linda has helped the  
women’s music scene to become more  
open and accepting than it was before.  
She’s made people understand that it  
is important for good musicians to  
play with other good musicians, no  
matter what sex or color they are.”

Simply put, Linda Tillery is an  
artist who has always rebelled against  
rigid definitions and constraining  
labels. Her independent spirit, which  
first blossomed with an acid rock  
band, is still reflected in her many  
multi-colored pairs of shoes, in her  
Oakland apartment where an auto-  
graphed photo of Earth, Wind and Fire  
shares the wall with an autographed  
one of Sweet Honey in the Rock.

About the future, Tillery said she  
intends to record more, tour more,  
and simply strive to get better. Such is  
her natural musical talent, and perhaps  
more importantly, her warmth and  
willingness to take professional risks,  
that Linda Tillery, if she wanted to,  
could probably persuade the Mormon  
Tabernacle Choir to join her in a soulful  
chorus of—“All you want to do is  
ride around Sally, ride Sally ride!”

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE FOURTEEN

FALL/WINTER 1985