Nora: an interview

By Delia D. Aguilar  
Copyright 1985

Nora lives in Teachers’ Village, a  
middle-class community on the out-  
skirts of the University of the Philip-  
pines in Quezon City. Her home is  
situated at a busy intersection, an un-  
pretentious dwelling which, unlike  
many others on the street, is without a  
carport.

As I am about to ring the bell by  
the gate, dogs start barking at me from  
the yard inside. Someone whom I as-  
sume to be a maid is hanging clothes  
on the line. She stops to let me in but  
I hesitate, asking her to hold off three  
barking dogs. Nora appears at the  
doorway, holding a fourth dog by the  
collar, and beckons for me to come up.  
Light-complexioned and slightly  
plump, she welcomes me with a pleas-  
ant smile.

She leads me through the living-  
room to the dining room adjoining the  
kitchen. I choose a seat at the round  
wooden dining room table with six  
matching chairs. With quick, efficient  
motions, she turns on the electric fan.

With the aftershocks of this family  
crisis, Nora as sole breadwinner guards  
against a similar fate: “My philosophy  
at work is not to do anything that can-  
be used against me, nothing at all.”

This caution is not applied consist-  
ently, however. She will, for example,  
exhort her children “...to get involved  
in demonstrations although it will  
scare me to death. I will be afraid be-  
cause they are my children, but better  
than having children who are smug and  
uninvolved.”

For Nora, marital equality is not an  
issue: “I do not have a scoreboard to  
note who’s doing more or less work.”  
Not that there is a question over who  
is carrying the heavier load. Here the  
ability to work hard and to endure  
gracefully in the face of adversity be-  
comes a source of pride. This forbear-  
ance, this capacity for industry, will  
stand her in good stead if she must  
join the stream of immigrants overseas.  
Faced with the prospect of manag-  
ing her family on her income alone, at  
least for a while, Nora toys fearfully  
with the notion—only as final resource—  
of leaving her husband and children  
behind while she sets forth for the  
United States to earn dollars.

I’m the fourth of what would have  
been five children, but my mother had  
a very sad history of childbirth. Her  
first baby was stillborn, probably be-  
cause of the tension she felt—she got  
married right before the bombing of  
the doctor decided to perform a  
caesarean. I was the first live birth. That  
was in 1946. I have a younger sister  
who came three years later.

We lived in a rented house in Do-  
minga, Pasay from the time I was  
born until I was 13. We were comfor-  
table enough. My mother was a teach-  
er, later becoming a supervisor of Eng-  
lish in the City Schools. My father  
was with the office of the Insurance  
Commissioner.

We lived in a modest house that was  
part of a compound owned by a  
family also living in the neighborhood.  
There were a lot of fruit trees—sampalok,  
caimito. It was in an interior portion  
of Dominga. You had to go through a  
narrow street to get inside. There was  
no danger of getting run over. We  
played with the children of the owner  
and all the other children in the neigh-  
borhood.

Although my parents were not earn-  
ing much, they were able to send me  
to Maryknoll College. I went there  
from kindergarten through high school.  
In the beginning, my mother would  
take me to school in the morning and  
fetch us in the afternoon. There were  
no school buses yet. When we were in  
high school, we transferred to Loyola  
Heights and had to wake up early for  
the bus.

I loved Maryknoll. I had very good  
teachers who were American. These  
days we say a lot of things about  
American imperialism, but I think  
Americans have done a lot for us. For  
English. But now it’s different. We did  
have many Filipino teachers also, but  
native teachers are different.

I am lucky in that schools at the  
time were really good. We did not yet  
have these economic problems with  
teachers being underpaid and the qua-  
lity of education being sacrificed.  
Now, from the way children speak,  
you can tell that their teachers do not  
know even simple grammar.

For college, I transferred to St.  
Theresa where economics was offered  
as a major. I chose it because it was a  
new field then. I wanted to get a job  
right after graduation, and I heard that  
employers were looking for people  
with a background in economics.  
When I graduated and applied to dif-  
ferent companies, all they could offer  
me was a job of going from home to  
home doing marketing surveys. But  
my father wouldn’t allow it. He was  
overprotective. Even when I was in St.  
Theresa, he would suggest that some-  
one accompany me if I stayed after  
school hours. So he disapproved of  
those jobs. Maybe if I took on that  
kind of job I would have a good posi-  
tion now. I ended up a secretary  
[laughs]. I only took typing and  
steno as electives, and never expected  
to be a secretary.

I wanted to get a job because I  
wanted to have my own money. My  
parents were getting older and I didn’t  
want to be a burden. I wanted to con-  
tribute to the family.

I applied to many companies. I did  
not have any padrino’s help. I took a  
lot of tests. There were jobs I applied  
to where there was an overwhelming  
number of applicants for one position.

We had a neighbor who was work-  
ing at City Hall and it was election  
year. (Those were the good old days  
when elections were still exciting.)  
This guy asked me if I wanted a job as  
casual. I replied, “No, harm in try-  
ing.” I got into City Hall. I started in  
October and was laid off in February.  
I earned the minimum wage—P8 a day.  
At least I had some spending money.

Not long after that I met a woman  
who became a friend who had a cousin  
in Pepsi Cola Co. She told me about  
an opening in Pepsi. I took the test  
and passed. Because the union was  
strong, the company was forced to  
take the candidate recommended by  
the union. I was the other choice.

What the company did was to put  
both of us to work alternately for two  
weeks each. Then they selected.

It mattered because I was not in-  
volved too much with boys and I have no brothers through whom I could meet boys. But I was very  
close to the boys in the neighborhood,  
and once in a while we had parties.  
But it was seldom. We didn’t have a  
car, so if I went to a party my father  
would have to pick me up or I had to  
ask a friend to take me home. And I  
wasn’t too keen on this. So in my  
group of friends everyone was sur-  
prised when I was almost the first to  
get married.

My husband is older by 13 years. I  
had crushes as a young girl, but no-  
body really courted me then. At the  
time, young women were still re-  
strained like Maria Clara [laughs]. In  
Pepsi there were a few other men who  
expressed interest in me, but I fell in  
love with Vic. Of all the men he was  
the one who offered marriage at once,  
so I guess that did it. You know,  
other men try to prolong the relation-  
ship and have nothing to offer. The  
age difference has helped because he  
keeps me in control. If I married  
someone my age, we may both have  
been impulsive.

We lived with my mother after mar-  
riage. My oldest daughter is 14, my  
son Fidel is 12, and Cristina is 9. All  
were born caesarean. The first de-  
livery was expected to be normal, but  
when the time came, the doctor could  
not take the baby out.

When I got married, my father had  
just had his first stroke. It limited his  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE SIX

SPRING/SUMMER 1985