Diné Elders resist relocation: “People on the  
land are like grass holding the earth.”  

by Maya Chumu  

About 100 participants sat for three  

days at last year’s annual Diné inter-  
national spring gathering listening  
to the testimony of the elders and  
other residents of the land. This was  
the Navajo, or Diné, people and this  
was their land. An arbor had been  

constructed and the people sat or  

stood around the sacred fire that  
burned continuously. There had been  
two meetings to instruct the non-  
Indians in the ways of respecting the  
elders. Now they listened to one tale  
after another of the history, the beliefs  
and the current struggle of the Diné.  

The Diné are in a crisis situation.  

Fourteen thousand of them are being  
asked to leave what they consider to  
be their traditional homeland, vol-  
untarily relocate as part of a federal  
program to compensate the Hopi,  
their neighbors on the mesas.  

For the Diné living in the remote,  
ecologically sparse and delicate pla-  
teaus of the northeastern corner of  
Arizona, 20th century progress has  
intruded its ugly head and they have  
been left with a feeling of disruption.  
A way of life known for centuries is  
under attack.  

It is a life that most outsiders are  
only vaguely aware of: Yet before the  
Europeans settled these lands by way  
of conquest, the law, order, and  
beliefs of the people here were very  
different. Now with development  
entering their lives in the form of  

mining and agribusiness; that life is  
once again threatened.  

Keshay pokes and tends the sacred  
fire tirelessly. He is an elder and years  
ago the women chose him and a  
younger native son, Bahe to be  
spokesmen for the outside supporters.  
“Our grandfathers all lived according  
to their prayers and songs that were  
passed on for many centuries,” Keshay  
started on the first day of testimony.  

[The speakers use the lilting tongue  
of the Diné language, while Bahe  
translates]  

The Diné, a matrilineal, matriarch-  
al nation, have always listened to the  
direction of their elders, especially the  
women.  

Irene Yazzie says she doesn’t know  
exactly how old she is but she knows  
she is past 80. She is blind and small  
framed, yet sits on the ground with  
the guidance of her granddaughter.  
She calls everyone her children or  
grandchildren; she says, though they  
are not Diné. She talks knowledge-  
ably about the past and what is hap-  
pening on the land now.  

“I hear there is fencing going on  
near my home again,” Yazzie spoke  
confidently. “But that land that I am  
on used to be my great grandmother’s  
land. When she passed it on to us, she  
told us who it belonged to before her,  
many great grandmothers and grand-  
fathers of hers.”  

The Diné were a nomadic tribe fol-  
lowing the seasons and the herds to  
eke out a living. Their settlements  
were in the canyons and plateaus of  
the entire four corners area where the  
states of Arizona, New Mexico, Color-  
ado, and Utah now meet. For cen-  
turies they had traded with the Hopis,  
who led a more settled pueblo life, and  
other Indian nations of the area.  

In 1848, the United States gained  
possession of the four corners area  
under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidal-  
go. The treaty with the Spanish gov-  
ernment in Mexico specifically asked  
that the indigenous people be allowed  
to remain on their land and that their  
way of life be respected.  

Soon after Kit Carson, working for  
the war department, brought thousands  
of Diné, whom the Spanish called Na-  
vajos, meaning thieves, to Fort Sumner  
near Flagstaff. They stayed impris-  
oned there for nearly 20 years. In  
1868, the U.S. signed the Navajo Treaty  
and allowed the imprisoned Diné to  
join their relatives in the four corners  
area next to the Hopi, who have never  
signed a treaty with the U.S.  

The Diné prospered here, preferr-  
ing to raise sheep in the barren and  
harsh landscape rather than farm as  
did their neighbors on the mesas. In  
1882, the U.S. created the Hopi  
reservation, a neatly drawn rectangle,  
which left out important traditional  
sites for the Hopi, in an attempt to  
control the land and its inhabitants.  
In the 1930s the government created  
“Grazing District 6,” 640,000 acres  
immediately surrounding the Hopi  
villages, for their exclusive use. The  
rest of the rectangle was designated as  
a “Joint Use Area (JUA)” between the  
two tribes, or any others the govern-  
ment saw fit to put there.  

“In the past,” Yazzie recounted,  
“our Diné people and Hopi people  
have always cared for one another. We  
helped one another. When one nation  
was lacking food or medicine, we  
traded corn and fruit and sheep with  
necklaces of turquoise and white shell.  
Today I wonder why there is no unity.  
Who were the people to tell Washing-  
ton (D.C.) that these people are too  
friendly to one another? Somebody  
out there has snitched on us.”  

It is the question of who gets the  
benefits of resources in the JUA that  

Photo by Maya Chumu  

has divided the two tribes. In 1921,  
Standard Oil discovered a large oil re-  
serve on the Diné reservation. When  
their leaders voted 75 to 0 against a  
lease for Standard, the Bureau of In-  
dian Affairs which regulates all Indian  
land, set up the first tribal council  
made up of three men who were per-  
suaded to sign a lease.  

The Hopi resisted federal represen-  
tation well into the 1950s. But when  
Peabody Coal Company discovered  
one of the richest coal fields in the  
Joint Use Area, negotiations started  
with the Navajo and Hopi tribal  
councils which gave Peabody exclusive  
use to two billion tons of Black Mesa  
coal in 1964 and 1966. Even so, Hopi  

traditional leaders contested the lease  
because the tribal council had not  
been legally constituted. The case was  
heard by the Supreme Court and the  
Hopis were told they had no right to  
sue “their” government.  

With the exception of these two  
leases, no other energy company has  
been able to get at the other estimated  
60 billion tons of coal which sits under  
Black Mesa. The Hopis worked with  
their lawyer, John Boyden a former  
archbishop in the Mormon Church  

Between Our Selves - Women of Color Newspaper  

who also negotiated for Peabody Coal,  
partly owned by the Mormons. The  
Hopi council saw energy development  
increase the wealth of the tribe.  

Boyden was paid one million dollars  
by the Hopi Council to get increased  
leases. In order to do that he needed  
to get clear title to the JUA for the  
Hopis. He publicized range wars for  
the benefit of the media and lobbied  
constantly in Washington to have title  
exclusively for the Hopi.  

In 1974 Senator Barry Goldwater  
(R-AZ) sponsored Public Law 93-531  
which split the JUA down the middle  
between the two tribes. It ordered a  
90 percent reduction in livestock of  
the Diné, a ban on further construc-  
tion, and the removal of all people liv-  
ing on the wrong side of the fence.  
Since the Diné population had spread  
out within the JUA, it meant that  
14,000 Diné and a few hundred Hopi  
would be forcibly relocated by the  
July, 1986 deadline.  

The elders and those who cling to  
their traditional way of life don’t un-  

derstand why this is happening to  

them. A core group has centered a-  
round the resident of Big Mountain,  
(continued on page 4)  

PAGE THREE