Asian Women’s Research Network  
is a group of Asian women from 10  
countries, formed to promote feminism in research and action based on  
grassroots realities of Asia. Their ob-  
jectives are to build an Asian network  
of women involved in research and  
action for their mutual support and  
development, exchange information  
and experiences; identify gaps in re-  
search subjects or methodology, and  
to promote work in these areas; bring  

research and action groups into ongoing  
interaction with each other’s work  
and output; engage in action on com-  
mon issues. Membership is open to  
individual Asian women who subscribe  
to the Network’s objectives. Dues are  
US$10. Members are entitled to re-  
ceive the Network newsletter. Non-  
Asians may subscribe to the newsletter  
for US$10. Send all inquiries and  
materials to Pilipina, Kahayag Founda-  
tion, P.O. Box 208, Davao City,  
Philippines.  

On Friday, November 16th Audre  
Lorde and Essex Hemphill joined the  
many artists who have participated in  
the two-month old Art Against Apar-  
theid series at Hunter College. The  
Lesbian/Gay Students at Hunter hosted  
the event.  

Art Against Apartheid was orga-  
nized in late 1983 to bring artists to a  
new awareness about what their role in  
the apartheid struggle can and must be.  
AAA works to support the cultural  
boycott of South Africa and tries to  
raise funds to fight apartheid conditions  
which exist in the country.  

Audre Lorde told those in atten-  
dance: “We are citizens in a country  
which stands, and has stood, on the  
wrong side of every liberation struggle  
in this world. I’ve got to cop to it, and  
so do you!”  

Write Art Against Apartheid, 280  
Broadway, New York, NY 10007.  

California Women of Color Against  
Domestic Violence held their second  
statewide conference October 27-28,  
1984 in El Monte, California. The  
conference—“Women of Color: Movin’  
On Up!”—celebrated the achievements  
and work of CWOCADV in the do-  
mestic violence movement.  

For further info write: Southern Cali-  
fornia Coalition on Battered Women,  
P.O. Box 5036, Santa Monica, CA  
90405.  

Committee on South Asian Women  
(COSAW) was formed to provide in-  
formation on the conditions under  
which South Asian women live and  
work; to discover and act on issues  
that are germane to South Asian  
women settled abroad; and to support  
the efforts of women’s groups in  
South Asia and establish links be-  
tween these groups and their western  
counterparts. Write, Jyotsna Vaid,  
Department of Psychology, Michigan  
State University, East Lansing, MI  
48824.  

Kali for Women is a professional so-  
ciety concerned primarily with Third  
World studies on women. Based in New  
Delhi, India, it is hoped that it will ra-  
pidly establish links in other Third  
World countries, as well as in the West.  
Kali’s main concern is to increase the  
body of knowledge on women in the  
Third World, and to give a voice to  

such knowledge as already exists.  

Equally, it is concerned with ensuring  
that Third World women be provided  
an opportunity—and a forum—to speak  
out for themselves, rather than have  
the situation represented, as it has  
hitherto been by the West.  

Kali will publish formal and  
informal interdisciplinary studies on  
women from the perspective of the  
humanities and social sciences, on  
health, education development, agri-  
culture and industry, advancement  
and equality, sources of strength and  
depletion, historical perspectives, eco-  
nomical, political, social and legal  
structures, ritual and custom, the fami-  
ly, and so on, and women’s struggles  
and movements all over the Third  
World.  

Kali reprints articles in original  
English and translation from regional  
languages, and will soon publish a  
landmark series of fictional and  
non-fictional work featuring short  
stories, memoirs, autobiographies  
and biographies. Write Kali for  
Women, N84 Panchshila Park New  
Delhi, 110017 or B26 Guimohar Park,  
New Delhi 110049.  

Palestine Aid Society  

(continued from page 10),  

liberation and to become part of the  
leadership in the struggle of Palestinian  
people for national liberation.”  

Leila Zakarta:  
‘SERVING WAR-STRICKEN  
LEBANON  

Leila Zakarta spoke about the work  
of Association Najdeh, sister organiza-  
tion of the Palestine Aid Society. The  
civil war in Lebanon led to the founda-  
tion of Association Najdeh (which  
means assistance) in January, 1977.  
The task of rehabilitating families, find-  
ing decent jobs for women and training  
unskilled women to earn their living,  
motivated the formation of the  
Association.  

The Association began socio-eco-  
nomic, vocational, and educational pro-  

grams among the major Palestinian re-  
fugee camps in Lebanon and poverty-  
stricken areas. The projects include  
typing and sewing vocational training  
centers, embroidery and industrial  
workshops, daycare centers and kinder-  
gartens.  

Zakarta reported that Najdeh had  
six embroidery workshops. They send  
raw materials and designs to South  
Lebanon to 350 women. “The women  
produce the work and Najdeh pays  
them by piece and the work is returned  
to Beirut.” The average age of the  
women in the embroidery workshops  
is between the age of 25 and 35. “The  
majority,” said Zakarta, “are single.”  

Najdeh has six kindergartens. Each  
services 60 children. Children are of-  

fered a program which ranges from  

WINTER 1985  

Photo by Annette Pelaez/Sisterfaces  

The first meeting of the Internat-  
ional Committee for the Release of  
Detained and ‘Disappeared’ Women  
in Iraq took place on July 26, 1984  
at the House of Commons in London.  
The meeting decided that July 15th  
should become International Day of  
Solidarity with Iraqi Political Women  
Detainees. For more information  
contact Donna McDonald, MP, House  
of Commons, Westminster, London  
SW1 OAA.  

teaching them colors, contrast, rhythm  
and music, to such things as familiarizing  
them to their environment and teaching  
them how to love their environment.  
“The feeling is,” Zakarta told the audience,  
“that it is not necessary that people who  
live in a deprived area that the areas do  
not have something to offer. The children  
visit the shopkeeper, the garbage man,  
craftspeople, all over. They learn to interact  
with the environment and not to be  
ashamed about poor conditions.”  

In 1982 Association Najdeh serviced  
about 500 people, Zakarta said. Now  
they service over 3,000. Najdeh is con-  
centrating on expanding their voca-  
tional projects.  

For information on the three organi-  
zations, write:  

Palestine Aid Society  
904 Woodward Tower  
Detroit, MI 48226  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

The Association of Black Women  
Historians is a recently formed organi-  
zation of professional Black women  
historians and other persons interested  
in Black women’s history and culture.  
ABWH is affiliated and holds its an-  
nual meetings in conjunction with the  
Association for the Study of Afro-  
American Life and History. The  
ABWH is presently seeking persons  
interested in participating and becom-  
ing active members. For info. contact  
Dr. Cheryl Johnson, Program of Afri-  
can Studies, Northwestern University,  
630 Dartmouth Street, Evanston, IL  
60201. Regular membership, $30,  
Student, $10, Retired, $10.  

Madre (which means mother) is a  
friendship committee. The purpose of  
Madre is to stop United States inter-  
vention in Nicaragua, all of Central  
America and the Caribbean, and to  
develop true exchange between wo-  
men here and women there. Madre  
connects the problems women face  
every day in this country with the  
struggles of women in Central America.  
Madre brings together small groups of  
women in the U.S. who know each  
other through their jobs, their children’s  
schools or day care centers, through  
community or political work, churches  
and synagogues and matches them with  
a sister institution in Nicaragua through  
a process called “Twinning,” pairing  
local institutions with a similar institution  
in Nicaragua for joint educational work  
and fundraising. For info write: Madre,  
853 Broadway, Room 905, New York, NY  
10003.  

PAGE ELEVEN