PUBLICATIONS

The Conditions Magazine Editorial  
Collective, having completed  
Conditions: Eleven/Twelve, The Dou-  
ble Issue, is in the process of re-  
organizing and expanding our Col-  
lective in line with our commitment to  
multi-cultural, ethnic, racial, and class  
diversity. The goal of this reorganiza-  
tion is to bring together a group of  
editors to produce Conditions:  
Thirteen, The International Women’s  
Issue, which we will publish during the  
summer of 1986. We are very excited  
by this project and hope that women  
from all over the world will send us  
their poems, short fiction, essays,  
translations, book reviews, photo-  
graphs (black and white), and visual art  
work for consideration. We welcome  
submissions in a variety of forms from  

all women who feel that a commitment  

to women is an integral part of their  
lives.

While Conditions is an English  
language publication, poems, short  
fiction, and prose four pages (double-  
spaced) may be submitted in any  
language if accompanied by an English  
translation. However, longer work  

must be translated in English. Manu-  
scripts should be typed and double-  
spaced. All submissions must be pre-  
viously unpublished in the United  
States. Photographers and other visual  
artists are encouraged to submit any  
work appropriate for an 8 1/2” x 5”  
perfect bound, black and white format.  
Please send manuscripts and art work  
to:

CONDITIONS MAGAZINE

P.O. Box 56 Van Brunt Station  
Brooklyn, New York 11215

Only manuscripts and photocopies  
accompanied by a self-addressed  
stamped envelope will be returned.  
We are also requesting that you en-  
close a fifty-word biographical state-  
ment, which includes date and place of  
birth and current residence with your  
submission(s). Please tell other  
women about Conditions: 13, The  
International Women’s Issue. Thank  
you for your support of Conditions.

-----The Conditions Magazine Editorial  
Collective

Meadowsweet Apothecary  

School of Herbology  
77 East 4th St., New York, N.Y. 10003, (212) 254-2870  

Store Hours: Tuesday Thru Saturday 11AM-7PM  
Catalogue $2.00  

Over 250 high quality herbs. All types  
of medicinals including Chinese medicines.  

Beginner/intermediate courses and  
advanced courses in Herbal Medicine.  

& Arcus Flynn, C.H., Proprietress  

PEACE AND FREEDOM  

Special 70th Anniversary Magazine  

Discover the Roots and Power of the  
Women’s Peace and Justice Movement.  

Oral histories, poetry, articles on South Africa,  
peace work, civil rights, women’s history and more.  
Featuring Barbara Ehrenreich, Adrienne Rich, Sonia  
Sanchez, women from El Salvador and Nicaragua.  

To order send check for $2 to: Women's International League  
for Peace and Freedom, 1213 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA  
19107  

PAGE SIXTEEN  

The Gay Studies Newsletter is  
published each March, July, and  
November by the Gay and Lesbian  
Caucus for the Modern Languages, an  
affiliated organization of the Modern  
Language Association. Editorial  
Address: Dept. of English, University  
of Toronto; 7 King’s College Circle;  
Toronto, ON M5S 1A1. For member-  
ship or subscriptions write GLCML;  
P.O. Box 415, Kittery, ME 03924. For  
Caucus business, write John C. Miller  
and Virginia Cox, School of Continuing  
Education, New York University, 2  
University Place, Room 55, New York,  
NY, 10003.  

Sister Vision, founded in the sum-  
mer of 1984, the first press for Black  
women and women of color to be es-  
tablished in Canada, seeks  
ideas, and donations. The press will  
encourage works by women of all  
cultures, sexual preferences and  
will focus on four areas: women’s  
oral history, creative writing, books  
for children and young people, and  
theory and research. Women interested  
in supporting Sister Vision, or who  
would like to be on the mailing list can  
write Sister Vision, Black Women and  
Women of Colour Press, P.O. Box 217,  
Station E, Toronto, Ontario, M6H  
or call (416) 532-0868.  

Issue Four of Woman of Power  
Magazine, available May of 1986, seeks  
to give expression to the voices of  
women of color from around the  
world. They will consider “the  
literary and artistic works of women  
of color from all countries, cultures,  
ages, social classes and feminist,  
sexual, and spiritual backgrounds.  
Send poems, art, photographs, short  
stories, plays, essays, biographies,  
autobiographies, organizational pro-  
files, and other works that reflect your  
experience and your aspirations as  
women of color.” Guest Editor for  
this issue is Asoka Bandarage. Dead-  
line for submission of materials is  
December 15, 1985. Please send for  
editorial guidelines. Write: Woman of  
Power, P.O. Box 827, Cambridge, MA  
02238-0827.  

A Directory of Women’s Media, lists women-owned and  
operated media in all forms of communications: Periodi-  
cals, Presses, Publishers, News Services, Radio/TV Groups &  

Regular Programs, Video & Cable, Film, Multi-Media,  
Music, Art/Graphics/Theater, Writers Groups, Speakers  
Bureaus, Media Organizations, Bookstores & Mail Order,  
Distributors, Library Collections, Selected Directories...  

and more!  

Entries include addresses, phone numbers,  

contact people and 25-word descriptions written by the  
groups themselves. The over 500 groups are arranged  
geographically with cross indexes alphabetically.  

The Directory includes a section of over 800 media  
women & media-concerned women. It is also an annotated,  
cumulative Index of media activities and research from the  
bi-monthly Media Report to Women.  

The Index/Directory of Women’s Media, edited by  
Martha Leslie Allen, is available from the Women’s Insti-  
tute for Freedom of the Press, 3306 Ross Place, N.W.,  
Washington, DC 20008 (202) 966-7783 for $12.  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

INMAN SQUARE  
CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  

HAMPSHIRE STREET  

AWOMEN’S  

FALL/WINTER 1985