BOOK REVIEWS.

Narratives—a review

NARRATIVES

poems in the tradition of black women  
by Cheryl Clarke

Second Edition  
Kitchen Table Women of Color Press  
Softcover. $4.95 at

By Anita Cornwell  
Copyright 1985  
In her Foreword to the First Edition, Cheryl Clarke writes, “The decision to publish my narrative poems has been a slow process. I have always been drawn to narrative poetry because my living has been infused with storytelling.”  
This Second Edition has been expanded to two new narratives, the last two in the book, “The Johnny Cake,” and “Cantaloupe.” In her short Foreword to the Second Edition, Clarke writes, “. . . Narratives is still as much a celebration of living, of art, of poetry as it is a celebration of black women’s lives.”

The first selection in the book, “A Narrative,” rings with the authenticity of the Black female experience:

An early childhood memory:  
me: sitting in the kitchen  
holding down onto my hair  
shoulders hunching  
toes curling in my sneakers.  
my mother, standing behind me  
bracing herself against the stove  
greasing the edges of my scalp  
and the roots of my hair violently  
heating the straightening comb alternately  
and asking between jerking and pulling:  
‘Why couldn’t you have good hair?’

Perhaps the most wrenching poem in the book, “If You Black Get Back,” concerns Vashti, “. . . an ugly and dirty girl/whose nappy hair could not hold a curl/whose name nobody even wanted to say.”

Then we learn that:  
Vashti’s hair was never straightened.  
To be black was bad enough.  
To be black and have nappy hair was just plain rough.  
Boys terrorized her.  
Girls scorned her.  
Adults walked the other way  
to avoid the play of Vashti’s eyes marking their cruelty.

The third poem in the book, “The Older American,” relates the sad, yet all too familiar story of the plight of older people in society today:

Lettie Walker was 71  
when she was struck unconscious in the street  
by a hit-and-run driver  
who seemed not to have obeyed the stop sign  
or perhaps became impatient with her halt gait.  
Then, since her stay in the hospital:  
Lettie Walker has been depressed  
agoraphobic  
nearly anorexic  
taken to walking with a cane  
given up her home in the South  
to stay with her daughter in the North  
and ambivalent about wanting to live;

Another tragic narrative relates a happening that occurred after the Martin Luther King, Jr., slaying on April 4, 1968. The narrator is living in Washington, D.C., with her daughter and husband, and due to the rioting, the mother tells her daughter not to go out that night. But she steals out while the mother sleeps. The stepfather, fearful because of the rioting, gets his shotgun handy. Then later, when he hears the daughter trying to re-enter the house, he thinks she is one of the rioters:

‘Shhhhhh,’ he tensed.  
The shell burned the door.  
And then, frozen, he asked, ‘Where’s Doe?’

The poem ends:  
The mortician, a friend of Joe’s  
did everything he could to cosmetize the tunnel in Doe’s head.  
I ordered the casket closed.  
I must admit that at times I wondered about the “I” narrator in some of the poems since it seemed obvious that the “I” was not the poet speaking, nor did the “I” always appear to be the same person. However, that really did not detract from the overall enjoyment I received from reading these narratives. Two that I especially liked were, “Of Althea and Flaxie”:

In 1943 Althea was a welder  
very dark  
very butch  
and very proud  
loved to cook, sew, and drive a car  
and did not care who knew she kept company with a woman  
who met her every day after work  
in a tight dress and high heels  
light-skinned and high-cheekboned  
who loved to shoot, fish, and play poker  
and did not give a damn who knew her ‘man’ was a woman.

And, perhaps the most delightful selection in the book, “A Mother’s Story,” which tells of the mother with twin daughters so identical she could never distinguish one from the other:  
. . . to this day I cannot tell them one from the other.  
there is no mark on one that is not on the other  
same skin  
same rebellious grade of hair  
same voice—dark, petulant, monotone  
every word said the same.  
in every trait identical.

Nine drawings by Gaia (Gay Belknap) provide a vivid accompaniment to the narratives.

Anita Cornwell

Gathering Ground—a collection of writings

GATHERING GROUND  
New writing and Art by Northwest Women of Color

Edited by Jo Cochran, J.T. Stewart and Mayumi Tsutakawa

The Seal Press 1984 187pp.

Softcover $6.95

By Windy Sky  
Copyright 1985  
Gathering Ground is a unique collection of writings and art by women of color of the Northwest. This anthology’s uniqueness is in its subject and in the fact that it is the forerunner in publications from a group of women that editor Jo Cochran states are “real different from the rest of the country. . . we aren’t as urbanized.”  
The inclusion of the conversation process of the editors in “Listening In” gives the readers insight into the selection process for the entries selected.

The group’s main goal according to editor Mayumi Tsutakawa was to give a “really strong definition” to the term Third World women writers. While the group falls a little short on clearly defining the term, we are given much on the editors' experience in academia.

The editors have all seen the pitfalls for women of color writers in the academic world, and they offer their thoughts and suggestions for alternatives to the universities. One alternate method is to have workshops and conferences where experienced writers can work with young and beginning writers.

The book is divided into three main themes: self-discovery, community perspectives, and cultural awareness. While there is not the development of the themes I would like to see, there is a lot of work exhibited. The editors have presented a varied selection.

I’m sure the editors realized the tremendous task they were undertaking in doing this anthology as noted in the preface: “What sort of work is representative of women of color from the Pacific Northwest? And why is putting the language on the page still so difficult for many of us?” In spite of this beginning dialogue they fall into the snare of most Third World publications; ‘someone or something’ is left out.

I’ve often wondered how these omissions could be avoided. One definite suggestion that comes to mind is that due to the diversity of our communities, the solicitation of submissions could be done on a more broad-based community level. However, I would like to concentrate more on the positive aspects of Gathering Ground, such as the contemporary artwork of Edna Jackson, Barbara Thomas, Amy Nikaitani, and Cecilia Concepcion Alvarez. For some of these artists, Gathering Ground has been a forum for their work to be exhibited on a national level.

There is an optimism and enthusiasm expressed throughout this book for women of color writers. “Writing is a way to know ourselves, to come to be strong in ourselves, and to tell the truths of our realities and visions and as women to fill in our side of the story and the world”—Jo Cochran, introduction to “We Can’t Wait to be Discovered.”

An attitude of support is conveyed by the comments of Mayumi Tsutakawa: “We need to work with women of color writers to help them gain control over skills and tools needed to become accomplished writers,” in the introduction to “I am going to talk to them about their daughters.”

There are several historical essays included, of which my favorites were “Frances E. W. Harper: Black Feminist Pioneer” by Evelyn C. White and “Pinays-Filipinas in America” by Dorothy Laigo Cordova. These articles present many little-known facts.

In the “Yellow Dress,” we meet Jannette, a young Indian woman torn with self-hatred and hopelessness as she tries to assimilate into the dominant culture with little success.

Julia Boyd’s “Something Ain’t Right Here” gives us a sharp contrast between the white women’s fight for the ERA and the Black woman’s fight for basic survival.

“Perma Red” by Debra Earling, based on a true life story of Earling’s aunt, is very powerful and done with engaging simplicity. We get to know Louise’s pain and feel for her loneliness and anger.

Editor J.T. Stewart questions, in the introduction to “In Order To Survive,” our awareness as women of color, “How can we recognize ourselves? How can we define ourselves in terms of our cultural experiences?” She gives two examples of her cultural awareness and quotes an African proverb that says “Remember, hippopotamus, as you go upstream, your home is at the mouth of the river.”

“As women of color,” Stewart says, “we are constantly moving up and down the river which has many names.  
(continued on page 19)

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE EIGHTEEN

FALL/WINTER 1985