Anti-riot women during March 8, 1984 Rally

movements and he had a hard time  
speaking. He eventually had to retire.  
My father was a very big, healthy man  
and when he got sick he became a very  
thin, frail person. It was sad. He  
didn’t live too long after that, but he  
saw the first two grandchildren.  

My mother was still working then.  
That was hard. But I was already  
working also, so I was giving money.  
I'd also spend on groceries. My sister  
lived in the house but she was already  
working, too. She taught for a year in  
Dole Company in Cotabato. My  
father didn’t like that because it was  
too far away.  

My first childbirth was a bit traumatic.  
We named her Veronica because she  
was born on a Holy Thursday. I got a  
urinary tract infection and had to stay  
in the hospital. It was hard. It was  
also very expensive. But I breastfed  
my baby for three months. We had a  
longer maternity leave then. For the  
two others, I was in good health. In  
1972 the second child was born.  

We applied for an SSS [Social Security  
Service] loan and got it. The ceiling  
was P30,000 at the time, so you net  
P27,000. This house was actually put  
up on that loan plus some savings. It  
cost us around P50,000. But it is not  
quite complete. It was only after we  
moved into the house in 1973 that we  
had cabinets made.  

We decided to build because in my  
mother’s house we all stayed in one  
room. My mother, of course, helped  
with the children, which was a relief  
for me. But yet once in a while I’d  
feel too hemmed in. If you weigh the  
advantages and disadvantages, the latter  
far outweigh the former.  

Yes, we had arguments. One thing  
she didn’t want me to do was to  
socialize, to attend gatherings. She  
wanted us to spend all our free time  
with the children. I was out at work  
eight hours a day. “You have to give  
up those things,” she advised me. You  

SPRING/SUMMER 1985  

came a route manager, he was respon-  

see, when she was an official in the  
City Schools, she gave up a lot of op-  
portunities. She was offered a scholar-  
ship at the East-West Center in Hawaii,  
but she did not accept it.  

When we moved, I missed my  
mother’s presence. She relieved my  
worry about the children’s welfare.  
She could take care of us. We had a  
yaya [nursemaid] for the children. I  
was lucky with the ones I got. The  
yaya I have now has been with us since  
the youngest child was born. She’s  
now in her late twenties. We Filipinos  
are lucky that we have our mothers,  
especially if you have small children,  
even though sometimes you want  
them off your back.  

In our new house it was difficult.  
Before payday comes, there’s little  
money left, and you still need to eat.  
Especially now it is hard because my  
husband has been retrenched.  

We realized that Pepsi would re-  
trenched, but never did I imagine my  
husband would get it! He had been  
there for 17 years. The situation is so  
bad that companies can’t help but lay  
off people, but in his case... His  
whole department, sales training, was  
cut. But they didn’t try to relocate  
him. All these years he had always  
tried to be the best. As a salesman, he  
got a lot of awards. I used to ask him,  
“Why is Pepsi so important to you?” I  
couldn’t plan weekends to take the  
children out. Once he was assigned  
out of town for three weeks, another  
time for a month to Mindanao - that  
was the time there were bombings in  
Davao. He was a salesman, then a  
route manager going out in trucks.  
But he didn’t play politics so he  
always got a promotion last. He didn’t  
go out on the town with the right guys  
- he always came home. When he be-  

men  

sible for a whole crew, so it was hard  
to plan family outings. I tell him: “All  
your sacrifices, and look what hap-  
pened.” He won a sales contest prize  

Copyright 1985 Center for Women  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

Resources, Philippines  

Copyright 1985 Center for Women Resources, Philippines  

that was a trip to Hawaii. That was  
the first time I stepped out of the  
Philippines, in 1979. In spite of his  
prizes, trophies and plaques, he was  
laid off.  

It would not be so bad if economic  
conditions were not like this. Every  
day prices go up. Like yesterday, I got  
my pay. Tomorrow is Sunday. By  
Monday there’ll be barely enough to  
pay the electric bill. There will be al-  
most two weeks more. Where is the  
money to come from? I get a head-  
ache. The children need money for  
jeepney fare. Sometimes I can’t sleep  
and have to take tranquilizers.  

The children are okay. They seem  
to adjust. We don’t have as much food  
as we used to have. I feel so bad cut-  
ting back on food. We'd always eat  
well as a family. Look at that [point-  
ing to Fidel raiding the refrigerator].  
But we’re still not doing badly. There  
are many people who go through gar-  
bage. Every now and then, poor little  
children come here to beg for rice, to  
ask for ratiles that they see in our  
backyard.  

I’m responsible for all expenses,  
large and small. When he was still  
working, Vic gave his whole paycheck  
to me, and I would hand him his al-  
lowance. Some of the husbands at  
work conceal part of their pay from  
their wives, but Vic doesn’t do that.  
I’m free to buy what I want. He  
doesn’t ask me to account for any-  
thing. Now I really can’t make any  
purchases outside food and home  
maintenance. We have no recreation  
now.  

WHAT IS YOUR VIEW OF THE  
CURRENT SITUATION?  

As much as possible, when we make  
it we join rallies. We joined the jog-  
ging every Sunday, the whole family.  
We were there every time, but it made  
(Continued to Page 15)  

Woman peasant organizer with child. October 16, 1984.  

PAGE SEVEN