oe eee a eee es

somebody. [ still like the Last Poets
albums and Gil Scott-Heron. There’s
just a lot of people whose talent I
appreciate. Like, I love Nina Simone.
She’s incredible. I love Laura Nyro’s
writing. I have a list and I sort of go
from 1 to 10 on each thing.

Q: When you are just being Nona, and
relaxing, what do you like to do?

Nona: Nothing and everything. I
throw things up in the air and I pick
out one. Whichever thing turns me on
at the moment that’s what I do. In a
way, I guess I’m lucky to be able to
live my life that way. I love tennis,
softball, skiing, ice skating. I love
sports and I seem to be very agile so I
can compete in those things. And I
like playing chess and backgammon. I
like watching late night television
when a lot of old movies are on. I like
playing the piano and guitar. I’m very
relaxed when I’m doing that. If I feel
any sense of tension or stress, I either
play the piano, play the guitar, work
on something that’s been in my head
for a long time or there’s a thing that I
do called bio-feedback. I do that and
it’s so relaxing that sometimes I don’t
realize that I’ve gone to sleep.

Q: Being a star do you find it difficult
to find true friends and lovers and to
have real, unstrained relationships?

Nona: Unstrained? No, I don’t find it
very hard at all. You see, I’m a very
selfish person and I only do what I
want to do. I spent so many years
trying to not be selfish until I decided
the hell, I may as well tell people that
I’m selfish so they'll know up front
and there’s no problem later on.
I know that I have to live in this world
with other people, so I have to
compromise sometimes but I only
compromise to the point where I’m
still satisfied with the situation. So I
have very good friends. There are not
many but they’re very good friends. I
think I have more friends than I know.
As far as lovers are concerned I have
no problem. If people love you or you
love them there shouldn’t be any
problem anyway. So I’ve kept very
good relationships with everybody I’ve
met over the years. I think there are
like 3 or 4 people I’ve known that I
could not see now and welcome them
into my heart and arms happily or
without any prejudiced feelings.

Nona: Total. I can’t exist any other
way. You see the years with Patti
Labelle and the Bluebelles were spent
being ignorant. A lot of it was naivety.
We just had no idea about the scope of
the business and how far we could go
and the amount of money that could
be made or how it was made. Now I
know. And it’s not that I want to—
check on everything. Even though I
do. And it’s not that I want to make
sure every penny comes to me. It’s
just that I want to know what I’m
spending my time and my life doing
and I want to be responsible for myself.
I don’t ever want to turn around
again and say “Wow, nobody told
me!”

Q: Have you ever been ripped off as
an artist creatively or monetarily?

Nona: I think everybody in this
business has been ripped off. Yes, I
was also because I didn’t know any
better and the people around me
didn’t know any better. But there
were people who knew better. The big
fish ate the little fish. If you know
then at least you can defend yourself.

Q: Have you found it is more difficult
for a female to make it in the
music business? A Black artist? What
obstacles have you come up against?

Nona: Yes it’s very difficult being a
Black female artist. Because this
business is geared toward the male ego.
Being a Black female doing rock makes
it even more difficult because the
color doesn’t go with the music and
the music doesn’t go with the color.
So the business doesn’t understand
what I’m doing and if they don’t
understand something, they don’t have
a tag to put on it so therefore they just
ignore it and hope it will go away.
But, I’m sort of like a thorn in its side
and I’m not going away. They’ve got
to pick me out and take a look or stick
with the pain. It’s difficult because they assume that a
woman is penetrable and vulnerable.
They greet you in the same sense.
They either say you're ultra feminine
and therefore they can say ‘well if you
sleep with me I’ll do this for you’ and
you go ‘Oh yes Mr. thank you,
thank you’ or they say well she’s not
feminine, she’s gay, or she’s not
emotional, she’s intellectual and so the
approach is guarded. That’s why I try
to do as little business as I can with
the business. I leave that to Vicki [her
manager]. I know what she does and
we discuss it and I tell her things that I
want done. But she can handle those
types of people. I cannot. They
totally destroy my soul. So I have to
stay away from them.

Q: How do you get up for a perfor-
mance?

Nona: Nerves and quiet. I need at
least an hour, an hour and a half, of
total quiet. Relaxing the body, relax-
ing the mind and just quieting myself
inside. That’s how I get up.

Q: What advice do you have for song-
writers and performing artists who are
trying to break into the business?

Nona: Learn the business if you can.
If you are a songwriter, copyright your
songs before you give them to anyone.
As an artist learn as much as you can
about your art and develop your
technique and become accomplished
on whatever ground you’re standing—
whether it’s singing or an instrument.
Those are the things that I would tell
anyone who wants to get into this
business.

Q: What personal statement do you
want to say to the world at large?
This is your soapbox space. Give us a
poem, motto, philosophy, etc.—some-
thing that keeps you keepin’ on.

Nona: It’s hard to say my philosophy.
I’m trying to think of one word that
would say it. I imagine it would be
freedom. That’s an all-important word
for me really. In everything, whether
it’s love, business, or associate relation-
ships, anything. Freedom. Just living.
If anybody wanted to really under-
stand what that word means and
where I get my philosophy from it
would involve reading Alan Watts, and
the I Ching, or Kahlil Gibran or any of
Mahatma Gandhi’s teachings.

Interviewer’s Note: Check out Nona’s
new album The Heat (RCA). It’s a
sizzler with a rhythmic heartbeat
that’s so hot, it’ll burn all six of your
senses!!!

Afua Kafi-Akua is a freelance writer, a
poet, and a musician. She is a
musician with IBIS, a women’s jazz/
funk group, which has performed
throughout the United States and
Europe. She is also the Music Editor
for Between Our Selves.

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

FALL/WINTER 1985

PAGE THIRTEEN