NETWORKING

New York City Women of Color Coalition: Kenya and Beyond (NYCWOCC), a multiracial, multilingual and multicultural organization, whose first meeting was held in January 1985, is composed of 15 grassroots activists and cultural workers. The women came together through political, artistic and social networking in the NYC women of color community. The group works collectively, envisioning itself, primarily, as a coalition effort, while individual members maintain full-time involvements in other organizations.

NYCWOCC constitutes a delegation that will participate in the United Nations Decade for Women Conference to be held this summer in Nairobi, Kenya. They will network and exchange resources with international colleagues; present a panel discussion, focusing on territorial perspectives, specifically gentrification/displacement, in relation to people of color in the United States. A workshop, initiating discussion around cross-cultural coalition building, and a cultural presentation will also be offered by NYCWOCC. On return from Kenya, NYCWOCC is committed to the sharing of skills and information gathered at the conference, through the sponsorship of political and cultural community-based events.

Historically, working class women of color have been denied access to national and international forums—traditionally, not being represented or allowed a voice in decisions involving issues integral to their lives.

Therefore, NYCWOCC is combining energies and resources to facilitate being present at the NGO forum. The group has submitted a grant proposal to more than 30 funding organizations, in an attempt to raise the necessary travel expenses for sending its delegates to Kenya.

For information, donations, and possible networking, contact:

NYCWOCC:

Box 7521

FDR Station

New York, NY 10150

by Linda Jean Brown

with thanks to Gale Jackson &

Robin Christian (delegates, along

with Linda Jean to NYCWOCC)

March 8, 1985 International Women’s Day Cultural Event Benefit for NYC Women of Color Coalition: Kenya and Beyond. Linda Jean Brown reading.

Third World Women’s Project sponsors Third World women who have worked on socioeconomic justice and women’s issues to engage in a dialogue with American groups. For info write: Third World Women’s Project, Institute of Policy Studies, 1901 Q Street, NW., Washington, DC 20009, c/o Isabel Letelier or Jill Gay.

The Lesbian Caucus of My Sister’s Place, a shelter for battered women and their children, wants to hear from the lesbian community. They are seeking ways to best serve in battering and/or abusive situations. They are asking for your input and ideas on how they can become more responsive to lesbians’ needs. All responses will be confidential. Write: My Sister’s Place, P.O. Box 29596, Wash., DC 20017, c/o WAWC.

A TWO DAY OPEN-AIR FESTIVAL OF WOMEN’S CULTURE

Edwina Lee Tyler & Piece of the World - Sweet Honey in the Rock Kim Jordan - Kate Clinton - Split Britches - Mischief Mime - Faith Petric Susan Freundlich - Moving Ster Hall Singers - Sandra Gish - Ariel Hall Ferron and more...

June 22nd and 23rd, 1985 - Wash., D.C. Tickets: In Advance - one day $16; two days $24

Info: Roadwork, Box A, 1475 Harvard St. N.W., Wash., D.C. 20009 — ph. 234-9308

The Circulo de Cultura Cubana and the Third World Women’s Archives is organizing a “Women in Literature and Journalism Group to Cuba,” June 14-23, 1985. The cost is $700 from Miami. “Full-time professionals who travel to Cuba to do research in their professional areas, whose research is specifically related to Cuba and will constitute a full work schedule in Cuba, and where there is substantial likelihood of dissemination of the product of such research” may participate on this trip. This stipulation is due to the U.S. government restriction on travel to Cuba. The activities provided by this program meet the above criteria. If you are interested, contact as soon as possible: Marazul Tours, Inc., 250 W. 57 St., Suite 1311, New York, NY 10107, (212) 582-9579, outside of NYC, 800-233-5334, Telex 220712 TRAL.

Black and White Men Together, NY, a multi-racial gay male organization committed to addressing and combating racism in the gay community has changed its name to Men of All Colors Together, NY. For info., write: MACT/NY, Box 148, Ansonia Station, New York, NY 10023.

Umoja is a lesbian mother/parent support group for Third World women raising handicapped children. Their main goal is cooperation from various communities. They encourage letters, but request a SASE, if possible. For info, write: Umoja, c/o Lou Blackdykewomon, Apt. J-3 Broad River Terr., Columbia, SC 29201.

Lahzem which means belt or rainbow, was formed in Paris in the fall of 1982. The group offers an alternative for North African Arab lesbians and gays. Write Lahzem, c/o Librairie les mots a la bouche 35, Rue Simart, 75018, Paris France.

Photo by Annette Palaez/Sisterfaces Copyright 1985

Listen, Your Mama is Talkin’ to You, an Oral History/Video Documentary project, coordinated by New York City poet Gina Rhodes, is currently seeking participants. The project is aimed at opening and sustaining communication channels between old and young. It is a response to, and a protest against the back-of-the-closet status relegated to senior citizen mothers and grandmothers. A place for them to talk as much as they want, a place for us to listen as intently as we should. The NYC based project is focused upon Black senior citizen women only. For specific information write to: Listen, Your Mama is Talkin’ to You, c/o Returning Women, Box 510, Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10021.

The National Institute for Women of Color is a formal system of affiliations for organizations, groups, task forces and committees, etc. interested in being an official part of their networking system. NIWC defines women of color as women who are Black, Hispanic, American Indian, Alaska Native, Asian American and Pacific Islander. Among their accomplishments for 1984 were the publication of the 1st issue of the Brown Papers; a presidential candidates’ forum held in Houston, Texas; and the 3rd annual National Strategies Conference in Reno, Nevada. The NIWC works toward the establishment of a communication and support network to promote the awareness of the histories, status, and current concerns of women of color. They invite interested groups to officially affiliate with the NIWC to gain access to their publications and resources. Groups need not be formal; they may be simply groups of activists who have come together to address a particular need. For more information write: National Institute of Women of Color, 1712 N Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20036: Phone 202/466-2377.

SPRING/SUMMER 1985

Between Our Selves. Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE THIRTEEN