ET a SAA Se TLL ~ i es el iets OO a aT

Filipina women

By Karin Aguilar-San Juan

The Philippines is undergoing a fem-
inist awakening. What is most exciting
about this awakening is the passion
and seriousness with which Filipina
women are beginning to articulate
their concerns as feminists.

This is not to say that, before this
day, women were only timid or fearful.
As early as the 1890s when the archi-
pelago was struggling to free itself
from Spanish colonialists, women were
actively calling for national indepen-
dence. In the first part of this century,
Filipina women began carrying out
their own suffragette campaign. In the
1960s, women started to find their
own voices as they fought against
national domination and control by
the U.S. Now, in the 80s, revolutionary
Filipina women are shaping a femi-
nist agenda that will guide them in the
movement for national liberation. It is
only now, in the 80s, that Filipina
women have been able to bear the
label “feminist” without being im-
mediately connected with the white,
middle-class radical feminists of the
U.S. Filipina women have had to
struggle with the racism and ethnocen-
trism of some of these western brands
of feminism, while they have also had
to confront the machismo of the re-
volutionary movement. Both of these
obstacles, it appears, will continue to
pose polemical issues to Filipina wo-
men.

But there will be some people who
will find it difficult to discard the
image of a Filipina woman who is sub-
missive and resigned to her fate. We
need, then, to point to the examples of
Mila Aguilar and Cynthia Nolasco, a
poet and a church worker recently de-
tained and accused of “subversion”;
Maita Gomez and Nelia Sancho, for-
mer beauty queens whose lives now re-
volve around political and feminist is-
sues; Mita Pardo de Tavera, a doctor
among the poor and fervent human
rights activist; Charito Planas, a for-
mer businesswoman and lawyer in
Manila who surrendered her upper-class

SPRING/SUMMER 1985

Copyright 1985 Center for Women Resources, Philippines

March 8, 1985 Rally for Women

privilege to exile herself to the U.S.,
where she devotes her time to educat-
ing the U.S. public about her role in
the Philippines; Maria Elena Ang,
Vilma Riopay, and Liliosa Hilao, three
women who were brutally tortured for
their political activities and, in the case
of Liliosa, viciously killed; Maria
Lorena Barros, founder of MAKI-
BAKA (a women’s organization
whose purpose, before it folded, was
to develop a feminist orientation to
counter the male-dominated revolu-
tionary movement), and a member of
the New People’s Army, the armed
wing of the Communist Party of the
Philippines. Shortly after joining the
NPA, Maria Lorena was shot and killed
by President Marcos’ military.

These women must be named, not
to make them celebrities in the chroni-
cle of popular Philippine history, but
to find in their example a testimony to
the strength and courage of all women
who persevere in this current epoch of
fermenting rebellion and spiraling
change in the Philippines.

It has not been easy to carry on the
fight. The task before both women

Manila, Philippines

and men in the country is to link na-
tional concerns to women’s issues.
The group MAKIBAKA eventually dis-
solved partly because of the ambitious-
ness of their goal: to identify four
causes of women’s oppression—political,
familial, religious, and male—and to or-
ganize the struggle around this new
theoretical framework. Groups
formed since the 1970s attempt to
narrow the feminist objective by link-
ing women’s lives in more concrete
ways to the new agenda. These in-

* clude: the Center for Women’s Re-

sources, set up to coordinate research
and to organize among peasants and
prostitutes; PILIPINA reaches out to
workers and peasants, particularly in
Mindanao, the second largest island
with a long tradition of resistance to

foreign rule; WOMEN is a writers’
workshop with a political orientation;
WOMB is the acronym for Women call-
ing for the Ouster of Marcos and a
Boycott of his fraudulent elections.
Most important but probably the least
reported are the trade unions to which
a significant portion of urban working
women belong. Although union acti-
vities are banned under Marcos, strikes

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

resisting and organizing ©

and boycotts led by union activists,
many of them women, embrace a full
range of economic and political de-
mands. They are also an important
indicator of increased militancy among
workers.

Filipina women must, therefore,
necessarily focus their energies on the
problems that beset their third world
nation: an economy twisted by the
requirements of multinational cor-
porations and the agencies for inter-
national development; a corrupt political
system marked by the paroxysms
of a desperate dictator whose life-support
machinery is fueled by the Pen-
tagon, where his once-best friends are
doubting his ability to maintain at
least a facade of political and moral
decency; and a cultural life that be-
longs more to narrow-minded tourists
and leering U.S. servicemen than to
the Filipino people themselves.

The substance of Filipino feminism
reflects a condition drastically dif-
ferent from that faced by western wo-
men. For example, more and more,
Filipina women are being tied to the
assembly lines of multinational cor-
porations. Across Asia and Latin
America as well, women are becoming
integrated into the international eco-
nomy as sources of cheap labor. In
the Free Trade Zones that serve as en-
claves for foreign-owned multina-
tionals, about 90% of the workers are
women, and a shocking proportion of
them are young, teenage girls.

This phenomenon has had a special
effect on women’s lives in the Philip-
pines, and in other third world coun-
tries, too. Developing countries like
the Philippines set up Free Trade
Zones in the 1960s as a strategy to
spur their own economic growth by
attracting foreign investment. The
Zones are supposed to benefit both
the host nations and the corporations
that invest there by opening manu-
facturing plants. Now, the presence of
the Zones, though it generates wealth
and prosperity for some, has intensi-
fied the exploitation and objectifica-
tion women were already facing.

Wages for assembly line work in
textiles, electronics, toys, and foot-
wear are a tiny fraction of what com-
parable jobs offer in the industrialized
countries. For example, in the Philip-
pines wages are so low that a woman
must work 20 minutes to earn the
price of one egg, 30 minutes to buy a
Coke, and a full 10 hours for a T-shirt.

Free time from this work merely
exacerbates the way in which women
are sexually degraded. As part of the
recreational program, companies hold
yearly “Miss Free Trade Zone” beauty
contests, bathing suit parades, and
“Guess Whose Legs These Are” shows.

Asian beauty queens are highly re-

garded for their light skin and Eurasian
features. Company management plays
into this mentality by sponsoring cos-
metics classes and, on payday, by en-
couraging women to purchase make-up
and jewelry from vendors they wel-
come to the factory.

Outside the factories, women des-
perate to supplement their meager in-
comes, are forced to sell themselves.
Their favored clients are the 15,000
U.S. servicemen stationed in the
islands. An estimated 300,000 prosti-
tutes cater to men at Subic Naval Base
and Clark Airfield alone (two largest
bases outside the continental U.S.). In
(Continued on Page 12)

PAGE FIVE