Diné in crisis  
(continued from page 3)  

one of the traditional sacred mountains  
rising out of Big Mesa, to resist reloca-  
tion. Many say they won’t move at all,  
deadline or not.  

Paul Tessler is the assistant director  
of the relocation commission which  
was formed to help implement P.L.  
93-531. He said that 591 Diné fami-  
lies have relocated voluntarily since  
1977, but that in July 1986 voluntary  
relocation will come to an end.  

“Ultimately, there will be no  
choice,” Tessler said. “At the legis-  
lated deadline, we’ll turn in a list to  
the U.S. attorney and secretary of the  
interior of those who refuse to move.”  

Tessler admitted not knowing what  
would happen then: It might be ugly,  
they might send in federal marshals,  
the Hopis might go to court, he didn’t  
know. Relocation is to be completed  
by 1993.  

“My guess is that the deadline of  
1986 will be extended,” said Tessler.  

In the meantime, horror stories a-  
bound about loan sharks and bad real  
estate deals that prey on relocatees.  
“Many have made their way back to the  
reservation, at least to Tulsa City  
which is as close as the relocation  
commission will let them get. For the  
most part, they’ve lost everything they  
had and suffer from physical and  
mental stress.  

Pauline Whitesinger, a resident of  
Big Mountain, is one of the original  
organizers of the resistance. It was as  
natural for her to stop a relocation  
commission fencing crew putting up  
barbed wire on her land as it was for  
her to protect the sheep she tends  

Photo by Maya Chumu  

from coyotes.  

“In our traditional tongue there is  
no word for relocation,” said White-  
singer. “To move away means to dis-  
appear and never be seen again.”  

At the gathering, she testified of  

her struggles with the fencing crew in  
1976. She saw that some of them  
were relatives of hers from her father’s  
clan. She said she was lonely for a-  
while because her relatives called her  
crazy for resisting the crew.  

“But there are those who thank me  
for what I did,” said Whitesinger,  
“They tell me I’ve thrown a rock in  
the water and that the waves are  
spreading throughout the lands.”  

Ray Baldwin Louis, press  
secretary for the tribe, said that relo-  
cation was not the solution.  

“As a tribe, the law has been passed,”  
said Louis, “and we’re doing every-  
thing in our power to what pertains to  
the law. Yet we understand the people  
and if someone doesn’t need to re-  
locate, they shouldn’t.”  

Whitesinger said the resistance must  
fight on the same level as the govern-  

“In our traditional tongue there is no word for  
relocation.”  

“Who are the people making the  
law?,” Whitesinger asked rhetorically.  
“Who agreed to have it tested on us?”  

The Navajo tribe is the largest in  
the U.S. The population of 163,000  
spans a million acres across Arizona  
and New Mexico. Between four and  
five thousand Navajos work for the tri-  
bal council situated at Window Rock  
or in the chapter houses around the  
reservation.  

Peter McDonald, former tribal chair,  
built a personal fortune as head of the  
Navajo tribe and chairman of the  
Council of Energy Resource Tribes.  
CERT is an intertribal business organ-  
ization serving tribes who develop  
natural resources on their land.  

ment. They will write down their laws  
and stack them on their desks, she said.  

“There are a bunch of young brats  
in Window Rock who carry out the  
orders,” she said, “and they always  
come here and act like they are our  
sons and tell us, well you have to go  
with this law, you have to accept our  
ideas.”  

In a traditional government, where  
the leaders are the elders, the tribal  
government is a foreign power. Intro-  
duction of the federal government with  
the formation of the tribal council was  
resisted in 1921. Relocation is being  
resisted today. Their lawyer Lew Gur-  
witz has represented their cause for the  
past two years.  

“Today I wonder why there is no unity. Who were  
the people to tell Washington (D.C.) that these  
people are too friendly to one another?”  

Peter McDonald, former tribal chair,  
built a personal fortune as head of the  
Navajo tribe and chairman of the Coun-  

cil of Energy Resource Tribes. CERT  
is an intertribal business organization  
serving tribes who develop natural re-  
sources on their land.  

The current chair of the tribe, Peter  
Zah, was elected on a popular vote in  
1982 because he promised to fight re-  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

“Partition was one of at least a  
dozen viable solutions to the problem  
of joint ownership,” said Gurwitz. “It  
was the only one that pushed the peo-  
ple off the land, that made the people  
leave the land and exposed it then to  
those who would develop land, to  
those who would dig for coal and ura-  
nium. The people on the land are like  
(continued on page 5)  

WINTER 1985