--Smithsonian’s first Arab-American exhibit

By Aida S. Wakil  
Copyright 1985  

The Smithsonian Institute’s ‘first  
Arab-American exhibit opened in July  
1984 at the National Museum of Amer-  
ican History, in Washington, D.C., as  
part of its “Nation of Nations Exhibit.”  

“The Exhibit isn’t a big one but it  
is the first of its kind,” said Dr. Alixa  
Naff, collector and historian of the  
exhibition, which is named The Faris  
and Yamna Naff Family Arab-Amer-  
ican Collection, after Naff’s parents.  

The exhibit includes pictures, post-  
cards, books, records; kitchen gadgets,  
knives and hatchets; tools, jewels, tex-  
tiles and clothes; letters and notes; and  
a large body of research papers and  
tapes Dr. Naff collected as part of her  
forthcoming book, Becoming Amer-  
ican: The Early Arab Immigrant Ex-  
perience, (Southern Illinois Press).  

“In 1962, I interviewed people that  
had migrated in 1892, 1895. They  
were the pioneers, because the first  
immigration began [in] 1876. It was  

“not a rush, but it gradually developed  
until about the 1890s when you have  
an exodus, given the small population  

of Mount Lebanon and Syria from  
which they came from.”  

Nearly 90 percent of the early Arab  

immigrants began as peddlers and by  

1910 were in every state of the union  
including Alaska and Canada, accord-  
ing to Alixa Naff who interviewed  
people in 16 different Arab communi-  
ties across the United States and in  
Canada. “When they [the Arabs] first  
came to this country, the Americans  
didn’t know what to call them. They  
were calling them Turks and Asians at  
first, and rightfully so since they were  
subjects of the Ottoman Empire. But  
when most of them were coming from  
Syria, they were given the classifica-  
tion as Syrian by the Immigration  
Bureau. They didn’t call themselves  
Arabs, although they knew they were  

Copyright 1984 by  

Arabs and were proud of it.”  

Alixa Naff made distinctions be-  
tween the different Arab immigration  
waves and immigrant experiences; the  
early waves before World War II and  

the later waves after 1948. “It makes  

a difference, that 1948 line and  
especially the 1967 line are very im-  
portant. You can’t generalize unless  
you have those dates. You have a  
whole different story, you have a  
whole different Arab coming over, you  
have a whole different America they  
came to, and you have a whole dif-  
ferent attitude toward Arabs.”  

The Faris and Yamna Collection  

Smithsonian Institute  

came to being out of Naff’s concern  
and desire to preserve the old artifacts  
and books that “were literally turning  
to powder” in her hands. Some of the  
artifacts date from before the turn of  
the century. When she approached the  
Smithsonian about how to preserve  
these articles, the museum showed in-  
terest in taking on the collection be-  
cause they had nothing about Arabs or  
the Middle East. This was in 1982.  
“For more reasons than just pre-  
serving them, I realized it was impor-  
tant to have them exhibited so that 25  
million tourists could see them and see  
that Arabs have been here for 100  

years; and to have them accessible to  
students and scholars so they could  
further study the situation, not just  
for Arabs, but as an example of a small  
group of immigrants in this country...”  

As a last project, Alixa Naff wants  
to “help people preserve their artifacts.  
People are cleaning out their closets  
and attics and throwing it all away. I  

want that collection at the Smithso-  

nian to increase. I want communities  
to make this their project, to give to  
the Smithsonian excuses to keep that  
exhibit out here. And I want the exhi-  
bit to travel to Houston, Cedar Rapids,  
Detroit...”  

Thandie Ranoke speaks about South Africa  

By Valerie Russell  
Copyright 1985  

“Good morning to you all. I bring  
you warm greetings from the Black  
oppressed women of South Africa,  

Thandie Ranoke  

who are denied all basic human  
rights.” With these words Thandie  

Rankoe began her talk about apartheid,  

the role of South African women, and  

U.S. involvement in the South African  

Photo by Raymina Y. Mays/8.0.S.  

government. Under the auspices of the  
Third World Women’s Project of the  

Institute for Policy Studies, Ms. Rankoe  
spoke to a small group of interested  

persons, at the Longworth House Of-  

fice Building on March 8th.  

Ms. Rankoe began by talking about  
women, “Black South African women  
are denied all basic human rights.  
That is, lack of equal pay for equal  
work...They suffer twice the instances  
of diseases as compared to men...and  
two out of every three women are illi-  
terate.” She then detailed the history  
of apartheid and the systematic segre-  
gation of the sexes that exists in South  

Africa. She stated, “Since the whites  

left only 13% of the land to the  
Blacks, women have to carry the  
burden of living on these reserves and  
looking after the children, while men  
go to the mines to work.”  

Black South African men work in  
the coal mines and steel plants where,  
“they are just used as cheap labor, and  
the white people get all their money.  
They have very little money to send to  
their women and children whom they  
are allowed to visit for one month a  

year.  

Ms. Rankoe closed her presentation  
by focusing on United States corporate  
support to the apartheid system.  

U.S. corporations supply computers,  
which keep the pass laws functioning.  
They supply motor vehicles used by  

the military and police. U.S. banks  

loan billions of dollars to the South  
African government which, “allows  
the apartheid regime to increase its  
war against the people...Without the  
U.S. support, the economy of South  
Africa would be crippled im-  
mediately,” she said.  

Regarding divestment, Ms. Rankoe  
said, “Let me say that the Black  
people of South Africa support divest-  
ment...There was a chief who came  
here to say that the Blacks are not  
interested in divestment. This is not  
right.” Blacks do not profit from the  
companies investing in South Africa,  
she said. “The Blacks do not want  
their fate to depend on foreign com-  
panies...What they want is freedom for  
themselves... They want better condi-  
tions for themselves...If people sup-  
port divestments, this expresses abhor-  
rence for apartheid. This is supporting  
the Black people of South Africa.”  

Between Our Selves. Women of Color Newspaper  

PAGE FOUR  

SPRING/SUMMER 1985