OF FICTION CORNER |

These are “The Earlene and Lossie Stories,” the be-
ginning of a series, which I hope will follow in the
tradition of Langston Hughes’ “Simple Stories,” which
were originally serialized in The Chicago Defender.
One of my uncle’s wife’s sisters-in-law is named
Lossie. All of us know somebody named Earlene.
Earlene and Lossie probably live in Harlem.

‘BARBARA SMITH

Clean Cut

“Hello.”

“Hello, Earlene. It’s me.”

“Hey girl. I’m glad you caught me. I’ve been
meaning to call you, but I got to doing first one thing
and then another and before I knew it, the week was
out.”

“No need to explain. I can’t talk long because my
block club is meeting this evening, but I just had to
tell you this one.”

Earlene got comfortable in her chair, got ready for
one of Lossie’s stories.

“Well, I was on the Two last night, coming home
pretty late cause Miss Lady had her parents over for
dinner and they were there until nearly eleven.
Needless to say I was dog-tired and real glad to find a
seat, until I noticed what was sitting across from me.”

“What was it?”

Lossie paused, savoring Earlene’s anticipation.
“Right across from where I am sitting is this man
holding a rat.”

“Beg pardon?”

“I said there was a man holding a rat.”

“I don’t believe it.”

“Believe it, sweetheart.”

“Dead or alive?”

“Oh, very much alive. The man was Black. The
rat was white with little pink eyes and a long wormy
looking tail. And obviously they were the best of
friends. The boy was letting it crawl all over his lap,
really in his crotch between his legs which was wide
open.”

“It wasn’t on a chain or nothing?”

“No way. This rat was as free to walk around that
train as I was. I was sick. And do you know nobody
else even seemed to notice except this other young
lady who was sitting by me on the same seat?”

“What did you do?”

“What could I do? Of course how I felt was
probably written all over my face. It made me feel all
shivery inside. The sister next to me nudged me and
then rolled her eyes up toward the ceiling. But all
this without a word, because I didn’t want to upset that
man in case he decided to send that rat over to me.”

“Too nasty. Don’t he think we have enough rats
up here without him adopting another one? I could
show him some rats right out here in this alley. He
loves rats so bad he ought to get a job with the health
department.”

“I know. I mean what could possess a fool to have
a rat for a pet, to spend money feeding it, and then
have the nerve to bring it on the subway?”

“Uhm, uhm, uhm.”

“Nice looking boy too. Clean cut. But that don’t
mean he had good sense.”

“Of course not. Sounds like he must have spent his
whole day trying to figure out how to mess with
people.”

“Well, I don’t know about people, Earlene, but he
sure as hell messed with me.”

“So what you think about this Black child being
crowned Miss America?”

“Say what?”

“I said, what you think about them crowning one
of our girls on t.v. Saturday night. Me and Jim were
up to nearly midnight watching the ceremony and
then they had it on the news. You haven’t seen the
newspaper?”

“I was too tired to look at it when I got back from
work. You say she’s Black?”

“Uh-huh. Real bright-skinned, but Black just the
same. Her folks live on Long Island.”

Lossie pressed her lips tight together and made a
sucking sound. “You must be kidding. I wonder
what these white folks are up to now?”

“Maybe they ain’t up to nothing, just picked the
best one for the job. Seemed like everybody was real
tickled, grinning all over themselves, kissing and
hugging her and acting just like this kind of thing
happens every day. I have to admit I went to bed
feeling kind of proud.”

“You did, Earlene?”

“Sure. How often do they choose one of us for
that kind of honor, for being beautiful? She’s going
to represent America to the whole world and you
know the runner-up is a Black girl too.”

“Somebody must have put something in those
white folks’ drinks.”

“But Lossie, ain’t you a little bit proud?”

Lossie frowned and suddenly thought about her
daughter, Angela, who wasn’t here anymore, because
when she finally left her no good husband he took it
upon himself to put three bullets through her head
cause as he explained to the white policemen, if he
couldn’t have her nobody else was either. She was a
pretty girl, too, with smooth dark skin like Lossie’s
and big, deep eyes that used to follow Lossie every-
where. Even when she was just a baby seemed like
she understood most everything that was going on.
Being pretty hadn’t saved her or nice neither. In fact
that might have been what killed her.

“No, Earlene, it don’t really make me proud. I
mean I’m happy for the girl and all, but it’ll take a lot
more than that to make me satisfied about living on
this white boy’s land. Let me break it down for you.
When I go to the supermarket tomorrow, are they
going to give me steak for my hamburger money
because she’s Miss America? Is Miss Lady that I work
for going to cut my hours, raise my pay, and stop
following me around all day whining while I’m
trying to work because some other white people say a
Black girl is Miss America? I tend to doubt it.”
(continued on page 16).

WINTER 1985