EDI

The problem with “isms”

By Jewell L. Gomez  
Copyright 1985

Across from the tenement in Bos-  
ton where I grew up there was a sec-  
ond-hand shop. This cluttered, dusty,  
intriguing corner was run by “The Jew”  
as he was called. He rarely spoke more  
than five words at a time and those in  
a mysterious accent full of open vowels  
and no periods at the end. In his old  
work clothes, he was stoop-shouldered  
and dusty like the treasures he had in  
his little shop. His pick-up truck was  
ancient as was his small black and white  
dog. They all seemed to emerge from  
a past which stretched backward into  
unwritten antiquity and then re-  
appeared in the present on that Boston  
street corner in 1958 with a puzzled,  
sooty grimness I did not understand.

My great-grandmother bought many  
of her important household items from  
“The Jew.” Still to me, at age 10, he  
was a mystical being. I was fasci-  
nated by the idea of strict social/reli-  
gious codes so the mystery of his  
Jewishness was automatically heroic. I  
thought I wanted to be one some day.  
Just as I had thought I’d like to be  
Japanese. But instead I was a Black  
Catholic in a white Catholic town. I  
didn’t have any idea what being a Jew  
really meant until much later. There  
were no other Jews in my Black neigh-  
borhood and there were few Jews in  
my schools which were inner-city poor,  
segregated by sex and class. Most Jews  
didn’t seem to belong to the same class  
as I. Those that I did know in high  
school vanished with the other white  
kids as quickly as possible when the  

late bell rang. I did not know where  
the Jews went and did not question  
their disappearance. I was certain they  
retreated to a place that was in some  
ways the same as our homes. They  
were a mysterious people as were we,  
“the Blacks.” 

When I learned about the Holocaust  
in my teens it was not in high school,  
but where I learned everything else: in  
the movies. I finally understood some  
of the mystery. I wept and wailed for  
the injustice and outrage of mass mur-  
der just as I had done over Christians  
being thrown to the Roman lions, the  
Trail of Tears, and Africans drowning  
themselves rather than endure the  
Middle Passage. Still “the Jew” re-  
mained an abstraction for me.

A few things made the picture  
clearer: I glimpsed the wrist of an old  
woman by chance on the Tremont  
Street trolley one day: a wrist with  
numbers etched crudely; but so pre-  
cise in their integers. Those numbers  
embodied not just her place in the  
stream of humanity led to slaughter  
but also indicated the thousands of  
numbers that had gone before her.  
Somehow, perhaps miraculously, per-  
haps mundanely, the counting had  
stopped before her number was called.  
She survived as a Jewish woman.

My first year in college in 1966, I  
worked as a typist at the Boston Globe,  
for the “Women’s Pages.” Ellen Good-  
man was toiling as a young reporter.  

When she was away from her desk I  
heard one of the others say caustically,  
“So where did ‘the Jew’ go this time?”  
I froze at my typewriter. A queasy  
feeling spread through my body. I  
wanted to become invisible. I wanted  
to stab the woman in her false eye-  
lashes. Someone else answered with a  
casual air, “To the cafeteria,” and the  
world went on. I kept typing and  
thought, “What the hell do they say a-  
bout me when I leave the room!” I  
was certainly the only black face on  
the premises except the cafeteria  
workers.

I wanted to tell Goodman when she  
returned what had been said. I wanted  
to warn her; to be sure she knew she  
was not safe here, anymore than I.  
She came back and sat down at her  
desk, but I said nothing. I was eighteen  
and she was white. I did not dare to  
mix in her business. I had not figured  
out how to fight all the “isms” yet.

In 1983, working on a historical re-  
search project on gay life I and another  
researcher expressed our anger that the  
project was ignoring the impact of  
black gays on the movement. Our in-  
put was considered annoying. We were  
told by a white, Jewish, gay male:  
“Who ever heard of the Harlem Renais-  
sance until you brought it up!”

In 1983 in a meeting of a gay, feminist  
group, we had just welcomed a new  
member, a Puerto Rican woman whom  
none of us knew well. We tried to set  
our next meeting date. When several  
people pointed out that the suggested  
date was Good Friday, a white woman  
who is Jewish said in feminist  
righteousness, “So who cares!” I  
cringed, our new member cringed. We  
said nothing.

In 1984, a Jewish, feminist, lesbian  
friend mentioned she was planning an  
ecumenical Seder for Passover. She  
went on and on describing the pre-  
parations and how she would share her  
cultural heritage with her sisters who  
had been alienated as well as with non-  
Jewish lesbians. She was planning a  
party around me, without me! I final-  
ly asked, “Am I invited or what?” She  
sputtered and hesitated then said, “I  
had no idea you’d be interested in  
something like this.” I said, “I’m as  
interested as the white lesbian friends  
you’re inviting.”

In 1984 I tell a black friend how I  
made a purchase at one of those nu-  
merous bargain, electronic, toy stores.  
The guy quoted one price and I said I  
could get it cheaper somewhere else.  
He then said okay and gave it to me  
for the cheaper price. She said, “You  
jewed him down!” Suddenly it was  
1966 again. I flinched. She said she  
didn’t mean anything bad by it, it was  
a compliment. I said it was not, it was  
reinforcing a stereotype. She said “So  
why be ashamed of something you do  
well?” I said I had no interest in her  
reasoning. Jews didn’t like it and that  
was good enough for me. Don’t ever  
say it again in my presence.

In 1984 I count the numbers and  
kinds of incidents I include in this  
article so that Jewish readers won’t  
think I’m anti-Semitic and black  
readers that I’m apologetic.

These are not stories about people  
who are anti-Semitic or resist. They  
are regular people with whom I grew  
up, with whom I am close. Like me  
they grew up in a society of “isms.”  
Those “isms” dictate our feelings  
about “the other” in our society. We  
have little choice about the “isms” we  
imbibe along the way as young people.  
We think that calling the guy who runs  
the laundry a “Chinaman” and the  
antique dealer “the Jew” is okay. Just  

as Jews called us die schwartzen.  
Society tells us that white people are  
the generic brand of homosapiens, all  
of them/us are sternly “the other.”

Lesbian feminist projects were the  
first to provide me with a broad range  
of contact with the “other.” For the  
first time in my life I found myself  
organizing/speaking/reading with Jews,  
Arabs, Native Americans, Puerto  
Ricans, Asians and those who are dif-  
ferently abled.

I soon saw that all the “isms” were  
replicated in this movement in exact  
proportion to their existence in larger  
society. The so-called “special rela-  
tionship” between Blacks and Jews  
only makes the situation more volatile.  
That we both have been the object of  
“genocidal policies, and social discrimi-  
nation does not automatically give us  
insight into each other. While we  
both speak the language of oppression  
it is not always the same dialect.

In 1980, my lover, white and Jewish,  
did not understand my outrage when  
she told me her friend, a white woman,  
had decided to cut off the nappy hair  
of her black, adopted daughter, rather  
than learn to deal with it. My lover  
understood oppression and discrimi-  
nation but as a white-skinned woman  
with the approved hair texture, she’d  
never thought about the years of insi-  
dious assault black women face daily.  
Books, newspapers, magazines, movies,  
plays, television programs and adver-  
tisements insist that our skin, mouth,  
body and hair are all wrong and can  
only be right if they can be made  
white.

There are two approaches to learning  
each other’s language. First I must  
continually confront my Jewish friends  
and co-workers and insist that they  
look at me as an individual, not as an  
oppressed group whose struggle Jews  
have traditionally supported. I try to  
remind these women that Blacks make  
anti-Semitic remarks in no greater pro-  
portion than whites and that slavery  
(no more than the Holocaust) did not  
turn us all into civil libertarians de-  
void of insecurity and ignorance.

At the same time I try to strip away  
the complex layers through which I  
view other groups. This is as painful  
to me as confrontation of women I re-  
spect.

Ironically, much anti-Semitism often  
condemns Jews for having “too much”  
of some quality this society values,  
the ability to accumulate wealth; or  
pursue education. I know that survival  
mechanisms frequently give birth to  
stereotypical images: the ability/need  
to laugh under impossible conditions  
makes all Blacks grinning fools. Close  
examination always reveals a reality to  
dispel the myths. There are few Jews in  
the Fortune 500 and very few head  
major education institutions in this  
country.

In sorting out which language of  
oppression we're using, I have no  
interest in buying into the ranking of  
oppressions: Jews lost so many in  
WWII, Blacks lost so many between  
1790 and 1850. That numbers game is  
the product of the thinking of the  
same people who inflict these losses  
upon us. While some women’s organi-  
zations have fallen prey to the idea of  
single issue politics as a way of life,  
many lesbian feminist groups have  
begun to ask the hard questions: What  
do we have to give up in order to work  
together? Where are the Black Jews in  
these debates?

On her death bed Gertrude Stein  
said to Alice B. Toklas, “What is the  
answer?” When Alice said nothing,  
Gertrude said, “In that case, what is  
the question?” There are many of  
them which we must ask rigorously.  
What have you done for anyone out-  
side yourself? When did you last ack-  
nowledge that you don’t know every-  
thing? How much refuge do you take  
in sameness? When was the last time  
you broke down some idea you be-  
lieved in? We cling to the “isms”  
which infect us because they seem to  
provide an easy answer to our own and  
society’s discomforts. Ultimately in  
our life, our work, our politics it is  
really the questions that we ask our-  
selves that make the difference. It is  
our intent to poke and probe until the  
walls come down that is important. It  
was Malcolm X who said, “If you’re  
not part of the solution, you're part of  
the problem.”

Jewell Gomez writes literary criticism  
for the Village Voice, Wellesley  
Women’s Review of Books, and Hur-  
ricane Alice.

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

SPRING/SUMMER 1985

PAGE THREE