Freedom

By Nellie Wong  
Copyright 1981  

At a party for Hisaye Yamamoto Desoto, I tell her I am getting a divorce.  
“Oh, no!” is her reply. I read sorrow in her gentle eyes, continue my  
conversation and give her my new address. She does not question me,  
but I tell her that I am changing, thinking: even divorce is movement.  

Saturday afternoon Greg and I go to KFRC to be interviewed for Dupont  
Guy. We talk about Asian Pacific American Heritage Week, the festival  

at the Oakland Museum, how politics are entwined with culture and art.  
Literature from The Committee to Free Chol Soo Lee and Reparations for the  
Japanese will appear alongside Chinese lion dancers, Ehulani’s Hawaiian  
Dance Troupe.  

When Merle and Karen aren’t free for lunch because they’re going to a  
meeting for the National Gay Conference, I find myself eating Szechuan  
noodles at Hon’s Wun Tun House of California. How necessary for me to taste  
the warm broth, dip my noodles into the chili pepper sauce, listen to  
conversations in Cantonese.  

Returning to Oakland, I put a quarter into a parking meter. I wander into  

A Woman’s Place Bookstore, find Passion by June Jordan, read a leaflet  

about women’s music companies no longer willing to pay the bookstore for its  
work in ticket sales. I talk to Keiko, tell her I have moved and next,  

I will circle to Kenwyn Road to housesit for my brother.  

In the spring rain freedom engulfs me like a baby blanket. I try  
to decide whether I should go to the Walk for Life, a vigil for  
Atlanta’s Black children. Keiko invites me to go with her when  
the store closes. I hesitate, saying I don’t know where I’ll be  

by six o’clock. I buy postcards of Frida Kahlo and Billie Holiday  
signing autographs for her fans.  

At Annie’s home on Morrill Court I surround myself with my aloneness.  
I drink Calistoga water as if I’m stranded in a desert. I read bits  

of newspaper articles and try to work on poems. Concentration  
abandons me like an unwanted child. I read the poems of June Jordan,  
my spirit lifts for the afternoon.  

I make excuses. I don’t wish to go to Mosswood Park by myself.  

It will be dangerous, I prophesy, wanting to hide like a skeleton  

in a closet. I glance at the green ribbon on top of my flower-carved  
wooden box. I finger the green ribbon, pin it on the lapel of my raincoat.  
With this movement I drive off to Mosswood Park.  

Umbrellas parade in a sea of flickering candlelight. A voice from the  
stage sings out: “We are all God’s children. Only God has the power  
that we human beings don’t have.” I disagree in silence. Grief and hope  
are lined in the faces of the crowd. I am an Asian woman moved to tears  
by the turnout, realizing the Civil Rights Movement is not yet over.  

On stage a coffin reminds me why I am here. Trees sway against the  

black sky as voices chant: “Save the Children Right Now! Save the Children  
Right Now!” Mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers gather to mourn, to  
walk for life. A newspaper clipping is thrust into my hands. Pictures  

of the dead children shine in the rain.  

I forget my afternoon of restlessness, my desire to read in bed  

or watch the evening news. I move closer to the stage, raise  

my umbrella higher to keep it from getting burned.  

Candlelight reflects the beauty of the people. A boy lights  

his burnt-out candle, smiles at me as if I’m sister. Men shout  

that they can’t hear the speakers. Women dance. The crowd surges forward.  
Carter Gilmore tells us he is opening up his home to house Atlanta’s  

Black children. He pleads for the crowd to open up its homes while  

an artist sells T-shirts to donate money to the children’s summer camp  

fund. A voice shouts that infant mortality is a giant in East Oakland.  

I cannot find Meryl or Manny or Anne. I am getting used to standing  
in the crowd alone. I want to touch the faces of the crowd, hold a  
child’s hands. Affirmations for the Black family and “Where is Mayor  
Wilson?” intermingle with chants to find the killer of the children,  

to end poverty and hopelessness in the ghettos.  

When my back feels tired, I climb on stage and cross the wet grass  

to MacArthur Boulevard. With my umbrella I am unafraid to walk back  
alone to my car. As I drive up Broadway, “Wendy’s Hamburgers” flash  
across my eyes. My stomach gurgles, true to its predictable hunger.  

I stop and get in line, recognize people from the Atlanta children’s vigil.  

In my room I snuggle in bed with my hamburger and French fries. I drink  
Calistoga. As I eat, I recall how Saturday nights were supposed to be  

date nights, the shame I felt watching T.V. at home with my mother,  

the illusion of security in my twelve-year marriage.  

When people say they’re sorry about my divorce, I no longer weep.  
Grief is a detective in plain clothes. I go where my heart beats,  

begin again to affirm my own life: I alone cannot prevent the death  

of another Black child, the rape of a woman, the profit-hunger sweeping  
against the people across the United States. But I can write, I can  
march, and I can sing. I can understand Birdie’s lines in “The Little  
Foxes” that she has never known one single day of happiness.  

Outside on the sundeck Annie’s clean shirts flutter beneath the  
apple blossoms. Annie calls it her applesauce tree because the apples  
are not good for eating fresh. The sun begins to set. I walk into  
the kitchen. On the kitchen table sits Karen’s and Merle’s gift of  

a crystal dinner bell. I pick it up and let it ring.  

POETRY CORNER  

Enter the Mirror  

By Nellie Wong  
Copyright 1985  

I have no children. The other night I dreamt I gave birth to an insect.  

What terrified me even more was the insect was sucking up a glob of  

pink goo. Was it a strawberry milkshake? And did it ooze from my vagina?  
This is not a metamorphosis. This is a dream and I am perplexed now, at age  
44, why the process of birthing seeps up through the subconscious at night  
when the moon should be napping.  

In another dream, on another night, a woman rose before me. She was dressed  
in a cheong sam of white brocade. White orchids spilled from the seams of  
her dress, cascading over her mandarin collar, framing her face in an avalanche  
of snow. However, she was still my friend even with her false eyelashes, thick  
as wooly worms on the edge of sleep. The only thing that didn’t change -- from  
real life, that is -- was her long, long hair; black and silver as rain in a  

late-night movie.  

I have no children. I am rushing to complete tasks, chores, adventures, before  
I die. I am not afraid of death, of dying. I do not separate the joy of  

typing from the necessity of walking, the euphoria of plotting from the attract-  
ion of fighting back. To win. I want to write stories, poems, plays, to write  
and write and stand by them, tall, no twins or copies, but firsts, until my last  
breath.  

In my bathroom I make up songs. I watch the movements in the three-way mirror,  
my feet cool as icicles on the cobalt-blue tile. I enter the mirror and other  

selves emerge from arms that fling, a cabaret chanteuse, from a mouth that  
blossoms, not in a trance, but in rhythm with my pounding heart.  

When I was young, I wanted to dance. I wanted to foxtrot with Fred Astaire,  
tap dance with Gene Kelly, tango with Tony Wing, swing with Cyd Charisse, and  
even then I was dancing, dancing toward death. Is death an obsession, an occu-  
pation? Or is it life, is it every waking moment when the spark titillates the  
grain and the premises, conflicts, and characters blink themselves from eye-  
flashes, from dreams and desire to be a chameleon, yet human, and yet be free?  
Once I said to my youngest sister that we were dying the moment we were born.  
“How morbid,” she responded and I laughed.  

I have no children. I am a tutor. Linda is 13 and reads at the third grade  

level, fifth month. Linda won’t show me the dances she knows, but she likes  

to dance as much as she likes to roller skate. Linda lost her personal dictionary  
which she was filling with new words: energy, hippopotamus, illusion, rainfall,  
desolation, adventure. She also lost her No. 2 pencils inscribed with “Eagle  
Mirado” which I stole from work. Linda will read. She will like to read by the  
end of spring. I will see to it. I will plot a story of brother “Q” and sister  

“U”, convince her of their golden links, of the magic of images more magnificent  
than all of the gumballs enclosed in an antique machine.  

I have no children, but the doorsteps, the light streaming through the transom...  
will tomorrow be concrete if I work and wait to jog around Lake Merritt and let  
the wind carry me, extinct and fleet as a pterodactyl? And just now my boss  
puts up a poster on my file cabinet. In the poster an alligator is sneaking up.  
The alligator is actually tip-toeing in the grass, behind a great white hunter  

who is lost in his binoculars. The words on the poster leap at me in fire-  
cracker red: “Mistakes usually happen when we’re not paying attention. Let’s  
concentrate.”  

And when Dick from Portland Sales calls inquiring about Arnold Mfg., he says,  
“Arnold Mfg. in San Francisco.” But my boss insists that Dick was inquiring  
about Mr. Arnold of Morgan Mfg. I don’t tell my boss that I suspect my brains  
are scissors.  

And two weeks ago when I took a message from a customer in Honolulu, I told  
my boss to call Mr. Arthur Oka, Who? Mr. Arthur Oka. That’s what the voice  
from the island said. Waves crashed in my ears. My secretarial voice was  

firm. I can be a mule or I can be a tiger. Now when Mr. Asaoka calls, I am  
friendly, I address him by his first name. I chat about the unusual February  
heat, the coming summer fog, but I don’t tell him that I am a poet. I don’t  
even tell him about my dreams.  

Nellie Wong. Born and raised in Oakland, California, Nellie Wong is a long-time  
clerical worker. She’s a member of Radical Women, the Freedom Socialist  
Party, and the clericals union at the University of California, San Francisco,  
AFSCME 3218.  

Her Poems, Dreams in Harrison Railroad Park, was published in 1977 by  
Kelsey Street Press. Her second collection will be forthcoming in 1986 from  
West End Press, titled The Death of Long Steam Lady. Wong’s work has  
appeared in numerous anthologies and journals including This Bridge Called  
My Back, Echoes from Gold Mountain, 13th Moon, Conditions, Real Fiction,  
Working Classics, Ikon 4, The Women Writers Calendar 1984, among others.  

Wong is co-featured with Mitsuye Yamada in the documentary film,  
“Mitsuye and Nellie, Asian American Poets,” produced by Allie Light  
and Irving Saraf.  

Wong has spoken at many feminist and people of color conferences  
including The National Women’s Studies Association and Third  
World Women and Feminist Perspectives. She just returned from  
teaching in Women’s Studies at the University of Minnesota  

in Minneapolis.  

~ FALL/WINTER 1985  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

PAGE FIFTEEN