: CONFERENCE :

“Toward an Integrated Arab Women’s Movement:
Obstacles and Prospects”—
a Symposium

By Aida S. Wakil :
Copyright 1985

On March 8-9, 1985, at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., the Arab Women’s Support Group of Washington, D.C. sponsored the two-day symposium, “Toward an Integrated Arab Women’s Movement: Obstacles and Prospects.” The first day included presentations on the topic:

“Arab Women’s Organizations in the U.S.: Problems and Prospects.” This session included presentations by Azizah Al-Hibri, Arab-American feminist scholar and activist; Helen Samhan-Hattab of Feminist Arab-American Network (F.A.N.); Najat Khalil of Arab Women’s Council; Alia Orsoghli of Women for Women in Lebanon; and Rima Sabban of Arab Women’s Support Group of Washington, D.C.

The second day, the symposium focused on the Arab women’s movement in the Arab world with a variety of presentations describing the situation of women in Lebanon, Palestine, Libya, Algeria, the Arab Emirates, Egypt, and Tunisia.

For further information write: Arab Women’s Support Group of Washington, D.C., c/o Rima Sabban, 1800 N. Oak St. No. 6, Arlington, VA 22209.

Arab-American women organizing

“Women for Women in Lebanon” was formed in October 1982 after the Sabra and Shatilla massacres because the women [in the Boston Arab community] felt the needs of Palestinian and Lebanese women ‘back home’ were not adequately being addressed,” explained Alia Orsoghli, one of the participants on the panel, “Arab Women’s Organizations in the U.S.: Problems and Perspectives.”

Alia Orsoghli, a member of the Boston-based group, further described the situation for women in occupied South Lebanon. “With the majority of the young male population either dead, in prison, or in exile,” she said, “poor Palestinian and Lebanese women are left with the mammoth task of providing for their families’ basic needs: food, security, shelter, clothing, and medical care.” Alia explained that the work of Women for Women in Lebanon is not that of charity and dependence, but rather, aiding Lebanese and Palestinian women under occupation achieve economic independence so that “our sisters, mothers, friends, and daughters are a step closer to becoming full participants in their social, political, and economic life.” The money, most of which is raised by selling the sewn goods made in women-organized workshops in Lebanon and the Occupied Territories; and by showing the video, Beirut on a Clear Day You Can See Peace, co-produced by Grassroots International and Women for Women in Lebanon, goes directly to women in Lebanon.

“If we were sending money to the Sabra and Shatilla camp we had women who were in our group who could call their family to see if the money got there,” Alia noted.

Women for Women in Lebanon’s work is also focused on organizing Arab women in the Boston area. Alia explained that many Arab women who were used to moving about “back home” because they could depend on other extended family, would come to Boston and quickly find themselves isolated. Women for Women works to help these women overcome this isolation by developing a network of Arab, Arab-American, and American women throughout Boston. “Our inclination was that we wanted to empower these women in the community by letting them know we cared.”

Women for Women in Lebanon publishes the newsletter, Our Voice/Sautuna, a news and information publication.

For further information: Women for Women in Lebanon, P.O. Box 9, Cambridge, MA 02140.

ON
Azizah Al-Hibri: Arab-American feminist ©

Aida Wakil of Between Our Selves interviewed Azizah Al-Hibri, Arab-American feminist and activist, at the International Women’s Day Symposium - “Toward An Integrated Arab Women’s Movement: Obstacles and Prospects” which was held at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., March 8-9, 1985. The Symposium was sponsored by the Arab Women Support Group of Washington, D.C.

We had just seen the video “Beirut: On a Clear Day You Can See Peace,” produced by Grassroots International and Women for Women in Lebanon of Boston, MA.

A: You're upset.

AZ: Yes, I’m quite upset. This is the first time I have seen a movie about my country and actually my hometown, Beirut, being bombed. I saw areas I recognized and I saw how families have been impoverished and how many members have been killed - the majority of members of the families have been killed - and I am trying to hold back from crying.

A: I was very moved too.

AZ: Let me tell you something. In light of that, it makes it very important that we Arab women and American Arab women have gotten together in this conference today and yesterday. Despite all our attempts, us Arab American women are, in a way, one step removed from what’s happening back home. We have our sisters, the Arab women, constantly reminding us of the horrible situation back home; not only in Lebanon but the tragedy that is constantly hitting the Palestinian. So we see how some families have not just lost a lot of members but have moved three, four, and five times in a lifetime, which is a whole lot. I don’t know if you noticed that the old women (as shown in Clear Day) who have nowhere to go are relying on younger women who they have never known before to take care of them. Children who have nothing to play with except each other - it is wonderful, in a way, that they do have each other to play with - but some of them have lost legs, have lost parents, sisters, and brothers. And all of this destruction distorts the society. We have the Arab women in this country to keep reminding us of this tragedy and of our priorities.

When we talk of the women’s movement in the U.S. and priorities and Third World women’s perspectives, it becomes very real that our issues are issues of survival. To be speaking of traditional white middle-class women’s issues is just not good for us at all and if we start talking like that, we will be alienated and divided from our sisters back home and some of our sisters here, too. So the kind of choices we are making are made by the very necessity of making them, by our conditions back home and here in the U.S., especially when we are treated sometimes in the women’s movement in ways that are not equal, that reflect inequality in terms of seeing our problems and appreciating them as real problems. In particular, people clam up when we start talking about Lebanon and Palestine. They think they are getting into sensitive areas that might be divisive for the women’s movement and so on. In one way I can appreciate to some extent these kinds of concerns, but we have to be honest and we have to face the issues and we have to take the positions and gather facts, and these things shouldn’t divide us as women. It should bring us together because if a solution will ever come out it has to come out in a way that is based on true understanding and true love and cooperation among women. Therefore I think the women’s movement has been remiss in opening the discussion wide open on these issues so that we can settle many of them and form a united front that we can all identify with.

A: When was the last time you were in Beirut?

AZ: After the Copenhagen Conference which was in 1980. For two years after that, I was teaching and then I started going to law school. The summer before I started law school, Beirut was being bombed. I had just moved into Philadelphia, I had no friends, nobody. I was sitting home the whole summer watching my city getting bombed. My family was there. I knew they had no water, no food. It was a terrible experience for me. And ever since the bombing I did not have the urge to go see Beirut destroyed. I am now reaching the point where I have to go home and see my family. I am really scared of the impact of seeing all these buildings after all these years and seeing the people in a way that I haven’t seen before. It is going to be quite an experience.

(Continued to Page 18)

PAGE NINE