CONFERENCES |

Black Women Rising Together Conference

From March 15-17, 1985, 200 Black
women gathered at the Medgar Evers
College to forge unity among Black
women and to consolidate this unity
in preparation for the United Nations

Decade for Women Conference to be
held July 1985 in Nairobi, Kenya.
The conference was sponsored by the
Medgar Evers College Center for
Women’s Development, Brooklyn, NY.

For the Heritage Foundation report:
The Heritage Foundation, 214 Mas-
sachusetts Ave. N.E., Washington, DC
20002.

For ICAW information write:
Box 8686, Washington, DC 20001

P.O.

Audre Lorde: I am your sister - Black women
organizing across sexualities

Whenever I come to Medgar Evers
College I always feel a thrill of antici-
pation and delight because it feels like
coming home, like talking to family,
having a chance to speak about things
that are very important to me with
people who matter the most. And this
is particularly true whenever I talk at
the Women’s Center. But, as with all
families, we sometimes find it difficult
to deal constructively with the genuine
differences between us, or recognize
that unity does not require that we be
identical to each other. Black women
are not one great vat of homogenized
chocolate milk. We have many dif-
ferent faces, and we do not have to be—

Photo by Salimah Ali

come each other in order to work to-
gether.

Loretta Ross addressed the
need for Black and other women of
color to be prepared for the United
Nations Decade for Women Conference
to be held July 1985 in
Nairobi, Kenya. The following is an
excerpt of her presentation.

In 1985 we're coming together in
Nairobi, Kenya to conclude the World
Decade for Women. At that con-
ference, we’re going to assess our pro-
gress during this ten-year period, we're
going to assess the success of imple-
menting the goals of the world plan of
action of following the strategies of
the program of action. We’re going to

talk about new strategies that have
come up in the last five years. . .we’re
going to spend a considerable amount
of time. . talking about forward look-
ing strategies.

What are we going to do when this
decade is over? Is that going to be it?

It is not easy for me to speak here
with you as a Black Lesbian Feminist
recognizing that some of the ways in
which I identify myself make it diffi-
cult for you to hear me. But meeting
across difference always requires mu-
tual stretching, and until you can hear
me as a Black Lesbian Feminist, our
strengths will not be truly available to
each other as Black women.

Because I feel it is urgent that we
not waste each other’s resources, that
we recognize each sister on her own
terms so that we may better work to-
gether toward our mutual survival, I
speak here about heterosexism and
homophobia, two grave barriers to
organizing among Black women. And
so that we have a common language
between us, I would like to define
some of the terms I use. HETERO—

SEXISM - A belief in the inherent
superiority of one form of loving over
all others and thereby the right to
dominance. HOMOPHOBIA - A terror
surrounding feelings of love for mem-
bers of the same sex and thereby a
hatred of those feelings in others.

In the 1960s, when liberal white
people decided that they didn’t want
to appear racist, they wore dashikis,
and danced Black, and ate Black, and
even married Black, but they did not
want to feel Black or think Black, so
they never even questioned the
textures of their daily living (why
should flesh-colored bandaids always
be pink) and then they always

wondered “why are those Black folks
always taking offense so easily at the
least little thing? Some of our best
friends are Black...”

Well, it is not necessary for some of
your best friends to be lesbian,
although some of them probably are,
no doubt. But it is necessary for you
to stop oppressing me through false
judgment. I do not want you to ig-
nore my identity, nor do I want you
to make it an insurmountable barrier
between our sharing of strengths.

When I say I am a Black Feminist, I
mean I recognize that my power, as
well as my primary oppressions come
as a result of my Blackness as well as
my womanhood, and therefore my
struggles on both these fronts are insep-
arable.

When I say I am a Black Lesbian, I
mean I am a woman whose primary
focus of loving, physical as well as
emotional, is directed to women. It
does not mean I hate men. Far from
it. The harshest attacks I have ever
heard against Black men come from
those women who are intimately
bound to them and cannot free them-
selves from a subservient and silent
position. I would never presume to
speak about Black men the way I have
heard some of my straight sisters talk
about the men they are attached to. 
And of course that concerns me, be-
cause it reflects a situation of non-
communication in the heterosexual
Black community that is far more
truly threatening than the existence of
Black lesbians.

What does this have to do with
Black women organizing?

I have heard it said — usually behind
my back — that Black lesbians are not
normal. But what is normal in this de-
ranged society by which we are all
trapped? I remember, and so do many
of you, when being Black was con-
sidered NOT NORMAL, and they
talked about us in whispers, tried to
paint us, lynch us, bleach us, ignore us,
pretend we did not exist. We called
that racism.

I have heard it said that Black les-
bians are a threat to the Black family.
But when 50% of children born to
Black women are born out of wedlock,
and 30% of all Black families are
headed by women without husbands,
we need to broaden and redefine what
we mean by family.

I have heard it said that Black
lesbians will mean the death of the
race. Yet Black lesbians bear children
in exactly the same way other women
bear children, and a lesbian household
is simply another kind of family. Ask
my son and daughter.

The terror of Black lesbians is buried
in that deep inner place where we have
been taught to fear all difference to
kill it or ignore it. Be assured; loving
women is not a communicable disease.
You don’t catch it like the common
cold. Yet the one accusation that
seems to render even the most vocal
(Continued on Page 19)

oss: Black women prepare for Kenya

for women? Are we going to press for
anything else? Are we going to make
arrangements to meet again on a global
basis? Or is it time to now go back
and spend the next ten or fifteen years
meeting together on a regional basis
and planning another conference some-
time in the future? Rumors are that
one of the proposals for forward look-
ing strategies will be to have the next
world conference in the year 2000.
It’s very important that if we are con-

cerned as women of African descent
that this decade doesn’t pass us by...
doesn’t conclude without us figuring
out a way to continue the progress
that we’ve worked on for the last ten
years. The whole thing is going to be
like them having a party in our back
yard and not inviting us to attend. It
is very important that as many women
of color, particularly Black women,
get involved in the preparations for the
Nairobi conference... as many people
as possible, who are not attending, be
supportive of the sisters who are going.

The U.S. government from the be-
ginning has condemned the world con-
ference for women, calling them politi-
cal failures, accusing them of being too
politicized, condemning the women of
color who have come forward and lit-
erally dominated these world con-
ferences by putting their issues out
there on the floor demanding that the
World U.N. Assembly address these
problems... And these strategies and
these demands were successful... Wo-
men of color succeeded in bringing world
attention to their problems, to their
affairs, to their concerns. They suc-
ceeded in doing so in a way that made
Western feminist women who
attempted to limit the definition of
women’s issues... issues like the Pale-
stinians, apartheid, and female slavery,
and loss of reproductive control, hous-
ing, economics... issues that are im-
portant to women of color. Any at-
tempt to link struggles of oppressed
peoples together was seen by Western
feminists as being a divisive tactic,
and in a way they were reinforcing the
position of the U.S. government.

It is very important that we under-
stand that the response of the U.S.
government [see the Heritage Foun-
dation report, “A U.S. Policy for the
U.N. Conference on Women,” Feb. 25,
1985] outlines what the U.S. feels
about this conference and what it is
going to do to try to undermine this
world conference. I am going to read
excerpts from [The Heritage Founda-
tion report].

“Women’s issues [at the Interna-
tional Women’s Conference in Mexico
in 1975] were straddled with extra-
neous and unacceptable political state-
ments, like ‘international cooperation
and peace requires the achievement of
national liberation and independence.
The elimination of colonialism, neo-
colonialism, foreign occupation,
Zionism, apartheid, racial discrimina-
tion in all its forms and the recogni-
tion of the dignity of peoples to the
rights of self-determination [Resolu-
tion 32].” The U.S. government
finds this statement very offensive.
The declaration of Mexico, [said the
Heritage report] “Singled out Pales-
tinian and Arab women for special at-
tention, appealing to women around
the world ‘to proclaim their solidarity
with... Palestinian women’ and to give
“moral and material support in their
(Continued on Page 18)

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

PAGE EIGHT

SPRING/SUMMER 1985