Asian Lesbians of the East Coast:  
Breathing Fire of Resistance  

In Dedication To A.L.O.E.C  
I am a woman who breathes fire. . .  
A proud Asian.  
A proud Lesbian.  
A proud woman. . .who breathes fire.  

I am a proud Asian Lesbian who speaks out against  

every tyrant who wishes to silence me.  

I am a volcano woman. :  

I spread the fire of resistance.  

I am a woman who denies herself nothing.  

A woman who wears the red beret of the streets.  

A woman who will kick your ass.  
A woman with unbound feet.  

A woman who sees all  

A woman unchained.  

I am a woman who breathes fire. . .  

I am not a Suzy Wong centerfold for Playboy or +  

an Oriental dish. . .  

I am not the woman in the mail-order bride classifieds.  

Wanted: Young, Submissive, Filipino virgin  
desired by the white man.  

I am a woman who breathes fire!  

I am a woman to smash the myth!  

I am an Asian Lesbian of the East Coast, of the world,  

of the Universe!  
~-Chea Villanueva  

By Katherine Ekau Amoy Hall  

Asian Lesbians of the East Coast  
began organizing in August, 1983 out  
of our individual need to break our  
isolation from one another. When I  
came out in 1969 there were only  
white dyke organizations to relate to  
like Daughters of Bilitis. If you saw  
another Asian in a lesbian bar, you and  
she would usually shy away from  
one another.  

Racism has been our lot as Asians  
in white “amelika” and silence and  
invisibility our herstory as women, and  
seeing one another in the bars, a public  

place no less, made us feel ashamed.  
We wanted to mix and not draw atten-  
tion to our differences. There are still  
many Asian lesbians who feel this way  
today.  

ALOEC (Asian Lesbians of the East  

Coast) has formulated alternatives to  
the bar scene. As an organization I  
founded upon “autonomy is empower-  
ment” (defining ourselves as we have  
actually experienced our lives and  
unearthing our culture and herstory  
that has been kept buried by a racist,  
homophobic, sexist society), we have:  
generated vehicles/spaces for us to  
“meet socially, politically and culturally.  
We are made up of many different  
Asian cultures, i.e., Chinese, Hawaiian,  
Korean, Cambodian, Filipina, Vietna-  
mese, Burmese, Japanese, and mixed  
“hapas” like myself Irish, Hawaiian  
and Chinese. .  

We find power by being within the  
context of our own people/sisters/  
friends. It has been difficult for many  
of us to be visible for the same reasons  
that lesbians have had to be closeted  
throughout herstory. Loss of job and  
family disapproval are common reasons,  
but being Asian involves another  
dynamic. Some of our members are  
immigrants and fear deportation. The  
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service defines gay/lesbian as “deviant  
behavior” and can deport persons des-  
pite visa status on this charge alone.  
The immigration laws affecting lesbians  
is a research project we are working  
on and plan to develop as a workshop.  

ALOEC’s task for 1985 will be bridg-  

PAGE SIX  

By Bonnie of Women Free Women  

ing the gaps between our closeted Asian  
sisters, straight Asian women and the  

Asian community in NYC. There  

is no place like home “to combat  
racism, sexism, classism, all the “isms”.  
Organizations such as Asian Women  
United who have been struggling for  
the last eight years and Organization  
of Asian Women who are also active  
on the front are Asian women’s groups  
we are presently working in coalition  
with against the sex trafficking of Asian  
women here in the United States (i.e.  
Filipina mail-order brides). :  
The publishing of our bi-annual  
newsletter which contains articles,  
graphics, photos, reviews, poetry, etc.  
by and about Asian lesbians has given  
us a voice and vehicle for organizing,  
communicating and educating. Net-  
working as always is an important  

activity.  
with Asian lesbians from as far as  
Kenya, Africa to as close as San  
Francisco or Manhattan. By using our  
art as a vehicle to motivate others into  
joining us in the struggle we have been  
able to put on productions such as our  
recent December 8th event, “A  
Gathering of Women of Color.” We  

were Asian, Black, Latina, Native  

American, sharing ourselves through  
our culture, song, dance, music,  
drama, and lots of laughter with  
women of all colors that evening:  
Kitchen Table: Women of Color  
Press and Asian Lesbians of the East  
Coast on December 11th co-sponsored  
a book party held at Basement Work-  
shop in Chinatown for a comrade as  
precious as a rice seedling by Mila D.  
Aguilar, one of many Filipina writers  

Inquiry Demanded  

WASHINGTON, D.C. - On October  
25, 1984 Dessima Williams, executive  
director of the Grenada Foundation  
and former Ambassador of Grenada to  
the Organization of American States  
(OAS), was arrested and charged with  
being an “illegal alien” in the U.S.  

On the eve of her arrest Ms. Williams  
was the featured speaker at Howard  
University paying tribute to the late  
Prime Minister of Grenada, Maurice  
Bishop, as part of a series of activities  

protesting the continuing military oc-  

cupation of Grenada and marking the  
anniversary of the U.S.-led invasion  
in 1983. During the program and at a  
press conference held earlier in New  
York City, Ms. Williams reiterated her  
call that all foreign troops be immedi-  
ately withdrawn from Grenada and  
that national sovereignty for her coun-  
try be respected in keeping with the  
United Nations’ resolutions.  

While standing outside with friends,  

at the conclusion of the program, two  
men, later identified themselves as  
Immigration and Naturalization Ser-  

vice (INS) agents, worked their way  
through the crowd and told Ms. Wil-  
liams she was under arrest and directed  
her to accompany them. At no point  
did they clearly identify themselves or  
explain the reasons for the arrest as re-  
quired by law.  

Ms. Williams was forced into an un-  
marked car while her requests for  
some explanation were ignored by the  
INS agents. She was taken to the Fair-  
fax County jail in Virginia, where she  
was denied an opportunity to contact  
her attorney or friends for several  
hours. Ms. Williams was held in jail  
overnight pending a hearing before an  
immigration judge.  

After a hearing accompanied by a  
protest outside the INS office, and  
testimonies made by activists, Jose-  
phine Butler and Jacqueline Jackson,  
Dessima Williams was released on her  
own recognizance on a $1,000 cash  
bond and ordered to appear in Immi-  
gration Court on November 27, 1984  
to show cause why she should not be  
deported. That hearing has been  
rescheduled to April 1985.  

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper  

We are in communication  

Former Ambassador arrested —  

fighting against the U.S. backed  
Marcos dictatorship in the Philippines.  

We will continue to build coalitions  
with our Asian sisters and brothers  
who are working on issues that affect  
the Asian community as well as work-  
ing in coalitions that struggle to keep  
our legal right to abortions, to pass the  
Equal Rights Amendment and the Gay  

Rights Bill (which has recently been  

vetoed in New York City.)  

“Whether the cry for self be in  
another land, the Philippines, Africa,  
Latin America, Southeast Asia or  
right in your own neighborhood (for  
me NYC), each and every one of us  
takes the responsibility to make this a  
better world for all of us to live.  

A.L.O.E.C, c/o Hall, 320 Eastern  
Parkway, No. 6-D, Brooklyn, NY  
11225 -  

Contrary to statements by INS of-  
ficials that they had been unable to lo-  
cate Ms. Williams, since leaving her  
post as ambassador, she has publicly  
been serving as executive director of  
the Grenada Foundation and is pre-  
sently a full-time doctoral student at  
American University, School of Inter-  
national Service.  

Supporters are urged to write let-  
ters to the Immigration and Naturali-  
zation Service requesting them to can-  
cel the deportation proceedings and to  
accord Ms. Williams the opportunity  
to apply for permanent residence sta-  
tus which is the usual courtesy granted  
to former diplomats serving in this  
country.  

-Write: Allan C. Nelson, Commis-  
sioner, INS, 425 I St., N.W., Washing-  
ton, D.C. 20538 and Robert E. Nep-  
tune, District Director, INS, Stratford  
Building, 25 E. St., N.W., Washington,  
D.C. 20538. Letters to congress mem-  
bers calling for an inquiry into the  
handling of the case by INS are also re-  
quested. The address of the Grenada  
Foundation is 348 Convent Ave., New  
York, NY 10031  

WINTER 1985