NE WORKING : e

Mila D. Aguilar is now a political pri-
soner in the Philippines. Born and
raised in Manila, Aguilar became a poet,
journalist and university teacher. She
was a vocal opponent of the Marcos
dictatorship and its twelve year reign
of martial law. Aware of her promi-
nence, the government posted a boun-
ty for her capture. Kitchen Table Press
and Asian Lesbians of the East Coast
(A.L.O.E.C.) have joined the fight to
free Mila D. Aguilar by helping to pub-
licize her imprisonment within the wo-
men’s community. In a joint effort,
Kitchen Table Press and A.L.O.E.C.

have produced Mila Aguilar’s collec-
tion of poetry, A comrade is precious
as a rice seedling. Concerning the
book, write Kitchen Table Press, P.O.
Box 2753, New York, NY 10185.
To protest Aguilar’s imprisonment,
write Bicutan Rehabilitation Center,
Camp Bagong Diwa, Metro Manila or
for information write Committee to

Free Mila D. Aguilar, 5A Durham St., 

Somerville, MA.

The address of the National Campaign
to Restore Abortion Funding is P.O.
Box 27175, Oakland, CA 94602.

Feminist Arab American Network
(F.A.N.) is an organization of femi-
nists of Arab heritage residing in the
U.S. They are interested in collecting
bibliographies on Arab women;
personal and family histories, writings
on topics of concern to Arab-Ameri-
can feminists, information about lo-
cal projects and activities, etc. Write
F.A.N., P.O. Box 725, East Lansing,
MI 48823-0625 for more information.

Southern Rural Women’s Network is a
regional association of rural women
addressing rural quality of life issues
and working in concert to effect social
change by developing the leadership
potential of southern rural women.

For more information write: Billie

Jean Young, Director, Southern Rural
Women’s Network, 108 Minerva St.,
Jackson, Mississippi 39203.

The National Coalition of Black Gays
(NCBG) is the only national lesbian/
gay political, educational and service
organization whose focus is to pro-
mote the healthy development of the
Black lesbian and gay community
through programs for public education

and programs for organizing the Black
lesbian and gay community on the lo-
cal and national level. For more info,

USA - New York City: March for Medical Aid to El Salvador

Annette Glaez

write Gil Gerald, Executive Director,
National Coalition of Black Gays, 930
F St., N.W., Washington, DC 20004.

PUBLICATIONS :

Upfront newspaper is a non-profit pro-
ject of the Upfront Collective. Four
times a year, the Washington, D.C.
based group prints articles by and a-
bout Black women—and for everybody.
They publish news, features, profiles,
and interviews, opinions, and more.
Invest in this important resource for
Black women. For information:
Upfront, P.O. Box 2293, Washington,
DC 20013.

The International Council of African
Women (ICAW) is a consortium of
Black women’s service and community
groups in the Washington Area. They
are a political collective working on
theoretical as well as community pro-
blems affecting Black women. They
are seeking to build an international
network of African women and are
sending a delegation to the World Con-
ference for Women in Nairobi, Kenya
in July, 1985. For information write:
International Council of African Wo-
men, P.O. Box 8676, Washington, DC
20011.

The first issue of the Isis Interna-
tional Women’s Journal shares the re-
sults of the Second Latin American
and Caribbean Feminist Meeting which
was held in Lima, Peru in July 1983.
Six hundred women from all over
Latin America and the Caribbean came
together from feminist groups and
media, political parties, and grassroots
groups. The 82-page Journal shares
information from 21 workshops: Fem-
inism and Daily Life, Exile, Violence
and Sexual Slavery, Sexuality, Lesbi-
anism, Alternative Women’s Communi-
cation, Power, and more. The Journal
also includes the text of the resolu-
tions and motions made at the plenary, a list of resources, papers,
publications and audiovisuals. For
information write Isis International,
Via Santa Maria del’Anima, 30; 00186,
Rome, Italy, or Isis Internacional,
Casilla 2067, Correo Central, Santiago,
Chile.

SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black
Women is an interdisciplinary forum
for the discussion of issues relating to

conditions
a feminist magazine

BOX 56A VAN BRUNT STATION BROOKLYN, NY 11215

Black women. Each issue contains
feature articles and critical essays, in-
depth interviews, reviews of books,
etc. Individual subs are $15; inst. subs
are $25. Reduced rates are offered for
charter subscriptions. For more infor-
mation write: SAGE, P.O. Box 42741,
Atlanta, GA 30311-0741. Attn:
Beverly Guy-Sheftall Managing Editor.

Third Woman is a journal of literature
and arts focusing on the creative work
by and about and on behalf of Hispanic
women, in the U.S. and beyond. For
information write: Third Woman,
Norma Alarcon, c/o Chicano-Riqueno
Studies, Ballantine Hall 849, Blooming-
ton, IN 47405.

Firebrand Books, Nancy K. Bereano
editor and publisher, will publish its
first three titles in April-May 1985.
Two of the titles are Mohawk Trail by
Beth Brant, Native American author,
member of the Turtle Clan, editor of
A Gathering of Spirit, and Jonestown
and Other Madness, poetry by Pat
Parker, West Coast Black lesbian poet
and activist.

THE CELIBATE WOMAN

A Journal for Women Who Are Celibate or
Considering This Liberating Way
of Relating to Others

The Celibate Woman Journal is a communica-
tions network among women who are interested

Work is underway for the Alterna-
tive Asia/Pacific Report on the Impact
of the Decade for Women. Non-gov-
ernmental women’s groups in 17
countries in the region have commit-
ted to consolidating their countries’
evaluations into one report to be pre-
sented at the End of the Decade Con-
ference in Nairobi in July 1985. The
report aims not only to bring to the
attention of the Nairobi Conference
the impact the decade has had on the
masses of Asian/Pacific women who
are poor, but also it hopes to help
facilitate women’s planning for action
on all levels beyond 1985.

Agreement on the collaborative
undertaking was reached by represen-
tatives of the Asian Women’s Research
and Action Network (AWRAN), the
Pacific Asian Women’s Forum (APWE),
and the Women and Development Net-
work of Australia (WADNA) at a con-
ference in Kuala Lumpur which met in
1984. For more information write:
Asian Women’s Research Action Net-
work, c/o Irene M. Santiago, P.O. Box
208, Davao City, Philippines.

We are concerned that women’s lesbian publications have often failed
to reflect the experiences and viewpoints of Third World, working-
class, and older women. We want CONDITIONS to include work in a
variety of styles by both published and unpublished writers of many
different backgrounds. We welcome submissions from all women who
feel a commitment to women is an integral part of their lives.

SUBSCRIPTIONS
(three issues)
$15 individual; $25 institution; $9 special “hardship” rate; $20 or more - sup-
porting subscription; Single Issues: $6 individual; $9 institution. Overseas
distribution: add $2 for subscription and $50 for single issue.

BACK ISSUES (five and subsequent issues still available): $4.50 each.

in exploring new and meaningful ways of relating

to others — including those with whom we are

intimate — rather than taking our affections in a
sexual direction.

SUBSCRIPTIONS

(irregularly published)

$8 for 2 issues

$4 per copy

3306 Ross Place, N.W.
Washington, DC 20008:
(202) 966-7783

We welcome submissions
on the issue of celibacy —
articles, artwork, letters,
experiences, ideas, theory.

PAGE TWELVE =

Between Our Selves: Women of Color Newspaper

WINTER 1985