young or old, are sympathetic and resourceful women grap-
pling with uncaring or self-centered parents, spouses,
friends, and children.

Wesley says her claim to fame rests in having her first
novel published when she was over seventy (she was living
carefully until that time on a widow’s pension). Her writing
is droll and steady, and she catches much of the absurd in
modern England with an attention to detail. This results in
extreme or exaggerated characters and situations becoming
quite real, and one is caught up in them as though they were
the most natural in the world, only occasionally realizing
how outlandish they are.

In Vacillations, Poppy Carew gets involved with the
sprawling household of Fergus Furnival, the funeral direc-
tor, to whom she leases her father’s now-empty country
residence as headquarters for his business. Fergus has sev-
eral young women living in his establishment who care for
the horses and assist in funeral preparations. Mary, his
lover and the general femme de ménage, is a truculent
young woman who, at some point, acquired a baby named
Barnaby. Fergus puts the baby in a horse trough for his nap
and, much to Mary’s annoyance, refers to him as Jesu. Both
Fergus and his friend Victor have an eye for Poppy, who
takes off for North Africa with her old lover Edmund di-
rectly after her father’s funeral.

Victor, a budding novelist separated from his wife, has
made a special trip from London weeks before, to find a
home in Fergus’s pond for a trout, which he resuscitated
after bringing it home from the fishmonger and finding it
not quite dead. When Edmund’s jealous girlfriend learns he
has taken Poppy to North Africa on a business trip right
after the funeral, she glues his clothes into folds and spills
honey on the floors and carpets of Poppy’s father’s house.

Not all of Wesley’s books are so irreverent. In Not That
Sort of Girl (Viking, $17.95, 279 pp.), naive Rose marries,
just before the Second World War, a pompous and insecure
parvenu in line to inherit his uncle’s country house. Ned
Peel sees Rose as the perfect country matron who will
enhance his image and produce an heir. She does both, but
she also has an affair with Mylo, a man she has loved since
she was eighteen. The War gives their love extra impetus,
as she manages the farm alone and he runs dangerous mis-
sions in and out of France. She carries off this balancing act
with only the housekeeper and her husband’s kind old uncle
knowing about Mylo. She is a steady, reliable wife, mother,
and farm manager, the soul of propriety and good sense.
Her more frivolous friends make fun of her steadfastness.

From her youth, Rose is friends with Nicholas and Emily
Thornby, exploitative siblings who sponge off others at
every chance they get and who, when their plumbing breaks
down, are found together in Rose’s bathtub. They later turn
up in Second Fiddle (Viking, $18.95, 184 pp.) as the moth-
er and uncle of Laura Thornby. Laura affectionately cares
for the aging couple, who are just as childish and demand-
ing in old age as they were in youth. She knows she resem-
bles them and suspects that her uncle may be her father.

Laura, in her forties, is an art restorer who becomes the
muse and lover of Claud, the son of a friend. Claud is
struggling to write his first novel. As Laura encourages
him, she becomes obsessively jealous of a young woman
whom he had loved. The protagonist of Claud’s novel
becomes a composite of Laura and several younger women,
and she finds it increasingly painful to sustain the nurturant
role, especially as she recognizes the power of his writing.

Claud had created a girl who came alive, a girl who would
linger in the minds of his readers, a person people would
discuss, comparing her with other characters in litera-
ture.... I underestimated Claud, Laura thought. I used him
for pleasure. I even suspected him of being a little camp....
I went overboard, was even ridiculously in danger of believ-
ing his suggestion of marriage could be serious, not just
froth. I could not have been much stupider than that.... Right
then, Laura thought, I shall play second fiddle. Playing
second fiddle to a fictional character has a certain originali-
ty. Having made this decision Laura was almost back to her
old self.

Laura is typical of many of
Wesley’s women; that is,
she is older, attractive,
seasoned, still vulnerable,
but in the end usually
resilient.

Wesley’s latest novel, A
Sensible Life (Viking,
$18.95, 364 pp.), is more
somber than her earlier
ones. Ten-year-old Flora
has been farmed out to a Russian emigré seamstress in
Dinard on the coast of Brittany while her parents are on
home leave from India. The parents remain in London,
where they revel in each others’ sexuality and figure out
ways to dispose of Flora still further. She had formerly
been boarded with a family in Italy, ostensibly to learn
Italian. The year is 1926, and some upper-middle-class
English families have also descended on Dinard for the
school holidays. Flora is especially smitten by two of the
fifteen-year-old boys and an older Dutch boy. She will
spend winters in a boarding school while her parents are in
India and spend some time during holidays with one of these
English families at their country house.

The resourceful Flora makes her way in the world, all
her life aching for family affection and the company of the
three boys she met in Dinard. The boys are equally taken
with her but drift in and out of her life over the years. After
boarding school, en route to India, she jumps ship at Mar-
seilles with one of them, and has a romantic fling before
returning to England. Her parents, needless to say, make
limited efforts to learn where she is. She goes on to lead a
very “sensible life" as an adult and carves out a practical
niche for herself, rather deliberately “crossing the bridge"
from upper middle class to working class to find content-
ment. In her middle age, she looks back philosophically but
also wistfully to her youth and especially to her early friend-
ships. After a long and lonely life, she ends up — albeit
circuitously — living happily ever after (as do most of Wes-
ley’s protagonists).

Some might quibble with the coincidences in Wesley’s
novels. People from widely separate areas bump into each
other, even in London, and disparate individuals end up
knowing each other or being related. Often the story is tied
together in the nasty gossip of chance encounters. However,
if one views these stories as modern-day fables, the coinci-
dences become unimportant and are lost in Wesley’s shifts
from one absurdity to another. Knowing of the author’s
advanced age heightens one’s enjoyment of her books,
perhaps because she "who laughs last laughs best," even
when the laughter is bitter.

Victor has made
a special trip
to find a home
for a trout.

© Barbara Griffith Furst was trained as an anthropologist
and worked many years in international development.