=—

a ce nme

a es

affair, had a powerful imagination, and
could be destructive around the house.

In Part III, the cross-examination of
Claire takes place. She seems capable of
answering lucidly, but she will not reveal
the whereabouts of the head. “If I tell
where the head is I’ll have told every-
thing.” After all, she has revealed so
much information about herself before
the crime (i.e., her murderous dreams,
thoughts of suicide, and the voices she
hears in her head) that the only secret
she has left is the location of the head. It
is no accident that Duras ends her novel
with Claire the madwoman keeping her
only secret intact and failing to allow
the detective to obtain the truth about
the head. Duras calls the nature of truth
itself into question in this novel. Willis
thinks the headless woman’s body is a
metaphor for all of Duras’s works com-
bined.

Woman to Woman (1974), first pub-
lished as Les Parleuses or “talking
women,” is an extremely important book
in Duras’s career. French feminists
claimed Duras as a foremother; her
readership increased because these inter-
views made her more accessible to her
public; and, as a result, her reputation
grew. Xaviére Gauthier, a writer and
friend of Duras, leads the five interviews,
which are uncensored and unedited.

In the first interview, Duras speaks
about language in her texts. She explains
her radical approach to language: “The
word counts more than the syntax... .
The grammatical tense follows, at a dis-
tance.” Duras also claims she experiences
hypnotic states when she writes. “I
know that when I write there is some-
thing inside me that stops functioning,
something that becomes silent. I let
something take over inside me that
probably flows from femininity.” She
knows that she is forging new territory in
her writing because “silence is heard in
her books” and the “force of female
desire” is depicted. Among other topics

NEW BOOKS

MORNING
BREEZE

Fulang Lo.

MORNING BREEZE:
A True Story of China’s
Cultural Revolution
by Fulang Lo
“A deeply moving account of a young
Chinese girl growing up during the
Cultural Revolution.”
Nien Cheng
Author of Life & Death in
Shanghai
“a unique and revealing document of
human courage and commitment.”
Kirkus Reviews
cloth $16.95 paper $9.95

THE PIANO TUNER
by Cheng Naishan

Third in our series of New Chinese
Fiction. Expressive stories of urban life
by one of Shanghai’s foremost women
writers. Disturbing tales of love
between the classes in “classless” China.

cloth $16.95 paper $8.95
For more information on our many
women’s titles, please write:

CA CHINA
YES! BOOKS
& Periodicals, Inc.

2929 Twenty-fourth Street
San Francisco, CA 94110

Winter 1989

discussed are her alcoholism and being
psychoanalyzed by Jacques Lacan.

The remaining four interviews are
filled with important information about
her novels and films. Duras also reveals a
great deal of autobiographical detail.
One of the most painful experiences
from a financial point of view for Duras
was when she wrote the screenplay for
Hiroshima Mon Amour. Even Resnais did
not alert her to the percentage clauses in
the film contract. As a result, she was
“robbed” of hundreds of thousands of
francs in royalties. She learned to be a
better businesswoman in the future.

Marguerite Duras (1976/1979) includes
a collection of essays by Duras and other
contributors, three interviews with
Duras, and the entire shooting script,
with notes, of her film India Song. This
complete script will be greatly ap-

preciated by those interested in her uni-
que filmmaking techniques. Photographs
from her films are also included.

In the seven essays by Duras, she in-
cludes film methods used in making
India Song; stage directions for the
theater for this script; how she managed
to make films without a salary for an
uninterested public ("No one sees my
films"); her film Son Nom De Venise dans
Calcutta Desert; the reactions of her
pragmatic mother to one of Duras’s
autobiographical films, and her last visit
to her mother’s home before her death;
her film Vera Baxter, about a woman
who was burned because she was per-
ceived as a sorceress; and, finally, her
film Le Camion about a woman who is
happy “without a need to search for
meaning.”

In the three interviews with Duras,
“Dispossessed” by Xaviére Gauthier
questions the author about the dif-
ference for her between films and writ-
ing books; “The Path of Joyful Despair”
by Claire Devarrieux asks Duras to dis-
cuss the politics of Le Camion, and “An
Act Against All Power” by Jacques
Grant and Jacques Frenais solicits Duras
to analyze closely Vera Baxter and Le
Camion.

The remaining essays fall into the
category of tributes to Duras, the most
notable by Jacques Lacan, the struc-
turalist psychoanalyst, who psychoan-
alyzed Duras and remains one of her
greatest admirers. Maurice Blanchot the
writer; Dionys Mascolo, her second for-
mer husband and an author; Joel Farges;
Benoit Jacquot; and others continue the
tone of tribute in their essays. All these
essays help in understanding Duras the
filmmaker, who claims, “I make films to
occupy my time. If I were strong enough
to do nothing, I wouldn’t do anything at
all. It’s because I’m not strong enough to
do nothing that I make films.”

Outside (1981) is a lively collection of
essays written by Duras for a purely prag-
matic reason. “I needed money.” She ex-

Price, Melina Mercouri, Brigitte Bardot,
Maria Callas, and Monique Wittig.
Duras has warm exchanges with these
women that indicate an easy rapport
with other women. She once admitted
that, when she was younger, she hated
the female sex.

Other essays in this collection are as
diverse in topic and as well written as
befits a true literary virtuoso. It is ob-
vious that she also considers herself a
global citizen in “that every person is in-
evitably connected with every other.”

The Malady of Death (1982) is a short
novel in which Duras strips writing to
bare essentials. Here the narration alter-
nates between the male narrator’s use of
“you” for himself and the third person
“she” for the woman in his room. The
namelessness of these characters is inten-
tional. “She” has been paid to be present
for sexual favors and to help relieve the
solitude of the male character. She is
“subject” as she sleeps calmly despite the
inner and outward turbulence of the
male character/narrator. He suffers from
the malady of death, the lack of love,
and the fear of the unknown; whereas
she sleeps, omniscient and powerful,
through the frightening and murderous
thoughts of the male. The powerful
presence of the woman’s body and its
endless capacity for pleasure make this a
powerful, erotic novel. Duras includes
directions for stage adaptation at the
end.

The War: A Memoir (1985), originally
published under the title La Douleur,
meaning pain or suffering, is a fascinat-
ing firsthand account of Duras’s ex-
periences during World War II. The
manuscript was found years after it was
written in 1944, after Duras’s friend
Xaviére Gauthier asked if she had any of
her earlier writing available for publica-
tion. Its autobiographical nature helped
Duras become better understood and ac-
cessible to her public just one year after
The Lover was published. She received
the Prix Goncourt in 1984 for this novel

after forty years of being ignored by her

peers.
The text is divided into three parts.
Part I is titled “The War.” Duras

recounts the pain of waiting for news of
her deported husband, Robert. As a
writer, she was politically active in the
French Resistance. She founded a paper
called Libres and included a tracing ser-

vice to determine the whereabouts of
political prisoners. She writes about the

intense pain of awaiting news of Robert’s
whereabouts before she learns that he is
still alive. François Morland, the man

who delivers the news, is actually

François Mitterrand both active in the
same Resistance network. Despite
Robert’s return to safety and Duras’s in-

tense emotional release and regained
will to live, she asks him for a divorce.

She had met and fallen in love with

Dionys Mascolo, her soon-to-be second

husband with whom she had her only

child, Jean Mascolo.

Part II depicts the life of Pierre Rabier,
an agent of the Gestapo. This true story

explains the precarious situation Duras
found herself in when Rabier became at-
tracted to her. As a worker for the Resis-
tance, she pretended ignorance to
Rabier, a “creator of fear” responsible for
sending people to ovens and concentra-
tion camps. Duras was protective of
François Morland’s whereabouts and

does not give in to Rabier, who was

finally shot after the war.
In Part III, four short pieces are in-
cluded. In “Albert of the Capitals,”

Duras documents the torture of an in-

former caught by the Resistance camp.

In “Terror of the Militia,” a young mem-
ber of the far-right French militia is
depicted. “The Crushed Nettle,” the
only invented story, is about a member
of the Communist party. And finally
“Aurelia Paris” tells the story of a little
Jewish girl during the war.

Marguerite Duras: Writing on the Body is

an impressive first book by Sharon Wil-

lis,

who combines feminist theory,
Lacanian psychoanalysis, and semiotics

in her interpretation of Duras’s fiction.

Willis sums up the major themes in

Duras’s work as “desire and its lack of
coincidence between desire, the body it-

self, and language.” She examines how
these contradictions of lack of coin-
cidence are thematized in select novels
and the filmscript for Hiroshima Mon
Amour. Willis also addresses the impor-
tant French and now American debate
on Écriture féminine, “the inscription of

the body,” and “feminine specificity” in
Duras’s writing. She addresses her em-

phasis on the hysteric: “Hysteria is... a
failure of spoken discourse”; “the hysteric
is alienated from a body whose speech is
actually addressed to him but in a lan-
guage that she does not understand.”
Willis’s book is essential reading for
those interested in understanding the
deeper levels of the themes in Duras
through an analysis of her language; yet
to truly appreciate it, the reader must be
familiar with Duras’s work and the areas
of Willis’s expertise.

Marguerite Duras is one of the most
powerful and gifted French women
writers of our time, with one of the
richest and most fertile intellects. She
particularly challenges women as
readers, writers, and critics to examine in

themselves love, desire, and the erotic as

a crucial step to understanding woman’s
connection to nature. She depicts
women as an oppressed “race” in a
patriarchal world. Duras paves the way
to the beginnings of an understanding of

ourselves that can free us and return us

to the realm of “subject” where true
liberation will come — when all women
have the right to be “subject” in a world
without an “other.”

@ Joanne Schmidt teaches French,
Spanish, and Women’s Studies at Califor-

nia State University at Bakersfield and is a

poet who conducts feminist poetry work-
shops.

Belles Lettres @ 13