Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

%  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  
¢  
Kamili Anderson  
Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
4  
Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
¢  
Celia McEnaney  
ADVERTISING REPRESENTATIVE  

%  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions, $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly subscrip-  
tions $2.00 an issue for classes of 10  
or more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, essays,  
biography, and criticism. Our pur-  
pose is to promote and celebrate  
writing by women and in doing so,  
to inform and entertain. For a more  
detailed editorial statement, send  
SASE for a copy of the Guidelines  
for Reviewers. All views expressed  
in Belles Lettres represent the views  
of the individual authors.  

Submissions  

Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  

Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Deanna D’Errico or call 703-524-  
7743. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

Report  
From Paris  

cow, grazing outside Simone  

by Viola G. Thomas  
de Beauvoir’s old hangout, the  

A Café Aux Deux Magots, in the  

heart of Paris’s formerly existentialist  
Left Bank, seems a fitting emblem for  
the general state of confusion that ap-  
pears to reign these days in most of  
French political, artistic, and intellec-  
tual life.  

In fact, the cow and its associate, a  
donkey, were part of the annual Spring  
Theater Festival. One of the groups, “Le  
Phun,” had spent $20,000 to plant  
radishes, leeks, and lush lettuces over  
the wobbly cobblestones of Saint-Ger-  
main des Prés, rescued from the student  
revolution of May 1968. And so the ac-  
tors carried manure and built huts and  
the odor of haystacks wafted for their  
play, The Revenge of the Seedlings. For  
three days, fashionably dressed, amused  
or bemused passersby provided the text,  
with comments ranging from the wildest  
speculations to the paltry mundane:  
They are angry farmers, they are con-  
ducting experiments, they are hiding  
electrical wiring underground. Others  
were content simply with photographing  
those who photographed the rustic  
scene.  

And beneath the city, while waiting  
for the subway, you could find yourself  
idly gazing at a seductively pictured  
breast, artistically lit. One is expected  
to be sophisticated and thus inured to  
the erotically charged images from  
French billboards before riding in the  
public transportation system. But this  
year it was a male breast! The current  
trend of an industry forever in search of  
the nouveau is to confuse unsuspecting  
commuters by using finely built male tor-  
sos to seduce (women, one presumes)  
and make men envious. Is this advertis-  
ers’ idea of postfeminist practices?  

Recently, Mme Yvette Roudy, the  
former Minister for Women’s Rights,  
spearheaded a campaign against the de-  
gradation of women through the use of  
violence in advertisements such as the  
one for Buffalo Jeans which depicted a  
topless woman tied up in coils of rope.  
She was laughed off as the “Ayatollah  
Roudy.” The Ministry of Women’s  
Rights, created in 1981 under the  
socialist government, has been disman-  
tled by the current conservative govern-  
ment. Fortunately, Mme Roudy con-  
tinues to fight, and she was present this  
spring at a colloquium at the Centre  
Pompidou on the state of current French  
feminism.  

The main question, predictably, was:  
Is feminism dead in France? Not quite.  
Women in their thirties, forties, and fif-  
ties still meet, although with greater dif-  
ficulty now that many women’s centers  
have closed due to lack of funds. The  
rally for International Women’s Day  
drew only about 150 people, and  
feminist presses have shrunk consider-  
ably in number. Only two main feminist  
magazines are left. As elsewhere, the  
publishing world in France is dominated  
by men, and easily 90% of literary critics  
are men. However, a new women’s  
group did form last December, calling  
itself “Mad Mothers,” to protest police  
violence against patently peaceful stu-  
dent demonstrators. This group echoes  
one formed in 1971 to protest Mother’s  
Day (a Pétainist invention in France).  

The Centre Pompidou colloquium  
also sought to question the economic  
status of French women after the con-  
quests of the 1970s. The answers were  
generally pessimistic. One had to face  
the fact that women’s financial situation  
has, in general, become worse: They rep-  
resent 75% of the minimum-wage earn-  
ers, and the only increase in jobs has  

— continued on page 15  

CONTENTS #¢  

VOLUME 3/NUMBER 2  

CENTENARIANS: MARIANNE MOORE AND HILDA DOOLITTLE  

2 The Complete Prose of Marianne Moore ...... edited by Patricia C. Willis  
Marianne Moore: Subversive Modernist ................000000+ by Taffy Martin  
3 (Herself Defined) 1 ococcon occu ceexsrs vevenes tans capevas core nos exes os by Barbara Guest  
Nights .........cc.c:ceeeeeeeeeees by John Helforth [H.D.]  
Ton: A Play After Euripides ............ccccccseeseeseceeeeserteeneeeaas by H.D.  
H.D.: The Career of That Struggle ..... by Rachel Blau De Plessis  
H.D.: Woman and Poet ..............c00065 ... edited by Michael King  
Women of the Left Bank «is. .2.c:ccisaa cess ssatsea oss ecu tees by Shari Benstock  
AVANT GARDE WRITERS  
8 Three From the Literary Vanguard: Lydia Davis, Candace Denning,  
and Kathy Acker ...........ccccecseeceuceecccectsuseessensreseesesescenees [an essay]  
9 Catherine Parke Speaks With Top Stories Editor Anne Turyn [an interview]  
10 Faithful Rebecca. sees xs sss oxsnssa 5.004 04h shes vend 16S EADS hae ones by Janice Eidus  
Madonna on Her Back .... AE .. by Alyson Hagy  
Modern Romances ...........0.ccceccceeseceueesseeteuesteneseaneees by Judy Lopatin  
REVIEWS  
4 Willa Cather: A Pictorial Memoir ...... by Lucia Woods and Bernice Slote  
Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice ...........00c00cccesees by Sharon O’Brien  
Willa Cather: A Literary Life 1.0.0... .....cccccseeeeeeeeeees by James Woodress  
The Voyage Perilous: Willa Cather’s Romanticism . by Susan J. Rosowski  
Willa Cather in Person: Interviews, Speeches,  
and Letters ..........ccccccesecesceeeeeceueecsueseeesees edited by L. Brent Bohlke  
5 Emily Dickinson .............cccccccceecncceseeueennees by Cynthia Griffin Wolff  
Emily Dickinson: A Poet’s Grammar . by Christanne Miller  
Dickinson: Strategies of Limitation .............. by Jane Donahue Eberwein  
11 If You Want to Write: A Book About Art, Independence,  
GH Spirit ssens css un sans ven anes 2055 664 dhs Uda ane HARI LAD Ede nnneee by Brenda Ueland  
The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe . by Jane Wagner  
12 Proud Shoes: The Story of an American Family and Song  
in a Weary Throat: An American Pilgrimage ............... by Pauli Murray  
The Threshing Floor ...........c:.ccscccseescceetaeeseeneeeees by Barbara Burford  
14 The Female Malady: Women, Madness, and  
English Culture, 1830-1890 .........c0ccccceeseeseees ees by Elaine Showalter  
A Dark Science: Women, Sexuality, and Psychiatry  
in the Nineteenth Century ..............000c.0005 by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson  
A Fish to Feed All Hunger ..............:cccceccsseceeeneeess by Sandra Alcosser  
Blue Stone & Other Poems .............c0ecc0eeeees .. by Neva Herrington  
The Chicago Home .......... .... by Linnea Johnson  
Tap Dancing for Big Mom ...........00.c0sceeeees .. by Roseann Lloyd  
Charlotte Temple ............0.cccecececcssscucececssceevencucs by Susanna Rowson  
The Coquette .......0.0...:cccccccceseeeccaueeeeeeraes by Mrs. Hannah W. Foster  
Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel  
in AMERICA. 005 gees ccavens sass vas aw5 Roba aes noon ode omen none by Cathy N. Davidson  
COLUMNS  
6 Belles Lettres Interviews: Sonia Johnson and Charlotte Bunch  
13. Impressions: Gift Books, Briefly Noted (by Janet Mullaney)  

On the Cover: Marianne Moore in 1922. Photo by Marjori © Rosenbach Museum &  
Library.  

TRIV ms  
Nicole Bragg  
A JOURNAL OF IDEAS. Paba Copne, re Conain Wy, A  
a ‘arly  
Mathers ang  
. soe ° Mary Daly f Invention Davaheer,  
Radical feminist visionary Jane Ce  

Critical essays — Reviews  

TRIVIA is published three times a year.  

Alor 'RNAL VI  

writing  

Diane  
Mine R, Holman  

5  
Sarah [, UCia H¢ Agland  

Theory and Scholarship Bonnie St. Ang Phesings  
© Andrews  

TRIVIAL LIVES  

Necessary sustenance for  

the labrys-toting mind.  

$14/year — out of U.S.  
Sample Copy: $5.00/$6.00  

TRIVIA PO Box 606 N. Amherst, MA 01059  

$12/year — individuals  
$18/year — institutions  

| NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987 Belles Lettres @ 1