and twenties and imagery in works by Cunningham,  
Demuth, Dove, Hartley, Marin, Matisse, Rodin, Stieglitz,  
Strand, van Gogh, Walkowitz, and Weston. In so doing, she  
makes the point that O’Keeffe’s artistic vision, which the  
artist claimed was self-determined, did not develop in isola-  
tion during this period. By implication, Messinger questions  
but does not explore whether O’Keeffe’s artistic vision was  
ever, in fact, purely self-conceived.  

Messinger notes a movement from abstraction toward  
realism in O’Keeffe’s paintings of the East River completed  
between 1925 and 1929 and points out that this development  
contradicts a pattern established by other series that begin  
with relatively realistic forms in nature and become progres-  
sively more abstract. Messinger also points out that  
O’Keeffe’s abstractions of the late twenties, whether part of  
a series or autonomous, are specifically related to forms in  
nature. As such, these differ from abstractions O’Keeffe  
completed in the late teens, as in the series Music Pink and  
Blue and Black Spot (1919), which Messinger suggests  
derive more directly from the artist’s imagination.  

But Messinger does not question why these important  
reversals in O’Keeffe’s thinking, as reflected in her imag-  
ery, occurred, nor does she effectively support her claim  
that O’Keeffe’s art changed markedly in 1930 as a result of  
her second extended visit to New Mexico. Moreover, she  
does not explore a premise implied in her discussion of  
paintings from the 1940s through the 1960s: that the work  
itself seemed to have changed little, except for the introduc-  
tion of new subject matter (such as animal skulls and bones)  
and its inventive juxtaposition with landscape forms.  

However, the essay, published in book form to coincide  
with the 1987-1988 O’Keeffe centenary exhibition, offers an  
informative and richly illustrated discussion of O’Keeffe’s  
oeuvre as well as an exploration of aspects of its imagery,  
such as O’Keeffe’s fetishization of a limited number of  
themes. In short, it provides what Messinger intended, a  
“survey [of] the full range of O’Keeffe’s expression during  
the first forty years of her career."  

® Barbara Buhler Lynes is Chair of the Art History Depart-  
ment at the Maryland Institute College of Art.  

"Bettina" (1917) from Gluck: Her Biography by Diana Souhami  
(Pandora, $19.95 PB, 333 pp.). A superb portraitist and still-life  
painter, Gluck invented a frame that integrated the art and the  
room, used to great effect in her one-woman exhibitions.  

“Landbook One" by Barbara Harman. The first in a series of  
books combining imagery and two texts. One text deals with some  
aspect of a particular landscape (in this case, the physicality of the  
Southwest), while a parallel text focuses on the same aspect in a  
relationship. The books are designed so that images and text may  
be experienced separately from one another.  

Making Artists’ Books  

by Barbara Harman  

It is always somewhat awkward when someone asks me  
what kind of art I do. I have learned that the statement "I  
make books" is an incomprehensible answer, eliciting a  
range of responses from blank stares to the assumption that  
I am an illustrator of other people’s words. With some  
discomfort, born of the knowledge that whatever words I  
use will prove inadequate, I explain that I make the whole  
book: I create the structure, I write the text, and I draw or  
assemble any visual content. I always follow up this expla-  
nation with the lame statement, “It’s a lot of fun!"  

While it could be expected that the average person — and  
even perhaps most artists — would not know what consti-  
tutes an “artist’s book,” even those engaged in making them  
tend to disagree about the definition. Some feel it applies  
only to books designated "fine press": limited editions  
produced on quality paper, hand-printed using handset type  
on a letterpress, and handsomely and expensively bound  
(with a few choice illustrations). Although the subject matter  
is not regulated, it is often poetry or reprints of famous  
(mostly male) authors’ works, or someone whom the pub-  
lisher feels has languished in undeserved obscurity. These  
are collectors' items with high price tags, exacting standards,  
and a narrowly defined market. I do not make those kinds  
of books. And for those who do, my characterization of my  
work as creation of books requires argument and defense.  

I am afraid I am not very good at pinning myself down.  
Every time I try to fit into a particular groove, I find myself  
doing something unacceptable that slides the needle off the  
record. I don’t have much interest or enthusiasm for repeti-  
tion, so my editions (when I make them) tend to be thirty  
copies or fewer. I have even less interest in routine, so even  
when I bother to make an edition, I often don’t manage to  
get it all bound. Whatever I just finished, the thing I am just