Never Her Turn

Islanders, by Helen R. Hull. New York:

The Feminist Press at CUNY, 1988,  
$10.95, 337 pp. (PB)

At the beginning of Helen Hull’s

newly reissued 1927 novel, El-

len Dacey’s beau lights out for  
Gold Rush territory and leaves her to the  
rigors of life on a small midwestern farm  
in the mid-nineteenth century. Rather  
than focus on the boyish hero whose  
flight from women and responsibility has  
characterized so-called mainstream  
American literature, Hull centers her  
story on the girl he leaves behind. A  
memorable chronicle of six decades of  
domestic heroinism, Islanders offers to  
readers a woman bound to the home by  
the restrictions of gender yet able to cul-  
tivate a sense of self that all but tran-  
scends such limits.

With her lover’s defection, the  
youthful Ellen faces an unpromising  
world. On her falls the burden of com-  
forting her mother, Martha, and her  
sister-in-law, Sarah, also deserted by  
their gold-seeking men. Unlike Martha,  
she cannot find release from loneliness  
in hysterical devotion to quack evangel-  
ists, nor, like Sarah, in a foolhardy  
elopement with one of them. “The only  
thing I’m good for is work” becomes El-  
len’s creed, and work she does: manag-  
ing the farm, the house, the kitchen,  
the sickbed, and her younger brother  
Thurston as well.

Ironically, the woman who proves so  
capable in the absence of patriarchs is  
disenfranchised the moment they take  
back or take up the role. Her shiftless  
father returns after a two-decade absence  
and sells the land out from under her;  
her grown brother, now married and a  
father, relegates her to the monetary and  
emotional dependency of the Maiden  
Aunt. And her diversion-seeking female  
in-laws leave nephews, nieces, and later  
grandnephews and grandnieces to her  
charge with the assumption that a spin-  
ster is grateful to rear children she can-  
not have — at least not without shock-  
ing the Bible-thumping society she in-  
habits.

All of this is grim, but what is distinc-  
tive about Hull’s protagonist is her re-  
sponse to the Victorian family politics  
that dictate her submission. She cannot  
proclaim her own freedom, for the un-  

Reprints

written law of the Daceys is that  
spinsters have none, but she is fierce in  
empowering the weak. Out of family  
loyalty she does not protest much when  
her brother Thurston steals her bank-  
book, but she does hold the theft over  
the man to force him to give his son a  
college education. A generation later,  
she transfers her attention from that son  

when he denies his small daughter Anne  
the love and respect she is due: “She  
would forge some armor for Anne, from  
the steel of her own hard years.” An  
enabling rather than a softly maternal  
presence, she strengthens herself each  
time she defies a paternalistic lawgiver or  
protects a child or helpless poor relation  
from family scorn.

Hull adds another dimension to the  
portrait of Ellen by endowing this emi-  
nently level-headed heroine with a phil-  
osophical understanding of woman’s sit-  
uation. As the title suggests, Ellen sees  
women as inhabiting islands remote  
from the larger world. Late in life, when  
she attempts to “rescue” her niece  
Anne, she employs the metaphor. As  
she explains to the girl,

Here’s this house, with all of us in  

it. . . . Only Robby, your father, he goes  
away [and is] part of the world outside.  
Crops and money and the lives of lots of  
folks all over the world. Then he comes  
home, off the ocean, to a little separate  
island. Your mother’s good; she just thinks  
about him, and making the island pleas-  
ant. But she never stretched off it.

Ellen Dacey’s insights are at odds with a  
training she never truly escapes. She  
enters old age in the 1900s as remote  

by Laura Hapke

Biting the Victorian Bullet

The Wide, Wide World, by Susan Warner. Afterword by Jane Tompkins. New York:

The Feminist Press, 1987, $11.95, 608 pp. (PB)

The Lamplighter, by Maria Susanna Cummins. Edited and introduced by Nina Baym.  
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1988, $45 (HB), $15 (PB), 437 pp.

Will ten-year-old Ellen Mont-  
gomery of Susan Warner's  
Wide, Wide World (1850),  

sent off to an unloving relative by an  
irresponsible father and a dying mother,  
learn that “though we must sorrow, we  
must not rebel”? Can Gerty Flint, the  
mistreated eight-year-old slum child at  
the center of Maria Susanna Cummins’s  
The Lamplighter (1854), come to the  
same conclusion? These are the ques-  
tions at the heart of these reissued  
mid-Victorian bestsellers. Immensely  
popular with the women of their time,  
both are sentimental melodramas that  
tell the perennially fascinating tale of an  
appealing orphan struggling to survive in  
a hostile world. Drenched in a religion  
of Christian submission familiar to  
nineteenth-century Protestant  
America, for hundreds of pages the nov-  
els pelt their girlish protagonists with  
trial after trial. In The Wide, Wide  
World, Ellen’s eccentric aunt withholds  
precious letters from the child’s far-off  
mother, resents Ellen’s friendships and  
other innocent pleasures, and generally  
proves as odd a female role model as one  
might find anywhere. It is even worse for  
Cummins’s Gerty: Her sadistic guardian  
thrashes her, kills her pet kitten, and  
willingly hands the girl over to anyone  
who offers to keep her.

Not surprisingly, Ellen and Gerty  

display an angry resentment toward their  
incompetent protectors, which modern  
readers can only applaud. To their cre-  
ators, however, it is Duty, not rebel-  
lion, Humility, not rage, and Faith, not  
angry doubt, that enable unruly little  
girls to develop into good women. As  
Nina Baym points out in her introduc-  
tion to The Lamplighter, “temper, the  
unrestrained expression of passion and  
anger, is the novel’s word for all that is  
most destructive in human relation.”

Baym’s ingenious explanation not-  
withstanding, today’s audience will find  
it difficult to applaud the author's belief  
in bending the feminine will.

Still, for all its belief in the wisdom of  
submission, The Wide, Wide World offers  
an authentic picture of the powerlessness  
of children. The “obedience les-  
sons” Ellen is taught reflect the quirks  
and insecurities of those laying down the  
law. Her strange, misnamed Aunt For-  
tune alternately requires that Ellen be as  
invisible as possible and chides her for  
her absence. Her neighbor Mr. John, a  
paternalistic figure for a good part of the  
novel, insists that their conversation be  
a catechism, correcting her clever re-  
sponses if they displease him and in ge-  
neral acting the benevolent despot. And  
her uncle in Scotland, to whom she is  
shipped off later in the narrative, insists  
on being called Father and punishes her  
for fond mention of past friends in  

from the feminist movement as she was  
in her youth. What in other hands  
would be a tragic portrait, though, in  
Hull’s is not. Islanders is a tribute to the  
endurance of the altruistic unmarried  
woman in a marriage-centered society, a  
hymn of praise to a type satirized by  
Mark Twain, pitied by Sherwood An-  
derson, and made grotesque by William  
Faulkner. Yet the novel is ultimately a  
sad one, for Ellen is among the first to  
acknowledge that the tradition of males’  
being in the world and females’ being  
out of it “made an emptiness for  
women.”

Laura Hapke writes frequently on  
reissued fiction for Belles Lettres.

My Mother Gets Married  
by Moa Martinson

New York: The Feminist Press, 1988,  
$24.95 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 287 pp.

Like many feminist heroines, Mia, the  
little girl at the center of Swedish author  
Moa Martinson’s 1936 autobiographical  
novel, now translated into English by  
Margaret S. Lacy, is in search of a room  
of her own. Maybe not just her own:  
Seven-year-old Mia includes her embat-  
tled mother, Hedvig, in her fantasy of a  
woman’s clean, well-lighted place.  
There they could be safe from the dirt,  
disorder, and above all, drunkards of  
turn-of-the-century Sweden. If they  
could find such a sanctuary, Mia inno-  
cently believes, she and Hedvig could  
end their peripatetic, Zolaesque exis-  
tence as the wife and stepdaughter of the  
alcoholic Stenman, who has such curi-  
ous power over her mother. To Mia, his  
chaotic presence means violent dis-  
putes, the lice-infested rooms of the  
impoverished, and in a way she dimly  
understands, a mother pregnant with  
sickly children who soon die off.

“I think [Swedish] women wouldn’t  

have survived if they hadn’t read Moa,”  
commented one critic recently of those  
inspired by Martinson’s fictions of fe-  
male endurance. To American readers  
unacquainted with My Mother Gets  
Married, this seems rather exaggerated  
praise. But to judge by this first volume  
of Martinson’s autobiographical trilogy,  
Hedvig and Mia’s struggles with the  
harsh conditions of life in slumlike fac-  
tory towns and primitive rural outposts  
certainly demonstrate impressive cour-  
age. The two always try not to be ground  
down by the dreary predictability of  
Stenman’s behavior — the disap-  
pearances for months that push the de-  
stitute mother and little girl to relocate  
in poorer lodgings, his sudden remorse-  
ful returns, filled with an alcoholic’s  
false promises, followed by new vanish-  
ing acts. Both mother and daughter, in  
the novel’s metaphor for hope, keep  
imposing domestic order on a series of  
unpromising dwellings.

The novel’s most powerful passages  
issue from Mia’s despair at rooms in-  
vaded by men like Stenman. With one  
of her stepfather’s many returns, she  
wakes to a room “scantily filled with  
October light, that autumn morning  
light that is neither bright nor dark,  

[when] everything looks gray and impos-  
sible. . . . [S]uddenly the furniture. . .  
was really ugly.” The life of her mother’s  
hapless friend Olga, married to the bru-  
tal and slovenly Kalberg, is captured  
thus:

It was so gray-cold there. [Olga’s room]  
smelled of the barn, sour milk, and  

babies. The room was like a trash room  
where someone by mistake had thrown a  
clothes basket with a baby in it. A room  
like one folks put spades, crowbars, water  
buckets, and some chickens or anything  
else.

Mia’s vision of the “anguish of life” is  
Martinson’s own, encompassing the  
sorrows of women beaten, endlessly  
impregnated, left outside with the farm  
wagons while their husbands drink to  
oblivion at an inn. “Life was work; that  
much had become clear to me,” sage lit-  
tle Mia comments early in the narrative,  
and much of what follows in her trau-  
matic young years certainly bears that  
out. Still, reading My Mother Gets Mar-  
ried is not a depressing experience. Dis-  
tinguished by unusually clear language,  
defiant optimism, and a shrewd under-  
standing of the sexual politics of late-  
nineteenth-century working-class life, it  
establishes Moa Martinson as a writer of  
the first order.

The Stairway  
by Alice A. Chown

Toronto: University of Toronto Press,  
1988, $30.00 (HB), $12.95 (PB), 273 pp.

“I was born an individualist,” observed  
Canadian reformer Alice Chown (1866  
—1949) in her newly reissued diary, orig-  
inally published in 1921. The rest of her  
autobiographical narrative amply dem-  
onstrates the truth of that assertion.  
Although her lucid prose reveals an ex-  
cellent mind and an abiding concern  
with the key social issues of the Progres-  
sive era, reading Chown offers some-  
thing else as well. In diary essays dated  
from 1906, the year of her mother’s  
death, to 1919, when the world was  
embroiled in a war she opposed, she  
exhibits an unusual intensity and fresh-  
ness of response to the events and ideas  
of the day.

With a candor that would be surpris-  
ing were it not so deliberate, Chown  
opens her journal by commenting that  
with her mother’s passing she can now  
“commence to live.” It is not a heartless  
declaration so much as an announce-  
ment of her decision, at forty, to bend  
the knee no longer. Recalled from set-  
tlement work to nurse a mother made ill  
largely by the constraints of marital re-  
spectability, Chown was not at ease as  
the late-Victorian Dutiful Daughter. In  
her scholarly introduction, her great-  
great-niece Diana chronicles Chown’s  
professional activities — including  
scholarly papers on women and eco-  
nomics and on the practice of social  
work — when family demands on her to  
be the Angel of the Sickroom were in-  
creasing. But Chown really gives birth  
to herself, so to speak, when she is rel-  
eased from caretaking domesticity. Only  
then, in her far-from-closet journal,  
does she glory in accounts of visits to  
rough union halls in Toronto, suffrage  
meetings in London, utopian socialist  
communes on Long Island. She experi-  

Summer 1989