Impressions

Conventioneering

Herewith we bring you a brief,

idiosyncratic account of

several literary forums we were
privy to this summer.

The American Booksellers
Association convention is the
grandmama of them all for both size
and hype. While “manning” our
booth and roaming around to make
ourselves known to the hundreds of
publishers there, we managed to
collect our thoughts long enough to
note the following highlights.

Kitchen Table: Women of Color
Press appeared next to Alice Walker’s
new venture, Wild Trees Press. This
space became a magnet for a notably
underrepresented group: people of
color. As Betty Powell of KTP
exulted, “There was enough energy to
launch a satellite.” This press will
continue pioneering by presenting a
panel or two at the next ABA.

We could not pass up the press
conference of Judith Martin, aka
“Miss Manners,” opinionated doyenne
of etiquette. (We have been beholden
to her ever since she took the side of
one of us against an unreasonable
boyfriend on a call-in show.) Most of
all, we admire her freezingly polite
responses. They sound — although we
have never actually tried them out —
effective enough to temporarily stun
the unmannerly, if not reform them
on the spot. We were less enraptured
by the content of her talk, although it
was certainly polished and amusing,
than consumed by envy at her ability
to maintain a perfectly turned-out
appearance amidst the maelstrom of
media events. We were gratified to
note that her endearing, youthful,
and cheeky manner offset the austere
mental image we had of her (see
photo). Miss Manners’s new book,
Common Courtesy, is due out from
Atheneum in October.

We sat in on a fairly well-attended
panel on how to market feminist titles
in bookstores. Nancy K. Bereano,
publisher of Firebrand Books,
suggested that booksellers create a
display of titles by women who have
won awards. Helaine Harris of
Daedalus Books remarked on the
shifting attitudes toward viewing books
by women as a separate category. She
recalled the reaction to her former
company, Women in Distribution, the
last time the ABA met in San
Francisco. WIND was on the main
floor rather than sequestered with the
small presses and it dealt exclusively
with women, which made it an
oddity. Its presence prompted
facetious quips such as “Do you have
any women to distribute?”

The third Women in Print
conference came right after the ABA,
and enervated attendees of both
meetings were hard put to decide
whether future WIP meetings should
occur in tandem with ABA or not.
Some definite resolutions did emerge,

however: to consider a code of ethics
for feminist publishers, to strive to
have more women of color involved,
to attract more feminist-oriented
“mainstream” presses, and to develop
more sophisticated workshops
(although the nuts-and-bolts skill
sharing was quite useful to many
women). Kitchen Table Press, which
debuted at the 1981 WIP conference,
gave an update on its operations (an
uphill struggle, but it is moving on
daily). The report was enthusiastically
and supportively received. Women
writers and editors of color,
particularly Latina and Asian women,
who have publishable material should
get in touch with the press.

Judith Martin. Photo by Margaret Thomas.

Two editors of The Seal Press gave
one of the more illuminating and
instructive workshops, on publishing
translations. (See the review of Early
Spring in this issue.) Concerned that
we are missing out on experiences of
other women globally, as they are
often reflected in works of great
literary merit, The Seal Press began
its Women in Translation series by
publishing writers of Norway and
Denmark. Seal Press is now working
on translations of German and
Japanese women authors who are little
known here. The series, available in
trade paperback, is handsome looking
and is carefully edited with the
assistance of area specialists.

Get in touch with Linda Bubon at
Women and Children First bookstore
(1967 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL
60614) to participate in or help plan
the next WIP conference.

The National Women’s Studies
Association convention was a gift for
spirit, mind, and heart. From our
booth we got only snippets of the
academic goings on, but what we
gleaned was “cherce,” to borrow from
Tracy on Hepburn. We did hear some
fascinating papers on lost political
cartoons of the Suffragette era and the
dynamic feminist theater movement in
Australia and New Zealand. We hope
to follow up on these topics in future
issues. The celebration of women’s
culture included powerful, exhilarating
readings by poets Judy Grahn and
Paula Gunn Allen, a summer solstice
ceremony, and a film about Black
women comics.

Paperback Reissues: Dreamy Dreams

and the Floating World

was enthralled by Ellen Gilchrist’s

first short story collection, In the

Land of Dreamy Dreams. I thought
she was such an original talent that
she had even made up the title (my
father later told me it was the title of
an old Louis Armstrong song). Little,
Brown has brought out a trade
paperback ($6.95, 167 pp.), which
features a lovely cover painting by
Ginny Crouch Stanford of a
languorous, reclining woman (a
trademark by now on Gilchrist titles).
To me, her vignettes of New Orleans
“characters” seem just as delightful the
second time around. If they do not

become classics (along with the stories
from the sequel, Victory Over Japan),
I’ll eat my beignet.

Vintage has published an oversized
paperback of Geisha ($9.95, 347 pp.),
a true account of anthropologist Lisa
Dalby’s life as the first Westerner to
inhabit the “floating world.” Amidst
general acclaim for the book, one
reviewer questioned whether Dalby’s
unprecedented assimilation into geisha
society subtly colored her scientific
objectivity. It is something to ponder
while one enjoys, nonetheless, the
detailed, privileged glimpse into a
unique culture of women.

Black Women’s Writing: Around the World,

Across the Centuries

If the names Aminata Sow Fall

(Senegal), Faith Bandler (Australia), and Maryse Condé (born in
Guadaloupe and living in Paris) fail to
ring a bell with you, maybe you
should check into the Black Woman
Writer and the Diaspora Conference,
October 27-30 at Michigan State
University. The topics of the 35 pan-
els include reconstructing the female
Harlem Renaissance; magic, myth,
and folklore; Fannie Lou Hamer and
Sojourner Truth; Ama Aidoo com-
pared with Toni Morrison; and con-
temporary Caribbean women poets.
Chairperson Linda Susan Beard says
“there is tremendous energy in terms
of the American literature being
generated by Black women writers.
People know very little, however,
about comparative diasporic
literature.” She hopes the gathering
will “open up the lens of comparative
literature a little wider.”

North American writers will be
well represented. Audre Lorde will
speak on “Sisterhood Is Survival.”
Also attending will be novelist Paule
Marshall, science fiction writer
Octavia Butler, and scholars Mary
Helen Washington (Black Eyed Sus-
ans), Claudia Tate (Black Women
Writers at Work), and Gloria Hull
(Give Us This Day: The Diary of Alice
Dunbar-Nelson). Nigerian writer Buchi

Emecheta, Canadian Ann Wallace,
and American Barbara Smith will
discuss starting women’s presses to
break free of the constraints of
male-dominated publishing houses.

The organizers are particularly
happy to welcome South African
Ellen Kuzwayo, whose magnificent
autobiography, Call Me Woman, is
published here by Spinsters Ink. The
70-year-old Kuzwayo will be making a
lecture tour after the conference, as
will several other women from
overseas. She will show two films that
she made: A Place of Goodness, which
portrays the plight of people relocated
in the “homelands” in South Africa
(like Indian reservations) and Awake
From Morning, which shows women
banding together to form a financial
base when their men go off to the
mines (they form a selling co-op).
Other films, dance, drama, music,
poetry readings, and radio interviews
will also supplement the formal part of
the conference.

The conference will be videotaped;
partially in the hope that someone
will make a documentary. For
registration information or to request a
bibliography, write to Linda Susan
Beard, Department of English,
Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824 or call Katherine
Stopa at (517) 355-4557.

Subscription Form

Please send a one-year subscription (6 issues). A check for each

subscription is enclosed ($18/Individuals, domestic; $22/Individuals, foreign;
$30/Institutions; $15/Students, with photocopy of current student ID).

Name

Street

City State

Zip

Enclosed is a donation of $.

BL 9/85

Use this form, a photocopy, or a separate sheet. Make checks payable to

Dear Readers,

Thanks to charter subscribers and to people who sent helpful and gratifying
comments upon receiving the preview issue. To readers who have been awaiting
the first issue and to first-time readers: If you like what you see, please subscribe
today! What you see here is only the beginning. With your support, Belles
Lettres can grow bigger, better, and more beautiful. We are publishing this
review without the help of grants, endowments, or fairy godmothers. Therefore
any contribution you can make (even one you might consider measly) will help
us reach more readers, publish more pages, establish writing awards, remunerate
our writers, and maintain our fine quality.

1. Number of books you buy per year
2. Number of literary publications to which you subscribe

3. Rate your level of interest (1 = high; 5 = low) in the following
genres: novel
literary criticism
fiction ___ mystery nonfiction. Other
4. occupation 5. salary level
6. How did you discover Belles Lettres?
7. Will you pass Belles Lettres on to friends? How many? —___—
8. What sources do you use to find out about books?

short story
poetry
romance

biography
arts criticism
history

essay
science fiction

We want a picture of each of you. We can’t take photographs, but we can
create your profile if you will fill out our brief survey (a photocopy is fine) and
send it to us. We would like to publish the results so that you can all get a

glimpse of each other, too.
| September/October 1985

Belles Lettres. Send to Deanna Cook, P.O. Box 987, Arlington, VA 22216.