“We wanted the anthology to help Jewish women build identity, to  
give us joy, pleasure, and knowledge — a sense of deep roots in  
Jewishness,” co-editor Irena Klepfisz tells interviewer Barbara  
Johnson about the spirit behind The Tribe of Dina: A Jewish  
Women’s Anthology. She and Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz have  
indeed succeeded in reaffirming “not only the importance of each  
strand of Jewishness, but also the connectedness.”  

How did you get the idea for The Tribe of  
Dina?  

MK: The Tribe of Dina came from a  
few different threads. One was that we  
wanted to continue work that Nice  
Jewish Girls [1982, available from The  
Crossing Press] had started: We were  
contributors to that anthology and were  
working together politically, at first  
around anti-Semitism. Especially we  
wanted to gather the creative work that  
Jewish women were producing. And  
around the same time, mid-1982, Israel  
invaded Lebanon. The invasion, and  
the response inside the women’s move-  
ment, propelled us into dealing more di-  
rectly with anti-Semitism and also made  
us realize — for our own sanity and to  
get necessary information — that we des-  
perately needed to make contact with  
feminists, peace activists, and lesbians  
in Israel and make that information  
available in this country. This was a sec-  
ond thread.  

IK: A third thread was realizing that  
the work against anti-Semitism is terri-  
bly depleting. That was not what we  
wanted to see Jewish feminist identity  
founded on. We wanted the anthology  
to help Jewish women build identity, to  
give us joy, pleasure, and knowledge —  
a sense of deep roots in Jewishness.  
Another thread was Jewish secularism. I  
come from a very strong secular Jewish  
background that I didn’t see reflected as  
a solid position of identity. Both within  
the women’s movement and within the  
Jewish community — and this is a good  
thing, not a bad thing — there has been  
enormous focus on the reformation of  
religion, and on dealing with feminist  
issues within religious structures. A lot  
of Jews who come from various assimi-  
lated backgrounds move toward reli-  
gion. But for me and for many women I  
knew, religion was not the answer. I  
wanted Tribe — for myself and other  
women — to affirm secular identity as a  
concrete option.  

It seems like it was a gradually evolving  
agenda. You say it began with Nice Jewish  
Girls, which is a lesbian anthology.  

MK: When we began working on  
Tribe, we were very engaged in the les-  
bian community, with lesbian writing  
and publishing. I’ll speak for myself. I  
felt what I needed was to root my  
Jewishness in the tradition of Jewish  
women, very woman-centered, in the  
same way that, as a lesbian, I look to  
women’s history and women’s cultures  
for a line of continuing women’s  
strength. I wanted to find that in Jewish  
cultures. So Tribe was not conceived in  
opposition to Jewish lesbian identity,  
but in making the connection among  
Jewish women.  

But also there is something that  
frightens me about the way divisions  
happen in the women’s movement. You  
start out as women, then you break into  
straight and lesbian women; then the  
lesbians split into Jewish and gentile.  
Not that these divisions and separations  
aren’t important, but especially as Jews  
you end up as a very small world.  
Whereas another approach is that each  
time you’re engaging an issue or iden-  
tity, you expand to include other people  
who might also belong. Jews. Workers.  

Anti-interventionists. We saw Tribe in  
this light: to connect Jewish lesbians  
and feminists in a large and ancient  
women’s tradition.  

What's been going on since The Tribe of  
Dina came out? What kind of reception has  
it received?  

IK: Within 5 months we had distrib-  
uted half of our print run — or 5,000  
copies — prior to any reviews or inter-  
views. Publicity had been word of  
mouth and flyers, that’s all. And dis-  
tributing 5,000 books in 5 months may  
not sound like much, but large presses  
will normally publish only about 5,000  
copies of a new book, unless it’s one of  
the very few they’ve already decided to  
put out in 16 colors and really push. For  
a small press, it’s a phenomenon. Espe-  
cially powerful has been the response  
from the Jewish community: People  
congratulating us on the scope of the  
book, its diversity. People seem sur-  
prised by the book, by its information.  
Progressive feminist and lesbian study  
groups are using it as a text.  

We got wonderful letters from, for  
example, Susanna Heschel, who had  
edited On Being a Jewish Feminist: A  
Reader, which was basically concerned  
with struggles inside the Jewish religion.  
And, for another example, from a  
Jewish lesbian radical who had previ-  
ously written letters to the feminist press  
saying things like “Who cares about  
Jewish identity?” and now she writes  
that The Tribe of Dina changed her mind  
and made her understand. We just got a  
letter from England, from a group of  
Jewish feminists who are putting to-  
gether an anthology there.  

MK: Our sense is that people are re-  
sponding by connecting with their own  
shtik and by learning something about  
other Jewish shtiks. The essays and crea-  
tive work by Sephardic women have  
been especially important, both to  
Sephardi and to Ashkenazi Jews. Pro-  
gressive Jews are very happy to see  
analytical and creative work about Jews  
and the left, and cultural Jews have  
commented favorably on seeing Jewish-  
ness reflected back not only as religion  
but also as culture.  

I imagine that the last section would be  
especially helpful as a study guide.  

IK: We hope so. The last section, “In  
Gerangl/In struggle,” was written by  
Melanie, me, and Bernice Mennis, and  
it contains suggestions for consciousness  
raising, for identifying and resisting  
anti-Semitism, and for building Jewish  
identity and strengthening ties with  
other people.  

You worked on The Tribe of Dina for 4  
years? What was working together like for  
the two of you?  

MK: I think we have a really amazing  
working relationship. The hard part was  
mechanics: We live hundreds of miles  
apart, and we both work for a living.  
(Neither of us has made a penny from  
the book, nor have any of the con-  
tributors.) And so our work schedules  
would always be clashing, and espe-  
cially toward the end, pressure was  
building. We did all the production of  
the book, and it was very complicated.  

Belles Lettres Interview  

Sometimes it got pretty hairy between  
us. The easy part, ironically, was agree-  
ing on what was important, why we  
were doing the book, and what we  
wanted it to achieve. We never thought  
of abandoning it.  

IK: I can’t imagine having done it by  
myself. One of the things that we got  
out of working together was that we  
bring very different perspectives and  
strengths and peculiarities to the work.  
And one keynote in our working to-  
gether is that we have enormous respect  
for each other. We did not block each  
other’s passions or obsessions. Any-  
thing either of us felt really strongly  
about happened.  

What do you feel best about?  

IK: Most simply, that there now  
exists, in one volume, a collection that  
is strongly Jewish, strongly feminist,  
strongly aligned with progressive  
thought, strongly pro-lesbian. It’s been  
especially important, we think, to bring  
information about struggles in Israel to  
the Jewish community. And, getting  
back to our original impulse, which was  
to gather creative work by Jewish  
women, we are especially proud of the  
fiction: some by well-known writers like  
Grace Paley (there’s also an interview  
with Grace, on her peace activism); by  
poets Enid Dame and Ruth Whitman;  
much by incredible writers who are not  
yet known, like Vera Williams (a prize-  
winning children’s author but whose  
adult fiction is published here for virtu-  
ally the first time); or by Gloria Kirch-  
heimer, whose story “Food of Love,”  
about her Sephardic heritage, is one of  
everybody’s favorites.  

I’m struck by the massiveness of this book,  
yet the way you organized it makes it so ac-  
cessible and engaging. How did you decide  
how to organize the book?  

MK: Partly the organization evolved  
over the 4 years we worked on it. At  
some point we knew we wanted to in-  
clude photographs and visual work, and  
these helped us to see the book as more  
than a collection of words. We ended up  
with six sections: “My Ancestors  
Speak,” about Sephardic and Ashkenazi  
cultural roots; “The Women of Our  
Family,” about just that; “I Am the Pre-  
sent Generation,” about the U.S. and  
assimilation; “Lot’s Wife Revisited,”  
about tradition and religion; “Kol  
Haisha/Israeli Women Speak,” which  
consists of interviews and first-person  
work from Israeli activists and other  
women; and “Bread and Roses,” about  
Jewish women activists in the U.S.  

IK: One decision we made about or-  
ganizing the book was that we decided  
not to have separate sections on women  
and the Holocaust or on lesbians; in-  
stead, these materials stream through all  
the sections. We wanted to assert the  
connectedness, that women who did or  
didn’t survive the Holocaust were not a  
separate category, but were women in  
our families, dealing with being Jews in  
the U.S., working as activists in various  
movements, and so on. And the same  
for lesbians. In the same way, having it  
all in one book reaffirms not only the  
importance of each strand of Jewishness,  
but also the connectedness.  

@ Barbara Johnson is an anthropologist  
who teaches at Goddard College in Plain-  
field, VT.  

Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz (left) and Irena Klepfisz (right). Photo by Judith Waterman.  

The Flood  
by Carol Ascher  

Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 1987, $16.95,  
191 pp.  

In The Flood, a first novel, as elsewhere  
in her work, Carol Ascher explores the  
twin themes of “being a woman and  
being a daughter of refugees from the  
Nazis” through the perspective of her  
9-year-old protagonist, Eva. Ascher sets  
the story in the summer of 1951 in  
Topeka, Kansas, where the Hoffmans,  
refugees from Nazi Germany, and their  
two daughters have resettled. The book  
takes its structure from the Kaw River’s  
rhythm of rising, flooding, and receding.  
The characters symbolically evoke the  
biblical flood story and the problem of  
theodicy.  

Lillian, a mental patient of Eva’s  
father, serves as Cassandra. She predicts  
the flood as punishment from God for  
sin and evil, adding human causation to  
divine by plugging the plumbing in two  
hospitals, but later offers Eva symbolic  
restoration — a rainbow she has embroi-  

dered on a handkerchief. The Reverend  
Thomas’s fundamentalist sermon is a re-  
prise to Lillian’s prophetic rumblings to  
the accompaniment of both choir and  
theophanic manifestations of thunder  
and lightning outside the meeting tent.  

Reactions of the Jewish characters to  
the flood, by comparison, reflect Job-  
like struggles with the problems of  
theodicy against the background of the  
Holocaust. Eva’s father and his colleague  
Mordecai argue about reconstructing  
their own lives as they work to recon-  
struct those of their patients. The flood  
propels the Hoffmans into action —  
sandbagging to prevent it and then tak-  
ing refugees into their home. But despite  
their efforts to acculturate, the  
Hoffmans remain isolated. The mother’s  
attempts, for example, to connect with  
the cleaning woman, the neighbor, and  
the family she shelters (who repay her  
with anti-Semitic remarks) are frustrated  
by racial, religious, and class differences.  
Through Eva’s eyes, Ascher reveals the  
family’s emotional isolation from each  
other as well.  

— Miri Amihai  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987 Belles Lettres @ 5