The Venetian Glass  
Nephew  

Mr. Hazard and  
Mr. Hodge  

by Elinor Wylie  

Academy Chicago, 1984, $6.95, 182 pp.  
(VGN); $7.95, 256 pp. (HH).  

The Venetian Glass Nephew is the  

story of a naive and idealistic  
Italian cardinal who, toward the end of  
his long life of service, realizes that  
what he wants most for himself is a  
nephew to educate. Too innocent to  
conceive of the methods whereby the  
other cardinals acquire their nephews,  
he has a glassblower and a magician  
make him a nephew out of the most  
exquisite Venetian glass. This perfect  
but inhuman creature, Virginio, is  
captivated by Rosalba, a young poet of  
genius whom he observes singing in a  
garden. Like Virginio, Rosalba is other-  
worldly, and the two fall in love. The  
rest of the novel is about the working  
out of this passion. I will not give away  
the ending, except to say that Virginio,  
unlike Pinocchio, does not turn into a  
Real Boy.  

In Mr. Hazard and Mr. Hodge, a  
romantic poet of extreme sensibilities  
who has taken a central role in a  
revolution in Greece returns to Eng-  
land. He spends the summer nursing  
an idealized platonic passion (never  
mind the oxymoron, that is Wylie’s  
universe) for a teenage girl named  
Allegra. Her sister, of course, is Pen-  
serosa. The depiction of their mother,  
Claire, is as romantic and idealized as  
that of Rosalba. She takes care of Mr.  
Hazard by allowing him to visit the  
family weekly, by not taking notice of  
his passion, and most of all by not  
trampling on his sensibilities. This  
seems to be enough.  

During the rest of the week, Mr.  
Hazard works on a verse drama based  
on the book of Job. Mercifully, we are  
spared excerpts from the poem. This  
idyll is ended by Mr. Hodge, a modern  
young man of strong mind and charac-  
ter, who is in love with Claire. Mr.  
Hodge is revolted by the nonsense he  
thinks Mr. Hazard represents, and says  
one or two harsh things to Mr. Hazard,  
whose summer world is destroyed in  
a moment.  

These two fables or fantasies were  
widely read when they were originally  
published in the twenties. The roman-  
tic idealism, the themes of wounded  
innocence, and the allusive, elliptical,  
and flowery language of these two  
books look back to the mid-Victorian  
period, as does her depiction of women  
as being mysterious creatures, who  
exist only to be attractive and inspiring  
to men. Most of Wylie’s contempo-  
raries, however, were writing strong  
realistic fiction. Wylie herself was a  
romantic figure, a poet of note, and her  
early death just after Mr. Hazard and  
Mr. Hodge was published must have  
contributed to the popularity of that  
book. —Jessica Weissman  

10 © Belles Lettres  

% Short Reviews %  

Volume the First  
by Jane Austen  
Schocken Books, 1985, $18.00, 152 pp.  

In my honor, reader, I nearly fell  
out of bed laughing at the hilarious  
admixture of absurdity and wit found  
within the too-few pages of Volume the  
First, a collection of pieces that Jane  
Austen wrote between the ages of 12  
and 18 and read to the undoubted de-  
light and amusement of her immediate  
family.  

Like many other writers, Austen  
started out writing parodies of popular  
literature. Of course, this tendency  
showed up in her major novels: What  
was sophisticated and droll about the  
send-up of Gothic romances in North-  
anger Abbey began as outright slapstick  
in Volume the First. The accomplished  
novelist’s fine-tuned sense of the mani-  
fold quirks and foibles of humanity gets  
fair play here, albeit ridiculously ex-  
aggerated, as does the verbal profi-  
ciency of an eventual mistress of the  
English language. What I relished most,  
however, were the incessant absurdities  
that provoked me to the aforementioned  
fits of merriment and which, in  
Austen’s words, “if they should fail of  
exciting in you, Reader, your mind  
must be unworthy to peruse them.”  
Just kidding. —Janet P. Mullaney  

A Comrade is as  
Precious as a  
Rice Seedling  
by Mila Aguilar  

Kitchen Table, 1985, $4.50.  

Putting conviction before her craft,  

Philippine journalist and activist  
Aguilar tells in a voice of mingled anger  
and longing, ardor and strength, of her  
revolutionary fight against the govern-  
ment of President Marcos. From this  
collection of poems comes an audible  
and visible sense of Aguilar’s struggle to  
thwart a government that has given its  
people little except years of repressive  
and corrupt rule. In many poems she  
translates her vision of that struggle  
into turbulent and recurring images of  
darkening skies, torrential rains, gales  
and thunder; in others of a more per-  
sonal nature it is blended with profes-  
sions of compassion for her “comrades”  
and confident hope. Quite a few of her  
poems seem more like proclamations of  
class warfare, chants of Marxian values,  
and fistfuls of exhortations than  
poetry. Anticipating criticism of the  
political character of her work, in “To  
A Foreigner” Aguilar writes: “You ac-  
cuse me of sloganeering/and being  
unpoetic/My writing lines like/‘Damn  
the US-Marcos Dictatorship.’” To a  
woman imprisoned for subversion since  
August 1984, certainly any writing less  
than political would be merely self-  
indulgent. —Pamela Moore  

A Studio of One’s Own  
by Ann Stokes  

Naiad Press, 1985, $7.95, 128 pp.  

Ann Stokes wanted to dedicate  
something of her New Hampshire  
mountain top to the arts. She brought  
up the idea over dinner: “What do you  
think of building a studio for women  
artists?” The responses were positive,  
and the project was begun—building a  
simple living/working space in a quiet  
wooded setting.  

This book is a journal that chronicles  
the realization of that dream, from the  
selection of the site through the oc-  
cupancy by the artists. Ways and  
means were provided, and several  
women joined the author in contribut-  
ing labor, dedication, and imagination,  
as well as the entries in the logbook  
that form the basis of this volume. As  
the vision took shape under the hands  
of initially unskilled laborers, their  
mastery of craft was recorded, their  
physical and spiritual changes were  
charted. The studio gets built through  
fortitude and hard physical labor.  

A section of the book is reserved for  
comments by women who have availed  
themselves of the studio since its com-  
pletion. Their words add to the satis-  
factory conclusion of the project, but  
perhaps more important, they show  
that the studio itself, a work of love for  
art’s sake, will continue to offer artists  
the opportunity to benefit from its ex-  
istence, long after the last batten had  
been nailed down.  

—Deborah M. Welsh  

¥%  

Belles  
Lettres  

According to C. Hugh Holman in  
A Handbook of Literature, belles  

lettres is “literature, more es-  
pecially that body of writing compris-  
ing drama, poetry, fiction, criticism,  
and essays, which lives because of in-  
herent imaginative and artistic rather  
than scientific, philosophical, or intel-  
lectual qualities.” Belles Lettres (pro-  
nounced bel-letruh) does indeed en-  
compass reviews of and news about  
that especial body of writing. We mean  
to include nonfiction also. For, al-  
though nonfiction is engendered by  
science, philosophy, or intellect, we  
believe that it too has “inherent  
imaginative and artistic qualities.”  
When it does not appear so, it is the  
fault of the exposition. We chose the  
name Belles Lettres also for its beauty.  

Annie John  
by Jamaica Kincaid  

Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1985, $11.95,  
148 pp.  

The first story that I read by Jamaica  
Kincaid was called “Gwen” and  
appeared in The New Yorker. Every  
week after reading that story I would  
hurriedly look at the table of contents  
of The New Yorker for Jamaica Kin-  
caid’s name, and copy any Jamaica  
Kincaid story to send out en masse to  
all my friends. Thank goodness that  
Farrar, Straus & Giroux has finally  
collected these stories and a few others  
into Annie John so now I can throw  
away my collection of her stories which  
I have held in a loose-leaf binder.  
Obviously autobiographical, Annie  
John is a collection of interrelated  
stories of a young Antiguan girl going  
through the pains of growing up. It is  
filled with childhood memories that are  
so vivid, so verbally forceful that they  
have the power to move one to tears.  
The intense feelings expressed by the  
narrator are told in such a matter-of-  
fact way that the reader is often emo-  
tionally surprised. I can still remember  
and feel scenes that I read months ago,  
especially those involving Annie and  
her wild-hair, guava-tree-climbing girl-  
friend, “Red Girl.” Annie’s childhood  
is filled with doting adults (her mother  
chews her meat for her and bathes with  
her regularly in herbed baths to ward  
off evil spells). This protectionism is  
paved over as adolescence takes its  
place in Annie’s paradise and every-  
thing is turned upside down. Unfortu-  
nately, the most noticeable crack in the  
pavement is the one between Annie  
and her mother. Adoration turns to  
rebellion and Annie looked at her  
mother and thought “I could not be  
sure if for the rest of my life I would be  
able to tell when it was really her  
shadow standing between me and the  
rest of the whole world.” What Jamaica  
Kincaid reveals to us about the loss of  
childhood in only 148 pages are all  
those things about mothers, daughters,  
and the special passage from girlhood  
to womanhood that so many other  
writers have written around but not  
written about. —Helaine Harris