Travail, Opium Unique

The Face of War, by Martha Gellhorn. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1988,

$9.95, 337 pp. (PB)

The View from the Ground, by Martha Gellhorn. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press,

1988, $9.95, 419 pp. (PB)

Liana, by Martha Gellhorn. New York: Penguin Books/Virago Press, 1987/1944, $6.95,

251 pp. (PB)

by Lorraine E. McCormack

In The View from the Ground, Martha Gellhorn remembers herself at eighteen, tacking Mauriac’s words “travail, opium unique” to her dormitory wall: “A certain daftness attaches to an eighteen-year-old who felt she needed the opium solace of work, but it has served me ever since.” Her adopting Mauriac’s “opium unique” at that age reveals the force that sustained her through a life of danger and financial jeopardy while she chased the truth about the world in which she lived. With work as her only opium and with her insatiable curiosity about the human condition, Gellhorn has spent a lifetime covering conflict, from the Spanish Civil War to Vietnam to Central America. Her focus is on the moral aberrations that cause wars, the valiant people who fight them, and the innocents whose lives and homelands are forever altered because of them. In addition to her contributions to wartime and peacetime journalism, Gellhorn has published two nonfiction books and eleven works of fiction. Liana, written in 1942, made the New York Times best-seller list.

Racism, oppression, and the moral exigencies of war, recurrent themes in Gellhorn’s nonfiction, are the constant stars in Liana’s Caribbean sky. The story is a deceptively simple one of a wealthy, white landowner who attempts to change everything about his Black wife, Liana, to make her acceptable to his white community. Liana accepts the arrangement to escape her dismal living conditions and to help support her family. Desired but despised by her husband, Liana leads an empty, hopeless life until her tutor, Pierre, kindles within her a dream of love.

Marc the rich lout and Pierre the poor scholar have only one thing in common besides their selfish participation in Liana’s destruction, and that is their desire to be ennobled in some way by participating in the war effort. Marc hopes to redeem his social standing by bolstering the island’s economy with exotic war supplies, and Pierre is driven by guilt to return to France to fight. Gellhorn’s message of the pervasive evil of war is clear: No matter how remote the spit of land you call home, the evil can infect your life.

Although set in a lush tropical island, Liana has no pictures of flowers in riotous colors, or of a sun-sparkled sea. The atmosphere under the tropical sun is gloomy and hopeless. Only a fall night that Liana enjoys alone seems peaceful.

The stars looked polished and higher in the sky. The weather affected the size of the island: a clean wind, or this sort of wide night made the land seem larger. As the land stretched in the wind or grew beyond its boundaries in the bigness of the night, the people had more room to breathe and to live.

For Liana, wrapped in a lie, there was no room to breathe or to live and, worst of all, there was no one to care. Considering when this book was written, it is easy to understand the source of its cynical tone, but Liana’s tale lacks even the grim humor and the hope that Gellhorn manages to find in most of the real occurrences she reports.

Cartoon by Susan Catherine.

Last time we heard from her, she was overhearing bizarre, tacky, and profound bons mots in the snack bars of London.

Part 1988

In The Face of War, the Atlantic Monthly Press republishes thirty-five articles Gellhorn wrote on wars in Europe, China, Java, the Middle East, Vietnam, and Central America. These articles, which originally appeared in Colliers, The Guardian, and other popular publications on both sides of the Atlantic, were written in the midst of the fray. As portraits of war, they are genuinely hair-raising, heart-stopping testimonies to the valor of those who survived the carnage day by day and those who succumbed.

In her introduction, Gellhorn speaks of journalism as her personal passport “to the spectacle of history in the making.” Her images of that spectacle are haunting in their beauty and their horror, like Finnish soldiers, camouflaged in white, gliding silently into battle on skis. Some of the images go beyond horror, such as Dachau, napalm, and Italian orphanages full of tiny, silent amputees. Gellhorn does not spare us the pain of revisiting these atrocities, because if we look closely enough at what war really is, we will choose peace. Won’t we?

The View from the Ground is a selection of articles Gellhorn wrote over five decades in so-called peacetimes. As her stories of lives in war are riveting for the immediacy of the suffering, these peacetime snapshots are similarly compelling in their images of terrorism and oppression around the world, McCarthyism at home, and war’s hapless victims. Happily, Gellhorn treats us to a few lighthearted reminiscences, including her attempts at pioneering in the beauty of East Africa. Her savoir faire in a broken-down house with monkeys on the roof and poisonous snakes in the parlor explains much about the toughness that kept her on the front lines of international journalism. Homesteading in Africa was her idea of relaxation; sitting on a wooden crate between the twin tails of a P-61 on a bombing mission was her idea of getting a story.

The View from the Ground is an excellent follow-up to The Face of War. Gellhorn rounds out themes from her wartime writings by reexamining the human conditions in Germany, England, Poland, Spain, Israel, Palestine, Cuba (where she lived during her marriage to Ernest Hemingway), and, most provocatively, the United States. The wartime writings are sharp and spare, and they pique our curiosity about this remarkable writer. The peacetime writings give us a satisfying ration of feelings along with the facts. Her artful dealings with government officials and her penchant for living room interviews show her skills as a canny information gatherer and a tireless debunker of government propaganda. Her personal experiences with racism in Haiti, protest against nuclear weapons by the women of Greenham Common, and other issues that affect our lives are colorfully but thoughtfully narrated, often so candidly that we cannot predict which view she will espouse until the story has been told. She explains, “Journalism is education for me; . . . writing is payment for the chance to look and learn.”

It does not matter if you accept her cynical assessment of refugee life in the Middle East or her invective on greed-driven governments. Gellhorn’s purpose is to stimulate your appetite for enough information to form an opinion of your own, and she succeeds brilliantly. She requires collaboration of her readers. “The act of keeping the record straight . . . is a form of honorable behavior, involving the reporter and the reader.” Her work is a reminder to those of us who learn our history from television miniseries that we have a responsibility for the world we live in, and an imperative to keep ourselves informed about its workings.

@ Lorraine E. McCormack is a Washington, D.C., writer and critic.

A Rose and a Widow

The World Is Round, by Gertrude Stein (illustrated by Clement Hurd; afterword by Edith Thacher Hurd). San Francisco: North Point Press, 1988, $19.95, 162 pp.

The Widow and the Parrot, by Virginia Woolf (illustrated by Julian Bell; afterword by Quentin Bell). San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $12.95, nonpaginated.

by Karla Jay

Many readers will be surprised to learn that two great feminist modernists who were not mothers broke ground in children’s literature while contemporary male counterparts who were fathers (Hemingway and Steinbeck, for example) declined offers to do so. One may thus speculate whether writing children’s literature springs more from a certain sensibility than from being a parent.

Creating stories for children in the 1920s and 1930s, when The Widow and the Parrot and The World Is Round respectively were written, was an adventurous undertaking because, generally speaking, children were expected to read whatever adults found ennobling or entertaining. Those books, of course, upheld the patriarchal ideals of post-Victorian life, which both Woolf and Stein undermine in their tales.

Both stories are predicated on an alliance between women and animals rather than between men and women (a bonding foreshadowed in Renée Vivien’s 1904 “The Woman of the Wolf”). In Woolf's tale, set in Sussex in the 1870s (conveniently past but not long ago and far away like a fairy tale), a poor elderly widow is aided by a straggly grey parrot. Both the woman and the bird are without value to the society around them: The parrot might fetch half a crown; the widow, nothing. The parrot saves her life by lighting her way home when she is lost and then enriches her by leading her to the secret cache of gold her miserly brother hid before his death. Stein’s heroine, Rose, feels closest to her dog Love and to the lion Billie, although she marries her cousin Willie (who turns out inexplicably not to be a relative) in an ending so obviously tacked on that their nuptials evoke hilarity rather than romance.

More cogently, both Woolf and Stein were preoccupied with the task of creating strong female protagonists long before Nancy Drew pursued criminals in her red roadster. Woolf's Mrs. Gage is perhaps the more subversive of the two central characters, for when she travels alone to her brother’s hometown, crosses a dangerous ford by herself, and scoffs at advice to sell the parrot, she is defying conventional stereotypes about class and age as well as gender. Rose embarks on a quest to climb a mountain, lugging a blue lawn chair all the way up so that she can sit and enjoy the view. In completing their quests, both characters overcome what are considered to be women’s terrors: night, loneliness, solitary travel, the wilderness.

Stein takes a particularly shrewd look at the difference between the nature of boys and girls. Willie is sure of his identity and place in the world. He sings:

Believe me because I tell you

Then I am Willie and Willie oh.  
Oh Willie needs Willie to tell

them so.

Rose, on the other hand, is not so certain of hers: “Would she have been Rose if her name had not been Rose and would she have been Rose if she had been a twin?” Only after she has completed her journey and carved “a Rose is a Rose is a Rose is a Rose” on a tree does she establish a firm sense of herself. (Stein chanted this line in several works, not just here.)

Stein also has great insight into how children view the world. Rose is disappointed when she learns that stars are really round, just as the world, moon, and everything else seem to be. Willie wonders why lizards don’t fall off a round world. And children are likely to have less trouble with Stein’s nonsense rhymes than many adults I know! Her verses are simply fun to read out loud.

Both books are gracefully illustrated. Clement Hurd, who studied with Fernand Léger but whose work more closely resembles that of Matisse, illustrates Stein’s text with wood and linoleum cuts that reflect Rose’s concept of space. Julian Bell, Woolf's great-nephew, has created some well-detailed and softly colored illustrations for the widow’s tale.

It should be clear that both books are entirely suitable for children as well as for adults. Even though the cost is higher than that of the average children’s book, either work would make a splendid seasonal or birthday gift, for Stein and Woolf are “name brands” worth the extra price!

@ Karla Jay is a professor of English at Pace University, New York City. Her latest book is The Amazon and the Page: Natalie Clifford Barney and Renée Vivien.

Belles Lettres @ 21