Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, Virginia 22216  
301/294-0278  

2  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

®  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
DESIGNER  

®  

Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

¢  

Kamili Anderson  
Jane Bakerman  
Regina Barreca  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary K. Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Helaine Harris  
Susan Koppelman  
Faye Moskowitz  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  

¢  

Jeanne Casey  
Adele Gorelick  
Carmen Johnson  
Catherine McDermott  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) ap-  
pears four times a year. It is available  
by subscription and is distributed by  
Inland Book Company, East Haven,  
CT; Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and  
Ubiquity Distribution, Brooklyn, NY.  
Member of the Coordinating Council  
of Literary Magazines. Funded in part  
by the Jenny Moore Fund and the Na-  
tional Endowment for the Arts.  

Subscription Rates  
$30.00/institutions; $15.00/individ-  
uals; $12.50/students with photocopy  
of student ID; foreign + $9.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of books  
written by women, published by trade,  
university, and independent presses.  
Both scholarly and popular works are  
reviewed in the genres of fiction, non-  
fiction, poetry, biography, and criti-  
cism. Our purpose is to promote and  
celebrate writing by women and in  
doing so, to inform and entertain. All  
views are those of the individual  
authors.  

Correspondence  
Editorial correspondence and books  
for review should be sent to Janet  
Mullaney at 11151 Captain’s Walk  
Ct., Gaithersburg, MD 20878, except  
for poetry books and queries (send to  
Michelle Tokarezyk, 130 W. 16th St.,  
#61, NY, NY 10011) and mysteries  
(send to Jane Bakerman, RR 23, Box  
131, Terre Haute, IN 47802). Con-  
tributors should query first, send clips,  
and enclose SASE.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is accepted.  
Copy should be camera ready (stats or  
veloxes suitable for direct paste-up). If  
other forms are accepted (i.e., manu-  
script, negatives, photocopies, art  
boards), production charges will be as-  
sessed for typesetting or camera work.  
Deadline for space reservations is the  
first of the month, two months preced-  
ing the month of issue. Write for rate  
card or call 301/294-2078 or 301/949-  
1838.  

©Belles Lettres Inc.  

Spring 1989  

Report From  
New Orleans  
by Deborah Price  

“There really are two MLAs,” Paula Ben-  
nett says of the Modern Language Associa-  
tion, “the mainstream MLA and the alterna-  
tive MLA for Blacks, women and gays.”  

For Bennett, an Emily Dickinson scholar,  
and a growing number of gay teachers and  
students in the professional association, ses-  
sions about homosexuality in literature—or,  
closer to home, in the tenure track—are the  
primary motive for attending the annual con-  
vention.  

At the recent gathering in New Orleans,  
the Division on Gay Studies in Language and  
Literature sponsored sessions that focused on  
lesbian literary theory, Walt Whitman and  
homosexuality, and gay playwrights such as  
Tennessee Williams and Oscar Wilde who  
wrote straight plays. The Gay Caucus, a sepa-  
rate group with a political agenda, held ses-  
sions on coming out and on the impacts of  
AIDS on the teaching profession. Another  
group paid tribute to the author of Mrs.  
Stevens Hears the Mermaids Singing, May Sar-  
ton, who read a selection of poems.  

I went to New Orleans to hear the session  
on Whitman and to “try” my first MLA con-  
ference. When I encountered a full agenda  
on homosexuality in literature, my reporter's  
curiosity overtook me. I was surprised how far  
back my investigation led me; the vitality of  
the gay-related groups had suggested new-  
ness.  

The history of open and active gay partici-  
pation in the MLA dates back to the 1973  
convention in Chicago. “Things were just  
right then for the organization of a caucus,”  
recalls Dolores Noll, cofounder of the Gay  
Caucus. Christopher Isherwood attracted an  
overflowing crowd to a forum on homosexu-  
ality and literature.  

Everyone described Isherwood’s speech as a  
turning point for gays in the MLA. Bennett  
said Isherwood “was a big splash. We were  
saying with him, ‘We're out and we're never  
going back again.” James D. Steakley,  
author of The Homosexual Emancipation  
Movement in Germany, recalled feeling ex-  
uberant. “In what direction do you see the  
gay-rights movement going?” Steakley re-  
counted an audience member asking Isher-  
wood. “On to victory!” was the reply.  

The morning after Isherwood spoke, gay  
professors and students met and crafted an  
agenda. “The time was right,” cofounder  
Louis Crompton said, echoing Noll. Cromp-  
ton, author of Byron and Greek Love, credited  
the Stonewall riot of 1969 and the collective  
energy of feminists, Blacks, and student gay  
groups for empowering him and others to de-  
cide to take action in the MLA. “We've been  
enormously successful in achieving our  
goals,” he said. “The most significant thing is  
the enormous burst of publications, the pro-  
liferation of scholarly studies” relating to ho-  
mosexuality. Noteworthy books by partici-  
pants in the groups include Lillian Faderman’s  
Surpassing the Love of Men: Romantic  
Friendship Between Women From the Renais-  
sance to the Present, Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s  
Between Men: English Literature and Male Ho-  
mosocial Desire and Sharon O’Brien’s Willa  
Cather: The Emerging Voice.  

Among the interesting presentations in  
New Orleans was Rebecca Mark’s explora-  
tion of Gertrude Stein’s little-known Lifting  
Belly as a representation of lesbian lovemak-  
ing (Naiad Press plans to publish the book-  
length erotic poem in October, with an in-  
troduction by Mark.) In a session on coming  
out, Karla Jay, author of The Amazon and the  
Page, humorously described her parents  
wanting to boast of their daughter but not  
wanting their friends to learn the subject of  
her work. If anyone asks what Jay’s books are  
about, her mother has instructed her what to  
do. “Tell them you forgot.”  

I was surprised to learn that many members  
in the gay division are straight, having either  
joined as a symbol of solidarity or simply out  
of scholarly interest. I also was surprised that  
the gay groups are not male-dominated; to  
the contrary, time and duties have been  
divided equally from the start. The visible  
and active participation of women left me  
wondering whether the MLA’s feminist  
groups had been drained of their lifeblood.  
Interviews with several women, however,  
convinced me that no such effect has been  
felt.  

Joanne Glasgow, a past president of the  
Women’s Caucus, said the feminist and gay  
groups meet separate needs. “Gay men and  
women share their gayness and minority sta-  

CONTENTS  

eo  

VOLUME 4/NUMBER 3  

SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY  

2 Dawn and Adulthood Rites.......  
by Octavia Butler  

3 Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences and  
Dancing at the Edge of the World. .  
The Queen of the Damned  
Those Who Hunt the Night  

BB Ob 6x sm OBONDOT by Ursula K. LeGuin  
sown ememome swankdlk £5:828 by Anne Rice  
. emitiad ERS EMS ESE by Barbara Hambly  

4 Women of Vision: Essays by Women  
Science Fiction Writers ..........  
The Best of Pamela Sargent.......  
The Hidden Side of the Moon.....  
A Door Into Ocean... 1... ...-.++-  

path ew bea edited by Denise DuPont  
Ki@Ies Ee edited by Martin H. Greenberg  
whee Gaemome omewran dt by Joanna Russ  
by Joan Slonczewski  

5 Transcending Gender: The Male/Female Double in  
Women’s Fiction.........-. 64-6  

REPRINTS  

6 Pink and White Tyranny.......-.  
Clovernook Sketches and Other Stories......-.-.-+.--+++55  

we emia we ewen edd SHED by Joanne Blum  

cmon me cusses ¥ by Harriet Beecher Stowe  
by Alice Cary  

Women Artists, Women Exiles: “Miss Grief” and  
Other Stories..........50.00 05+  
Alternative Alcott.............--  
The Hidden Hand............---  

eer by Constance Fenimore Woolson  
a nmi d tan FRACEEEE by Louisa May Alcott  

7 Lady Bridget in the Never-Never Land: A Story of Australian Life;  
Outlaw and Lawmaker; and The Bond of Wedlock  
An Australian Girl.........-.---  

Uncle Piper of Piper’s Hill  

A Marked Man: Some Episodes in His Life...........-  

SHORT STORIES  

by Rosa Praed  
Anos ri eaor osc by Catherine Martin  
by Tasma (Jessie Couvreur)  
by Ada Cambridge  

wow Ee euls Re by Paulette Bates Alden  

Trashy cs cages ae gyrus voreuems $E0R EES AR EGSEE COTE we by Dorothy Allison  
Sans Souci and Other Stories ........--- 6 cence ee ee eee by Dionne Brand  
The Book of Seeing With One’s Own Eyes........--- by Sharon Doubiago  
Love, Struggle, and Change: Stories by Women and Through  
Others’ Eyes: Animal Stories by Women..........- edited by Irene Zahava  

19 The Long White ...........--++-  
The Purchase of Order.........--  
Playing with Shadows......+..---  

cviewin cmamane ERERES by Gloria Whelan  

Fifty Years of Eternal Vigilance and Other Stories. ... by Carolyn Thorman  

REVIEWS  

8 Deceits of Time........-...0055  
The Truth About Lorin Jones.....  
Tracks 6.0... eu cee ene eee  

9 John Dollar ........-..0250-e05  
Vanished 25 ss ccscs paces cee ones  

10 Fair and Tender Ladies.........--  

Storming Heaven  

12 Passion and Prejudice...........-  
The Amazon and the Page........  

13. A Renaissance Tapestry........--  
The Good Times Are Killing Me ..  

16 Not So Quiet... Stepdaughters of War  

cebu eect eeeee by Isabel Colegate  
wy weina embetae PEERED ® by Alison Lurie  
er eee by Louise Erdrich  
by Jessica Mitford  

ae oOo NNGOCOs050 by Marianne Wiggins  
eee e eee by Mary McGarry Morris  

Eee ey aiieye et et iab rail by Lee Smith  
ried emamemne eoanmt a € by Denise Giardina  

ROA OVANE 4/20 OS DUOMO OF by Sallie Bingham  
(oan ames warmmnwn smele dee Be by Karla Jay  

das FRESE GESHERO CH cme by Kate Simon  
by Lynda Barry  

Aan honaAO by Helen Zenna Smith  

Women on War: Essential Voices for the Nuclear Age from a Brilliant  
International Assembly .....-----  

We Stand Our Ground: Three Women, Their Vision,  
bh ahe 2 BEHE by Kimiko Hahn, Gale Jackson, and Susan Sherman  

21 The Carpathians..............5-  

20  
Their Poems  

Girl in a Turban.... 2.0.6: .-..-»  
Centuries of Female Days  

COLUMNS  

edited by Daniela Gioseffi  

11 Belles Lettres Interview: Denise Giardina  

14 Rediscovery: Nella Larsen  

15 The Criminal Element { by Jane Bakerman  

17. Retrospective: Rachel Ingalls  
22  

Impressions: Briefly Noted, Miscellany, Help Bail Out Belles,  
Book Drawing Winners, Plume Reprints  

On the Cover: “Dutch Doll” quilt by Talula Gilbert Bottoms. From Legacy: The Story of  
Talula Gilbert Bottoms and Her Quilts, by Nancilu B. Burdick (Nashville, TN: Rutledge  
Hill Press, 1988, $19.95, 172 pp., color photos)  

&  

tus, but they are still men and women,” she  
said. “One of the nice things about the MLA  
now is that I can find a place for both—the  
concern or the issues stemming from being  
gay and from being a woman.”  

The feminist and gay groups offer variety,  
choices “other than Swift and Milton,”  
Glasgow said.  

“Fifteen years ago, this was all very scary,”  

¥  

said Bennett, who has just completed her  
second book. “We knew what we were trying  
to do was important. A lot of people were  
taking risks. But today, we are accepted; our  
scholarship is being accepted. We know  
things are changing.”  

@ Deborah Price is an editor at the Washing-  
ton Post.  

Belles Lettres @ 1