described “short, chubby dyke” who has lesbians have reclaimed dyke t  
Sex Is Work, Too signal sentate sslieal, uam-  

Sex Work: Writings by Women in the Sex Industry, edited by Frederique Delacoste and  
Priscilla Alexander. Cleis Press (P.O. Box 8933, Pittsburgh, PA 15221), 1987, $10.95,  

349 pp. (PB)  

Good Girls/Bad Girls: Sex Trade Workers and Feminists Face to Face, edited by Laurie  
Bell. The Seal Press (3131 Western Ave. #410, Seattle, WA 98111), 1987, $9.95, 231 pp. (PB)  

by Jane Campbell  

Are feminists anxious and fearful  

about recreational sex? Do they  

secretly condemn prostitutes  
because they personally dislike sex  
without emotional intimacy? Have their  
historical efforts to legislate against por-  
nography and prostitution assisted in the  
madonna/whore dichotomy? Do feminists  
view prostitutes, strippers, and porn  
workers as either victimized or brain-  
washed by the patriarchy?  

These and other questions inform Sex  
Work and Good Girls/Bad Girls, forcing  
feminists to take a long, decidedly pain-  
ful look at their attitudes about women  
working in the sex industry. In each of  
these fascinating books we hear the voices  
of strippers, hookers, porn actresses, and  
models enraged by feminists who have  
regarded them as contributing to the op-  
pression of women, and who have de-  
nied that many sex workers not only  
choose their profession but enjoy and  
celebrate it.  

But these books do not aim merely to  
challenge feminists. Instead, both books  
seek to unite women in and outside the  
sex industry, to demystify this industry,  
and to raise women’s consciousness.  
While compiling Sex Work, coeditor  

Bones  
Gives Plenty  

Bones of Plenty, by Lois Phillips Hudson.  
St. Paul: Minnesota Historical Society,  
1986, $7.95, 439 pp. (PB)  

by Madelyn M. Arnold  

If my freshman lit professor had suc-  

ceeded, as he tried so hard to do, in  

persuading me that a writer could  
not convincingly write across gender,  
that a woman must therefore fail in at-  
tempting to create the voice of a male  
tenant farmer, then I would necessarily  
conclude that Lois Phillips Hudson is a  
committee. For in addition to five major  
(and many minor) viewpoints, Hudson  
mimics identically what might be called  
the voice of a certain vision of the Dust  
Bowl years.  

In fact, freshman lit tried to sell me a  
lot of stuff — like that to fictionalize in-  
dividual characters within a framework of  
large events was to write socialist  
realism, a term that generally translates  
as “nonpoetic bullshit.” And that writ-  
ing about the lives of people like myself  
(working-class, or worse, working-class  
women) was by definition trivial, being  
about the ugly, gloomy, mundane world  
of people who were not like my English  
professor (“The happy peasants,” scorned  
my Indiana pedant, “singing and danc-  
ing.”)  

Bones of Plenty is not didactic.  
Neither is it contrived sentiment nor  
unrelieved gloom. It is good realism,  
and a very good read besides. Through  
the disaster of 1930s farming, the reader  
follows two men and three women, one  
of whom exists in a feminist nightmare  
like that of many rural girls (for exam-  
ple, me). These voices work, the envi-  
ronment works, because Hudson plays  
cats’ cradle with detail, and she shapes  
some of the most believable per-  
sonalities in fiction.  

As life rains down on their dreams,  
these people — three generations of a  
family — think and work. Critics have  
repeatedly stated that Americans are  
unique in that they write about work.  
Here, then, is a singularly American  

[ 4 © Belles Lettres  

Frederique Delacoste placed ads in the  
feminist media, discovering that sex  
workers are part of the women’s move-  
ment but have had difficulty coming out  
within the movement as prostitutes. The  
misconceptions about prostitution and  
other sex work, Delacoste found, divide  
and weaken the women’s community.  
Rather than being victims, women in  
the sex industry struck me as being pow-  
erful, resilient, often funny. Above all,  
these women demand that their work,  
like that of all women, be respected.  

Although the two books pursue a simi-  
lar agenda, they do so in rather different  
ways, making them useful companion  
pieces. Sex Work opens with riveting in-  
troductions by Delacoste, whose sensi-  
tive identification with les putes began  
years ago in a Paris café, and coeditor  
Priscilla Alexander, whose activity with  
Margo St. James and other prostitutes’  
rights advocates enables her to sum up  
nicely most of the issues tackled in the  
book. Following this, Sex Work divides  
into three parts.  

Part 1, “In the Life,” reverses the usual  
academic style by first offering poems,  
narratives, and essays by sex workers  
themselves rather than scholarly back-  
ground. Telling their stories, these  
women reveal their complexity and di-  
versity. We meet Peggy Morgan, a self-  

novel of stiff-necked people. The cent-  
ral character’s (George’s) sheer labor  
must surprise the citified reader. His  
wife works even more, considering her  
relative strength and size. And here is a  
point Hudson makes in a number of  
ways: Woman is genuinely worth less.  
The child Lucy, working hard, learning  
to be silent, watches her parents sweat  
their way to the bottom. She is horrified  
at her sex and her world, but she fights.  

There are many fine touches here.  
The detail interests, the story involves,  
the political and feminist information is  
clear. And these are not Steinbeck peas-  
ants; these folks are neither ignorant nor  
pawns. It is their source of strength that  
these farmers consider themselves  
partners with the country. They believe  
that hard work will occasionally (in the  
“parity years”) zero their economic  
danger. But partners they are not: There  
are layers upon layers of parasites above  
them, and war is coming. Their ignor-  
ance, in a way, gives them courage.  

There is one episode that I considered  
didactic: A minor character lectures  
Grandfather Will on economics. Yet  
even here, the reader is not clapped on  
the dunce stool for instruction. This  
Wobbly is a sick old man, bullied and  
laughed at by the hospital staff. He is a  
pitiable old reprobate, a device that  
keeps him from being oracular.  

The author’s ancestors farmed unsuc-  
cessfully during the Depression, an un-  
remarkable fact when one considers the  
numbers of farmers displaced at that  
time. What is remarkable is her ability  
to give us the entire picture, and in this  
way to remove the guilt from those who  
failed — to show that they were not re-  
ally cogs in the economic mill but grist.  
Bones of Plenty is a good historical por-  
trait with convincing characters (read-  
ers can learn, for example, the silver  
standard and how to connect a cream  
separator). Like a feminist Mackinley  
Kantor, Lois Phillips Hudson has a  
phenomenal ability to particularize —  
with no holding back, no observational  
posing.  

@ Madelyn M. Arnold, who lives in  
Seattle, is a sci-tech and realistic fiction writer  
with a keen interest in history.  

strips for a living, notwithstanding her  
college degree; Debi Sundahl, a former  
women’s studies major turned stripper;  
Karen, working the street for a brief stint  
when she was a 15-year-old runaway;  
Gloria Lockett, who reveals the horrors  
of arrest and rape by the police; Mistress  
Lilith Lash, who hired on at a B&D  
club as a dominant partner “figuring it  
was better to give than to receive”; and  
Nell, who has left the street for safer  
territory but continues to identify with  
her racial and class background. We  
walk the street when it is thirty below  
zero; we enter the porn films, the cars,  
the bars, the brothels. We hear from  
workers like Aline, who likens her ser-  
vices to psychotherapy and lambasts the  
notion of the sex-crazed hooker, “an-  
other myth created by men and per-  
petuated by horny priests, ministers,  
two-faced religious enthusiasts and  
Bible-beaters.” We observe backstage  
dialogues such as the one between mas-  
sage parlor workers Emma and Candy:  
“How does Kim do it? They’re all crazy  
about her.” “It’s because she hates sex.  
. . . It turns them on.”  

Throughout Part 1 Carol Leigh, the  
Scarlot Harlot, appears, exists, and reap-  
pears, elucidating the joys and agonies  
of sex work, offering comic relief (“My  
life was so boring/ 'Til I started whoring,”  
she sings) and sobering commentary.  
Part 2 makes connections between sex  
workers and feminism, practice and  
theory, by presenting fine essays on is-  
sues such as AIDS and the convergence  
of racism, anti-Semitism, and misogyny.  
Part 3 enunciates the views of sex work  
organizations such as COYOTE (Call  
Off Your Old Tired Ethics); Whisper:  
Women Hurt in Systems of Prostitution  
Engage in Revolt; and The Red Thread:  
Whores Movement in Holland.  

Good Girls/Bad Girls does not illumi-  
nate the industry through storytelling,  
but it gives voice and immediacy to par-  
ticipants at a 1985 conference sponsored  
by the Ontario Public Interest Research  
Group and organized by sex trade work-  
ers, political activists, lesbians and gays,  
women and men of color, “an academic  
or two,” and Laurie Bell, editor of this  
book. In Part 1, “Feminists Speak,” we  
hear from Mariana Valverde, Susan  
Cole, and other members of the Cana-  
dian women’s movement, followed by  
speeches, comments, and questions from  
the floor. Part 2, “Sex Trade Workers  
Speak,” maintains the same format, with  
the voices of sex workers Margo St.  
James (founder of COYOTE), Valerie  
Scott, and Amber Cooke, followed by  
Joan Nestle’s “Lesbians and Prostitutes:  
A Historical Sisterhood,” a piece also  
appearing in Sex Work. Part 3, “Sex  
Trade Workers and Feminists Speak,” juxt-  
aposes speeches by the two groups. The  
design of Good Girls/Bad Girls grants us  
vicarious participation in the confer-  
ence; moreover, it furnishes a forum so  
that feminists and sex trade workers, his-  
torically polarized, can debate issues.  

Margo St. James explains why she and  
many other prostitutes have reclaimed  

signal an embracement of a radical, non-  
procreational sexual identity. Speakers  
also explore the advantages of de-  
criminalization over legalization. Legali-  
zation allows the government to regulate  
prostitutes, often forcing them to live in  
brothels or in designated areas; the gov-  
ernment lists or licenses prostitutes and  
decides with whom they do business. De-  
criminalization, on the other hand, en-  
ables prostitutes to work freely, entitling  
them to insurance, retirement, and  
other benefits. Another matter of con-  
sequence is sex trade workers’ insistence  
that the knife-wielding, abusive pimp,  
although a reality for some women, does  
not constitute a universal fact but a  
stereotype. We are also reminded about  
the discrimination against women of  
color, who more often work the street  
and suffer arrest.  

Good Girls/Bad Girls wrestles with sev-  
eral considerations not handled in Sex  
Work. Speakers move discussions of ra-  
cial and class discrimination in new di-  
rections. Particularly significant are pre-  
sentations on racism in pornography,  
especially the depiction of Native  
American women and the speech about  
prostitution and pornography in the  
Philippines. There, Martha O’Campo  
tells us, “the use of women as sex com-  
modities ranges from erotic models and  
child prostitution to mail-order brides,  
domestic slaves, and troupes of dancing  
girls for overseas.” But for every speech,  
like O’Campo’s, that decries women’s  
exploitation in the sex trade, we have  
another, like Amber Cooke’s, that  
reemphasizes the need for feminists to  
regard sex industry workers with respect  
rather than seeing them as victims.  
Cooke, a retired stripper and political  
organizer, analyzes the forces propelling  
some women into exotic dancing: For  
many women from dysfunctional, chem-  
ically addicted families, stripping repre-  
sents “the most dignified thing they will  
ever do in their lives. They’re in show  
business, they have status, they have a  
career.”  

My juxtaposition of O’Campo’s and  
Cooke’s points of view approximates the  
experience of reading Good Girls/Bad  
Girls. At times the interplay between  
speakers and participants at the confer-  
ence is frustrating and confusing. The  
organization of the book, while it engen-  
ders useful interplay, also tends to rein-  
force the stereotype that sex trade work-  
ers cannot also be feminists. But my  
applause far outweighs my criticism. Sex  
Work and Good Girls/Bad Girls are  
pioneering, myth-shattering works that  
have the capacity to inspire and em-  
power all women.  

® Jane Campbell, author of Mythic  
Black Fiction: The Transformation of  
History and “Pauline Elizabeth Hopkins”  
in the DLB 50: Afro-American Writers  
Before the Harlem Renaissance, is a  
feminist who has recently become intrigued  
with the connections among lesbians,  
witches, and cats.  

HOT OFF THE PRESS!  
THE 1987 CANADIAN WOMEN’S DIRECTORY  

At last!  

A bilingual index of  

women's groups across Canada!  

Nearly 2,000 addresses organized  
by subject with easy reference  
by province and territory.  

$7.95  
(+ $1.00 postage  
and handling)  

Telephone orders welcome  
Also available in bookstores  

An essential networking tool for  
women's organizations, for commu-  
nity groups and agencies... and  
for all women in Canada.  

Order your copy now!  

Les Editions Communiqu'Elles  
3585 St. Urbain Street  
Montreal, Qc, H2X 2N6  

(514) 844-1761  

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988 |