Two Ways to Read

The Doris Lessing Reader, by Doris Lessing. New York: Knopf, 1989, $24.95, 633 pp.  
Rereading Doris Lessing: Narrative Patterns of Doubling and Repetition, by Claire  
Sprague. Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press, 1987,  

$22.00 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 210 pp.

The Fifth Child, by Doris Lessing. New York: Knopf, 1988, $6.95, 131 pp. (PB)  
Prisons We Choose to Live Inside, by Doris Lessing. New York: Harper & Row,  

$6.95, 78 pp. (PB)

by Jeanne Schinto

There are two ways to read, ac-  

cording to Martha Quest. One  

“deepens and intensifies what  
one already knows.” The other gathers  
“new facts, new views to weave into  
one’s life.” Lessing’s semiautobiographical  
Quest, whose developing con-  
sciousness drives the five novels of the  
quintet Children of Violence was, at age  
sixteen, “saturated” with the first kind of  
reading and needed the second.

Lessing comments differently on the  
act of reading by a middle-aged political  
organizer in her lengthy short story “The  
Temptation of Jack Orkney.” During a  
personal crisis precipitated by a visit  
home to his dying father, Orkney goes to  
the British Museum Reading Room:

He could not keep his attention from  
wandering from the page, and the men  
and women all around him bending over  
books seemed to be insane; this habit of  
solving all questions by imbibing informa-  
tion through the eyes of the printed page  
was a form of self-hypnotism. He was see-  
ing them and himself as a species that  
could not function unless it took in infor-  
mation in this way.

Lessing, in her nearly forty-year ca-  
reer, starting with The Grass Is Singing,  
set on a farm in separatist South Africa,  
occasionally may doubt the efficacy of  
reading, but she has never doubted that  
free thought is the way to a unified  
world. A champion of global humanist  
concerns, she believes that the unifica-  
tion — indeed, the very continuation —  
of our world depends on freedom of  
mind, the kind, like her own, that  
courts paradoxes and contradictions.

This year, marking Lessing’s sev-  
entieth birthday, The Doris Lessing  
Reader has been issued. Both “Jack Ork-  
ney” and a piece of Martha Quest (1951)  
are included, as are thirteen other sto-  
ries, excerpts from twelve more of her  
nineteen novels, and four nonfiction  
pieces. The effect is daunting even on a  
reader familiar with Lessing’s scope and  
prodigiousness. The stories have been  
selected not so much to make an artful  
collection of her best work but to show  
her remarkable range of subjects and  
styles — and conclusions. The novel  
excerpts, no less remarkable in their  
variety and sweep, start with the first  
chapter of the earliest and end with a  
section of the pseudonymous The Diaries  
of Jane Somers (1983, 1984).

Reading excerpts gives a fractured  
feeling, quite different from the satisfac-  
tion of reading a whole. The Reader,  

therefore, is a disconcerting package,  
emphasizing, as it does, content and  
chronology over form. The Reader  
eventually makes its own shaped book,  
however. And perhaps it is handy to  
have this buffet when faced with a writer  
who offers so much. This new compen-  
dium, for example, gives a brief but  
compelling look at the space fiction  
quintet Canopus in Argos: Archives.  
Those who previously shunned work  
they feared was of an alien genre will be  
pleased to find that it is not, and may be  
enticed to sample a whole book from the  
series. What is more, The Reader's effect  
is to show how these works naturally  
flow from the more realistic novels.

Critical reading is a special kind. It  
must always be rereading. Rereading  
Doris Lessing: Narrative Patterns of Dou-  
bling and Repetition discusses Lessing’s  
“career-long naming pattern,” which  
will send veterans back to the books in  
wonder at the discoveries of Claire  
Sprague. “From 1950, when Mary and  
Moses appear in The Grass is Singing, and  
1952 when A’s and M’s appear profusely  
in Martha Quest, to 1985, in The Good  
Terrorist,” writes Sprague, “Lessing’s  
compulsive use of A and M figures has  
persisted.”

A and M name patterning is only one  
example. Not only names but also num-  
bers (five is a favorite) acquire “archety-  
pal status” in Lessing’s work, according  
to Sprague, and “are an important index  
to her thought.” Sprague, a New York  
University professor who edits the Doris  
Lessing Newsletter, believes that Less-  
ing’s patternings within a novel and  
from novel to novel are “clues to realities  
beneath the appearance of her wholly  
freestanding characters.” These “multi-  
ple mirrors” — other women, men,  
environments, fictions — prove to  
Sprague that, for Lessing, in contraries  
and repetition are both “progression and  
vision.”

And unity. Perhaps Sprague’s most  
significant claim is that Lessing’s whole  
method questions the ideal of the unified  
self: “Doris Lessing’s quest plot is still  
being written,” she says. “Its long medi-  
tation on character presents us with fig-  
ures who contradict the stable, mono-  
lithic view of personality in favor of one  
that is permeable, volatile, various, and  
interchanging.”

The above two books are the first  
kind of reading that the young Martha  
Quest identifies; the next two books are  
for the second,

“If I had known t-shirts could be this  
classy, I would have ditched my habit  
ages ago.”

—Abbess Hildegard von Bingen  
Yes, the Belles Lettres t-shirt is now on  
sale, and it is the hottest one from coast  
to coast! Modeled here by editor Mary  
Lynn Skutley is our roomy extra-large  
version, stylishly knotted for knocking  
around junk shops or for twisting the  
night away. You too can sport this fine  

piece of wearable art (from a design by  
Lorraine Inzalaco) and make your stand  
for women’s writing. Get an extra-large  
one for a nightshirt, a large one for step-  
ping out, and a medium one for a muscle  
shirt. Looks great whatever size or shape  
you come in!

Available for $15 in jet black, 100  
percent cotton (specify M, L, or XL).  
Make checks payable to Belles Lettres,  
and send to 11151 Captain’s Walk  
Court, Gaithersburg, MD 20878.

Size(s)____Number of shirts.

14 @ Belles Lettres

Doris Lessing. Photo by Sydney Goldstein

Like The Reader, Rereading renews our  
awareness of Lessing’s sometimes alarm-  
ing range and depth. Lessing is a name  
synonymous with weight. The Fifth Child  
(1988), her latest novel, however, is  
spare, a “quick read.” Yet it is profound  
and colossally disturbing in the para-  
doxical conclusions it draws. As Sprague  
points out, Lessing can be deceptively  
straightforward.

Lessing’s protagonists David and  
Harriet are true nonconformists who  
didn’t conform in the sixties. The cou-  
ple buy a house in a London suburb and  
plan to have many children — a com-  
mon enough goal for the fifties but  
downright rebellious for the sixties. Fe-  
cundity simply is not encouraged any-  
more. However, as Harriet says to her  
mother-in-law, Molly: “This is what  
everyone wants, really, but we’ve been  
brainwashed out of it.” Molly disagrees:  
Domesticity should be “kept in its place,  
a background to what was important.”

The year before the novel’s release,  
Lessing published what amounts to a  
companion piece, another slim volume,  
Prisons We Choose to Live Inside. This is  
actually a series of lectures she gave un-  
der the auspices of the Canadian Broad-  
casting System, and to look at these two  
recent books together illuminates them  
both. To treat them as a pair is also the  
best way to avoid misinterpretation of  
the novel.

In one lecture of the five that make up  
Prisons, Lessing writes: “Everything that  
has ever happened to me has taught me  
to value the individual, the person who  
cultivates and preserves her or his own  
ways of thinking, who stands out against  
group thinking, group pressures.” It  
must be, then, that Lessing sympathizes  
with Harriet, guardian (along with  
David) of “that stubborn individuality of  
theirs.” And Harriet and David likely  
would have continued with their plan of  
raising six or seven kids if not for the  
trouble that started with the fifth birth,  
of Ben.

Ben is a “throwback.” “All those peo-  
ple who lived on the earth once — they  
must be in us somewhere,” says Harriet,  
who indeed experienced Ben living in  
her during the brutal pregnancy. And  
readers watch helplessly as, with the  
illusion of alarming speed created by  
short sentences and paragraphs, Ben  
grows up to be a child not quite human.  
“With his yellowish stubbly low-growing  
hair, his stony unblinking eyes, his  
stoop, his feet planted apart and his  
knees bent, his clenched held-forward  
fists, he seemed more than ever like a  
gnome.”

A second point made in Prisons is that  
if we would only acknowledge the savage  
within us, we might conquer it. Not sur-  
prisingly, the creator of Canopus rec-  
ommends we try to see ourselves as a vis-  
itor from another planet or people living  
on our planet in the future might. She  
frequently does, she says, adding that it  
is “a deliberate attempt to strengthen the  
power of that ‘other eye,’ which we can  

use to judge ourselves.” Lessing thinks  
novelists are among the best equipped  
for the seeing task and that literature is  
“one of the most useful ways we have of  
achieving this ‘other eye,’ this detached  
manner of seeing ourselves.” But seeing  
is not enough.

She claims in Prisons that ten percent  
of the population are natural leaders who  
follow their own minds. Elitism? Once  
so unfashionable, so politically inept.  
Yet she makes her case for elitism, even  
using the word itself, implying that the  
“ism” is where the only “real” ideas come  
from. “It is my belief that it is always the  
individual . . . who will set the tone,  
provide the real development in a socie-  
ty,” she says. “What a great influence an  
individual may have, even an apparent-  
ly obscure person, living a small, quiet  
life” — one perhaps like Harriet, who  
may seem conventional but who event-  
ually defies her convention-bound fam-  
ily to do what she knows is right.

In imprisonment imagery these two  
books converge. The “prisons we choose  
to live inside” are prisons of the mind —  
brainwashing techniques used by gov-  
ernments and by the media to sell prod-  
ucts, and peer pressure used by every  
group, including one’s family. Ben, on  
the other hand, is literally imprisoned at  
an asylum. When Ben is freed by Harriet  
and returns home, he makes prisoners of  
all the Lovatts, once again literally.  
They lock their bedroom doors so Ben  
will not sneak up and harm them as they  
sleep. To lock in Ben instead may be a  
sounder solution, but Harriet does not  
feel it is her right to favor her freedom  
over his, especially not to maintain a  
facade of civility: the happy English  
family with the bad seed locked up.

What Lessing is ultimately saying,  
then, is that until we are all free, none of  
us is — an old political saw, it is true, but  
an inevitable one for a writer whose vi-  
sion is of us all as one big family, happy  
or unhappy, still one, the human race.

© Jeanne Schinto is the author of Shad-  
ow Bands (Ontario Review Press), a col-  
lection of stories. Her first novel, Children  
of Men, and a second story collection will be  
published by Persea Books.

Those who have no money  

are bound to get down"  

So said Alessandra de’Machi Strozzi to  
her son in 1464, and her words ring true  
today. For helping us to avoid that  
ghastly fate, Belles Lettres offers its deep-  
est thanks to these individuals, who  
have generously contributed to our  
equipment and fundraising drive:

Jane Bakewell  
Members of the Bethesda Co-op  
Salli Bingham  
Camilla A. Collins  
La Connors  
Rosemary Cut  
Lowa S. Eckedin  
Barbora Erdle  
Barbara Furst  
Barbora Gerber & Nancy Osborne  
Renee Hartman  
Lloyd Hillelstrom  
Mary Alice Hostetter  
Elaine  

Mar Parisoe  
Stephanie Patterson  
Roberta Rube  
Elizabeth J. Saunier  
Nancy Schaumburger  

Beul Schicher  

Michele Slang  

E.M. Uprichard  
Women's Community Bake Sale of  
Washington, D.C.  
Claudia Landy  
Elizabeth Lographos  

Our drive is still in progress. Please send  
your tax-deductible contributions to  
Belles Lettres, and earn free books in  
proportion to your munificence.

__|

Summer 1989