Crime and conviviality are surpris-

ingly compatible, it seems. Mys-

tery writers and fans gather to-
gether at the drop of a tradition. Each
spring, Edgar Week attracts them to
New York City, and each fall Boucher-
con, the Annual Anthony Boucher
Memorial Mystery Convention, draws
them together again. Bouchercon loca-
tions vary, and this year’s co-chairs Phyl-
lis Brown and Ray Hardy hosted
Bouchercon XIX in San Diego. One of
the best organized Bouchercons yet held,
the long weekend was a great success
and included a variety of activities: a
lavish afternoon tea feting Guest of
Honor Charlotte MacLeod, a banquet
presided over by Toastmaster Robert
Barnard at which the Anthony Awards
(fan awards voted on by the Bouchercon
membership) were announced, and a
rich array of sessions designed to help
readers know their favorite writers better
or to give established writers a chance to
share their insights and experience with
beginning authors and curious fans.

Authors autographed their works in
the huge dealer room; in the halls, lob-
bies, and nearby watering holes, old
friendships were enhanced and new ones
developed as people talked fictional
crime to their hearts’ content. Mystery
readers are not only some of the
friendliest people in the world but also,
it seems to me, some of the brightest.
Many demonstrate an encyclopedic
knowledge of crime fiction (happily,
most do so modestly!), and being avid
readers, almost all have acquired a fas-
cinating range of information about
other topics as well.

Bouchercon XX takes place in
Philadelphia, October 6-8, 1989. To
register (the cost is $40.00) or for further
information, write Bouchercon XX, PO
Box 59345, Philadelphia, PA 19102-
9345. If you register, let me know (RR
23, Box 131, Terre Haute, IN 47802),
and I will arrange a gathering of our
“Criminal Element” during the conven-
tion. Meanwhile, ward off the winter
blahs by curling up and chilling the
blood with a good murder mystery.

ttt

Reg Wexford and Mike Burden, Ruth
Rendell’s popular team of police officers,
reappear in The Veiled One (Pantheon,
$17.95, 278 pp). During their investiga-
tion of murder in an “intestine-like” un-
derground parking garage, “with its
winding passages and its strictly one-way
direction,” Wexford narrowly misses
death in a car bomb explosion. Little
daunted, the chief inspector continues
to quote widely from his extensive read-
ing; Burden continues to misconstrue or
chaff at the quotations, and together,
they continue to make a shrewd, success-
ful investigative team. The marital
problems of Wexford’s beloved daughter,
Sheila, are complicated by her anti-
nuclear activism, which also strains her
relations with other family members.
Nevertheless, the Wexfords’ decency
and love for one another carry them
through — not the case for other
families who appear in this seamless, ab-
sorbing tale. And at $19.95, Ruth
Rendell’s Collected Stories (Pantheon,
436 pp.) is a great bargain and an excel-
lent introduction to her work because it
includes not only episodes in the lives of
her continuing characters but also many
of her major themes.

In his latest adventure, Homer Kelly,
living alone, eating badly, disliking it
heartily, and missing his wife (who is
studying at Columbia) attempts to solve
various crimes culminating in murder
that threaten Boston’s Isabella Stewart
Gardner Museum. In Jane Langton’s
Murder at the Gardner (Pantheon,
$17.95, 353 pp.), the museum, full of

Winter 1989

beautiful treasures, overseen by an odd
lot of trustees, and strictly governed by
the detailed instructions in Isabella
Gardner's will, is so vividly and affec-
tionately depicted that it becomes an
important character. The emphasis on
the Gardner itself and the diverting,
cleverly sketched portraits of other in-
teresting characters serve perfectly to
take the edge off Homer’s lack of imme-
diate success and to temper Langton’s
perceptive questions about the pride and
even arrogance that might prompt
benefactors as well as villains.

Primary Target (Bantam, $3.50, 232
pp.), by Marilyn Wallace, details a brief,
tense period when murder threatens the
presidential campaign of Congress-
woman Jean Talbot. Suddenly even her
most trusted associates become suspect
when the Brotherhood of Man, a reac-
tionary group, launches an attack
against her. Carlos Cruz and Jay
Goldstein investigate the Talbot case as
Goldstein also copes with the kidnap-
ping of his father. Strong charac-
terization and fast, persuasive action are
Wallace trademarks; one hopes for many
more Cruz-Goldstein adventures — and
many more firm, able female heroes like
Jean Talbot.

In Emma Lathen’s Something in the
Air (Simon & Schuster, $16.95, 270
pp.), series hero John Putnam Thatcher
and his worthy if eccentric colleagues
from the Sloan Guaranty Trust, one of
the world’s most powerful banks, learn
almost more than they want to know
about small commuter airlines. Because
the Sloan is a stockholder in Sparrow
Flyways, it behooves Thatcher to do
what he can to identify a Sparrow
competitor’s murderer. Almost everyone
at Sparrow is a suspect, and the mystery
is satisfying enough, but in this, his
twentieth outing, Thatcher finally
grasps how readily (and effectively)
strong, determined businesswomen wield
power. For many readers, Thatcher’s
late and sudden awareness will be par-
ticularly satisfying.

Nancy Pickard, winner of an Anthony
Award in 1987, offers a new Jenny Cain
mystery: Dead Crazy (Scribner's,
$16.95, 276 pp). As Jenny and her new
husband, Geof Bushfield, adjust to mar-
ried life, her professional life grows com-
plex; she must fire a charming but feck-
less employee of the Port Frederick
Civic Foundation, which she supervises,
and another trusted aide resents her
decision. When Jenny’s assistant disap-
pears in the midst of a terminal assign-
ment, the Foundation’s establishment of
a center for drifting former psychiatric
patients, Jenny fears for his safety be-
cause a killer seems bent on driving the
Foundation and all connected with it
away from the chosen site. With her
usual blend of humor, insight, and social
awareness, Pickard informs as she enter-
tains in Dead Crazy, her best novel to
date.

Two women won Edgar Allan Poe
Awards from the Mystery Writers of
America in 1988. Sharyn McCrumb’s
cheerful Bimbos of the Death Sun (best
paperback original; Windwalker, $2.95,
219 pp.) deals with murder at a science
fiction convention. McCrumb makes
good-natured fun of stereotypically
depicted fans, and her central charac-
ters, a first-book author and his bright,
attractive lover, are appealing.

Death Among Strangers (best first
mystery novel) by Deidre S. Laiken
(Macmillan, $17.95, 258 pp.), centers
on crucial days in the lives of police of-
ficer George Murphy and social worker
Elizabeth Kern. Beyond their first youth,
these lovers carry heavy emotional bag-
gage: Murphy cannot relinquish some
habits of his first marriage and Kern
wishes for a rather less prosaic (or at
least a less reserved) commitment. As
Murphy almost obsessively investigates

THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN

the murder of a young girl so viciously
beaten that she is unrecognizable, Kern
explores her own sudden obsession, a
passionate affair with a young stranger.
Relationships are the central focus here
— between lovers, between friends, be-
tween parents and children, between
killer and victim, victim and cop— and
Laiken handles them confidently in a
strong debut.

Ruth Rendell

A Great Deliverance by Elizabeth
George (Bantam, $16.95, 305 pp.), is
another strong first novel in which the
convoluted personal relationships of in-
vestigators and bystanders affect a case.
When teenager Roberta Teys is accused
of patricide, various friends, lovers, and
ex-lovers affect one another, shadowing
or illuminating the gripping puzzle.
George’s portrait of a fascinating but un-
quiet village is good, but her unlikely
team of police officers — blunt, discon-
certing Barbara Havers, perpetually
furious and seizing her last chance at
promotion, and elegant Inspector
“Tommy” Lynley, a gifted cop with a
dicey social reputation — is her best
stroke. Both harbor terrible secrets, and
they bring intensity and unusual
perspectives to the hunt. Notwithstand-
ing the pace, which falters a bit at the
conclusion, and grating portraits of ugly
Americans (once commonplace, this
device is now dated), A Great
Deliverance is a very good book.

Dorothy Sucher’s Dead Men Don’t
Give Seminars (St. Martin’s, $16.95,

The Passionate Nomad:
The Diary of
Isabelle Eberhardt

Translated by Nina de Voogd

Boston: Beacon/Virago Press, 1987, $7.95,
116 pp.

“No one has ever lived as haphazardly
as I do,” wrote the Geneva-born
vagabond of North Africa, Isabelle Eber-
hardt, in the early 1900s. The diaries she
left behind, carefully winnowed by Rana
Kabbani, who supplies an illuminating
introduction, chronicle a life at once
chaotic and compelling. Often disguised
as “Si Mahmoud” to gain entrance to
mosques and other places barred to
women, she had vowed to “complete my
education as a man of action, the spar-
tan education I need.” Such self-trans-
formation extended from traveling the
desert on horseback in torrid heat to
drinking and drugging herself in rough
company to wandering penniless
through the public streets.

Chaotic enough, surely, for a well-edu-
cated woman in her twenties who grew
up believing her father was a Russian
nobleman and who could produce such
passages as these:

279 pp.) introduces private investigator
Sabrina Swift and her assistant, Vic
Newman, who narrates the story of mur-
der among erudite participants in the
annual Lake Champlain Physics In-
stitute Seminar. Sabina, accompanying
her physicist husband, and Vic, escaping
Washington’s steamy heat, intend a
quiet weekend but find themselves
working hard when a Nobel Laureate is
poisoned. Sucher maintains a brisk pace,
does a good job with setting, and strikes
exactly the right tone in this enjoyable
mystery. Although they will remind
readers of Rex Stout’s Nero Wolfe and
Archie Goodwin, Swift and Newman
are original, clearly drawn, and intrigu-
ing enough to support a series.

Intent upon remaining active and self-
reliant, three elderly women agree to
join forces and resources, but their ex-
periment in comradeship and inde-
pendence is interrupted by a blackmail-
ing stranger who terrorizes them. Draw-
ing on reserves of experience and deter-
mination, the three ultimately unite to
counterattack with surprising but satisfy-
ing results. With Mary Lou Bennett’s
first mystery, Murder Once Done
($8.95, 195 pp.), Perseverance Press
(P.O. Box 384, Menlo Park, CA 94025)
again fulfills its stated goal: to publish
sound, not-too-blood-and-gutsy crime
novels. Bennett also succeeds; she has
said that she was determined not to cre-
ate “paperdoll figures,” and, indeed, her
three protagonists are fully human both
in their weakness and in their consider-
able strength.

Opposite the Crosskeys (St. Martin’s,
$15.95, 240 pp.) recounts a privileged
child’s initiation into the intricacies of
the English class system and her growing
awareness of most adults’ willful blind-
ness toward social and economic prob-
lems. Author S.T. Haymon’s unsen-
timental, humorously affectionate tone
suggests that she learned far more about
tolerance and decency than any one of
her wildly varied mentors alone could
teach, and fans of her Ben Jurnet
mystery series will be intrigued with this
glimpse into the author’s life.

@ Jane Bakerman, our mystery colum-
nist, is the recipient of the 1988 Dune
Award from the Popular Culture As-
sociation for scholarly contributions to the
study of crime/mystery writing.

El Oued, 27 October 1900, 9 p.m....On my
left the plains looked pink, and in the
village I saw a few women in blue rags and
an oddly shaped dromedary. Utter peace and
silence all around... .

People who interest me are those who are
subject to that lofty, fertile form of suffering
known as dissatisfaction with oneself; the
thirst for an ‘Idea,’ something mystical and
eminently desirable that fires their souls . . . .

Ever unable to reconcile the destruc-
tive and the creative in her nature,
adopting a male identity may have given
Isabelle a sense of control. Certainly the
cravings which propelled her to endless
doses of “kir” (an Arabic word for drugs)
and to a series of love affairs with Arab
men, in which she was the stronger if
more disturbed personality, never pro-
vided her stability. For Isabelle, as for
many Grandes Romantiques, the need
to keep searching, “to flee inertia and
stagnation,” first heightened the aes-
thetic moment, then crushed it.

Eberhardt’s diaries inspire and perplex.
What is one to make of her deliberate
self-fashioning and attempts at androgy-
ny? What is clear is that she is an impor-
tant addition to the literature of fem-
inine self-exploration: she foreshadows
Virginia Woolf, Maryse Holder, and
Tama Janowitz. Eberhardt wrote at the
turn of the century, but she is ours as
well. —Laura Hapke

Belles Lettres © 17