selves of different sexes. Is that a legacy of Woolf?

Yes, and of course Shakespeare, who is one of my great
sources of inspiration. In Shakespeare, you find that the
minute a girl puts on a pair of britches, another girl falls in
love with her. As soon as a man puts on a frock, his best
friend is drooling over him. People go by appearances and
expectations. And one of the ways of challenging these is to
turn them around in funny stories that say, "Is there really
so much to gender? Do masculine and feminine models
make a person self-contained?"

If you want to challenge things that make people feel
uneasy — and a lot of people are uneasy with homosexuality
or with the idea of a blurring of male and female — then
you have to be a little bit clever and a little bit sly. If you
start hitting them over the head with it, they’ll turn off and
start shouting at you. If you can make them laugh, if you
can tell them the stories they want to read, then somewhere,
sometime their brains are going to start ticking. And maybe
one time when they start to open their mouths and be a
prejudiced, popeyed idiot, they might think again.

I want to seduce people into a different point of view. I
don’t want to bully them, because I don’t think bully tactics
work in any context. I think you could call it nonviolent
direct action.

And what kind of nonviolent direct actions are you
working on now?

At the moment, I’m doing an original screenplay called
"Great Moments in Aviation." As a matter of fact, I’m also
learning to fly. It’s great fun. A pilot who is a great admirer
of my books offered to give me lessons. That would be hard
to turn down, wouldn’t it? Especially after all the flying in
Sexing the Cherry.

The screenplay is about a young Black woman who co-
mes from the Caribbean to Great Britain in the fifties,
which was the first great wave of immigration for us, and
which was encouraged and sponsored by the government.
(That’s a fact, by the way, which everyone has forgotten
forty years later.) And the woman, for her own reasons,
wants to learn to fly. Her whole life is spent reading about
the great pioneers of aviation. They are her special saints,
her heroes. Clearly, it’s not going to work out for her. We
know that a Black woman coming to England in the fifties is
not going to be trained as a pilot. But this too is about the
triumph of the spirit. If something is denied to you, you can
still find something else. You can’t be crushed.

Because I love journeys, it all takes place on a boat dur-
ing the eight-day crossing. When she finally arrives, she
knows perfectly well that it won’t be the way she imagined
it. In fact, the film has three possible endings, all of which
she tells. Her life can go in any of these directions, but
whichever one it goes in, it’s still her life.

What wonderful optimism. Do you think of your work as
optimistic?

Yes, because I am very optimistic. I see things at once
tragic and absurd. The two things run together. Every day I
find there’s something to celebrate about the human condi-
tion. People just won’t lie down and shut up. It’s right to
look at the atrocities in our society wherever we find them,
but it’s also right to be in the spirit of celebration. I don’t
want people to feel crushed. I want them to feel that there is
a way out — even if you have to build your own door.

@ Lynne M. Constantine and Suzanne Scott review and
interview frequently, when not working on writing projects
of a more practical sort or escaping to West Virginia.