Grace, Pain, and Transformation

Female Adolescence: Psychoanalytic Reflections on Works of Literature, by Katherine  
Dalsimer. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986, $16.95, 149 pp.;  
A Wider World: Portraits in an Adolescence, by Kate Simon. New York: Harper &  
Row, 1986, $14.95, 186 pp.

by Elizabeth Stark

The adolescent years when a girl  
becomes a woman are full of con-  
tradictions: ugliness and beauty,  
awkwardness and grace, naiveté and  
cynicism. Some would prefer to forget  
those fumbling, gangly years of pimples,  
family feuds, broken friendships, and  
failed sexual attempts. But others see the  
wonder of those years and celebrate them.  
Katherine Dalsimer, a psychologist at  
Columbia University, and travel author  
Kate Simon are of the latter group. In  
Dalsimer’s psychoanalytic view of  

The Rigors of  
Discernment  

A Passion for Friends, by Janice G.  
Raymond. Boston: Beacon Press, 1986,  
$22.95, 275 pp.  

Female Friendships and Communities, by  
Pauline Nestor. New York: Oxford Uni-  
versity Press, 1986, $19.95, 220 pp.  

by Joyce Bright  

My mother refused bridge with  
“the girls” and gnashed her  
teeth with every invitation to  

afternoon tea. Yet getting ready to go out  
in the evening, she grew giddy with the  
prospect of male company. I gave a  
muddled interpretation to the model; tak-  
ing a degree in philosophy, I found the  
company of dead men preferable to any-  
thing living. Today, in contrast, nothing  
gives me greater joy than the company of  
women. The women I call friends —  
powerful and effective, witty and caring,  
intelligent and tender — these women are  
the foundation of my Being-in-the-world.  

A Passion for Friends is not a  
sentimental hymn in praise of women  
together. It is a thoughtful, analytical,  
and critical examination of friendship.  
Raymond’s study, which she views as a  
genealogical search, is placed within a  
historical context and written within the  
context of present “hetero-reality”  
(Raymond’s term). She also, without  
flights of fantasy or fancy, prescribes for  
the future. The motif of this book is a  
phrase repeatedly quoted from Alice  
Walker: “the rigors of discernment.”  

right.  

8 @ Belles Lettres  
Le  

Adolescence, “There is a tone of hopeful-  
ness, a suggestion of freedom from the  
relentless determinism of the past that is  
absent from the discussions of any other  
period of life. . . . Adolescence is a peri-  
od of widened possibilities.” But as she  
notes, most of what has been written in  
psychoanalytic theory about adolescence  
has pertained to men. Women have been  
either left out or forced to fit into the  
wrong mold. So Dalsimer has turned to  
literature to find models for the female  
passage into adulthood.  

Empowering friendship is a choice we  
make.  

Raymond starts with a quote from Lily  
Tomlin: “I’ve actually seen a man walk up  
to four women sitting in a bar and say:  
‘Hey, what are you doing here sitting all  
alone?’ ” This would, of course, be funny  
except that all too frequently, women out  
together act as though they are out alone.  
In hetero-reality, woman acquires her es-  
sence in relationship to man. (Indeed,  
one is tempted to ask why God and Adam  
were not enough for each other.)  

Raymond looks at women in spiritual  
communities — the Beguines and  
medieval convent living, and the Chinese  
marriage registers. To a large extent these  
women were considered loose, not only in  
the sense that they were without men but  
also in the sexually implicit sense that they  
were perceived as aberrant. Despite the  
prevailing hetero-reality of medieval Eu-  
rope and turn-of-the-century China,  
these women flourished for a while, con-  
tributing to each other and to the larger  
society.  

In contrast, Nestor’s book Female  
Friendships and Communities, concerning  
Charlotte Brontë, George Eliot, and  
Elizabeth Gaskell, is the negative side of  
Raymond’s argument. As the 1851 census  
revealed, there was an excess of half a mil-  
lion females in the English population.  
This “excess” became a matter of “awful  
importance.” That women writers and  
women’s publications should arise is not  
surprising. However, even the female  
writers engaged the issue of friendship  
within the conventional framework of  
heterosexual roles, “the related notion of  
female friends compensating for the lack  
of a male and the recognition of a need for  

From “Some Notes on Evolution” by Honora Bartlett, in the collection Stepping  
Out: Short Stories on Friendships Between Women (Methuen, 1986, $8.95, PB)  

She likes her beautiful friend’s Indian husband, but it does not occur to  
him to notice the women of India even while he is working so hard to recom-  
mend himself to her. She thinks he might be something of a sexist. In 1968 the  
word “sexist” did not exist, or if it did Betsy did not know it. She knew what it  
was, though, to sit among her male professors, talking away like the child Jesus  
in the temple, and then suddenly to know that she had been talking too long,  
that the space left in their conversation for the speech of women had been filled  
and that she had begun to overspill it. It was as though a small receptacle was  
provided for her which gave her words shape and made them worthy of atten-  
tion, but when she had filled it she began to talk loosely, her effects began to run  
away from her like tepid water out of the sides of an old bath. The men grew im-  
patient. When she awoke to this she would fall silent. She would not even finish  
her sentence. She hoped no one would notice; and no one did. The conversation  
had already called “next.” It was some man’s turn to talk.  

Those bruising awakenings. Surely they are over now? Surely the world  
has altered, or her segment of it has, and she will never again sit up suddenly to  
find herself in the company of that male determination to exclude her, as the  
author can, from his play... . The women Betsy knows now spend a lot of time  
proposing new standards — of behaviour, ethics, style. She does this also. No  
one can meet them. But the standards are out in the open. They can be de-  
scribed, they can be explained. Betsy hugs this to herself like an amulet. It is this  
explicitness that is the law of her new world.  

For her, it is no longer the way it was in 1968, when Susan’s family watched  
her from their distance, when they hissed sour-faced as she passed out of the din-  
ing room, What is wrong with that girl? They knew she could hear them. They  
wanted her to hear that they knew what was right for Susan, and that she wasn’t  

Kate Simon. Photo by Jerry Bauer.  

male authority.”  

In her fiction, Eliot, like Brontë, de-  
fined female characters in relation to  
men. Brontë celebrated the assertion of  
self, whereas Eliot extolled subjection.  
Brontë conceived of the male as sexual  
partner; Eliot saw him as savior. Only  
Gaskell, in The Grey Woman, allows for  
the possibility of all-female friendships  
providing not simply a substitute for men  
but a chosen alternative. These writers  
essentially confirmed the hetero-reality of  
their world. Nestor’s book is more a  
literary dissertation than a critical ex-  
amination into the present state of female  
friendships.  

Raymond, on the other hand, con-  
siders the whys and wherefores. The  
structure of her argument is easy to follow  
and large enough to incorporate an over-  
view — in abstract — of present women’s  
communities. To the extent that women  
have dissociated from, assimilated to, or  
played out a role of victimization in the  
world, female friendship is impossible.  
Such modes of Being-in-the-world are  
inauthentic representations of who each  
of us is individually.  

For example, under dissociation,  
Raymond talks about “therapism: the  
tyranny of feelings.” She writes,  
“Genuine self-revelation should not be  
confused with therapeutic man-  
ifestations.” Her point is that self-  
disclosure as a substitute for friendship  
objectifies the self: The feeling of one’s  
feelings becomes a substitute for feeling  
and passion and life itself.  

Related to this is the corruption of “the  
personal is political” into the notion “the  
personal is public.” If we do not disclose  
everything, we are suspected of elitism,  
deviating from the homogeneous norms  
and values of women-centered com-  
munities. But as Raymond points out,  
“privacy fosters involvement in the world  
because it adds a quality of reflection to life  
and the selection of friends.”  

Raymond’s concern, as should be ours,  
is that undiscerning modes of accom-  
modation both to hetero-reality and to  
women in community do not foster true  
friendship. It is only in authentic self-  
centered living that we discover friendship  
and our place in the larger world. Through  
thoughtfulness, passion, and a life that is  
happiness directed, we can learn to make  
choices about our friendships — friend-  
ships that provide “a point of crystalliza-  
tion for living in the ordinary world, not  
the pretense for exiting from it.”  

I very much enjoyed A Passion for  
Friends. Its structure, language, and con-  
tent excited me. It provides a reference  
point for any continuing debate about  
women, the effective and affective uses of  
power, and our relationships to each  
other. Nestor’s book, in contrast, though  
academically astute, does not lend itself  
for use as a tool. Nestor gives us affection.  
Raymond provides passion.  

® Joyce Bright is a philosopher-  
novelist-reviewer-counselor living in  
Sacramento.  

In Female Adolescence, she describes  
various stages of emotional development  
as revealed in The Member of the Wedding,  
The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie, The Diary of  
Anne Frank, Romeo and Juliet, and  
Persuasion. The works are considered in  
the order of their heroines’ ages to describe  
the advancing stages of adolescence.  
Dalsimer begins with Carson McCullers’s  
12-year-old Frankie Adams. She, with  
her tomboy ways and 6-year-old cousin as  
companion, is extremely reluctant to  
leave the comfortable and familiar world  
of childhood.  

Terrified of puberty and its capacity for  
sexuality and procreation and isolated by  
her peers, who spend their time discussing  
the secrets of sex, Frankie decides in  
desperation that she will join her brother  
and his bride in their new life. When her  
fantasy disintegrates in the face of reality,  
she retreats. Finally, however, she gains  
courage to “overcome the terrors of her  
new separateness by developing an intense  
friendship with another girl,” which  
Dalsimer sees as the first stage of female  
adolescence.  

In the section on Muriel Spark’s The  
Prime of Miss Jean Brodie, Dalsimer dis-  
cusses the stage in which the adolescent  
develops a deep crush on an older woman.  
The adoration and mimicry of Miss Brodie  
by her prize pupils, Dalsimer argues, is  
normal for their development but ul-  
timately something they must leave  
behind. By the end of the novel, all of the  
schoolgirls have lost their infatuation with  
Jean Brodie and moved on to other inter-  
ests (boys among them), except for the  
narrator, Sandy, who to the end “remains  
trapped in ambivalent bondage to Jean  
Brodie,” never able to resolve her  
adolescence.  

Dalsimer shines in her analysis of these  
two books, both of which fit her theory  
well. In the next two works, probably the  
most familiar of the five, Dalsimer sets  
herself a more difficult task. The Diary of  
Anne Frank has become so identified with  
actual incidents of the past that it is dif-  
ficult to put the Holocaust aside and read  
Anne’s diary simply as the record of the  
coming of age of an extremely appealing  
and lively young woman. Dalsimer should  
be commended for reminding us of its  
original context, as well as her compelling  
explanation of how Anne’s diary, named  
“Kitty,” acted as an alter-ego or “other” for  
the sometimes misunderstood and con-  
fused girl. But ultimately, analyzing the  
diary in terms of adolescent themes di-  
minishes its great power. The discussion  
of Anne’s estrangement from her mother  
(reflecting Dalsimer’s next stage, separa-  
tion from the parent), her developing  
sexuality, and her short romance, while  
worth noting, becomes belabored.  

Some of the same observations could  
be made about Dalsimer’s discussion of  
Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, which,  
not surprisingly, concerns the stage at  
which a young woman must relinquish  
family ties. In all fairness, these two  
works, especially the play, may suffer  
because they are so familiar. When  
Dalsimer discusses the speech, “Romeo,  
Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?” it is  
hard to suppress a giggle.  

Dalsimer ends her book on a high note  
in her chapter on Austen’s Persuasion, in  
which she considers the resolution of  
adolescence. Although Anne Elliot, the  
heroine of this novel, is 27, the conflict of  
the book concerns the decision she made  
at age 19 not to marry the man she loved.  
According to Dalsimer, Anne exemplifies  
an adolescent unable to break away from  
her parents (in this case a surrogate par-  
ent). When Anne belatedly escapes au-  
thority, she is able to find happiness and  
appreciation with the man she originally  
rejected. Among the delights of the chap-  
ter on Jane Austen’s work are the early  
19th-century author’s very contemporary  
lament of the lack of opportunities for  
women, the decidedly untraditional  
woman she offers as most happy with her  
life, and her argument that women are too  
dependent on their feelings.  

September/October 1986