Kate Simon’s Other World

Row, 1988, $22.50, 309 pp., illus.

by Helen Barolini

Kate Simon has brought to A Re-

naissance Tapestry the gifts that

inform her unique travel books
and her lively autobiographies. As she is
an uncommon guide through place, so
she is through a complex time as she
deftly explores the Italian Renaissance
through the family dynasty of the Gon-
zaga, who ruled the city-state of Mantua
from their rise in 1328 until the dissolu-
tion of the dukedom in 1708. Simon has
used her perceptiveness, irony, and fine
hand at detailing to evoke not only the
people and the times but also an ideal,
which clearly entrance her.

The first thread of her tapestry was put
in place when Simon explored Mantua
in the 1960s, just as long-lost Pisanello
frescoes were being reclaimed. Later, she

Ludovico II portraying his wife, Barbara
of Brandenburg, and their children,
courtiers, servants, and retainers in their
castle. Although first struck by the
beauty of the artwork of both frescoes,
Simon was led to consider what it sig-
nified. Where did such wealth of bro-
caded costumes come from? Where that
confidence of family bearing? That atti-
tude in Ludovico of enlightened hu-
manist and total ruler? To probe for an-

stimulating book.

Writing with Olympian understanding, Simon is the composed un-
raveler of a knotty history. She weaves
her way dexterously through documents,
showing us the Gonzaga as gifted, agile

Octavia Butler, cont. from page 2

Without children, without the ability to
plan for the lives of their progeny or to
control their own futures, humankind
loses its dream and the tendency to self-
destruction quickly resurfaces.

Akin’s contact with humans in the
various resister villages and with those
in the trade villages (where Oankali and
humans are integrated) teaches him a
great deal about human culture. Butler
has reshaped her version of a “brave new
world” to a very small global village
where new leadership becomes a neces-
sity if what remains of humanity is not
to be fully absorbed and lost in trade. It
is not that unseemly that Akin, with
deliberate exposure to the two sets of
peoples, and a voice that both human
and Oankali can hear, should adopt as
his life’s task the role of spokesman and
leader.

Some might begrudge the loss of Lilith
from center stage as a flaw. Butler, how-
ever, compensates for that loss by giving
us Akin as a worthy replacement. With
him she resurrects the legendary half-
breed of television westerns and
dramatically reshapes the alienated out-
sider who must nonetheless learn the
ways of all the people in order to serve
as emissary. Also, it could be argued that
not quite enough of an argument is
made for the alleged saving graces of
humankind. Our DNA not withstand-
ing, the overwhelming evidence cited is
that the perverse part of our human con-

IMPORTANT REMINDERS:

Floss your teeth, call your parents,

vote, get your library to subscribe to
Belles Lettres, and send us your change
of address promptly when you move.

Spring 1989

Renaissance attribute of grace, all of

viewed the superb Mantegna frescoes of

answers was to bring forth this singular and

A Renaissance Tapestry: The Gonzaga of Mantua, by Kate Simon. New York: Harper &

in their maneuvering, and lucky. They
were, in the best tenets of humanism,
self-made. Their business was protection
and warfare; they were on retainer as
commanders of armies to the powerful
republic of Venice, to the duchy of
Milan, to the Pope, or to the Medicis of
Florence, depending on which way the
wind shifted; and they were the great
Condottieri of their times. They warred,
they caroused, they supported the arts.
Simon’s insights on the women are
especially interesting. The gifted and
educated Cecilia Gonzaga refused to be a
pawn in the marriage game and entered
a convent in order to live her own life as
a distinguished scholar. Isabella d’Este-
Gonzaga was a patron of all the arts, in-
cluding the burgeoning art of the printed
book. Other women took on the gover-
norship of the city-state when their lords

tradition too often takes precedence.
Our capacity for violence is a recurring
theme, our capacity for destructiveness
and waste are continually demonstrated.
Even prior to our final holocaust, we
were well on the way to destroying the
environment. We consistently waste
human potential or fail to use the poten-
tial at our disposal. We are selfish far
more often than compassionate; we act
without thinking of our action’s con-
sequences far too often. As Lilith has
once explained to Akin, “Human beings
fear difference, Oankali crave difference.
Humans persecute their different ones,
yet they need them to give themselves
status.” Perhaps one explanation of the
Oankali’s attraction to humankind,
despite our warts, is that they seek differ-
ence and collect it. Still, one speculates
about their ultimate motives.

Another drawback is the story’s abrupt
ending. Entranced by the rising action
of the last few chapters, the reader
rapidly turns pages, pushed ahead by the
story’s pace and unmindful that there
are but few pages left. Then, a climactic
turn of events. Phoenix is in flames.
There is a new proposition for humanity
on the table. Akin has just completed
his metamorphosis. The page turns again.
Nothing. The end.

The avid, attentive reader then feels
keenly the acute frustration of waiting
until the next book in the series appears.
Readers just beginning Butler’s xeno-
genesis tales at least have the prospect of
two books before them. They have only
to wait for one more. We Butler fol-
lowers have been twice tantalized; we
are glad this is 1989. The best prospect
of the year is the arrival of Imago, the
final book in the trilogy.

Sandra Y. Govan teaches English at
the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte. She is the book review editor of
Obsidian II, an African-American literary
journal.

were off to war. Young girls were given
in marriage contracts in exchange for
favorable alliances: sized up as potential
breeders, shipped back and forth, re-
jected if thought unable to fulfill their
prime function of bearing heirs, and be-
headed if they became an encumbrance
to a better match. Some remarkable
women married illustrious princes but
rose to eminence in their own right.
Elisabetta Gonzaga, duchess of Urbino,
had conversational soirees in her apart-
ments of the Ducal Palace during the
spring of 1507 that became the setting
for Castiglione’s The Courtier, the re-
nowned primer of Renaissance ideals.

As for the Gonzaga court painter,
Simon writes, “Life with Mantegna was
not easy, no more than it was with Mi-

Lynda Barry

The Good Times
Are Killing Me

by Lynda Barry

The Real Comet Press (3131 Western
Avenue, Seattle, WA 98121), 1988, $16.95,
120 pp., color illustrations (PB)

If you are familiar with Lynda Barry the
cartoonist, you will be as curious as I was
to read what has been billed as her first
novel. Actually, the book defies the cate-
gory novel, which is no quibble. Both
Barry’s comic strips and artwork sit jaun-
tily askew in their respective categories.
Barry’s style—whether expressed in pic-
tures or prose—is the most original and
innovative I have seen in the bland
1980s.

For those who are sticklers for category,
this book is really a long short story. Al-
though the characters are wonderfully
drawn, a novel would demand greater
scope of characterization.

The story is a reminiscence by Edna
Arkins of her life from the age of nine
until seventh grade. Edna’s coming of age
in a deteriorating and racially mixed
neighborhood is linked to her friendship
with a Black girl, Bonna Willis, and
music. The friendship sensitizes her to
the bigotry and racism rampant in her
world; music is Edna’s own personal tree
of knowledge, since every song becomes
the trigger of memory and experience. Of
the day that Edna’s mom is taken to the
hospital after a miscarriage, for example,
Edna recalls

The radio was on and that was the first time I
heard that song, the one I hate. Johnny
Mathis singing “It’s Not for Me to Say.”
When I hear it all I can think of is that very
day riding in the front seat with Lucy leaning
against me and the smell of Juicy Fruit gum
making me feel like I was going to throw up.
How can a song do that? Be like a net that
catches a whole entire day, even a day whose
guts you hate? You hear it and all of a sudden
everything comes hanging back in front of
you, all tangled up in that music.

As in her comics, Barry makes us want to
laugh or cry—we don’t know which. She
is a master of the poignant, achieved
through that special ingenuous-but-wise,
forever preadolescent voice that has be-
come her trademark.

Following the text is a “Music Note-

chelangelo, Leonardo, the Bellini, and

other esteemed artists before and later.
‘Not now, maybe later’; ‘What happened
to my meager stipend!’ they would say in
varying tones of tact, or no tact at all.” And here is Simon on the frescoed walls
of Mantua’s Palazzo del Te: “Overripe
bodies disporting themselves in a gentle
breeze of soft porn, as well as the stormy
apocalyptic rumblings of a Hall of Gi-
ants, propel us into a changing mode of
painting.”

Few are the oversights in this rich
compendium. I missed some mention of
the Venetian courtesan-poet Veronica
Franco, who dedicated a book of her
poetry to the austere Guglielmo, third
duke of Mantua. Errors occur in the
genealogy, which the seemingly lost art
of copyediting might have caught. And,
in such a rich and painstaking documen-
tation, it is disconcerting to see a final
chapter head not corrected from the
meaningless “Sale, Farewell” to the cor-
rect hail and farewell formula, “Salve, 
Farewell.”

Still, Kate Simon, fascinated by the
personages, admiring of the high arts
produced under the Gonzaga family at
its height, at home in the turbulent cur-
rents of Renaissance passions, has woven
a rich, full tapestry with her admirable
book.

Helen Barolini is a novelist, the editor
of the award-winning collection The Dream
Book: An Anthology of Writings by Italian
American Women, and the author of
Festa, a cookbook memoir.

book,” eighteen of Barry’s mixed media
paintings of musicians and music styles,
each made palpably three-dimensional by
marvelous tooled metal frames. Accom-
panying each work (except James
Brown) is a summary of the musician or
style depicted, written in the same
scrolly, jarring, all-caps script with
which Barry pens her comics. The sum-
maries are simultaneously dead serious
and hilarious (which spells unsettling);
they provide a context for interpreting
the frames—almost giving them a life
apart from their contents. For example,
four knives form a sort of fence in front
of “Little Willie John”—three pointing
up, one pointing down. The summary
informs us that

He had a reputation for a bad temper, lying,
cheating, wild spending and could con
people out of lots of money by making up
pitiful stories about his mother. He often
carried a knife or a gun which people said he
did because he was mad about being short.
In 1966 he stabbed and killed a man in a
cafe brawl ... and went to the ...
penitentiary where he died in 1968. His
death certificate says the cause was a heart
attack, others say he was beaten and died
during an operation to relieve pressure on
his brain.

“The good times are killing me” seems
not to refer to the story so much as to
the notebook. Like Little Willie John,
many of the musicians died in bizarre or
ignominious ways. The paintings are
magnificent; Barry uses color like she
uses language—in primitive, bright
strokes.

No effort is made to connect the
“Music Notebook” to the text or to iden-
tify it as Edna’s work, which could have
been accomplished neatly had we been
informed in the story that Edna had kept
a notebook. The lack of connection is
lamentable. The summaries appear to be
Edna’s work: The tone and style match,
and they are replete with misspellings
and bad grammar. Viewing the notebook
separately from the novel gives one
pause. Why do the summaries sound like
they were written by an adolescent? And
more puzzling, is the reader to believe
that the artwork was done by Edna? The
novel and the notebook should
strengthen one another, and they should
be able to stand alone.

— Deanna K. D’Errico

Belles Lettres @ 13