Legacy of  
a Literata  

Ghost Dance, by Carole Maso. Berkeley,  
CA: North Point Press, 1986, $16.95,  
288 pp. (PB)  

by Helen Barolini  

Seemingly unburdened by the de-  

mands of crypto-autobiography,  

which tend to overwhelm most first  
novelists and force them into an unload-  
ing of experience gratia experience,  
Carole Maso instead makes a stunning  
debut with Ghost Dance. She has centered  
unerringly: Language is the writer’s sub-  
ject. Thus, both in Maso’s own luminous  
style, and also in the novel's “story” — the  
life and death and legacy of poet Christine  
Wing as recalled and re-imagined by her  
daughter Vanessa — the power of art and  
language is the focus of the telling.  

From the first page, Ghost Dance  
compels attention, admiration, and in-  
volvement as it deftly draws us into the  
narrator's mixed vision of her mother the  
artist. The novel obsessively returns again  
and again, in an artful discontinuity, to  
the persona of the poet and the impact  
that her life and wavering sanity have on  
her husband and two children, especially  
the daughter, Vanessa. Vanessa is the  
novel’s narrator, the one who finds  
reconciliation at the mother’s death  
through her own frantic and haunted  
ghost dance of drugs and eroticism.  

This is not so much a novel with a story  
line as it is a look at love from the painful  
viewpoint of a daughter recalling her  
beloved and recently dead mother — the  
tyranny of love, the mystery, the pain it  
inflicts, the need it engenders, the insan-  
ity, and yet the boundless hope. It is, too,  
a novel of creativity, which is another  
tyranny. Vanessa reads biographies: “It  
brings me some comfort to know that no  
life is simple.”  

Reality, in Vanessa’s telling, is con-  
stantly interwoven with transcendent  
vision: Vanessa imagines her mother  
waiting for her in Grand Central Station,  
willing her there while focusing on an  
unfinished poem as she waits and thinks,  
“There is no life more perfect than my  
own.” And yet what she means is that, for  
her, there is no other life possible. This is  
the world of mirage, of Never Never  
Land; and not only the poet but also those  
who love her live there.  

Christine Wing is as beautiful as she is  
preeminent in her art; she is adored by her  
family, she lectures all over the world, she  
has appeared on the cover of Time. She is  
a woman who teeters between the pull of  
life and the intensity of art, leaving her  
family to wonder how the balance is  
achieved. It isn’t. In a striking fable by  
which she explains her life and work to her  
children, Christine uses the image of the  
Topaz Bird — the manifestation of being  
touched by art, being prey to inexplicable  
moods and strangeness. There is either  
fierce dedication to the work, coddling  
and protecting it as a precious gem, over  
and above the needs of her husband, her  
children, and her daily life; or the sur-  
render to life in order, briefly, to be the  
wife, the mother, the good daughter-in-  
law. She had to learn, her daughter  
recognizes, when to look away from life.  
Not even Vanessa, despite her fierce love  
for her mother, would have traded her  
mother’s work for her attention.  

Her mental state precarious already as a  
young woman newly married and at the  
beginning of her life’s work, Christine  
flings out at the psychiatrist who advises  
her not to carry through her pregnancy, “I  
will have children. I will write poetry.  
There is nothing you can do about it.”  

Is this possible? Is the self-centered life  
of the artist possible in combination with  
the selfless devotion of the loved and lov-  
ing people in that life? Is this novel the  
combined story of all gifted women who  
strive to create and who, in creating life as  
well as art, create everlasting words  
together with voids in the lives of their  
children? They — we — want it all. Poets  
who are women should, in the best of all  
worlds, be able to have their gift of words  
and give the gift of life. What goes wrong?  
Is it the burden of guilt, of the world’s  
expectation on them, that they either  
renounce the gift of art and become, as is  
expected of their sex, sacrificial women or  
become, to the world’s censure, unnatural  
women?  

Without seeming to accept that harsh  

bargain, they have, ironically and  
paradoxically, already internalized it. It  
shows in their madness, or the strain leads  
either to suicide or some other dissolution  
of the self, or their children feel forever  
the distance between themselves and the  
mother who also loves words as much as  

Carole Maso. Photo © by Thomas Victor.  

she loves them. A woman who gives  
herself so unequivocally to something so  
“unnatural” is tainted by literature, has  
become a literata at the price of being a  
human being.  

Christine Wing becomes the cele-  
brated, lionized poet who in her glory  
both loves and cruelly humiliates the  
husband and two children who adore and  
protect her and yearn for her. Michael  
Turin, Christine’s husband, was drawn to  
her at a Vassar dance and became willing,  
forever after, to live in her shadow. At  
Christine’s horrible death, he simply dis-  
appears. Michael is the son of Italian  
immigrant parents who are drawn with  
economic and vivid authenticity. The  
grandfather, the dreamer and searcher  
who is drawn to the spirit world of the  
American Indians, discovers their  
trance-inducing ghost dance by which the  
dead can be seen again and so live again.  
The grandmother is the voice of sensible  
attitudes, stubbornly believing that life is  

Wolf demythologizes the complex of Trojan material and  
“scratches off the male tradition” to which she has said that it  
adheres. She strips the setting and the events of their mysterious  
and vainglorious trappings, projects an economic motive for the  
war, and depicts the male heroes, both Greek and Trojan, as  
cruel, weak, vain, or in other ways flawed.  

an attempt to examine the personal and  
historical bases of her art: first in the auto-  
biographical A Model Childhood (1976), a  
story of growing up during the Nazi era;  
then No Place on Earth (1979) and the es-  
says connected with it, primarily  
meditations on women Romantic writers;  
and finally Cassandra (1983) and its  
accompanying essays. Cassandra is a  
re-vision (in Adrienne Rich’s sense) of  
the Western literary tradition as well as of  
the Trojan war and an examination of the  
connection of that male-dominated tradi-  
tion to the contemporary threat of world-  
wide nuclear destruction.  

Wolf uses the character Cassandra to  
represent the female writer/truth-sayer in  
a preliterary age. She allows her to tell her  
own story through a long interior  
monologue as she awaits her fate before  
the palace at Mycenae. Cassandra pre-  
sents her own story and the traditional  
story of Troy from a new perspective,  
“from below” as Wolf calls it in an  
accompanying essay, from the nonheroic  
perspective of someone who is powerless,  
of a woman. In the process, Wolf de-  
mythologizes the complex of Trojan  
material and “scratches off the male tradi-  
tion” to which she has said that it adheres.  
She strips the setting and the events of  

their mysterious and vainglorious  
trappings, projects an economic motive  
for the war, and depicts the male heroes,  
both Greek and Trojan, as cruel, weak,  
vain, or in other ways flawed. Wolf also  
explores the relationship between the  
growing subjection of women in Troy and  
the general decay of Trojan society. As a  
natural and necessary result of this de-  
terioration, there arises an alternate,  
woman-dominated subculture in which  
Cassandra eventually finds refuge from the  
persecution of the palace as she takes her  
role as truth-sayer more and more  
seriously. Wolf's attempt to “read  
between the lines” of the literary tradition  
that created a mad Cassandra is very per-  
suasive.  

The four essays that accompany the  
novel were originally published sep-  
arately. They formed the series of “lectures  
on poetics” that Wolf gave in 1982 at the  
University of Frankfurt. She prefaced  
them with a disclaimer: that they do not  
form a system of poetics, indeed that she  
distrusts such systems that tend, she says,  
to bury “the living experience of countless  
perceiving subjects” in art objects.  
Therefore she chose more personal modes  
of expression: a two-part travel narrative  
documenting the trip to Greece that  

comprehensible and one survives in the  
observed world, a practical wisdom that is  
underlined by loss and an endless patience  
with that loss.  

“Be sensible,” the old Italian  
grandmother is constantly chiding, suspi-  
cious (like a latter-day Plato) of poets and  
the imagination. She admonishes her  
fanciful husband (who having arrived in  
the New World wants literally to be new,  
to shed being Angelo and become Andy,  
friend and fellow spirit of the Indians),  
and she admonishes her grandchildren,  
sending them messages of disapproval of  
the woman, their mother, who has taken  
away her son and lives not for him and  
their children. Instead she lives for the  
imagination she personifies in the image  
of the Topaz Bird, a beautiful, but  
ominous creature who descends like the  
harbinger of fantasy and menace.  
Whether Maso’s novel is a fable of the  
Topaz Bird, a morality tale, or an exercise  
in wishful thinking of how a woman might  
center on herself and still keep the loyalty  
of her loved ones, or a mélange of all those  
elements, it is exquisitely rendered.  

This is a novel about accommodating  
the gift in oneself, which is at odds with  
the world of sense and reasonableness. It is  
a beautiful and painful book because it  
says, in incomparable language, the truth:  
that there can be no accommodation,  
that life is difficult and love even more so,  
that it will not be fine but still we live.  
The implicit hope throughout is that “we  
will understand our lives, we will be the  
best we can be. We will be brave. We will  
say what we meant to say.”  

What gave Maso this sureness of depic- ©  
tion, the power of her insights? Is it the  
story of Plath? of Sexton? of all of us who  
write and love words and yet are bound  
instinctually to flesh and family? Is it her  
own young experience of the demands of  
literary creativity? Yet how, so new to the  
novel, has Maso so unerringly evoked the  
threat inherent in all art so intensely  
pursued? Ghost Dance is an impressive  
novel by a gifted writer who is already at  
work on her next novel, The Art Lover.  
The theme continues.  

D  

@ Helen Barolini is the editor of The  
Dream Book: An Anthology of Writings  
by Italian American Women.  

sparked her work on the Cassandra  
material; a work-diary, in which Wolf  
expands on the connections she sees  
between this material and the self-  
destructive tendencies in the West; and a  
letter to another woman, in which she  
asks “questions about the historical reality  
of the Cassandra figure and conditions for  
the woman writer past and present.”  
These prose pieces offer the reader  
fascinating insights into the dilemma of  
the modern writer: What is the purpose of  
writing in a world that may have no  
future? Wolf's answer seems to be the  
assertion of the social as well as literary  
value of a female aesthetic. It is surely no  
small thing that she states that the ex-  
ploration of the Cassandra material  
changed and liberated the “viewing lens”  
through which she perceives our time,  
comparable to the change that occurred to  
her 30 years earlier, when she first became  
acquainted with Marxism.  

Wolf has protested against being called  
a feminist writer, a term she associates  
with radical, man-hating groups in the  
West. Yet her focus on female figures, her  
interest in the female literary tradition,  
her concern for a nonauthoritarian nar-  
rative mode, and now her re-vision of a  
complex of mythic figures and events  
connects her work to that of many con-  
temporary women writers. She is un-  
compromisingly honest in her exploration  
of character and events, at times perhaps  
rather ponderously Teutonic in her style,  
but Cassandra is an enjoyable and reward-  
ing reading experience.  

® Linda Schelbitzki Pickle teaches Ger-  
man and English literature courses at  
Westminster College in Missouri.  

September/October 1986 Belles Lettres @ 13