P|

N

orth of the Border

Surfacing, by Margaret Atwood. New York: Warner Books, 1983, $3.50, 224 pp. (PB)  
Green Water, Green Sky, by Mavis Gallant. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1959 (out of print).

The Stone Angel, by Margaret Laurence. New York: Bantam/Windstone, 1981, $3.95, 304 pp. (PB)  
The Beggar Maid, by Alice Munro. New York: Penguin, 1984, $4.95, 224 pp. (PB)  
The Tiger in the Tiger Pit, by Janette Turner Hospital. New York: Bantam/Windstone, 1985, $5.95, 240 pp. (PB)

by Diana Abu-Jabar

tain swings along the upper borders

of the United States, but it is there,  
selectively releasing tourist information  
on Toronto and Quebec, yet withholding  
so much else. When I ask my  
students what they think when they hear  
“Canada,” I can see in their faces a  
simultaneous respect and blankness;  
they remember the snowy spaces, the  
visual clues of beer commercials, yet  
their information all finally settles  
around a kind of environmental cliché.  
Those who can tell us about Canada, by  
which I mean its writers, are scandalously  
ignored or trifled with in American academia.

I can remember reading a travel piece  
written for Vogue by Margaret Atwood,  
highlighting a few of the delights of her  
country. Fittingly enough, Atwood, a  
gifted spokesperson for Canadian  
literature, was given a forum in one of  
America’s best-known magazines, yet  
the body of her article finally had to  
concern itself with place, with much  
more of the geographical and technical

le not know what mysterious cur-

Anatomy  
As Destiny

The Handmaid’s Tale, by Margaret  
Atwood. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986,  
$16.95, 311 pp.

by Roberta Rubenstein

s Canadian poet and novelist

Margaret Atwood recently de-  
scribed her increasing political  
awareness, “politics” is connected with  
power: “who’s got it, who wants it, how  
it operates; in a word, who’s allowed to  
do what to whom, who gets what from  
whom, who gets away with it and how.”  
This set of exchanges is brilliantly ex-  
plored in her new novel, The Hand-  
maid’s Tale. Taking as her starting point  
the irreconcilable contemporary split  
between “pro-life” and “pro-choice”  
ideologies, Atwood imagines a world in  
which the state legislates sexuality and  
reproduction. In the Republic of Gilead  
— a theocracy that melds Puritan  
righteousness with the religious fun-  
damentalism of Ayatollah Khomeini  
— the correspondences between “per-  
sonal” and “political” find chilling ex-  
pression. Anatomy is destiny: Procrea-  
tion and maternity are projected as  
private nightmare and cultural  
catastrophe.

Nature corroborates the destructive  
potentialities in human nature. Because  
environmental pollution has resulted in  
widespread sterility and genetic muta-  
tion, generativity itself is at risk. As the  
narrator, Offred, describes this insidious  
connection, the air and water have  
become contaminated by toxic sub-  
stances that have altered organic, in-  
cluding human, life.

Who knows, your very flesh may  
be polluted, dirty as an oily beach,  
sure death to shore birds and unborn  
babies. Maybe a vulture would die  
of eating you. . . . Women took  
medicines, pills, men sprayed trees,  
cows ate grass, all that souped-up  
piss flowed into the rivers. Not to  
mention the exploding atomic power  
plants.

The time is a decade or two into the  
future. The events that lead to a drastic  
transformation of women’s lives began  
inconspicuously enough; Offred only  
gradually realized that she and other  
women had been stripped of their legal  
rights when the “Sons of Jacob” took  
over the government and suspended the  
Constitution. Following a failed attempt  
to escape to Canada with her husband  
and young daughter, Offred instead  
finds herself captive in a repressive state  
controlled by intimidation and brutal-  
ity. The dangers are real: There are Eyes  
(spies) everywhere. Those identified as  
political enemies — guilty of “gender  
treachery” — are publicly executed and  
grotesquely displayed on an ominous  
Berlin Wall-like structure.

Through Offred’s testimony, we grad-  
ually discover how reactionary ideology

Offred. . .

rator claims that this kind of rational,  
exploitative attitude belongs to a kind of  
person she calls “American.” It is a label  
that holds no gender distinctions and  
seems to hinge only incidentally upon  
the border as she points out that  
Canadians may easily be “American” in  
their approach to the world.

Despite this, the female figure is  
identified with body and emotion in this  
work. The narrator’s mother appears as a  
nourisher, a nurturer, feeding the wild  
birds from her hands. It is through  
recognition of the feminine aspect, un-  
covering her body in a nonexploitative,  
nondestructive way, that the narrator is  
brought to a full self-realization.  
Although her friends will doubtless con-  
tinue to perceive nature as indifferent  
and “other,” it is through healing the rift  
between herself and nature that the nar-  
rator heals her own internal wounds.

he title of Janette Turner Hos-  

pital’s The Tiger in the Tiger Pit  

suggests that the nature motif  
also runs through the book — like some-  
thing out of Kipling, perhaps. However,  
this narrative is caught up mostly in in-  
ternal, rather than external, land-  
scapes. This story of the Carpenter  
family is divided among its separate  
members, each voice distinctly mediat-  
ing his or her own experience, then  
blending together. The story is struc-  
turally similar to the fugue-like mix of  
The Sound and the Fury. However, while  

Faulkner’s classic derived from an in-  

is Everywoman, struggling to make sense of the  

oppressive world into which she has been thrust. Her tale is  
poignant, horrifying, and sometimes even funny. Telling it is  
an achievement of psychic survival.

is translated into daily experience. In  
Gilead, women are segregated by caste  
and function: Wives, Aunts, Hand-  
maids (fertile women), servant  
Marthas, and lower-class Econowives.  
The handmaids are indoctrinated into  
their social and sexual oppression by the  
“female control agency” of Aunts.

As Offred mordantly phrases it, she  
and her handmaid peers are “two-legged  
wombs,” indentured to serve the state in  
production of the next generation. The  
actual procedure for insemination is a  
perverse ménage à trois, parlor rape per-  
petrated upon the would-be surrogate  
mother by her owners. Although the  
chance of conceiving a deformed baby is  
one in four, attempted abortions are  
punishable by death. All infants — ex-  
cept those declared “Unbabies” and dis-  
carded — become the property of the  
handmaid’s Commander and his Wife.  
Yet, despite these extraordinary ma-  
nipulations of procreation, actual  
children are notably absent from Gilead.

Because we learn only what Offred  
(whose name means “Property-of-Fred”)  
knows, we identify with her disorienta-  
tion, fear, and loss. As she expresses her  
loneliness, “Nobody dies from lack of  
sex. It’s lack of love we die from. There’s  
nobody here I can love... . [tooama  
missing person.” Through such reve-  
lations of feeling, Atwood vividly bal-  
ances the ideological implications of her  
story with the personal dimension.  
Offred, unlike her mother (a feminist  
activist of the 1970s), is not a politically  
conscious woman; rather, she is  
Everywoman, struggling to make sense  
of the oppressive world into which she  
has been thrust. Her tale is poignant,  
horrifying, and sometimes even funny.  
Telling it is an achievement of psychic  

survival — a risk and a necessity more  
primary than physical survival. Both  
Offred’s predecessor and her partner  
handmaid commit suicide, the latter  
choosing self-inflicted death in prefer-  
ence to public execution for her under-  
ground activities. Offred, too, risks  
punishment for contacts with the Com-  
mander and intimacy with his chauffeur.

In fact, the sign of hope in this utterly  
sterile world is the fact that human  
nature has changed less than the re-  
pressive ideology implies. In the novel's  
few humorous interludes, Offred de-  
scribes illicit visits with her Commander  
(at his initiation), who plays Scrabble  
with her and longs for her to kiss him  
sincerely. An active underground, with  
which Offred eventually makes contact,  
is the collective expression of the same  
triumph over repression.

In the novel’s ironic coda, scholars  
looking back from an even more distant  
future try to understand the anachronis-  
tic Republic of Gilead. One historian  
cautions that the Handmaid’s tale must  
be understood in the context of “the  
moment in history of which [its author]  
was a part.” His proviso is a telling point  
for contemporary readers. In this  
dystopian narrative, Atwood fuses cen-  
tral ideological concerns of women at  
this moment in history with believable  
extrapolations and ironic exaggerations  
of processes both private and public,  
organic and social. The result is a stun-  
ning fable of gender and power politics  
in the tradition of 1984.

@ Roberta Rubenstein teaches modern  
fiction at American University. Her  
forthcoming critical study of women  
novelists contains a chapter on Atwood.

May/June 1986