Wrestling With Emancipation

Rhapsody, 1986/1927, 234 pp. and Winter Sonata, 1986/1928, 245 pp., by Dorothy Edwards  
Year Before Last, 1986/1932, 329 pp. and My Next Bride, 1986/1934, 330 pp., by Kay Boyle  
A Game of Hide-and-Seek, 1986/1961, 260 pp. and The Wedding Group, 1985/1968, 230 pp., by Elizabeth Taylor  

The Little Company, 1986/1945, 319 pp. and Lantana Lane, 1986/1959, 254 pp., by Eleanor Dark  
—New York: Penguin/Virago, $6.95 (PB)  

by Laura Hapke  

Different as they are in their  
world views and aspirations,  
the characters of these newly  
reissued novels wrestle with the problem  
of emancipation. The “solution” in  
Dorothy Edwards’s works is a dark  
Chekhovian one, in Kay Boyle’s a  
quest for love and beauty, in Elizabeth  
Taylor’s a desperate submersion of self in  
others, in Eleanor Dark’s an attempt to  
forge personal freedom through social  
equality. While these novels do not ex-  
clusively concern women’s freedom, in  
their distinctive ways they illuminate  
the obstacles that women encounter as  
well as those they create.  

Dorothy Edwards, a Welsh writer of  
too-fleeting renown in the 1920s, was  
known for her subtle, understated fic-  
tion of English village life. She killed  
herself in 1934 at only 31. Her charac-  
ters are, significantly, in flight from the  
pain of existence and the intensity of  
their yearnings for self-expression. They  
are tongue-tied yet long for human con-  
tact, prone to morbidity yet delight in a  
note of music, a falling leaf. Edwards  
prefers the male protagonist, an artistic  
decision that critic Elaine Morgan (in  
her introduction to Winter Sonata) as-  
cribes to Edwards’s unorthodox upbring-  
ing by an idealistic socialist father and  
her resulting inability to imagine the  
traditional feminine role. Whether this  
is so or not, her reticent, often middle-  
aged men are, in the sexist but eloquent  
term of earlier times, “womanish.”  

In the short story “Treachery” (pub-  
lished in Rhapsody) representative Mr.  
Wendover, with small and wistful blue  
eyes, “always spent his summer holiday  
in the middle of Shelgrove Forest.” A  
quiet tea party stimulates him, conver-  
sation with a flirtatious married woman  
titillates him, and the thought that she  
has left the forest vacation spot without  
a polite goodbye sears him to the core.  
Longing, inarticulate, defeated, he  
writes her a gently reproachful letter but  
is too depressed to send it.  

Edwards’s women, in contrast, are  
frequently young, curious, and inci-  
piently sensual, as in this fine descrip-  
tion from Winter Sonata of the house-  
maid Pauline, who saw a handsome man  
she knew pass by her house.  

She ran out into the passage and  
pulling her coat hurriedly over her  
working dress and pinafore, she slipped  
out of the house. . . . She ran very  
quickly until she was quite warm.  
When she came to the main road again  
she stopped. Her heart was beating  
quickly, partly from the running and  
partly from her anxiety not to miss him.  

Yet if this passage reminds one of D.  
H. Lawrence in its celebration of un-  
folding sexuality, over all of Edwards’s  
characters is the pall of “an overwhelm-  
ing melancholy within [the] soul.” Exit  
Lawrence and enter Chekhov. The re-  
tiring and ineffectual Arnold Nettle, ap-  
palled by Pauline’s free mannered way  
with the men of the town, dreams in his  
little room of lovely, sad-eyed Olivia  
Neran, herself enamored of the elusive  
Mr. Prentiss. Prentiss, like Nettle and  
Olivia, passes his day meditating and  
taking solitary nature walks. Here he is  
captured in Edwards’s deceptively sim-  
ple way. Prentiss “sometimes, looking  
from his book, was a little struck with  
[Olivia’s] rather subdued beauty . . . .  
[He] did not allow these thoughts to be  
seen on his face.”  

The reader is fascinated with these  
people because they are so terrified of  
taking charge. Edwards’s women spend  
silent rural lives waiting in the wings or  
planting brief, ardent kisses on the  
mouths of the men who then flee them.  
But there is great beauty in the intensity  
of these characters’ reactions to the  
shards of existence they permit them-  
selves to unearth. Thus Sidney Mihail,  
the schoolboy from the Rhapsody story,  
“A Throne in Heaven,” can appreciate  
the transformation of the school gar-  
den’s horse chestnut tree; although he is  
“too tired to say a word” in the presence  
of young girls. He wonderingly observes  
that the winter buds on the ends of the  
branches, which were “like iron,” have  
become glorious leaves. The flowers in  
summer profusion are now driving “the  
bluebells back, like a white cloud hiding  
the blue of the sky.” If developing sexual  
awareness is dangerous in such a world,  
looking at beauty of any kind becomes  
an act of courage.  

Kay Boyle’s characters have none of  
the fear of existence that dominates  
Edwards’s. Boyle’s female heroes rush to  
make poetry of experience, at home in  
their streams of consciousness. Year Before  
Last, her second novel, was written  
when Boyle was in her late 20s. She  
continues to be vigorous 30 books later,  
at 84. If Edwards’s fiction is informed by  
a sense of the dangers of growth and  
breaking patterns, Boyle’s is infused  
with the need to combat rule makers,  
manipulators, and authoritarian oppo-  
nents of emotional freedom. Year Before  
Last, set in France where Boyle lived at  
the time, weaves these themes into the  
tale of the love affair of Hannah, a  
young American woman who has left  
her French husband for the mercurial  
and Keatsian Martin, who is dying of  
tuberculosis. Hannah takes on the roles  
of mistress, nurse, and guardian against  
the rage of Martin’s wealthy and con-  
trolling Scottish aunt, Eve, who vio-  
lently resents Hannah’s youth and resili-  
ence.  

As Eve pits herself against Hannah,  
daring the younger woman to combat  
the older one’s wealth and puritanical  
strength of will, Hannah’s struggle to  
protect Martin becomes a parable of the  
artistic struggle itself. In the introduc-  
tion Doris Grumbach notes, “the tex-  
ture of the novel is the texture of Han-  
nah’s sensibility.” Hannah is the prag-  
matist in her attempt to conserve Mar-  
tin’s health and secure his freedom from  
Eve. But more important, she is the ar-  
tist who imposes the force of her own vi-  
sion on the bitterness of experience.  
Fleeing Eve, Hannah takes Martin to a  
rented villa in the south of France. The  
dubious welcome it provides calls forth  
Hannah’s poetic response:  

The mail was in the box and the  
milk can was empty. A bill for five  
hundred francs was thrust in under the  
lid. She sat down, wondering, in the  
miraculous warm sunlight. All about  
her was the confusion of the plants and  
mosses, and the sight of this in her own  
cold bitter world would have set her  
anger aflame. But here she sat at peace  
with the wondrous tide of warmth  
breaking over her. . . . Where it is  
harder you do not give in. . . . Where  
it is black as Iceland, you take the six  
months of midnight and the small  
pea-green sun, what there is of it.  

Critics have made much of this novel  
as a roman à clef, noting that, in his  
heroic fight against illness, Martin is a  
version of Boyle’s lover, the doomed  
avant-garde poet and editor Ernest  
Walsh. Yet Year Before Last, like her  
next novel, My Next Bride, is really a tri-  
bute to woman and her will to endure  
ego-deflating experience and wrest  
aesthetic meaning from emotional disaster.  

The protagonist, Victoria John, is  
another of Boyle’s hardy American  
women, gone to France for art and  
truth, only to find that to gain them she  
must defend her identity against the on-  
slaughts of manipulators. Newly arrived  
in Paris, Victoria ingenuously joins a  
commune led by the charismatic Sorrel,  
who convinces his gullible followers to  
renounce materialism and weave wool  
tunics in a filthy, freezing suburban  
house. They work slavishly at crafts  
whose profits produce only comfort for  
this self-styled visionary. Victoria’s coming-  
of-age includes her discovery that Sorrel  
and, in a more insidious way, her would-  
be lover, the married dilettante Anthony,  
are not her mentors but her captors.  

As she struggles to throw off their  
power, her very isolation and fear color  
her reactions to Paris. Insight merges  
with depression as she observes “blond  
men with tittering leaves in the cold,  
the sap stopped in them, watching the  
lighted limousines drive smoothly to the  
steps, lion-maned flowers gone toothless  
and tame in captivity.” As the narrative  
is propelled by Victoria’s hallucinatory  
visions to its startling conclusion, the  
strange alliance she forms with Anthony’s  
wife Fontana illustrates her determina-  
tion to “no longer believe” in the sophis-  
tries of the Sorrels and the false promises  
of Anthony.  

Elizabeth Taylor  

Despite the resistance they meet,  
Boyle’s women seek identity in a time  
and place far more conducive than is the  
1950s England of British novelist  
Elizabeth Taylor. For how does a mar-  
ried woman without a profession take  
risks in the oppressively sedate England  
of that period? To read Taylor is to enter  
that era’s rigidly gender-defined world  
and view “risk” at best as the fantasy of a  
married matron craving rescue from the  
stupefying tedium of her life. Taylor,  
who lived her own life in marital quiet  
in an English village, tantalizes us with  
ambiguity. In her A Game of Hide-and-  
Seek, for instance, whose side is she on?  
That of her fearful, unprepossessing  
heroine Harriet, who, “hating danger,”  
marries the dull and prosperous Charles?  
Or that of Harriet’s cousin and lifelong  
passion Vesey, the improvident, provin-  
cial actor who plays hide-and-seek with  
her feelings? Charles is older, stolid,  
apologetically unimaginative. Devoted  
to Harriet, in his moments of passion he  
is too afraid to carry her upstairs to bed  
lest a servant see them. Knowing that  
Harriet is smarting from another man’s  
rejection, Charles offered his wife the  
consolations of the 1950s: predictabil-  
ity, security, and a beautiful house to re-  
decorate at will. Vesey characteristically  
disappears, only to return years later to  
rend “the fabric of daily life with which  
she had for long camouflaged her de-  
sires,” and the tensions in Harriet’s mar-  
riage come to the surface.  

As the reader is drawn into this familiar  
but gripping story, now sympathizing  
with the bewildered Charles, now favor-  
ing the self-pitying Vesey, and with  
Taylor’s own opinions still a secret, the  
ambitiousness of the novel becomes  
clearer. Harriet’s dilemma is not which  
man will complete her but whether she  
will realize why she acts out the same  
roles with Vesey as with Charles. Will  
she act on the insight that “there was no  
comfort in defiance and .... she  
tended to propitiate”?  

Although Taylor’s later novel, The  
Wedding Group, also has a 1950s quality  
to it and, again, a love triangle at the  
center. And once more the plain-looking  
woman sees redemption as rescue by a  
charismatic man. Unlike the conven-  
tional Harriet, however, Cressy has  
been raised in a kind of pre-Raphaelite  
artist's and craftsmen’s colony and  
dreams of “clothes that would fall apart  
before she tired of them.” Yet, as in the  
earlier novel, the heroine’s life alter-  
natives are suspect. Cressy thinks she has  
found freedom from the strictures of the  
colony in a modern marriage to David.  
She wakes up to find herself in a televi-  
sion-viewing rut, with a fretful infant, a  
manipulative mother-in-law, and (al-  
though she does not know it) a philan-  
dering husband.  

Taylor studies the problem that  
Cressy and her husband have created  
and that convention has created for  
them. Cressy looks for self-definition to  
her husband, who had rather illogically  
“rescued” her so that she could be both  
wife and mistress to him. His mother  
had trained him to expect the tradi-  
tional wife she made him believe she  
was, although her own husband left her  
in disgust years before. David’s mother is  
also a prisoner of her expectations. Un-  
able to leave the home, she has embit-  
tered her life by clinging to domesticity.  
“She liked to be taken out,” she reflects  
resentfully of David’s desertion-mar-  
riage, “not to have to fend for herself.”  
She scatters her considerable energies  
plotting against Cressy rather than try-  
ing to adapt to an independent life. Her  
ultimate strategem, and the way it trans-  
forms the lives of Cressy and David, is  
the ironic culmination of a novel filled  
with satiric thrusts at the perils of female  
cowardice and frustration.  

As if commenting on Taylor’s works,  
Australian writer Eleanor Dark writes,  
“rebellion, for a woman, had been a ter-  
rible matter once.” Yet The Little Com-  
pany teaches that passive women with  
no program for liberation are out of step  
with history. Dark herself came from a  
socialist and suffragist milieu. Her  
feminism is perceptively described by  
Drusilla Modjeska, who in her introduc-  
tion to the book finds Dark “tough on  
women who conform, who accept the  
values of capitalism and patriarchy, who  
cannot lift themselves out of the domes-  
tic mire or fantasies of violence.”  

Set in Australia during World War II,  
the novel is about Gilbert Massey, who  
is greatly disturbed by Hitlerian aggres-  
sion and suffering from midlife crisis and  
writer’s block, and his sister Marty, a  
successful writer and radio commentator  
who is depressed by the rise of Nazism  
and fascism. In a kind of novel-as-ex-  
tended-manifesto, Dark employs Gilbert  
and Marty as mouthpieces for her anti-  
authoritarian views. They were brought  
up, as Marty put it, to believe that “poli-  
tics kept us safe at the breakfast table.”  
Gilbert and Marty comment at length  
on everything from fascist propaganda  
abroad to the folly of Australian domes-  
tic womanhood embodied in Gilbert’s  
dowdy and frustrated wife Phyllis.  

Both the strength and weakness of  
the novel are that the protagonist Gil-  
bert is overshadowed by the outspoken  
Marty and the querulous Phyllis. To  
Dark, the women represent the respec-  
tive acme and nadir of feminine  
achievement. Or, put less generously,  
Dark herself is Marty, savagely attacking  

— continued on page 15  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987