a  
Retrospective  

Penelope  
Mortimer  

by Roberta Rubenstein  

Penelope Mortimer, a British con-  

temporary of Doris Lessing in age  

and of the early Lessing and  
Margaret Drabble in subject, is an im-  
portant recording muse of women’s lives  
in patriarchy, having given literary ex-  
pression to the “housewife’s disease” a  
decade or more before Betty Friedan di-  
agnosed the condition in The Feminine  
Mystique in 1962. Her unjustly neglected  
fiction describes women who confront  
limit and negation, partly because of their  
own natures, partly because of the nature  
of the world in which they live. Although  
some of the assumptions that permeate  
Mortimer’s novels of the 1950s and 1960s  
are dated, such as her female characters’  
absolute economic and emotional depen-  
dence on men and their subordination to  
unquestioned patriarchal values, other  
dimensions are of contemporary interest  
because of their depiction of perennial  
dimensions of female reality.  

Certain patterns predominate in the  
domestic circumstances of Mortimer’s  
female characters. If married, they are  
emotionally and economically dependent  
on roving, unfaithful husbands; if single,  
they are lonely and anxious about their  
circumstances. In several instances they  
suffer either physical or emotional injuries  
that impair their self-esteem so seriously  
that they are depicted in crisis. These sub-  
jects are expressed through images that  
resonate throughout Mortimer’s fiction,  
connecting her work to the female literary  
tradition: mirrors and reflections, con-  
finement and imprisonment, houses and  
homes, and other metaphorical structures  
through which social and psychological  
life are expressed.  

In the early narratives the conflict  
between domestic fidelity and erotic  
license or, in moral terms, between duty  
and freedom, is explored through  
marriage (the central social institution  
through which women have traditionally  
been identified) and infidelity (the private  
and social transgression of its boundaries).  
Marriage begins as a cocoon of exclusivity  
created by the lovers to shelter their  
mutual desire in privacy. Gradually it  
hardens into a prison of habit and obliga-  
tion from which one or both spouses may  
feel compelled to escape. Each of the early  
chronicles of domestic life (Joanna, 1947;  
A Villa in Summer, 1954; and The Bright  
Prison, 1957) focuses on a young married  
couple with one or more children.  
Chance events subject apparently stable  
relationships to erotic temptation and  
force the married pair to examine the  
terms of their emotional contract.  

These early novels also dramatize the  
dilemmas of women who are unable to  
find a way to “be” — unable, because of  
their internalization of attitudes and  
norms of their times, to identify  
themselves or exercise their talents apart  
from their men. Yet, circumscribed by  
matrimony and motherhood, they are  
typically imprisoned in the very  
relationships that provide them with  
identity and security. As Emily Addams  
(A Villa in Summer) expresses her con-  
tingent selfhood, “If, one morning, she  
woke up and found that she no longer  
loved [her husband] it would be like wak-  
ing to find that she was someone else; she  
wouldn’t know what to do, how to  
behave. . .”  

By contrast, the husbands oscillate  
between fidelity to their wives and the  
imperative need, as one husband ex-  
presses it, to “explore something new. . .  
to widen his horizons beyond the small,  
familiar limits of his wife’s body. It didn’t  
mean that he wanted something else as  

Serremper/Ocroser 1986  

well.” Although adultery is a prerogative  
not restricted to men, the women in  
Mortimer’s stories have far more to lose,  
both socially and emotionally, regardless  
of their position in the erotic triangle.  

The “bright prison” of marriage also  
includes children, whose dependency and  
intrusiveness thwart the parents’ hunger  
for freedom. As in most conventional  
marriages, the mothers assume primary  
responsibility for their children and are  
thus more restricted by their emotional  
ties and domestic obligations than are  
their husbands.  

One of Mortimer’s best-known and  
most accomplished novels, The Pumpkin  
Eater (1962), is the author’s culminating  
exploration of the female conflict between  
erotic and domestic fulfillment. It is also  
of particular interest for contemporary  
readers as a virtual case study in fiction of  
Friedan’s later-diagnosed “problem that  
has no name.” Mrs. Armitage is the vet-  
eran of multiple marriages and mother of a  
numberless, genderless brood of children  
who justify her existence. Maternity, if  
not children, provides a source of being  
that is absent from her relationships with  
men. When she discovers that her current  
husband is involved in (yet another)  
adulterous relationship, she carelessly  
becomes pregnant. However, Jake,  
emphatically rejecting the possibility of  
another child, persuades her not only to  
have an abortion, but also to undergo  
sterilization.  

Like the young wives of Mortimer’s  
earlier novels of marital discord, Mrs.  
Armitage is both bound by and dependent  
on the structures of matrimony and  
motherhood. Significantly, her husband  
builds a “tower” in the country for her and  
their children — an apt image of sexual  
domination and female imprisonment in  
male structures. A revealing indicator of  
her auxiliary status, Mrs. Armitage’s first  
name is never given.  

Whereas the patronizing doctor to  
whom Mrs. Armitage tells her story  
regards her as a neurotic housewife, the  
contemporary reader sees her illness as  
something outside of the doctor’s skewed  
perspective. As Mortimer implies,  
women like Mrs. Armitage cannot expect  
insight into or sympathy for their actual  
condition from doctors who are steeped in  
the patriarchal assumptions of the time  
about women’s adjustment to “feminin-  
ity.” Mrs. Armitage’s story gives the lie to  
the then-prevailing assumptions that  
promised women fulfillment solely  
through marriage and children. The nurs-  
ery tale of the pumpkin eater does not  
have a happy ending from the wife’s point  
of view.  

In Mortimer’s middle and late novels,  
the female protagonists are literally alone  
— either legally or emotionally separated  
— and struggling to come to terms with  
their involuntarily solitary state.  
Additionally, the experiences of com-  
pulsory “femininity” and unhappy  
marriage produce a legacy of vulnerable  
women who are emotionally and often  
physically wounded. Several of them (in-  
cluding Mrs. Armitage) have “female”  
operations (abortion, sterilization,  
mastectomy) at the discretion of male  
doctors or spouses. Female wounding is  
also envisioned in psychic terms. In The  
Home (1971), the loss of the security of  
marriage, no matter how destructive the  
marriage may have been, leaves Eleanor  
Strathearn emotionally maimed. She  
regards the death of her sexual life as “a  
secret disfigurement, a hidden wound.”  
When Phyllis Muspratt’s husband of 45  
years dies suddenly (The Handyman,  
1985), she is “attacked by mourning.”  
The hole she discovers in the floor of one  
room of her house corresponds to the  
bottomless hole in her emotional life.  

In My Friend Says It’s Bulletproof  
(1967), Muriel Rowbridge feels di-  
minished and undesirable because of her  

disfiguring loss of a breast to cancer.  
Single, childless, and afraid that she is  
permanently barred from erotic mutuality  
and motherhood, she experiences her  
altered body as a death sentence for the  
possibility of personal happiness. Much of  
Muriel’s anxiety about her disease and  
disfigurement can be understood through  
cultural attitudes toward both the female  
body and cancer. Men worship the female  
breast, and women internalize the male  
overvaluation of this aspect of their an-  
atomy. Because it is also associated with  
the actual and symbolic qualities of  
nurturance, the loss of a breast affects a  
woman's sense of her procreative  
capabilities. Moreover, cancer itself is  
among the most dreaded afflictions of our  
century. Intrepidly, Mortimer articulates  
in fiction an experience that threatens the  
basic sense of female selfhood.  

Several of Mortimer’s novels explore  
other significant relationships in a  
woman’s life besides marriage. As astute  
depictions of the complex dynamics of  
mother-daughter relationships, both  
Cave of Ice (1958) and The Home deserve a  
wider audience among contemporary  
readers. In Cave of Ice the daughter of  
Ruth and Rex Whiting was conceived out  
of wedlock. The reason for their marriage,  
she is also the excuse for its failure. More-  
over, the unresolved marital conflict is  
expressed through the daughter. Angela  
Whiting becomes pregnant by a young  
man “exactly like Daddy” whom she has  
no desire to marry. Her predicament  
replicates not only her mother’s history  
but their mutual hunger for love: the de-  
sire of an insecure, unformed female to  
merge with and be defined by a domina-  
ting male.  

In addition to representing the peren-  
nial problem for women in the years before  
we acquired control over reproductive  
decisions, the girl’s accidental pregnancy  
crystallizes unresolved psychological  
matters between mother and daughter.  
For Ruth, it embodies a fantasy of undoing  
the mistake of her past and guilt for her  
failure in mothering. For Angela, it  
embodies the need to remain a child  
herself, to be loved and mothered. In  
effect, mother and daughter each invests  
Angela’s fetus with her own fears, desires,  
and unmet emotional needs. In Ruth’s  
dreams the baby is hers and Angela does  
not exist.  

Competing needs to mother and to be  
mothered are powerful but ambivalent  
pressures that many of Mortimer’s  
characters experience, often directly  
affecting, and interfering with, their  
capacity to maintain positive intimate  
relationships. In The Home and in The  
Handyman, Mortimer combines two of  
her recurrent subjects: a woman’s  
attachments through marriage and family  
and the consequences of her submergence  
in or involuntary loss of these roles.  
Eleanor Strathearn of The Home struggles  
unsuccessfully to separate not just legally  

but emotionally from the “frail receptacle”  
of a 26-year marriage. Over time it has  
become a prison within which she is both  
sheltered and trapped, financially  
dependent on the man who has cut her off  
emotionally. Like Mortimer’s other de-  
pendent women, she recognizes but fails  
to overcome her vulnerability to what she  
terms “parting,” the “taste of a continual  
goodbye.”  

Similarly, as Phyllis Muspratt (The  
Handyman) tries to adjust to sudden  
widowhood, she feels prophetically  
“beyond age ... as though she had  
slipped over the edge of her life.” Her  
acute loneliness makes her susceptible to a  
handyman who cynically exploits her cir-  
cumstances. Demanding payment in  
sums of money or sexual favors, he erodes  
Phyllis’s tenuous grip on her life.  

Through unconscious repetition of  
deeply rooted emotional patterns, many  
of Mortimer’s women are thus hostage to  
past events that constrict their current  
lives. In Long Distance (1974), the pro-  
tagonist-narrator discovers that her “task”  
is literally “to repeat experience until it is  
remembered.” In this most experimental  
of Mortimer’s novels, setting and  
chronology are surreal; events are linked  
not by traditional plot or character de-  
velopment but by an inner logic originat-  
ing in the emotional reality of the name-  
less narrator. In an ostensibly timeless  
world, the protagonist inhabits a kind of  
existential nightmare: freedom without  
free will.  

Mortimer’s nine novels evoke, from a  
consistently female perspective, the  
sources of “the loneliness, the guilt, and  
the unendurable exercise of loving,” as  
the narrator of Long Distance expresses it.  
Union with another is, for Mortimer’s  
women, both necessary and destructive.  
Another character describes her “grief”  
and “the despair of all women for some-  
thing gone, never to come again — some-  
thing never known, now never to be  
known.” Physical and emotional events in  
these women’s lives — pregnancy, abor-  
tion, sterilization, infidelity, divorce,  
widowhood, cancer, aging, and death —  
challenge the most basic emotional  
attachments between women and men  
while undermining the women’s pre-  
carious sense of autonomy.  

Mortimer’s narratives of the 1950s and  
1960s presciently dramatize the de-  
structive consequences of the feminine  
mystique, illustrating, as Friedan later  
argued, that “the very condition of being a  
housewife can create a sense of emptiness,  
nonexistence, nothingness, in women.  
There are aspects of the housewife role  
that make it almost impossible for a  
woman of adult intelligence to retain a  
sense of human identity.” Mortimer’s  
narratives artfully belie the overarching  
assumption of her generation, that “a  
woman’s place is in the home.” In her fic-  
tion, “home” is the locus not only of  
security but of imprisonment.  

Mortimer’s more recent fiction follows  
those same women into later life as they  
face living alone for inevitable reasons:  
children grow up and depart, parents die,  
spouses leave (for younger women) or die.  
These women’s struggles to achieve con-  
trol of their lives stand as poignant object  
lessons in the necessities of female eco-  
nomic and emotional survival. Thus,  
Mortimer’s novels are valuable chronicles  
not only of a recent era of women’s history  
but of conventional attitudes that still  
persist in the 1980s, not historical artifacts  
but cautionary tales. Confinement, with  
its multiple connotations of maternity,  
imprisonment, and mental incarceration,  
evokes the conditions of female oppres-  
sion that we ignore at our peril.  

® Roberta Rubenstein teaches modern  
fiction at American University. Her critical  
study of women novelists will be published in  
the fall.  

Belles Lettres @ 11  
ees