A Hypnotic  
Saga  

The Greenlanders, by Jane Smiley. New  
York: Knopf, 1988, $19.95, 554 pp.  

by Paula Bonnell  

Jane Smiley’s The Greenlanders is an  
epic novel of daily life. Never mind  
that it is fourteenth-century Green-  
land; you will recognize the same  
deft touch with telling detail that made  
last year’s The Age of Grief a fiction  
award nominee from the National Book  
Critics Circle. That book was a novella  
and short stories, remarkable as much  
for the compression and power with  
which it conveyed characters’ emotions  
as for its acute observation of the bag-  
gage and furniture of contemporary life.  
Like Ursula Le Guin’s Always Coming  
Home, which it somewhat resembles,  
The Greenlanders is a long, slow read. Its  
554 pages span the lifetimes of Margaret  
Asgeirsdottir and her brother, Gunnar  
Asgeirsson. Bloodshed, starvation, and  
disease are the threats that endanger the  
lives of all Greenlanders. Everyday life is  
care of sheep, cows, and goats; hunting;  
clothmaking and clothesmaking; child-  
care; tanning; and storytelling. In their  
society, both Margaret and Gunnar are  
exceptional for their longevity, their  
freedom from the almost universal af-  
fliction of arthritis, and for their  
willingness to disregard custom.  
Margaret married about ten years  
later than most girls. In her prolonged  
girlhood, she learned bird-hunting  
(from a bachelor uncle who was a nota-  
ble hunter), herb-gathering, and skill in  
spinning, weaving, and cheese-making.  
As she grew up, both self-reliance and a  
love of the outdoors became hers, traits  
that made her somewhat exceptional.  

Ice and Fire  
by Andrea Dworkin  

New York: Weidenfeld and Nicholson,  
1987, $14.95, 181 pp.  

Perhaps I should not have been sur-  
prised, given the rhetorical skill and  
energy that Andrea Dworkin displays in  
her nonfiction and her public speaking,  
at the poetic power of Ice and Fire, her  
first novel, but, frankly, I was. Certain-  
ly previous reviews, which have largely  
focused on Dworkin’s politics and the  
difficulties of getting this book published  
in the United States, prepared me for its  
ability to cast a hypnotic spell, for the  
immediacy of its first-person narrative,  
and for its emotional strength.  

Resistance to this powerful and mov-  
ing novel must have come, I think, from  
reviewers’ unwillingness to admit the  
validity of the narrator’s view of the  
world, the depth of her ability to be  
hurt, abused, rejected, and thwarted by  
the world, both as a woman and as a  
writer. But to say that one does not ex-  
perience the world in that way does not  
negate the validity of either the narra-  
tor’s experience or her perception of it.  
The pain, the loss, the bewilderment are  
real, and we should be willing to deal  
with the book on that basis.  

From the lyrical evocations of urban,  
working-class childhood to the writer's  
final betrayal by the literary establish-  
ment, Ice and Fire mesmerizes and draws  
the reader in by the strength of the au-  
thor’s vision and the poetic rhythms and  
repetition of her prose. The first-person  
narrative voice is as believable and  
spellbinding as the voice of a close  
friend, late at night, telling in the  
dreamy and increasingly impassioned  
mode we can fall into after midnight,  
the story of her life. Maybe the listener  
does not believe every detail, but she  
recognizes the emotional truth of what  
the speaker says and the reality of the  
pain, the terror, and sense of loss, the  
feeling that someone who feels that the  
world is estranged from all she holds as  
true and important.  

The rhythm of the novel builds from  
the early recollections of childhood  
(containing clues to what the world  
holds for women) through her life on the  
underside of New York, to a crescendo at  
the end of the first part with the narra-  
tor’s marriage to a Dutch man whose  
impotence is transformed to spouse  
abuse by the union. The second section,  
concerning the narrator’s life as a strug-  
gling writer in New York, begins at a  
higher level of lyrical intensity with its  
interlaced metaphors of publishing and  
forced sex, of coldness and deceit, and  
builds to final confrontation with an ul-  
timate example of the betrayal of the  
writer’s love and art by an editor.  

This is a novel written at white heat,  
yet paradoxically, out of feelings of loss  
and betrayal it is as cold as ice. It does  
not matter how “accurate” this novel is.  
It does not matter if it mirrors your or my  
reality. What matters is that we live in a  
world that can make the feelings and  
experiences of this narrator believable;  
that it convinces us that we could be  
hurt in all these ways.  

If my friend had told me this, late at  
night, over the last of a bottle of wine,  
perhaps I would not have believed it all.  
But I would believe her pain, and honor  
it, and grieve for it. I believe the readers  
of Ice and Fire will do the same.  

—Bonnie Jean Cox  

hunter-gatherer society to understand  
how relatively ordinary is killing and  
how extraordinary is adultery.  

This novel draws its literary inspira-  
tion from the Icelandic prose sagas;  
however, its success must be judged as a  
contemporary novel. Smiley’s fashion-  
ing of the accounts of succeeding winters  
and summers into a tale the reader can  
care about derives in some measure from  
the periodic windows she gives us into  
people’s feelings. For example:  

Gunnar held [his daughter] by the  
arm, and when they came near to  
[the bridegroom], he felt her jerk  
away from him, but not meaning  
to, only called out of herself by the  
presence of the husband she was  
about to take, and this movement  
of hers filled Gunnar with pleasure.  

[H]is promise to Gunnar never to  
speak of the business to Helga [his  
wife] tried him every day, and every  
moment of every day. What he  
especially could not withstand was  
the slow turn of her head in his  
direction, and the slow lift of her  
eyelids, so that her gaze fell upon  
him with pleasure and sadness.  
Then his tongue seemed to come  
alive in his mouth, and to beat  
against his teeth, and it seemed to  
him that the stream of words was  
already half out of him. . . . So he  
fled from Helga and yearned for her  
at the same time.  

For [the same husband], there was  
the relief of giving up his secret to  
the breezes, and when Helga turned  
her slow gaze once more upon him,  
he made his quick one upon her,  
and for three years they were very  
content with one another.  

Mary Flanagan. Photo by Jerry Bauer.  

Trust  
by Mary Flanagan  

New York: Atheneum, 1988, $17.95,  
292 pp.  

None of the five leading characters in  
Trust is trustworthy. In fact they are  
weak and spoiled children — with the  
possible exception, ironically, of the  
child Clover. However, such is the skill  
of the author that the characters are  
creditable, and one wonders uneasily if  
greed, moral bankruptcy, and self-  
destructiveness are really that pervasive  
among London’s upper middle class.  
The story revolves around Clover,  
whom we meet when she is nine years  
old; her radical and alienated painter  
father Jason; his well-off American  
amanuensis Eleanor; Eleanor’s later  
lover Felix (a shady but diabolically  
charming art dealer); and the benevo-  
lent, successful, but weak family friend  
and solicitor Charles. Charles’s cousin  
Monica, the wife of a wealthy art-  
collecting dentist, is Clover’s mother.  
Eleanor, Jason, Clover, and Charles  
each tells his or her own story in relation  
to the others. Eleanor, after she has left  
Jason, arranges with Charles to set up a  

This kind of statement is relatively in-  
frequent (I counted only thirty-four such  
passages in the book). The power of  
these “windows” derives partly from  
their infrequency and partly from the  
wealth of detail and lack of emotional  
revelation in the remainder of the narra-  
tive. Probably such statements are out-  
side the conventions of the saga — but  
that is irrelevant to the reader of Smil-  
ey’s book.  

The annual rhythms, the sheer quan-  
tity of significant events in the lives of  
people in a small society, the insight  
Smiley shows into legal contests (law  
cases are a major part of the plot of the  
book) — all of these combine to make  
The Greenlanders almost hypnotic. It is  
not an easy book to read (the intermit-  
tent violence and the hints of more  
coming were often enough to make me  
want to keep a day’s reading session  
short), but once I adapted to its clear,  
cold, harsh yet beautiful picture of a so-  
ciety, it preempted my desire to read  
other books so that my imagination  
remained full of The Greenlanders.  

Not since George Eliot wrote Romola  
has any writer attempted so complete a  
portrait of a society so remote in time.  
Like Romola, The Greenlanders requires  
patience. Also like Romola, it is a pow-  
erful book about how ego, love, and the  
desire to hurt others are entwined in the  
human heart.  

© Paula Bonnell, a Boston trial lawyer,  

writes fiction and has won an NEA/PEN  
Syndicated Fiction Prize.  

trust for Clover whom she raised from  
infancy and loves like a daughter. She  
suffers because Jason is keeping them  
apart. She is also anorexic, drug depen-  
dent, and manifesting early symptoms of  
the severe diabetes which will kill her.  
The meaninglessness of her life and her  
despair are palpable.  

Angry Jason is perhaps somewhat  
redeemed by his moral courage and re-  
fusal to be lionized by the fickle and  
ever-voracious art world and by his de-  
votion to his daughter. Charles, enam-  
ored of Eleanor and captivated by  
Clover, attempts to protect Monica,  
who received a stolen art object pro-  
cured by Felix. As a result Charles’s law  
career goes downhill, and he is reduced  
to living in an alcoholic fog with his al-  
coholic wife in a dismal basement in  
Fulham.  

After Eleanor’s death, Jason suc-  
cumbs to the enticements of ego and  
money and goes to New York to paint  
and exhibit. Clover, already the mis-  
tress of the errant Felix, comes of age at  
fifteen in fashionable and frenetic New  
York. After the opening of her father’s  
exhibit, which becomes a drunken de-  
bacle, she takes command of her own  
and her father’s life with the help of  
Charles.  

From this sorry set of characters, their  
convoluted relationships, and outra-  
geous behavior, Flanagan, an American  
living in London, has managed to weave  
a well-written and fast-moving story.  
The ending is a bit contrived, for few  
people with Clover’s background could  
be the competent, balanced, and re-  
sponsible adult that she appears to be in  
the ten-year leap forward with which the  
book closes. However, this is a minor  
criticism. Flanagan has an eye for land-  
scape and a feel for atmosphere —  
whether it be London, Rome, Sussex,  
Utah, or New York — and the ability to  
bring characters intensely to life in all  
their strengths and weaknesses. Al-  
though she has published a book of short  
stories, this is her first novel and I look  
forward to more.  

—Barbara Griffith Furst  

Belles Lettres @ 9