The Virgin of Polish Hill by Carotyn BANKS

The section of the city was called "Polish Hill." It con-
sisted of narrow streets and row houses, brick pavements
gradually being replaced by concrete sidewalks. A few slat
fences were left, but these too were going. In their stead,
chain-link fences were being raised.

There was a hospital on the hill that loomed over the rest
of the neighborhood. Its psychiatric ward, on the top floor,
was commonly referred to as "the crazy house.” Children
used to line up on the street to stare at the top floor, waiting
to see one of the patients. At the slightest sign of movement
on any of the floors, they would run, screaming happily,
home to safety and normalcy.

Normalcy meant the smell of kishka or kielbasi reaching
from kitchen to hall and all through the house. On Mon-
days, bleach and ammonia welled up from a hundred white-
washed cellars.

Beyond the hospital, enemy lines. Names like Carrozza,
Damiano. Pizza houses, not our own.

Most of the people in our section spoke Polish, and all of
the older children understood the language when they heard
it, although they didn’t speak it. In the market on Saturday
morning, over the smell of fruit and fresh-killed meat, a
steady chirrup of Polish arose.

The market was a favorite gathering place. It was the
only store in the three-block shopping district that still
covered its floors with sawdust. The older children would
slide in it, and the little ones, hanging onto a coat sleeve or
hem, would make tentative marks with their shoes: circles,
lines, little ditches. My dream when I was small was to be
free to storm and slide up the aisles, a whirl of chips flying,
the dust clouds in my wake falling evenly on every bottle,
every jar, every tissue-wrapped lemon, apple, and orange.

Secular pleasures, even those only imagined, were few.
The real center of the neighborhood was the church. Every-
one, even the drunkards like Diana Dogonka’s father, went
to church on Sunday mornings. The ones who went earliest
were considered saintliest, while the ones who went to the
noon mass were virtually atheists. My parents went, usual-
ly, to 6 a.m. mass with my grandmother and Aunt Clara,
while I went to “children’s mass" at 8:30.

All of my classmates were there, unwilling but kneeling
starch-straight because of the nuns who were stationed every
third row. Sometimes I pretended to be sick so that I could
sit, but during the sermon we all sat, and I would read
almost all of the gospels in my missal before the priest had
finished reciting and preaching.

Even though we went to church every week, few of us
seemed to know when to sit or stand or kneel. We always
had to look at each other or the nuns, so that the movement
never happened all at once in all the times I’d been to
church. I always promised myself that I would learn the
routine so thoroughly that the class would look at me before
rising, before kneeling. And yet it was always the good
girls, like Maryann Wrobleska, the girls who never talked
in school and who never got their hands hit with the ruler
by the nuns, who were never slow to decide what to do
during mass. Despite my promises to myself, I was always
off in daydream or in the midst of one of the gospels. May
was the cruelest month, the month of Mary. It began with a

Baldovinetti: Virgin and Child, 15th century. The Louvre.

procession through the neighborhood streets. The boys
carried a large plaster statue of the Virgin and the girls
followed, emptying baskets of rose petals along the way,
and singing over and over again, a long, strangely sad
Polish hymn called Podgura Dolina.

I hated the whole thing. I think it was a safe guess that
all of us did, the boys in crisp navy suits, the girls in
starched white dresses and knee-length white socks.

Old tapestry banners recalling miracles were held high,
usually by the older men in the Sacred Heart Society: Lour-
des, Fatima, Guadalupe. The smell of incense in the streets
was fleeting except to those of us in procession. We grew
dizzy as we walked and sang, casting the petals into the
warm spring streets.

The neighborhood people would come down from their
porches and stand at the curb. Some would lean out of
upstairs windows. The old women would cry a little and try
to sing with us, but always much too slowly.

Except for May, evenings in the church were given over
to these old women, who would go in groups to say the
rosary. Since few of the babkas had even attempted Eng-