The Weight of That Enormous  
Sky: Coming of Age in Australia  

The Road from Coorain, by Jill Ker Conway. New York: Knopf, 1989, $18.95, 238 pp.  

by Scarlet Cheng  

Some autobiographies are in-  

sufferable self-aggrandizement.  

Others, especially those by people  
who grew up under hard-pressed and  
unusual circumstances and later made  
some sense of it all, offer the adventure  
and inspiration of great novels. Jill Ker  
Conway, the first female president of  
Smith College, has written one of the  
latter in The Road from Coorain.  

Her elegantly crafted memoir begins  
with an evocative description of the  
vast, parched spaces of her native Aus-  
tralia, dotted by bush and prickly weed  
and crossed by silent emus and kanga-  
roos. “Here,” she writes, “pressed into  
the earth by the weight of that enormous  
sky, there is real peace. To those who  
know it, the annihilation of the self,  
subsumed into the vast emptiness of na-  
ture, is akin to a religious experience.”  

Jill Ker (Conway is her married  
name) was brought up on an immense  
sheep farm in New South Wales, a place  
her parents named Coorain, after the  
aboriginal word for “windy place.” Al-  
though loneliness and physical hardship  
were ever present, she fondly recalls  
sharing that rugged existence with her  
handsome, strong-willed parents and  
two lively older brothers. Jill grew up  

quickly, learning from her mother to  
read and to love reading. When her  
brothers were sent to boarding school,  
she began helping her father in his daily  
rounds — mustering sheep and mending  
fences — at a time when she was so small  
that it was difficult to remount her horse  
when she fell off. Then a severe drought  
destroyed their dream — and her father.  

Mrs. Ker moved the family to Syd-  
ney, and she struggled financially and  
emotionally to make ends meet. Her  
painfully shy daughter struggled to adjust  
to urban society.  

Conway has a knack for summing up  
situations with terse observations: “My  
mother’s code of thrift, sobriety, and  
industry had served her well growing up  
in a simpler Australian society, but it  
had little appeal for her children, hungry  
for excitement and experience, and  
made aware of a more complex society by  
their urban schooling.”  

A reversal in fortune allowed the Ker  
children to enjoy jazz, American mov-  
ies, and fast cars, but ultimately, a sub-  
tler vision captured Jill — the joys of  
scholarship. She first attended Ab-  
botsleigh, a top-notch private girls  
school, then the University of Sydney,  
where she found the intellectual world  

Women’s Autobiography  

Jill Ker Conway  

she would embrace for life. Rarely has  
the transit to the calling been so elo-  
quently conveyed.  

In learning to master French, for ex-  
ample, Jill also learned to appreciate  
English. The morning sermons that  
began every school day began to reson-  
ate for her.  

Now, as though I had been deaf before, I  
began to hear Miss Everett’s beautiful  
voice lingering lovingly over the cadences  
of the King James Bible. I had loved po-  
etry before because of its imagery, but now  
I heard language as a form of music, and I  
waited for the succession of readings  
marking the liturgical year as though I  
were a traveler looking for familiar places  
along a well-traveled path.  

It is a painful irony that while Jill  
found the world expanding, her once  
active and vibrant mother saw hers grow  
narrow and paranoiac. Jill was to find  

herself besieged — at home by her  
mother’s sudden rages and manic out-  
bursts and in the outside world by a sexist  
society.  

Self-defense certainly prompted Con-  
way to assess many a situation from a  
cool distance. In looking at her mother,  
she also shows a heartfelt sympathy for a  
generation with fewer choices than hers:  

I would place beside her in my mind’s  

eye the young, competent woman, proud,  
courageous, and generous, I’d known as a  
child. I was living with a tragic deteriora-  
tion brought about because there was now  
no creative expression for this woman’s  
talents. Lacking a power for good, she  
sought power through manipulating her  
children. The mind that once was engaged  
in reading every major writer of the day  
now settled for cheap romances, murder  
mysteries, and a comfortable fuzz of tran-  
quilizers and brandy at the end of the day.  

Despite being the top of her history  
class at the university, Ker was turned  
down by Australia’s foreign service. The  
evaluation contained criticisms such as  
“Too good-looking,” “She’d be married  
within a year,” and “Too intellectually  
aggressive.” Since two fellow seniors —  
male — did make the grade, Ker realized  
painfully that sometimes merit does not  
overcome discrimination. She decided  
that Australia held no future for her.  
The book ends with her departure for the  
United States and the history depart-  
ment of Harvard.  

@ Scarlet Cheng writes on film, litera-  
ture, culture, and the arts.  

Lost in Translation: A  
Life in a New Language  
by Eva Hoffman  

New York: Dutton, 1989, $18.95,  
280 pp.  

Carolyn G. Heilbrun suggests in Writing  
a Woman’s Life that the female writer of  
autobiography has to begin by finding a  
pattern that explains her life. She can-  
not use the tired myths of the quest or of  
marriage-and-happily-ever-after sug-  
gested by the stories men have told so  
often. These patterns need replacing  
with new ones that match women’s lives  
originally lived.  

In Lost in Translation, Eva Hoffman  
seeks a pattern that conveys healing or  
knitting. Her life, like so many in the  
twentieth century, splits when she and  
her family emigrate from Poland to Ca-  
nada in 1959 when Eva is thirteen.  

Once in the West, Eva goes to  
school, performs at piano concerts, at-  
tends Rice University, gives up music,  
and gets her doctorate at Harvard in  
English with the idea of becoming a New  
York intellectual. She apparently suc-  
ceeded, since she is now an editor of The  
New York Times Book Review. The auto-  
biography, however, hardly mentions  
this curriculum vitae. Instead, its sub-  
ject is the interior journey, the healing  
of the rift between her Polish side and  
her American side.  

Throughout her girlhood — success-  
ful as it is — Hoffman always feels some-  
how foreign, estranged:  

In the midst of a conversation, as we lift  
our wineglasses to each other in a moment  
of affirmation and camaraderie, I lift off a  
little too high, to a point from which the  
room becomes only a place in which I  
happen to be, where I’ve found myself by  
some odd accident. . . . Nothing here has  
to be the way it is; people could behave  
in a different manner; I could look differ-  
ent, flirt differently; I could be having  
entirely different conversations.  

Eva Hoffman.  
Photo by Sara Krulwich  

The feeling of estrangement reveals  
itself most poignantly in friendships,  
where “we want to enter into the very  
textures, the motions and flavors of each  
other’s subjectivities.” Yet because her  
“version of reality was formed in Eastern  
Europe” and her friends’ in the New  
World, all kinds of mixed messages keep  
getting in the way. Furthermore, she  
wonders if she should regret leaving  
Poland, giving up the other self she  
might have been:  

I no longer know who would have lived  
the life I might have lived there. I would  
have become a pianist. . . . I would have  
married and had fights Polish-style, and  
gone on winter vacations to Zakopane. I  
would have known the clarity which gives  
Polish conversation and thinking such  
robustness and wit. In 1968, I would have  
been forced to emigrate. . . [but] I don’t  
know the person who would have made  
that decision.  

To explain her groping toward a ma-  
ture identity, Hoffman uses the meta-  
phor of language. She has been “lost in  
translation” and needs to build a new  
language to be a new person.  

When she describes this process, the  
translation at the heart of her autobiog-  
raphy, she is funny and wise and origi-  
nal. Building her English “from the roof  
down,” filling in words she missed in  
childhood, she adds richness to her Pol-  
ish memory and association. Ultimately  
her whole identity — symbolized by her  
language — partakes of that richness:  

“Azalea, hyacinth, forsythia, delphini-  

um.” The names are beautiful and they fit  
the flowers perfectly. . . . Right now, this  
is the place where I’m alive. Be here now,  

I think to myself in the faintly ironic  
tones in which the phrase is uttered by  
the likes of me. Then the phrase dis-  
solves. The brilliant colors are refracted by  
the sun. . . . The language of this is suf-  
ficient. I am here now.  

Eva Hoffman has found a useful pat-  
tern to explain her struggle for identity.  
Her reader understands her childhood in  
Poland and her adult life in Canada and  
the United States, and also feels their  
texture as her two-sidedness, her Pol-  
ish-Americanness, permeates her whole  
personality. By focusing on language in  
Lost in Translation, she has created a  
metaphor that makes it possible to imag-  
ine a life torn by emigration and made  
whole again by imagination.  

—Susan P. Willens  

Nettie Palmer: Her  
Private Journal Fourteen  
Years, Poems, Reviews and  
Literary Essays  

edited by Vivian Smith  

St. Lucia, Australia: University of  
Queensland Press, 1988, $19.95, 548 pp.  

For those of us who fell in love with  
Australian cinema through My Brilliant  
Career and Breaker Morant, Nettie Pal-  
mer promises to be as delightful a dis-  
covery from Down Under. Palmer pub-  
lished her first collection of poetry in  
1914 and continued publishing through  
the 1950s. She put together “the first  
systematic, modern critical study” of  
Australian literature in 1924, Modern  
Australian Literature 1900-1923. In  
Fourteen Years, her collection of journal  
entries from 1925-1939, she recounts  
her travels in Europe, her meetings with  
famous writers, and her efforts, with her  
husband, Vance, to nurture and pro-  

mote Australian literature.  

This collection of some of Palmer’s  
most important critical, historical, and  
creative work is edited by Vivian Smith,  
who has also published three other stud-  
ies of the work of the Palmers, as well as  
five books of poetry and several antholo-  
gies and critical studies of Australian and  
American poetry. In this volume, she  
focuses carefully on the work of Nettie  
Palmer, chronicling her significant con-  
tribution to the establishment of an  
Australian literary tradition. Palmer’s  
voice comes through, delightful in its  
honesty and love of her homeland.  
While traveling in Europe after World  
War I, she records her response to the  
expatriates, “But what is life for all these  
refugee-writers? ‘By the waters of Baby-  
lon I sat down and wept.’ It’s true  
they’re not captives, they’re guests in a  
country still free; yet how can they sing  
the songs of Zion in a strange land!”  
Palmer sings the songs of her land in a  
voice worth becoming familiar with.  

—Cecilia Konchar Farr  

Winter 1990