Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

¢%

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  
of  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR  
o  
Kamili Anderson  
Carol Armbruster  
Jane Bakerman  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Faye Moskowitz  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
®  
Jeanne Casey  
Adele Gorelick  
Carmen Johnson  
Catherine McDermott  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in  
September, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available by  
subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ insti-  
tutions: $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly subscrip-  
tions $2.00 an issue for classes of 10  
or more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose is  
to promote and celebrate writing by  
women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, send SASE for  
a copy of the Guidelines for Review-  
ers. All views expressed in Belles  
Lettres represent the views of the  
individual authors.  

Correspondence  

All editorial correspondence and  
books for review should be sent to  
Janet Mullaney at 11151 Captain’s  
Walk Court, Gaithersburg, MD  
20878, except for poetry books and  
queries, which should be sent to  
Michelle Tokarczyk, 130 W. 16th  
St, #61, NY, NY 10011. Con-  
tributors should query first, send  
clips, and enclose SASE.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Please write for rate card or  
call (301) 294-0278.  

March/April 1988  

Back Issues  

The following back issues are available  
for $3.50 each (includes postage and  
handling). Please specify volume(s) and  
number(s) desired and make checks pay-  
able to Belles Lettres, Inc.  

Volume I  

Number 4: Marina Tsvetaeva, Sheila  
Fugard interview, Winnie Mandela  
biography, “Behind the Fig Leaf”  
Number 5: Canadians, Josephine Jacob-  
sen interview, 19th-century antholo-  
gies, Illinois short fiction  

Number 6: Anzia Yezierska, mysteries,  
Viragos, firsts in fiction, Susan Allen  
Toth interview  

Volume II  

Number 1: Australian and New Zealand  
fiction writers and playwrights, Penelo-  
pe Mortimer retrospective, Vernon Lee  
Number 2: Irish writers, Gwen John,  
Mothers of the Novel, Louise Erdrich in-  
terview, firsts in fiction, poetry essays  
Number 3: Re-visions of Black women,  
Latina prose, dissident women, May  
Miller Sullivan interview, Mlle de Scud-  
ery rediscovery, Defiant Muse  

Number 4: Lesbian writers, Judy Grahn  
interview, WW II novels, Evelyn Scott  
rediscovery, cartoonists  

Number 5: Asian, Native American,  
Linda Ty-Casper interview, Lorine  
Neidecker rediscovery, Tribe of Dina  
Number 6: Medieval writers, Rose  
Macaulay, Rebecca West, Alison Lurie  
interview, feminist criticism  

Volume III  

Number 1: Jewish writers, Fay Weldon,  
firsts in fiction, NWSA report, Virago  
novels  

Number 2: Centenaries of Marianne  
Moore, Emily Dickinson, H.D. Inter-  
views with Sonia Johnson and Charlotte  
Bunch, Willa Cather, avant-garde  
Number 3: Mothers, working-class  
women, women and work, the Triangle  
Shirtwaist Factory fire, Harriet Arnow.  

Win Free Books  

Your mailing label indicates the month  
your subscription expires. If it reads  
5/88, for example, and you are looking at  
the March issue, you need to renew  
quickly so as not to miss the July issue;  
the May issue will be the last in your sub-  
scription. As an added incentive, we  
have selected the following list of books  
for new or renewing subscribers. Buying  
subscriptions for others or for more than  
one year gives you that many more op-  
portunities to receive books. If you like,  
put the title(s) you prefer on your sub-  
scription blank, and send it in soon.  
People sending the first 10 subscrip-  
tion blanks (or copies) from this issue  
will receive one or more of the following  
titles: The Custom of the Country,  
Ethan Frome, Roman Fever and Other  

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216  

Check the subscription rate that applies:  

CONTENTS #@  

VOLUME 3/NUMBER 4  

STORIES FROM SOUTH AFRICA  

2 A Sport of Nature  
by Nadine Gordimer  

Home Ground ...........ccccccesseceeeeescaaeseseeeseesseaseees by Lynn Freed  

3 Poppie Nongetia’ «....... cnnsionses tons vant tae naan roanawe nade cto by Elsa Joubert  

A: Staterol Bear sess cease ves coerecee naesuws cows ime vues comers + by Menan du Plessis  

Sometimes When It Rains .............sscceeeeeevees edited by Ann Oosthuizen  
DISSIDENT VOICES  

5 The Women’s Decameron .............:0cecceceeneeeoens by Julia Voznesenskaya  

A Captive Lion: The Life of Marina Tsvetayeva .......... by Elaine Feinstein  

Selected Poems of Marina Tsvetayeva  
Beyond the Limit ...............2600665  
My Companions in the Bleak House  

SHORT STORIES  

6 The Melting Pot ............. cee  
by Eva Kanturkova  
translated by Elaine Feinstein  
jaws eennses « by Irina Ratushinskaya  

.. by Lynne Sharon Schwartz  

Fair Augusto and Other Stories ...........:...cccsseeeeeeeees by Laura Kalpakian  
130) qoeteaeencer anaieaeen am amnnE No EEConrennconENcce by Maxine Chernoff  
7 Scenes from the Homefront ...............0.:ccceeseeseeeeeeeeneees by Sara Vogan  
Legacies ........cccseeecseeceeeeee .... by Nancy Potter  
Beyond This Bitter Air .. ... by Sarah Rossiter  
8 Supernatural Tales ..........:..:ceeecceeeeseeseeeeeeeneceueeeeeneees by Vernon Lee  
Sugar and Other Stories and Still Life .............:.:seceees by Antonia Byatt  
WOMEN AND WAR  
10 ‘Gone:to Soldiers: sso, ssssses sxe1vee ccessorneer caovens correorrma verse by Marge Piercy  
Women and War ..........:..:eeceseecnseeeeeeeeeesecenees by Jean Bethke Elshtain  
Mothers in the Fatherland: Women, the Family, and  
Nazi Politics swiss: rosea wenwees vere ves noes cowsann exewnns esos meres by Claudia Koontz  
In the Autumn Wind ...........0.::00ee . . by Dorothy Stroup  
REVIEWS  
4 Beloved .........c:scccsccsecevecesecsseeesceescsnesesccesecnseseeees by Toni Morrison  

Webster’s First New Intergalactic Wickedary of the  
English Language ........ conjured by Mary Daly in cahoots with Jane Caputi  

11 A Wreath for the Enemy ............  

Feminism and Poetry .....  
Night Driving ...........  
Dwarf Bamboo  

The White Junk of Love, Again _  

12 Specifying: Black Women Writing  
the American Experience ............  
Gwendolyn Brooks: Poetry and the Heroic Voice ..  

eee nee nents by Pamela Frankau  

oe by Jan Montefiore  
.. by Suzanne Helfman  
ee by Marilyn Chin  

seeecsentecteneeescneeeceneeeees by Sibyl James  

by Susan Willis  
... by D. H. Melhem  

A Life Distilled: Gwendolyn Brooks, Her  

Poetry and Fiction ................-  

edited by Maria F. Mootry and Gary Smith  

13. The House of Mirth, The Reef, The Custom of the Country  

and The Age of Innocence ..........  

COLUMNS  

To by Edith Wharton  

9 Belles Lettres Interview: Bharati Mukherjee  
14 Impressions: Out of Africa, More Women and War, Briefly Noted, One Less  
Belle to Answer, Looking Forward (by Janet Mullaney)  

On the Cover: Portrait of Vernon Lee by Berthe Noufflard.  
Courtesy of Colby College Library, Waterville, Maine.  

Stories, and The House of Mirth by  
Edith Wharton; Of Love and Shadows  
by Isabel Allende; Taking Leave by  
Janet Shaw; Persian Nights by Diane  
Johnson; Daughter of the Hills by Myra  
Page; Mary Shelley by Muriel Spark;  
How I Grew by Mary McCarthy; The  
Queen of Swords by Judy Grahn; Riding  
the Moon in Texas by Ntozake Shange;  
and Ngambika: Studies of Women in  

Please send  

Name  

1-year subscription[s] or  
subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check  
or money order in the amount of  
Belles Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a  
photocopy, or handwritten copy.  

African Literature, edited by Carole  
Boyce Davies and Anne Adams Graves.  

Also, remember that your tax-  
deductible contributions to Belles Lettres  
enable us to receive matching funds from  
the Jenny Moore Fund, which has given  
us a matching grant of $2,500 for 1988.  
Subscriptions are also included, if you  
write “for Jenny Moore grant” on your  
subscription form.  

2-year  

payable to Belles  

Street  

City  

State Zip  

1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year * Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:  
1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)  
@ $12.50/year A contribution of $ is enclosed  
Send gift card to:  
1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year  
2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year  
subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00  
Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription  
I am renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue.