FS  
Not What Dickens Expected  

Estella, by Alanna Knight. New York: St.  
Martin’s Press, 1986, $14.95, 237 pp.  

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumberger  

Estella shifts the point of view of  

Dickens’s Great Expectations  

from Pip to Estella, the beautiful  
adopted daughter of the jilted Miss  
Havisham. In this imaginative retelling  
of one of the most beloved Victorian  
novels, Estella relates her own story (as  
Pip told his) from earliest childhood re-  
collections to the bittersweet reunion of  
the two lovers some dozen years after  
their painful parting scene. Avid readers  
of Dickens, still the most popular  
novelist in English, have always won-  
dered what exactly happened to the  
strong-willed Estella after her calculated  
marriage to rich, brutal Bentley Drumm-  
le, and many of us cherish private  
theories. This novel offers the emotional  
satisfaction of answering the questions  
that remain in readers’ minds after their  
eyes have passed over the famous con-  
cluding sentence of Great Expectations,  
“I saw no shadow of another parting from  
her.” While Knight’s novel works to-  
ward this “reunion” ending (Dickens’s  
second and the one he ultimately pre-  
ferred), it provides us with the particu-  
lars that have made Estella the greatly  
changed person whom Pip encounters  
on the ruined grounds of Miss  
Havisham’s estate, where they were in-  
troduced as hapless children.  

Raised by her half-crazed adoptive  
mother to be an instrument of revenge  
on the male sex for Miss Havisham’s  
jilting in youth, Estella progresses from  
heartless flirt to a condition of hard-  
bought maturity. The plot has all the  
sensation and sentiment that one could  

Quirky Stories  

Passion Fruit: Romantic Fiction with a  
Twist, edited by Jeanette Winterson.  
London: Pandora Press, 1986, $6.95,  
168 pp. (PB)  

by Emily Toth  

When I said I'd give my right  

arm for you, I didn’t think  

you’d ask me for it, but  
you did. . . . And I said, ‘OK.’ ” And  
so the central character in Rebecca  
Brown’s “Forgiveness,” the first of sev-  
eral intriguing, quirky stories in this col-  
lection, chops off her right arm. She and  
her lover keep it in the bathtub over-  
night, and eventually the lover bronzes  
it and hangs it on the mantel.  

Jeanette Winterson, the editor of Pas-  
sion Fruit: Romantic Fiction with a Twist,  
keeps mum (no introduction, no after-  
word) about why she has chosen the 13  
stories in the collection. The writers,  
American and British, include Bobbie  
Ann Mason, Marge Piercy, Fay Weldon,  
and Angela Carter, among lesser-known  
names, and none of them could be called  
“romantic” in the traditional sense.  

Mason’s hero, for instance, is in love  
with (or obsessed with) Big Bertha, a  
strip-mining machine with the powers  
of Paul Bunyan. Weldon’s protagonist  
and her male lover go in for cross-  
dressing, while the central character in  
Fiona Cooper’s “Herself and Herbert” is  
a bored jewelry shop assistant who yearns  
for something interesting to happen—  
and so her friend obligingly robs the  
shop.  

The characters in Passion Fruit seem  
to suffer from a general Weltschmerz,  
but they refuse to see love as the answer.  
The woman in Laurie Colwin’s “French  
Movie” refuses to get dressed up for a  

wish of a Dickens offshoot; it includes  
the poignant deaths of her newborn  
babies from congenital “blue baby” syn-  
drome, Estella’s near-murder by the heir-  
less Drummle, her flight from him with  
the aid of loyal childhood servants, and  
a colorful supporting cast of helpful gyp-  
sies, a laudanum addict, and an or-  
phaned infant girl whom Estella adopts.  
Although the tale is agreeably action  
packed, it never loses sight of its guiding  
motif, Estella’s search for the identity of  
the violent biological parents that she  
dimly remembers in the form of a recur-  
rent nightmare. In the course of her  
gradual uncovering of the past, she  
comes into contact with two of the most  
memorable eccentrics from Great Ex-  
pectations, lawyer Jaggers and his clerk  
Wemmick. Their convincing reappear-  
ance in Estella as somewhat older men  
is a sheer delight, which Dickens readers  
and fans of the great David Lean film of  
his novel will relish to the last detail.  

When Estella finds her dark heritage,  
it proves to be the last obstacle to her  
happiness. Her ultra-respectable lover,  
with whom she had had a tepid affair  
while longing for the rejected Pip, now  
rejects her. She then returns to the scene  
of her childhood, with her own adopted  
daughter, firmly resolved to bring the  
girl up on healthier principles than those  
bitterly imparted by Miss Havisham.  
There she and Pip meet, for the first  
time as equals, able to appreciate each  
other’s suffering and growth and to share  
the nurturing of the child.  

The task of evaluating later fiction  
based on famous characters created by  
another hand always poses special prob-  
lems. (One thinks, for example, of the  
many contemporary novels of Sherlock  
Holmes, such as The Seven Per-Cent Sol-  

rendezvous with her lover, who  
comments on how nice she is to “give blind  
people an opportunity to learn to cut  
hair by practicing on you.” But Colwin’s  
lovers do at least like the same kinds of  
movies: It Oozed from Mars and Ghost  
Dogs from Outer Space.  

Still, most of the characters in Passion  
Fruit are amiable drifters and gossips and  
cat lovers, irritated by junk mail and the  
suspicion that operators are not really  
standing by at a toll-free number to take  
their calls (in Rebecca Brown’s “Junk  
Mail”). More than a few characters wind  
up being thought “loony,” in or out of  
the hospital—and I, as a reader, did not  
know whether I was supposed to laugh,  
shriek, or be disgusted.  

Sometimes I did all three, but I would  
have liked more active characters, the  
kind of women who seize their own de-  
stinies rather than submitting to them.  
Perhaps the Passion Fruit characters (like  
Ann Beattie’s characters) are symptoms  
of our troubled times, but I wanted them  
to get up and do something.  

Nevertheless, the stories in Passion  
Fruit do pose one of the most important  
and eternal questions plaguing women:  
How far will women go for love? Cross-  
dressing, sure; robbing a jewelry store,  
maybe. But cutting off their right arms?  
Or wrapping themselves in styrofoam  
peanuts and masquerading as junk mail?  
Most do draw the line—which may be  
just a sign that most women lack the  
wild and woolly imaginations of the writ-  
ers in Passion Fruit.  

® Emily Toth teaches at Penn State and  
has published five books, including a biog-  
raphy of Grace Metalious and a historical  
novel. Her first book, The Curse: A Cul-  
tural History of Menstruation, is being  
reissued, and she is writing a biography of  
Kate Chopin.  

olution, or the numerous attempts to  
“solve” Dickens’s irresistible unfinished  
novel The Mystery of Edwin Drood.) Al-  
most invariably, the later works are not  
as compelling as the originals that in-  
spired them. (Some readers will be quick  
to argue for one exception, Jean Rhys’s  
acclaimed Wide Sargasso Sea, a “prequel”  
to Jane Eyre, which explores how  
Brontë’s “madwoman in the attic” got  
that way.) Whereas Estella has no pre-  
tensions to being a work of art on the  
level of Dickens’s achievement, neither  
is it a facile trick of imitation. Above  
all, Estella is a highly engaging literary  
entertainment and, as such, thoroughly  
successful. Estella captures the essence  
of mid-Victorian England, from gas  
lights to public readings by Tennyson,  
and at the same time plausibly extends  
our insight into one of the most complex  
heroines in literature.  

One particularly commendable aspect  
of Knight’s novel is the fascinating infor-  

mation it offers—all of it historically  
sound—on the areas of a woman’s life  
that were unmentionable in Dickens’s  
time. If you ever wondered about Es-  
tella’s experience of her own sexuality,  
for example, this novel develops the  
slow-burning passion that Great Expecta-  
tions could only faintly suggest. It also  
expands the resentment and prefeminist  
rebellion that we can see simmering  
within Dickens’s cool Estella at the cruel  
restrictions placed upon her because of  
sex-role rigidities. In a sense, then, Es-  
tella is a valuable piece of literary criti-  
cism as well as a satisfying novel; it  
doubles our perceptions into a very im-  
portant and strangely modern woman  
character.  

® Nancy Engbretsen Schaumberger  
writes on Victorian literature and women’s  
studies. She teaches at Manhattanville  
College.  

—Impressions, continued  

Mary Lynn Broe gave a moving and  
much too short synopsis of work she has  
been doing on Djuna Barnes, Emily  
Coleman, and Antonia White (“My Art  
Belongs to Daddy: Incest as Exile—the  
Textual Economics of Hayford Hall”).  
She started off with a “collage” of letters  
to and by the three women centering on  
the theme of incest, Djuna in relation  
to her grandmother and the other two  
writers to their fathers. Broe is looking  
at the “multiple silencing” that attends  
these incest survivors and fiction writers:  
Exiled both from childhood and from  
their roles as adult women, they under-  
stand the abuse of power by the adult  
yet feel ambivalence and conflict be-  
cause they forgive them and feel  
warmth. They have power in the family  
because of their “privileged” status, yet  
they are exiled within the community  
of the family.  

These three women were friends and  
were present off and on at Hayford Hall,  
a residence presided over by patron  
Peggy Guggenheim, which Broe calls a  
“version of Boccaccio written with an  
all-female cast.” They shared confi-  
dences—and men. For Barnes, Col-  

eman, and White, Hayford Hall “recon-  
figured the conventional family.” The  
sanctuary of the place and their verbal  
freedom with each other enabled them  
to break the taboo of silence and to write  
their most serious work: Coleman with  
Shutter of Snow (1930), White with Frost  
in May (1933), and Barnes with Night-  
wood (1936). Nightwood, to paraphrase  
Barnes, is the most famous unknown  
novel ever, and it is readily available in  
paperback. Virago reprinted Frost in May  
a while ago. Broe says that this novel  
“recreates the sadospiritual rule, the  
order of the patriarchal family.” In it,  
the Mother Superior and the father both  
try to erase the text of the daughter,  
who has written about what happened  
to her. The Shutter of Snow was recently  
reprinted by Penguin/Virago. It was  
Coleman’s only novel, although she  
wrote other prose prolifically. It is an  
unparalleled depiction of a brilliant,  
poetic, insane mind. Broe also men-  
tioned that she had received permission  
to co-edit the correspondence of Djuna  
Barnes and that her edited collection of  
essays on Barnes, Silence and Power, is  
due out this spring.  

—Janet Palmer Mullaney  

WHAT IS IT REALLY LIKE TO BE A LESBIAN?  

Introducing  
LESBIAN  
LETTERS...  

a book that gives new perspectives  
on lesbians who—like other women—  
possess great variety, dignity,  

and courage.  

This book, by Christine Heron Stockton,  
addresses the broad range of heartfelt issues  
that face lesbians, their families and friends.  

Please send me  
Enclosed is my check for $  
Name  

copies of LESBIAN LETTERS at $9.50 each postpaid.  
made payable to Heron Press.  

Address  

Apt. No.  

City  

Heron Press, P.O. Box 31539,  

State Zip  
San Francisco, CA 94131  

March/April 1987