publican Army bomb and his wife has  
lost a foot. James’s business associates  
are self-serving and greedy, and one of  
them is in prison. The ugliness and soul-  
lessness of urban renewal is a recurring  
theme. Alison thinks as she enters a  
London railway station,  

She had so loved England. A fear  
and sadness in tune with her own  
breathed out of the station’s shifting  
population: old ladies with bags, a  
Black man with a brush and bin,  
pallid girls in jeans, an Indian with  
a tea trolley, a big fat man with a  
carrier bag, they all looked around  
themselves shiftily, uneasily, eyeing  
abandoned packages, kicking dirty  
blowing plastic bags from their an-  
kles, expected explosions. It can’t  
be like this thought Alison: how  
can it have got to be like this? Who  
has so undermined, so terrified, so  
threatened and subdued us?  

This is Drabble’s only novel with a male  
protagonist. Contrary to all the others,  
it ends in almost total despair.  

We are back to the old Drabble in The  
Middle Ground. Kate Armstrong is an  
energetic journalist who was born to  
lower, middle-class parents in the East  
End. She married into a raffish,  
Bohemian family and of necessity soon  
thereafter must take in freelance writing  
assignments to support herself, her in-  
fant, and her painter husband. She has  
several more children and gets a divorce.  
The story opens when she is forty and  
complaining that she is tired and dis-  
gusted. She considers the subtle ways in  
which women are manipulated and ex-  
ploited and wonders if she has been, too.  
She says, “You know, looking back, I  
realized I felt as light as air, all these  
years I felt as though I was walking on  
air. I did feel free, I felt so — so un-  
determined, so unforced, so unpushed  
in every way. And now I realize it wasn’t  
like that at all. It was all an illusion.”  

Her friends include another journal-  
ist, who had his hand shot off in Eritrea,  
and Ted, a doctor of tropical medicine.  
Ted is a former lover. Ted’s wife Evelyn  
is a social worker in London and is now  
Kate’s best friend and alter ego. The  
children of Ted and Evelyn are also good  
friends of Kate’s offspring. Glimpses of  
Kate’s warm but chaotic household are  
interspersed with those of her profes-  
sional life. On a visit back to the old  
neighborhood, Kate ruminates on how  
far she has come and how far the area has  
deteriorated. That visit and a nasty en-  
counter Evelyn has with the angry hus-  
band of one of her clients jar Kate into  
her old buoyancy. The book ends as  
Kate is preparing for a huge, family party  
at her house. “There she sits, Kate Arm-  
strong, in her black Marks and Spencer  
petticoat, her feet dangling in their  
emerald Arabian slippers, wondering  
what to wear, and wondering what will  
happen at her party.”  

Drabble’s latest novel, The Radiant  
Way, begins at another party — still in  
London but this time at the end of 1979  
as Liz Headleand prepares for her New  
Year’s Eve party. She is a successful psy-  
chotherapist whose children are grown  
and whose husband, unbeknownst to  
her, is about to leave her. Her guests —  
artists, politicians, writers, and other  
trend-setters — represent the different  
facets of life in contemporary England.  
The previous twenty-five years are seen  
through the eyes of Liz and her two  
closest friends from Cambridge days —  
Alix, a gentle Quaker-trained teacher of  
adults and prison inmates married to an  

equally gentle and idealistic man, and  
Esther, a Holocaust refugee and special-  
ist in Renaissance painting who lives  
modestly and runs off to Italy every  
chance she gets. We experience the  
excitement of being young, female, and  
at university in the sixties; the optimism  
and social turmoil of the sixties; and  
then the economic and social decline of  
the seventies reflected in jaded,  
middle-aged intellectuals, and their dis-  
illusionment.  

All the familiar Drabble elements are  

JULY/AUGUST 1988  

THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT BY JANE BAKERMAN  

Murder is serious business, and  
no one takes it more seriously  
than writers whose business is  

murder. Many of the most prestigious  
and influential crime writers are female,  
and among these gifted women, the  
continuity of purpose and respect for one  
another is readily discernible. Certainly  
today’s mystery writers benefit from the  
enormous impact Agatha Christie made  
on their art. By selling gooseflesh with-  
out fear, Christie and a handful of other  
extremely successful women expanded  
the crime novel market and paved the  
way for current favorites whose thrillers  
range from the adroitly formulaic to the  
cleverly innovative.  

Even were Christie’s literary de-  
scendants tempted to forget her influ-  
ence, publishers would not allow it.  
There is simply too much profit to be  
made from proclaiming a newly pub-  
lished writer to be “the new Agatha  
Christie,” or from announcing that she  
follows “in the footsteps of Mary Stew-  
art” or “in the tradition of Daphne du  
Maurier,” to cite two of Christie’s highly  
popular sisters in crime. In fact, today  
there is such an abundance of excellent  
women mystery writers that the names of  
Ruth Rendell and P. D. James, who  
were formerly identified as Christie’s  
heirs, are now themselves invoked to  
introduce authors just entering the  
crime scene.  

Although both Rendell and James  
point out that their work differs signifi-  
cantly from Christie’s, both are quick to  
praise her, noting her capacity to enter-  
tain, the cleverness of her plots, her  
long span of productivity, and her  
willingness to undertake the hard work  
demanded by authorship. In a lighter  
vein, relative newcomer Liza Cody also  
pays tribute to Christie, joking that she  
chose Cody as her pseudonym for the  
reason that when fans discover they  
have read all the Christie volumes on  
the bookstore shelf, they will turn natu-  
rally to the Liza Cody novel stocked  
handily nearby! Cody fans who might be  
recruited by such an alphabetical acci-  
dent will discover that Cody, like Chris-  
tie, du Maurier, and Stewart, under-  
stands her craft thoroughly, consistently  
producing a fine blend of the familiar  
and the unexpected in her stories. These  
qualities are essential to genre fiction,  
and the ability to balance them is the  
true measure of a writer’s skill.  

As Dorothy Simpson, author of the  
highly praised Luke Thanet series,  
points out, “Everyone writes as well as  
she can. No one sets out to write a bad  
book.” That intention is as true for  
writers of popular fiction as it is for  
mainstream authors, and if the impulse  
toward mayhem or murder lies in the  
heart of almost everyone, as some  
writers (such as Rendell and James) sug-  
gest, then the crime story’s almost uni-  
versal appeal is founded on twin impul-  
ses: readers’ pleasure in dangers that in  
no way endanger them and their un-  
easy, unquenchable curiosity about the  
depths of human nature. No less potent  

there. Liz was born into a pathologically  
peculiar household in a drab, industrial  
town in the North and is bright, compe-  
tent, and accomplished. The children  
are sturdy. Alix and her husband remain  
gentle and idealistic. And despite  
setbacks and crises, each of the three  
protagonists arrives at some kind of reso-  
lution. The book ends on an upbeat note  
if not in exhilaration.  

Hailed as a major novel and the first  
in seven years from the usually prolific  

when addressed in the delightful social  
comedies of Charlotte MacLeod or  
Lucille Kallen than in the incisive social  
criticism of Sara Paretsky or B. M. Gill,  
these enduring interests afford writers an  
open invitation to explore the serious  
business of murder. In the coming  
months, reviews of works by these  
writers and a host of other potential  
Queens of Crime (to borrow a title often  
bestowed upon Christie) will appear in  
this column. Though the subject matter  
of these stories may vary widely, and  
though the types of novels reviewed may  
represent the full range from near gothic  
thriller to murder mystery to adventure  
tale to spy story and beyond, all the  
books will share one important quality:  
Humorous or grim, each will be praise-  
worthy. The aim of this column is not to  
second-guess writers who fall short of  
their goals but rather to acknowledge  
writers who attain them. In this fashion,  
we hope to put mystery fans right into  
their criminal element.  

Nursery Crimes, by B. M. Gill (New  
York: Scribners, 1987, $15.95, 194  
pp.), recounts the chilling career of  
Zanny Moncrief, who, when only six  
years old, murders an even-younger  
child, an evacuee lodged with her fami-  
ly. The strange relationship between  
Zanny and Dolly Morton, the seven-  
year-old sister of Zanny’s first victim,  
develops against the background of  
World War II and its aftermath and,  
along with the adult Moncriefs’ refusal  
to face facts or to discharge responsibil-  
ity, demonstrates that there is as little  
innocence and civility at home and  
school (those esteemed purveyors of cul-  
ture) as there is on the front lines of bat-  
tle — quite possibly less. Enlivened by  
moments of dark humor, the plot moves  
swiftly and inexorably to a satisfying  
though unsettling climax.  

Sheila Radley continues the troubled  
story of Detective Chief Inspector  
Douglas Quantrill of the Breckhan Mar-  
ket crime squad with her latest, Who  
Saw Him Die? (New York, Scribners,  
1987, $14.95, 202 pp.). When the  
town drunk finally gets himself killed in  
the incessant game of chicken he plays  
with the local traffic, Quantrill must  
cope with an unlikely and rather unlika-  
ble cast of characters. In so doing, he  
solves the current crime as well as a very  
old one. Less successful, however, are  
his efforts as husband and father. His  
wandering eye almost costs him an ex-  
cellent subordinate, and his flaring pa-  
ternal temper contributes to a dreadful  
accident involving his son. While Rad-  
ley does not require that we admire her  
characters — not even Quantrill — she  
does expect us to understand them, a  
process made effortless by her skillful  
characterization.  

“E” Is for Evidence (New York:  
Henry Holt, 1988, $15.95, 227 pp.),  
the fifth of Sue Grafton’s alphabetical  
titles, introduces California private eye  

Drabble, The Radiant Way is something  
of a disappointment. It jumps dis-  
jointedly from place to place and from  
time to time. Furthermore, the narrator  
breaks in with arch and disconcerting  
“gentle reader” comments indicating a  
distance between the author and her  
material. The earlier novels were imme-  
diate and involved — at times one felt  
one’s feet in the mud. Although The  
Radiant Way is interesting reading, es-  
pecially for those not familiar with Mar-  

Kinsey Milhone’s second ex-husband,  
who, she says, “taught me how to value  
solitude. What I endure now doesn’t  
hold a candle to what I endured with  
him.” The appearance of Daniel Wade  
and renewed contact with friends from  
her high-school days would seem to offer  
Milhone warmth during an otherwise  
dreary Christmas season. Actually,  
though, they distract her from her cur-  
rent quest: discovering who set up a  
nearly perfect scheme to discredit her  
professionally and to make her liable for  
prosecution. The fast pace and strong  
characterization resulting from Kinsey’s  
unsparing assessments of herself and her  
acquaintances are the dominant quali-  
ties of this superior novel.  

Element of Doubt (New York:  
Scribners, 1988, $14.95, 225 pp.)  
marks the seventh appearance of  
Dorothy Simpson’s Detective Inspector  
Luke Thanet. To solve the murder of  
beautiful, impetuous Nerrine Tarrant,  
Thanet must understand the Tarrants’  
unusual relationships, and as the intro-  
spective Thanet discovers the price the  
dead woman’s husband, child, and ex-  
tended family paid for her infidelities, he  
worries about the threat this case poses  
to his own happiness. Joan Thanet is the  
probation officer for young Damon Tar-  
rant, a suspect in his mother’s murder,  
and the Inspector believes that his wife’s  
obligations to her client conflict with his  
own duties as a police officer. Though  
Simpson’s practice of comparing the  
Thanet family with those of colleagues,  
victims, and suspects is now familiar to  
her fans, her theme — the need for  
openness, forbearance, and under-  
standing between marriage partners —  
remains fresh and absorbing.  

Lora R. Smith’s Revolting Develop-  
ment (Perseverance Press, P.O. Box  
384, Menlo Park, California 94025,  
1988, $8.95, 70 pp., PB) is set in a Palo  
Alto “from an alternative universe,  
where much is similar but nothing is the  
same,” according to the author’s note.  
Bridget Montrose, reluctant jogger and  
would-be writer, stumbles upon the  
body of a richly despised, freshly mur-  
dered real estate developer during her  
morning run. Thereafter, no matter  
how hard she tries not to, Bridget gets  
caught up in detecting, just as no matter  
how hard she tries to ignore it, a police  
officer on the case persists in showing  
how attractive he finds her. And all this  
transpires while she discovers her  
writer's identity, cares for two young-  
sters and a toddler, and begins to suspect  
that she is pregnant again. Bridget  
Montrose is an appealing if overly pas-  
sive central character, and Lora R.  
Smith is a promising newcomer on the  
crime scene.  

Jane Bakerman has written about and  
interviewed scores of mystery writers. She is  
the recipient of the 1988 Dove Award from  
the Popular Culture Association for schol-  
arly contributions to the genre. This is the  
first appearance of her mystery column.  

Margaret Drabble’s work, it is almost a paro-  
dy of the earlier novels. One can only  
hope that this is a transitory lapse, that  
Drabble will not wait so long to produce  
her next book, and that it will be up to  
her usual standards.  

Barbara Griffith Furst was trained as  
an anthropologist and has worked in Asia  
and Africa. Currently she is a writer and  
editor and lives in Washington, D.C.  

Belles Lettres @ 11