the palace grounds (she was gathering material for a socio-
logical study, indignantly noting that the husbands lazed in
the shade while women, "their backs bent and their brows
dripping with sweat," carried heavy copper jugs filled with
water up and down the steep slopes); nor could they fathom
why she chose to wander the multiple terraces of the palace
at night with a candle (a true romantic, she loved to see the
moon over the water from the different aspects afforded by
the rambling structure: "The setting sun drapes Mount
Epomeo with its purple; the palace is in the shadows. But at
its feet the little circular port sparkles with pink glimmers
like an immense ruby.... One hour later I contemplate from
the high terraces the night dazzling with stars.").

The immediate threat over, Fiorentini
and Colet spent the rest of the eve-
ning discussing poetry. Together they
read Hugo’s latest collection, which
the poet had just sent to her.

There were three lights on the island after sundown,
explains Colet: the lantern at the edge of the port, the light in
the highest tower of the fortress, and hers, “always lit from
7:00 P.M. until 2:00 A.M.," which were her hours for
writing. "‘What was I doing?’ they wondered. The lantern
illuminated the reefs and allowed small boats to approach
the port without danger; the light in the tower watched over
the prisoners; to what use was the light at the Villa Reale
being put? for what mysteries? for what incantations?"
“Why did she ceaselessly contemplate the mountain of fire
Mount Vesuvius in which the devil was hidden? Of what
spells was she the practitioner?"

Colet was aware of some of the gossip she occasioned,
but, no stranger to scandal and notoriety, she chose to
ignore it. Twenty-five years earlier, pregnant with the first
of her three children, she had attacked a sardonic Parisian
columnist with a kitchen knife after he stated that her hus-
band was not the child’s father (he was probably right, for
Colet was romantically involved with a very influential
political figure at the time). This tragi-comic scene was the
prime subject of conversation in Parisian salons for months.
Having been Flaubert’s mistress for the five years he la-
bored to write Madame Bovary, and then having had a brief
affair with poet Alfred de Musset, Colet had enraged friends
of these two by exposing what she saw as their faults in a
roman à clef called Lui. It was at least partly to escape
some of the condemnation of the novel which sold very well
and gave its author a degree of financial independence she
had not had for years that Colet had originally gone to Italy
in 1860.

Fortunately, Colet’s triumphs had balanced her problems.
Four times — an unprecedented honor — she had been
awarded the French Academy’s poetry prize. Her works
won the admiration and friendship of Victor Hugo, France’s
most revered man of letters, and L’Italie des Italiens
brought grudging praise even from recalcitrant critic Sainte-
Beuve. The greatest disappointment in Colet’s life was
Flaubert’s unwillingness to respond to her passionate attach-
ment more than half-heartedly for, although his hundreds of
letters to her are among his most beautiful writings, the
rendezvous he was willing to grant his ardent "Muse," as he
called her, were far too infrequent to satisfy her. Of all her
many famous and fascinating lovers, he was the only one
with whom she longed to make a life, and she could not
make it happen. Their final rupture had occurred in 1855, a
little over a year before the publication of Madame Bovary
(whose heroine shares some traits with Colet). There had
been other lovers after Flaubert, including the poet Alfred
de Vigny, but now Colet was alone, and in the view of the
nineteenth century, past the age of passion.

Despite her interest in the local color and her pleasure in
the natural beauty of the island, Colet was often lonely in
Ischia. She became somewhat friendly with the receveur
d’Ischia, a Signor Corbone, but he had little time to spare
for social distractions. Commandant Fiorentini, the captain
of the garrison stationed in the Aragonese Castle, the impos-
ing fortress that is now Ischia’s most easily recognized
structure, invited Colet for a personally escorted tour of the
complex, and he too became a friend.

When Colet arrived in Ischia, in August of 1865, a
cholera epidemic was spreading throughout Europe and had
become, in Colet’s words, "the sinister preoccupation of the
entire world. Having decimated Marseilles, Toulon, and
Arles, it had broken out in Paris, where it was claiming
more victims than the papers admitted." While it was un-
likely that there would be responses as drastic as that of a
fourteenth-century ruler of Milan, who stopped the spread
of the Black Plague by having the three houses in which the
dread illness was first diagnosed walled up with their occu-
pants entombed inside, fear was likely to bring draconian
measures.

In letters to her physician son-in-law, Colet noted that
sanitary conditions on the island were so poor that if a
single case of cholera should occur there, catastrophe would
surely follow. Local priests had been calling cholera a
chastisement from God, brought about by irreligious behav-
ior on the part of the populace due to the pernicious influ-
ence of foreigners. Strangely enough, the one local doctor,
who, like the palace servants, was paid a retainer by the
new government, seemed to support the views of the priests.
Soon even villagers previously friendly to Colet began to
shun her, for if her vehemently anticlerical writings were
unknown to the illiterate population, her refusal to respect
Catholic ritual was apparent to all. Rumors began to spread
that she was a sorceress — the superstitious villagers’ expla-
nation for her nocturnal meanderings.

Now Colet was in real danger. Despite the pleading of
the Ischian authorities, who were aware of the fear and
hatred she had aroused and doubted that they could protect
her or themselves if they allowed her to stay, she refused to
leave Ischia, hoping that if cholera did not actually strike
Porto d’Ischia the hostility would dissipate. Commandant
Fiorentini, the only person of any power who might have
been able to ensure her safety, had been ordered to take his
garrison to the nearby island of Procida to suppress rioting
prisoners who feared a cholera outbreak there. On Novem-
ber 10, when Colet met the 4:00 boat from Naples as she
did almost every day, receiving her mail and supplies from