Rediscovery

Frances Burney  
by Katharine M. Rogers  

critical biography of Frances Burney  

d’Arblay, Margaret Anne Doody  
makes the point that it is patronizing to  
call the author "Fanny." This diminutive  
has been standard in writings about Bur-  
ney, and it accurately indicates the tradi-  
tional estimate of her work and her per-  
sonality. She is one of the few British  
women writers before Jane Austen  
whose name would have been generally  
recognized before the 1970s, but she has  
been known as the girlish author of  
Evelina, a charming novel about an  
ingenue’s entrance into society, and as  
the pet of Samuel Johnson — that is, for  
"properly ladylike" writing and for her  
connection with an eminent man. Fran-  
ces was the daughter of Charles Burney,  
a distinguished and charming musi-  
cologist who was a member of Johnson’s  
Club. Evelina, or A Picture of a Young  
Lady’s Entrance Into the World (1778),  
which she wrote in secret, presents con-  
temporary society through the eyes of a  
seventeen-year-old girl and comically  
satirizes bad manners in the vulgar mid-  
dle class and in aristocrats as well.  

Burney’s picture of the embarrassments  
of female adolescence evokes sym-  
pathetic echoes in women students even  
today. Her next novel, Cecilia, or  
Memoirs of an Heiress (1782), centers on  
a more mature heroine and offers a  
broader, more thoughtful critique of  
society. Cecilia’s fortune should enable  
her to live independently, but in fact she  
never controls her money and eventual-  
ly loses it.  

Although both novels were extremely  
successful, they were not profitable, and  
at thirty-four, Burney was still unmar-  
ried. So when Queen Charlotte offered  
her the position of Second Keeper of the  
Robes, everyone, especially her father,  
saw it as a wonderful opportunity. For-  
seeing the awful boredom and constraint  
that this service would entail, Frances  
longed to refuse; but she could not bear  
to disappoint her father. She served the  
Queen for five years, until, by resorting  
to illness, she got his permission to  
resign. At the age of forty-one, she fell  
in love with a penniless French émigré  
aristocrat, Alexandre d’Arblay. Her  
father opposed the match, but at last she  
found strength to resist him. She married  
d’Arblay, had a son, and enjoyed a bliss-  
fully happy home life. In order to sup-  
port the family, she wrote Camilla, or A  
Picture of Youth (1796). For the first time  
comfortable about making money, she  
marketed the novel carefully and made  
two thousand pounds.  

Camilla is a well-meaning but impul-  
sive girl whose errors of judgment  
produce increasingly disastrous conse-  
quences; eventually she learns prudence,  
those around her recognize her goodness  
of heart, and she is rewarded with a  
model young man. Burney’s last novel,  
The Wanderer, or Female Difficulties  
(1814), relates the tribulations of Juliet,  
a flawlessly modest and genteel but also  
brave and intelligent woman, as she tries  
to support herself in an inhospitable  
world. She is contrasted with Elinor, a  
radical feminist resembling Mary  
Wollstonecraft, who scorns the con-  
straints of propriety. Although there are  
delightful comic characters in all the  
novels, Burney dealt with increasingly  
serious issues and presented an increas-  
ingly grim picture of society. Partly for  
this reason, her later novels were less  
popular than her earlier ones; The  
Wanderer was branded a failure.  

Feminist critics have brought a new  
sympathy and respect to Burney’s life  

|: the introduction to her landmark  

20 Belles Lettres  

and novels. They have noted that this  
dutiful daughter, apparently obsessed  
with modesty and gentility, was a brave,  
competent, resourceful woman. For ex-  
ample, after the Battle of Waterloo, she  
learned that her husband, serving in the  
army of Louis XVIII, had been seriously  
injured. She did not hesitate to set out  
alone to join him, even though she had  
to cross a war zone infested with  
demoralized soldiers, without regular  
transport, adequate money, or any  
knowledge of German, defying brutal  
Prussian commanders all the way. (On  
arrival, she immediately collapsed on  
the arm of her husband’s valet, hardly  
able to walk or speak.)  

On reexamining Burney’s novels,  
feminist critics have found that, far from  
unthinkingly accepting the conventions  
of her time, she criticized and subverted  
them. Evelina evokes not only trivial gir-  
lish embarrassments but also the  
frightening powerlessness of women in a  
world dominated by men. In showing  
how the heroine’s fortune is stripped  
from her, Cecilia dramatizes the  
devaluation of women in patriarchal  
society and suggests that romantic mar-  
riage does not provide women with bliss-  
ful fulfillment, as is implied in Evelina.  
Discrepancies between overt statements  
and plot development subvert the ap-  

Frances Burney. Photo by Paula Payraud.  

has traditionally been dismissed as an ill-  
judged intrusion into the light satire of  
that novel, in fact effectively expresses  
the real hostility to women embedded in  
English society.  

Doody brilliantly demonstrates how all  
the characters in Cecilia are controlled  
by their heartless, greedy, hypocritical  
society. Even the privileged male heir,  
young Delvile, is imprisoned by his role  
in his family, just as Cecilia is by her  
role as a woman. Moreover, the same  
society that limits and distorts natural  
feeling by its arbitrary laws condones  
wickedness in those who pay lip service  
to those laws. Early in Cecilia there is a  
debate between idealistic Mr. Belfield,  
who argues that men should think and  
act for themselves, and worldly Mr.  

Frances Burney: The Life in the Works, by Margaret Ann Doody. New  
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1988, $40.00 (HB), $14.95 (PB),  

426 pp.  
The Wanderer, or Female Difficulties,  

by Fanny Burney. Introduction by  

Margaret Drabble. London: Unwin Hyman, 1988, $8.95, 836 pp. (PB)  

Cecilia, or Memoirs of an Heiress, by Frances Burney. Edited by Peter Sabor  
and Margaret Anne Doody. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988, $7.95,  
1004 pp. (PB)  
Selected Letters and Journals, by Fanny Burney. Edited by Joyce Hemlow.  
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987, $11.95, 366 pp. (PB)  

apparently simple didactic message of  
Camilla. Elinor, the antiheroine of The  
Wanderer, expresses her defiance with  
persuasive eloquence, and the novel’s  
events demonstrate the truth of much of  
what she says. Most of these critics,  
however, emphasize conflict and con-  
tradiction in Burney’s life and works —  
between her need to be conventionally  
blameless and her resentment of con-  
strictions on women’s thinking and feel-  
ing, between the reflection of contem-  
porary ideology in her novels and sub-  
versive criticism and protest. These non-  
integrated elements produce confusion  
and structural weakness.  

Margaret Anne Doody’s Frances  
Burney: The Life in the Works, a  
book sparkling with sharp insights and  
weighty with exhaustive research,  
rejects this view. Doody argues that  
Burney’s novels are consistent as well as  
complex and that, together with her  
plays, they present an incisive criticism  
of her society. Burney should not be read  
as a comic realist like Austen (the tradi-  
tional comparison), but can be  
evaluated justly only if seen as "an ex-  
pressionistic novelist who mingles the  
pathetic and the comic, the grotesque  
and the farcical." Her characters are not  
so much individual comic aberrations  
from the norm as they are expressions of  
"the grotesque and macabre symptoms of  
society’s own perverseness, and of the  
wildness in the human psyche that  
leads" to creating such a society. The  
violent farce in Evelina (a practical joke  
played on Evelina’s grandmother and a  
foot race between two aged poor women  
staged by frivolous aristocrats), which  

Monckton, who maintains that they had  
best defer to the common forms of  
society. Monckton, whom Cecilia mis-  
takenly trusts as an old friend, has mar-  
ried an elderly woman for her money,  
expecting that she will soon die and  
leave him free to marry Cecilia, whose  
person and money he genuinely loves.  
Doody comments: "Monckton is  
decorous and influential; he plays his  
part as landed proprietor very well. He  
shows how a social pirate can be a pillar  
of the community, and makes one  
wonder about the nature of such a com-  
munity."  

Doody’s reading of Camilla is pat-  
ticularly original. In no way is this novel  
a treatise on female education out of the  
courtesy books or an affirmation of con-  
servative ideology; Burney uses her con-  
ventional plot only to mock and under-  
mine it. Rather, Camilla carries deeper  
the questioning of society’s standards  
found in Cecilia. Both books expose in-  
coherence in the structure of society,  
but Camilla is also concerned with in-  
coherence within the psyche. Edgar and  
Camilla love each other, but their court-  
ship "degenerates into a tense and comic  
game" because they are playing by dif-  
ferent and incompatible rules, dictated  
by social convention and reinforced by  
their individual personalities. As Camil-  
la’s father teaches her anxiety and "femi-  
nine” passivity, Edgar’s tutor, March-  
mont, inflates his ego and plays on his  
insecurity. The result is that both young  
people are forced to distort their real na-  
ture and unnecessarily become adver-  
saries. The self-defeating courtship of  
Edgar and Camilla represents the gene-  
ral state of relationships in Burney’s  

society, fraught with anxiety, pain, and  
fear.  

All these relationships are corrupted  
by the human impulse to judge others,  
coupled with the impossibility of truly  
understanding them. Doody takes  
seriously Burney’s prefatory statement  
that her subject is the unknowable  
“wonders of the Heart of man” and her  
warning against making easy judgments.  
Early in the novel, Burney questions  
society’s justice by criticizing the callous  
conduct of the assizes; and she develops  
her characters so as to question interper-  
sonal judgments as well. Camilla offers  
"no objective rational standard for judg-  
ing others or oneself" and shows that  
"logic is created by the emotions," by so-  
cial pressures, and by inner drives often  
concealed from oneself. Judgmental  
Edgar seems to be judicious, but actually  
he is motivated by touchy pride on the  
one hand and lack of self-confidence on  
the other; hence, he relies too much on  
his tutor. The tutor, in turn, appears to  
be a model of disinterested rationality —  
until Burney reveals that his severe judg-  
ments on Camilla spring from unhappy  
experience in marriage, which was large-  
ly his own fault.  

The style of Camilla is unpleasantly  

cumbersome when compared to  
that of Evelina, but Doody shows that, in  
some cases, what could be hastily dis-  
missed as awkward circumlocution is in  
fact a successful effort to convey a state  
of mind too subtle to be clearly formu-  
lated. An example is Edgar’s reaction to  
Camilla’s impulsive admission that she  
has been duped by his rival: "The idea of  
Camilla duped by any man, seemed, in  
one blow, to detach him from her per-  
son, by a sudden dissolution of all charm  
to his mind in the connection." The im-  
personal construction indicates that  
Edgar is not thinking but reacting in-  
voluntarily; a strong moral word such as  
disgust would exaggerate and too sharply  
define his feeling.  

Doody develops more fully than pre-  
vious critics the strong political content  
of The Wanderer. It opens with a debate  
over the merits of the French Revolu-  
tion, recalling the more general debate  
between conventional Monckton and  
nonconformist Belfield in Cecilia. It  
demonstrates the stagnation and injus-  
tice of British society and appeals for  
mutual understanding between Britain  
and France, then at war. Burney strove  
for a fair balance between conservatism  
and reforming zeal, exposing both Eli-  
nor’s radical extremism and the stupid,  
callous complacency of the convention-  
ally respectable. Doody’s thorough ex-  
amination of Elinor clinches the point  
that Burney had not only been listening  
to contemporary feminists like Woll-  
stonecraft, but also in many ways agreed  
with them. Yet it is not Elinor but con-  
ventional Juliet who, having to work for  
her living, actually understands the  
problems of working women. More  
clearly even than Wollstonecraft, Bur-  
ney saw that freedom is no more than a  
name for women who have no leisure  
and no economic security.  

Doody discusses Burney’s life as per-  
ceptively as she does her works. One ex-  
ample is her explanation for Burney’s  
bitter opposition to the remarriage of  
Hester Thrale, who had been her closest  
friend. Thrale, a widow, had shocked all  
her acquaintances when, at the age of  
forty-three, she fell in love with and in-  
sisted on marrying an Italian Catholic  
music teacher, Gabriel Piozzi. She was  
deeply hurt and angry when Burney  
joined the outcry against her. Burney  
mustered many dubious arguments, but  
particularly emphasized Thrale’s "deser-  
tion" of her children by her first mar-  
riage — a seemingly absurd charge, since  
Thrale did not want to abandon them.  

Winter 1989