IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

— Paris, continued from page 1

been in part-time jobs. Also, unemploy-
ment for women has gone from 17% to
20%, whereas for men it went from 10%
to 12%. In France the “cadres,” or top
managers and executives, in both the
public and private sectors, are recruited
largely from the “Grandes Écoles.” This
system, parallel to the university, edu-
cates and trains the best students after
they have passed a highly competitive
examination. Women are still vastly un-
derrepresented, which means that they
have fewer chances of access to top posi-
tions. One of Roudy’s points was that
women need to be better trained.

Another worrisome new phenome-
non in France is the increase of single
mothers. The number of abortions is
stable, but some hospitals have begun
to refuse to perform them. In the mean-
time, young women who take their right
to abort for granted are unaware that,
as Roudy revealed, abortion is not cov-
ered completely by the National Health
Insurance plan. Instead, abortion fund-
ing also depends on the government’s
general spending budget and can be
politically challenged every year.

The question of why young women
no longer seem to be involved in the
women’s movement loomed large in the
colloquium audience. Where were their
daughters that evening? Some advanced
that it was merely a reflection of the
good job these mothers did in raising
them as equal citizens. That is how they
now felt. Others warned that “these
young women would be shocked when
they joined the workforce and realized
how hard it is to face obstacles as indi-
viduals without the support of a group.
Of course, another major factor recog-
nized by the panel is the present dire
economic situation for most of Europe’s
youth. Be they male or female, they too
often seem to be losers of equal oppor-
tunity.

One woman in the audience raised
the issue of the female artist’s plight.
Here we were at the Centre Pompidou.
Upstairs was an utterly confused and
confusing exhibit that professed to pre-
sent the last decade of contemporary art
under an umbrella title borrowed from
Baudelaire, “L’Époque, la mode, la
morale, la passion.” Out of about 200
works presented by 60 artists, only 6
were by women. In view of the recent
controversy surrounding the opening of
the National Museum of Women in the
Arts in Washington, D.C., I inquired
about such a possibility in France. The
idea is definitely not yet welcome.

But I did discover, by accident, that
a French Union for Women Painters and
Sculptors exists and holds an annual
Spring Exhibit in Paris. However, it is
so poorly advertised that few know about
it. Its members meet once a month at
La Coupole, and the exhibition hall
changes from year to year. This Union
was founded in 1881 by Mme Berteaux,
a sculptor, for the express purpose of
supporting female artists. Thanks to her,
the Prix de Rome was awarded, for the
first time, to a woman in 1909. Many
prestigious female artists have been
members, including Sonia Delaunay,
Suzanne Valadon, Marie Laurencin, and
Camille Claudel. The Union is
criticized, however, for its criteria in
choosing which pieces will hang at the
exhibit. They do not wish to foster
“female” art, but the art they choose
cannot be called “feminist” either. They
merely seek to reflect contemporary
trends and eschew distinctions of gender
in artistic matters.

One area in which women visual art-
ists seem to have made significant strides
in France is in film. Since 1976 an Inter-
national Women’s Film Festival is held
in Créteil, close to Paris. And one is
impressed at how many French female
directors have become known in major
American cities just in the last three
years. From 1985 to 1987 alone, four
female directors have enjoyed new rec-
ognition: Coline Serreau, for Three Men

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987

and a Cradle (now being remade in Hol-
lywood), Agnès Varda and her latest The
Vagabond, Vera Belmont with Rouge
Baiser, and Diane Kurys (Peppermint
Soda, Entre Nous, and this fall, A Man
in Love). Other names that may be famil-
iar to American audiences are Yannick
Bellon, Nadine Trintignant, Nelly Kap-
lan, Chantal Ackerman, Caroline Hup-
pert, Nina Companeez, and Marguerite
Duras. Still, out of 150 films made in
France last year, only 10 were by women.
And the Simone de Beauvoir Audio-
Visual Center, created four years ago to
gather and broadcast films by and about
women, has just closed down.

As a general conclusion to the crisis
of feminism in France, the colloquium
tied it to the more general failure of
ideologies to generate any sort of faith
in the 1980s. And with the end of mass
movements, French women find it harder
to define their enemy. The current trend
for everyone is to seek solutions on an
individualistic basis, thereby placing the
emphasis on resilience and personal

® Viola G. Thomas, when not in Paris,
teaches literature and works on her disserta-
tion on Vernon Lee.

— Maladies, continued from page 14

Catherine MacKinnon’s preface to A
Dark Science is especially well-written
and to the point in exposing the
mother-blaming, child-denying world of
our courts and social service systems in
dealing with child sexual abuse. She al-
lows us to realize that the content of the
articles that Masson has uncovered are
identical in many ways to contemporary
pornography, which (she quotes John
Stoltenberg) “tells lies about women,
but the truth about men.” During the
time this review was being written, the
front page of the Boston Globe (Sunday,
April 6, 1987) contained an article stat-
ing that mothers in child custody cases
frequently claim that fathers have
abused children sexually when they
have not. The April 1987 Sojourner, a
Boston area feminist paper, also pub-
lished an article about how psychiatric
diagnoses defined Mary Beth White-
head as an unfit mother; one charge was
that she gave her daughter stuffed ani-
mals instead of toy pots and pans. Mas-
son himself quotes a judge in a child sex-
ual abuse case in 1985 as describing a 5-
year-old female incest victim as “promis-
cuous” and “seductive.” None of this
sounds very different from the words of
Demetrius Zambaco, Gustav Braun, or
Auguste Motet penned over a century
ago. There is a message for all of us in
this reality, and we ignore it to our peril.

® Patricia Roth Schwartz is a
psychotherapist and writer. She publishes
fiction, poetry, reviews, and nonfiction in
feminist and small press journals.

@ $12.50/year

Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216

Check the subscription rate that applies:
1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year

1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)

Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription

— Moore, continued from page 2
indicated how social and sociable she
really was. Moore was perceived always
as eminently civilized. In these later
years her civility tempered the tone of
critics. For Moore, Montaigne’s “truce
to politeness” suggested that writing it-
self is a moral, even religious, act. She
saw Stevens — “the La Fontaine of our
day” — in a review of The Auroras of
Autumn as writing a poetry that “substi-
tutes for... a spiritual happiness.” The
experimentalists of early modernism by
mid-century became the high priests and
Moore the high priestess of the temple
of 20th-century American literature.
When she added Auden to her circle
of aesthetically just poets, Moore ad-
vanced her own self-edification.
Auden’s moral tone was exactly right for
her. “He has a mission,” Moore asserts,
while agreeing with Kimon Friar who
wrote in 1944, there is “at the very
center of Auden’s style and thinking
a veritable Ark of the Lord in
which may be housed the Holy Spirit.”
It was the war, Vendler believes, that
caused Moore’s “flexible ethical medita-
tions to rigidify into moral outcries.”
Thus “animals became an end in them-
selves, as human beings became more
remote or more repellent.” When How-
ard Nemerov asked Moore whether she
was preoccupied in her poetry with a
changed world “during this century,” she
replied: “It preoccupies me... con-
tinuously. Every day it is borne in on us

— H.D., continued from page 3

High, formalist Modernist was
specifically a masculine, heterosexual
phenomenon that excluded those who
did not share the mores of its dominant
culture... Homosexual women were
constrained by Modernist aesthetics in
a variety of ways: they could remain
silent on the subject of their lesbianism
and its relation to their art; they could
adapt Modernist forms (as Gertrude
Stein and Virginia Woolf did) to
disguise the lesbian viewpoint of their
poetry and fiction; or they could
translate love of women into the
dominant heterosexual code.

H.D.: Woman and Poet includes a
120-page bibliography of writings about
H.D., each fully annotated to give read-
ers a sense of how critical opinion has
progressed over the past 15 years. An in-
dispensable resource, the book is worth
the purchase price for the bibliography
alone. Also included is Diana Col-
lecott’s fascinating 50-page essay on the
nude photographs that make up the
“H.D. Scrapbook.” Presumably taken in
the 1920s, these photographs were mon-
taged by Kenneth Macpherson and pub-
lished in an album intended only for
friends.

Macpherson, 16 years younger than
H.D., became infatuated with her.
Since H.D. was still officially married to
Richard Aldington, Bryher married
Macpherson, and the three traveled and

Please send

subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check
or money order in the amount of
Belles Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a
photocopy, or handwritten copy.

that we need rigor — better governance
of the emotions.”

Williams’s appellation of Moore —
“our saint” — may be ground enough to
consider Taffy Martin’s thesis that we
should no longer look at Moore through
the false myths about her. Other tales
are to be told. Martin’s own tale about
Moore dismisses the idiosyncratic inter-
pretations of Moore’s work — a work,
Martin argues, that contains many “rad-
ical implications.” Moore’s poetry, Mar-
tin insists, does not fit either the older
formalistic approaches to poetry or the
newer feminist critique. Criticism of
Moore’s work, she argues, may indeed
be compatible with an insistence on a
“close and extensive examination of
women’s texts.” Moore’s work certainly
defies the theoretical considerations of
feminist criticism. Nevertheless, her
poems are too elusive to be taken over
by both contemporary feminist and for-
malist critics alike.

Martin’s purpose is not only to save
Moore from the myths about her; she
wants to see Moore thrive as well “on
her own terms.” Fortunately for us, The
Complete Prose has, quite admirably and
in keeping with Martin’s own wish, per-
mitted Moore once more to save herself.

® Ruby Riemer, a recent recipient of a
poetry grant from the New Jersey State
Council On The Arts, publishes poems,
reviews, and articles on poetry and feminist

philosophy.

lived together for several years. Mac-
pherson edited the film magazine Close
Up and directed several pre-dadaist films
in which H.D. and Bryher acted.

In these photographs, Macpherson
juxtaposes H.D. naked on the rocky
California coast with images from Greek
temples, depicting her as the manifesta-
tion of the personae her writing em-
bodied. In one montage, which Col-
lecott has titled “Two Selves,” we see
the ruined columns of a Greek temple in
the center; in the upper right corner is a
photograph of a naked Bryher perched
precariously on a rock ledge, while in
the lower left is H.D., arms raised,
jumping gracefully from rock to rock in
the shallow tide. In discussing this pic-
ture, Collecott quotes from H.D.’s
poem, “The Master,” where the goddess
“leaps from rock to rock... / as her
limbs fling wide in the dance/ ecstatic/
Aphrodite.” By thus interspersing related
lines from the writings of both H.D. and
Bryher, Collecott opens up areas of
criticism that have yet to be explored,
such as the part that film played in
H.D.’s work as a writer or the parallels
between the writings of the two women.

Rochelle Ratner is Executive Editor of
American Book Review. She has written
a novel, Bobby’s Girl; a collection of arti-
cles on women poets, Trying to Under-
stand What it Means to be a Feminist;
and ten books of poetry.

1-year subscription[s] or 2-year

payable to Belles

1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year

2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year
subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00

[J I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue.

Name

Street

City State Zip

* Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:

A contribution of $ is enclosed

Send gift card to:

Name

Street

City State Zip

Belles Lettres