Kentucky

Characters  
by Joyce Reiser Kornblatt  

In Country, by Bobbie Ann Mason. New  
York: Harper & Row, 1985, $15.95, 245  
pp.  

In her first novel, In Country,  
Bobbie Ann Mason displays all the  
skills that made her short story  
collection, Shiloh, such an impressive  
book: a perfect ear for dialogue, an  
anthropologist’s attention to cultural  
markers (brand names, pop music  
lyrics, car models, food fads), and a  
quietly conveyed respect for her rural  
Kentucky characters who meet their  
trials with spunkiness, humor, and an  
unworldly candor. In such a fictional  
milieu, the modernist’s irony is out of  
place. Direct and unguarded, Mason’s  
voice evokes a world in which a  
certain innocence continues to  
prevail, however grim reality becomes.  

Samantha Hughes (Sam) lives in  
Hopewell with her uncle Emmett, a  
Vietnam veteran suffering from a  
variety of symptoms that Sam believes  
might have been caused by Agent  
Orange. Sam’s father, Dwayne, died  
in Vietnam before Sam was born; her  
mother, Irene, who took Emmett in  
and raised Sam, has moved to  
Lexington with her new husband and  
baby and urges Sam to join her there.  
But Sam feels responsible for Emmett  
and angry at Irene for blotting out the  
memory of Dwayne. “These are all the  
things you missed,” Sam tells her  
father’s picture, as if she could bring  
him into the present — into life —  
with the recitation. As Sam involves  
herself more and more with the  
activities of Vietnam veterans in  
Hopewell, she becomes conscious of  
her need not only to help Emmett but  
also to learn everything she can about  
Dwayne. She unearths the letters he  
wrote to Irene from Vietnam and  
discovers in them his tenderness, his  
farm boy’s love of nature, and his  
excitement over Irene’s pregnancy.  
Later, visiting Dwayne’s parents, Sam  
receives her father’s Vietnam diary  
and confronts there his capacity to  
kill: “Aug. 14. Big surprise. Face to  
face with a V.C. and I won. Easier  
than I thought. But there wasn’t time  
to think. It was so simple. At last.”  

For Sam, Vietnam is no longer  
simple nor remote. The distance she  
has maintained between herself and  
her father evaporates; the words of the  
diary have more power than Sam’s  
lifelong defenses. “Now everything  
seemed suddenly so real it enveloped  
her, like something rotten she had  
fallen into, like a skunk smell, but  
she felt she had to live with it for a  
long time before she could take a  
bath. In the jungle, they were nasty  
and couldn’t take a bath.” Now a  
lifetime’s grief — denied, yet pursued  
— overwhelms her and she merges  
with the father she must mourn in  
order to truly live herself.  

In a kind of waking dream, ren-  
dered by Mason with great beauty and  
force, Sam spends the night at  
Cawood’s Pond, a nearby swamp,  
recreating as well as she can her  
father’s nights in the foxholes:  

She was in her father’s place, in a  
foxhole in the jungle, with a bunch  
of buddies, all breathing quietly,  
daring to smoke in their quiet holes,  
eating their C-rations silently, their  
cold beans. . . . She felt more like  
a cat than anything, small and fragile  
and very alert to movement, her  
whiskers flicking and her pupils  
widening in the dark. It was a new  
way of seeing.  

But the struggle for empathy fails  
her (“she didn’t really believe this was  
real, after all”) until Emmett, arriving  
to rescue her, wails out his own  
pent-up pain. “His cry grew louder, as  
loud as the wail of a peacock. She  
watched in awe. In his diary, her  
father seemed to whimper, but  
Emmett’s sorrow was full blown, as  
though it had grown over the years  
into something monstrous and fantas-  
tic.” Dead for 19 years, Dwayne  
Hughes frees his daughter and his  
brother (“This is what I do,” Emmett  
says. “I work on staying together, one  
day at a time... . It takes all my  
energy.”) and the future becomes a  
possibility, however tenuous, for each  
of them.  

The novel is set in a frame —  
Sam, Emmett, and his mother  
Mamaw traveling to Washington to  
the Vietnam Memorial — and the  
final scene at that site is one of the  
most moving set pieces one will find  
in contemporary American fiction.  
“Sam doesn’t understand what she is  
feeling, but it is something so strong,  
it is like a tornado moving in her,  
something massive and overpowering.  
It feels like giving birth to this wall.”  
First her feeble grandmother struggles  
up a worker's ladder to Dwayne’s  
etched name, “running her hand over  
it, stroking it tentatively,  
affectionately” and then Sam climbs  
the rungs herself and weeps, a daugh-  
ter at her father’s funeral at last. “Up  
on the ladder she feels so tall, like a  
spindly weed that is sprouting up out  
of this diamond-bright seam of hard  
earth.” When she turns to look for  
Emmett, she finds him “sitting  
cross-legged in front of the wall, and  
slowly his face bursts into a smile like  
flames.”  

In this final image, In Country  
incarnates the horror and the grief  
that Vietnam has willed us all and the  
catharsis each of us requires. One can  
fault Bobbie Ann Mason for an overly  
slow beginning, for a certain  
repetitive quality in the book’s early  
scenes, for a failure to make the  
reader feel what it is like to grow up  
without a father, for overly didactic  
speeches from some of the characters.  
But the deeply felt and completely  
convincing last third of this book is  
the work of a fine artist, a woman  
wise and humane, and, in her  
tenderness, heroic.  

@ Joyce Reiser Kornblatt is the au-  
thor of Nothing To Do With Love and  
a new novel, White Water (E.P.  
Dutton).  

Witness to  
the Magical  

by Eileen McClay  

The House of the Spirits, by Isabel  
Allende. Translated by Magda Bogin.  
New York: Knopf, 1985, $17.95, 368 pp.  

Chilean journalist Isabel  
Allende is an audacious  
author. In her first novel,  
already a great success in Europe and  
Latin America, she ignores all the  
so-called rules of the contemporary  
writing game and gets away with it.  
Magnificently. Home free. She is an  
author who asks us to keep track of  
three points of view (an omniscient  
author and two first-person narrators,  
one of them a man); who trusts us to  
take for granted two heroines with  
green hair and a third who not only  
can predict the future and move  
objects without touching them but  
who herself on occasion glides about  
the house in a chair that floats above  
the floor; who has a tendency to  
telegraph her punches; and who tells  
us in unpruned detail what appears to  
be everything that happens to the  
characters during the more than 50  
years her novel embraces — thereby  
breaking the most sacred rule of all:  
Show, don’t tell. It is all true, and  
none of it matters. Because overriding  
everything is the fact that Allende  
radiates the exuberant confidence of a  
born storyteller by whose grateful  
readers all merely technical infractions  
are happily forgiven.  

The novel is set in a South  
American country “at the end of the  
earth.” (Both the topography and the  
political details of the novel bear a  
marked resemblance to Chile and the  
ill-fated Allende regime. The author  
is a niece of the former leftist presi-  
dent.) The story follows three  
generations of women and the  
violent-tempered man who is  
husband, father, or grandfather to  
each. They in turn baffle, enrage, or,  
finally, comfort him in the wreckage  
caused by his ferocious resistance to  
political change. But if Esteban  
Trueba’s “most salient trait was his  
moodiness and a tendency to grow  
violent and lose his head,” he is also  
capable of a deep and lifelong passion  
for his clairvoyant wife, Clara, who  
entices and infuriates him because he  
cannot feel that he owns her spirit as  
he owns her body. It is Clara, more-  
over, who sees, when he cannot or  
will not, that “[the poor] don’t need  
charity; they need justice.”  

Originally, Trueba was the suitor  
of Clara’s older sister, the fabulously  
beautiful Rosa. When Rosa dies, the  
victim of an unfortunate accident, he  
spends his grief by cruelly working the  
peasants on his country estate and by  
prodigious exercise of le droit du  
Seigneur, which he interprets broadly.  
He thereby sows the seeds of the  
fearful retribution that will be exacted  
from his granddaughter, Alba. Alba is  
herself the illegitimate fruit of yet  
another lifelong love, that of Trueba’s  
daughter Blanca and Pedro Tercero  
Garcia. It is a passion that enrages her  
father because Pedro Tercero is not  
only the son of his peasant foreman  
but a political radical, a singer who  
composes ballads that give heart and  
hope to the peasants who have long  
since learned that in the end “the fox  
always eats the hens.”  

To Esteban, now Senator Trueba  
and a Conservative member of  
Congress, “all political parties except  
his own were potentially Marxist, and  
he could not distinguish one ideology  
from another.” He repeatedly warns,  
“The day we can’t get our hands on  
the ballot boxes before the vote is  
counted we’re done for.” But the  
complacent members of his party  
dismiss his apocalyptic predictions as  
senile ranting. “Relax, hombre... .  
Marxism doesn’t stand a chance in  
Latin America . . . it doesn’t allow  
for the magical side of things.” When  
to everyone’s surprise a Socialist  
government is elected, Senator Trueba  
connives at a military coup that has  
appalling consequences he does not  
foresee. At that point, the humor  
that has kept shocking events safely  
distanced from our deepest responses  
abruptly disappears as the military  
junta ruthlessly consolidates its power  
in a reign of terror.  

Allende has dedicated her novel to  
“my mother, my grandmother, and all  
the other extraordinary women of this  
story.” There is a sense of history, of  
continuity, in those words that makes  
one believe the author is speaking  
through Alba’s voice in the novel’s  
affecting conclusion. Rescued from a  
harrowing imprisonment where she  
has been humiliated, raped, and  
tortured, Alba waits for better times  
to come, safe for the moment in the  
house of the spirits where she grew  
up. She has retrieved the notebooks  
of her grandmother Clara, begun 50  
years earlier to “bear witness to life”  
and miraculously saved from the  
holocaust of the military coup. Alba  
picks up a pen and begins to write,  
noting first that when she was  
suffering the torments of prison she  
believed that one day she would  
avenge herself on all those who need  
to be avenged.  
But now I have begun to question  
my own hatred. . . . I am beginning  
to suspect that nothing that happens  
is fortuitous . . . . no brushstroke is  
in vain... . Each piece has a  
reason for being the way it  
is... . memory is fragile and the  
space of a single life is brief, passing  
so quickly that we never get a  
chance to see the relationship  
between events... . That’s why my  
Grandmother Clara wrote in her  
notebooks, in order to see things in  
their true dimension and to defy her  
own poor memory. And now I seek  
my hatred and cannot seem to find  
it. ... It would be very difficult for  
me to avenge all those who should  
be avenged, because my revenge  
would be just another part of the  
same inexorable rite. I have to break  
that terrible chain. I want to think  
that my task is life and that my  
mission is not to prolong hatred.  

The House of the Spirits then is not  
so much about politics as about life  
itself — messy, undisciplined, stuffed  
with assorted odds and ends that may,  
for all we know, be equally important.  
Our task is not to judge but to be  
aware of life as we live it day by day,  
moment by moment; to bear witness  
to it so that truth may not be lost or  
distorted by faulty memory; and to  
allow for the magical side of things.  
Given the events that Allende  
records, it is a surprisingly large-  
spirited and ennobling message.  

® Eileen McClay, a member of the  
George Washington University De-  
partment of English faculty, is completing  
a study of Latin American images in  
U.S. fiction.  

Belles Lettres © 7