we look more deeply at this popular period work, we see  
that it is a fantasy of escape from domestic responsibility into  
the world of work. From the opening of this narrative in  
rambling diary form, the lady from the provinces is hell-bent  
on going to London to “help with the war effort." This is  
despite the fact that her husband is an air raid warden, they  
are active in village war relief work, and she has just taken  
two child-refugees and their nurse into her home for the  
duration. The novel’s unnamed protagonist (self-identified only  
as the wife of "Robert") is appalled at any display of feminine  
assertiveness — and she sees a good deal of that in the women  
she meets as a cafeteria worker serving London’s military  
personnel. But she has fled the cozy domesticity of her own  
home to room in a tiny flat, eat bad food, work the graveyard  
shift in the cafe, and hear the romantic problems of the single  
women who are her co-workers.  

Both Delafield’s heroine and her readers have great fun. In  
its day, the novel must have provided a welcome alternative  
vision of wartime Britain, for in it, privation is adventure and  
hard work is "a lark." The audience for Delafield’s cheery  
vision, of course, was the hard-pressed English matron, who  
was expected to be both mother and father, to keep her upper  
lip stiff, and to accept either the solitude of the homefront wife  
or the clamor of refugee boarders. Further feeding the escape  
fantasy, in The Diary’s version of World War II it is the  
husband who is marginal. "Robert," on the provincial lady’s  
rare visits home, retreats behind his crossword puzzles and is  
anything but the gallant soldier. Such a situation enables the  
woman to command the center of the narrative. She is the  
brave one who is sent to London because of her "inability to  
remain out of touch with current happenings."  

Not only is Delafield always immensely readable (her  
heroine has a wicked ability to skewer fools and braggarts),  
but she captures a certain euphoria about wartime situations in  
which people were liberated from routine to live out dreams  
of the "great cause," "the war effort," and the flight from  
marital responsibility. That Delafield’s lady can find such  
happiness in her canteen work would be a sobering reflection  
on the bourgeois marriage were this novel not so comical.  

Pamela Frankau’s The Willow Cabin (Penguin/Virago,  
1989, $8.95, 410 pp., PB), published in 1949, belongs  
chronologically to the Post-World War II era, and the strug-  
gles of its upper-crust actress/heroine, Caroline, are at times  
reminiscent of the 1940s “woman’s film," which featured stars  
like Bette Davis. The issue, as in many of those tear-jerking  
Hollywood movies, is illicit love versus career. Caroline has  
fallen for an elegant but enigmatic London surgeon, Michael  
Knowle, who cannot exit a neurotic relationship with his  
estranged wife, Mercedes. Caroline often waits by the phone,  
missing important rehearsals and interviews for plum Shake-  
spearean roles; Michael remains apologetic and unavailable.  
The war actually soothes the tensions in their affair, for now  
it is accident rather than Michael’s ties to Mercedes that keeps  
him from Caroline.  

For Frankau’s enthusiastic audience — the book was avidly  
read — Caroline’s romantic torments must have been riveting.  
Her creator paints a beautiful, witty, and curiously self-  
sacrificing protagonist. To those now discovering this text,  
however, there is another Caroline. Endowed with a fine  
talent, the aristocratic and theatrical connections to launch a  
brilliant career, and an unusual receptiveness to experience,  
Caroline romanticizes her obsessional pursuits of Michael and  
fails to accept herself as a professional. What to 1940s readers  
may have seemed her ability to turn a love affair into art now  
seems avoidance of career in the name of passion.  

Nevertheless, The Willow Cabin makes fascinating reading.  

It is certainly a testament to the toll an emotionally absent  
lover can take on a sensitive, talented woman. Almost in spite  
of itself, the novel comments on the unacknowledged value of  
a vocation for a woman who convinces herself to give all for  
love and robs herself, and the world, of her talent.  

Laura Hapke, who teaches at Pace University, is the author  
of Girls Who Went Wrong, a study of prostitutes in fiction.  

Mary Trasko. Photo by Cesar Vera  

Heavenly Soles: Extraordinary  

Twentieth-Century Shoes  
by Mary Trasko  

New York: Abbeville Press, 1990, $29.95, 131 pp.  

The twentieth century has yielded more innovation in shoe  
design than all the centuries before it. Much of that innovation  
has been captured in Mary Trasko’s Heavenly Soles, a richly  
illustrated chronicle of outstanding shoes and the people who  
made and wore them.  

While the focus is on high fashion and the twentieth  
century, Trasko does explore the history of female footwear  
and the fact that “for centuries women’s feet and their  
coverings have held an oddly exalted position."  

Historically, the exalted position has almost always been a  
sexual one: Witness Chinese footbinding, which Chinese men  
found “deliriously erotic,” the Western preoccupation with  
small female feet, and the crippling styles that continue to  
deform feet to this day.  

Trasko also discusses foot fetishism, which turns the  
fashionably erotic into what looks, at least, much more  
sinister. One fetish shoe, dating back to 1900, is a Victorian-  
style boot with an absurdly high heel that curls under the sole,  
rendering the wearer incapable of walking.  

Despite these dark undertones of shoe design, there is much  
that is beautiful in this book — and much to celebrate. The  
masters of shoe design have brought as much to fashion as  
have their counterparts — the great couturieres.  

—continued on page 37