TS

She Sparkler, Bubbles, Gets You

in & Whole Lotta Trouble

A Far Cry From Kensington, by Muriel
Spark. New York: Houghton Mifflin,
1988, $17.95, 189 pp.

by Mickey Pearlman

With her eighteenth novel, A

Far Cry From Kensington,

Muriel Spark returns to mid-
1950s London, “a city just emerging
from postwar austerity” but rich and
abundant in the eccentrics, literary
hangers-on, hack journalists, misguided
spiritualists, sexual deviates, and
Machiavellian males her readers have
come to expect. And the thematic pat-
terns of contrariety, sexuality, litany,
and creativity, which assert themselves
in most of her novels from The Com-
forters in 1957 to The Only Problem in
1984, are in place here too.

A Far Cry From Kensington hinges on
the misadventures of Agnes “Nancy”
Hawkins, the plump twenty-eight-
year-old war widow who is “comfortable
in [her] fatness [and] known as a ‘won-
derful woman,’” who is everyone’s con-
fidante and reliable friend. She is called
“Mrs. Hawkins,” she explains, since
“abundance was the impression [she]
gave,” and “when [she] decided to be
thin ... [she] noticed that people
didn’t confide their thoughts to [her] so
much.” Mrs. Hawkins, an insomniac
with “wide-eyed midnights,” lives in a
rooming house, and the occupants, dizzy
and/or desperate as usual, constitute a
group, a familiar Sparkian idea from the
schoolchildren in The Prime of Miss Jean
Brodie, the unmarried in The Bachelors,
the old people in Memento Mori, and the
“girls” of slender means in the novel by
that name.

Muriel Spark. Photo by Jerry Bauer

The most intriguing of the roomers is
Wanda Podolak, “whose capacity for
suffering verged on rapacity,” a Polish
dressmaker catapulted into craziness by a
series of anonymous threats made by an
equally unstable but vicious character
calling himself “The Organiser.” There
is also Kate Parker, who detests germs
(“the Work of the Devil”) and is the
kind of tight-spirited, overcontrolled
neurotic who appears frequently in
Spark, and the landlady, Milly, a
woman “under the fixed impression that
you could not conceive a child unless
you had experienced an orgasm.”

The Organiser, Hector Bartlett, is
another Sparkian staple, a kind of luna-
tic manipulator, much like Sir Quentin
Oliver in Loitering With Intent or two
female versions, Georgina Hogg in The
Comforters and Mabel Pettigrew in

Memento Mori. There is always someone
in a Spark novel whose unlikable and
often-manic personality, warped vision
of reality, and vindictive behavior en-
ergizes a series of coincidental but re-
lated events. This time, the evil im-
presario type fancies himself a writer
(“The Eternal Quest” yet!), and he
touches a deep-seated animosity in Mrs.
Hawkins for all that is pretentious and
second-rate.

Mrs. Hawkins labels him a pisseur de
copie, a “urinator of journalistic copy,”
and it is the use of that nineteenth-
century French phrase that causes her
dismissal from two jobs in publishing
firms, one of them run by a “vegetarian,
graphologist, astrologist” involved in
the pseudoscience of radionics. That
phrase, or part of it, appears like a litany
forty-four times in the novel, and is
reminiscent of other repeated phrases in
Spark’s work, such as “I am a woman in
my prime” and “You are the crème de la
crème” in The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie
and “Remember you must die,” in
Memento Mori. These litanies are
attention-producing catchphrases,
whether they are used to terrify, reify, or
identify and are, when analyzed, about
as meaningful as a soft drink slogan. But

ARE YOU A MAN OR A WOMAN? * CHECK THE

THINGS YOU FIND FUNNY = TO DRESS UP AS WOMEN AND CURLY.
UNSHAVEN LEGGS SHOULD PEE

=~] THE Disparity BETWEEN
THE IDEAL AND THE REAL.

“Gender Based Differences in Humor,” by Nicole Hollander

they make Spark’s points: that language
is both powerful and problematic in a
quixotic world profuse with the inex-
plicable and touched by a shadow of
moral absurdity.

Spark is the godmother of the spare,
lean novel whose audience must read
above, between, and beneath the lines.
But she often writes lines so remarkably
correct in their perception about people
(that they are sometimes “chosen for
some slightly grotesque quality,” or that
there is a “common fallacy which as-
sumes that if a person is a good, viva-
cious talker he is bound to be a good
writer”) that the reader never misses
what is not there. This book is a far cry
from the genius of Jean Brodie but for
Spark enthusiasts, it is another witty,
intelligent, much-awaited and delight-
ful new novel.

@ Mickey Pearlman is the author of
Re-Inventing Reality: Patterns and Char-
acters in the Novels of Muriel Spark. She is
editor of American Women Writing Fic-
tion: Memory, Identity, Family, Space and
of Mother Puzzles: The Theme of Mothers
and Daughters in Contemporary American
Literature.

WITH THEIR

Stamped SELF-
ADDRESSED ENVELOPE

The difference between men’s comedy and women’s comedy is
the difference between revolt and revolution!

Last LAUGHS
Perspectives On Women And Comedy

Edited by Regina Barreca, University of Connecticut

Volume 2 in the Studies in Gender

and Culture series

The 19 original essays (and three
Sylvia cartoons) included in this
volume deal with the gender-specific
nature of comedy. This pioneering
collection observes the creation of

Contents: Introduction, Regina Barreca . Who Was That Masked Woman? The Prostitute and the

Playwright in the Comedies of Aphra Behn, Cathy Gallagher . Life After Sex: The Fictional Autobiography of

Delariver Manley, Janet Todd . Jane Austen: Irony and Authority, Rachel M. Brownstein . Austen’s Laughter,
Patricia Spacks . Deflation of Male Pretensions in Fanny Burney’s Cecilia, Kay Rogers . Frances Miriam Whitcher:
Social Satire in the Age of Gentility, Linda A. Morris . Hate and Humor as Empathetic Whimsy in Anne Thackeray
Ritchie, Carol Hanbury MacKay . Between Women: A Cross-Class Analysis of Status and Anarchic Humor,
Regenia Gagnier . Slaying the Angel and the Patriarch: The Grinning Woolf, Denise Marshall . (En)gendering

women’s comedy from a wide range
of standpoints: political, sociological,
psychoanalytical, linguistic, and his-
torical. The writers explore the role
of women’s comedy in familiar and
unfamiliar territory, from Austen to
Weldon, from Behn to Wasserstein.
The questions they raise will lead to
a redefinition of the genre itself.

The essays in this volume also

appear as Vol. 15, No. 1-3 of the
journal Women's Studies

4 Belles Lettres

Laughter: Woolf's Orlando as Contraband in the Age of Joyce, Judy Little . Truth-Telling: The Self and the Fictions
of Humor, Mary Ann Rorison Caws . Ironic Autobiography: From The Waterfall to The Handmaid's Tale, Nancy
Walker . Muriel Spark’s Unknowing Fiction, John Glavin . Metaphor-into-Narrative: Being Very Careful with
Words, Regina Barreca . Uncommon Woman: An Interview with Wendy Wasserstein, Esther Cohen . Feminist
Humor: Rebellious and Self-Affirming, Lisa Merrill . Daughters of Anger /Material Girls: Con/Textualizing
Feminist Criticism, Jane Marcus . Towards a Humorous View of the Universe, Fay Weldon . Sylvia (3 Cartoons),
Nicole Hollander

1988 310 pp. / hardcover 0-677-22020-0 $29.00 / softcover 0-677-22030-8 $14.00

GORDON AND BREACH SCIENCE PUBLISHERS
PO Box 786, Cooper Stn. New York, NY 10276, USA
PO Box 197, London WC2E 9PX, UK

© 1988