Reflections in a  
Jaundiced Eye  
by Florence King  

New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989,  
$15.95, 198 pp.  

Those who discovered Florence King as  
a treasure trove of outrageous wit and  
unabashed feminism in her coming-  
of-age memoir Confessions of a Failed  
Southern Lady will find that her new  
book Reflections in a Jaundiced Eye de-  
livers the humor, but not the heart, of  
her previous work.  

Still, this is a sparkling collection of  
essays, and King scores satiric points.  
“America is the only country in the  
world where you can suffer culture shock  
without leaving home,” she says. And  
the things that give our Ms. King culture  
shock are legion — from the paralysis of  
the American mind and the deteriorat-  
ing quality of life to “democrazy” and  
“pseudo-feminists,” who fail to realize  
that the only true feminist is the spin-  
ster, like herself.  

As a language purist, she fulminates  
against jargon and other forms of word  
abuse. One hysterical chapter is a tour  
de force featuring memorable lines from  
Gone with the Wind rewritten in psycho-  
pop lingo: “Miss Scarlett, I don’t have  
no baby-birthin’ skills!”; “But Rhett, if  
you leave me, what will I do about re-  
entry?” To the latter, King’s Rhett re-  
plies, “Frankly, my dear, it doesn’t im-  
pact me.”  

King herself is amply gifted with the  
turn of a phrase as well as a sense of the  
high absurd. Her finger is ever on the  
erratic pulse of pop culture — and even,  
occasionally, on what passes for high-  
brow culture. The hilarious chapter  
called “Phallus in Wonderland,” pre-  
sented as a series of letters between her  
and her literary agent, chronicles her  
inability to write an article on John  
Updike because she finds his novels ago-  
nizingly awful. Weeks late with her as-  
signment, she gets desperate. “Last week  
while deep-frying softshell crabs I got the  
oil too hot and the pan ignited. It was a  
Freudian slip — I was trying to burn the  
house down so I wouldn’t have to read  
John Updike.”  

But, after all, humor is often not  
nice. As King explains, “Wit is rooted in  
the personality traits of the intelligent  
loner. The witty person characteristi-  
cally takes a dim view of human nature  
and may even be a misanthrope.” How-  
ever, too much of this kind of humor  
sounds curmudgeonly.  

In Confessions, King’s evident affec-  
tion and sympathy for members of her  
eccentric family — her intellectual En-  
glish father, her tough-talking tomboy  
mother, her domineering and outra-  
geously misguided Southern grand-  
mother — and select others softened the  
acerbic observations of life in these  
United States. Even in her current  
work, her highly colored memories of a  
wild and crazy youth, slipped into the  
diatribe, are the real gems.  

—Scarlet Cheng  

SSN SVANSNUSTASUSTANS NAS  

Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum  

A collection of papers, bibliographies, and syllabi on the  
integration of gender, race, and class into the general  
curriculum, Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum will appeal to  
anyone active in or interested in higher education.  

Literature, the arts, the classics, exercise and sports  
studies, science and technology, social sciences, and enlisting  
administrative and faculty support are just some of the areas  

represented.  

Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum (ISBN 0-9623277-0-0) is  
available in a 124-page, 8½ x 11 paperbound format for  
$12.95 (+ $1.95 shipping and handling) — a 25% discount off  
the cover price when this ad is used or mentioned. Send  

check or purchase order to  

EPHEMERA: PROCEEDINGS OF WOMEN'S CONFERENCES  
Attn: Order Dept., 6300 Rockhurst Rd., Bethesda MD 20817.  
“I realized that just when my students were at the peak  
of their own self-conscious quests for identity  
as young women, I had been presenting a syllabus  
that offered not one female writer.” —Gail C. Holian  

S ReneS  

& Belles Lettres Subscriptions &  

785 Verbenia Drive @ Satellite Beach FL 32937  

Check the rate that applies:  

1-year individual @$20  

(2-year individual or two 1-year  
individual @$35)  
1-year institutional @$40  

1-year student rate (photocopy of  
student I.D. required) @$15  

Foreign mailing, add $9/year  

Please start my subscription with the  
Fall / Winter / Spring / Summer issue  
(circle one).  

Subscribers checking the 2-year rate  
are eligible to participate in drawings  
for free books. Please indicate pre-  
ferred genres:  

Contributions beyond the subscrip-  
tion price are a tax-deductible gift to  
both Belles Lettres and women’s writ-  
ing. Individuals who contribute $25  
or more will receive a free book  
(please specify preferred genre).  

A contribution of  

is enclosed.  

Name  
Street  
City  
State Zip  

Send gift card to:  
Name  
Street  
City  

State Zip  

Winter 1990  

Morning Breeze  
by Fulang Lo  

San Francisco: China Books, 1989,  
$16.95 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 243 pp.  

The Cultural Revolution and the role of  
China’s youth in it continue to fascinate  
us. How are we to explain the absurd and  
tragic events of that time? Even more  
puzzling is the apparently widespread  
acceptance and support for violence  
against haphazardly defined “enemy” in-  
dividuals and groups.  

Fulang Lo, born in Neijiang city in  
the southwest province of Sichuan, be-  
came a Red Guard leader, overseeing as  
many as 10,000 members at one time.  
Morning Breeze is her account of those  
days of madness, when the Chinese were  
made paranoid about the possibility of  
foreign attack and domestic contamina-  
tion by “impure” elements, impurity  
being repeatedly redefined with the po-  
litical climate.  

Fulang Lo as a young revolutionary  

MORNING  
BREEZE  

Fulang Lo  

A True Story of  
China's Cultural  
Revolution  

Fragments of Stained Glass  
by Claire Nicolas White  

San Francisco: Mercury House, 1989,  
$18.95, 230 pp.  

Claire Nicolas White calls Fragments of  
Stained Glass a “literary memoir, not  
necessarily history.” She explains that  
“the memory of a child is altogether un-  
reliable, and it is not the veracity of  
what I remember as much as the why and  
the how that interest me.” White's  
memoir, a string of vivid reminiscences  
of her unconventional childhood among  
European artists in the 1920s, is true to  
the nature of childhood memories in its  
vague interconnectedness. One inci-  
dent follows another in a not always  
chronological, sometimes confusing  
style that echoes the metaphor of its ti-  
tle; but by the end of the book the  
seemingly confused pieces have formed a  
lyric, coherent whole.  

The final picture is unlike the “wildly  
agitated scenes” and “bold counterpoint  
of color” that made up her artist father’s  
painted glass art. It is unlike the daring,  
romantic stories her adventurous sculp-  
tor mother retells of “fourteen boy-  
friends” and of her “handsome poet”  
lover. Next to her parents’ high-spirited  
lives, White’s autobiography seems  
softly impressionistic rather than defiant  
and modern. Up close her images are  
precise, her words carefully selected.  
She writes of the connections among the  
generations — her mother, herself, and  
her daughter. “It occurs to me that we  
are like those Russian dolls that fit inside  
one another, the mother inside her  
daughter inside her daughter.” Take a  
step back and the breaks disappear, the  
edges blur together in a lovely story that  
celebrates creativity, art, romance,  
families, and life.  

—Cecilia Konchar Farr  

One moment “capitalist roaders”  
were denounced, the next moment Red  
Guards themselves, until reinstated via  
media and flyers. Then the Guards were  
sent en masse to labor camps in the  
country when they — overzealous and  
nonproductive — were getting too  
troublesome and the economy was  
threatening to collapse.  

Though we now know the general  
scope of what occurred during the Cul-  
tural Revolution, Lo’s account still as-  
tonishes. Mao’s image took on the pow-  
er of the Messiah. Both “rebel” and  
“conservative” Red Guard factions quo-  
ted his “sacred” words to vilify each  
other. At neighborhood meetings,  
leaders lectured, “Every morning you  
must ask Chairman Mao, The Old Man,  
to instruct you, and every evening you  
must report to him. Besides this, you  
must dance the Loyalty Dance whenever  
we ask you to.”  

In this climate, friends and family  
were required to betray each other. As  
writer Tao Kuang tells the young Lo,  

It is difficult to be an honest citizen,  
since many people have been trained to  
lie. . . . Everyone has tears, as the sun  
has light, as the tree has leaves; everyone  
has a voice, as the birds in the trees. But  
we are taught not to be free and see and  
talk. Even if we see a donkey, we must  
say it is a horse.  

Later this outspoken woman disappears.  

Bit by bit, Lo sees through the hypo-  
crisy and destructiveness of official pol-  
icy and those who carry it out. Yet her  
rather flat style does not effectively con-  
vey the outrage or the sorrow of her ex-  
perience. Her lack of regret or embar-  
rassment is troubling since she is a  
former mob leader. And finally, given  
the spate of remarkable books about this  
period, her overviews of the political  
situation seem thin.  

The effort of China Books to publish  
intriguing books about China by Chi-  
nese writers is laudatory. However, they  
would do well to spend more time shap-  
ing the material. More editing might  
have helped some awkward passages and  
loose ends in Morning Breeze.  

Perhaps the containment of real  
emotions was something bred during the  
turbulent years of the Cultural Revolu-  
tion. But one thing Morning Breeze  
makes clear: the extraordinary energy  
and heroism of Chinese youth was ruth-  
lessly exploited by older politicians. It is  
a testament to the human spirit that  
nearly a generation later the youths of  
China would be fighting for themselves  
and their own vision of what is right for  
China: freedom of speech and demo-  
cratic government. Both are landmark  
requests in a society so long and so rigidly  
controlled by its leaders.  

—Scarlet Cheng  

HERE’S LOOKING AT YOU, KID!  

Don’t pass up this chance to get your very  
own BELLES LETTRES t-shirt, modeled  
here by junior bibliophile Sarah Tucker  
Jenkins. Available for $15 (+$1.50 post-  
age) in jet black, 100 percent cotton (spec-  
ify M, L, or XL). Make checks payable to  
Belles Lettres, and send to 11151 Captain’s  
Walk Court, Gaithersburg, MD 20878.  

Belles Lettres @ 9