Lee Miller: Model Photographer

by Darcie Conner Johnston

Miller in her first
—and last—screen
appearance: the lead-
ing female role in
Jean Cocteau's sur-
realist film titled Blood
of a Poet. (1930)

Summer gathering in

France, with Nusch
and Paul Eluard,
future husband Roland
Penrose, teacher and

ex-lover Man Ray

and his friend Ady.

(Miller, 1937)

Lee Miller, 1907-1977:
model, photojournalist,
fashion and portrait pho-
tographer, free spirit, sur-

Elizabeth (“Li Li”) at three and a half,
favorite subject of her photographer
father, Theodore Miller, in hometown

Poughkeepsie, New York. (1910)

A sublime eye for perspective and
composition: the marionettes of Her-
mann Aicher, Salzburg. (Miller, 1945)

Bombs destroying the once-picturesque town of Saint
Malo, France: “. .
then it was swallowed up in
smoke—belching, mushrooming, and columning—towering
up, black and white. Our house shuddered and stuff flew
in at the window—more bombs crashing, thundering,

flashing—like Vesuvius . .

(Self-portrait, 1932)

..” (Miller, 1944)

An example of the
solarization technique,
one of Miller’s joint
achievements with Man
Ray during their pro-
fessional and personal
alliance in Paris. The
dark aura around this
unknown woman is the
result of exposing the
film to light in the de-
velopment process.
(Miller, 1930)

realist, world traveler, war
correspondent, self-effacing
genius of the darkroom.

At Normandy, covering
tent hospitals and a front-
line casualty station.
Miller’s riveting images and
reports, first published in
Vogue that September,
established her as a leading
war journalist. (Photogra-

pher unknown, 1944)

Lee Miller: Photographer, by Jane Livingston (New York: Cal-
ifornia/International Arts Foundation and Thames and Hudson, 1989,
$50, 171 pp.), and The Lives of Lee Miller, by Antony Penrose (Lon-
don: Thames and Hudson, 1988, $19.95 PB, 216 pp.) showcase this
remarkable woman’s story and the photographs by and of her.

Darcie Conner Johnston is the associate editor/designer of Belles Lettres.

Women, Art, and Power
and Other Essays
by Linda Nochlin

New York: Harper & Row, 1988,
$22.50, 190 pp.

Linda Nochlin’s feminist perspective
slowly and persuasively changes the way
we look at art, old or new. Readers can-
not come away from Women, Art, and
Power without this new dimension per-
manently ingrained in their critical fac-
ulties. Nochlin’s controversial 1971 es-
say “Why Have There Been No Great
Women Artists?” provides the basis
from which to read the others. Although
dated, it renews the feminist call-to-
action of that era and still inspires a few
goosebumps by its directness:

In the field of art history, the white
Western male viewpoint, unconsciously

28 Belles Lettres

accepted as the viewpoint of the art his-
torian, may — and does — prove to be
inadequate not merely on moral and ethi-
cal grounds, or because it is elitist, but on
purely intellectual ones.

Striking down myth after myth re-
garding women artists as a collective
group, Nochlin’s arguments are con-
crete. “In every instance, women artists
and writers would seem to be closer to
other artists and writers of their own
period and outlook than they are to each
other.” Nochlin remains surprisingly
objective throughout, and knowl-
edgeably includes male artists such as
Courbet, Manet, and Degas in discus-
sions of particular works and themes.

Intended as a textbook, Women, Art,
and Power belongs in art history or
women’s studies courses. Even as lei-
surely reading, however, it has brilliant
thought-provoking moments that beg
for further discussion. For example, how
can women “demystify the discourses of
visual imagery” and articulate an appro-
priate response to art such as Balthus’s
Girl with Cat? For whom does such art
represent eroticism — men only? Can
our new consciousness penetrate insti-
tutions?

Working from general theses toward
specific examples, Nochlin covers many
artists and genres, holding each up to
new scrutiny. She turns away from anal-
ysis of specific technique in order to fo-
cus on works in terms of the traditional
stereotypes of male/female roles.

It is commendable that Nochlin
chose to reprint these essays as they first
appeared, “warts and all”:

To do otherwise would be to falsify the
historical record: these essays were, after
all, written in specific historical contexts,
in response to concrete problems and sit-
uations. . . . Nevertheless, there are, as
the reader will discover, certain dominant
themes and perspectives running through
them, as well as a persistently critical at-

titude toward the practice of mainstream
art history which provides a unity to the
texts as a whole despite the range of sub-
jects and approaches represented by the
individual pieces.

That the forty-five illustrations are in
black and white also becomes irrelevant,
since they are included only as reminders
of the works referenced in the text. I
profoundly disagreed with only one
reading: that of Goya’s Y Son Fieras (And
They Are Like Wild Beasts), which ig-
nored the satire in its title. But then,
this is the type of questioning that Noch-
lin encourages, and no doubt a lively
discussion on the real or imagined subju-
gation of women could prove endless.

Nochlin’s Women, Art, and Power
certainly succeeds as the “an ongoing
and open-ended project” that she in-
tended. As an ideology, feminist art his-
tory has arrived.

—Mary Garvey Verrill

Fair 1989