Kick of a Dying Horse

Not Either an Experimental Doll, by Shula Marks. Bloomington: Indiana University

Press, 1988, $9.95, 234 pp. (PB)

Lives of Courage: Women of a New South Africa, by Diana E.H. Russell. New York:

Basic Books, 1989, $22.95, 375 pp.
by Gwendolyn Mikell

Reading these two powerful and

perceptive books on the experi-

ences of South African women
leaves one with the feeling of having
taken an excursion through the violent
historical, racial, and cultural strands of
the apartheid reality. Since the 1970s,
Nadine Gordimer’s novels have pro-
vided us with fine portraits of the psy-
chological and political intensity in the
lives of the South African whites —
English and Afrikaaner, men and
women — as they fought against the
inhumanity and racism of apartheid.
And we have listened as Black South
African women like Winnie Mandela
and Mamphela Ramphele have spoken
to us through the news media and film
about the defense of children, home,
and community. Therefore, these two
books speak eloquently to a Western
audience that is poised to deal with the
political and personal lives of South
African women in an intimate and
holistic fashion. Marks’s book is an
anatomy of the descent into insanity by
the Xhosa woman Lily Moya; Russell’s
book presents the testimony of struggles
and feminist consciousness on the part of
twenty-four South African women.

These books are different types of
works, yet both focus on the ideas and
interactions of Black, white, Indian,
and Colored women as they fight for
self-realization, education, family life,
and political participation. One of the
reasons they make such a heavy impres-
sion on our intellects and emotions is
because they are written by “involved
outsiders,” Western scholars whose
knowledge of South Africa and commit-
ment to advancing the liberation strug-
gle there cause them to dig deeper in an
attempt to unravel the layers of gender,
race, and class experiences. Shula
Marks is primarily known for her earlier
work on the early political economy of
apartheid and the history of diseases re-
lated to it. She is already experienced at
using biography to illuminate the con-
tradictions within colonial domination.
With great sensitivity and thorough-
ness, she approaches her goal of making
available some of the information on
South African Black women who have
been doubly “hidden from history.” In so
doing, she draws our attention to the “at
times discordant voices” that emerge,
and the dilemmas that Black women
face. Her account raises a jarring sub-
theme evident in both these works: that
is, how the differences that spring from
the cultural and historical backgrounds
of South African women ultimately
shape their notions of feminism and lib-
eration.

Marks reminds us of how the lives of
Black and white women intersected
each other as the spread of Christianity
and mission education penetrated the
Natal area during the early part of this
century. Scholars familiar with South
African history know the impact that
Christianization had on ethnic migra-
tion and resettlement in Natal, but we
tend not to be as conscious of the dilem-
mas facing the small group of educated
Xhosa and Zulu women as a result of
these processes. The correspondence
between the Xhosa student Lily Moya,
the British feminist and Fabian activist
Mabel Palmer, and the outstanding Zulu
educator Sibusisiwe Makhanya allows
Marks to trace the cultural misunder-
standings and tragic results that ensued,
despite the good intentions of all three
women.

Lily, the teenage daughter of an es-
tablished Christian family attending an
Anglican school in Transkei, finds her-

Spring 1990

self in dire financial straits in the face of
her father’s death, her mother’s migra-
tion to find work, and her uncle’s de-
termination that she marry instead of
continuing her schooling. She pleads for
assistance from Mabel Palmer, who was
an outspoken activist on behalf of Black
and women’s education at a time when
the infamous Bantu Education Act of
1953 was being formulated. Mabel took
an interest in Lily’s situation, and
eventually helped her enter secondary
school in Natal, but even such de-
termination could not overcome Ma-
bel’s ignorance of African culture and
her fear of being drawn into a personal
and dependent relationship with Lily.
Therefore, Mabel fluctuates between
giving impersonal financial assistance
and expressing skepticism as Lily faces
continual obstacles due to family resis-
tance, apartheid travel and housing re-
strictions, and sexual and ethnic harass-
ment at school. Lily, the budding intel-
lectual, is frustrated by the lack of aca-
demic seriousness and the moral laxity at
the schools for Blacks in Natal. Lily’s
difficulties at school prompt Mabel to
refer her to Sibusisiwe Makhanya for
counseling and support, but Lily does
not appear to respond well to
Makhanya’s emphasis on “better homes
for better Africans” and on training
women in “knitting, gardening, sew-
ing, housework, cookery, native
craft-work, and tree planting.” Despite
Mabel’s generosity in searching for
schools that will match Lily’s personal-
ity, Mabel rejects the personal, suppor-
tive relationship that Lily needs, remi-
nding her of their differences in age and
race at this time in South Africa’s his-
tory.

The paper record ends with a number
of disturbing letters, which provide evi-
dence of Lily’s increasing isolation, psy-
chological alienation, and disappear-
ance from Mabel and Sibusisiwe’s social
circle. Lily’s last angry letter to Mabel
contains complaints about her treat-
ment and the comments that as a human
being she is “not either an experimental
doll.” In 1982, Marks finally succeeded
in locating Lily herself and documenting
her twenty-five years of confinement in
psychological institutions. The in-
escapable reality is that these three
women were not having a mutual dia-
logue as they intended, but that race,
culture, and history propelled them
along separate paths and conspired to
make each one unable to interpret the
other’s sincere communication.

The themes of feminism and fe-

male self-realization are treated

differently in these two works,
since each book captures different gen-
erations and time periods. Western in-
fluences are evident in the choices that
the three women in Marks’s volume
make about self-realization. All of them
either rejected marriage, sexual rela-
tions and family life, or eventually di-
vorced and pursued their professional
goals. Even Sibusisiwe Makhanya, who
made significant contributions to the
welfare of the Zulu community, was
often criticized for her outspokenness
and independence vis-à-vis men. In con-
trast, the women in Russell’s book are
determined to maintain their own cul-
tural identities, and they are explicit
about the necessity to include women’s
consciousness and women’s self-
realization as part of the national
agenda.

The beauty of Russell’s work is that
she has brought the spectrum of South
African activist women to us by inter-
viewing a cross-section of those who
have been imprisoned, those involved

— continued on page 14

Elizabeth of Toro: The
Odyssey of an African
Princess

by Elizabeth Nyabongo

New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989,
$9.95, 287 pp. (PB)

Elizabeth of Toro contains aspects of
autobiography in its classic male sense:
the writing of the lives of those in posi-
tions of authority and power facing situ-
ations of difficulty over which they tri-
umph. Rather than being a “lifestory” —
an oral or written genre that reflects a
woman’s coming to voice and to terms
with what it means to be a woman in
society — Elizabeth Nyabongo’s auto-
biography is more of a “celebrity auto-
biography,” since she is a well-known
figure in African and Western circles.

Elizabeth Nyabongo

Elizabeth of Toro reads in places like a
family scrapbook, with pictures of her
father, mother, siblings, and cousins;
photographs with American presidents

and Queen Elizabeth II; professional
fashion photographs; photos of her love,
Wilbur; newspaper clippings; photos of
missionaries in Uganda; and so on. The
photographs alone paint a problematic
reality. Centered in the autobiography,
they become a palpable text in their own
right, illustrating how colonial powers
interacted with traditional forms of au-
thority at a critical period in African
history.

The book is broken into three parts
called Living History, Torchbearer, and
The Ultimate Mystery of Being. The
first deals with early days, schooling at
home, and some history of Elizabeth’s
people and the Royal House of Toro.
She refers with pride to being one of
three Black women to be accepted at
Cambridge and closes with some discus-
sion of life as a royal child in the Kitara
Empire. Although there is an early dis-
claimer, this period is unavoidably ro-
manticized by one who benefited by that
world and then subsequently was dis-
possessed. Running through the narra-
tive then, is a lament for the past.

The second section deals with Eliz-
abeth’s political life and the way in
which traditional life was dismantled.
She describes herself as a symbolic “pillar
of conquest” for Idi Amin, then head of
state, who attempted to seduce and/or
marry her and publicly attacked her in-
tegrity upon her refusal. The last, more
personal section highlights her romance
with Wilbur, which ended in the trag-
edies of her miscarriage and his death.
Reading the final chapters titled “From
Symbol to Individual” makes one feel
that this is where the lifestory really be-
gins. The “autobiography” or the con-
scious self-construction is over, as the
author moves from all the trappings of
her past to a new set of relationships as a
woman in African society.

—Carole Boyce Davies

Another Year in Africa
by Rose Zwi

Athens: Ohio University Press/Swallow
Press, 1987, $14.95 (PB)

Rose Zwi, in Another Year in Africa,
illuminates the daily struggles, joys, and
aches of a group of people rarely des-
cribed — Jewish immigrants (and their
Boer neighbors) in 1937 Johannesburg.
Their struggles are played out against a
backdrop of mines where black and
white laborers are treated with unequal
degrees of brutality and growing towns
where businessmen work and dream.

Berka Feldman, a shoemaker, has left
the pogroms of Eastern Europe for South
Africa, and he is not alone. His neigh-
borhood is filled with “mishpocha” —
extended family. His dear friend Her-
shel, the baker, prospers while Hershel
longs for Palestine. His own wife is bitter
and confused by her complicated, phi-
losophizing husband, her assimilating
son, Joel, and her attractive, headstrong
daughter, Raizel.

Raizel and Berka are two of the more
fully realized characters in this book,
which, when it does not slip into jar-
ringly trite phrases (“turgid water,”
“leaden skies,” “black as pitch”), almost
approaches the power of Tillie Olsen’s
classic Tell Me a Riddle: Zwi’s focus on
the ordinary is far more eloquent than
any polemic.

Raizel is full of feeling for her family,
for the unhappily married Dovid, and for
his creative young daughter, Ruth.
Dovid reveals his spinelessness after
their affair scandalizes the group of Jews.
Raizel then turns to Jan, the Boer across
the way, who offers friendship, love,
and Christianity. Raizel converts in part
because Berka’s brand of secular Jewish-
ness is as hollow to her as Dovid’s relig-
iousness is hypocritical. “I’m not con-

verting out of cowardice,” she declares,
after Berka suggests she is afraid or ash-
amed of being a Jew. Berka’s professed
tolerance gives way in their passionate
argument, and these two decent human
beings are divided by love as well as by
their own culture.

Dovid’s daughter Ruth, six years old
at the beginning of the novel, develops
perceptions and skills beyond her years.
Her world is full of heated debate about
what language to use, how great the
dangers are in Eastern Europe, and the
relative merits of socialism and Zionism.
These are the same debates countless
Jewish children everywhere were ex-
posed to in the 1930s and 1940s, over-
heard through walls as thin as those in
Ruth’s house. As her milieu expands to
include school friends and teachers who
recognize her academic and artistic
skills, Ruth shows promise of becoming
compassionate, whole, and less wound-
ed by the travails of those close to her.

Watchful Ruth ultimately holds this
story together. Berka sputters and fumes
at others but is soft and grandfatherly
with her, making her feel safe and se-
cure. He displays her drawings on the
walls of his shop. Before leaving for
Rhodesia with Jan, Raizel treats Ruth
with the tenderness both their mothers
are too worn out to proffer.

If Ruth keeps her eyes open and her
heart strong, she may act with moral
conviction as she matures. We root for
her even as we know that her contempo-
raries — Nadine Gordimer, Helen Suz-
man, and other members of the Black
Sash — are still, more than fifty years
later, a long way from seeing a just reso-
lution to the pain and iniquities that tear
South Africa apart. We identify with
her because Zwi has created a world the
reader can enter and find lyrical, fasci-
nating, and full of hope.

—Barbara Berman

Belles Lettres @ 13