The Hellbent Men  
They Know  

Hellbent Men and Their Cities, by Susan Dodd. New York: Viking,  
1990, $17.95, 240 pp.  

The People I Know, by Nancy Zafris. Athens: University of Georgia  
Press, 1990, $16.95, 162 pp.  

by Catherine Francis  

We are living, so some literary critics claim, in the  

golden age of short stories, a prosy boom beneficial to  
reader and author alike. Two recent books, Susan Dodd’s  
Hellbent Men and Their Cities and Nancy Zafris’s The  
People I Know, provide a sampling of the stories this surge  
has produced, packed with rich nuggets of description and  
eccentric detail.  

Of the two, Dodd’s stories are the more polished. Hell-  
bent Men is her fourth book, following a collection of short  
stories, Old Wives’ Tales, and two award-winning novels,  
No Earthly Notion and Mamaw. Her stories have also  
appeared in magazines like The New Yorker, North Ameri-  
can Review and Redbook.  

They are well crafted. Dodd’s descriptive passages seem  
effortlessly simple and refined: "The two handsome old men  
hover in the archway, their eyes ardent, expectant, the  
shade of maple syrup under the fluorescent hallway lights.  
One gestures — come hither. His elegant hand is all bone  
and manicure." ("Sinatra")  

Dodd is unafraid to play with forms, tenses, and points of  
view, claiming each as her own as she makes it an integral  
part of the story. This variety creates a pleasing rhythm as  
the book progresses. Her ease with language is also admira-  
ble. In “Undeniable Sweet Talk," a carpenter falls in love:  

He sang, as he beveled the edges and mitered the corners  
of pine planks. His heart and his hopes and his dreams and  
his hands made a lovely racket. The wood smelled like his  
dreams of her hair and their future all entangled. His heart  
was swollen and his hands could do no wrong. And the  
bookcases he made on that particular day would last  
forever.  

Zafris’s work stays on more traditional paths, but her  
subject matter is wildly energetic and full of quirks. Her  
characters emerge more solidly than Dodd’s:  

When she finished eating, she rinses out the foil dish with  
the water on full blast for as long as it would take someone  
else to wash a sinkful of dishes and gives it to her cat. She  
doesn’t think cats should get addicted to human leavings,  
but neither does she think cats should be humiliated with  
animal bowls for their food. (“The People I Know")  

Zafris’s characters seem less civilized than Dodd’s, which  
makes their personalities more engaging. We encounter  
occasional tangles of syntax or the jarring effect of an  
unnecessary word, but Zafris makes up for these flaws in  
her adept portrayal of the paradoxical complexities that  
make up human beings. In “From Where I Sit," a narrator  
describes her sister:  

—40—  

My college graduation she showed up for but left during  
the A’s. Just as "Appelbaum" was being called, she bolted  
up from her chair with a shock of realization on her face.  
"Oh my God!" I could almost hear her saying. "They’re  
calling every fucking name in alphabetical order!"  

An elderly woman aids a housebreaker, who tells her details  
about her neighbor’s lives, in "Morning at the Beach." "She  
had a certain code for each neighbor’s absence and was able  
to relay the information through a creatively phrased mes-  
sage that sometimes incorporated music."  

The People I Know, Zafris’s first book, is the winner of  
the latest Flannery O’Connor Award for Short Fiction.  
Perhaps works to come will have fewer linguistic snarls but,  
it is to be hoped, not lose the vibrancy of this one.  

Catherine Francis is an instructor in the Writing Semi-  
nars at the Johns Hopkins University.  

Nancy Zafris  

Spider Woman’s Granddaughters:  
Traditional Tales and Contemporary  
Writing by Native American Women  
Edited by Paula Gunn Allen  

New York: Ballantine, 1990, $11.95, 280 pp. (PB)  

Paula Gunn Allen, the editor of Spider Woman’s Grand-  
daughters, is a Laguna Pueblo/Sioux scholar, feminist, and  
professor of Native American studies. In The Sacred Hoop,  
she gave her audience a vision of the feminine in traditional  
native thought and literature. In this book, she has gathered  
views, ideas, and wisdom about surviving personal and  
social conflict, written by women from a number of differ-  
ent tribes. Stories about women warriors and their resistance  
to white encroachment accompany prose, by traditional and  
contemporary Native American women, concerning stress,  
conflict, loss, separation, relocation, death, rebirth, and  
revitalization.  

Allen’s review of historical events in her excellent intro-  
ductory chapter is important in understanding the Native  

—continued on page 42