BO RS

Joeqe’
by Deborah Price

book review quiz: Which ma-
jor newspaper’s book section
asks this question each week at
its staff meeting about books to be re-
viewed: “Can we find a woman to do it?”

Need a hint?

The woman in charge of the section
not only says she’s a feminist but notes,
“I’m so sure of my own feminism that I
know I’m not going to discriminate
against women.”

If you’ve guessed the answer, you're
ahead of me, because I wouldn’t have.
Another hint for those in my camp?

The woman in charge says things like
this in passing: “To me, the gender issue
starts with things like staffing. I think if
you have a staff of ten reviewing editors
and they’re all men, fewer women’s
books are going to be assigned. That’s
common sense.”

If you’re as cynical as I am, then you
probably need something less subtle:

This influential book review is based
in New York and has long been chastised
for not reviewing enough books by wo-
men, for not choosing enough women
to be reviewers, and for allowing sexist
tone and language in its reviews.

The answer: The New York Times
Book Review.

“Perceptions are hard to change,”
says Rebecca Sinkler, who was pro-
moted from deputy editor of The New
York Times Book Review to editor in Jan-
uary 1989.

Numbers are also hard to change.

The New York Times Book Review does
not use as many women as men re-
viewers, nor are as many books by
women reviewed.

That is true at other newspaper book
sections as well, as has been documented
by Dale Spender, author of The Writing
or the Sex? (Pergamon Press), Marilyn
French, Margaret Atwood and others.

French monitored the space devoted
to women in the NYT Book Review over
a seven-week period in 1984 and found
that 80 percent of all reviews and 90 per-
cent of lead reviews were of books by
men. That survey led to a campaign by
women writers to pressure the newspaper
to boost its coverage of women’s books.
Spender contends that this campaign
and similar ones elsewhere work only in
the short term and that as soon as the
heat is reduced, a book section returns to
its usual practices.

Spender recounts surveying, in
1982-83, eight general readership book
pages in Britain and finding that women
had much less than 20 percent of the
review space. Spender recalls of her dis-
cussions with the British editors:

What I did not entirely expect, however,
was the downright rudeness of three of the
editors who declared in varying degrees of
insult that I must have been bitter and
twisted to even think of such things and
to intimate that any form of bias could be
found on their pages.

I must admit that I am still taken a-
back, no matter how often I encounter
this phenomenon. An entire industry can
be shown to wilfully discriminate against
women and not a breath of scandal will be
raised; but let a few questions be asked
about the motives and means of the men
who are perpetuating the injustice — and
the wrath of the peasants descends.

My own rudimentary survey of ten
randomly selected issues of the NYT
Book Review between July 16, 1989, and
Jan. 28, 1990, found that fewer books by
women were reviewed. (Women fared
much better in poetry and fiction than
nonfiction.) Among the findings: Of
lead books reviewed, 57 percent of the
authors and 79 percent of the reviewers
were men; of inside reviews, excluding

26 @ Belles Lettres

brief reviews, 69 percent of the authors
and 62 percent of the reviewers were
men. Asked about these numbers, Sin-
kler — while not disagreeing with the
overall conclusion — said she thinks a
more thorough survey would find that
women are better represented than these
figures indicate. “I would be shocked to
find the percentage is that bad.”
Sinkler pointed to several changes in
the section that suggest a better balance.
For example, Newgate Calendar has
been succeeded by Marilyn Stasio as the
mystery roundup reviewer. “I knew that
her reading habits included women mys-

Rebecca Sinkler, New York Times Book Review, and Pat Holt,

tery writers. So the percentage went up,
of course,” Sinkler said. She added that
more women are writing cover essays.
(In my ten-issue random survey, women
wrote 44 percent, or four of nine cover
essays.)

But the concerns about book sections
extend beyond review space. Spender
tells of a male reviewer writing in a Brit-
ish newspaper who attacked authors
Casey Miller and Kate Swift on the basis
of their photographs on the jacket of the
Handbook on Non-Sexist Writing.
Spender quotes the reviewer:

From the photograph supplied of Mss
Casey Miller and Kate Swift, I should
judge that neither was sexually attractive

. a sense of grievance can often bring
out the worst in people, and there is no
reason to extend our sympathy where the
motives of these disgruntled feminist agi-
tators is simply to make a nuisance of
themselves.

Similarly, Atwood found that male
reviewers who liked women’s writing
used such phrases as “she writes like a
man” or “she thinks like a man.”

Yet, the attitudes and balance are
changing. And not just at the NYT Book
Review, but at book sections of major
papers all across the country. Does it
have something to do with the gender of
who is in charge?

Sinkler says yes. So do many other
women who are running book sections.

In addition to the NYT Book Review,
women are the editors of book sections
at the Washington Post, Chicago Tribune,
Philadelphia Inquirer, (Cleveland) Plain
Dealer, San Jose Mercury News, San
Francisco Chronicle, Detroit News, De-
troit Free Press, and Pittsburgh Press. The
list could go on.

Interviews with several book editors
at newspapers and magazines suggest a
deliberate effort to bring more women
onto book pages, both as authors and
reviewers. This is happening despite an
inherent counterforce — that books on
topics deemed newsworthy tend to be
written by men and are considered
“musts” to review.

“If you think of the book section as a
party,” Carol Muller, book editor of the
San Jose Mercury News, says of trying to

ensure balance, “it’s just mixing up the
guest list. And it’s just inviting a lot of
interesting voices to the party and trying
to make the guest list fun.” Co-hosting
San Jose’s party is Constance Casey, the
former book editor who is now book
critic.

When contacted about this column,
Muller offered to do a three-month sur-
vey of her book section. The results:
reviewers were 50-50 women and men,
she said, although more books written
by men than women were reviewed —
most notably books featured as the lead
review.

San Francisco Chronicle

Muller, echoing several other women
editors, said the disparity in the number
of books by men as opposed to
women in part reflects the evaluation of
“newsworthiness.”

Politics, military history, and lives of
prominent leaders generally are consid-
ered to have news value — and the big
titles will be spread on nearly every
newspaper’s book page. Such nonfiction
tends to be written by men. In contrast,
women novelists — such as P.D. James,
Margaret Atwood, Jane Smiley, Joyce
Carol Oates — have secured strong play
with each new book.

“Men are just generally more privi-
leged in this society and are considered
hotter tickets,” said one woman at a
prominent magazine who declined to be
identified. Asked whether she had ever
been pressured to review fewer books by
women, she replied, “The ways in which
we may work against women are much
more insidious,” explaining that the
magazine shuts off many of the subject
areas in which women are the chief au-
thors, such as rape, sex discrimination
and biographies of lesser-known women
figures.

Another book-page editor who asked
not to be identified said, “Every week,
the push is on to run in the choice spots
reviews of books about white men writ-
ten by white men and reviewed by white
men. When you put out white men,
white men, white men, they [the
higher-ups] don’t notice.”

She added, “When your vision of
what the balance is is different than
what is fashionable, then they cry ‘femi-
nist.’ It is amazing how this word has
become a vitriolic stigma.”

Jan Harayda of The Plain Dealer, who,
like Sinkler, is the first woman to head
her paper’s book section, says she con-
sciously attempts to keep a balance and
was surprised when she recently sur-
veyed her pages.

“Before I did our count, I would have
said we were equal,” she said. “I was sur-
prised that in every category — the lead
reviews, number of books by women and
female reviewers — we were doing more
men.” She estimated that 20 percent
more books by men were reviewed and

that 10 to 15 percent more reviewers
were men. “Since then, I have made an
effort to have it be more equal.”

Harayda says she has set up roundups
on books by women and has written fea-
tures on sexism in children’s books.
(She found that 80 percent of children’s
books have boy protagonists.) Letters
from readers have always been suppor-
tive of both efforts, she notes.

“We really try to do as many by
women, but the fact is that we do more
men’s books just because more of them
are published and more of them are the
sorts of books that we in the busi-
ness tend to label ‘newsworthy,’” says
Harayda.

“I don’t make these decisions with my
ovaries. I make them the same way men
would make them, but I think it’s im-
portant to have women doing this. I feel
there are certain subject areas that have
traditionally been neglected by news-
papers, and one possible reason is that
the decisions about them have been
made by men.”

Pat Holt, book editor at the San
Francisco Chronicle, considers herself
successful in balancing women and mi-
norities in her book space. She has taken
an intense interest in such books, espe-
cially those published by Bay Area small
presses. “I don’t feel any pressure not to
celebrate that,” she said. But despite the
area’s cultural diversity, Holt says some
readers have written to complain.
“When we have had two black women
on one page right after another, there
has been a reaction,” she said, “meaning
that people write and are worried that
we're turning the section into something
other than a book review. If it’s four
white men, you don’t get any letters.”

Holt, who writes a column on indus-
try news every week as well as two other
columns and an occasional cover re-
view, says she not infrequently has ar-
gued with reviewers over sexist lan-
guage. “Sometimes the reviewer feels
compromised, and then again the ques-
tion becomes, ‘Are you turning this re-
view into a polemic for women’s rights
or are you going to review books?’ ”

Sallie Bingham, who was book editor
at the Louisville Courier-Journal in 1981,
recalls “feeling on thin ice” when she
tried to increase the number of books by
women that were reviewed.

“When you as an editor assign say 50
percent of your reviewing space to books
written by women, which is what I was
doing, you begin to run into a good deal
of resistance,” she says. “Not at first. But
editors begin to make remarks such as,
‘Is this a feminist book page? Are you
being objective? Where is the balance
on this book page?’ Of course, people
have a skewed notion of what balance is
— 90 percent reviews of books by men
versus 10 percent books by women.
That’s considered balance.”

Bingham is the author of several
books, including Passion and Prejudice:
A Family Memoir, an autobiographical
look at her newspaper family. (Her de-
scription and analysis of the range of
problems women face up and down the
line in a newsroom would be valuable for
any woman either in mainstream jour-
nalism or thinking about going into it.)
Reviewers of her books have used such
words as “shrill,” “unbalanced,” “radi-
cal,” “poorly researched,” “unsubstanti-
ated,” she said, adding, “all those terms
we are so used to being applied to women
who take any kind of political stand.”

Bingham feels it is crucial for women
writers to pressure book reviews about
balance. “We're strangling off books,”
she said, “and for those of us who are
writers to just sit and write books and
have no concern with these book review

Spring 1990