A Walk in the Shadows

Cosima, by Grazia Deledda. Translated and with an introduction by Martha King. New

York: Italica Press, 1988, $10.50, 140 pp.

Maria Zef, by Paola Drigo. Translated and with an introduction by Blossom S. Kirshenbaum. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989, $9.95, 182 pp.

A House in the Shadows, by Maria Messina. Translated by John Shepley, with an afterword by Annie Messina. Marlboro, VT: Marlboro Press, 1989, $15.95, 133 pp.

by Helen Barolini

Linked by the strong narrative

accounts of women’s circum-

scribed lives in old Italy, and by
the corresponding dates of their authors’
lives, each of these recently translated
novels discloses its particular vein of
verismo with the different regions writ-
ten about. Grazia Deledda (1871-1936),
a 1926 Nobel Prize laureate, is the only
one of the three novelists whose name is
recognizable, although she is little
known here. Neither Paola Drigo (1876-
1938) nor Maria Messina (1880-1944)
appears in any standard Italian literary
history. Only recently has some atten-
tion been given to Deledda. Martha
King’s valuable translation of Cosima is
that novel’s first appearance in English;
in the case of the other two authors,
none of their work has previously been
translated. That these three writers have
been brought to our attention restores a
much-needed balance to the panorama
of recent Italian literature.

Grazia Deledda is the major narrator
of Sardinian life. Her career began at age
fifteen with the publication of her first
story and, at her death, her oeuvre
numbered thirty-three novels, several
books of short stories, translations and
other writings. Cosima was published
posthumously in Italy in 1937 and is the
account of her early life in Sardinia until
just before she married and made her
home in Rome.

Maria Messina, referred to admiringly
as a “pupil of Verga” for her unsentimental
depictions of Sicilian life, wrote
novels, short stories, and children’s
books and enjoyed a certain success dur-
ing her lifetime, only to be forgotten af-
ter her death. A House in the Shadows, a
novel of suffocated middle-class lives in
provincial Sicily, was published in
1921, then reissued in 1982 after a re-
vival of interest in her work.

Paola Drigo was born in the Veneto
region of northern Italy and had pub-
lished three collections of stories, poetry,
and a memoir before her only novel,
Maria Zef, came out in 1936. She places
the events and people of Maria Zef in
Friuli, the mountainous region in
northeastern Italy. This work, too, was
rediscovered and republished in 1982,
and it resembles Messina’s in that both
are realistic and regional. (Blossom
Kirshenbaum has skillfully rendered
the regional flavor of Maria Zef by her
retention of certain words in dialect and
by closely following the prose rhythms of
the author.) In their other works,
Messina and Drigo write of the lowly,
the country folk, the people who are on
the fringe of society but endure.

Grazia Deledda, whose middle name
was Cosima, writes of herself in the book
of that name, mostly at a remove as an
affectionate observer of the little girl
growing into her imaginative and crea-
tive powers and sometimes using the first
person to establish herself in the midst of
her family life. This is a memoir, as her
translator says, that reads like a charm-
ing fable. Although she was raised in a
well-to-do family, Cosima was allowed
only three years of schooling and there-
after was self-taught. In the rugged
Sardinia of the last century, a woman’s
horizons ended at the home. All the
more striking then is Deledda’s self-
emancipation. In a dazzling achieve-
ment of internal autonomy, Cosima
becomes her own guide: “She decided to
expect nothing that might come from
outside herself, from the world agitated
by men; but to expect everything from

Spring 1990

herself, from the mystery of her inner
life.”

Deledda’s Cosima is a unique and
supremely satisfying portrait of the artist
as a young girl. She triumphs over cir-
cumstance and connects to the verities,
far beyond the confining “laws of the
community.” Deledda’s beliefs are not
in the saints but in mountain giants and
natural forces; she is in tune with archaic
memories and myths, and her work res-
onates with them.

All this provides needed counter-
balance to the tragic destinies of the
female figures in the other two novels,
particularly to the irredeemable sisters of
A House in the Shadows, who sink pas-
sively into their own enslavement. It is a
tale as bleak and merciless as Edith
Wharton’s classic Ethan Frome: Each
character is tied to the others in a recip-
rocal hell.

At Antonietta’s induction into mar-
riage with Don Lucio, a small-town ac-
countant to whom her father is in-
debted, she dreads leaving her family for
Don Lucio’s house on a side street with
neither light nor sun. She asks that her
younger sister Nicolina, with whom she
is close, come with her. The two sisters
fashion their lives around the tyrannical
Don Lucio: from the lengthy combing of
his hair in the morning to the careful
preparation of his meals and filling his
pipe, they are at his service until he dis-
misses them to bed.

When Antonietta starts bearing chil-
dren, all the household tasks devolve
onto Nicolina. Once an exuberant,
lively young woman, she becomes quiet,
anxious, fearful. How can she not be
thankful? she asks herself. She owes her
brother-in-law everything. And the
bond with her sister and the children
keeps her there. With Antonietta’s dif-
ficult third birth, however, convales-
cence is long and the inevitable happens
— Don Lucio makes Nicolina his con-
cubine, then assigns the blame to her
“for her mincing ways.”

Don Lucio is a sordid figure, ex-
plained only by what was done to him in
his childhood. It is not so much that we
withhold compassion from him as that
we are stung with horror at the behavior
of the two women, who allow Don Lucio
to bully and abuse them.

The corrosive anger between the sis-
ters corrupts the household and is felt by
the oldest child, a sensitive boy named
Alessio who wonders why his beloved
aunt does not flee the shadowy tomb of
her existence. He provides the tragic
dénouement of the novel.

Messina seems to have discharged the
pain and bitterness of her own unhappy
life into the story of the two stifled sis-
ters, yet the overstatement of their pas-
sivity deflects the thrust of the novel and
makes it less credible. Missing is any
sense of the outside world. Except for
one walk to the sea, organized by the
poetic Alessio when his father is away,
Antonietta and Nicolina are never de-
scribed outside or with other people.
Surely they had an external life, if only
to do the daily marketing that, along
with church-going, is part of the fabric
of village life in Italy.

Indeed, somewhere in the outside
world Nicolina seems to have been ob-
served, for a suitor asks her brother-in-
law for her hand. Don Lucio, not one to
lose a servant who costs no wages, dis-
misses him without informing Nicolina.
Antonietta, however, knows. Again
the question, why do they submit?

Nothing in their inner lives justifies or
explains the psychology of such abnega-
tion. It is comparable to the withdrawn
and wasted lives of Concetta and her sis-
ters in that exemplary Sicilian novel The
Leopard; but there, their reclusiveness is
put into relief by the womanly figure of
the enterprising and newly confident
Angelica, who emerges from the lower
class to claim power. All is not shadows
in Sicilian life; some light must fall even
onto the darkest corner. The setting of
A House in the Shadows with its
middle-class comforts and respectabil-
ity, approximates the Sardinia in which
Cosima comes of age. But even as she
participated in that life, she found her
way out of it.

Maria Messina is a skillful narrator,
and her final metaphor is perfect: “The
whole house, the old ship rotting in the
port, full of travelers who have never
seen the broad horizon, is soon wrapped
in the shadows of night.” The short
novel ends on a finely evocative note
with the scene of Antonietta’s two
young daughters sitting in the garden on
a summer night. In their silence and
wonder is all the tragedy of their proba-
ble future.

COSIMA

A Novel by Grazia Deledda

Maria Zef by Paola Drigo is a powerful
novel that elicits deep, intense feelings.
Maria Zef is a young girl, ragged and
uneducated, who is known as Mariu-
tine. Her world is circumscribed and
harsh; yet she knows what joy is. She
can savor the beauty of her sur-
roundings, and she has resources of
hope. Though all is hard, she can sum-
mon daydreams of the young immigrant
Pieri, who has said that in four years he
will return.

Along with the sense of imprison-
ment in the Zef hut on a remote,
snow-bound mountain, Drigo expertly
paints the details of an outside world:
occasional exchanges with people in an
inn or hospice, scenes of harvest festivi-
ty, the gathering at a barn dance. The
occasional characters who appear in
Mariu- tine’s life contrast with the stark-
ness of her solitude.

This novel, which also revolves
around two sisters, is as unrelenting in
its depiction of a tragic destiny as any-
thing in Hardy. Mariutine is fourteen,
and her sister Rosute a six-year-old when
they are first seen with their mother, a
sickly, haunted-looking widow who
trudges the countryside selling kitchen
wares from a cart hauled by Mariutine.
Despite her life of crushing poverty and
deprivation, Mariutine is resourceful
and able; she sings and is caring and lov-
ing toward her ailing mother and sister.
When their mother collapses and dies
from exhaustion and disease on the
road, the orphaned girls are turned over
to their uncle, Barbe Zef. Mariutine
takes on his care, tied to life on the
mountain, where winter cuts them off
from all human contact. They live liter-
ally with their beasts in a rude hut. In

the silence that has frozen her grief and
overwhelmed her since her mother’s
death, Mariutine is left to ponder her
destiny: where else can she go, she who
is unprepared for any other life? She who
is responsible for her little sister?

When Rosute’s leg becomes severely
infected and she has to be taken down
the mountain to a hospital, Mariutine
experiences both the high point of her
young life and its utter abasement. Left
in town with no way to get back up the
mountain in approaching night, uncle
and niece are given shelter at the pros-
perous farm of three brothers for whom
Barbe Zef has worked. There Mariutine
is received kindly, fed a meal of food the
like of which she has never before
tasted, led by the hunchbacked master
of the farm in a dance, and compli-
mented and made to feel joyous and
glowing in the company of the hospita-
ble, large, farm family. The hunchback
master offers Mariutine another life:
leave the mountain, says he; he will find
her a house in town that will take her in
to work as a domestic.

But she has her own code of honor:
She cannot abandon her sister, or the
brutish uncle for whom she is servant
and chattel. After their return to the
hut, Barbe Zef, jealous at the attention
Mariutine received at the farmhouse,
rapes her in a drunken rage. Thence-
forth he takes her at will, infecting her
with the venereal disease that has cor-
rupted and disfigured him. Mariutine
goes to an old woman further up the
mountain whom she remembers her
mother consulted, and she learns that
her mother, too, had been so used by
Barbe Zef and had, in fact, self-aborted
several times so as not to bear his child,
suffering the effects that finally ended
her life.

At fifteen, Mariutine’s life seems
over. The one thing she can do is to pre-
vent her uncle from brutalizing her sister
when the child leaves the hospital. In
anger and despondency Mariutine had
already turned on him for his treatment
of her mother and neglect of Rosute in
the hospital, showering violent blows on
him. Now she acts with deliberate cool-
ness and cunning. She leaves out for
Barbe Zef to find a flask of grappa that
she had hidden and waits for him to
drink himself into a stupor. And as he
does, even in her degradation and rage,
Mariutine can rise to compassion for the
drunken, sleeping figure of her uncle:
“An abrupt pity for him, for herself, for
life and its common destiny made her
feel weak kneed . . . pity for that being
who was there on the ground and who
from birth to death had also remained a
beggar, a poor unhappy wretch born
perhaps without guile, but whom pov-
erty, promiscuity, solitude, absolute
privation of all that can sweeten and
elevate life, had brutalized and over-
whelmed.”

Thinking of her mother and her un-
cle’s next victim, little Rosute, Mariu-
tine stiffens herself against pity, takes
the axe, aims it at his neck, and delivers
the blow. The novel’s final line reiter-
ates its stark theme of silence and suffer-
ing: “Not a cry — only a gush of blood.”

@ Helen Barolini is the author, among
other works, of the intergenerational novel
Umbertina, which has recently been
reissued in paperback by Ayer.

More Italian Writers

New Italian Women: A Collection of
Short Fiction, edited by Martha King.
(New York: Italica Press, 1989, $14.95,
218 pp., PB). Deledda, Drigo, Ginzburg,
Morante, Ortese, and twelve other con-
temporary writers are featured.

Woman at War, a novel by Dacia
Maraini (Italica Press, 1988, $14.50, 282
pp., PB). A reprint of a 1981 novel by one
of Italy’s best-known authors.

Belles Lettres @ 7