Raving Colossus

Tripmaster Monkey: His Fake Book, by Maxine Hong Kingston. New York: Knopf,

1989, $19.95, 340 pp.  
by Shirley Geok-lin Lim

Maxine Hong Kingston’s third  
book, her long and eagerly  
awaited first novel, is difficult  

to review. It has many of the qualities  
that make postmodernist texts lusted  
after by deconstructionist professors and  
shunned by ordinary readers. The novel  
offers a dazzling density of language, a  
multiplicity of voices, ambiguous points  
of view, and shifting perspectives. All of  
this keeps the reader off-balance —  
dancing on the edge of humor, cyni-  
cism, earnest social observation, and  
fantastic invention. It is satire in an  
eighteenth-century mode. With her  
Tristram Shandy a Chinese American,  
post-Berkeley, sixties hippie, male  
chauvinist would-be playwright, King-  
ston has ventured into both cross-  
dressing and ventriloquism.

A careful and dedicated reading of  
the novel explains the use of Whitman  
Ah Sing as protagonist. Whitman (Wit  
Man, as his family calls him), like his  
American forebear, is a rap artist with an  
ego larger than life. Verbose and satiri-  
cal, he rejects ethnic stereotypes,  
middle-class values, and the work ethic.  
In turn, Kingston holds up his defensive  
ethnicity and con-man artistry for au-  
thorial mockery. She tells us in her  
farewell sentence that there is affection-  
ate teasing in her portrayal of the  
Chinese American male literary  
avant-garde as trickster: “Dear  
American Monkey, don’t be afraid.  
Here, let us tweak your ear, and kiss your  
other ear.” But the condescension is too  
palpable, and the strikes against Whit-  
man’s fragile, paranoid, megalomania-  
cal webs of personality too resounding to  
be swept under the Goodwill rug.

Yet Whitman is also a hero on a  
quest. “Fifth-generation native Cal-  
ifornian that he was. . . His province is  
America, America his province. But  
story boats and story teahouses where a  
professional can talk are as gone at Lake  
Anza and the Bay as they must be gone  
from China. What is there beautiful and  
adventurous about us here?” He is a  
singer of Chinese theatrical history and  
traditions, rescuer of his abandoned  
grandmother, and thinker of profound  
thoughts. More significantly, he is the  
mouth the author has chosen through  
which to pour forth a seemingly endless  
assortment of Chinese legends and  
talk-stories — tales within tales of he-  
roes and heroines, many of them grip-  
ping and brilliant. He is also the filter of  
hip consciousness through which we are  
reintroduced to campuses, campy street  
scenes, and identity debates.

Although Whitman straddles the  
novel like a raving Colossus, the book  
teems with vividly realized, supporting  
characters, even those with walk-on  
parts. Among the best passages are those  
in which characters other than Whit-  
man are seen and heard (for all King-  
ston’s genius, her hero becomes tire-  
some in 340 pages). The description of  
his mother’s mah jong party — to which  
Whitman brings his bride, Tana — is  
particularly effective. Mother and aunt-  
ies speak in sharply recognizable regis-  
ters and from finely observed social atti-  
tudes. “Every auntie had jet-black dyed  
hair. Why do women as they get older  
have to have fixed hair? Because of  
beauty fixed in 1945. These were the  
glamour girls of World War II. Taking  
after the Soong sisters and Anna  
Chennault, who married guys in uni-  
form. Whenever the aunties’ pictures  
appeared in the papers — Chinese or  
English — they were identified as ‘the  
lovely Madame Houston W.P. Wong,’  
‘the beauteous Madame Johnny Tom.’  

Summer 1989  

©  

They were professional beauties.”

The novel’s characters are described  
with the penetrating solidness of real-  
ism, yet they act in a mostly fabled and  
fabulous plot, to curious effect. So  
Whitman’s grandmother, left to die in  
the Sierras by his mother (Ruby Long  
Legs) and father (Zeppelin), is picked up  
by a rich old man, whom she marries.  
Beautiful, talented, Porsche-owning  
Tana marries Whitman, whom she has  
just met at a party, to save him from the  
draft. Whitman, broke and un-  
employed, succeeds in producing the  
great Chinese American play with the  
support of everyone who knows him and  
many who do not.

These magic turns, however, are  
more like broad structures on which the  
author (through Whitman, and some-  
times over Whitman’s voice) improvises  
her riffs. The theme of play is the major  
motif — as tricks, comedy, creativity,  
drama, and linguistic invention. But the  
novel inspects an encyclopedic range of  
stereotypes, fads, and controversies  
dealing with American ethnicity and  
identity. Like Whitman, these riffs are  
wildly intelligent, compulsively  
manic-comic, and fast paced. “But the  
best way to talk to someone of another  
language is at the top of your intelli-  
gence, not to slow down or to shout or to  

©  

“Performing Acrobats,” painted by Chinese  
prodigy Wang Yani at age four. From Yani:  
The Brush of Innocence, Hudson Hills Press  

babytalk. You say more than enough,  
o.d. your listener, give her plenty to  
choose from. She will get more out of it  
than you can say.” Kingston does a su-  
perb job of conveying the nervous zani-  
ness in the zigzaggings of American  
speech, from the tensions and rivalries  
between Japanese Americans and  
Chinese Americans portrayed in the  

Wang Anyi: Writing as a Daughter  

Wang Anyi  

Wang Anyi was born in 1954 after the  
founding of the People’s Republic of China.  
The most popular woman writer in  
Shanghai today, she represents the new  
generation. Lapse of Time, the latest trans-  
lation of her work, is published by China  
Books. This interview with Shirley Geok-lin  
Lim was translated by Charles Huang.  

©  

Your novella, Lapse of Time, covers the  
period of the Cultural Revolution and  
changes that followed. Do you consider it a  
political work?  

Not altogether.  

The novella suggests that the sufferings of  
the Cultural Revolution made the major  
character, the mother Duanli, a better per-  
son. Do you agree with this reading?  

I think that the Cultural Revolution  
in social and political terms was un-  
doubtedly a disaster. But the implica-  
tions for individuals varied. This partic-  
ular woman was given an opportunity to  

go into society and to improve herself  
even through suffering.  

In the novella, the family is reimbursed af-  
ter the Cultural Revolution for its losses and  
property is returned. But members revert  
back to their old selves. The story suggests  
that these bourgeois values are worthless.  
Where do you stand in the move from so-  
cialist redistribution of wealth, which was  
one of the goals of the Cultural Revolution,  
to the present capitalist methods of produc-  
ing wealth?  

The story does not deal in such big  
terms. Even though, for the main char-  
acters, the appearance of the family is  
better, emotionally it does not need  
Duanli as much. She discovers some  
promise in herself through this suffering,  
and she feels she cannot accommodate  
all these new potentialities in the old  
bourgeois norms.  

Duanli is the strongest character in the nov-  
ella. She grows in strength, whereas her  
husband remains weak throughout. Has  
there been any critical response to the  
emerging feminism in the story?  

My thoughts were very simple when I  
wrote it. I did not think of men and  
women in general. This man turned out  
to be the way he did partially because his  
family’s property was taken away. As an  
entrepreneur of the third generation, his  
executive instincts had degenerated. He  
lost ground.  

I gave the opportunity to grow  
through hardship to a woman simply  
because, when hardship hits any human  
family, the housewife always encounters  
the pain first. Everyone thought the  
strong woman was realistic. Some men  
did get exceedingly angry; they thought  
I looked down on men. I feel sometimes  
that the fortitude of men, like steel, can  
be broken; but the fortitude of women,  
like a bundle of reeds, bends and  
stretches.  

You were sent to a rural region as a young  
person. How did that experience affect you?  

Lance-Whitman encounters, to the  
generational fractures within Chinese  
American families, to the interracial  
sexual byplay, which gets its zest from  
race as much as from gender.  

After all, Kingston has modeled her  
novel on the story of Monkey, a hero  
who brought the Buddhist scrolls to  
China but who also caroused so hard he  
destroyed the party the Immortals had  
planned for themselves. Like the figure  
of Monkey, Kingston’s protagonist (and  
her novel) is up to both good and mis-  
chief. Whitman’s story is not to be  
trusted, being only a “fake book” (like  
the false book of Buddhist scrolls first  
given to the heroes). But the “fake  
book” is also the sacred text, made sac-  
red by Buddha’s infinite compassion. In  
a recent reading, Kingston said that the  
real narrator in the book is Kuan Yin,  
Goddess of Mercy. So too Whitman’s  
rhetorical bountifulness must be seen as  
contained by and controlled within the  
cooler, more acerbic authorial voice,  
including the overflowing talk-stories  
and the plethora of things Chinese  
American.

Tripmaster Monkey is a big novel. It  
shows an enormous amount of work,  
research, ambition, and talent, and it  
needs to be slowly unraveled for all its  
multiple diversions and meanings to be  
enjoyed. The scholars are already wad-  
ing in; its madcap satirical energy may  
encourage the general reader to follow  
suit.

@ Shirley Geok-lin Lim is a poet, fiction  
writer, and critic whose most recent book of  
poems is Modern Secrets (Dangaroo  
Press). She co-edited The Forbidden Stitch:  
An Asian American Woman’s Anthology.

I was sixteen when I was sent to the  
Anhui Province for two and a half years.  
My going to the country at such a young  
age has made it impossible for me to go  
into any other trade. I have received no  
other education, and my passion from a  
young age was to be a writer.

I felt deep distress during that time in  
the country, and this anguish continued  
long after. I did not start writing until  
some time after this experience. Life in  
the country differs drastically from the  
image I was brought up to believe in,  
making me a skeptical person. China is  
an extremely big country. To attempt to  
understand China without understand-  
ing the peasants is impossible.

How has having the famous writer Ru  
Zhijuan for a mother influenced you?  

My parents, being prominent figures  
in culture, provided me with a good  
environment at home, which makes me  
feel that I am truly educated, even  
though I had only five years of formal  
education. Ever since I was little, I have  
always liked to read and write. But my  
mother disliked Chinese language  
classes; she wanted me to excel in arith-  
metic. So I never wanted consciously to  
be a writer. It was not until much later  
that I finally attempted to write some-  
thing and had it published. That gave  
me the confidence to be a writer. The  
first to actually discover my literary tal-  
ents was my mother, who saved all the  
letters I used to write home.

My mother was my model of the  
strong woman in Lapse of Time. During  
the Cultural Revolution, I saw how she  
struggled to keep the family together. I  
had what I considered a happy child-  
hood, although now I realize how far  
from happy it was. My father was like a  
boy in that he avoided troubles. My  
mother would face up to them. In fact,  
friends say I am too dependent on her.  
Just recently she had to have an opera-  
tion. When I was asked to sign permis-  
sion forms, I gave them to her to sign.  
She is like a heroine to me.

Belles Lettres @ 13