Requiem for an Age

Cat’s Eye, by Margaret Atwood. New York: Bantam, 1989, $5.95, 445 pp. (PB)

by B.A. St. Andrews

Margaret Atwood’s Cat’s Eye is
the most complicated and ex-
acting rumination on female

friendship since Toni Morrison’s under-
estimated Sula. Although the novel is
anything but comforting, it faces dis-
comfort courageously. In a career that
has produced some of the best poetry,
literary criticism, and novels of post-
modern literature, Cat’s Eye is a jewel in
Atwood’s diadem. This portrait of an
artist as a young woman, as a child, and as
a matron thickening into artistic emi-
nence presents an odd Triple Goddess.

And if this achievement were not
complex enough, the novel also sets up a
meticulously detailed world of four de-
cades’ descent toward the Millennium.
Cat’s Eye articulates truths and half-
truths about the fall from grace that each
old century feels as it cracks against the
sharp edges of the new one. Emblematic
of this sense of a century’s slipping out of
light is Atwood’s use of a line from Ste-
phen Hawking’s A Brief History of Time,
which serves as the haunting epigram for
Cat’s Eye: “Why do we remember the
past, and not the future?”

Even as the novel examines the past
to comprehend the present, it integrates
elements quintessential to the modern
sensibility — quantum physics, terror-
ism, string theory, the new globalism —
showing a sensibility witnessing itself
vanish across an imaginary time-line.
Atwood manipulates a simple conjunc-
tion and plugs into ready-made symbol-
ism by doing so: the protagonist’s life
review occurs simultaneously with that
of the century. Every generation sees
itself as a symbolic end of an era; this
generation’s reckoning is merely exacer-
bated by the Millennial parallel.

The narrative voice here reminds the
attentive Atwood reader of the Surfacer’s
voice in the book of the same
name; that nameless protagonist spoke
in the same relentless emotional mono-
tone about the same admissions and tiny
tragedies that mold a modern hero. Like
the Surfacer, this hero is an illustrator

who has now aged into an artist of some
renown; she also has visions, spiritual
longings, and a brother named Stephen.
And, like the Surfacer, this protagonist
is haunted by her childhood and by feel-
ings of what, in the 1950s, would be
called anomie.

Unlike the Surfacer, she has a name,
Elaine Risley, and while she may not be
every woman she is still, like the Surfa-
cer, Everywoman. Either because of or
in spite of this epic reach, the book
demands emotional responses from the
reader. This is paradoxical because At-
wood’s characters are so emotionally
stifled. What compels the fatigued read-
er forward is a twofold reward: first, it is
pleasurable to witness the courage of a
writer who translates life so unsparingly.
Second, there are satisfactions in alter-
nately wallowing and reveling in At-
wood’s notorious, apt pearls wrought
from everyday irritants. She remains a
master: Pressed high school corsages
look like “a collection of floral shrunken
heads.” The protagonist’s desire for her
refugee art teacher is described as being
“wrapped... in dense minor-key
enchantment.” On women: “What is
wrong with us the way we are is men.”
On being a child with a cold or an
adult with one: “If I want ginger ale I'll
have to go to the store or the kitchen,
buy it or pour it myself.” On being com-
plimented by a younger artist as having
been a pioneer: “Eminence creeps like
gangrene up my legs.”

Poetic metaphors still preside in
Atwood’s work; the image of brother
Stephen’s jar, which works as his symbol
for scientific, objective distance
throughout the novel, turns into a “jar of
light” after his murder by terrorists. (It
also stands as the best use of this particu-
lar image since the jar Wallace Stevens
crafted that remains unshattered in
Tennessee.) This brother, who tries to
teach his little sister the difference be-
tween what things are and what things
mean, is himself doomed by an inability
to distinguish between logical theoreti-
cal stratagems and the passionate irra-
tionalism of the Realpolitik. The lives of

these characters are blocked by in-
explicable barriers and dead ends; they
belong to their irrational, violent, and
complex historical moment.

To help her along life’s blade, Risley
has her anthropomorphic imagination;

Margaret Atwood. Photo by Graeme Gibson

this helps her endure the torment engi-
neered by her girlfriends, particularly by
her Jungian shadow, Cordelia. This
sense of the sacred allows Elaine to have
a vision of the Virgin whom she calls
“Our Lady of Perpetual Help.” This vi-
sion frees her from the tyranny of her
cruel friends; it also presages Elaine’s
final vision of Cordelia, in the chapter
aptly named “The Bridge,” which pro-
vides a passageway over the abyss be-
tween adulthood and childhood. Thus
the spiritual longing so palpable in
Surfacing is achingly present in Cat’s
Eye, both in Elaine Risley’s art and in
her life. Nor is this aspect of the pro-
tagonist’s quest unexpected; Atwood,
after all, lists herself in Contemporary
Authors as a “Pessimistic Pantheist,”
which, according to her typically desul-
tory definition means “that God is
everywhere, but losing.” In case this is
unclear, there’s little or no good-
natured joking in Cat’s Eye, but there is
plenty of satire, gallows humor, and
ironic understatement.

For readers who cannot sustain the

considerable emotional drain demanded
by this novel, one section may provide
unexpected relief. Elaine Risley’s ac-
count of feminist art (in an age that she
knows prides itself on being post-
structuralist, postmodern, postfeminist,
postcolonial, posteverything) is a joy-
tide. One woman’s “lintscapes,” created
around fluff balls from clothes dryers, are
juxtaposed with another woman’s ex-
hibit of condoms stuffed with tampons
that spell out “What is Luv?” Risley
understands the freedom of being poised
between feminist audacity and patriar-
chial disdain: “because it doesn’t matter
what I do, I can do what I like.” There-
fore, Risley can paint her childhood
nemesis, Mrs. Smeath, naked on a
frumpy couch and call the work
“Torontodalisque: Homage to Ingres.”

Atwood doesn’t get any funnier than
that; nobody does. There’s not an art
student in North America right now
who wouldn’t devour parts of Cat’s Eye
with horror and delight; there’s not a
reader over forty who won’t wince when
reading it. The “shock of recognition”
that Edmund Wilson pondered in an-
other context belongs to this novel as,
in the century’s twilight, we stand with
Atwood’s protagonist at a fête in her
honor, sipping a glass of wine: “The
cheeses hardening at the edges, the
sulfur-drenched grapes, luscious and
shiny as wax, plumped with blood from
the dying field workers of California. It
doesn’t pay to know too many of these
things; eventually there’s nothing you
can put into your mouth without tasting
the death in it.”

If, in the cat’s eye marble, Elaine
Risley can “look ... and see my life
entire,” many readers will find at least
fragments of their experiences of child-
hood, sexual initiation, parenting, sex-
ual warfare, aging, spiritual longings,
and the century’s quest for nothing less
than a peace that surpasses understand-
ing distortedly mirrored in this book. A
master at distilling essences and de-
lineating profiles of our age, Atwood has
created a massive and moving novel that
may well be its first requiem.

@ B.A. St. Andrews has written for the
Paris Review, the New Yorker, Carolina
Quarterly, and the Georgia Review. She
teaches humanities at the SUNY/Health
Sciences Center.

A Book for Believers

She Rises Like the Sun: Invocations of the Goddess by Contemporary American
Women Poets, edited by Janine Canan. Freedom CA: The Crossing Press, 1989, $8.95,

226 pp. (PB)

by Enid Dame

This is, quite simply, a religious
work. Editor Janine Canan has
assembled an impressive selec-
tion of poems invoking “The Goddess.”
In her introduction, she speaks of the
“great hunger in American culture for
images” of this deity and of the “enor-
mous inner excitement” aroused by art
seeking to reclaim her. Perhaps. Cer-
tainly, there are many well-crafted po-
ems here by some fine contemporary
poets. And yet something seems lack-
ing. Or perhaps the lack was in me. Al-
though I sympathize with the movement
to re-discover a female aspect of God, I
can only respond to these poems as a
reader of poetry. And, while I enjoyed
many of these works, few moved me.
Perhaps the strength of this book is
also its problem: Its intended audience is
obviously a community of believers.
One can imagine many of these poems
included in rituals chanted by circles of
women seeking “alternative” spiritual
experiences. Indeed, many of these
poems are meant to be read aloud. Their
effect relies heavily on repetition, on
accumulation of words and images. An
individual poet’s voice could produce
subtle, surprising variations on an estab-

Spring 1990

Illustration by Mayumi Oda from She Rises
Like the Sun

lished pattern. Yet on the page, many
sink into flatness.

True, there are shining moments:
Marge Piercy’s “old woman sitting by the
river counting corpses,” Diane Wa-
koski’s lily-fingered Ice Queen, Ntozake
Shange’s “fiercely-loved” god-within-
herself, Jana Harris’s magical incanta-
tion, “Beneath the Pole of Proud Ra-
ven.” With some exceptions, the best
poems make connections between “The
Goddess” who can transform the world
and the ordinary woman trying to live in
it. Diane Di Prima, for example, does
something original and wonderful when
she writes in “The Loba Addresses the
Goddess/or The Poet as Priestess Ad-
dresses The Loba-Goddess,”

Is it not in your service that I wear myself
out

running ragged among these hills, driving
children

to forgotten movies? In your service

broom and pen. The monstrous feasts

we serve the others on the outer porch

barn the house there is only rice &
salt

But she is more predictable when she
writes in “The Poet Prays to the Loba,”

O Lady

the hem of whose garment

is the sky, whose grace

falls from her glance, who gives
life from the touch of one finger
O Lady

In short, the strongest poems here cre-
ate their own quirky voices. I first read
Mary Mackey’s “Betony” several years
ago. It still enchants me with its tale of a
miracle: a child conceived with the help
of a few herbs, without a man. The first
lines establish its tone of quiet, un-
predictable self-sufficiency:

by the time
we came across the gap

through the Cumberlands

it was late spring

and I was driving the wagon alone. . .
it was a violent

blue-green Kentucky spring

Similarly, Joy Harjo skillfully blends
personal and public stories in her “Book
of Myths,”

There is a Helen in every language,

in America her name is Marilyn

but in my subversive country

she is dark earth and round and full of
names

Myths — whether folk legends, relig-
ion or fairy tales — have powerful things
to teach us as women, as poets, as read-
ers of poetry. As contemporary women,
we will imagine the old myths differently
than our forefathers (or foremothers)
did. Or perhaps the people in the myths
will speak to us differently from the way
they spoke to our fathers and brothers.

Robin Morgan’s “The Two Gretels”
explore the forest together, leaving an
anxious Hansel behind. They discover
that the witch is actually — you guessed
it — “the Great Good Mother God-
dess.” This short, jaunty poem could
serve as a commentary on all the poems
in She Rises Like the Sun, which represent
a movement by women to reclaim myth
for ourselves. And its slightly irreverent
tone — even toward its own Goddess, its
own truth — is refreshing after all that
worship.

@ Enid Dame is a poet, writer, and tea-
cher. Her latest book of poems is Lilith and

Her Demons.

Belles Lettres @ 9