eS

J

ewish Women Writers

The Stop Before Auschwitz

An Interrupted Life: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-1943. Introduced by J.G.  
Gaarlandt, translated from the Dutch by Arnold J. Pomerans. New York: Pantheon Books,  

1983, $13.95, 226 pp.

Letters From Westerbork, by Etty Hillesum. Introduction by J.G. Gaarlandt, translated by  
Arnold J. Pomerans. New York: Pantheon Books, 1986, $14.95, 156 pp., photographs  

by Sharon Weinstein

These diary entries and letters  

will break your heart. Yet you  

will feel extraordinarily, even  
painfully, alive as you read them. Etty  
(Esther) Hillesum’s diary began on a  
Sunday in March, 1941, in Deventer,  
Holland. Her last letter was a postcard  
thrown out of the train that Etty rode to  
Auschwitz on September 7, 1943. In be-  
tween those two markers Etty’s writing  
brings her alive for us. She probes into  
the outer and inner reality of her life.  
She questions everything. She has  
dreams. She seeks God. She learns to  
kneel, to pray, to give of herself self-  
lessly. And above all, Etty loves.

Etty is no Anne Frank. She is no bud-  
ding girl about to be. Etty describes her-  
self in her first entry as “accomplished in  
bed, just about seasoned enough I  
should think to be counted among the  
better lovers. . .” But it is the rest of  
that sentence that reveals the true es-  
sence of Etty’s character, her search for  
the meaning of things underneath the  
external reality: “. . . and yet it [love]  
remains a mere trifle, set apart from  
what is truly essential, and deep inside  
me something is still locked away.” Etty  
took nothing for granted, least of all  
herself. In that same entry she notes  
that “at times I am nothing more or less  
than a miserable, frightened creature  
despite the clarity with which I can ex-  
press myself.”

Although Holland capitulated to  
Germany in 1940, there is little men-  

tion of the war at first. In the early en-  
tries Etty is deeply involved with sorting  
out a new relationship with 55-year-old  
Julius Spier, a student of Jung’s who  
specialized in psychochirology, the  
study of human palm prints. They do  
some strange things, these two. For one  
thing, they wrestle. (It was supposed to  
be liberating.) And she decks him quite  
a few times, too. She seems mesmerized  
by his sensitive personality, his percep-  
tions of her, his reaching toward God,  
but also by his sensuality. They do not  
become lovers for some time. And even  
when they do, Etty’s observations are  
intriguing. As she stands alone in his  
bedroom, while he is at his desk in his  
study, she observes: “The turned-down  
bed, the orchids, the daffodils — there  
was no need to lie down in that bed;  
even as I stood in that dimly lit room it  
was as if I had had a whole night of lov-  
ing.”

In July 1941, Etty is feeling alive. She  
is trying to sort out the essential differ-  
ence between men’s and women’s na-  
tures. Though she feels strongly that it  
would not be in her nature to settle  
down with one man, she still feels a pull  
toward the search for one man.

And I wonder to what extent that is a  
handicap, a woman’s handicap  

.... Perhaps that’s why there are so  
few women scientists and artists: a  
woman always looks for the one man  
on whom she can bestow all her  
wisdom, warmth, love and creative  
power. She longs for a man, not for  
mankind.

She questions, too, whether “the es-  
sential emancipation of women still has  
to come.... We still have to be born  
as human beings, that is the great task  
that lies before us.”

At this time Etty lived in a communal  
household of five people, with 62-year-  
old widower Han Wegerif as her bed  
partner. Etty came from a stimulating  
family. Her father, headmaster of the  
Municipal Gymnasium, taught classical  
languages. Her mother, a Russian who  
fled to the Netherlands from pogroms, is  
described in the introduction to Letters  
from Westerbork as “passionate, chaotic  
and in almost everything the opposite of  
her husband.” Their marriage is charac-  
terized as “tempestuous.” There were  
two other gifted children in the family:  
Mischa, a distinguished pianist, and  
Jaap, who discovered some new vita-  
mins when he was 17.

By 1942 the entire Hillesum family  
were inmates of Westerbork, a transit  
camp near the German border. From  
Westerbork there was only one direc-  
tion: the death train that carried 1,000  
people to the one stop from which there  
was no return. Her letters from the camp  
reveal the terrible deprivations, the  
shockingly subhuman conditions people  
were forced to live under, the emotional  
trauma of incarceration. And yet Etty’s  
spirit soared. The way she continually  
had nurtured her inner life paid off here,  
for although she is quite cognizant that  
“the misery here is quite terrible” she  
still can “late at night when the day has  
slunk away into the depths behind  
me... often walk with a spring in my  
step along the barbed wire.” She cannot  
let loose of “the feeling that life is glori-  
ous and magnificent.”

The striking fact is that Etty volun-  
teered to go to Westerbork when she  
could have been exempted by taking a  
job with the Jewish Council in Amster-  
dam. She refused to separate herself  

from the life of her community, refused  
to go into hiding, refused to allow her  
friends to rescue her: “I want to be sent  
to every one of the camps that lie scat-  
tered all over Europe . . . . I don’t ever  
want to be what they call ‘safe’.” She be-  
came a “luminous personality” in Wes-  
terbork, selflessly seeking to relieve  
others of their burdens. Plagued by ail-  
ments and illness, she understood her  
situation well, knew that she would be  
sent to her death, and knew that she  
could bear it. She had read many books,  
and in Westerbork she read people:  
“Nothing was alien to me, not one  
single expression of human sorrow.”

Etty brings alive with an unbearable  
anguish the conditions, the losses, the  
terrible tragedies of her times. She is not  
soft, she is not sentimental. She can see  
the faces of the guards with horror; she  
can casually say that “at night the bar-  
racks sometimes lay in the moonlight,  
made out of silver and eternity: like a  
plaything that had slipped from God’s  
preoccupied hand.” The grim paradox is  
that Etty was born as she prepared to  
die. One of the last sentences of her  
diary tells us that “I have broken my  
body like bread and shared it out among  
men. And why not, they were hungry  
and had gone without for so long.” In  
her last postcard she reveals that her pa-  
rents and her brother Mischa left West-  
erbork singing. Etty Hillesum died in  
Auschwitz on November 30, 1943. But  
when you read her diary and her letters  
you will find that she becomes fiercely,  
illuminatingly, alive.

© Sharon Weinstein is a professor of  
English at Hampton University in Virginia.  
She is currently designing and creating a  
hand-printed book of her poetry and prose  
with artist Francis Brady for Yaup Press.

Invented Memories

Enchantment, by Daphne Merkin. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1986, $16.95,  

288 pp.

Breaking Bread, by Joyce Reiser Kornblatt. New York: Dutton, 1987, $16.95, 206 pp.

by Faye Moskowitz

Memory can chalk in child-  

hood with the pastels of nos-  

talgia — or cut like a whip-  
lash into the face of sentimentality.  
Memory helps light our journey back-  
ward into darkness or maps a half-for-  
gotten landscape. In fiction as in life,  
memory digs down to expose the roots of  
the present. For Merkin’s narrator,  
Hannah Lehmann, memory is the rough  
bark against which she incessantly rubs  
raw the itching present. Kornblatt’s  
nameless “I” finds ultimate redemption  
in the “memories” she both remembers  
and imagines.

In Enchantment, an exploration of a  
troubled childhood, Hannah Lehmann  
examines her memories in order to ex-  
plain her obsession with her mother,  
whom she calls “the source of my unease  
in the world and thus the only person  
who can make me feel at home in the  
world.” “What I wanted,” Hannah says,  
“was for her to stand over a hot stove,  
like all the immigrant mothers I had  
read about, and stir soup: I yearned for  
the stereotype instead of the unpredict-  
able, powerful person I had been born to.”

Enchantment is set on Manhattan's  
Upper East Side where Hannah lives  
with her German Orthodox Jewish par-  
ents and five brothers and sisters.  
Though the family is wealthy, Hannah,  
starved for emotional and physical  
bread, squirrels away bags of Pepperidge  
Farm cookies under her bed to keep  

them from her ravenous siblings with  
whom she must share the parsimony of  
her parents’ affection. For the  
Lehmanns, sibling rivalry is elevated to  
the equivalent of global conflict. Reli-  
gious ritual, meticulously observed,  
bears no undergirding of spirituality and  
offers Hannah no succor, either. In fact,  
after Hannah wryly describes just how  
far her family fell short of the plastic per-  
fection of life in TV sitcoms, movies,  
and children’s books, a reader is apt to  
wonder how she can be at once so funny  
about details and so utterly humorless  
about the outcome. As this plotless  
novel opens, 26-year-old Hannah has  
one thing on her mind: “Without that  
image of consolation flashed and re-  
flashed on my early brain like a winning  
ace in a deck of cards — The Mother  
who ran to pick me up when I cried —  
how was I to develop faith in the coming  
end of sorrow?”

The obsessive relish Hannah takes in  
recounting her hurts gives energy to a  
work that might otherwise be static. At  
the end, full circle, Hannah says, “De-  
sires that aren’t met don’t go away; they  
just become twisted. My love for my  
mother is not love; it is consuming, an  
addiction.” As it documents the origins  
of that addiction, this book both fasci-  
nates and repels, and as it foreshadows  
and then confirms the emotional style  
that marks Hannah’s present life, espe-  
cially her romantic relationships, the  
effect is chilling.

Daphne Merkin. Photo © by Thomas Victor.

Students of literature are cautioned  
against confusing narrator and author,  
but both Enchantment and Breaking Bread  
clearly contain elements of autobiog-  
raphy, although they are published with  
the usual disclaimers of fiction. Walker  
Percy calls Enchantment “a remarkable  
memoir, fictional or not.” On the jacket  
of Breaking Bread Kornblatt is said to  
have “quite daringly fused the tech-  
niques of autobiography and fiction.”  
This conscious blurring of the line bet-  
ween fact and fiction became popular  
with the “new journalism” of writers like  
Mailer and Capote. Kundera, Lessing,  
and Mailer have also had their go at  
welding the real with the imagined.  
Kornblatt signals her intention to fill in-  

the-blanks with cues such as “In this  
legend I am inventing.” Still, if the work  
is honestly meant as a fiction, then the  
technique proves unnecessarily distract-  
ing.

Having said that, I must say that  
Breaking Bread is a deeply evocative,  
beautifully written set of portraits of  
characters who figured significantly in  
the narrator’s journey toward self.  
Simca, the great-grandmother whose life  
the narrator invents, seems to be her  
precursor, “a professional mourner, a  
woman paid to wail at funerals, paid to  
sit on the hill above the graves of the  
dead and sing to the ghosts.” Simca  
opens herself to her calling, “as an artist  
assents to the colors burning behind her  
eyes or the music rising through the long  
columns of her bones or the poems read-  
ing themselves aloud in the silent realm  
of her heart.” The narrator, also an art-  
ist, sings to the dead as each of her  
characters is now available to her only  
in memory.

Lila, the subject of the final portrait,  
a woman whom the narrator met when  
they were both giving birth to their first  
children, becomes the catalyst by which  
the book turns full circle to the grand-  
father of the first portrait. It is she who  
prompts the narrator to move backward  
in time to become whole again. “ ‘Re-  
member,’ ” Lila says. “To restore what  
was amputated.” The book ends as it  
began, echoing the epigram by W.H.  
Auden from which its title comes:  
“Through art, we are able to break bread  
with the dead, and without communion  
with the dead a fully human life is impos-  
sible.”

© Faye Moskowitz is the author of a book  
of memoirs entitled A Leak in the Heart.

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987