Belles Lettres Interviews

“The time for women-wrought miracles has finally come,” Sonia Johnson tells interviewers Suzanne Scott and Lynne M. Constantine. They talked with the feminist speaker, activist, and ex-candidate for president about her second book, which takes her from “heretic” to revolutionary.

In Going Out of Our Minds: The Metaphysics of Liberation (Crossing Press, 1987), Sonia Johnson chronicles her personal, political, and spiritual journey after her excommunication from the Mormon Church in 1979. The narrative recalls her highly publicized acts of civil disobedience and 37-day fast in support of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), in addition to her campaigns for the presidency of the National Organization for Women (NOW) and of the United States. The book reveals how Johnson progressively came to the sense, during her years of highly visible feminist activity, that all political actions ultimately were counterproductive for women. By continuing to pour energy — even the energy of resistance — into the patriarchal system, she decided, women are cooperating in their own oppression. As an alternative, Johnson came to advocate psychic, if not literal, separatism: Women, she said, should spend as little thought or energy on men and their systems as possible. If even 5% of women were truly able to “take their eyes off the guys,” Johnson writes, “I see the men crying in terror: Where are the slaves?” The male-dominated system will collapse, she believes, because “men don’t do patriarchy without us.”

In a wide-ranging interview at her home in Arlington, Virginia, and in a subsequent telephone conversation, Johnson spoke candidly about the views she puts forth in Going Out of Our Minds. In the large, cheerful room in which the interview took place, Johnson’s diminutive form could easily seem lost among the well-tended plants and the striking art she later mentions is her daughter’s work. Yet she fills the room with the spirit and energy that have been drawing women to hear her speak since her first forays into public feminist action in the late 1970s. Her intensity and personal power seem almost palpable from the moment she enters.

“I want us to understand that we are the ones who can change things,” Johnson says earnestly. “I want us to take ourselves and other women more seriously and to realize that there is only one source of truth — our own selves — and there is only one source of reality — us.” In her own daily life, she says, she is learning to stop considering herself a “means to an end — the kind of thinking that makes us keep working while bravely saying ‘I may never see the results of this in my lifetime, but my children will.’” That kind of thinking, she says, is patriarchal thinking, in which the ends justify the means and the means are expendable. “If feminism says that the means are the ends,” Johnson says, “then if I draw every breath in freedom and happiness, this act of personal transformation would further the revolution.”

Feminine self-sacrifice, she reminds us, is a cornerstone value when men are in charge. “And as Mary Daly says, to get at the truth of that, you’ve got to turn it upside down,” she laughs. If we do invert the paradigm and put our right to personal transformation first, Johnson is convinced that we can change reality and that we can change it fast. “We must never sacrifice our own happiness — not for one second,” she says with excitement. “We must have it now. And demand it now of ourselves, that we be joyful, that we live in a world that gives us what we deserve and need — this instant — because that’s the only way things are ever going to change.”

Johnson acknowledges that women who are moved to political action by the anguish and suffering of other women often find her line of reasoning hard to accept. Even if they agree that women have internalized the male structures of thought and that it is our responsibility to purge those structures from ourselves, they also believe deeply in women’s responsibility to work against male violence, rape, hunger, and other ills so that fewer women will suffer. “That's a very difficult one,” admits Johnson. Still, she points out, women have been working for the past 20 years to stop rape and violence against women. “It has only gotten worse,” she says.

Johnson is far from indifferent about rape. “All men, whether they physically rape women or not, participate in the benefits of rape, just as all women, whether they are physically raped or not, are kept enslaved by it,” she writes in Going Out of Our Minds. But instead of saying that we ought to get out there and do more, work harder, fight more, Johnson believes we simply should stop and do our own business. “For 5,000 years we've resisted and tried to save ourselves. We've been strong and wonderful. We’ve never been clods or toads — never throughout all history,” says Johnson. “Now, I don’t want to be hasty, but I’m willing to say that all the work we’ve been doing doesn’t work.” If we invest all our energy in the male-created reality of rape, we wind up sacrificing our lives and treating ourselves as expendable. Every time we participate in that kind of patriarchal thinking, we just perpetuate it. But if I refuse to participate in it, I know that by not participating, I am stopping rape. I am stopping battering.”

Johnson sees her own experiences in the world of feminist power politics and presidential politics as another breeding ground for her current ideas. Her 1984 presidential campaign on the Citizen’s Party ticket, she says, “allowed me to talk to women all over the country, to see how they live and what matters to them.” A major theme of the campaign was the familiar feminist slogan, “All of us are the leaders.” At speaking engagements, Johnson would ask audiences to stand up and shout aloud what they would do if they were president. “Most of what I heard,” she writes, “belonged in my platform.” But if Johnson was eager to listen to others, she quickly learned that the regular political establishment had stopped its ears to her. The major parties and the League of Women Voters barred her from the national forum represented by the televised Reagan—Mondale debates.

In her militant campaign on behalf of the ERA as well as in her bids for the U.S. presidency and the presidency of NOW, Johnson learned a more painful lesson: Feminists do not always behave as sisters. During her fast for the ERA in Illinois, some feminists sent letters telling her she was making herself a victim, giving the opponents of ERA a living target for their charges that feminists are all crazy. When she ran for president of the U.S., many feminists either ignored her candidacy or lamented her willingness to take votes away from Mondale. And when she ran for the presidency of NOW, she encountered personal and political attacks from the incumbent NOW leadership unlike anything she had experienced outside the Mormon church.

Johnson views these experiences as examples of women’s internalized oppression. “The patriarchy lives in us,” Johnson says. “And that’s how we change it — in us.” In her book, she calls the often-mentioned feminist infighting an example of “our profound and intractable belief — unconscious and pervasive, almost part of our DNA — in all women’s inferiority.” Her own negative experiences led her to redouble her own efforts to accept diversity without feeling threatened or feeling the need to attack.

“We talk a lot about diversity,” Johnson remarks, “but we can hardly stand it.” In the women’s movement, she believes the feminism of women of color has forced White feminists to come to grips with diversity. “We have to understand that we have more in common with any woman in the world than with any man — no matter how much men make us doubt that,” she says. “Every woman deserves our respect; every woman wakes up in the morning surrounded by a world that wants to kill her.” And this, Johnson says, is a way for us to have patience even with anti-feminist women such as Phyllis Schlafly. “It links us even to women we just can’t bear,” she says.

Sonia Johnson. Photo by Janet Mullaney.

In the years since her excommunication, Johnson has managed to retain that tolerance for her own diversity, her past as a “good Mormon woman” alongside her present as a well-known feminist activist. “In some ways it’s almost like being reincarnated without having to die first,” she laughs. Her Mormon past has, she believes, given her much that is of value to her in the present. Her quiet voice, for example, which she calls “a good Mormon woman voice, a voice of oppression,” nonetheless serves a useful purpose. “It lets me say the damndest things,” says Johnson, “and people just say, ‘Oh, isn’t she marvelous!’ or ‘Isn’t that funny?’” Her voice is not the only thing she’s grateful to the Mormons for giving her. “They made me an expert on patriarchy,” she quips. “They set me up for life as a feminist speaker, gave me a livelihood, and a chance to do what I have to do in the world.”

Still, the Sonia Johnson of Going Out of Our Minds is a very different woman than the one who wrote From Housewife to Heretic in 1981. The burning passion for the ERA that led directly to her excommunication no longer ignites her. In personal terms, too, her life has changed dramatically. The woman who in 1981 declared herself “hopelessly heterosexual” frankly admits that she now lives as a lesbian in a rich and fulfilling relationship. And the woman who pushed the boundaries of nonviolent radical action as far as they will stretch no longer wants to call herself a radical feminist. “I’m not going to talk about cultural feminists, liberal feminists, and radical feminists because those terms just further divide us,” she says. “It’s all feminism, the only genuine social, political, economic alternative on earth.”

Johnson believes that the experiences that brought her to embrace her “metaphysics of liberation” are not unlike those that have led many feminists to drop out of political activism or immerse themselves in New Age spirituality. Dropping out, however, does not necessarily lead to the personal and social transformation Johnson envisions. “It’s not the same to just lose your belief in activism. You also have to lose your belief in the patriarchal system,” says Johnson. She believes that a woman has to be aware that she is changing the world by changing herself. “You would think that doing it unconsciously would work, but I don’t think it does,” she says. “We have to know what we're about.”

Similarly, women who are looking for transformation through New Age spirituality often find themselves with a sinking feeling that some of what they hear is not so new after all. One of many amusing anecdotes in Going Out of Our Minds takes place at a conference, at which a woman who claimed to be a channel for extraterrestrials channeled a male being named Moka. At first the messages the group received were positive and uplifting. Soon, however, Moka was asking to meet with all the men and allowing a woman to join the group “to understand her partner’s work and help him in it.” Johnson wryly comments, “This whole alien bunch is not so alien after all.” For women, Johnson says, these messages can be insidious and dangerous if they’re seen as coming from an authoritative source. And even if they aren’t, according to Johnson, the messages are often little more than innocuous fluff. “That’s not what transforms women,” says Johnson. “If you would tell me your story, no matter who you are, I would hear things in it that would give me courage for months. Until I can know that and do that, there’s no hope for my personal transformation.”

To hear each other’s stories and begin to learn to hear each other and themselves, Johnson suggests a process she calls “Hearing into Being.” Three or more women meet regularly, and each woman gets 15 minutes or a half hour to speak without being interrupted and without being evaluated. “When they first think about having to talk nonstop for 15 to 30 minutes, they think they won't have anything to say or that they'll be boring,” says Johnson. But over and over again, women find out they do have something to say. “They just love it,” she says, “and at the end, they’re so impressed with themselves and have learned so much about themselves.”

Johnson considers herself lucky that she can make her living giving speeches, talking to women over the phone, and having people read her books, listen to her, and take her seriously. “It’s such a gift,” she says. Many women will consider Going Out of Our Minds a gift to them.

Lynne M. Constantine and Suzanne Scott are freelance writers who live and work in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area.

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987