Bird designs from ceramics, Southwest, 19th century.  
From North American Indian Design (Dover)  

~—continued from p. 40  

American struggle, as is her discussion of pertinent values  
and belief systems, such as community versus individuality.  
Her analysis of the philosophical and political differences  
between Western and Native American canons of thought,  
and her references to other Native American women’s  
literature beyond this collection, set the mood.  

The book is divided into three main sections: warriors,  
casualties, and resistance. This war theme serves as a  
metaphor upon which selected Native American women  
authors build throughout the book, and it is seen from  
several points of view (historical, contemporary, contextual,  
personal, familial, social, and political), all captured with  
rich, reflective prose.  

A war between the Native American nations and  
the U.S. government has existed for more than two hundred  
years, accompanied by internal symptoms such as depres-  
sion, alcoholism, suicide, and alienation. The women’s  
stories, however, exhibit hope, personal and tribal empow-  
erment, and examples of surviving oppression and racism as  
nations within nations. For example, LeAnne Howe, in "An  
American in New York," presents a Native American’s take  
on the Big Apple and her struggle to integrate Indian and  
white cultures. She shares her “urban vision quest" with  
irony, joy, and witty cross-cultural observation.  

Besides being an entertaining and informative book of  
general interest, Spider Woman’s Granddaughters is an  
excellent educational resource. It includes twenty-one tribal  
women’s voices, spanning time from the 1850s to the  
1990s. Included are the works of well-known authors such  
as Louise Erdrich, Ella Cara Deloria, Linda Hogan, and  
Leslie Marmon Silko, but also offers an opportunity for  
readers to acquaint themselves with authors such as Zitkala-Sa  
and Mary TallMountain. The book also includes a selected  
biography and a glossary of Native American-related terms.  

Spider Woman’s Granddaughters weaves a web of inter-  
locking suspension bridges made up of thoughts and visions  
for our contemporary world. Allen’s insight and wisdom are  
gifts for others to savor and appreciate — much like the  
Cherokee legend about the Spider Woman referred to in  
creation stories and oral traditions of several tribes. Spider  
Woman is a powerful metaphor of strength, resilience, and  
reconstruction of tribal ideologies and value systems. Allen  
is a quintessential Spider Woman, weaving her works for  
many grandchildren. —Charlotte Tsoi Goodluck  

Deep in the Heart  

Common Bonds: Stories By and About Modern Texas Women, edited  
by Suzanne Comer. Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1990,  
$22.50 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 340 pp.  

by Elizabeth Hand  

In her introduction to Common Bonds, Suzanne Comer  
bemoans the lack of a mythic female presence in what may  
be the last American stronghold of truly mythic figures, the  
Lone Star State. Cowboys, roughnecks, quarterbacks,  
ranchers, oilmen, singing outlaws, and sly politicians all  
populate the national folklore, from Pecos Bill and Willie  
Nelson to LBJ and J.R. Ewing. Of course, we have Lou  

Ann Barton and Janis Joplin and Lady Bird, and recently  

Texas Monthly featured an article upholding that time-hon-  
ored myth that Texas women are the most beautiful in the  
world (just look at the Dallas Cheerleaders and all those  
former Miss Americas). In literature, the stereotypes are  
even more pronounced. Now, in this strong but uneven  
collection, Comer gives us stories by thirty-two Texas  
women writers. Whether any of them will go on to make a  
permanent mark on Texas literature remains to be seen,  
although one or two are good bets.  

What is most striking about these stories — the collection  
is, after all, subtitled "Stories By and About Modern Texas  
Women" — is how little sense of place clings to them. Most  
seem to be set in that never-never land beloved of contem-  
porary short fiction writers, Raymond Carver’s heirs: that  
long dark mobile home of the soul that could be parked  
anywhere from Akron to Abilene. Rural Texas is mostly  
absent from these pages and with a few exceptions, so are  
the big cities. One can understand a desire, perhaps a need,  
to de-mythologize Texas, to steer away from the ranches  
and prairies and oil fields beloved of Hollywood and net-  
work TV. But why are there no tales of the boom years, of  
the oil bust, of the failed dreams and repossessed houses in  
Houston and Beaumont and Port Lavaca? Why so little from  
the barrios of San Antonio and Austin?  

Now, there’s nothing wrong with writing about small  
lives simply led, certainly nothing wrong with detailed  
exploration of those homey relationships that are the under-  
pinnings of our existence.