Rescued From Oblivion

From That Time and Place, A Memoir 1938-1947, by Lucy S. Dawidowicz. New

York: Norton, 1989, $21.95, 333 pp.

by Miriyam Glazer

Lucy Dawidowicz sailed, in August

1938 and at age twenty-three,

from New York to the Yiddish-
speaking heartland of Eastern Europe —
the small city of Vilna, then in Polish
hands. “It was a journey to seek one’s
purpose in life, an uncommon journey,
to be sure,” she writes, “to a place from
which most Jews, if only they could,
would have fled.” For Hitler was casting
his net around Central and Eastern
Europe, and Polish anti-Semitism was
relentless.

From That Time and Place is the story
of that “uncommon journey” and its af-
termath in postwar Europe. This power-
ful memoir depicts the details of a per-
sonal quest — an immersion in Yiddish
culture and scholarship — as well as the
searing details of everyday life, as the
Poles closed one means of livelihood af-
ter another to the talents of Jews. She
writes of the other Research Fellows
(Aspiranturs) at YIVO, the renowned
Yiddish Scientific Institute in Vilna at
the brink of World War II, and of the
poverty, oppression, and grand aspira-
tions of their lives. She tells the story of
this soon-to-be-doomed world of schol-
ars, poets, merchants, artisans, work-
ers, peddlers, beggars, thieves — from

Sleeping Arrangements
by Laura Cunningham

New York: Knopf, 1989, 190 pp.

Here’s what Lily doesn’t have: a legiti-
mate last name, a real home, a father,
and, later, a mother. Here’s what she
has: a flair for costume, decorating, and
adventure; some wild friends; a senile
grandmother as a roommate; and two
uncles who change their lives to take
care of her. In the course of the five years
dramatized in this memoir of childhood,
Lily comes to understand that what she
has is love.

Lily is a fictionalized version of the
child Laura Cunningham, author of the
previous novels Third Parties and Sweet
Nothings, as well as several plays. In
Sleeping Arrangements, Cunningham
makes her childhood seem as funny,
warm, enchanting, kooky, as if Mary
Poppins and Auntie Mame entered
Marilynne Robinson’s novel, House-
keeping, in the guise of Uncle Gabe,
Uncle Len, and Grandma Itka.

Set mainly in an apartment house in

the leaders of the Institute to the Yiddish
actors and poets; from a starving ap-
prentice with one hope (“Abi emigrirn,”
as long as I emigrate) to an aristocratic
Tolstoyan like Stefania Szabad who
served Dawidowicz a “huge steaming
bowl of green beans” on her first day in
Vilna because “If the peasants can sub-
sist on beans for a whole week, so can
we.” (Stefania Szabad, she tells us later
in her chapter “The Reckoning,” was
gassed in Majdanek in 1943.)

Lucy Dawidowicz fled Vilna in 1939
as Hitler closed in. Her memoir de-
scribes the anguish of the war years from
the refuge of New York and then cru-
cially, her return to occupied Germany,
the “Land of Amalek,” in 1946. As
Dawidowicz worked among Jewish sur-
vivors in the displaced persons camps,
an obsession intensified: to rescue the
remnants of the stolen YIVO library,
thousands of books located in Germany,
and to have them shipped to the reborn
YIVO in New York. “The human sur-
vivors had a will to live and even, at
times, a will to forget, but the books had
been dumb witnesses to mass murder.
They were the relics of six million mur-
dered Jews.” She fulfilled her mission. “I
knew that whatever I rescued from

the Bronx in the late 1940s, the memoir
begins when the four-year-old Lily and
her mother are roving among relatives,
waiting for the father, Larry, to come
home from the war. Hazed in romance,
he is a figure in photographs, real and
imagined. “The lunch-hour wedding, a

Woodcut by Rini Templeton

oblivion was all that could ever be res-
cued from the ruins of Vilna.” Over the
years since, she has chronicled the life of
that lost world and the horrors of the
Holocaust: in The Golden Tradition, The
War Against the Jews 1933-1945, The
Jewish Presence: Essays on Identity and
History, The Holocaust and the His-
torians, and other works.

As a third-generation woman raised
in a household where Yiddish, spoken by
my Bubba in our kitchen, was to be dis-
carded as the language of a rejected
world and where all of our Jewish energy

Lucy S. Dawidowicz in Vilna, Poland, 1938

went towards learning Hebrew and
planting trees in the Homeland, I was
extraordinarily moved by this memoir.
It opened up a world to me I had never
seen — because it was told from a young
woman’s perspective. And it also gave
my own life journey a new context.

goodbye kiss on the tarmac ... my
mother and Larry dashing from the
khaki world of the war office toward the
whiteout of a wedding.”

Trouble is, the war inconveniently
ends, and Larry fails to make the ro-
mance come true, come home, marry
the mother, and make an honest family
of them. The imaginary marriage ends
with a mock funeral, and, rid of the pos-
sibility of a father, mother and child
move to a Bronx apartment, AnaMor
Towers (“named for the owners Ana and
Morris Snezak”). The neighborhood,
home to Yankee Stadium,

stood on a baseball fault zone. The
building reverberated with collective roars
of victory or groans of defeat. Two-night
doubleheaders cast an insomniac glow into
our efficiency, and night after night my
mother and I would lie sleepless, bathed
in violet light, listening to the mega-
phoned moans of “It’s a homer! It’s a
homer!”

As happy as newlyweds — alone at last
— we danced with fruit in our hands and
celebrated the morning. Wearing turbans
and terry-cloth sarongs, we exulted in our
new private ecstasy in 3M.

But, as they used to say in radio dra-

My Place
by Sally Morgan

New York: Seaver Books/Henry Holt,
1988, $19.95, 360 pp.

From the beginning of My Place: An
Aborigine’s Stubborn Quest for Her Truth,
Heritage, and Origins, Sally Morgan grips
the reader with vivid detail and a sense
of the dramatic. The book begins with
Morgan’s early life in a poor suburb of
Perth, Australia, and proceeds to the
transcribed stories of Morgan’s great
uncle Arthur, her mother, Gladys, and
her grandmother, Daisy, known as Nan.
Just getting her mother and Nan to tell
their stories, not to mention having
them acknowledge their aboriginal heri-
tage, represents a victory for the persis-
tent Morgan. The stories themselves, as
vibrantly detailed as Morgan’s own, are
fascinating, often heartbreaking, and,
in the end, triumphant.

Morgan starts with herself as a small
girl visiting her father in the hospital he

Winter 1990

regularly retreated to after alcoholic
binges and sieges of flashbacks to his days
as a World War II soldier and prisoner of
war. When her father dies, Sally, the
oldest of five children, is nine. Her
hardworking and generous mother ral-
lies the family, juggles several jobs until
she can open a florist’s shop, and insists
on the children’s doing well at school.
Nan runs the house during the day. The
warm, chaotic enclosure of her family
provides a protective environment for
imaginative Sally, who is uncomfortable
in the institutional setting of school.
The book slackens with Morgan’s
school-year-by-school-year summary of
her life, but it reintensifies when, after
university, marriage, and childbirth,
she decides to write a history of her
mother’s family. Only Uncle Arthur, a
confident, self-made man, is eager to
dissolve the mystery and tell his tale.
After Arthur dies, Sally, her hus-
band, children, and mother (Nan re-
fuses to go) journey to the northwestern
area that was Nan’s original home. The
enthusiastic welcome by aboriginal peo-

ple who remember Nan and embrace her
relatives as cousins affects them deeply.
“We viewed her differently now,” Mor-
gan writes,

We had more insight into her bitterness.
And more than anything, we wanted her
to change, to be proud of what she was.
We’d seen so much of her and ourselves
in the people we’d met. We belonged
now. We wanted her to belong too.

Gladys is now inspired to tell her
story. Finally Nan, dying, is ready to
talk, too, as long as she can keep some
secrets. These are troubling stories, full
of unacknowledging white fathers,
forced separations from loving Black
mothers, children’s homes, servitude,
and forced assimilation into an un-
welcoming society. Yet Arthur, Gladys,
and Daisy’s strength prevails. My Place
opens a window into a hidden history
that Sally Morgan discovered only when
she began the quest that led to this rich
book. Like Sally, we want to know
more.

—Susanna Sloat

Thirty years after Lucy Dawidowicz
went to Vilna to seek her life’s purpose, I
left New York — also at twenty-three —
not for the “Jerusalem of Lithuania” (as
Napoleon had called Vilna when it was
part of Lithuania), but for the newly
“united” Jerusalem of Israel. In Da-
widowicz’s rendering of the violent po-
litical clashes between right- and left-
wing Jews in her time and place, I saw
the origins of the conflicts still raging in
mine. The year she was in Vilna, the
mainstream Zionists were at war with
the Revisionists — the right-wing mili-
taristic group led by Vladimir Jabot-
insky’s vehement opposition to the
Zionist policy of “self-restraint” and
“nonretaliation” against Arab anti-
Jewish violence in Palestine.

But it is more than those painful ech-
oes I heard. I left Israel in 1979, eleven
years after I emigrated there, skeptical of
ever making the desert “bloom” and
anguished about the country’s course
ever since. I have been restlessly search-
ing year after year for ways to honor and
express my Jewishness. I profoundly
admire Dawidowicz for recognizing that
Yiddish culture will not be reborn yet
realizing a form to express her own pas-
sion for our people. I have not yet found
mine. She remains someone from whom
I have much to learn.

— Miriyam (Myra) Glazer is editor of
Burning Air and a Clear Mind: Contem-
porary Israeli Women Poets. She is an As-
sociate Professor of English and Literature
at the University of Judaism.

mas of this period, this happy moment
was not to last. Lily’s mother dies, and
in her place appear the two guardian
angels, Uncle Len and Uncle Gabe.
Their adorable caretaking makes this
memoir memorable. Gabe, an obser-
vant Jew who writes sentimental songs
and teaches library science, watches
over Lily during the first grief. Len,
six-feet-six of tenderness and mysterious
hints about secret spying missions, joins
them in the AnaMor. Together they
become a family of such joy and loyalty
anyone would envy them. Ragtag in her
dress and personal cleanliness, wild in
her roamings with her friends, expres-
sive in her imaginations, Lily gets to be
as free as a child can be.

Such freedom and fun make the “au-
thorities” scowl. A delegation of teach-
ers comes to the apartment; some moth-
ers frown on this illegitimate child with
the happy home life; a pair of sadistic
camp directors hold Lily hostage. But
Sleeping Arrangements is not Cat’s Eye; it
is a comic rendering of childhood’s ran-
dom ugliness. Because the uncles pro-
tect Lily, the ogres have no power to
harm her, and the adventures of her
childhood are lovely in the telling.

Comic characters abound. There's
Aunt Barb (“Niagara Falls ain’t much.
It’s just a bunch of water.”) and Uncle
Norm (“Oh, listen to Barb; she’s smart.
She knows what she’s talking about.”).
There’s the dog, Bonny: “She has a lig-
uid, intellectual gaze, as if she’s not a
dog but a Democrat, interested, like
Gabe and Len, in civil liberties.” Most
elegant is Grandma Itka, with her senile
kleptomania, her fear of the color black,
her self-praising monologues. Itka deep-
ens as she lives with her sons and grand-
daughter. Just because she is so hard to
live with, she shows Lily how to love.

Out of this cast of characters — and
they are real characters — Cunningham
has built a recollection of her own life.
Although she had an irregular clan, she
recognizes it as all a family need to be.
She speculates that happy families like
her ill-assorted one are more varied than
unhappy ones, because “joy strikes me as
the more creative approach.” In Sleeping
Arrangements, she has dramatized that
creative approach and has made it a joy
to share.

—Susan P. Willens

Belles Lettres © 7