with surprising frequency,  
murder and mayhem are but  
secondary attractions in crime  

fiction. Many readers demand mysteries  
that comfort because they posit an es-  
sentially orderly world temporarily dis-  
turbed by panic, greed, or anger. These  
tales affirm that social order prevails  
despite even the most dreadful crime.  
Here, violence is played down — in-  
deed, it usually takes place off-stage, as  
it were — and generally, puzzle domi-  
nates action. This pattern is most com-  
monly associated with Golden Age or  
country-house mysteries and also ap-  
pears in series featuring English police  
officers who are long on psychological  
understanding, short on technical de-  
tail, and innocent of extralegal maneu-  
vers. Control is the factor that promotes  
such reassuring orderliness, and  
throughout their plots, such stories  
promise that decent people can almost  
always exert control over themselves,  
their relationships, their careers — their  
lives. The character who loses control is  
the anomaly, and once she or he has  
been removed from the scene, all is  
again well. Other authors, of course,  
depict quite a different world, a deeply  
disordered society, sometimes even an  
openly malevolent community, which  
they believe to be more realistic.  
American police procedurals, hard  
boiled private-eye fiction, and some  
psychological thrillers commonly fall  
into this category. For the protagonists  
of these crime novels, emerging from  
the case alive and not too badly wounded is  
the best that can be anticipated. Fre-  
quently involved in highly detailed,  
violent action, they do what must be  
done to survive, and if they can retain a  
sense of their own decency while surviv-  
ing, they count themselves lucky in-  
deed. Though often exerting considera-  
ble self-control in order to uphold their  
personal codes, they neither hope for  
nor dream of a culture where true order  
prevails.  

Examples of both types of realism  
appear in editor Marie Smith’s  
seventeen-story collection Ms. Murder  
(New York: Citadel Press, 1989, 274  
pp, $14.95). Jealousy and selfishness  
surge briefly out of control in “Tape-  
Measure Murder” by Agatha Christie.  
The temporary disruption of Jane Mar-  
ple’s St. Mary Mead contrasts sharply  
with the ongoing turbulence of V.I.  
Warshawski’s Chicago, where sheer  
coincidence victimizes an innocent  
photographer in “Three-Dot Po” by Sara  

Paretsky. Marple observes, considers,  

deduces, and goes to the police;  
Warshawski investigates, pursues, and  
confronts her deadly quarry. Each case  
satisfies nicely. Smith’s choice of widely  
ranging stories by other notable authors  
such as Mignon G. Eberhart, Dorothy  
L. Sayers, Charlotte Armstrong, Ruth  
Rendell, and Amanda Cross demon-  
strates the rich variety of crime fiction  
women have created and happily remi-  
nds us that contemporary writers com-  
pare favorably with their admired prede-  
cessors, whichever type of “reality” they  
choose to depict.  

True-crime fans will be fascinated  
with the gritty realism of The Corpse  
Had a Familiar Face (New York: Char-  
ter, 1989, 362 pp, $4.95), autobiography  
of Pulitzer Prize-winner Edna  
Buchanan, a Miami crime reporter.  
Direct and journalistic, Buchanan’s  
style is terse but moving. She recounts  
her early personal history as a march  
toward her true vocation and suggests  
that once she found her professional  
niche, work dominated her life. Char-  
acter sketches of victims, cops, killers,  
druggies, prostitutes, rapists, and by-  
standers both innocent and corrupt  
crowd the pages of this memoir, each  
figure almost as interesting as the author  
herself. But Buchanan does a particular-  

Spring 1990  

ly good job of depicting the attractions  
and the horrors of Miami. Informed by  
the author’s affection for her venue but  
unsparing in its detail, this portrait of a  
city under stress is a terrific bonus.  
Nobody’s Fault (New York: Ban-  
tam, 1990, 389 pp., $18.95), “inspired  
by a real murder,” is a searing account of  
family warfare complicated by class bias  
in contemporary England. Despite some  
awkward phrases, Nancy Holmes suc-  
ceeds in this study of a dissolute noble-  
man and his ambitious but vulnerable  
wife, Amanda. Determined to gain cus-  
tody of their young son, Lord Charles  
Warrington mistakenly murders the new  
governess instead of Amanda. This hor-  
rific opening scene triggers enough vio-  
lence and sex to undermine credulity,  
yet Holmes’s style is intense enough to  
make the situation alarmingly real.  
Charles disappears, and the War-  
ringtons’ circle and even her own family  
close ranks against Amanda who, iso-  
lated by bitterness and penury, comes to  
doubt her own sanity. She is harshly  
punished for undervaluing Charles’ so-  
cial status until finally, loyal friends and  
her own courage salvage a happy ending  
from near despair. Although this victim-  
ization-of-the-victim scenario is fami-  
liar to anyone alert enough to read  
newspapers, Holmes freshens it by cou-  
pling her indictment of snobbism with  
readers’ enduring interest in Cinderella.  
Here, as in du Maurier’s Rebecca, we  
discover what really happened to an  
unlikely couple after their wedding.  
Barbara Whitehead combines a grip-  
ping real-life tradition, a strong sense of  
place, and fiction in Playing God (New  
York: St. Martin’s, 1989, 187 pp.,  
$14.95), which introduces a pair of  
neighbors — Tom Churchyard, an en-  
gineer for British Telecom, and Chief  
Inspector Bob Southwell of the CID — a  
terrific investigative team. Tom, acting  
the part of God in the York Mystery  
Plays, shares the widespread dismay over  
the choice of Poison Peters, flamboyant  
rock star, to perform as Christ, until he  
gets to know Peters out of makeup (and  
out of the public eye). Normal tensions  
among the enormous cast and crew are  
sharply heightened by Poison’s several  
near-fatal “accidents,” by the murder of  
controversial director Bruce Exelby, and  
by the consequent investigations.  
Whitehead, author of three Regency  
novels, plots very well and creates strong  
characterizations, but the novel’s great-  
est triumph (as is that of The Corpse Had  
a Familiar Face) is local color; the atmos-  
phere of York and the spirit of the Plays,  
both remarkable evocations, simply  
glow. Setting is equally important in a  
trio of novels whose marked realism  
depends heavily on their vividly drawn,  
exotic locales. In Raptor (New York:  
Harper & Row, 1990, 246 pp, $17.95),  
Judith Van Gieson’s attorney-  
investigator makes her second appear-  
ance. While clearing up the affairs of her  
deceased Aunt Joan, Neil Hamel un-  
comfortably remembers the distance she  
maintained between them. So, as a kind  
of farewell salute, she undertakes a  
bird-watching trip into the Montana  
mountains for which Joan’s reservations  
had long been made. There, Neil en-  
counters the expedition’s extremely at-  
tractive leader (soon a murder suspect),  
warmly befriends a vigorous, elderly  
birder, becomes entranced with the gyrfalcon (object of the trek), witnesses  
two murders, and almost loses her life.  
Reading her aunt’s journal gives Neil a  
better understanding of that self-  
contained woman, who led a quiet but  
rich and independent life. Moreover,  
she solves the double mysteries and  
challenges the killer. By the end of this  
adventure, both Neil and her lover have  
also faced new complications in their  
relationship, and Neil has learned to see  
herself from Joan’s perspective. Pos-  

THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN  

sibly, these insights will have an impact  
on this tough, shrewd, hard-drinking  
protagonist, but Van Gieson cleverly  
leaves any such revelations for future  
adventures. Most readers will wait im-  
patiently.  

Another feisty, independent woman  
is the central character in Deadly Safari  
by Karin McQuillan (New York: St.  
Martin’s, 1990, 293 pp, $17.95). Emo-  
tionally battered by divorce, Jazz Jasper  
has returned to Africa and established a  
small safari company. However, murder  
invades her first junket and threatens to  
destroy the fledgling enterprise. Though  
the death of blustering entrepreneur  
Boyce Darnell might have passed as an  
accident, the slaying of the old college  
friend who landed her these clients in-  
tensifies Jazz’s determination to discover  
the whole truth. While some of  
McQuillan’s characters are a shade ster-  
eotypical, Jazz and the other two major  
figures, fellow expatriate Striker and  
Inspector Omondi, are very well de-  
picted as are the people, the flora, and  
the fauna of Kenya.  

Any author who describes a luxurious  
hotel room as “sensory deprivation”  
masked as civilization (in comparison to  
the visual and audible delights of the  
bush) is bound to attract attention;  
when she incorporates that observation  
into such a strong novel, she also com-  
mands respect. Dorothy Gilman, author  
of the popular Mrs. Pollifax series, alters  
her method in Incident at Badamya  
(New York: Doubleday, 1989, 204 pp;  
$16.95), though she continues to focus  
on the effect that national and interna-  
tional intrigue might have on ordinary  
folks’ lives and on the unsuspected hero-  
ism (or pusillanimity) concealed be-  
neath everyday behaviors. Here, her  
sturdy, independent hero is sixteen-  
year-old Gen Ferris, orphaned by her  
missionary father’s suicide and  
endangered by the struggle between such  
powers as the “government, the Red  
Flag Communists . . . the White Ban-  
ner and Yellow Banner factions” for  
control of Burma early in the Korean  
War. Imprisoned with an ill-assorted  
band of fellow refugees, Gen figures  
importantly in their escape plans. Ro-  
mances and minor mysteries complicate  
both group and individual schemes, and  
mysticism colors her relationship with  
Mr. U Ba Sein, an unlikely mentor who  
bolsters her resolve, strengthens her  
character, and enriches her spirit  
throughout this unusual and gripping  
story. Murder disrupts the quiet order of  
a seventeenth-century mansion, now  
the Country House Hotel, in Dead by  
Morning (New York: Scribner's, 1989,  
277 pp., $16.95) by the ever reliable  
Dorothy Simpson. Popular continuing  
character Luke Thanet investigates the  
death of Leo Martindale, adjusts to  
changing needs of his rapidly maturing  
son and daughter, and chafes beneath  
the close scrutiny of a new superintendent  
assigned to Sturrenden’s divisional  
police headquarters. As the shabby de-  
tails of Martindale’s past emerge, they  
reveal unsettled old scores against him,  
and Thanet is mindful that unsavory  
though he surely was, Martindale, as  
male heir, could usurp the business his  
sister and her husband have developed  
in order to preserve the family heritage.  
In this satisfying novel, Simpson con-  
trasts various marriages and various pa-  
rental relationships while examining the  
forces that unleash violence in otherwise  
peaceful men and women.  

Who is Rosie O'Grady, the reclusive  
author around whom Anna Clarke  
builds the plot of The Mystery Lady  
(New York: Charter, 1989, 155 pp.,  
$3.50)? Paula Glenning, autobiogra-  
pher and academic, undertakes a study  
of O’Grady, who communicates  
through Robin Key, the spokesperson  
who protects her privacy — unless, of  

course, he has done away with her —  
unless she is “Rosie O’Grady” — unless  
no Rosie O’Grady ever existed — unless  
Rosie O'Grady is really several people.  
Enlisting the aid of her former lover,  
James Goff, Paula unravels complicated  
alliances that obscure both O’Grady  
family history and the “Mystery Lady’s”  
identity, while she and James sort out  
their personal relationship. Aged Mrs.  
Martyr, the Grady clan’s strong-willed  
former neighbor, and Joan Cook, who  
surprises Paula as she is illicitly searching  
O’Grady’s present home, both wonder-  
fully viable characters, contribute to the  
solution of the puzzle. Questions of hon-  
or and self-esteem enrich these portraits,  
as they so often do in Clarke’s fiction,  
and The Mystery Lady will not disap-  
point this able author’s many fans. The  
worlds of Paula Glenning and Luke  
Thanet are generally orderly; violence  
may not be unknown, but it is as much  
an aberration there as in the milieu of  
Tessa Fields, a foundling reared by lov-  
ing adoptive parents, who obsesses  
(though quite cheerfully) about finding  
her birth mother. Down the Garden  
Path (New York: Bantam, 1989, 275  
pp., $3.95) is the broadly humorous  
account of Tessa’s search for blood kin —  
or perhaps one should say her  
blood-stained quest for relatives.  
Dorothy Cannell exaggerates the con-  
ventions of the modern gothic novel by  
mixing zany characters, a few carica-  
tures, cardsharps, deceit, ancient ruins,  
murder, romance, and spurious local  
history in an entertaining yarn whose  
slyest clue is its title.  

The mean streets of Las Vegas and  
Honolulu are the settings for two prom-  
ising first novels whose protagonists — a  
private eye and a Los Angeles cop —  
understand that uncertainties outweigh  
verities in their lives, but nevertheless  
try to maintain dignity and to seize a lit-  
tle happiness. Kat Colorado travels to  
Vegas on behalf of her friend, advice  
columnist Charity Collins, to ascertain  
the true financial status of Sam, the hus-  
band Charity is divorcing. There Kat  
encounters an old hometown pal, the  
proverbial ex-jock who never quite  
made it to the big time, an attractive but  
dangerous entrepreneur, and some new  
friends, Joe and Betty Rider, and Hank  
Parker. Joe, a reporter, and Hank, a  
police officer, help solve the case, and in  
Katwalk (New York: St. Martin’s,  
1989, 232 pp., $16.95), Karen Kijewski  
does a particularly good job of develop-  
ing the relationships among Joe, Betty,  
Hank, and Kat. Although seams show  
in this fast-paced novel, it deservedly  
won the Private Eye Writers of  
America’s 1988 contest for Best First  
Private Eye Novel.  

Like Kijewski, Lue Zimmelman, au-  
thor of Honolulu Red (New York: St.  
Martin’s, 1990, 245 pp., $16.95), also  
seems to have studied a popular formula  
carefully — and made it her own. In a  
gesture of loyalty, police officer Rachel  
Snow investigates the death of her ex-  
partner, despite the dangers of working  
outside her jurisdiction. Art thefts, drug  
deals, jewel robberies, and murder count  
as normal business for crime boss Jacob  
Tong and his henchwoman, Ivory  
Lin-Cho, who are, of course, abetted by  
a large organization. At Rachel’s side are  
a Honolulu cop who owes her a favor and  
Nicholas Snow, professor of art history  
and super-thief, whom she has coerced  
into helping. Learned, sophisticated,  
and handsome, Snow is a man with his  
own agenda and a wildly romantic his-  
tory. Zimmelman juggles numerous  
complications smoothly, demonstrating  
that she can handle herself on these  
mean literary streets.  

@ Jane Bakerman is Belles Lettres’ resi-  
dent Sister in Crime.  

Belles Lettres @ 21