Creating a New Cartography

Women of the Left Bank: Paris, 1900—
1940, by Shari Benstock. Austin: Univer-
sity of Texas Press, 1986, $26.95, 518 pp.,
illustrations.

by Maggie McFadden

Il tourist guidebooks point to

patriarchal pathways. In

literary England the traveler is
guided to Doctor Johnson’s favorite café
or Shakespeare’s birthplace or even on
a drive through Bloomsbury. But one
does not see the places in Bath that were
important to Jane Austen, or the spot
where Christabel Pankhurst was first ar-
rested in the women’s suffrage campaign,
or the school Mary Wollstonecraft began
with Fanny Blood. In Paris one can visit
Victor Hugo’s house or have a coffee at
Café Flore where Jean-Paul Sartre and
Albert Camus wrote, but a tourist sel-
dom looks for Colette’s house or wonders
where Natalie Barney held the Académie
des Femmes. One cannot find these
places in indexes or on maps or described
in guidebooks.

Women of the Left Bank is one of a
growing number of works that help to
guide the reader through a female liter-
ary world. It is a geography of the Paris
of the women of the early 20th century.
Author Shari Benstock quotes Louise
Bernikow in the epigraph, “Where do
we meet? The geography of our friend-
ships, the topography of the course of
the relation, the spots, the fiery moun-
tainous excitement and valleys, the si-
lences — a steady humming when it is
simply there, neither high nor low, not
remarked on — all this needs a school
of cartography (Among Women).”

Benstock attempts to write such a map
of “Expatriate Paris” with all the addres-
ses marked. The structure of her massive
work reminds one of the winding streets,
warrens, and cul-de-sacs of the Left
Bank. Benstock gradually creates por-
traits of her subjects, eschewing com-
plete contextual detail when a writer is
first mentioned. Instead, she writes
around and about, returning in succeed-
ing chapters to women discussed earlier,
going backwards and forwards in time,
as the subject demands. The result is a
composite literary, historical study of the
lives, work, and milieux of more than
20 creative women (mostly writers) dur-
ing this period.

The book is divided into three
chronologically ordered sections. The
first, “Discoveries,” contains a sketch of
the earliest of the American expatriate
women writers, Edith Wharton, con-
trasting her in detail with Colette. The
second section, “Settlements,” locates
and describes in separate chapters the
lives and work of Gertrude Stein and
Alice B. Toklas, Sylvia Beach and Ad-
tienne Monnier, Djuna Barnes, and
Natalie Barney. Finally, “Crossroads”
presents literary Paris in the 1930s, with
chapters on H.D. (Hilda Doolittle) and
Bryher (Winifred Ellerman); on women
in the world of bookshops, small presses,
and little magazines; and on the shift in
the attitude toward politics and art that
World War II brought about.

Throughout, Benstock explores two
main theses. The first is that the patri-
archal power structure of contemporary
literary criticism has ignored, misun-
derstood, denigrated, and even lost the
work of the women involved in that
literary movement known as modern-
ism. Because the women were not a part
of the “important” discussions and
dialogue, the new theories being debated
by men simply ignored what was being
produced by women. Because of this os-
tracism, work by women often did not
fit the strictures that came to be imposed
by the various literary movements, such
as imagism, vorticism, and surrealism.
Many of the most creative women were
lesbian or bisexual, and therefore they
were not involved socially in the same

Jury/August 1987

circles as the men, further contributing
to their marginalization. Some of the
women were well known in their own
day, but because their work did not fit
“the canon,” they were gradually omit-
ted from literary history, and by the
1950s, their work was no longer re-
printed, anthologized, or studied.

A second thesis Benstock asserts is
that, contrary to what some might say,
heterosexual women writers actually had
a more difficult time getting a reading
than did lesbian writers, because the
heterosexual women were connected to
the power structure for monetary and,
more importantly, psychic and critical
support, and had a much more difficult
time asserting their artistic indepen-
dence. Because lesbian women often had
their own support systems and knew
from the beginning that their creative
work was outside the critical establish-
ment, they realistically expected a less-
than-enthusiastic reception.

Connected to this thesis is Benstock’s
attempt to establish and map the differ-
ences among these women writers, both
in their personal lives and in their styles
of writing. She wants to show that mod-
ernism actually embraced a varied
aesthetic, and that some of the women
(H.D., for example, or Stein) have been
unfairly read by critics who were trying
to impose an inflexible masculine stan-
dard. Thus, as part of its ambitious un-
dertaking, the book is an attempt to
reevaluate modernism per se. Addition-
ally, Benstock wants to show that not
all lesbian writers were intent on repro-
ducing in their own relationships the
power structure of the patriarchal mar-
riage; that some of the women were
bisexual, some lesbian, and some
heterosexual; and that within those
groups there were many different at-
titudes toward sexuality and women’s
friendships.

Benstock’s best chapters combine
biography, literary history, and criticism
of the major works. In the section on
Stein and Toklas, Benstock discusses the
alternative readings that can be made of
Stein’s linguistic experiments. Either
Stein is the first post-modernist, break-
ing the absolute relation between word
and meaning, going far beyond James
Joyce’s Finnegans Wake (1939) and
Samuel Beckett’s The Unnamable
(1958), or she goes the modernists one
better, creating a whole new symbol sys-
tem with her language, a kind of lesbian
modernism, whose code is available only
to the initiated. Because her work did
not fit the pre-established mold, Stein
was for years dismissed by the masculinist
critical establishment. Whichever in-
terpretation one chooses, Stein becomes
for Benstock an essential foremother to
the post-modernist aesthetic.

The chapter on Djuna Barnes is an
important reinterpretation of this neg-
lected figure of the Left Bank, an in-
terpretation of her work not as cult ob-
ject or underground, but as “critique of
woman’s place in Western society.”
Thus, according to Benstock, Barnes, in
her seven published books of poetry, fic-
tion, drama, and essay, anticipates the
post-modernist tenets of Jacques Lacan
and others that “heterosexuality in
Western culture is really a form of what
has previously been defined as homosex-
uality: as a search for an image of the
self, a search for the twin, a search for
confirmation of one’s identity through
the double, a reinforcement of sameness
under the guise of difference.” Neglected
for half a century, Barnes did not die
until 1982 at the age of 90. Again, the
stranglehold of the modernist critical
canon effectively excluded Barnes’s
work.

Heiress Natalie Barney dedicated her-
self to providing a place in Paris for
women’s creativity and culture. She
learned Greek so that she could translate
Sappho, classical poet of female love and

Nancy Cunard at the Hours Press, Réanville,
France. Photo from Morris Library, Southern
Illinois University Press.

friendship. She celebrated the body and
refused to see lesbian love as an illness.
Of all the American expatriates, she
was, according to Benstock, the least
affected by Protestant morality and guilt.
Her house on rue Jacob became a salon
for women artists; women’s theatrical
evenings were held in the garden and
“temple” behind. Barney always em-
phasized women’s difference from the
masculine norm.

In a chapter on small presses and little
magazines, Benstock details the impor-
tance of small presses, such as Nancy
Cunard’s Hours Press and Harry and
Caresse Crosby’s Black Sun Press. Sig-
nificantly, women were involved in
every aspect of the business. These pres-
ses often published women’s works, and,
as was the case with Stein and Toklas’s
Plain Edition, were able to make available
the avant-garde writing that was not ac-
ceptable to establishment publishers.
Also described are the Little Review,
edited by Margaret Anderson and Jane
Heap, which was published in Paris after
being found obscene in New York in

1921 for the serial publication of Joyce’s
Ulysses; England’s Egoist (formerly The
Freewoman), under the editorship of
Harriet Weaver; and transition, edited
by Eugene and Maria Jolas. Benstock
also discusses the women who owned
bookshops and lending libraries on the
Left Bank (e.g., Adrienne Monnier’s Les
Amis des Livres and Sylvia Beach’s
Shakespeare and Company). Beach is
well known for her role in the publica-
tion of Ulysses, but Benstock, analyzing
the correspondence carefully, concludes
that Beach actually supported Joyce for
years (while remaining essentially pov-
erty-stricken herself).

Hilda Doolittle, known as H.D., was
one of the few American expatriate
women who did not like Paris and spent
most of her creative life in London. Her
contributions to modernism — the
work with Ezra Pound in imagism (she
ultimately rewrote that doctrine) and
her recovery of classical woman-cen-
tered myths in her poetry — make sense
only when her own sexual identity is
clarified. Bisexual, she was always pulled
between “contradictory worlds,” says
Benstock, “the paternal and heterosex-
ual world of modernism (exemplified in
her relationships with Ezra Pound and
Richard Aldington), and the maternal
and homosexual world of Bryher
[Winifred Ellerman].” This dialectic, al-
ways present in her work, is at once
H.D.’s strength and her weakness. She
is able to critique the modernist position
from an outsider’s perspective, but still
writes within it. She reinterprets the
classical story of the Trojan War in Helen
in Egypt as a tale in which the protagonist
is herself caught between the masculine
world of Troy and the more feminine
world of Egypt.

Although it is a big book, Benstock’s
work omits a great deal, and the reader
often wonders why certain writers were

— continued on page 15

If You Want to Write

A Book About Art,

Independence & Spirit

By Brenda Ueland

“a fresh and vivid approach to creative en-
deavors.”

Paper, $8.50

— Publishers Weekly

Family: Stories from the Interior
Edited by Geri Chavis

Superb fiction from a wide range of writers in-
cluding Colette, Willa Cather and Hortense
Calisher which paint a vivid portrait of family
life.
Paper, $9.50

Fair Augusto & Other Stories
By Laura Kalpakian

“As a whole, the collection is wonderful, a rich
and mature work, marked by signs of a real
writer’s gift.”

GRAYWOLF

PRESS

Paper, $8.00

— The Los Angeles Times

River of Light

A Novel by Brenda Peterson

“Brenda Peterson’s deep understanding of country
people . . . the lovely way she weaves her tale,
shows she is a writer to watch.”

Paper, $8.00

— Publishers Weekly

The Boat of Quiet Hours
Poems by Jane Kenyon

“Kenyon holds your attention . . . by the power
of her observing eye. . . . We trust that a voice
like this will always tell us the truth.”

Paper, $8.00

—The San Jose Mercury News

Belles Lettres @ 13