THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT BY JANE BAKERMAN

In P. D. James’s latest bestseller, Devices and Desires, the
murderer faces down an accuser, saying:

It’s very satisfying to the human ego to discover the truth....
It’s even more satisfying to human vanity to imagine you can
avenge the innocent, restore the past, vindicate the right.
But you can’t. The dead stay dead. All you can do is hurt
the living in the name of justice or retribution or revenge. If
that gives you any pleasure, then do it, but don’t imagine
that there’s any virtue in it.

This comment pinpoints one of the great attractions of the
mystery novel: the psychological thrill of understanding
what baffles others. It also addresses a basic question
serious crime writers consider, although few state it so
directly.

In suggesting that the pursuit of criminals may be nothing
more than arrogance and that punishment is a hollow exer-
cise that rectifies nothing and inflicts further injury, James’s
character equates pure justice with self-indulgence. Further-
more, if these "truths" apply to the individual sleuth and/or
judge, they must, by logical extension, apply to society as a
whole. In tones of cold reason, this murderer posits a cul-
ture so irrational that it all but equates justice, retribution,
and revenge.

Questioning the motives
of the investigator greatly
complicates both chase and
characterization, lending
considerable sophistication
to crime fiction. Some
readers, writers, and char-
acters believe in absolute
justice and hold that it
must be served; for others,
retribution and

revenge are appropriate
ends in themselves. Still others find these views too simplis-
tic, recognizing their own hubristic impulses and believing
that punishment merely extends the damage. Yet, what else
can be done? Not to oppose criminality can be tantamount to
participating in it. Perhaps, this group says, one’s only
choice is to behave as if justice or at least rationality lay at
the heart of our society.

In Devices and Desires (Knopf, 1990, $19.95, 433 pp.),
P. D. James poses these questions on both a small and a
grand scale, revealing parallels between an individual’s
behavior and national or even international policies. The
setting is a remote headland, site of property inherited by
Commander Adam Dalgliesh (James’s popular police offi-
cer) as well as of Larksoken Nuclear Power Station whose
Acting Administrative Officer, beautiful, ambitious Hilary
Roberts, is murdered. Her death, meant to be mistaken for
the work of a serial killer, is set against a complex back-
ground: the serial murders, echoes of a years-old murder,
natural deaths, and the Chernobyl disaster. Young children,
their parents, assorted lovers, and the very aged are all
threatened by various evils afoot in this Norfolk community,
a microcosm in which good works can be destructive and
where faith may or may not function redemptively. In this

modern morality play, controlled emotion and elements of
melodrama are skillfully balanced as Dalgliesh, discoverer
of the corpse, observes another officer’s case. Adam Dalg-
liesh cannot, of course, avoid involvement — nor, James
contends, can any one of us.

Questions of social responsibility, personal honor, and
contemporary ethics are also central to Time and Time
Again (Scribners, 1990, $16.95, 174 pp.) by B.M. Gill.
Protagonist Maeve Barclay, an anti-nuclear activist who has
just completed an eighteen-month prison term for acciden-
tally crippling a police officer during a demonstration,
cannot settle back into her rather privileged "normal" life.
Rather, a friendship with another former inmate not only
attracts but almost preoccupies her. Maeve feels close to
vigorous, intense René despite the latter’s marginal exis-
tence and the hardships, perhaps the dangers, of life with
René’s tough husband, Oliver, and her preschooler, Wayne.
Confused about the future, contending with guilt over the
police officer’s suffering, Maeve takes great risks. Eventual-
ly, however, she learns to trust her own conscience again, a
hard but bracing lesson that prompts her to seek new,
life-affirming responsibilities.

Both of these fine novels examine the individual’s ac-
countability in the face of nuclear development; both ac-
knowledge the natural hazards of human existence; both
dramatize the violence that invades even quiet, ordinary
lives, and both contemplate the evil that motivates some
attractive people. The atmosphere of imperilment pervading
these books intensifies their sound plotting and superior
characterization, entertaining readers even as the novels
challenge them.

Sometimes professional honor prompts an investigator
to track down criminals; that is, like Sam Spade, many
fictional PIs "do the right thing" simply because that’s what
PIs do. Among them are some well-realized female opera-
tives whose sense of honor may derive partly from earlier
male prototypes but who emerge as much more highly
individualized characters. In many ways, their talented
authors are redefining their subgenre, and it’s a fascinating
process. Private investigator V. I. Warshawski undertakes
cases not only to earn her living, but also because of family
obligations. V. I. may not much like and certainly does not
admire many of her blood relatives, but she cannot ignore
them. Author Sara Paretsky transports women’s perennial
quandary — what do they owe to others? What dare they
grant themselves? — from the hearth onto the mean streets
with stunning effect. In Burn Marks (Delacorte, 1990,
$17.95, 352 pp.), bent cops, dirty politics, and corruption in
the construction industry threaten V. I.’s life variously and
repeatedly as she assists her Aunt Elena, long an outcast and
now a derelict because her cheap hotel has been torched.
Despite her touchy independence, V. I. here, as in earlier
cases, gets needed help from her friends and neighbors,
demonstrating that mutual support is very different from
dependence. Though Burn Marks depicts a satisfying victo-
ry, Warshawski knows that other battles in Chicago’s end-
less corporate wars lie ahead.

Kinsey Millhone, Sue Grafton’s continuing character,