Modernism at MLA

comment | heard in passing,  
“women are taking over the  
MLA!” seemed corroborated  
by the dynamic sessions on literature by  
women that I attended at the 1986 Mod-  
ern Language Association Conference.  
The hot topic was modernism. Introduc-  
ing a panel discussion called “(En)gen-  
dering Modernism: Gertrude Stein,  
H.D., Marianne Moore,” Susan Stan-  
ford Friedman said that feminists are  
having “a major trickle-down effect” on  
the “re-visioning and re-engendering of  
modernism.” In 1974 the centenary of  
Gertrude Stein received “no fanfare”;  
1986 was the centenary of H.D., to  
whom were devoted four conferences  
and seven special issues of journals.  
(One hopes that Marianne Moore’s  
centenary this year will create a similar  
response. Two important volumes re-  
cently published are The Complete Prose  
of Marianne Moore, edited and with an  
introduction by Patricia C. Willis [Vik-  
ing] and Marianne Moore: Subversive  
Modernist by Taffy Martin [University of  
Texas].) Feminist critics, says Friedman,  
have been looking at the “profound  
gaps, absences, and traces” of women  
writers from the history of modernism.  
They are viewing these writers as the  
center, not the periphery, of inquiry.  
Catharine R. Stimpson, founding  
editor of Signs, began her paper (“A Tale  
of Three: Stein, Moore, and Henry  
James”) with a reference to one of the  

Impressions  

theses of Shari Benstock’s new  
groundbreaking book on modernism,  
Women of the Left Bank (to be reviewed  
in a future issue). Benstock holds that  
the female modernist writers differed  
greatly from the men; furthermore,  
among the women there were differ-  
ences, or “countersignatures”—espe-  
cially among lesbians. Modernist women  
writers “disrupted the specular relation  
of watcher and art object,” according to  
Stimpson. They “threw back the male  
gaze, constructing an optic of differ-  
ence.” She calls Moore and Stein “major  
construction workers” in this process,  
writers with many traits in common, in-  
cluding the “clever construction of ec-  
centricity.” They projected ‘difference’—  
‘individuality’—as something accept-  
able to American society.  

Moore and Stein both saw James as a  
cultural authority, yet as a precursor.  
Moore’s writing about James, said  
Stimpson, “makes him a delightful pre-  
ference instead of an authority.” Alice  
B. Toklas adored James. She and Stein  
read his books aloud, and Stein wrote a  
witty piece on the Jamesian paragraph.  
Both Moore and Stein “turned the good  
father into the good brother in the pro-  
cess of returning the male’s stare” (im-  
portantly, for Stein, as the replacement  
for her brother, Leo). In the process,  
they created an “egalitarian, affection-  
ate” relationship. Stimpson finds in  
Stein’s and Moore’s writing about James  
a “subtle laughter,” the “laughter of the  
sane and free.” She pointed to two pre-  
ceding kinds of women’s laughter: Grace  

Women Artists  

for this month’s cover, we chose  

a painting by Berthe Morisot de-  

picting her sister and mother (the  
latter engaged in one of our favorite ac-  
tivities). The work is from Women Im-  
pressionists by Tamar Garb, a new collec-  
tion containing 32 full-page reproduc-  
tions that splendidly capture the rich  
and luminous color in the paintings of  
Morisot, Mary Cassatt, Eva Gonzales,  
and Marie Bracquemond. Garb’s intro-  
duction sets the artists in a historical  
and artistic context, and she discusses  
each painting on the facing page. At  
$14.95 this oversized paperback is rela-  
tively inexpensive (for a quality art  
book) and well worth the pleasure it  
affords.  

Works by women artists are all too  
infrequently represented in collections  
or shown in exhibitions (see the review  
of Gwen John in our Nov/Dec issue).  
When I ordered a slide from the Na-  
tional Gallery of Art (which holds the  
Morisot we wanted to use), I found that  
their catalog offers only twelve slides by  
women artists (most of them impression-  
ists) among the hundreds by men. To  
offset this disheartening information, I  
should note that the Gallery plans in  
1987 to mount “the first substantial one-  
person exhibition of Morisot’s work out-  
side France.” This observation is from  
the introduction to The Correspondence  
of Berthe Morisot, edited by Kathleen  
Adler and Tamar Garb, to be published  
this spring by Moyer Bell Ltd. (Mt.  
Kisco, NY). The editors attack spurious  
views of Morisot as being either an un-  
troubled feminist precursor or a natural  
artist evoking subjects of “feminine” de-  
licacy and superficiality. Their subtle  
analysis of Morisot’s contemporaries’ in-  
terpretations of her art and the evolution  
of her reputation (especially the view of  
her as being “exceptional” and of the  
supposed ease with which she painted)  
remind me of Joanna Russ’s observations  
in How to Suppress Women’s Writing—  
with the medium transferred from pen  
to palette. The editors are skeptical of  

Marcu/Apan 1987  

how Morisot has been reassimilated into  
the impressionist canon:  

The fact that most educated, western  
art audiences have little difficulty in ac-  
cepting a re-inscribing of Morisot into  
an unproblematic tradition whilst the  
work of Rosa Bonheur, Louise Abbema,  
Louise Breslau (to name only a few  
painters widely acclaimed in their own  
lifetime) continues to be regarded as  

at best an historical curiosity, at worst  
“bad art,” is little cause for cele-  
bration.  

Fortunately, this collection of letters,  
along with the valuable essay by the  
editors, is cause for celebration.  

The topic of what women artists  
represent in their work is a concern of  
the editors of the Morisot letters, as it  
is for artist Lorraine Inzalaco, a painter  
of women, whose work appears in this  
issue. Regarding images of lesbian love,  
she writes:  

It is important to realize that one area  
of sexual subject matter still thought of  
as belonging to the male domain in art  
is that of lesbian eroticism. Watteau,  
Corbet, Renoir, and Lautrec (to mention  
a few) all have portrayed two women  
intimately revealing themselves. Where  
are the female artists who have centered  
upon this theme? When the male artist  
portrays this theme, women become  
fantasy objects, subjects of voyeurism  
created with the intention and specifi-  
city of the male audience. Why are  
women not working with this subject  
matter? Our artistic sisters through the  
ages (for example, Gentileschi, Cassatt,  
Kollwitz and Bishop) have represented  
most other aspects of women’s lives, but  
too few have portrayed this subject matter  
devoid of symbolism. Perhaps many have  
depicted it, but few have survived the  
editors and authors of our “great”  
history books, the critics of their time,  
art dealers, and museums.  

I contend that when a female artist  
embraces this subject, she has the power  
to excavate it from the male arena and  
establish it within the realm of self-  
experiential art. When viewed by a  
female audience, it is with compassion  
and self-identity. It is time to change  
both the “doers” and the “viewers.”  

—Janet Palmer Mullaney  

Poole cackling in the attic (see Sylvia  
Plath’s poetry) and the laughter of Anne  
Bradstreet and Emily Dickinson—a “de-  
corous but defiant assertion of self, per-  
ceiving the world more cunningly and  
cruelly than the world wants to know.”  

Jane Marcus created and chaired an  
excellent trio of sessions, “Women in  
Exile.” Because of the number of papers  
in the first session, Susan Stanford Fried-  
man shared only a few of her observa-  
tions on H.D. and exile, which will be  
published in the summer 1987 issue of  
the British journal Agenda. Friedman de-  
plores the “Eurocentric” view that  
makes internationalism a prerequisite to  
modernism. She views H.D.’s exile as  
the dictionary definition of fleeing from  
oppression. “Her homelessness was fun-  
damental to the psychodynamic of  
creativity,” and her flight was away from  
a “femininity that clashed with creati-  
vity.” Like Virginia Woolf's move to the  
Bloomsbury district of London, it was a  
“psychological matricide/patricide.”  

I won't recapitulate Shari Benstock’s  
talk on “Expatriate Modernism” except  

Bowen and Welty  

one would certainly never class  

Eudora Welty with the expa-  

triates whom I’ve been discus-  
sing, yet in a session at the MLA devoted  
to feminist views of Welty, Peggy Pren-  
shaw described the Southern writer’s  
visit to Elizabeth Bowen during a trip to  
Ireland. “I never in my life looked up  
anyone I didn’t know,” said Welty. “It  
was like a fantasy.” The meeting went  
swimmingly. Both authors admired each  
other’s work greatly and reviewed it  
often. Welty said that Bowen was “a  
marvelous writer about writing and very  
helpful to me.” She considered Bowen’s  
works “as good as, and more robust” than  
those of Virginia Woolf and was con-  
cerned lest they drop into obscurity. (By  
the way, Penguin has been reissuing  
Bowen’s novels in paperback in their  
Modern Classics series. To the North and  
The Last September, both set in the  
1920s, have lately appeared.) Prenshaw  
focused in her talk on the “congenial  
aesthetics” of the two writers, particu-  
larly in their autobiographical writings:  
Pictures and Conversations by Bowen and  
One Writer’s Beginnings by Welty. Pro-  
tective of their privacy, they both were  
reluctant about writing autobiographies  
until late in their lives, doing so partly  
to preempt others and characterizing  
their feelings with “oblique, humorous,  
and elliptical” techniques.  

Carolyn Heilbrun prefaced her re-  
marks on One Writer’s Beginnings by say-  
ing that they might appear “outrageous.”  
She contended that the Welty who ap-  
pears in this memoir is “camouflaged”  
and repeated Welty’s admission that the  
only anger she feels is anger at herself,  
and that she doesn’t write out of anger.  
Heilbrun conjoins Welty and Austen as  
authors who have been seen as “offering  
reassurance and docile acceptance” of  
proper behavior. Heilbrun concedes that  
for Welty to write any other way in her  
memoirs would have “violated every  
tenet of loyalty and sympathy” (e.g., to  
her parents) in her being. So why bother  
to criticize or even remark on the bit-  
tersweet, nostalgic, romancing nature of  
the memoirs? Why fault Welty for writ-  
ing the only kind of autobiography she  
can? Because, says Heilbrun, “this nos-  
talgia imprisons women without her  
genius or her rewards.” It is true that  
“her genius as a writer [of fiction] rescued  
her and us from nostalgia.” (Heilbrun  
believes that the person evoked in One  
Writer's Beginnings could never have  
written Welty’s fiction.) Yet “we don’t  
know each other’s pain because we’ve  

to note her apt quotation from Stein  
that it was not what Paris gave but what  
it did not take away. Don’t wait for re-  
views of Women of the Left Bank (Univer-  
sity of Texas): Buy it as soon as you can.  
It is magnificently conceived, written,  
and researched.  

Sonia Salvidar Hull gave a regretful  
and cautionary paper called “Wrestling  
Your Ally: Stein, Racism, and Feminist  
Critical Practice.” She pointed to the  
exile of Chicana writers from the Norton  
Anthology of Writing by Women and  
stated that feminist critics risk alienating  
women of color by not being aware that  
they are relegating them to the “back of  
the bus.” Ethnocentric criticism mirrors  
phallocentric criticism, she warns. Hull  
said that the leading feminist critics of  
Stein ignore the blatant racial slurs of  
the “Melanctha” section of Three Lives,  
which Hull demonstrated most con-  
vincingly.  

—continued on page 14  

been encouraged not to talk about it.  
And we [women] have always done this  
to deal with the things we could not face  
up to. Nostalgia is so attractive that we  
want to love it forever,” to dwell on  
“pain and love and the things we have  
endured.”  

Louise Westling (author of Ravaged  
Gardens: The Fiction of Eudora Welty,  
Carson McCullers, and Flannery O’Con-  
nor) was the respondent to the Welty  
session. She pointed out that “indirect  
writing strategies emerged in the writing  
of Bowen and Welty because of the  
society they lived in and the need to  
please men. They may appear to be  
docile, yet their work may contain sub-  
versive subtexts.” She used the scene of  
the father’s death from One Writer's Be-  
ginnings to illustrate how Welty “dis-  
tanced herself from self-indulgence”  
through the use of irony.  

Eudora Welty. From A Photographer's  
Scrapbook, by Louise Dahl-Wolfe (St.  
Martin's, 1984).  

In the discussion that followed the  
presentations, Westling proposed that  
Welty’s mother was presented as a heroic  
person in her memoirs and that her  
novel, The Optimist’s Daughter, was very  
close to autobiography. Heilbrun con-  
curred, saying that it was an “extraordi-  
nary novel for her to have written,”  
dealing as it does with the inability of  
the parents to speak to each other, a  
theme that was “muted” in the autobiog-  
raphy. Mother/daughter issues “seem to  
be at the heart” of these autobiographi-  
cal issues,” said Heilbrun, noting that  
Welty waited until long after her  
mother’s death to write about herself and  
the family.  

— Janet Palmer Mullaney  

Belles Lettres @ 13  
el