Reactions to the West

Letters of a Woman Homesteader, by Elinore Pruitt Stewart. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,

1989, $7.95, 282 pp. (PB)

Great Plains Patchwork: A Memoir, by Marilyn Coffey. Ames: Iowa State University

Press, 1989, $21.95, 200 pp.

Windfall and Other Stories, by Winifred M. Sanford. Foreword by Emerett Sanford
Miles. Afterword by Lou Halsell Rodenberger. Dallas: Southern Methodist University

Press, 1988, $17.95 (HB), $8.95 (PB), 179 pp.

by Barbara Horn

writes, “The great fact was the land
itself, which seemed to overwhelm
the little beginnings of human society
that struggled in its sombre wastes.” Eli-
nore Pruitt Stewart’s Letters of a Woman
Homesteader, in contrast, praises fron-
tier life, finding antidote to poverty and
city labor in “sage, sand, and sunshine.”
Indeed, its young author, who between
1909 and 1913 singlehandedly secured a
Wyoming homestead, argues similar
success could be had by “any woman who
can stand her own company, can see the
beauty of the sunset, loves growing
things, and is willing to put in... care-
ful labor.”
Stewart’s easygoing, often witty let-
ters to a former Denver employer bristle
with daily adventures, such as camping

|: O Pioneers! (1913), Willa Cather

A more talented delineator of femi-
nine dissatisfaction than Caird, Dela-
field is nevertheless a less ambitious one.
With her creator's tacit approval, Laura
is oblivious to the feminist questions of
her day. And as a working writer, she
has so little sense of herself that it is sur-
prising to learn she is successful. (It must
surprise her, too.) Her writing is dis-
missed by a husband who, beneath a
mask of geniality, alternately tolerates
and overlooks it. In other hands this tale
might be the bildungsroman of an inse-
cure artist, of Laura’s growing recogni-
tion of her identity as a writer, female or
not. However, Delafield chooses in-
stead to tell of Laura’s flirtation with the
dashing “Duke” Ayland, who urges her
not to write but to run away with him.
Laura’s quest for self becomes more
muddled. How is she to juggle passion
with the calm rhythms of her married
life? Sympathizing with Laura’s plight,
we are both annoyed and engaged.

Laura is maturity and professionalism
itself, when compared to the socially
brainwashed protagonists of Delafield’s
Thank Heaven Fasting (New York:
Penguin/Virago, 1989, $7.95, 233
pp.), first published in 1932. Weak-
willed, anxious to please her snobbish
mother, debutante Monica Ingram has
been taught to replace thinking with one
credo: “She could never, looking back-
wards, remember a time when she had
not known that a woman’s failure or
success in life depended entirely upon
whether or not she succeeded in getting
a husband.” Again the author tantalizes
us with what modern critics term a sub-
text of rebellion. By chronicling such an
indoctrination, doesn’t the novel con-
vey a powerful rejection of the ballroom,
the weekend house party, and all the
contrived occasions for aristocratic mat-
ing into which Monica is relentlessly
thrust? Not really. As Penelope Fitzger-
ald points out in her astute afterword,
Delafield finds a way of proving the older
generation right, for Cecily and her
friends are too horrified to listen to the
voice of truth.

Thank Heaven Fasting is literary soci-
ology, a study of a group of sheltered and
pampered young women, each of whom
yearns for a life: “A home, a husband, a
recognized position as a married woman
— an occupation,” as Monica terms it.
Significantly, the only other time the
word “occupation” is used, she fleetingly
imagines “trying to find an occupation
for herself — visiting a settlement, or
going to help at an East End Club — but
she knew that the mere suggestion would

Spring 1990

in a blizzard or undergoing the threat —
and thrill — of horse thieves. She senti-
mentalizes food, motherhood, and
friendship (showing particular kindness
to octogenarians) and insists on meeting
“all my land difficulties unaided. I wan-
ted the fun and the experience.”

Stewart’s work, which was the basis
for the movie Heartland, adds to Great
Plains history, especially to the depic-
tion of pioneer women. The grace and
energy of these twenty-six letters illus-
trate a familiar tenet — that the act of
writing helps one structure, understand,
and adapt to experience. Through pen-
ning these narratives, Stewart cor-
roborates her final statement: “I just love
to experiment, to work, and to prove
out things.”

Much of Marilyn Coffey’s Great

distress her mother, who would see in it
a public admission of the fact that Mon-
ica was a failure.” It is as if Monica and
the young women of her set are in a Vic-
torian time warp; work, at best, is chari-
ty visits to the poor.

The flapper heroine of American
writer Ursula Parrott’s Ex-Wife (New
York: Plume/New American Library,
$7.95, 224 pp.) has freed herself from
the cloistered world of female characters
from Jane Austen through E.M. Dela-
field. A self-described “unattached wo-
man-about-town,” she has rapidly
moved from a teenaged marriage to life
as a divorcee in her early twenties who
has many affairs and engages in what is
now termed casual sex. Paralleling this
change is a shift in her relationship to
work. She comes to New York to work at
some little job while her husband suc-
ceeds, and stays there to become a copy-
writer and, later, an advertising man-
ager with “a telephone that rang twenty
times an hour.”

Ex-Wife was considered a shocker
when it came out in 1929, and it is no
wonder. Pat, a Back Bay doctor’s
daughter and Radcliffe graduate, has
married and unmarried lovers, an abor-
tion, is raped, drinks too much, and
cannot shed the memories of an ex-
husband who considers her a slut. “The
only thing I have left to cherish is my
amateur standing,” she comments rue-
fully after one romantic evening gone
sour. In the 1990s this book should pro-
voke a different kind of controversy. Pat
seems both dated and modern: her fatal-
ism and promiscuity are responses to
similar impulses in the men of her gener-
ation, many of them traumatized by the
First World War or simply unable to find
much to believe in as children of the Jazz
Age. She is more interesting, however,
as a woman cut loose from all duties but
those to herself. She is free to carve out a
career, support herself, live alone or
with another. True, Parrott’s women
are always getting over the great ro-
mance that Delafield’s characters never
manage to find. Much of Ex-Wife is a
torch song, with Pat and her friends
working out their guilt at being between
marriages through self-lacerating humor
and barroom oblivion. But when day-
light comes they are sober, ambitious,
and on the job.

® Laura Hapke, our reprints editor and
columnist, teaches literature at Pace Uni-
versity in New York City. She is the author
of a book on the “fallen woman” in litera-
ture, reviewed in this issue.

Plains Patchwork: A Memoir, unlike Ste-
wart’s letters, substantiates Cather’s
claim that “the great fact was the land.”
A second-generation Westerner, Coffey
believes that vast places — in her case
Nebraska — mysteriously haunt the
imagination: “Some vestige of the virgin
prairie seemed to cling to me with the
stubbornness of the afterlife of a recently
amputated limb.”

Picknickers watch a narrow tornado funnel,
containing nature’s fastest known winds, drop
from a storm cloud. Courtesy Nebraska His-
torical Society. From “Great Plains Patch-
work”

Quilting together historical research,
Indian myth, family legend, and per-
sonal memory, Coffey writes in the lyri-
cal tradition of Annie Dillard’s An
American Childhood. Coffey stresses the
importance of the lay of the land, its
natural bounties and catastrophes, its
obliviousness to human history, and the
perversity of people’s acts upon it. So
embedded is her early impression of this
homeland that “the universe of my
senses stayed decidedly foursquare and
flat... as foursquare as our town,
Alma, laid out along the line that ran
between the two poles.”

That such a familiar, majestic blan-
ket can unravel is one of Coffey’s princi-
pal themes. Concentrating mostly on
the 1930s, she describes how grasshop-
per plagues, floods, and storms of thun-
der, hail, and dust swept the land. Her
facts assault: the first wave of settlers
plowed eleven million virgin acres; be-
tween 1857 and 1875, eight grasshopper
plagues invaded Nebraska. She argues
that farmers’ “anthropocentric view of
nature, this indifference” destroyed
prairie grasses’ root systems, resulting in

the Dust Bowl. Coffey miraculously
evokes those storms: “The land, which
had seemed so clearly defined, began to
move... The distinction between
land and sky, once so clear, became
blurred... as thousands of tons of soil,
once indisputably wed to the land, rose
and invaded the stratosphere.”

This handsome book — a wry mix-
ture of pride and sadness — includes
chapters on Coffey’s Irish-American
family, on how the Teamsters ruined her
father’s business, and on renowned bank
robbers and mass murderers. Stitching
together her volume with striking pho-
tographs of the land, its people, and its
natural disasters, Coffey, indeed, makes
a Great Plains patchwork.

Windfall and Other Stories, the col-
lected work of Winifred M. Sanford,
presents an even more modulated view
of the land than Coffey’s. Her principal
subject is how the Texas oil boom (San-
ford’s is the earliest southwestern fiction
on this topic) bred false expectations.
What drillers, speculators, and pro-
moters pumped out left the land and
human life scarred.

Published in popular magazines in the
1920s and 30s, Sanford’s stories present
lonely, indefatigable strugglers: the
poor, disempowered, inarticulate, ordi-
nary, maimed, widowed, crazed — a
Texas Winesburg, Ohio. Sanford partic-
ularly memorializes overworked, patient
women who run hotels, take in boarders
or feed drilling crews.

In the title story, a self-deprecating,
exhausted farm woman squeezes among
curious, disrespectful strangers to gape
finally at her husband’s new oil derrick:
“She felt as she did sometimes at funer-
als, when she wanted a last look at a face
she had known, yet hated to push herself
forward.” Sanford’s deft stories glow
with such telling details. And we thank
the Southwest Life and Letters Series for
collecting her work, a sensitive addition
to women’s reactions to the West.

@ Barbara Horn, who writes essays and
stories about the Midwest, teaches at
Nassau Community College and The New
School for Social Research in New York.

Makeshift jail in Greensboro, N.C., for women detained after a civil rights sit-in and picketing
to end segregation in the 1964 New York City school boycott. From the postcard series Women

in Social Protest (Helaine Victoria Press, POB 1779, Martinsville, IN 46151, $8.95).

¥

Check the rate that applies:
[] 1-year individual @$20

[] 2-year individual or two 1-year

individual @$35
[] 1-year institutional @$40

[] 1-year student rate (photocopy of
student I.D. required) @$15

(Foreign mailing, add $9/year)

Please start my subscription with the
Fall / Winter / Spring / Summer issue
(circle one).

Subscribers checking the 2-year rate
are eligible to participate in drawings
for free books. Please indicate pre-
ferred genres:

Belles Lettres Subscriptions
785 Verbenia Drive @ Satellite Beach FL 32937

Contributions beyond the subscrip-
tion price are a tax-deductible gift to
both Belles Lettres and women’s writ-
ing. Individuals who contribute $25
or more will receive a free book
(please specify preferred genre).

A contribution of
is enclosed.

Name
Street
City
State

Zip
Send gift card to:

Name
Street
City
State

Zip

Belles Lettres @ 23