Belles Lettres Interview

“Before The Highest Apple,” Judy Grahn tells interviewers
Lynne Constantine and Suzanne Scott, “I never understood
the great love people have for me as a poet. People who love my
work often express great love for me, which I used to take
personally and be embarrassed about. But while I worked on
this book, I fell in love with all of the poets in it. Of

course, it’s because love is the substance that informs art.

Love infuses art and gives it life.”

Best known as one of America’s

foremost poets, Judy Grahn has

in the last three years published
two major works of nonfiction. The first,
Another Mother Tongue: Gay Words, Gay
Worlds (Beacon Press, 1984), is a pro-
vocative work of cultural history and
theory, which uses etymology, an-
thropology, history, mythology, per-
sonal anecdote, and biography to envi-
sion the ancient roots of contemporary
gay culture. The second, The Highest
Apple: Sappho and the Lesbian Poetic Trad-
ition (Spinsters Ink, 1985), begins with
a literal translation of Sappho and com-
pares the ideas and images found there
with those found in the work of nine
American lesbian poets: Emily Dickin-
son, H.D., Amy Lowell, Gertrude
Stein, Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde,
Olga Broumas, Paula Gunn Allen, and
Grahn herself.

Both of Grahn’s books have already
had a profound impact on lesbian writers
and thinkers. The Highest Apple has pro-
vided a coherent and sensitive look at
what many have intuited as a “lesbian
tradition” in American poetry. Another
Mother Tongue, in addition to providing
a rich lode for further studies of gay and
lesbian traditions and cultural activity,
also challenges readers with its highly
personal form—a weaving together of
research, personal meditation, and the
stories of Grahn’s and her friends’ lives.
The book also takes what seemed a con-
troversial stance for a long-time lesbian
separatist: that contemporary lesbian
and gay cultures are derived from the
same roots in antiquity and are two ex-
pressions of the same original gay cul-
ture. In our telephone interview, Grahn
spoke about the genesis of both works
and what they taught her as she created

them.

It took you ten years to write Another
Mother Tongue. What was its genesis?

The work of Elizabeth Gould Davis.
When The First Sex came out, it elec-
trified lesbian feminists. It opened us up
to the possibility that women have a
culture, that it’s possible to look at
women’s history as being different—or
White women’s history as being different
from White men’s history.

I remember what a buzz we were in.
We were passing around xeroxed copies
of Gertrude Stein’s Q.E.D., and an un-
derground novel of Diane DiPrima’s,
and the earliest edition of Isabel Miller’s
A Place for Us [later retitled Patience and
Sarah]. Then came Davis, and she just
knocked us off our feet. Her work was
startling and a revelation to all of us.
She turned us 360 degrees. It became
possible to imagine history from our own
point of view.

That’s when I began writing prose in
my notebook and imagining a novel
(which I’m still working on). That’s also
when I got the idea that if it were pos-
sible to imagine women’s history as a
separate entity, it was also possible to
imagine gay history as a separate entity.
I kept that in mind as an underlying
working hypothesis. I will always be
grateful to Davis for her work. When
you go back and read The First Sex now,

March/April 1987

it seems shaky because it’s gotten filled
out by the hundreds and hundreds of
books that have come out. But she built
that first framework.

What was going on in your writing and
your life when you began Another Mother
Tongue?

In 1973, the year after I finished “A
Woman Is Talking to Death,” I began
working in prose. At that time I was still
living in an all-women’s collective
household, still running the Women’s
Press Collective, and living very close
to the bone. I began to do research and
take notes, at first just a list of words.
Being a poet, I’m very used to listing
words—everything that rhymes with
orange, everything that begins with fr.
So I carried my list around with me—a
list of words like camp and faggot and
bulldyke and green on Thursday, little
clues that I knew had to mean more
than anyone had imagined because
they’re used in the language so exactly.

My earliest research was gathering
these little fragments and doing heavy-
duty contemplation of them. Searching
for them everywhere, in the indexes of
all kinds of histories, searching for them
in my own mind and in the language of
the people I knew. Later I found the
work of people like Margaret Murray
[author of The Witch-Cult in Western
Europe] and Lawrence Durdin-
Robertson, who lives in a castle in Ire-
land and has encyclopedic information
about goddesses. But that didn’t come
until 1979 or 1980.

I gave the first presentation of ma-
terial from my research in 1978 or 1979
to a very astonished audience. I didn’t
have the overall perspective yet, so it
didn’t quite all fit together. The audi-
ence was interested, but I’m sure they
thought, “Boy, what an eccentric per-
son.” The work grew very gradually over
the first five or six years. Then I got an
NEA grant, which helped. It also helped
that my friend Karen Sjoholm began
helping me with research. She under-
stood what I needed. She didn’t know
where I was going, but she knew where
I was.

In the early 1980s, the Queen Boudica
chapter in an early form was published
in Chrysalis. They too were astonished.
Half of the staff thought I had written
a spoof on academicians; the other half,
including one tall redhead who
thoroughly identified with Queen
Boudica, defended it as a serious work.
The issue sold out very quickly and
brought in a lot of mail.

When it was published in Chrysalis, did
the Boudica chapter have the same intensely
personal tone that it does in the Beacon
edition?

No. It was much stiffer than the later
version. Even then I didn’t understand
that I was my own best example. I hadn’t
given myself full permission to examine
my own life and do a whole sociological
study of myself, within and without my-
self. Writing the butch and femme chap-
ter taught me how to do that.

Incorporating Von, my first lover and
dear friend, into the book was also part
of the change. When I first started the
book Von was still alive. She died in

1974, and I was profoundly affected by
her death. Things didn’t go well for me
for several years afterward. Then I began
to think of the book as a gift to Von.
As I did, the more of a gift it became
to me also. The voice talking to Von
then began showing up in some of the
chapters. My editor at Beacon at the
time, Marie Cantlon, encouraged me to
balance the book by including that voice
in each chapter. That was a wise choice.

Was being so personal in this book different
from being personal in your poetry?

I’m not sure that it is. As a poet, you
have to learn to speak from inside an
individual’s experience without identify-
ing with that person. You have to learn
to step outside yourself and know that
you're a character in the poem. You're
an observer, a subjective voice, any one
of a number of subjective voices that
could be saying these things. I don’t
think that I got a thorough grip on my
adult poetry until I was able to write a
poem completely about someone else.
Then I knew how to treat a person in a
poem as a character without confusing
them with myself. Then I could do that
about myself.

The one big difference in doing this
in prose is in the way I look at this
character—the I, the narrator. The po-
etic voice that I use is that of an ob-
server. In a poem, I try to expand the
vision of the observer. But to do this
book, I had to look at myself not as an
observer, not as this human being, this
American contemporary female looking
at the world—but as this dyke, whatever
that word means, this ceremonial
character in this century acting out cer-
tain cultural characteristics as part of her
whole subgroup. The set of questions is
different. The question is not, what did
I see when I was 22 and combing my
hair and slicking it down and going to
a bar? The question is instead, why was
I doing that? Culturally, what did my
action mean?

That kind of question was hard to ans-
wer. I really had to travel outside myself
to try to find the answers. I rewrote some
of those chapters many, many times try-
ing to get just some part of what was
true. In some of them I still didn’t go
far enough, but I went as far as I could go.

What kinds of reactions did you get for
saying that the culture of gay men and les-
bians derive from the same roots, that the
elements of gay culture are found in both
female and male groups?

My very first reaction was on my home
turf of Oakland, at the very first presen-
tation I did of the finished book. A very
indignant woman there informed me
that if I would just read Mary Daly, I
would see why I should not talk about
men. After ten years of effort on the
book, to say nothing of having founded
separatist institutions of my own more
than once, that kind of critique struck
me as ironic—and as probably the acting
out of my own worst fear that women

would all hate this book.
Have women hated the book?

No, women have not responded nega-
tively at all. In fact, many say it gives
them a new way to look at gay men. It
certainly gives us a new way to look at
lesbians. The book is pro women
throughout. It strengthens women’s
position and strengthens lesbians’ sense
of themselves in the world. I know that
women see this because I get wonderful
fan mail, really thrilling letters from
women. I actually think the lesbians
who can’t read it because it has men in
it are few and far between.

Still, I think there’s been a hesitancy
in the women’s press to deal with it be-

cause they don’t know exactly where to
put the book. But the men, they im-
mediately knew what to do with it. For
one thing, they reviewed the hell out of
it. It has become the basis for a new
philosophical stance in gay men’s cul-
ture, which they call essentialism, to
argue against the sociological/socialist
view that “gayness” was only invented
in this century and is the product of our
particular industrial culture. Actually, I
don’t think the two views are mutually
exclusive. Certain elements of gay cul-
ture are very 20th century, but we’re so
much older than that it’s absurd to im-
agine that all of this is brand new.
Another Mother Tongue has also
helped men lay a new spiritual founda-
tion for gay cultural life, as gay men have
had to turn away from the overtly sexual
and splashy coming out of the closet
which they did in the 1970s. That was
valuable at the time for what they were
doing, but it turned out to be very
limited and today is very dangerous. So
they’re turning from that materialist and
sensualist way of life to a much more
spiritual, helping, caring way of life.

How did you get from Another Mother
Tongue to The Highest Apple?

The Highest Apple was an afterword
to Another Mother Tongue. I could have
never written the second without having
written the first.

The Highest Apple has such a hopeful,
trusting tone that it feels like a pure gift to
your readers of your enthusiasm and plea-
sure in the poets you discuss. What were
you hoping to give to people who read it?

I think of the book as a gift given to
me. I didn’t set out to write it. I had
finished Another Mother Tongue and was
invited by the New College poetics pro-
gram—specifically, by Diane DiPrima—
to give three lectures on the subject of
Sappho. I said, “I don’t know anything
about Sappho. I can’t do it.” But Diane
said, “Of course you can—just come and
talk about lesbian poetry. You know all
about that.” Then I slapped my forehead
and said, “Of course, where does lesbian
poetry come from, etymologically, if not
from Lesbos—it’s the whole idea of les-
bian that came down from Sappho, and
wasn’t it wonderful that she also was a
poet.” So I was off and running.

I typed The Highest Apple in six weeks.
It was one of those books that just falls
out of you somehow. After all the ardu-
ous work of writing Another Mother Ton-
gue, The Highest Apple was a joy to write.
I was up at 6:00 a.m. every morning
working on it, which is very unusual for
me. I swore that the spirits of all of the
poets in the book gathered around me

—continued on page 8

Belles Lettres @ 7