The Luxury of Discontent

The House of Mirth, The Reef, The Custom of the Country, and The Age of Innocence, by  
Edith Wharton, with notes by R.W.B. Lewis. New York: The Library of America, 1986,  

$27.95, 1,328 pp.

by Dana Nelson Salvino

“Ah, how do you do, Mrs. Brown?” said Mrs. Tompkins.  
“If only I had known you were going to call I should have tidied up the drawing-room.” So began Edith Wharton’s first novel-writing attempt, at the age of eleven. The would-be writer rushed the fragment to her mother, who responded only that “drawing rooms are always tidy.” Described in Wharton’s autobiography, A Backward Glance, this childhood incident predicts the tenor of Wharton’s career — the joy she always found in the act of writing, her life-long interest in manners, and society’s resistance to her profession as a writer.

Wharton’s milieu discouraged her aspirations as much as it fueled them. From childhood on, her mother exhorted her, “Never talk about money and think about it as little as possible.” Further, she lived in a society where women were little more than “a toast, . . . child-bearing was their task, fine needlework their recreation, being respected their privilege” — certainly a society that would not encourage the young Edith Newbold Jones who from the earliest age was irresistibly drawn to her favorite activity: “making up.”  
Wharton recounted those early efforts in a tone of nostalgic rapture; indeed, throughout her life, telling stories charged her existence. Her subjects, she once cavalierly complained, “swarm about me like mosquitoes. I’m sick of them; they stifle me. I wish I could get rid of them.” Despite her flip confession, though, Wharton devoted the respect of an artisan to her craft, as meticulously concerned with structure as with subject matter. And despite her mother’s warnings about money, Wharton took a serious pleasure in the lucrative aspects of her writing: As Cynthia Griffin Wolff observed, Wharton, unlike many other women writers who were her contemporaries, insisted on negotiating all book and magazine contracts and handling her own pecuniary interests, even during stressful periods.  
Wharton reworked the professional space for women writers and opened up the narrative possibilities for her female characters. Often regarded as a slave to high social convention and a Jamesian lackey, Wharton was neither, and feminist scholars have begun to appreciate the dialogue that she carried on with “the tradition.” Her novels were not imitative but revisionist; her writings responded to society as well as to narrative and stylistic convention. But if they were revisionary, Wharton’s writings were not swept by the fervent hopefulness of the so-called woman question at the turn of the century; she saw little improvement through her life in the real place of women, and her novels explored the extent of women’s and men’s existing emotional and social bondage.

In The House of Mirth, Lily Bart chronicles the ravaging effects of society not only on woman’s circumstances but also on her psyche. Trained from girlhood to regard money as a game piece or not at all, Lily’s life in the fashionable circle is nonetheless fraught with the economy of exchange: A dinner invitation must be compensated for on the guest’s part by extravagant betting at the card table or a good business tip, and as Lily discovers, monetary loans from married gentlemen friends require discreet “social” recompense. Having learned to be what Wolff aptly characterized as a “self-creating artistic object,” Lily embraces her role as an ironically aware item of trade. She thinks herself prepared to negotiate the marriage market, but she is doomed by her precarious social standing (no parents, no money, and uninterested relatives), her own dazzling social aspirations, and her profound naiveté as to the arbitrariness of the social economy.

Unthinkingly confident of the beauty that her mother had regarded as “the last asset in their fortunes, the nucleus around which their life was to be rebuilt,” Lily launches herself. Counting on her face and social skills to garner the life she has never lived but has been taught she was born to, Lily recklessly squanders her small allowance on clothes, jewels, and bets at the gaming table. Placed in a position of dependency by her lack of monetary assets, Lily is forced to play secretary in return for weekend invitations, and she reflects sometimes, bitterly, that “she and her maid were in the same position, except that the latter received her wages more regularly.” She resents her worries over money, blaming them for the slightest diminution in her beauty.

Lily’s confidence in the solid value of her beauty leads her through a series of social indiscretions that further and further depreciate her real value on the social market. After confidently landing the wealthy and ineffectual Percy Gryce, Lily finds herself caught in indecision; not quite content to constitute herself into what Elizabeth Ammons called a “patriarchal totem,” she hesitates. Her vacillation manifests itself in what she considers clever machinations, which prove disastrous to her marriage hopes. Each faux pas marks another lowering of her worth, a decline carefully observed by the superior Lawrence Selden. Selden, an eligible bachelor, is most aptly an aesthete, and although he aspires to disassociate himself from the vulgarities of society, he unconsciously endorses them in his relationship to Lily. He is attracted to Lily but prohibited by condescension from acting on his feelings.

Lily learns eventually the nuances of the social economy, but too late to benefit her in the market. Ultimately, she is not ruthless enough to speculate on their terms. Her final gesture — destroying her single real asset, a pack of letters that would implicate Selden in a crude affair with a married socialite — condemns her to a prolonged and squalid end, marked only by Lawrence Selden’s momentary (and typically blind) tribute. The death of a beautiful woman, Wharton underlines, is anything but poetic.

Like Lily Bart, Undine Spragg is schooled to a naive dependence on her appearance and a disregard for money. Unlike Lily, however, Undine is not hindered by noisome moral ambivalence. Undine Spragg is the up-and-coming social woman gone wild. Willful, ambitious, lacking in discretion and integrity, she is an interesting cousin to a woman like Lily Bart, guaranteed not to end up in an unmarked grave. Custom of the Country, Undine’s saga, follows her social aspirations from wardrobe to wardrobe, marriage to marriage, country to city to continent.

Undine may be the woman everyone loves to hate, yet in Custom of the Country she is somehow sympathetic. Her restless ambition has no acceptable outlet in her society, but her own lack of acuity, while preventing her from feeling desperation at her gender role, does not allow her to transcend that role either. She remains trapped, frenetically rushing down every pathway accessible to women but blocked by rules she cannot sway.

Undine is Wharton’s own rather cynical vision of the self-made woman. Born to nondescript country parents who are ambitious for their only daughter, Undine is raised in expectation of society. Her life is a constant effort to situate herself at the center of style and social acceptance, but her attempts are always marked (often marred) by her lack of savoir faire, combined with her forceful will. Typically, Undine ascends the social ladder by means of marriage, and although her husbands are commonly read as victims blinded by her beauty and wrecked by her ruthless aspirations, closer reading reveals that the men were defrauded not by Undine but by their own allegiance to the society that created her.

The patriarchal system’s effect on men was an interesting issue for the author, and indeed, The Age of Innocence explores the men’s dilemma in society more precisely than does Custom of the Country. Newland Archer provides a vehicle for inquiry in this exquisitely — at times even achingly — nostalgic novel of old New York.

Archer’s difficulty comes in his endorsement of his society’s values; he heartily affirms them, only to find himself unhappily entrapped in them. From the first, he is seen as a man who can form his judgments only after the leader of his set, a venerated society don, has spoken. For Archer, “few things seemed more awful than an offence against ‘Taste,’ that far-off divinity of whom ‘Form’ was the mere visible representative and viceregent.” An offense in taste is exactly the question with the entrance into society of Ellen Countess Olenska, a granddaughter of the Mingott line, of which his newly betrothed May Welland is a member. The Countess, a fairly young woman and favorite granddaughter of the family matriarch, has recently left her husband and, worse, is rumored to have conducted a lengthy affair with her “rescuer.”

Archer, concerned with saving his own face while preserving a much-desired tie with the Mingott clan and his beautiful (and beautifully socialized) May, heroically springs to Ellen’s defense. In championing her, however, he falls in love. At first unwilling to forfeit the important social position eminent in his marriage to May by deserting her for a divorcée, Archer fights a dubious battle with his own deeply acculturated sense of propriety and his unwilling attraction to the sensuous Ellen Olenska. After his marriage, he finds himself tormented and more attracted to Ellen than ever, but at the point of his most desperate resolve, he discovers that his wife is more than the lovely, vapid shell he has recently found convenient to believe.

The Age of Innocence leaves Archer here and returns to him much later, after a life lived in brilliant conformity. He has received political recognition, local respect. May has died, leaving behind in her son’s ear a legacy of Archer’s love. He had, she told the son on her deathbed, given up the thing he had most wanted, for her sake. But in the last chapter of Newland Archer’s life, that “something he knew he had missed” has been transformed, through a life lived in propriety, into “a thing so unattainable and improbable that to have repined would have been like despairing because one had not drawn the first prize in a lottery.” Despite his recognition that he has in fact thrived on the social quota, he looks with hope to the new times which allow, for instance, his daughter to worry about better things than a tiny waistline, and his son to marry his “Ellen.”

Perhaps one of the most satisfying aspects of a Wharton novel is her refusal to oversimplify the emotional lives of her characters. The Reef is a case in point. A tangle of sexual attraction and love complicates the lives of George Darrow, a middle-aged businessman who finally has a chance to marry his childhood sweetheart; Anna Leath, a scrupulously innocent but passionate widow; and Sophy Viner, an ingenuous but willful young woman who finds herself attracted and attractive to Darrow. The Reef turns on a theme Wharton returns to several times in her career — women’s properly cultivated repression of sexual desire. The novel is dissatisfying in that it refuses conclusion; we are left suspended in Anna’s irresolution, with Sophy Viner and her unrepressed sexuality tantalizingly out of reach. The Reef is, in fact, an intriguing choice for this collection of Wharton classics. Because the books in the Library of America series contain no introductions, Lewis is not able to disclose why he chose this work over Wharton’s better-known Ethan Frome. Perhaps, we can hope to see it in additional volumes of the series, which promises to continue indefinitely. We might welcome as well a volume of nonfiction that would include her lovely A Backward Glance and The Writing of Fiction, as well as selections from her Italian and French writings.

Dana Nelson Salvino is currently writing, teaching, and studying for her PhD at Michigan State University in East Lansing.

Moving? You must send a change-of-address to Belles Lettres — the post office does not forward bulk mail.

Belles Lettres @ 13