Book of  
Changes  

by Cathie Brettschneider  

Cranes at Dusk, by Misako Matsubara.  
The Dial Press/Doubleday, 1985, $15.95,  
254 pp.  

Mrs. Yasumi, so people were  
saying, had eaten nothing for  
days.... She sat at her loom  

weaving blue silk. Here and there  

she would weave a few white cherry  
blossoms into the fabric, singly at  

first, then more and more until a dense  
white storm of blossoms crowded out  
the blue. As she wove she sang in a  
monotonous high voice the poem of  
the dying kamikaze pilots: Like white  
cherry blossoms/Borne by a gust of  
wind up to heaven,/So will the souls of  
heroes/Rise up to the clouds.... Often  
Mrs. Yasumi could be heard talking to  
the woven cherry blossoms. “She is  
talking to her dead son,” the neighbors  
said.  

Then the loom fell silent for a while.  
Mrs. Yasumi stroked each cherry  
blossom one by one on the blue back-  
ground.  

“Is this you?” she would ask. She sat  
with her head cocked slightly to one  
side, as if listening to the blossoms’  
reply.  

As a gradual madness steals the mind  
of this mother of a kamikaze pilot, the  
lives of others are transformed in post-  
war Japan. A woman steadfastly com-  
mitted to the aesthetic ideals of her  
samurai grandfather grows rigid in her  
reliance on fixed prescriptions of proper  
cloths for proper cleaning, proper  
bowls for proper serving, proper props  
for proper living. Her husband, a  
Shinto priest, retreats ever more deeply  
into his solitary study of the I Ching, or  
Book of Changes, finding solace in the  
very flexibility and change that his  
wife resists.  

As their estrangement from one  
another grows, their sensitive 10-year-  
old daughter Saya is torn between  
them. In ironic contrast to her parents,  
Saya observes the changes in her village  
and its way of life and tries to under-  
stand and adapt to them. Through the  
graceful brushwork of Misako Matsu-  
bara we get incisive portraits of Saya’s  
parents and brothers, her friends, her  
teacher, her neighbors. Set in Kyoto in  
1945, this is the story of a year in Saya’s  
life.  

Change might well be identified as  
the main character in the book, for  
Matsubara tells the story of the many  
changes that befall a country and its  
people in the aftermath of defeat. She  
describes these changes not only on a  
personal level—through the death of a  
loved one or the loss of hope in a  
marriage—but on a national level as  
well. Japan’s loss of the war has dis-  
solved its pride into humiliation, as the  
old order in Kyoto gives way to the  
new. Tradition coexists with innova-  
tion as the Americans bring to the city  
their churches, their God, and their  
chewing gum. The delicacy of sliding  
paper screens is juxtaposed with the  
resolute durability of stained glass win-  
dows. Freedom and self-expression  
replace loyalty to the Emperor as the  

oath in the schools. Village girls take  
service jobs in the employ of the  
“enemy.”  

Matsubara’s images stay with the  
reader long after the turn of the final  
page. In addition to the haunting por-  
trait of Mrs. Yasumi are the toddling  
antics of Saya’s 2-year-old brother, Bo,  
whom she so dearly loves. The con-  
scientious and fair Shinagawa, a child-  
less area warden, distributes grilled  
slices of sweet potatoes to children at a  
festival and judges the highest-flying  
kite on a windy New Year’s day. Saya  
spins in a circle to make her new bell  
skirt fly up—and continues to spin  
when she sees that it makes her mother  
smile. There is a searing account of vic-  
tims of the Hiroshima bombing, whose  
charred clothing and skin hang from  
their bodies in shreds. Saya gently pats  
her father’s back when they are out  
walking and affectionately admonishes  
him about his round shoulders, as he  
used to do when she hunched over her  
homework. And then there is the onset  
of dusk both in the tale and in the life  
of a little boy. In an especially artful  
sketch of the ebb and flow of human  
destiny, the death of one man’s son is  
closely followed by the return from war  
of another’s son, and so what has been  
taken away is given again. A rendering  
of immortality—as provocative as it is  
poignant—brings Matsubara’s story to  
a close.  

Cranes at Dusk is a quiet pleasure to  
read, by turns delightful, amusing,  
touching, sad, evocative, inspiring. My  
one regret about the story is the uneven  
treatment of Saya’s parents. Her father  
is portrayed as gentle and wise, yet the  
isolation he resorts to in his marriage  
comes at the expense of compassion  
toward his wife. Saya’s mother is por-  
trayed as brittle and bitter, yet she has  
borne the frustrations of her marriage  
and the responsibilities of a household.  
The respective virtues of being and  
doing are polarized, and the needs of  
self are set apart from the needs of  
others. As one is romanticized the  
other is superficially dismissed. The  
book ends with Saya and her father  
drawn ever more close in matters of  
heart and mind while somewhere in the  
background, left unfinished and alone,  
is Saya’s mother. Throughout the book  
Saya appears at the side of only one  
parent at a time. One wonders if Saya  
ever comes to walk between her mother  
and her father.  

Like the girl in the story, Hisako  
Matsubara was born in Kyoto, the  
daughter of a Shinto priest; she, too, is  
drawn to questions of religion and has  
an interest in the theatre. We learn  
from the dust jacket that Matsubara  
now lives in Germany, has so success-  
fully taught herself the language that  
she has her own column in Die Zeit,  
and has written all her books (includ-  
ing the international bestseller Samurai)  
in German. Cranes at Dusk has been  
translated from the German by Leila  
Vennewitz, the noted translator of the  

work of Heinrich Böll.  

Cathie Brettschneider is an editor at  
Princeton University Press.  

Note to Reviewers  

Belles Lettres considers unsolicited reviews of recent works by women. Features  
should be 3 to 4 double-spaced, typed pages; shorts, 1 to 2 pages. We reserve the  
right to edit for space, clarity, and correctness. Reviewers receive complimentary  

issues.  
© Belles Lettres  

Lady Trekkers  

Traverse Tibet  
by Chris Prouty  

On Top of the World: Five Women  
Explorers in Tibet, by Luree Miller. The  
Mountaineers Books, $8.95, 224 pp.,  
photos, maps  

Daring, physical feats by women  
are almost mundane in 1985.  

Women make friends with  
sharks, live with chimpanzees, climb  
Annapurna, orbit the earth, crawl  
about the floor of the ocean, and en-  
dure months of harsh conditions to  
pursue anthropological data. They do  
these things after proper preparation  
and training, with especially designed  
supplies and tested clothing. Women  
can do anything, given the nerve and  
the strength.  

To recall another day, when it was  
unladylike and shocking even to lift  
your skirts to step over a puddle, is  
instructive and sobering. Luree Miller’s  
book, On Top of the World, first pub-  
lished in 1976, now reissued, is a jour-  
ney back into that other time.  

Isabella Bird Bishop was written up  
in the Edinburgh Medical Journal after  
her death in 1904 because they could  
not comprehend her transformation  
from a timorous and delicate invalid  
with a spinal ailment into a fearless  
rider of yaks, ponies, and mules in all  
kinds of weather through North Amer-  
ica, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii,  
Japan, Malaya, Persia, and Tibet. Be-  
tween each trip she repaired again to  
her chaise lounge.  

Tibet is the unifying theme of this  
engaging volume. Each of the five  
women described traveled into Tibet in  
the course of their lives (Nina Mazu-  
chelli in 1872, Annie Taylor in 1892,  
Isabella Bird Bishop in 1889, Fanny  
Bullock Workman in 1895, and Alex-  
andra David-Neel made the first of  
many trips in 1918. There were no  
packets of dried food or warm, light-  
weight garments, so the improvised  
travels of these trekkers are all the  
more amazing.  

Miller devotes almost a third of her  
text to the formidable Alexandra  
David-Neel, a Belgian-French gentle-  
woman who was bounced on the knee  
of Victor Hugo as a child. She had a  
short career as an opera singer before  
her marriage at the age of 36 to  
Philippe-Francois Neel. She demanded  
her freedom but never a divorce, and  
the complaisant Philippe supported her  
endless travels and arranged for the  
publication of the scholarly articles  
that she sent back from whichever  
postal system she was near.  

These fascinating sketches are em-  
bellished by Miller’s research into the  
societies from which the five women  
came—English, American, and  
French—and she selects from their  
voluminous writings what will beguile  
the reader. There is an excellent bib-  
liography to guide the vicarious ex-  
plorer deeper into the subject. This  
book is a trip. Take it!  

Chris Prouty is a Washington writer  
whose book on the Ethiopian empress,  
Taytu Betul, will be a summer publication  
of Raven Books, Worcester, England.  

continued from page 3  

Angela Livingstone’s achievement  
is staggering. Not only do  
her biographical skills and in-  
terpretative perspicacity illuminate  
Lou’s life and work as a coherent, albeit  
baffling, whole; not only does she bring  
to us a wealth of information drawn  
from original sources in German, Rus-  
sian, and French; but also she offers  
an incisive commentary of her own on  
Nietzsche, Rilke, Freud, and others in  
addition to the gift of the portrait of  
Lou. But what is perhaps Livingstone’s  
most important contribution is the  
balanced, thoughtful, and inspiring  
biography we now have of Lou  
Andreas-Salome. Hers is a much  
needed corrective to both her prede-  
cessors, H.F. Peters’ My Sister, My  
Spouse (1962) and Rudolph Binion’s  
Frau Lou, Nietzsche’s Wayward Disciple  
(1968). From this biographer, Lou  
finally gets her due—in earned praise  
as well as in deserved criticism. Thanks  
to Moyer Bell for bringing out a U.S.  
edition of this 1984 publication by the  
Gordon Fraser Gallery Ltd. in London.  

In the end one might question Liv-  

ingstone’s reliance on Lou’s own telling  
of her life story, her tendency to take  
Lou at her word about herself, given  
Lou’s vague distinction from as far back  
as childhood between imaginary and  
real, fiction and fact, shaping reality  

and observing it. And Livingstone’s in-  
terpretation of Lou’s limited reference  
to Nietzsche in her last book as “surely  
an instance of Lou’s avoidance of any  
self-aggrandizement through famous  
acquaintances” (p. 194) seems surpris-  
ingly naive. Lou’s relationship with  
Nietzsche was a complicated affair. She  
could neither control him, as she did  
Rilke, nor collaborate with him, as she  
did with Freud, and his ultimate re-  
jection of her as his “heir” no doubt left  
its mark. Yet this recognition of Lou’s  
selective memory and deliberate omis-  
sions need not align us with Rudolph  
Binion, for his truculent treatment of  
Lou as a relentless liar and re-creator  
and inventor of reality is as wrong-  
headed as it is reductive.  

Livingstone offers a well-rounded  
portrait that captures Lou in all her  
psychological, emotional, intellectual,  
and spiritual complexity. Controversy  
about the details of Lou’s life abounds,  
and many questions remain unan-  
swered. But she was a woman who  
commands our attention for her “enor-  
mous readiness for life” and her in-  
sistence that we rise to its challenge.  

Cathie Brettschneider is an editor at  
Princeton University Press.