Briefly Noted

If thoughts of travel to foreign lands

are part of your repertoire of reveries,

you're likely to find diversion in the
following new releases.

@ On Persephone’s Island: A
Sicilian Journal (Knopf, $18.95) is
Mary Taylor Simeti’s evocative,
myth-influenced account of the passage
of both a year and the accumulation of
more than 20 years spent in Sicily. She
went there to work, alone, the year of
her graduation from Radcliffe (1962),
married a Sicilian bourgeois, and had
two children. Her descriptions of
rituals, like the rural one of lining up to
press one’s olives or the city one of pre-
paring elaborate marzipan and other
delicacies for feast days, recreate with
great sensuality and sensitivity the feel of
living in her adopted country.

@ If Gandhi, Jewel in the Crown, and
the Indian costume show at the Met
have merely whetted your appetite for
things Indian, consider picking up a
paperback copy of Golden Interlude:
The Edens in India, 1836—1842 by
Janet Dunbar (Academy Chicago,
$12.95) or The Census Taker: Stories
of a Traveller in India and Nepal by
Marilyn Stablein (Madrona, $8.95).
Emily Eden wrote the satirical novels,
The Semi-Attached Couple and The
Semi-Detached House, and the letter-
journals and drawings that she and her
sister Fanny produced when they were
with their brother, the governor-
general, in India are the basis of Golden
Interlude. From The Census Taker, the
following exchange between the author
and a monk is indicative of its wry
juxtapositions of cultures:

“How many monks live here?
How old are you? How old is the
monastery? How far is the next vil-
lage? Do you grow food? Are you in
good health? Are there nuns?”

“I like your questions. They are
very nice.”

“Can you answer?”

“What?”

to give.” Reversing the Biblical

adage, Donald Herdeck de-
scribes the dual function of Three Con-
tinents Press in the publishing world: to
introduce “other world” literature to
English-speaking audiences and to in-
vert Western assumptions of cultural
superiority. “We hardly are aware,”
claims the Georgetown University pro-
fessor whose interest in African and
South American writers prompted the
origins of the press.

In 1973 Herdeck and his wife,
Margaret, formed the small press to fill a
“time-lag” gap as well as a cultural one.
Having had difficulties with the printing
of his bibliography African Authors
1300-1973, Herdeck wanted a press
over which he had control. The first five
years, reference works and critical stud-
ies were emphasized — to supplement
the novels, poetry, and stories being
printed by Commonwealth and French
concerns. Now Three Continents
publishes literature, and its non-
Western focus has expanded to include
two more geographical categories — the
Middle East and Asia/Pacific. The press
has published works originally written or
told in Malay, Papuan, Zulu, and Zezuru,
and the first and only novel written by a
Black African in Afrikaans. Works by
Westerners are accepted when they de-
velop something specific to the Third
World (such as Robert Hamner’s Joseph
Conrad: Third World Perspectives, Pierrette

6¢ |: is more blessed to receive than

Jury/August 1986

1»

Impressions

“The questions. Of course, I'd
like you to answer them.”
“Do you have any more?”
“I always have questions. How
can I learn if I don’t ask questions?”
“You're right. I like you. I like
your questions. Don’t be afraid to
ask questions of me.”

“Thank you. So, how many
monks live in your monastery?”

“You want me to answer?”

“Of course, that’s why I ask.”

“You didn’t tell me you wanted
answers.”

“What did you think I wanted?”

“To ask questions.”

“You mean you thought I only
wanted to ask and not get answers?”

“I only thought what you said —
that you wanted to ask questions.
About the number of monks: there
are monks with being and monks
with non-being; there are beings
that are non-monks and likewise for
nuns. Do you see the problem?”

“Just a simple head count. You
can give me a rough idea. To put it
bluntly, how many bodies reside
here? Forget about being for now.”

“I can’t answer that.”

“Why?”

“You assume bodies are finite, I
do not.”

As part of its Lives of Modern
Women series, Penguin has
just brought out a short biog-

raphy of the great explorer and travel
writer Freya Stark ($4.95), who wrote,
“the beckoning counts and not the
clicking latch behind you: and all
through life, the actual moment of
emancipation still holds that delight, of
the whole world coming to meet you like

a wave.” And Beacon Press has just
reprinted Alexandra David-Neel’s My
Journey to Lhasa ($10.95), an auto-
biographical account of how she became
the first woman to enter Tibet’s for-
bidden city (she arrived alone disguised
as a pilgrim, having struggled through a
treacherous winter terrain). A travel
writer of my acquaintance — no mean
explorer herself — tells a story of invok-
ing her idol, David-Neel’s, courage in a
similar situation when faced with a
bunch of bullies on the Paris subway. It
worked.

Intrigued that a massive reference

work on comic art included a

mere half-page listing of women
artists, and that the collection of the
Museum of Cartoon Art represented the
work of only 20 women and thousands of
men, Trina Robbins and Catherine
Yronwode began researching. Even-
tually they turned up more than 500
comic artists, many of whom appear in
their Women and the Comics (Eclipse,
$11.95). They take us from the 1920s
(when women with backgrounds in
fashion drew mostly flappers and
pixieish children), through the
adventure series of the 1940s and the
domestic humor of the 1950s, up to the
“underground” comics of the 1970s.
Contemporary and foreign women car-
toonists are also featured. In 1951 Hilda
Terry was blackballed from the National
Cartoon Society. The reason most of the
men gave was that they were afraid they

could not “talk dirty” in her presence.
Times have changed for women
cartoonists: This year, Lynn Johnston
won a national award for her domestic
strip, “For Better or For Worse.” (Maybe
women cartoonists even talk dirty now
— when the guys aren’t around.)

Not only does Penguin have a
strong list of literature by
women, but the editions are

attractively designed and reasonably
priced ($5.95 or $6.95). Look for these
excellent paperback releases:

Linden Hills, by Gloria Naylor

Parents and Children and The Present
and the Past, by Ivy Compton-Burnett

Ceremony, by Leslie Marmon Silko
A Servant’s Tale, by Paula Fox
Almost Innocent, by Sheila Bosworth

Tender Mercies, by Rosellen Brown
— And out in June —

The Eleven Million Mile High Dancer,
by Carol Hill

Corrigan and The Stepdaughter, by
Caroline Blackwood

To the North and The Last September,
by Elizabeth Brown

— Janet Palmer Mullaney

—

were you out with
Archie again last
night? — y

yeah, an’ you know what he told me? “He said he'd lost
his entire fortune—

—to a slick stock
salesman,

gee, that’s tough—what
are you gonna do now?

I'm gonna get
th’ salesman's
name an’ phone

“Annibelle” by Dorothy Urfer, February 12, 193

Window on the Third World

Frickey’s Critical Perspectives on Jean Rhys,
and the annals of the African Literature
Association’s conferences).

Publishing is “an act of devotion,
religious, intellectual, ideological, es-
thetic” to Herdeck, and he likes to point
out that in its origins publishing was a
literary act. He also describes the
publishing of Three Continents as
political — not because its books are
from the Third World but because the
press exists to be in “opposition to ignor-
ance and oppression ... to proclaim
beauties and dignities where most
readers have seen nothing like them
before.” In the process of promoting
such works, the Herdecks have come to
recognize a “sexual gap” and, noting that
women are a “live, good, long-delayed
topic,” they have added them to their
list of filling-up duties.

There are 58 titles “by and about
women” in Three Continents’s catalog.
This grouping raises the provocative
question of identification — what makes
a woman’s book? The answer is not
found in the catalog, nor perhaps should
it be, for the Herdecks’ resolve is to
bring non-Western literature to the
attention of the self-absorbed U.S.
market; women writers will be used as a
marketing tool. When making publish-
ing choices, this publisher weighs the
sex of the author, and has often
published women who had been pre-
viously ignored. Herdeck points to

3.

. Reprinted from Women and the Comics (Eclipse, 1985).

Guadeloupian Maryse Condé, who once
was known only to the French-speaking
literati. Three Continents published
her semiautobiographical novel,
Heremakhonon, in translation in 1982.
Her most recent book, Segou, published
in France, is such a success that the press
will not be able to afford the U.S. rights.

I read two books published by Three
Continents. The Web is a rich, forceful
collection of stories by Argentine
women — all of whom have been
published in their country, although
some have had specific works banned by
the recent military regime. These are
tough stories — written by solid
witnesses to the oppression of their sex,
stories taut with the tension of a country
under siege. The collection spans three
generations of writers: Luisa Mercedes
Levinson, her daughter Luisa Val-
enzuela, Silvina Bullrich, Maria An-
gélica Bosco, and Beatriz Guido are the
better known; Reina Roffé, who
represents the youngest generation,
wrote the last story, “Let’s Hear What
He Has To Say,” expressly for The Web.
It is a gathering of sophisticated,
attractive, well-bred women whose
writings can get down and get gritty. I
found their stories provocative and com-
pelling and not non-Western.

The second book, The Coloured Bangles
and Other Stories, was published in
India by Three Continents and written
by Herdeck’s friend, Saloni Narang. It is
a disappointing collection that reads like
an idle retelling of one’s fantasies —
both horrific and wonderful. Scant in

language and convincing sentiment,
this collection, unlike The Web, does
not fulfill the Herdecks’ intention to
publish works revealing “felt lives lived
in some pain or neglected expression,”
which is how they distinguish writing,
hence publishing, as a political act.
Albeit, Bangles is written by a person of
privilege. This, Herdeck acknowledges,
is an inherent problem for his press —
education is still largely the privilege of
the upper classes; it is therefore they who
have the writing skills. (Many of the
writers published and distributed by
Three Continents write in English, such
as Patricia Grace, “the first Maori
woman to be published.”) And,
acknowledges Herdeck, they tend to be
conservative.

However, it is this — the status quo
— which Three Continents is attempt-
ing to overcome. The dedication and
commitment of this small group (three
to four full-time staff) is impressive. To
me, the greatest service that Three
Continents provides is represented by an
anecdote of Herdeck’s; he told of advis-
ing a friend, who had just bought a guide
book on Jamaica, to put it away and in-
stead read fiction by Jamaican writers.
This illustrates Herdeck’s confidence in
fiction’s truth-telling and the belief that
native voices will speak from the sense of
being — not of otherness. Thus, Three
Continents replaces the mirror (seeing
our own assumptions and vantage points
reflected) with a window open onto the
world.

— Melinda Lewis-Matravers

Belles Lettres @ 13 |