Five by Keane

Mad Puppetstown (288 pp.), Two Days in Aragon (256 pp.), Devoted Ladies (303 pp.), The Rising Tide (320 pp.) — by M.J. Farrell. New York: Viking Penguin/Virago, 1985, $6.95 (PB)

Time After Time, by Molly Keane. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1985, $8.95, 249 pp. (PB)

by Barbara Rich

When one considers Meryl Streep’s track record, it may not be indulging in pure fantasy to predict that one day she will star in a movie based upon the life of Molly Keane. This will, no doubt, elicit a chorus of complaints about yet another Streep foray into the world of accents; let the complainants chorus. If such an endeavor conveys just a bit of the complexity and talent of this writer and stimulates a rebirth of interest in her body of work, it will be worth any number of diatribes.

Molly Keane was born in 1904, in County Kildare, Ireland. Her family was wealthy and, like those to the (Anglo-Irish) manor born, owed allegiance to England more than to its native land. It was a world of almost inbred privilege, of servants and horses and dogs and the thrill of the hunt. Keane brought this world into all of her novels. The old creative-writing-class saw, “write what you know,” is carried to its ultimate in Keane’s work; however, even though the lay of the land may be similar, each book is a new adventure, peopled with characters of diverse and infinite fascination. Under the pseudonym M. J. Farrell, Keane published ten novels between 1928 and 1952. She started writing, not out of some terrible inner need, but due to the threat of tuberculosis when she was 17 and confined to her bed: “There was absolutely nothing to do, no one paid me the least attention and I started to write.” She continued writing after her early, happy marriage, reportedly to fill out her dress allowance. If this is true, blessings on her frugal husband, who had the bad luck to die when he was only 36. Keane, in her grief, stopped writing and devoted herself to her two daughters. It was not until a few years ago, 1981 and 1983, that two additional novels were published, this time under her own name. Rather than reviewing the five books in chronological order, I divide four into two pairs, leaving the most recent book, Time After Time, for last.

“There was absolutely nothing to do, no one paid me the least attention and I started to write.”

Mad Puppetstown, published in 1931, and Two Days in Aragon, which came out ten years later, celebrate the great houses of Ireland as much as, if not more than, their occupants. Both books also have as a common denominator “the little bitter forgotten war in Ireland” and how it affected those of English orientation living in a wracked country.

Easter lives in Puppetstown with her extended family. She is 8 when we first meet her, a child much like Keane herself must have been, born near the turn of the 20th century to parents too busy to do much more than to see that material needs were met. Her life revolves around her twin male cousins: Evelyn and Basil. Twins they may be, different they are. We follow Easter into her 20s as she goes from Ireland to London and then back home again. But the house is the star and the ultimate setting for a strange and yet inevitable platonic arrangement between the girl and one of her cousins. It is an intriguing tale of loyalty and of settling for what one can get, and over each page seems to hover a not completely unfriendly cloud of fate.

July/August 1986

Two Days in Aragon is different from Puppetstown in that there is raw passion between two of its principals: genteel Grania Fox and Foley, lusty son of the enigmatic nurse, Nan. Passion, raw or not, is not often found nestled among Keane’s pages, and it is a welcome ingredient in this convoluted novel, which illuminates yet again the dark side of life in seemingly orderly households. Perhaps it is due to her early widowhood that Keane gives us so many husbandless ménages, filled with women in various states of frustration. It is interesting to speculate so, at any rate, and Aragon is a wonderful, almost gothic book, with its strong sense of evil and retribution.

M. J. Farrell (Molly Keane)

A vein of homosexuality runs like a steady stream through many of Keane's works, and in Devoted Ladies (1934) and The Rising Tide (1937), the flow indeed rises. In the former, we are treated to a turgid lesbian relationship between blond, alcoholic Jane, who is also attractive to men, and dark, brooding Jessica, full of territorial imperatives. Fifty years ago, a same-sex tie could be presented only as inescapable doom. This being so, why was Keane so drawn to writing about men and women who ventured beyond the mainstream in their sex lives? Perhaps it was a combination of her many friends in the theatrical and literary worlds, as well as her instinctive way of viewing sex — of whatever variety — with a somewhat jaundiced eye.

What distinguishes Devoted Ladies, in addition to a full plate of wonderful, intricate characters (for example, Sylvester Browne, who appears in both books, is said to have been a blend of Noel Coward and John Gielgud) is the way the book ends. Few readers will forget the impact of this book or what it says about the nature of love. Nor will one easily forget the travelers along the route of The Rising Tide. Here another great house, Garonlea, takes second place to its inhabitants: four sisters, each so different, and the woman their brother marries and brings home. When Lady Charlotte is widowed (yes, that pattern again), her own children bring the action full circle with shattering results.

Time After Time, written in 1983, is a strange book. Not that any of the others are full of the sweet milk of human kindness, but this one, taking place as it does under less grand circumstances, has the added ingredient of ruin. The house of Durraghglass has fallen on rough times. Jasper Swift and his three sisters, April, May, and Baby June, are heading into irreversible old age, as well as financial troubles. These four are bitingly drawn:

Introducing Virago Press

by Janet Palmer Mullaney

On the cover of Virago Press’s publicity poster/booklist, three women are rowing out to a desert island with a boatful of the publisher’s distinctive, uniform volumes. The caption reads “Virago — all you need.” Opening up the piece and looking at the magnitude of their offerings makes one long for a desert island, an ivory tower, Jo Marsh’s attic — any secluded place in which to successively consume them all.

England’s Virago Press, begun and run by women, is a smashing success. Last year Virago started co-publishing with Penguin Books in the U.S. after severing ties with Doubleday/Dial, which could not commit to producing the number of titles that Virago was planning to publish. At the end of 1985, Virago had almost 300 titles in print, nearly all of which were written or edited by women, in three series: Modern Classics (reprints of 19th- and 20th-century fiction), Nonfiction Classics, and New Fiction and Nonfiction — all in affordable, handsome trade paperbacks.

How did this all come about? Virago Press was launched as an independent publisher by Carmen Callil, along with Harriet Spicer and Ursula Owen, in 1976. Callil, an Australian expatriate, had worked previously as a book publicist (one of the titles she was in charge of promoting was The Female Eunuch).

I talked recently to Virago editor Alexandra Pringle about the underpinnings of their success. She pointed to the marketing skills of the women running the company. They were always professional about publishing and targeted their books to a general, not specialized, market. There was, and is, nothing “alternative” about them in a packaging sense; they decided early on that the look of the books was paramount, that they should be “classy.” Pringle and Callil, who has recently left to work for the large London publishing firm Chatto & Windus, still share the aesthetically pleasing task of tracking down art to use on the colorful covers. They are guided by “no preconceived idea” of what they want, according to Pringle, and they mostly use “little-known works from provincial art galleries.”

A second factor in Virago’s success was getting distributed to bookstores by working with other, major publishers, and a third key ingredient was publicity — something Callil was expert at generating. “We got extraordinary coverage,” says Pringle. “Virago captured the imagination of the public, and we got not just reviews, but features and articles on the ‘women’s pages.’”

Women’s studies professors in this country have responded enthusiastically to Virago’s editions of undeservedly out-of-print and neglected women authors. Not so in Britain, says Pringle: “The hardest thing is getting them adopted in courses. There’s nothing like the size of your women’s studies programs in Britain. Our titles by Americans [e.g., Edith Wharton, Willa Cather, Kay Boyle, Jane Bowles, Eudora Welty] have made more of a dent in and have done more to promote American studies in Britain than those of any other publisher. American studies courses in England are newer, and hence more open to change than are our English lit courses, so it’s easier for our American authors to get adopted.”

I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings by Maya Angelou, one of Virago’s American authors, is Virago’s bestselling book. Virago’s bestseller in the classic “English lit” vein is Aphra Behn’s account of a famous scandal, Love Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister. Virago is bringing out a new edition of this work, which is one of the first novels published in England (1682) and has been out of print since the 18th century.

It is appropriate that Virago’s logo is an apple with a big bite out of it; browsing through Virago’s lists is like being tempted by an orchard of delights. Penguin is publishing two to three books a month and plans to publish all of its Modern Classics fiction titles. Not all of the books on the other two lists will be published, however, which is a pity.

Among England’s Virago authors are Kate Millet, whose Sexual Politics is shamefully out of print here, to my knowledge, and many works of fiction by Rebecca West, Sylvia Townsend Warner, Elizabeth Taylor, Christa Wolf, and Elizabeth von Arnim. Viragophiles will have to fabricate an excuse to visit the Virago bookshop in Covent Garden, London, and haul back coveted volumes of H.D., Julia O’Faolain, Rose Macaulay, Paule Marshall, and Clarice Lispector. Quite a few of Virago’s 20th-century novelists confront WWII from a woman’s perspective, and Round About a Pound a Week depicts working-class life from the inside prior to World War I. Virago has published valuable first-hand accounts of the British suffragette movement, a series of women’s travel writings, and a group of books that recast the role of women in the Russian revolution.

Callil originally chose the name Virago to convey a powerful image. Such is the revolution the company has brought about in women’s publishing, says Pringle, that the connotation of the word has shifted in many people’s minds from the first dictionary meaning — a termagant — to the second, antecedent definition: “a heroic woman of great stature, strength, and courage, possessing supposedly manlike qualities of body and mind.” If that is a virago, publishing could use a lot more of them!

Page of complex eccentrics? Keane writes with such genius that I was left astonished, puzzled, yet hungry for more.

I hope that Keane will go on spinning her tales and that discerning readers will devour them. And Meryl Streep might be well advised to start practicing her Anglo-Irish.

© Barbara Rich lives in Charlottesville, VA. She is a freelance writer who has taught and published short fiction.

Belles Lettres @ 5