Passion and Prejudice:  
A Family Memoir  

by Sallie Bingham  

New York: Knopf, 1989, $22.95, 475 pp.,  
photos  

The Binghams of Louisville, Kentucky,  
were recently in the news when their  
publishing empire and other companies  
were sold following stories of a family  
scandal. It was only the most recent  
Bingham scandal. At fifteen, Sallie  
Bingham, one of the five children of  
Barry Bingham, Sr., the former editor  
and publisher of the Louisville Courier-  
Journal, was told by a stranger that her  
“grandfather had murdered his second  
wife.” This clear, exciting memoir brings  
to vivid life both the ancestors and the  
current players in a tormented drama.  

The wife in question was Mary Lily  
Kenan Flagler Bingham. Her suspicious  
death provided her husband, called the  
Judge, with the money (that Mary had  
inherited from her first husband) with  
which he bought his newspaper and  
began a dynasty. Mary Lily had been  
planning to leave the money to her  
niece, so she “died because she would  
not, for a long time, give the man his  
money.” Tragedies abound. The Judge’s  
first wife had died in a trolley-automobile  
accident; an aunt of Sallie’s was perhaps  
a—gasp!—lesbian and had ended  
in alcoholic poverty; a niece ran in front  
of a train. Sallie’s youngest brother,  
Jonathan, was electrocuted and her  
oldest, Worth, was killed in a freakish  
automobile accident. Bingham believes  
that the latter two deaths were fueled by  
the Bingham males’ reckless belief that  
their immortality meant they could do  
anything. After Worth’s years of gambling,  
drinking, and womanizing, all that  
had been “left for him was a lifetime of  
fulfilling other people’s expectations.”  
And now Barry Jr., the only surviving  
son, the follower, unsuited to and disliking  
the position, became the Courier-  
Journal editor.  

The latest scandal had erupted when  
all the women were asked to resign from  

the newspaper’s board of directors. Only  
Sallie refused. She also refused to sell  
her stock to her family for a fraction of  
its true worth, and no one else would  
buy it. Her father, because of “financial  
problems and family disagreements,”  
sold the companies.  

But this is more than an account of a  
squabbling family. It is a perceptive story  
of how the subtleties of power at various  
levels—with servants, families, co-workers,  
friends—overruled human feeling  
and destroyed those it touched. It is also  
an account of the “pleasant plantation  
mentality” of the newspaper, derived  
from centuries of the Binghams’ patronizing  
kindness toward “their Blacks”  
combined with their failure to help  
them improve their living and working  
conditions. And, above all, it is a story  
of how the Bingham women, intelligent,  
lively, and talented, were kept firmly in  
their places, behind and below men, primarily  
useful as bearers of sons to continue  
the dynasty. “Without money we  
[women] lack clout. With money, we are  
hog-tied by our allegiance to powerful  
men, without whom we cannot exercise  
the power that money confers.”  

Bingham has written a quotable,  
thought-inducing book, and being a fiction  
writer, she knows how to climax  
her chapter endings. This story shows  
that behind the romantic facade of her  
remarkable family lurked the cold, cruel,  
power of the almighty dollar.  

— Janet Overmyer  

Sallie Bingham. Photo by George Lange  

Literary Inflections of Love  

The Amazon and the Page: Natalie Clifford Barney and Renée Vivien, by Karla Jay.  
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988, $27.50 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 152 pp.  

by Alice Parker  

At the turn of the century, aligning  
themselves with a new age, two young  
women writers fell  

passionately in love and proceeded to  
theorize their experiences of sex and  
gender, exploring the many literary inflections  
of their relationship in genres  
ranging from lyric poetry to witty epigrams  
and fiction. Because they wrote in  
French, Renée Vivien and Natalie Barney  
remain shadowy figures for anglophone  
readers, in spite of the extraordinary  
importance of their work for the  
study of radical feminist texts. Thus,  
Karla Jay’s new book The Amazon and  
the Page is a happy surprise. Her work  
will be essential for readers seeking a  
tradition of women’s writing, and particularly  
the lesbian intertext in the early  
twentieth century.  

In love and in Paris, the careers of  
Vivien and Barney touched for a brief  
moment before their differences drove  
them apart, although Barney, who lived  
into her eighties, kept alive Vivien’s  
memory after her premature death at the  
age of thirty-two. Jay makes a valiant  
attempt to treat their lives, their ideas, and  
their works in a parallel fashion. This is  
a tricky proposition. Although their love  
for each other was deep and endured  
separations and infidelities and in spite  
of the fact that they shared similar goals  
for a revival of Sapphic lyricism and the  
creation of a lesbian culture—largely  

12 ® Belles Lettres  

limited to beautiful young women like  
themselves—their work evolved in quite  
different directions and genres, the result  
of distinctly divergent sensibilities.  

As Jay notes, for Natalie Barney the  
lifelong cult of love was on the one hand  
a cultivation of the self, difficult but exhilarating,  
and on the other a carefully defined  
appreciation of female beauty.  

Sallie Bingham Speaks  

The name Sallie Bingham is not new to the  
publishing world; in fact, preceding the current  
spate of Bingham family books and  
scandals, her reputation rested on her literary  
fiction and on her stint as book editor of  
the Louisville Courier Journal. (Bingham  
often acts on the advice she gives women to  
protest trivialization at the hands of book  
reviews by writing letters to the editor.) In a  
conversation with Bonnie Jean Cox, Bingham  
revealed the early stirrings of observation  
that would lead to fiction writing as well  
as to her recent family chronicle.  

“By the time I was eight or nine, it was  
clear to me I wanted to be a writer. Part  
of that was because people in my family  
read aloud and told stories. Books were  
taken very seriously. Also important to  
me was the mysteriousness of words. I  
realized quite early that words might  
seem to mean one thing and in fact mean  
something entirely different depending  
on the speaker, the atmosphere, the setting,  
and whether secrets were being completely  
or partially concealed. I was fascinated  
by the underside of language.”  

Did you have any female role models or  
mentors at Harvard?  

“There was nobody. I know that seems  
almost incredible, but when you think  
about it, there were no women writers  
taught in the college courses that I can  
remember besides nineteenth-century  
English, where you got the Brontës or  
Jane Austen. There were no living  
women writers. I remember wanting to  
write my thesis on Brontë and being discouraged  
by my adviser, who told me  
that that was not original enough, so I  
should write about George Meredith (an  
impossible writer to get through!). It is  
hard to believe—after all, we are only  
talking about the late 1950s. But women  
writers were not in the anthologies we  
used, and books by women were not reviewed  
on the front page of the New York  
Times book section.”  

Who were the popular novelists at that time  
who were getting reviews?  

“Mary McCarthy was quite well known.  
She is unsympathetic to other women,  
however, and her female characters tend  
to be monstrous. So that created the  
off-putting sensation that if this is what  
it is to be a woman and write about women,  
I don’t want to do that. Only since the  
1970s have women characters been cast  
in the heroic mold.”  

“Reunion” is the only story of yours I have  
read so far that presents a bonding between  
women.  

“That early writing was influenced by  
the culture in which I grew up. The  
women, often depressed and alienated,  
were not kind to each other. They were  
completely absorbed by the men in their  
immediate vicinity. My life had to fall  
apart before I began to question that.  
When I was divorced and faced with  
more solitude than I could handle, I  
realized that not having cultivated close  
women friends was going to do me in. I  
made a conscious effort to refocus my  
energies on women. They are such stimulating  
company, so interesting, provocative,  
and unrestrained. The women I began  
to write about began to change, to become  
powerful main characters. Women’s  
friendships are a source of joy. They are  
something in this hard world that seems  
to flourish.”  

Editor’s Note: These remarks are extracted  
from a longer interview that appeared in the  
Kentucky Review, Autumn 1988.  

It was hard to believe—after all, we are only  
talking about the late 1950s. But women  
writers were not in the anthologies we  
used, and books by women were not reviewed  
on the front page of the New York  
Times book section.  

Once in Paris, young, single, and free to  
exercise her talents as a writer, how could  
she have avoided the attention of Natalie  
Barney, exquisitely formed and charismatic,  
since they circulated in the same expatriate  
group? Still, although Barney introduced  
Vivien to Sappho and to Greek and perhaps  
to a passion she might not otherwise have  
known to inscribe in her poetry, one feels  
that Vivien’s work grew out of a fundamental  
deprivation and suffering unaffected by  
friends and/or lovers and an insatiable  
longing that no human intercourse ever  
quelled. Barney, on the contrary, wrote,  
as Nicole Brossard would claim today,  
on the side of pleasure and desire. It was  
Barney’s ambition to redefine love in  
order to blur the distinctions between  
friendship and passion, to theorize a  
process whereby she could invert the  
Pygmalion story by turning her lovers  
into creative artists rather than fetishes  
in the male tradition.  

Beyond Karla Jay’s truly groundbreaking  
study, it is exciting to project careful  
analyses of the texts of each writer and  
reevaluations of their monumental contributions  
to lesbian/feminist writing. It is of  
course important to know, as Jay tries to  
establish in the cases of the amazon and  
the page, how writers influence each  
other, if there is an element of collaboration  
in their joint work, and how their  
lives and their texts interact. We now  
need new editions, more translations,  
and a wider readership for their works.  
Like Gertrude Stein and Djuna Barnes,  
Renée Vivien and Natalie Clifford Barney  
are of enormous significance to those  
attempting to trace their roots as women,  
as lesbians, as writers, or as feminists.  

@ Alice Parker is an associate professor  
of French at the University of Alabama.  
She writes on eighteenth-century women  
writers and on contemporary French and  
Quebecoise feminist writers.  

Spring 1989