Southern Hemisphere

New Twist on an Old Tale

The Ship of Fools, by Cristina Peri Rossi. Translated by Psiche Hughes. New York:  
Readers International, 1989, $17.95, (HB), $9.95 (PB), 205 pp.

by Mary G. Berg

To read Cristina Peri Rossi’s mar-  
velous novel is to embark upon a  
voyage through the many layers  
of Western culture and tradition,  
through centuries of human dreams and  
self-doubts. The central theme is that of  
exile: exile as an allegory of the human  
condition, as well as constituting the  
reality of a generation of Latin  
Americans. It is a story of a displaced  
people whose paths cross as they move  
restlessly through space and time, told  
through interwoven references to jour-  
neys and quests from the Iliad, Odyssey,  
and Bible to the Holy Grail and Kafka’s  
castle. The journey is the central meta-  
phor used to describe human experi-  
ence, and Peri Rossi’s very title, The  
Ship of Fools, deliberately links her book  
to its predecessors in art and literature:  
medieval tales and Sebastian Brant’s  
Ship of Fools (1494), Bosch and Borges,  
Katharine Ann Porter, and Julio Cor-  
tázar. The travels of the protagonist,  
Ecks (as in X, the unknown), alternate  
throughout the novel with descriptions  
of a medieval tapestry of the creation  
that hangs in the Cathedral of Gerona,  
Spain. Just as we try to interpret the  
meaning of the tapestry by examining  
each of its images, so, too, is an under-  
standing of human direction and pur-  
pose sought through a scrutiny of indi-  
vidual moments in Ecks’s journey.  
Rossi was born in Montevideo, Uru-  
guay, in 1941. She has lived in Barce-  
lona since 1972 and has published many  

volumes of poetry and short stories,  
some of which have appeared in English.  
Rossi has spoken of how “many writers of  
my generation had to choose exile be-  
cause of their political activities and  
writings. Exile became, by necessity,  
the theme of our work. A few years ago,  
dictatorship ended in Uruguay, so  
strictly speaking we are no longer exiles.  
Women, however, simply because of  
their sex, are often exiles even in their  
own society.” She says that her fiction  
tries to achieve “ ‘feminine writing’ by  
the abolition of literary barriers and a  
personal use of vocabulary, structures  
and subjective fantasies which delve  
into the unconscious.”

The Ship of Fools, the second of her  
three novels to date, was published in  
Spanish in 1984. It has been wonderfully  
translated into English by Psiche  
Hughes, who has managed to preserve the  
extraordinary tone of verbal harmony  
and gentleness that holds the diverse  
fragments of the novel together.

Unexpected spaces on the pages cre-  
ate the impression of prose poetry as the  
narrative begins. Dreams and inner  
musings precede (and take priority over)  
objective descriptions of Ecks’s journey.  
Ship’s bulletins and newspaper accounts  
are spliced into the text, parodies and  
references to other books abound, and  
long footnotes merge with the main  
text; the story travels sideways and  
backwards as often as forward. Vivid  
descriptions of the Gerona tapestry of  
the Creation (seen once by Ecks, says a  
footnote) are spaced throughout the  

Messengers to the New World

The Line of the Sun, by Judith Ortiz Cofer. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1989,  

$19.95, 291 pp.

by Denise M. Marshall

Many works have been written  
about minorities as they have  
confronted the American  

Dream. Most of them delineate the ob-  
stacles these groups face as they try to  
merge into mainstream American cul-  
ture. Few maintain a free flow between  
place of origin and adopted country.  
Judith Ortiz Cofer’s novel The Line of the  
Sun depicts the confusion of the middle  
ground between those places. Her pref-  
ace implies that these are family stories,  
but she has transmuted Puerto Rican  
experience into a tale of outsiders every-  
where as the umbilical cord to native  
culture is severed by distance, change,  
isolation and difference.

Like Maxine Hong Kingston’s The  
Woman Warrior, The Line of the Sun  
explores the generation who emigrates  
through the eyes of the generation who  
enters the new culture, embarrassed or  
ashamed of their parents and their par-  
ents’ friends. Not only do the children  
writhe at their parents’ gaucheries, but  
they are trapped between an inability to  
understand the double messages the eld-  
ers send out and the ability to serve as  
messengers to the new world for their  
elders. The parents’ messages are in-  
formed by the desire to succeed in the  
new place and the desperation to main-  
tain the culture of the old. They move  
their children forward into the new  
while they look backward to the old,  
unwilling to understand why the young  
cannot yearn with them.

In this doubleness legends grow, like  
that of Guzman, the mysterious troub-  
lemaker uncle of Marisol, the teller of  
the tale. Marisol gathers and embroiders  
the tale at night, listening to her par-  
ents discussing Guzman, making up  
events to fill in the gaps of his life and  
enlarging the lost problem child to fill  
her need for an understanding adult. For  
Guzman is a cosmic misfit, in his own  
land and wherever he goes. Marisol rec-  
ognizes her own type of exile in Guz-  
man’s story. He is not only her imagina-  
tive connection to Puerto Rico but also  
the psychic middle ground between her  
mother, Ramona, and her father, Rafael  
(he is the mother’s brother and father’s  
best friend).

Marisol is a go-between for her  
mother in the community, for her  
brother with her mother, and finally for  
Guzman when he appears in Paterson. It  
is a pattern Cofer establishes for the cul-  
ture, beginning with Marisol’s grand-  
mother, who for years speaks to her hus-  
band only through a third person, usual-  
ly a grandchild. Women are the inter-  
mediaries for their community with the  
spiritual world. The men go between the  
women’s world at home and the men’s  
world outside. Guzman, “the runaway”  
embodies Marisol’s sense of the powers  
of the cultural go-between. For Cofer  
and finally for Marisol, the cultural in-  
termediary is the source of significant  
change, of legend, of authorship. As an  

“author,” Marisol commands her mate-  
rial and makes coherence, enacting the  
author’s role of going between her vision  
and her readers.

Cofer places her point of view in a  
middle ground and maintains it without  
gliding into any consciousness but Mari-  
sol’s. This difficult stance distances the  
reader in the same ways Marisol is dis-  
tanced, but it becomes an effective  
technique. Cofer creates a sense of vil-  
lage speech, although I think she has  
underestimated her own powers (for  
example, she does not need the some-  
what repetitious device of “they say” to  
convey that sense of orality.) Perhaps  
the other difficulty of such a point of  
view is that it can often become  
disjointed and, with such a rich cast of  
characters, thin. But that is the quibble  
of a reader who wants to know more  
about the characters, more about what  
happened. Creating that desire is the  
mark of a true storyteller and a good  
story.

@ Denise M. Marshall specializes in  
contemporary novels, women heroes, com-  
edy, and film. She is writing a book on  
women and spatiality.

change, but remain like citadels or  
lighthouses facing the irresistible assault  
of time.”

Powerful stories interlink. A painting  
of a departing shipful of madmen evokes  
an account of the sixteenth-century  
story told by Artemius Gudrém of his  
voyages as captain of ships of lunatics  
taken out to sea to be abandoned there.  
On one of these voyages, the captain  
was assisted by a particularly capable  
madman, Glaucus Torrender, who tried  
to escape the ship with the crew but  
drowned while “in the distance the ship  
of fools sailed aimlessly on.” Another  
moving account is that of Vercinge-  
torix, Ecks’s friend, who appears inter-  
mittently in the book. It is an all-too-  
familiar story of clandestine arrest, im-  
prisonment, torture, and years of hard  
labor in a cement factory where most of  
the “disappeared” prisoners die. Vercin-  
getorix’s life is disrupted; survival comes  
to seem surreal.

He can barely live with the memories  
and images of the travesty of life of the  
prison camp. Like Ecks, he becomes one  
of the wanderers of the world. For a  
time, they live in a tropical island ha-  
ven, Pueblo de Dios, where Ecks makes  
love to a fat old woman whose language  
is totally unintelligible to him. For him  
she is a fallen angel, with feet “as white,  
puffy and childlike as those of an angel  
by Titian . . . a creature from another  
planet, an imaginary being only to be  
glimpsed in dreams or fantastical old  
engravings.” Ecks’s subsequent alliance  
with Graciela, a young woman who has  
traveled about the world with her few  
possessions in a guitar case, and his  
friendship with an eccentric collector,  
Morris, and an alienated astronaut,  
Gorgon, are of longer duration. The  
other residents of Pueblo de Dios are also  
eccentric strangers who belong no-  
where. “We have all been exiled from  
something or someone,” says Ecks. “I  
think this is the human condition.”

The novel describes journeys within  
journeys. The astronaut's trip to the  
moon, Morris’s expedition to a big city,  
Ecks’s experiences as a bus driver to and  
from a London abortion clinic, and  
Morris’s final decision to go to Africa  
with Percival, a nine-year-old named for  
the knight of the Holy Grail, are all var-  
iants of the central allegory. Ecks’s pur-  
suit of love (or definition through sex-  
uality) through the underworld byways  
of a city that is excessively real but also  
“the city of his memories or of his  
dreams, the imagined city,” leads him to  
an abused prostitute to whom he offers  
companionship, and, in a nightclub, to  
the woman he seeks, Lucia, performing  
as Marlene Dietrich in top hat and trou-  
sers, “the perfect androgynous image”  
for a final apocalyptic resolution of his  
anxieties.

Wending its way through a forest of  
momentary resemblances to other fic-  
tional explorations of contemporary  
angst by such writers as Milan Kundera  
and Italo Calvino, The Ship of Fools is  
about self-discovery, self-knowledge,  
the loneliness of human individuals, and  
the ways in which it is possible to share  
experiences or emotions with others and  
attempt to make some coherent sense of  
the fragments of daily happenings. Peri  
Rossi’s novel is profound but not pon-  
derous: Her prose is luminous and pre-  
cise, witty and lively. It amuses, star-  
tles, and cradles the reader, breaking off  
at the end, like real lives: “the tapestry is  
missing January, November, December  
and at least two of the rivers of Paradise.”

@ Mary G. Berg is a fellow at the Har-  
vard University Center for Literary and  
Cultural Studies, and is writing about nine-  
teenth- and twentieth-century Latin  
American fiction by women.

Winter 1990