— Cartography, continued from page 13

chosen over others. Certainly many
other expatriate women writers in
Paris — one thinks of the Russian
emigré Elsa Triolet — are omitted.
Perhaps Benstock intends to treat only
American expatriates, but why then is
so much space devoted to Colette, Vir-
ginia Woolf, Jean Rhys, and Anaïs Nin?

The biggest problem with this book,
however, is structural and conceptual.
Benstock assumes too much prior know-
ledge on the part of the reader. The
book lacks key introductory material, re-
ferences are not really explained, con-
textual details are withheld, no essential
biographical details are given, and no

summary of the works is made. Benstock
presumes that the reader knows the
background, biography, and bibliog-
raphy of each woman. Of course, by the
end of the book (if the reader has strug-
gled that far), the portrait of each writer
has been gradually filled out. For exam-
ple, the chapter on Barnes includes dis-
cussions of the critical reception of her
novel Nightwood, but there is no sum-
mary of the work. Benstock evidently
expects that the reader both knows the
work and has read it recently. However,
in Benstock’s final chapter there sud-
denly appears a description of Night-
wood, something the reader needed de-
sperately 200 pages previously.

This book has both too much and too
little. The structure and method of the
“palimpsest,” building new portraits on

top of old ones by writing over and be-
tween the lines, is in this case monu-
mentally unsuccessful. Although Ben-
stock attempts to write a new history of
modernism, one that will take account
of women’s contributions and explain
their work in relation to the male view
of modernism, the completed work is as
muddled as some ancient palimpsests
must have been.

Despite these serious shortcomings,
the work fills a gap, and the reader learns
much about a vital group of women.
Much of the detail of their work and
lives has remained hidden, and college
courses and graduate programs still do
not teach this material as a part of the
canon. The general reading public does
not know their work and did not learn
about them in school. Indeed, their

work was trivialized and forgotten even
before they had died. Many of these
women perished in poverty, loneliness,
and pain in the past two decades. So,
while many young women were making
literary pilgrimages to Joyce’s Dublin or
T.S. Eliot’s Boston, Djuna Barnes and
Janet Flanner and Natalie Barney were
uncelebrated, even though they were
very much alive. If nothing else, this
book may help restore a section of lost
history and may send readers to the
works themselves, helping to assure
reprinting, discussion, criticism,
reevaluation.

® Maggie McFadden coordinates the
Women’s Studies Program at Appalachian
State University. She is writing a book on
early 19th-century feminist theory.

— Muse, continued from page 8

The Rings of Saturn is Diane
Wakowski’s 36th book in a copious body
of work. Her style is anecdotal, full of
wry commentary on the complexities of
the human condition. Pet peeves are
aired in an honest and amusing way, as
in “The Fear of Fat Children,” where
Wakowski admonishes a fat student for
returning a book that looked “as if you
had fried bacon over it.”

Wakowski uses poetry as a means of
self-discovery. Many of her poems turn
on the sharp point of insight, but some-
times this has a tack-on feeling, as if the
poem needed to become profound at the
end in order to justify itself. However,
when this tendency is checked and the
poems are allowed to be as they are, they
easily transport the reader into the poet’s
richly observed environment.

Saturn and especially the ring that
encircles it are images that have ap-
peared in previous volumes of
Wakowski’s poetry and are prevalent in
this one. Saturn was supposed to have
had a baleful effect on those born under
its influence, and indeed the poet often

paints herself in this dim light. In
“Sleeping in the Ring of Fire,”
Wakowski writes:

I can sit here cool in a white gown,
having

watered my cucumbers and

tomatoes, and think clearly, sedately,

about the empty bed,

the years of empty beds,

the succession of mornings

alone, and knowing the pain

of a woman’s failure.

But this air-conditioned house
guards me, yes

like the cut flower I am
which couldn’t take

the heat of Michigan summer
nights.

I long for some ocean,

the cool shore/its landscape
But the salt would kill me.

Typically, this poem trails away from
moroseness and self-pity because of the
poet’s ironic detachment and her ap-
preciation for the little things in life.
Although the theme of loss and the
reckoning with it runs throughout this
book, there is humor here, and a sense
that the poet is content with the har-

monious life she lives.

The poetry in Terese Svoboda’s All
Aberration is formal and often enigmatic.
Tenuous and troubling family relation-
ships are depicted in bright, terse lan-
guage. “Wheatfields” traces a woman’s
memory of her father to the wheatfields
of her childhood and then comes back
full circle to the present where his pre-
sence lives on in her son who “stands
at the field’s edge/ his arms akimbo and
his feet firm/ as two shoots, and he wants
to know/ if the wheat’s ripe yet.” “Dust
Storm” is about the threatening aspects
of life on the prairie: “Midday dark, tum-
bleweeds throw/ themselves at the
windshield and part./ All land is whip-
ped into a black cloth./ I steer by my
sweat.”

In this collection, nature is often
harsh and unpredictable, and relation-
ships between parent and child are usu-
ally ambivalent ones. Look at how
motherhood is depicted in “When the
Cord’s Cut, Another Begins”:

Seeded in anger, carried like a welt
on my person, you heard me scream
at the worst birth part, I don’t

want you: you sprung frog
on my belly, sucking, sucking,
connected to me like an apple’s stem,

wet and dry and wet with the rhythm
of a bad bulb, you taught me to see
each toe a pig, each fist a face.

Contra La Violencia by Barbara Moraff
is a slender volume of poems filled with
homey wisdom. “Gaku” with its subtitle,
“may yr rebirth occur in the human
realm,” is about the death of her child’s
dog. “Calligrapher’s Moon” is a tribute
to “Jon Appleton, earth musician,” and
recalls the 1960s with its earthy, free
lifestyle: “rising I am rising w/koto &
shakuhachi/ rising I am rising w/but-
terflies floating/ w/clouds like vaginal
sleeves fitting loosely onto mountains.”
Moraff engages themes such as family,
love, and working with the earth in a
voice determined to find its own way.
This volume shares, with the others re-
viewed here, a deep regard for the
natural world, and what it can teach us
about ourselves.

® Mary Young is a freelance writer living
in New York City.

— Retrospective, continued from page 6

her achievement. Planned as a travel
book about Yugoslavia, it became much
more. It “turned out to be the central
book of her life,” writes Glendinning,
“a two-volume, 500,000-word work not
only of history, archaeology, politics,
conversation, folklore, prophecy, and
the evocation of landscape, but the work
in which Rebecca West formulated her
views on religion, ethics, art, myth and
gender.” West’s friend, the writer John
Gunther, said “It was not so much a
book about Yugoslavia as a book about
Rebecca West.”

Orel seems unaware that Black Lamb
and Grey Falcon was based on three trips
the author made in 1937 and 1938 but
is written as if it described one extended
visit. He also does not seem to recognize
that Gerda, the insufferable German
wife of the Serbian guide and translator,
Constantine, is fictional and a structur-
ing device. Nor does Orel acknowledge
the obvious subtext of the book, which
is the polarization of male and female,
a subtext that is revealed in West’s con-
tinual conversation with the semi-fiction
traveling companion “my husband.”
The ever-witty Mary Ellman’s commen-
tary on this quality of Black Lamb escapes
Orel’s notice. But then it is unlikely that
he reads the work of feminists, for he
even tries to diminish West’s stature as
one:

Though several of her essays suggest
she has read women with greater than
average care and one of her more not-
able passages speaks of the bravery of
Mme de la Fayette, Mme de Sévigné,
Jane Austen, Colette and Willa Cather
in refusing to yield to masculine values,
she is not willing to lie about the general
historical importance or the artistic
merits of women authors.

The Fountain Overflows, the first book
of the unfinished trilogy that includes
This Real Night and Cousin Rosamund,

Jury/Avenue 1987

was the only section to be published in
West’s lifetime. The novel was ex-
tremely popular when it appeared in
1957, edging out Peyton Place for number
one on the New York Times best seller
list and appearing in serial form in The
Ladies Home Journal. The trilogy follows
the siblings of the Aubrey family from
the certitude of an Edwardian childhood
into adulthood in a world of war and
change. The Fountain Overflows takes
them into adolescence and is, in part,
autobiographical. West is the narrator,
Rose, and the sisters, Mary and Cor-
delia, are versions of her own sisters,
Winnie and Lettie. The parents are dis-
tinctly West’s parents: the brilliant,
charismatic father who abandoned the
family when Rebecca was 9 years old
and the cultured, musically gifted
mother, worn thin by the exigencies of
marriage to an unstable man who failed

continually to provide for his family.

Duality is ever apparent in the pages
of the trilogy, in the conflicts and pairs
of opposites: the kind cousin Constance
and her malevolent husband Jock, the
good-hearted buffoon, Lilly, and her un-
repentant murderess of a sister; the con-
flicts between the intellectual and
spiritual, art and life, male and female.
The Fountain Overflows and its sequels
are also a rich portrait of a woman’s com-
ing of age. Rose’s adolescence is made
awkward by the eccentricity of her fam-
ily. In a strictly stratified society, Rose
(like West herself) fits in nowhere.
Through Rose’s developing career as a
concert pianist and the late-blooming
recognition of her sexual self are re-
vealed the stages and questions of a
woman’s life — the ties to family, the
desire for fulfillment, and the problems
of relationship.

The Fountain Overflows, This Real
Night, and Cousin Rosamund are, finally,
another unresolved plot. We are left sus-
pended and wishing for more. Fortu-
nately, West left behind a summary (in-
cluded in the afterword) that sketched
her plans for a fourth and final volume
of the saga and described what the work
meant to her. She tells us that Rose and
Mary “represent all that can be got out
of art, all that art can do: which is not
everything. There is something else, the
work of the spirit.” Echoing throughout
this monumental work of fiction is an
“abiding message of hope through love.”

® Eileen Lotozo is a freelance writer in
Philadelphia. She wishes to thank Professor
Mark Wheeler, expert on all things Yugo-
slav, and kind friend who magically acquired
and sent to her, from London, a copy of
the not-yet-released Glendinning biography.

t
1
Please send 1-year subscription[s] or 2-year |
subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check i
or money order in the amount of payable to Belles i
Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a 1
photocopy, or handwritten copy. H
1
P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216 Name 1
t
Street i
I
: . a
Check the subscription rate that applies: iy State Zip t
1
1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year * Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres: t
1
1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required) @ $12.50/year DO A contribution of $ is enclosed H
Send gift card to: t
1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year 5 H
Name a
2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year ot
subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00 Street 3 H
l
Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription City State Zip = i
|
I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue. a!

Belles Lettres @ 15 |