impending jolt:

My name is Mary Katherine Blackwood. I am eighteen years old, and I live with my sister Constance. I have often thought that with any luck at all I could have been born a werewolf, because the two middle fingers on both my hands are the same length, but I have had to be content with what I had. I dislike washing myself, and dogs, and noise. I like my sister Constance, and Richard Plantagenet, and Amanita phalloides, the death-cup mushroom. Everyone else in my family is dead.

Shirley Jackson in 1938  
(Courtesy June Mirken Mintz)

She is the enigmatic creator of such timeless works that Judy Oppenheimer probes in Private Demons: The Life of Shirley Jackson (Fawcett Columbine, 1989, $10.95 PB, 304 pp.). The result is captivating but uneven. While sometimes overly speculative, the biographer brings Jackson to life as a woman with as many surprises as one of her characters. The biography is beautifully written and reported, but Oppenheimer devotes too much attention to the minutiae of Jackson’s life and too little to her work.

The biographer’s discussion of "The Lottery" (1948) is the notable exception, as Oppenheimer richly details the social and familial influences that led to the creation of one of the most powerful short stories of our century.

First appearing in the New Yorker, the story’s haunting depiction of a woman who is stoned to death as part of a village’s annual lottery deeply disturbed readers who were only a few years out of the unimaginable horror of World War II. "Nothing in the magazine before or since would provoke such an unprecedented outpouring of fury, horror, rage, disgust, and intense fascination," Oppenheimer writes. Angry letters deluged the magazine. "Shirley Jackson struck a nerve in mid-twentieth-century America the way few writers have succeeded in doing, at any time. She had told people a painful truth about themselves—and the people were fighting mad."

Oppenheimer contends that "The Lottery" was "the purest, most direct expression she would ever give to that knowledge of human evil she had carried within her since childhood" — the neighbor who hated atheists and communists; the parent who disliked Jews.

Interpretations of this story abound. Jackson herself said her intent was "to shock the readers with a graphic dramatization of the pointless violence and general inhumanity of their own lives." She added, however, "The number of people who expected Mrs. Hutchinson to win a Bendix washer at the end would amaze you."

Oppenheimer has described Jackson as "a psychic visionary and a casserole cook." An odd combination, indeed, which the biographer examines exhaustively. Jackson (1916-1965) was a hard-drinking, chain-smoking, obese genius who eventually slid into acute depression and multiple addictions. She was also a doting wife and devoted mother, who once said of her writing, "It’s great fun, and I love it. But it doesn’t tie any shoes."

Her house was bursting with cats and kids and booze and parties — and a most forceful presence, Stanley Hyman, her husband. Hyman, who taught at Bennington, valued his wife’s brilliance and was instrumental in her progress as a writer. But he was also arrogant and demanding.

Moderation was hardly a mainstay of their lives. Oppenheimer’s reconstruction of alcohol-fueled gatherings at their home evokes Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

While the Jackson who emerges from Oppenheimer’s generous reporting is fascinating, the biographer’s descriptions of the writer’s weight and appearance become obsessive. Jackson "would eat herself huge." She "was fat, she wore no makeup." No doubt Jackson herself was fearful of losing her husband to a thinner and more traditionally beautiful woman, but the drumbeat becomes tiresome.

Oppenheimer seems to have missed her own point: "Other girls might have better figures; she had the stories."

Deborah Price is Deputy Bureau Chief of the Detroit News’s Washington Bureau and a doctoral candidate in English literature.

- 785 Verbenia Drive  
- Satellite Beach, FL 32937.

1) 1-year individual @ $20  
2) 2-year individual or two 1-year individuals @ $35  
3) 1-year institutional @ $40  
Foreign mailing, add $9/year  
Please start my subscription with the

Contributors of $25 or more will receive a free book (please specify genre).  
A contribution of $5 is enclosed.  
Please send ____ Belles Lettres Eahins @ $16.50 (specify size(s)  
1 medium [1 large [1 extra large]. 100% cotton, Black. Design (above) by Lorraine Inzalaco. Includes postage and handling]  
Name  
Street.  

Send gift card to:  
Name  
Street.  

City:  
State:  

Total enclosed: