Impressions

by Janet Palmer Mullaney et al.

Southern Hemisphere

Our new section was truncated at the
last minute by one page, which con-
tained an interview with Mexican writer
Margo Glantz. Although the press and
one of the interviewers gave their OK,
the other author withheld permission.
You can read the interview, however,
when the University of Texas Press pub-
lishes Intimate Histories: Conversa-
tions with Latin American Women
Writers later on this summer.

@ Twenty stories by ten Latin
American women make up Landscapes
of a New Land, edited by Marjorie Ago-
sin (White Pine Press, 1989, $10, 194
pp., PB). You can get a taste of Margo
Glantz’s fiction here, savor some fami-
liar writers, and try a few who I think
will be new to you.

% In 1988, The Seal Press published
a novel called Angel ($8.95, 294 pp.,
PB) by a poet from Grenada, Merle Col-
lins. The novel, which intertwines the
story of three generations of women with
the political struggles of the island, was
praised by both Paule Marshall and Rosa
Guy for its appealing and accomplished
narrative voice.

@ Evelyn Toft sent us this evaluation
of Breaking Boundaries: Latina
Writings and Critical Readings, edited
by Asuncion Horno-Delgado, Eliana
Ortega, Nina M. Scott, and Nancy
Saporta Sternbach (University of Mas-
sachusetts Press):

This book provides a much-needed intro-
duction to Hispanic women writers. Per-
sonal testimonials by Latina writers and
critical essays about their texts are grouped
according to the ethnicities that make up
the Hispanic cultures of the United States
(Chicana, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Latin,
and Central American), providing a
glimpse into the issues Hispanic feminists
face. By and large, Hispanic women have
defined their feminism in terms of their
minority status. Latinas reject the femi-
nism of middle-class white women as ei-
ther condescending or as unwilling to
challenge fully the ideology of the domi-
nant culture, whose capitalism continues
to exploit them. The Latinas’ struggle to
be heard is further complicated by the
question of language. Latinas write in
Spanish or create bilingual texts to reflect
their community’s bicultural existence and
focus on Hispanic women as minority
women of color who must reconcile two
cultures and languages.

Certain features of Breaking Boundaries
detract from the book’s value as an intro-
duction to its area. No background infor-
mation is provided on the Latinas who
wrote testimonials, nor is their work dis-
cussed in the critical essays. Some of the
testimonials lack substance. The editors
assume the reader already shares their
anticapitalist ideology, leading to regretta-
ble and sometimes exasperating leaps of
logic. Nonetheless, this attempt to make
American feminists aware of the issues
facing their Hispanic sisters must be ap-
plauded.

@ Ms. Toft, who teaches at Fort Hays
State University in the Department of
Foreign Languages, also looked at A

Texts of Self

He Included Me: The Autobiography
of Sarah Rice (University of Georgia
Press, 1989, $19.95, 200 pp.) was pub-
lished in December, too late to be in-
cluded in Shelley Crisp’s article on
Southern autobiography (see p. 3). But
this is a book not to be missed. Rice is a
minister’s daughter who devoted her life
to teaching, when she wasn’t working in
other people’s houses because of lack of
money to pay Black teachers. According
to Louise Westling, her editor and tran-
scriber, Rice “is an unusually articulate
person who speaks for millions of south-
ern black women whose lifelong work
has never been recognized or described.
As a former schoolteacher, she has the
educational background that many lack,
and yet she also has the experience of
hard and ill-paid work, single mother-
hood, and community life that charac-
terizes so many of her sisters.” In the fol-
lowing passage, Rice describes a pur-
chase her mother made for her sister:

One time she went to buy Beatrice
some boots that were very stylish at that
time, bootees they called them, high tops
that were strung up. Beatrice was going to
school in Eufala by that time. Mama went
to this store and fainted in there because
she hadn’t eaten anything. All the money
she had was about a quarter, besides what
it took to get Beatrice some shoes, and
she was supposed to get some groceries out
of it, too. But she was determined that
Beatrice was going to have those shoes. I
think between thinking about it and being
hungry, she just passed out. . . . It just
killed her, but she got those shoes.

@ A Woman Doctor’s Civil War:
Esther Hill Hawks’ Diary (University
of South Carolina Press, 1989, 289
pp.), rescued in 1975 from a trash heap,
is the “first volume in an on-going series
of women’s diaries and letters of the
nineteenth-century South,” says the
series editor, Carol Bleser. The diary
“begins in October 1862 and records her
experiences as a teacher of freedmen and
black Union troops on the Sea Islands of

22 @ Belles Lettres

South Carolina during the remainder of
the Civil War.” In the following verba-
tim excerpt, Dr. Hawks describes tend-
ing to wounded men:

The men fed and supplied with clean
shirts and clean straw to lie in. Most of
the wounds are comparatively light — but
many of them may prove severe from the
fatigue and exhaustion of their long
march. Many touching instances of friend-
liness occurred among our patients, who
were a mixed company. ... in very close
quarters. The black Regts. had borne the
fiercest onslaught of the enemy, and the
white soldiers were loud in their praise and
when I saw white soldiers sharing their
tobacco with the black ones, I concluded
that the end of the war was near for the
millennium had begun!

Later she goes to visit the aunt of an as-
sociate, purported to be “only a
country woman” who could be counted
on to provide a “hearty welcome and
plenty of country fare.”

For about 15 minutes we were left to
amuse ourselves before “My Lady” ap-
peared, in the doorway with a stage
curtsy. She sailed into the room and
went through with the ceremony of intro-
duction with the airs of a princess — then
sank with languid grace, into an easy chair
near the Col. and opened upon us a

whole broadside of information concern-
ing her losses by the war and the peculiar
condition of things as regards servants &
— assured us that their house had always
been noted for its hospitality — but now,
she only had three house servants when
she formerly had ten and they were so
impudent she wouldn’t think of asking
them to do any extra work — and as their
dinner was already over she really couldn’t
offer us the hospitalities of her house. Our
whole party was most effectively ‘squelched’. We couldn’t utter a word — an
everyday tone of voice would have
sounded vulgar. Col. tried to say a few
polite things but failed, so “my lady” did
the talking. She felt badly at the new state
of things in regards to the colored people
she was sorry that they should suffer as
they must now — (here she grew pathetic)
— for she loved these people — she was
reared with them they had played together
in childhood & now who would exercise
a guardian care for them and more than
all beside, (now that they had gone from
her fostering care) who would lead them to
Jesus! There was evidence of a profound
sensation in the room for me, I nearly
choked trying to keep my feelings from
overpowering me!

Rosario Castellanos Reader (edited by
Maureen Ahern, University of Texas
Press) and sent us the following brief
review:

This Reader introduces the English-
speaking world to the poetry, short stories,
essays, and drama of Mexico’s foremost
contemporary feminist writer. Until her
untimely death in 1974, Rosario Castel-
lanos explored, exposed, and sought to
subvert the ideology that subordinates
women in Mexican society, while striking
universal themes of women’s experience
that American women will recognize in-
stantly. Ahern masterfully introduces the
various feminist themes found in Castel-
lanos’s writing, demonstrating their com-
plex interrelationships in Castellanos’s
texts. Castellanos recognized language to
be an instrument of oppression, repression,
and exclusion of women and sought to
create new words that would authentically
reflect women’s identity and experience.
By giving equal attention to the silence
that has surrounded women and taken
them out of history, she converted lan-
guage into a means to combat women’s
domination by using it to fashion images
of feminine authenticity. This anthology is
essential for anyone interested in women’s
art. If you are willing to be disabused of
the notion that Mexican realities have
little relevance to you, you will be pleas-
antly surprised.

Wedding picture of Sarah and Andrew
A. Rice, 1953. From He Included Me.

®@ The Studies in American Auto-
biography series from the University of
Wisconsin Press brings us Forbidden
Family: A Wartime Memoir of the Phil-
ippines, 1941-1945, written by Mar-
garet Sams and edited by Lynn A.
Bloom (1989, $19.95, 316 pp.). Writ-
ten five years after the war and put away
until recently, the account is an apolo-
gia for the author’s daughter, born while
her mother was in a Japanese internment
camp and in love with a man who later
became her second husband. Calling
Margaret Sams “a born storyteller,” the
editor tells us that she was drawn to the
work because it “anatomizes not only the
experience of pregnancy and childbirth
in captivity, but the efforts of a single
mother to survive under conditions of
stress and privation while caring for two
young children. That Margaret was li-
terally cut off from home and family, in
addition to experiencing ostracism
within the camp, balances love against
alienation, defiance against the desire
for social reintegration.”

@ An anti-Semitic Russian mob
bursts in on a Sabbath meeting and is
met by resistance — Jews wielding
torn-up prayer benches — instead of the
usual nonviolence. A family hides out in
the attic while a pogrom rages outside,
the father vowing to kill anyone who
harms his family with the knife he uses to
cut the huge rounds of cheese he sells
and the mother holding up her baby
daughter to the window, where the child
says in Yiddish, “see the drunken Gen-
tiles.” Thus begins Dakota Diaspora:
Memoirs of a Jewish Homesteader
(University of Nebraska Press/Bison
Books, $6.95, 160 pp.) by Sophie Tru-

Briefly Noted

Before we get too far into 1990, we
should bring the following notable fic-
tion of 1989 to your attention: Charley
Bland by Mary Lee Settle (Scribner’s),
American Appetites by Joyce Carol
Oates (Dutton), Spider Woman’s
Grandmother by Paula Gunn Allen
(Beacon), and Jigsaw by Sybille Bedford
(Knopf; recommended enthusiastically
by our consulting editors).

® Taking root from Carolyn
Heilbrun’s work in Writing a Woman’s
Life is a seedling project to come to frui-
tion in spring of 1983: a biography of
Gloria Steinem from Norton. Says
Steinem, “I believe [Carolyn Heilbrun]
has created a new theory of biography
that better suits many of us in the female
half of the world. She goes beyond as-
sumptions that were built on men’s life
patterns, or on women’s lives as they
were shaped by men and families. I plan
to help her as much as I can, but this is
not an ‘authorized biography.’ It is Car-
olyn’s book. I’m proud to be her first
subject.”

® Miriam K. Harris is compiling an
international collection of first-person
writings by battered women, with
women in prison being of special inter-
est. Send journals/diaries (xeroxed),
autobiographies (25 pp. max.), letters,
and essays with SASE to her at PO Box
670-665, Dallas, TX 753367-0665. An-
onymity will be respected on request.

pin. The child in the above vignette
emigrated out of czarist Russia with her
parents to North Dakota. She is respon-
sible for this gripping account of life in a
sod house, her father’s farming attempts
and later opening of a butcher shop, her
protected mother’s attempts to adapt,
and the community of Jewish exiles
scattered in this remote region of a prob-
lematic promised land.

@ Anna Quindlen is a popular news-
paper columnist who mines domestic
experiences for material. In a piece from
Living Out Loud (Ivy, $4.50, PB), she
describes the situation of the
writer-mother working at home.

Three times last year my elder son told
his friends that his mother does not work.
This may come as a surprise to you. It
certainly surprised me. Yet the neighbors
probably share his opinion and, deep in
their hearts, so do some of my friends. I
know what they mean: I do not hoist the
briefcase each morning, take one last pull
on the coffee cup, and head for an office
in a building that looks like a chrome-
and-glass étagère.

Instead, I shamble about here in a
bathrobe, turn in the robe for sweat pants
and, between trips to school and sessions
playing trucks on the floor, drop into my
office. It contains a file cabinet, a com-
puter, and a copy of the inspirational “An
Octopus and My Mommy Sleeping,” ex-
ecuted in green and black crayon. When I
am blocked, I lean back in my chair and
try to figure out which is the octopus and
which is me.

@ As discussed in Elizabeth Baet’s
essay in this issue, autobiography was
and is a prime means of literary expres-
sion for Black women. As she men-
tioned, several important works in this
genre have recently been published in
paperback in the Schomburg Library of
Nineteenth-Century Black Women
Writers from Oxford University Press.
In extremely attractive, palm-sized vol-
umes, they have published Behind the
Scenes or Thirty Years a Slave, and
Four Years in the White House by
Elizabeth Keckley ($9.95, p. 371),
Journals of Charlotte Forten Grimke,
edited by Brenda Stevenson ($10.95,
622 pp.), and Six Women’s Slave Nar-
ratives ($9.95, 97 pp.).

Winter 1990