Dissident Voices

The Prison Smell Clings

My Companions in the Bleak House, by Eva Kantirkova. Foreword by Vaclav Havel. The  
Overlook Press (12 W. 21st St., New York, NY 10010), 1987, $19.95, 224 pp.

by Susan P. Willens

Take a close look at this sen-

tence: “The prison smell clings

to your hair, to your clothes,  
your skin, the mattress you sleep on, the  
blankets you pull over you; it clings to  
the floor, the walls, the iron bedposts,  
and the eyes of the guards.” The smell  
clings to... the eyes of the guards —  
graphic phrases like that transform this  
memoir/novel of prison life from a per-  
sonal horror story to a work of art.

With the flick of an insight, Eva Kan-  
tirkova makes vivid the women’s sec-  
tion of Ruzhyn prison outside Prague  
where in 1981 she shared a cell with a  
ragtag collection of prostitutes, em-  
bezzlers, and thieves. She devotes most  
of her book to the stories of each of eleven  
characters. For example, Andy, a  
gypsy girl of remarkable personal dignity,  
talks quietly all night about how she  
served as a decoy for robbers, stabbed her  
lover, and pined for her little boy.

When the guard shouts “Get your  
things ready!” Andy is replaced by  
Helga, a “mountain of flesh . . . piled-  
up blond hairdo at its peak,” who spies  
on other prisoners. Helga’s massive body  
and greedy ears make the tiny cell suf-  
focating as she watches Eva, the writer  
and protagonist, for every clue that  
might aid Eva’s interrogators. Offensive  
as Helga is, the reader comes to know  
and care about her as well as the other  
prisoners.

From all [Denise] said I soon knew what  
the house looked like, what the room  
was like . . . I knew what their win-  
dow in Prague looked out on, the win-  
dow box of fuchsia on the third floor,  
and the gypsy children begging  
cigarettes on the sidewalk in front . . .  
the spot where Jaroslav waited in the  
rain because he’d forgotten his key; the  
shop where she always bought wine and  
sandwiches.

Thus Eva Kantirkova identifies with  
her fellow prisoners in the noisy, filthy,  
airless cells in Ruzhyn. She conveys  
much more about them, however. Her  
scene pulses with the life created by  
these desperate women. With the toilet  
bowl as a speaker and the plumbing sys-  
tem the amplifier, they shout encourage-  
ment, obscenity, complaint, song, and  
warning throughout the prison. With  
“horses,” tiny rolls of paper swinging on  
string between floors, they tease and  
flirt. Inside the cell, they confess and lie  
and steal and suffer. In other words, even  
in their incarceration, the prisoners  
make a society. Although Eva says “the  
menace of the Bleak House is subtle:  
human beings are reduced to nothing-  
ness,” she shows how human vitality can  
frustrate that menace.

Observing and recording all this, Eva  
remains hidden. She restrains herself;

Eva Kantirkova

Ten by Ten

The Women’s Decameron, by Julia  
Voznesenskaya. Translated from the Russian  
by W.B. Linton. New York: Holt, 1987,  
$9.95, 320 pp. (PB)

by Irene Zabytko

I heard about Julia Voznesenskaya from a PBS docudrama based

on her interrogation by the KGB  
for “anti-Soviet” and feminist-inspired  
poetry and for publishing the samizdat  
Russian feminist magazine Maria. The  
program was mildly interesting, but a  
glimpse of the real Julia shown at the end  
via a film that was smuggled out of her  
KGB prison was memorable. There she  
was, long-haired, soulful-eyed, fervently  
writing something — perhaps more  
poetry, an appeal for her release, or the  
outline to The Women’s Decameron. Not  
long after the show was aired, a Ms.  
magazine article appeared in 1980 on the  
release of some Russian feminists, Julia  
included. There she was again, on the  
cover of Ms. with the other Russian  
feminists.

Voznesenskaya’s book idea is based on  
Giovanni Boccaccio’s 14th-century The  
Decameron, in which 10 refugees from a  
plague in Florence amuse one another by  
relating tales for 10 days. In The  
Women’s Decameron each of 10 Soviet  
women, while quarantined in a Lenin-  
grad maternity hospital, tells a story each  
day on each of 10 agreed-upon themes:  
first love, seduction and abandonment,  
sex in farcical situations, bitches, in-  
fidelity and jealousy, rapists and their  
victims, money, revenge, noble deeds  
(by men and women), and happiness. As  
the women unravel their tales each day,  
we are shown various sides of their  
characters as they reveal themselves to  
be individualized, rather complex  
women. We also see their similarities as  
women surviving in a tough world and  
empathize with them despite cultural  
differences.

For instance, when we are first intro-  
duced to Valentina, a stereotypical  
Soviet bureaucrat, she begins her first  
story with a propagandistic, politically  
correct Soviet rhetoric on how she and  
her husband Pavel Petrovich “decided to  
build a healthy Soviet family,” to which  
Albina, a flight attendant, replies,  
“you’ve lectured us about your healthy  
family . . . but in my opinion a man’s as  
good as his cock.” As the days progress  
and the stories become more personal,  
Valentina exhibits more human quali-  
ties, such as spunk when she humiliates  
her rapist or sensuality when she acts like  
an enchanting witch (complete with  
herbs and a forest setting) to control a  
man’s wandering eye. I came to like her  
very much.

In fact all of the women are likable,  
compassionate, sensitive, and not with-  
out a sense of humor. Albina’s stories re-  
veal her to be not only an airline hostess  
but a KGB courtesan and, tragically, a  
victim of child sexual abuse. Emma, a  
theater director, and the initiator of the

— continued on page 15

she is hardly a character in her own  
memoir. As a political prisoner, guilty of  
“actions against the Republic” of  
Czechoslovakia, the speaker undergoes  
long daily interrogations. She only hints  
at the terrible strain on her body and  
mind from the effort of keeping silent,  
giving nothing away to guard or ques-  
tioner. Compared to the minute details  
she observes around her — head lice,  
cigarettes, damp air, voices — this self-  
effacement is dramatic. It renders her  
own experience literally unspeakable.

The title recalls other memoirs in the  
genre called “prison literature,” the type  
of literature that studies prisons to reveal  
a society’s pathology. If a community is  
weak and cruel, if it fears a minority or  
trick of thought, its prisons show that  
weakness and that fear. Freedom and pri-  
vacy are the air and water of the spirit.  
Any prison, especially in a police state,  
is fetid and dry; the odor clings even to  
the eyes of the guards. In Ruzhyn, Eva  
records how some prisoners wrestle for a  
semblance of freedom and privacy; in a  
better world no one would ever have to.  
Like Dickens’s Bleak House, this memoir  
blames society because justice fails in so  
many specific, deeply felt lives. But Kan-  
tirkova avoids Dickensian oratory; no  
fog rolls through Prague to signify seep-  
ing injustice. She accuses the state indi-  
rectly. Every time a guard peers through  
a peephole to catch a woman in a private  
moment, the government makes another  
memory.

Kantirkova’s book is more like Dos-  
toevsky’s The House of the Dead. It  
studies her fellow prisoners — lower  
class, ignorant women — who reveal hu-  
manity at its most debased and exalted.  
It also explores the abstract notion of  
freedom. In prison, where Dostoevsky  
found God and faith, Kantirkova finds  
these earthy women. Her women were  
wildly free before they were physically  
caught and strapped to a schedule. Gyp-  
sies, crazies, women on the run from vio-  
lent homes or seeking love, they are mad  
for freedom. The author makes no great  
existential pronouncements about her  
cellmates. Instead she shows them — a  
lusty, brawling bunch of women — re-  
sisting capture.

Eva Kantirkova lives and writes in  
Prague, where she was a signatory of  
Charta 77, a human rights charter. This  
volume testifies to her continued cour-  
age. Like her previous novel, it was pub-  
lished outside Czechoslovakia and smug-  
gled back in, even back into the prison,  
where, she says, “it made a sensation,  
passing from hand to hand even among  
the warders, who are said to have de-  
clared it ‘a real slice of life’.” My Com-  
panions in the Bleak House won the Tom  
Stoppard Prize for the best book of 1984  
in Czech and Slovak nonofficial litera-  
ture, and Overlook Press now adds it to  
its list of controversial European fiction.  
Readers must be grateful to the writer  
and the publisher for creating it.

@ Susan P. Willens reviews fiction for  
Belles Lettres, and teaches and directs a  
continuing education program in Washing-  
ton, D.C.

Poems as Necessary as Bread

Beyond the Limit: Poems by Irina Ratushinskaya, translated by Frances Pador Brent and  
Carol J. Avins. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1987, $23.95 (HB) $11.95 (PB),  

121 pp.

A Captive Lion: The Life of Marina Tsvetayeva, by Elaine Feinstein. New York: Dutton,  

1987, $19.95, 289 pp., illus.

Selected Poems of Marina Tsvetayeva, translated by Elaine Feinstein. New York: Dutton,  

1987, $12.95 (PB), 108 pp.  
by Emily Leider

Marina Tsvetayeva and Irina  
Ratushinskaya — Russian  
poets of different generations,  

regions, and temperaments — have writ-  
ten poetry that bears witness. In isola-  
tion, in exile, separated from whatever  
and whomever they cherished, they pro-  
duced poems that say: This has hap-  
pened, not just to me but to others in our  
wolfish century.

Ratushinskaya, at age 33, now lives in  
the United States after having been re-  
leased from KGB prison on the eve of the  
Reykjavik summit. She wrote Beyond the  
Limit while incarcerated for “agitation  
carried on for the purpose of subverting  
the Soviet regime” in a “strict regime”  
Gulag camp for women prisoners of con-  
science, where she was often placed in a  
small, unheated, isolation cell. Her  
poems survive because she memorized  
them; some were written with a match-  
stick on a bar of soap. Repeatedly, she  
sounds the clarion note of defiance: “No  
is my only answer.” Watching the moon  
rise “through rusted fierce spikes,” she  
sees its ascent as an emblem of her own  
audacious “tearing the clouds” and  
celebrates the clarity born of privation:  
“through a grating, vision is sharper.”

Notoriously naive and impractical in  
her politics, Tsvetayeva was consistent  
in her humanism and her horror of or-  
ganized violence, “no matter in whose  
name it may be perpetrated.” Convinced  
that poetry should not be enlisted as  
propaganda, she nonetheless cried out in  
outrage when the Germans marched  
into Czechoslovakia, a country whose  
hospitality and financial generosity con-  
tinued to sustain her even after she had  
moved. She shaped her anguish into a  
classic refusnik anthem: “In/ the mad-  

house of the inhuman/ I refuse to live./  
With the wolves of the market place/ I  
refuse to howl.”

Tsvetayeva’s cultured, privileged child-  
hood as the daughter of a pianist and an  
art professor in Tsarist Moscow in no way  
prepared her for her life of dislocation,  
poverty, and loss. During the revolu-  
tion, while her fatally weak husband  
Sergei Efron fought with the White Rus-  
sians’ side, she found herself alone in  
Moscow with two small daughters to sup-  
port. During the famine of 1919, the  
younger daughter died of starvation.  
When she discovered that Efron had sur-  
vived their five-year separation, she  
doggedly followed him into exile, first in  
Berlin, then Prague, then Paris. Despite  
her impracticality, it was she who sup-  
ported and cared for her family through  
countless moves, disastrous love affairs,  
and abject living conditions. When  
Efron became sympathetic to the Bol-  
sheviks, she followed him back to the  
Soviet Union, where her pregnant  
daughter was soon imprisoned and her  
husband arrested. Unable to find even  
the humblest employment, estranged  
from her son, and rejected by Moscow,  
she hung herself in 1941. “I do not want  
to die,” she had written. “I want not to  
be.” Elaine Feinstein presents this tor-  
tured chronicle with unfailing sym-  
pathy, quoting generously from letters,  
journals, and poems. Only her sketchy,  
at times botched, documentation disap-  
points.

Tsvetayeva’s intensely romantic tem-  
perament made her a stranger to any  
kind of moderation. She pushed every-  
thing to its limit, “seeking ecstasy,  
(Nadezhda Mandelstam wrote) not only  
in love, but also in abandonment, lone-  
liness and disaster.” When she wrote,  

— continued on page 15

Belles Lettres © 5