A Woman Is Her Mother

Fierce Attachments, by Vivian Gornick. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1987, $15.95,

204 pp.  
by Enid Dame

This is a book about connec-

tions: to a tenement apart-

ment in the mostly Jewish  
Bronx, to one’s past, to other people, to  
the world as one finds and creates it. But  
for Vivian Gornick, the chief and fierc-  
est attachment is to her mother. Gor-  
nick and her mother are embattled  
women, “locked into a narrow channel  
of acquaintance, intense and binding.”  
This brilliant memoir, therefore, can be  
read in light of other mother-daughter  
explorations, from Colette’s loving rec-  
ollections to Tillie Olsen’s anthology of  
mothers’ and daughters’ voices. What  
surprises here is not the rage that Gor-  
nick recounts — some of Olsen’s women  
are just as angry — but that the relation-  
ship she documents is still very much in  
progress.

At first Gornick’s mother seems  
familiar — the Jewish Mother of litera-  
ture, usually encountered in books writ-  
ten by sons. She is opinionated, sharp-  
witted, feisty, a political radical, and a  

pragmatic feminist. But Mrs. Gornick is  
also “a working-class romantic” who be-  
lieves love is central to a woman’s exis-  
tence. Having mythologized her happy  
marriage, she reacts operatically to her  
husband’s early death: climbing into his  
coffin, leaping into his open grave,  
making subsequent scenes at the ceme-  
tery, weeping, fainting, sinking into si-  
lence. Her grief is on a grand scale; it  
lasts the rest of her life.

In identifying her mother’s terrible  
romanticism, Gornick introduces  
another theme: the strategies employed  
by women without power or status to  
confer meaning on their lives. Mrs.  
Gornick would rather see herself as a  
passionate sufferer than as a person with  
no identity at all. Nettie, a beautiful, re-  
cently widowed neighbor, takes a differ-  
ent approach. Knowing that she can at-  
tract men, she tries to use this knowl-  
edge to her advantage: “She knew of no  
other way to make herself feel better  
than to make people want her.”

Nettie seeks to initiate the teenage  
Vivian into her sexual stratagems.

Naturally, she and Mrs. Gornick are ad-  
versaries in a battle to influence the  
girl’s developing sense of self. Both are  
successful; young Vivian learns from  
both. But what does she learn?

Mrs. Gornick’s extravagant bereave-  
ment results in loneliness and an un-  
lived life. Nettie’s blatant use of sexual-  
ity results in her victimization by the  
men she had hoped to control. Al-  
though grown-up Vivian Gornick  
wishes to live differently, she finds her-  
self repeating their patterns, especially  
in her unsatisfactory relationships with  
men. Her two mentors, she discovers,  
are actually not so different from each  
other.

For Nettie and Mrs. Gornick ulti-  
mately share a conviction: They cannot  
conceive of a woman’s making her way  
through the world without depending  
on a man. Gornick comes to embrace a  
very different vision: salvation through  
one’s own rigorous intellectual work.  
For her, this ideal is symbolized by the  
image of a rectangular space inside her,  
a place of “light and air.” Her goal is to  
find a way to live within this clear space,  
unhampered by the sloppy temptations  
of love, loss, and self-pity. Personally,  
however, I found this love versus work  
dichotomy a bit too schematic. I wish  
Gornick could imagine a way to recon-  

cile, rather than oppose, the claims of  
the emotions and the intellect.

However, one reads this book not to  
agree with specific insights but to ex-  
perience the mother-daughter bond as  
the author has lived it, in all its furious  
complications. Male readers should find  
Fierce Attachments valuable and interest-  
ing, but it has, I feel, a special message  
for daughters. The mother sees separa-  
tion from her daughter as a rejection of  
her self, which it frequently is. Thus,  
Mrs. Gornick reacts violently to col-  
lege-freshman Vivian’s brand-new ideas.  
To the mother, this “unshared life” is no  
less than “treason.” To the daughter, it  
is a necessary step into selfhood.

“A woman is her mother,” Anne Sex-  
ton claims. “You are me,” my own  
mother once said — an idea I found ter-  
rifying because I could not absolutely  
deny it. Three years after her death, I  
am still reacting to this statement. Ob-  
viously, there can be no resolution to  
Gornick’s book. She and her mother  
(now 80) are still speaking, still embat-  
tled, still attached.

© Enid Dame is a poet and writer living  
in Brooklyn. Her latest book of poems is  
Lilith and her Demons. She teaches at  
Rutgers University and Lehman College  
and is currently working on a novel.

A is for Ambivalence:

Books on Motherhood

Of Woman Born: Motherhood as Experience and Institution, by Adrienne Rich. New York:  
Norton, 1986, $9.95, 322 pp.

The Mother Knot, by Jane Lazarre. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1986, $8.95, 188 pp.  
Every Mother’s Son, by Judith Arcana. The Seal Press (3131 Western Ave. #410, Seattle,  
WA 98121), 1986, $10.95, 322 pp.

Mothers on Trial: The Battle for Children and Custody, by Phyllis Chesler. The Seal Press  
(3131 Western Ave. #410, Seattle, WA 98121), 1987, $11.95, 558 pp.

The Mother Machine: Reproductive Technologies from Artificial Insemination to Artificial  
Wombs, by Gena Corea. New York: Harper & Row, 1986, $7.95, 374 pp.

Raising a Baby the Government Way: Mother’s Letters to the Children’s Bureau, 1915—  
1932, by Molly Ladd-Taylor. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986, $18.00,  
212 pp.

In the Family Way: Childbearing in the British Aristocracy, 1760-1860, by Judith Schneid  
Lewis. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986, $29.00, 313 pp.

by Darcie Conner Johnston

In the honest illustrated alphabet of  

motherhood, A is for ambivalence.

The picture shows the heroine with  
at least 15 hands: wiping a nose or a pair  
of eyes, sometimes her own; gathering  
an armful of precious child in a snug  
hug; spreading chunky peanut butter on  
whole wheat slices “because it’s good for  
you”; brandishing the means of murder  
or suicide; dripping fingerpaint and grip-  
ping a worn copy of Goodnight Moon;  
and grasping a flute, perhaps, or a com-  
puter manual, or a copy of Adrienne  
Rich’s Of Woman Born.

“Murderous alternation between bit-  
ter resentment and raw-edged nerves,  
and blissful gratification and tender-  
ness,” words from Rich’s journal, were  
the seed for her feminist classic, one of  
the most provocative, myth-bashing  
works ever published on being a mother.  
Recently reissued in a special tenth an-  
niversary edition, Of Woman Born has a  
rich new introduction and a few more  
notes. Otherwise, it remains the same  
timeless exposé of what it is really like,  
what it really means, to be a mother  
here on Earth in recent millennia.

Providing a perspective on mother-  
hood—the experience from the personal  
side of the prism, as opposed to Rich’s  
more analytic angle, is Jane Lazarre’s  
The Mother Knot. As different as a reader  
may be from Jane — a passionate, mid-  
dle-class, Jewish, intellectual White  
woman married to a Black man — she  
will feel repeatedly the rush of déjà vu.  
This is her story too. Jane’s day-by-day,  
thought-by-thought, crisis-by-crisis ac-  
count of herself, husband James, and  
baby Benjamin, from courtship to the  
decision to have another child, is starkly  
intimate and profoundly moving. Her  

struggle to retain her separate self de-  
spite the overwhelming love — the en-  
gulfment — she feels on Benjamin’s be-  
half picks up the same thread that runs  
through Of Woman Born. At the heart  
of this book with an enormous heart  
flows the following conversation be-  
tween Jane and another mother:

“I would die for him,” I emphasized.  
“All those movies about mothers  
running in front of trucks are true. I  
would much prefer to die than lose  
him. I guess that’s love” — I winced  
and we both laughed — “but he has  
destroyed my life and I live only to find  
a way of getting it back again.” I finish  
slowly, for without the second part of  
the sentence, the first part was a  
treacherous lie.

Every Mother’s Son is another per-  
sonal rendering of child rearing, with a  
special focus on sons, “the making of  
men.” In a different slant on a mother’s  
ambivalence toward her children, a step  
beyond Lazarre’s “I love them and every-  
thing, but I hate them,” Judith Arcana  
opens the pages of her journal to “The  
Book of Daniel,” where ’tis writ with  
high awareness and deep love her efforts  
to keep her son from blindly inheriting  
the male ethic that would teach him to  
view women — herself included — as  
less than. Not just a little part of her  
pain comes from the knowledge that  
those efforts, though they may better  
the planet, make Daniel’s growing up  
more difficult than it would otherwise  
be. To provide a context for her family’s  
story, Arcana also discusses the real and  
ideal roles of men and fathers in society  
and the relationships between men and  
women, using excerpts from many inter-  
views to illustrate.

Mothers on Trial reveals a growing  
trend in family courts to separate chil-  
dren from their “good enough” mothers.

&

Gena Corea. Photo © by Charlene Eldridge  
Wheeler.

Author Phyllis Chesler (Women and  
Madness), through example after tragic  
example, paints a relentlessly horrifying  
picture of the mothers and children who  
are victimized by a perverse system that  
focuses on the mother, measuring her  
against impossible standards, yet turns a  
deaf ear to the sins of the father. Chesler  
explores the many “crimes” for which  
these women are penalized (poverty, up-  
pityness, sexuality); the reasons for  
which fathers are often seeking custody  
(seeing children as part of an economic  
package, wanting to punish the ex-wife,  
needing to conquer a new frontier or as-  
sert supremacy); and the interrelation-  
ships among mothers, fathers, lawyers,  
judges, and, of course, children. Read-  
ers may find themselves searching  
through the index for “Hope, shred of” or  
“Tunnel, light at end of.”

Chesler also has a chapter on fetal  
politics — test tube babies, the rights of  
unwed fathers, sperm donors, and so  
forth — a subject that feminist scholar  
Gena Corea treats in full in The Mother  
Machine. As its subtitle indicates, this  
book covers the “gamete” of reproduc-  
tive technologies from artificial insemina-  
tion to artificial wombs, from surrogate  
motherhood to cloning. Its paperback  
release nearly coinciding with the Baby  
M case, this is a relevant, riveting  
analysis of the political, social, and ethi-  
cal implications of a new industry, an  
analysis that is buttressed by the author’s  
interviews with researchers, patients,  

and clinic personnel and her knowledge  
of the medical literature.

Raising a Baby the Government Way  
and In the Family Way are two books of  
historical interest. The first, a poignant  
collection of letters sent by mothers of  
every class, region, and educational  
background to the U.S. Children’s  
Bureau between 1915 and 1932, docu-  
ments the emotional and practical bur-  
dens, as well as the courage and re-  
sourcefulness, of a generation of Ameri-  
can women. For instance, in a letter  
dated October 19, 1916, Mrs. A.P. of  

Wyoming wrote:

I live sixty-five miles from a Dr. and my  
other babies (two) were very large at  
birth, one 12 lbs. the other 10½ lbs. I  
have been very badly torn each time,  
through the rectum the last time. My  
youngest child is 7½ (and when I am  
delivered this time it will be past 8½  
yrs). I am 37 years old and I am so  
worried and filled with perfect horror at  
the prospects ahead. So many of my  
neighbors die at giving birth to their  
children. I have a baby 11 months old  
in my keeping now whose mother died  
—when I reached their cabin last  
Nov. It was 22 below zero and I had to  
ride 7 miles horseback. She was nearly  
dead when I got there and died after  
giving birth to a 14 lb. boy. It seems  
awful to me to think of giving up all  
my work and leaving my little ones, 2  
of which are adopted — a girl 10 and  
this baby. Will you please send me all  
the information for the care of myself  
before and after and at the time of  
delivery. I am far from a Dr. and we  
have no means, only what we got on  
this rented ranch. I also want all the  
information on baby care especially  
right young newborn ones. If there is  
anything what I can do to escape being  
torn again won’t you let me know. I am  
just 4 months along now but haven't  
quickened yet. I am very Resp.

In the Family Way, also a period piece,  
focuses on childbearing by women of the  
British aristocracy from 1760 to 1860, a  
subject brought to life through the  
women’s supportive letters to each  
other. Although both books are must  
reading for scholars, they should fasci-  
nate even the casually interested — and  
remind us that regardless of when or  
where or how, in the alphabet of  
motherhood, A is for many things, not  
the least of which is awe.

@ Darcie Conner Johnston, mother of  
two young boys, grew yet another hand to  
write this article. Some of her other hands  
edit for Time-Life Books, write songs, and  
strum the guitar.

Belles Lettres $9