A Tale of Two Islands

John Dollar, by Marianne Wiggins. New York: Harper & Row, 1989, $17.95, 214 pp.

by Susan P. Willens

I read it at one sitting—because the
dread and excitement hold
you—Marianne Wiggins’s novel

John Dollar makes you watch civilization
unravel slowly, inevitably, with agoniz-
ing beauty. In this tale of two islands,
Charlotte Lewes leaves England in 1917
for Rangoon in order to escape the
image of a war widow she sees in her
mirror:

War showed on all [widows] ... their faces
read like places on a map: Ypres, Marne,
Verdun. Her own face, she assumed, read
Somme. That’s why she hated looking at
herself ... turned away from herself or
anyone who might reflect an image of herself.

In Burma she becomes a teacher of
young daughters of the British Raj. From
her they learn English and order accord-
ing to the precepts of the fatherland they
have never seen. At the same time,
Charlotte shucks off some of her own
English restraints, clothes, shoes, man-
ners. She wanders invisible through the
early morning streets, among startling
smells and sights: the songbird market;
“nirvana goods” like scent sticks, flowers,
puppets; saffron-robed young priests. She
also gives herself to water, the element
that pours through the novel:

Charlotte drank her first monsoon as if she
were turned to earth. She stood in it and let
it wash her. She walked in it, making
laughing eddies ‘round her ankles. She liked
to feel amphibious, swimming through a

double life.

Charlotte, an alien in the stuffy British
community, melts into Rangoon, finds a
new mystic self, and falls in love with
the sailor John Dollar.

Charlotte’s character rings true. She
resembles Adela Quested in A Passage to
India and other repressed fugitives from
England to the colonies, but she is still

Marianne Wiggins.
Photo by Andrew Douglas

an intense, quirky original. On the other
hand, John Dollar remains hazy. We
learn only that he is a capable seaman,
respected by other Englishmen and na-
tives, and that he finds love and passion
together with Charlotte. He is a missed
opportunity in the novel named for him.

The heart of the story begins to beat
when John Dollar’s boat the Charlotte
leads a doomed expedition to an island
south of Rangoon. In fine weather a
band of English subjects—including
some parents, Charlotte and a male
teacher, their pupils, and servants—sail
off to explore the Island of Our Out-
lawed Dreams and dedicate it to King
George on his birthday. But fearsome
portents hover around their jolly picnic.
Frantic turtles rush beachward to lay
their eggs, phantom outriggers material-
ize on the horizon, someone finds a skull,
the boys disappear. When a tidal wave
smashes the Charlotte onto the beach,
the expected horrors begin.

Wiggins has been quoted as saying that
this novel began as an answer to Lord of
the Flies. She observed that William
Golding “had it wrong for girls,” that

girls would experience isolation and
danger differently from his schoolboys.
She shows how Charlotte’s eight stu-
dents, now castaways, lose their civiliza-
tion as they lose their language, myth
and fairy tale, the names of things. She
has an uncanny ear for the way children
grasp and twist what they have heard
from their parents.

Thus, when the adults are lost, the
shipwrecked girls form a kind of com-
mune at first. In a planning circle, they
work together to keep their language
and make rules. This benign social order
is inevitably colored by the attitudes of
the Raj; the mixed-race girl called
Monkey is set outside the circle because
she is coffee-colored instead of pink.
Still, when they find John Dollar on the
beach, his spine broken, they shape a
family around him. For a while they are
mother and sister to one another.

Wiggins makes each of the little girls
individual with amazing economy. In
quick brush strokes she paints the twin
sisters who become one creature, the
youngest child who creates her own sep-
arate cave-home, the grief-stricken Jane
who just stops eating. The girl called
Monkey loves Jane. When Monkey finds
water, she celebrates it as a gift to Jane:

There hung a sort of spray and dozens of
small rainbows, from which she could hear
the melody of running water. If I could bring
Jane here, she knew, If I could bring all this
to Jane ... She knelt beside the stream and
let the water run around her fingers,
thrilling to its race, so clear and cool. It
tasted like a breath of heaven, like the story
and the meaning of her life—like joy. She
splashed her face with it. She could wash
Jane’s hair, she thought, she could renew her
and restore her with this.

Throughout the novel, as here, Wiggins
combines expressive detail with insight
into her characters.

Gradually, the girls succumb to grief,
illness, natural dangers, and their own
evil. Nolly, the strongest and cruelest,
dominates them with her insane version
of the Christianity she learned from her
minister-father. She thinks, “perhaps
there was someone among them who
was being tested by God,” so she anoints

herself high priest. She recites the cate-
chism, judges good and evil, and reduces
John Dollar to a useless, cannibalized
idol. Despite her, the other girls lose
their faith in him and in one another;
they split into hideous factions. Finally,
one day from their perch on a headland,
they witness a ghastly scene, after which
nothing can keep them from savagery.
The girls rend their original compact so
completely that even when they dis-
cover water and fire they cannot live.

The adventure ends when the two sur-
vivors—Charlotte and Monkey—find
each other. Since the novel opens with
them living in isolation in rural Eng-
land, two lone women surviving like
witches on a barren hill, the reader im-
mediately turns back to the beginning of
the book to start again.

It is Wiggins’s achievement that the
reader is eager to return to the island of
horrors. She revives old stories—Robin-
son Crusoe in the heart of darkness—
and makes them new. Like Conrad, she
sees how thin is the veneer of civiliza-
tion, how our furies, our Ypres, Marne,
Verdun, and Somme, pursue us to the
farthest island. Unlike Defoe’s castaway,
Charlotte and her girls die or go mad.
This is Wiggins’s original vision.

Persuasive and compelling in itself,
John Dollar now acquires added intensity
from events in the real world. As the
wife of novelist Salman Rushdie, Mari-
anne Wiggins is experiencing a new
nightmare. Condemned to death by the
Ayatollah Khomeini, vilified by Muslim
fundamentalists because of supposed
heresy in his novel The Satanic Verses,
Rushdie must feel that a terrible tidal
wave has ripped him off the fragile ship
of the familiar. Gone are constitutional
protections of speech and imagination,
respect for life, physical safety. Even in
hiding in England, then, he and Wiggins
are living with the situation that she has
depicted in John Dollar. They must be
terrified.

# Susan P. Willens teaches English at
George Washington University in Wash-
ington, D.C.

On the Road with Wimp,

Waif, and Teen

Vanished, by Mary McGarry Morris. New York: Viking Penguin, 1988, $16.95, 246 pp.

by Jeanne E. Casey

In this stunning first novel, Canny, a little

towhead kidnapped from her well-to-
do family, does not vanish from the
reader’s point of view. Nor does Aubrey
Wallace, the mousy, middle-aged man
who is seduced and curiously abducted
by the same manic-depressive teenaged
girl who whisked Canny from her play-
pen. Dotty Johnson is the girl whose
compulsive acts of sex and thievery and
drug-induced moods compel the three-
some to drive desperately for five years
from one roadstop to another.

From the onset of what Morris calls
the true story (a story that later will be
contradicted), the reader is privy to
details of Canny, Wallace, and Dotty’s
life together—and to Wallace’s private
thoughts.

Canny, kidnapped when she was one,
thinks at six that Wallace and Dotty are
her parents. Sick, lice-infected, and rid-
ing in the back seat, Canny alternately
whines and, when her complaining sets
Dotty off, plays diplomat to pacify
Dotty’s anger and impatience with life.

Wallace is as protective of Canny as
he can be. In mollifying Dotty’s temper,
Wallace and Canny are allies. Wallace
drives wherever Dotty tells him to;
Dotty steals or buys with sexual favors,
food, clothing, and junk they can sell

|: Vanished, Mary McGarry Morris’s

Spring 1989

out of the car trunk at seasonal flea
markets.

Both Wallace and Canny depend on
Dotty for their emotional security—that
security being the belief that, together,
they are a family. Dotty brought them
together. Probably an abused child her-
self, Dotty found two human beings she
could dominate and instinctively se-
cured for herself a family. But Dotty’s
survival needs change after five years.

What Dotty once did without premed-
itation (kidnap a baby girl and run away
with a waifish man), she plans to undo.
She has no remorse, no sense that
Canny belongs to her natural parents, no
suspicion that Wallace would be better
off without her. She wants to move, un-
fettered, off to Hollywood and start an
acting career.

By the time Dotty conceives of a plan
to abandon Canny at the house she took
her from five years ago, new characters
have been introduced—an impoverish-
ed, backwoods family of an ex-convict
with whom Dotty becomes sexually in-
volved. Dotty schemes with her crude
lover to turn Wallace and Canny over to
the police and claim a big ransom.

Morris creates a climactic irony around
the prospect of Canny being returned to
her natural parents and a wholesome
home. The only family Canny knows is
Wallace and Dotty, and Canny’s greatest
fear is that they will abandon her. Some-
how the kidnapping, the five years of

Mary McGarry Morris.
Photo by Melissa A. Morris

deprivation, and an instance of sexual
abuse when Canny is victimized by the
ex-convict’s brother-in-law—in sum,
what Morris terms the “terrible random-
ness of evil”—does not rend Canny’s in-
nocence and spirit the way society’s
decisive vengeance does when she is
wrested from Wallace and Dotty.
Canny’s real father, Louis Bird, and
the law officers intent to free her from
her “captors” destroy her world. Her
points of reference are lost in a blitz of
confusion, anger, and violence.

“Get away!” Canny screeched, moving the
gun from window to window. “You bastards!
You goddamn pricks, you get the fuck away
from us!”

“They ain’t gonna hurt you, Canny,”
Wallace said.

Coming around the front of the car was a
tall, stoop-shouldered man with sharp bony
features and long, deep creases in his cheeks.
His eyes were bloodshot and set deep with
weariness. He was the only unarmed man.

“Caroline!” the man called, his voice
cracking as he stopped to look through the
shattered windshield ...

“Get the fuck outta ...” she gasped, cringing
as Bird leaned closer.
“Oh my God!” Bird cried in a thick, choked

voice. “It’s you, Caroline, my ...”

Not in the five years since Canny
vanished has it so clearly registered in
Bird’s mind that he has lost his
daughter. For the reader now, too, what

has unequivocally vanished is Canny’s

innocence and, with her innocence,
Canny as we have known her. “How will
Canny brave life now?” we can only
wonder, as the narrative ends.

An epilogue follows, disturbing for its
startling change in voice. Dotty speaks
now. We learn from her that society
judged Wallace as Canny’s kidnapper
and Dotty’s abductor. Dotty appears on
talk shows promoting this version. Her
story contradicts Wallace’s account,
what Morris offered as the true story.
That Dotty’s version is accepted (and
perhaps by now she believes it) is provo-
cative testimony to the vulnerability of
truth as well as of innocence. We can
only hope that Canny will recover and,
exonerate both. Nominated for the 1988
National Book Award and the PEN
Faulkner Award, this riveting tale cries
out for a sequel.

@ Jeanne E. Casey edits two newsletters
and a book review column for Contingen-
cies, the magazine of the American
Academy of Actuaries.

Belles Lettres @ 9