A Studio of One’s Own

Women, Art, and Society, by Whitney Chadwick. New York: Thames  
and Hudson, 1990, $24.95 (HB), $14.95 (PB), 384 pp.

by Scarlet Cheng

In her 1979 book The Obstacle Race, Germaine Greer  
brushed aside the "false question" so often raised against  
women artists — "Why were there no great women paint-  
ers?" Instead, she suggested that the real questions include  
the following: “What is the contribution of women to the  
visual arts?"; “If there were any women artists, why were  
there not more?"; and “If we can find one good painting by  
a woman, where is the rest of her work?"

Whitney Chadwick’s new book, Women, Art and Society,  
a chronological survey of women artists in Western society  
from the Middle Ages to the Postmodern era, is a continua-  
tion of the attempt to answer those questions and to under-  
stand women artists in the context of their times.

While Greer’s book was divided by theme — with chap-  
ters entitled "Family," "Love," "The Illusion of Success,"  
and so forth — Chadwick’s book looks at women artists and  
the society in which they lived, period by period, which  
makes it ideal for an introductory survey course or for  
someone in the mood for a crash course on women’s art. It  
is amply filled with over 240 illustrations, 50 of them in  
color, and it is part of Thames and Hudson’s handsome  
"World of Art" series.

Both Greer and Chadwick show that for centuries women  
have been looked upon as sources of inspiration, symbols of  
abstract ideas and emotions, and objects of desire. As Si-  
mone de Beauvoir argued so cogently in The Second Sex,  
woman was always the Other. As a result, woman as  

Artemisia Gentileschi: Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting  

the active agent, the do-er, the artist, was a social anomaly  

and perceived as a threat. As Greer writes, "The young  

woman who gave evidence of talent was not an artist, but a  
[continued on next page]  

starting is much more interesting to me.

The most exciting thing I do is to sit down at my table  
with a variety of materials that seemed to me, when I was  
selecting them, to have an affinity for one another, and start  
playing with them. A lot of the time I find that people  
become suspicious as soon as I use the word "play." I also  
tend to feel just a little embarrassed by how much fun I  
have, as if anything that is that much fun could not also be  
serious.

Whenever I am working on a book, I get ideas for others.  
I also get ideas for books when I am travelling or when I  
see something that someone else has done that excites me.  
The structure often comes before anything else. I see or  
imagine something that seems interesting but is not neces-  
sarily functional. I like to construct and deconstruct it in my  
head first, then go to my sketchbook and see if I can draw  
the parts. Then, I make a model to see if I can make it  
work. I like structures that are complex and challenging to  
figure out, but are self-explanatory for the person experienc-  
ing them. If I can’t make it obvious how to unfold, turn,  
unwrap, assemble, or disassemble something I have made, I  
feel dissatisfied. I am not interested in making objects that  
only other artists and critics have a hope of understanding.

This doesn’t mean you don’t have to do anything. My  
best books are interactive. In order to "get" them, you have  
to be open to the experience. To begin with, you will proba-  

bly have to re-examine your definition of book. If I say to  
you "A book is a space-time sequence," and you are willing  
to think about what that means, we have a framework in  
which to communicate.

From an art education in printmaking, I learned to think  
in layers — to construct images sequentially from back to  
front. From my experience as a closet poet since the age of  
sixteen, I learned a sense of mystery and the necessity of  
economy. From long association with graphic designers, I  
developed an awareness of structure and the ability to syn-  
thesize diverse components into a whole.

I have been looking for a job that would support me in  
doing something I am good at and would enjoy for about  
nine months now. During that time, I have had a lot of  
informational interviews with other people who design  
books for commercial markets and who produce wastebasket  
art (advertising). Unfortunately, they want to know how to  
do what I am doing, while I want to know how I can go on  
doing what I am doing and not starve.

Barbara Harman has been making unique, editioned  
artists' books since 1985. Her book "Some Mountains" is in  
several major collections internationally, including the  
Victoria and Albert Museum in London and The Museum of  
Modern Art in New York City. She currently teaches and  
works at the Minnesota Center for Book Arts, Minneapolis.