The Triumph of Age

Age, by Hortense Calisher. New York: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1987, $14.95, 121 pp.  
Second Chances, by Alice Adams. New York: Knopf, 1988, $18.95, 257 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

Rupert and I are not expected to

be still compelled by sex," writes  
Hortense Calisher. But Gemma and  
Rupert (he, seventy-three and she,  
seventy-seven) have little time for the  
supposed-to-bes and the process of  
graceful aging. Thirty-five years into  
their marriage, they still surprise and  
baffle one another. Sometimes their  
anger comes through, but more often,  
joy, reveling in one another’s being —  
physically, yes, but also emotionally and  
intellectually. Whether our witness is to  
their shared laughter or pain or to their  
mundane or worldly talk, we are privy to  
the special relationship they have  
worked so hard to create.

In a series of short, alternating chap-  
ters, we are taken inside the soul and  
psyche of each partner. We enter, for  
example, into that heart of hearts where  
lust for life competes with dreaded  
death, where terror is a constant com-  
panion. But fear of one’s own death is  
not so frightening; rather, both Gemma  
and Rupert fear the aloneness that will  
follow the other’s passing.

Dudley Venable and Celeste Timber-  
lake, two of the seven friends met in  
Second Chances, know that aloneness.  
Both widows, they are ostensibly coping  
well. Yet suddenly, when least expected,  

most couples the age of  

both experience waves of longing for  
their deceased mates. Dudley, for one, is  
overcome with "the most acute and  
painful" sense of loss while waiting for  
her new lover in a restaurant. "Ah, if  
only it were he, her old Sam, who would  
at any moment now walk through that  
wide, brass-fitted door ... over to Dud-  
ley. His wife." The ache, she muses,  
blots out the ambivalence that so often  
marred their day-to-day lives. Gone are  
the mixed memories, the little irrita-  
tions. In their place is guilt for those  
"joyless strivings with Brooks, in bed...  
that terrible act of treachery to Sam —  
poor dead, defenseless Sam."

But this is not a novel of unending  
grief, angst, or self-pity. On the contrary.  
Adams has created a dazzling story, an  
older person’s Big Chill, where reverence  
for long-time friendships and the rituals  
that accompany them override concern  
with smaller things like annoying habits.  
Take enigmatic Polly Blake, a woman  
who in some ways is the group’s pivot.  
Save for sketchy knowledge about her  
stint in Spain against Franco during the  
Spanish Civil War, many details of her  
life are unknown to her best friends.  
This is troubling, sometimes, but  
reclusiveness is Polly, and the friends  
know that they cannot push her. In-  
stead, they appreciate what she gives  

Hortense Calisher.  
Photo by Thomas Victor.

them and satisfy other needs by contacts  
with others.

Or take prudish, gay Edward Crane  
and his lover, the too-beautiful Freddy,  
who found the joys of gay activism after  
years in the closet. Much to Edward’s  
surprise and dismay, Freddy embraces  
political action, heading Harvey Milk  
parades and actions concerning AIDS.  
The friends are torn between admira-  
tion for Freddy’s commitment and  
respect for Edward’s need for privacy.  
They strike a balance by accepting both  

men while tottering on a tightrope,  
refusing to choose sides — or friends.  
Adams introduces us to a special  
group of people and, like Calisher, zeros  
in on the concerns and challenges they  
face. Both novels make us care pas-  
sionately about the characters; both  
provide role models to emulate as we  
grow older. And perhaps most impor-  
tant, both show us the precarious  
balance involved in preserving dearly  
held behaviors while growing, changing,  
and moving forward. For the people in  
Second Chances, this meant doing what  
they had always done: hiking, gossiping,  
partying, listening to and advising one  
another while channeling their con-  
cern with the world around them into  
activism styled to the 1980s. For Rupert  
and Gemma, the balance was between  
capitulating to panic by spending their  
remaining years in a cloistered,  
protected environment or in moving  
past their preoccupation with death into  
a future full of unpredictable surprises.  
Despite the novels’ similarities, Second  
Chances is the more engrossing, more  
resonant book. Age is full of insight,  
with wonderfully constructed sentences  
and vivid imagery, but it lacks the  
cohesion of a well-defined plot. Al-  
though some scenes lack certainty and  
others seem contrived, the book is filled  
with brilliant, quirky statements and  
passionate ideas. Read together, these  
books expand the world a little bit,  
helping us look in the mirror, refreshed  
and proud, gratefully accepting the gray  
hairs and wrinkles as our triumph. @

At Risk  
by Alice Hoffman

New York: Putnam, $17.95, 219 pp.

At thirty-six, Alice Hoffman has been  
publishing novels for twelve years,  
developing a reputation as an excep-  
tional "literary" writer with a dedicated  
following of readers — but without  
much "commercial" appeal.

Happily, her seventh novel, At Risk, is  
changing all that. A main book club  
selection, condensed in Redbook, movie  
rights sold, and a screenplay completed,  
it is the story of a family unexpectedly  
faced with AIDS, an issue from which  
they imagined themselves protected.  
Ivan and Polly Farrell are raising their  
children in upper-middle-class Morrow,  
Massachusetts. Their eleven-year-old  
daughter, Amanda, is a promising gym-  
nast; their eight-year-old son Charlie is  
a budding scientist. Then, unthinkable,  
Amanda gets AIDS from a blood trans-  
fusion administered years before, and  
they find themselves dealing not only  
with her illness, but with the hostility of  
neighbors, school system, community.

Charlie loses his best friend because  
the boy’s mother believes the Farrells  
will infect him. Irate parents try to get  
Amanda barred from school. She reacts  
by isolating herself even from those  
classmates who support her, turning in-  
stead to her mother’s friend — and ex-  
medium — for support. Amanda’s  
mother, Polly, is jealous of the new  
liaison but tolerates it. Amanda’s father,  
Ivan, feels helpless and alienated. For  
months each has to cope separately  
before beginning the painful process of  
coming back together.

In her previous works, especially the  
brilliant Fortune’s Daughter, Alice  
Hoffman’s special gift has been the  
weaving of the realistic with the mythic,  
combining everyday language with the  
lyrical, poetic phrases which have be-  
come her trademark. Her books are  
populated by dwarves, giants, and for-  
tune tellers; her prose can have the im-  
pact of music.

Winter 1989

Alice Hoffman. Photo by Thomas Victor.

In At Risk, there is less of this. The ex-  
medium is the only other-worldly char-  
acter, and she is never fully developed.  
She functions primarily as a support sys-  
tem for Amanda. Even the family mem-  
bers are sketched in rather than fleshed  
out as they have been in earlier works —  
presumably to center interest on the ac-  

tion of the story. Similarly, Hoffman’s  

language is more understated than usual,  
though her prose is always fluid and  
often deceptively simple. When Aman-  
da gives up her dreams of the Olympics  
for the short-term goal of having her  
braces removed, the reader is deliberate-  
ly drawn into the practical matter of  
finding an orthodontist to work on an  
AIDS patient. But when Amanda looks  
in the mirror after the braces are finally  
taken off, the focus shifts swiftly to the  
girl herself — and the effect of her reac-  
tion is heartbreaking.  
At Risk is unabashedly a "commercial"  
book. Unabashedly a tear-jerker. A lot  
of little ends are never tied up. A lot of  
the plot can be reduced to cliché. But  
Alice Hoffman writing "commercial  
fiction is still better than most writers  
writing anything at all. If this book wins  
her the wide audience she so richly  
deserves, and interests people in the fine  
work she has already produced, more  
power to it.

—Ellyn Bache

Early Warnings in Palestine

The Lord, by Soraya Antonius, New York: Holt, 1987, $17.95, 218 pp.

by Susan P. Willens

Every day for months, young Pales-  

tinians have thrown stones at Is-  

raeli soldiers and screamed out  
their fury on our television screens and  
front pages. Commentators discuss this  
protest, unrest, agitation — whatever  
inadequate name they give to anguish  
— as if it were a surprise suddenly rear-  
ing up out of the stony soil of Israel’s oc-  
cupied territories. In that land of long  
memories and blood revenge, however,  
every action is really a reaction to an  
earlier hurt, and that hurt to one before  
it, down the sinuous mirrored halls of  
Middle Eastern history.

In this novel, The Lord, Soraya An-  
tonius recalls a chapter in history that  
certainly contributed to today’s tragedy  
in Israel. Set in Palestine and Lebanon  
in the thirties, it dramatizes the ad-  
ministration of the British Mandate  
when the League of Nations empowered  
the British to govern there. Under the  
Mandate occupying armies of British  
soldiers maintained order with casual  
cruelty. They rounded up people of Jaffa  
and Jerusalem, exploded their homes,  
ridiculed and feared them, and killed to  
maintain order.

Echoes of George Orwell’s "Shooting  
an Elephant" and E.M. Forster’s A Pas-  
sage to India sound behind the story of  
The Lord. Here again are British police  
completely ignorant of local culture,  
diplomats afraid for their positions, and  
helpless bystanders, both English and  
Palestinian. Zionism is a minor player,  
off in the wings while conflict between  
Palestinian and English occupies the  
main stage.

The "ingliz" who embodies the  
cynicism of the Mandate is police chief  
Challis. He hates Tareq, the magician  
from Jaffa, for no reason except that  
Tareq’s grace and beauty make Challis  
feel ugly. Challis pursues Tareq through  
Palestine and Lebanon until he runs him  
to ground, tortures and kills him. All for  
nothing; all because power corrupts.

The central story of Challis and Tareq  
is set in a frame. A modern-day inter-  
viewer gets Tareq’s story from Miss  
Alice, a teacher who knew him as a boy.  
In this, the female side of The Lord,  
Soraya Antonius paints luscious still  
lifes of Palestinian homes, food, and  
landscape:

The terrace was bright red with tomatoes,  
then a deep rich sienna, then brown with  
figs and raisins, yellow with boiled crushed  
wheat. The thick parapet sprouted large  
glass jars full of grapes stewing in the sun,  
turning to vinegar. An alembic was placed  
in one of the upper rooms and filled with  
fifty kilos of orange blossoms.

The author has more success with her  
dramatic setting — historical and physi-  
cal — than she has with her plot.  
Tareq’s martyrdom seems vague because  
the novelist is too diffident with him.  
She says that Tareq has powerful charis-  
ma, that he makes magic when he  
speaks or does card tricks or pulls scarves  
from the air. She has him create mis-  
chief with illusion: the fully clothed  
commissioner appears naked before  
Tareq’s audience. Yet this protagonist  
remains mysterious, hidden from the  
reader. Are we to see in him a rebel  
leader? Is he a new Savior, born to free  
his people through his death? The inten-  
tion blurs in a crowd of minor charac-  
ters, subplots, and political observation.

A first novel, The Lord makes an  
original statement about the roots of the  
Palestinian conflict by sketching a tale  
of British oppressors under the Mandate.  
It creates the feel of the Middle East  
brilliantly and packs much of interest  
into a small space. The Lord could realize  
its ambitious purpose if it were 100 pages  
longer. As it is, the novel whets the ap-  
petite for more fiction set in the Middle  
East and displaying this author’s com-  
plex intelligence and painterly eye.

@ Susan P. Willens once lived in Israel  
for a year. She frequently reviews fiction for  
Belles Lettres.

Belles Lettres @ 7