No Mercy  
by Lee Upton  

New York: Atlantic Monthly, 1989, $9.95, 58 pp. (PB)  

"Reading poetry in translation is like kissing a woman  
through a veil." This Yiddish saying kept running through  
my mind as I read Lee Upton’s No Mercy. Although written  
in English, these often brilliant, quirky poems have some-  
thing of the quality of work originally written in another  
tongue. One of the strongest poems, “The Interpreter,"  
actually addresses this subject:  

And then, at last, late  

filling the whole shop, she’s here, my friend,  

my translator with her tired face.  

All day she has tried to tell the English tour group  
that the goddess of mercy  

would plant her tiny feet in their hands.  

She smiles at the boy who talks to us.  

Rising, the boy hands me  

the folded paper—flower, bird, boat  

The paper is slippery, a little like the world outside  
us today.  

Words and events are "slippery" in many of these poems.  
In "The Quality of Mercy," a woman "begins / by touching  
a man who is her friend," but "may change her mind /  
about him in time." "Change" is a favorite, recurring word  
in Upton’s work. In "New Year’s Eve on a Train," the  
persona triumphantly informs us that she has changed — and  
she expects Kalamazoo to have changed as well. In “Hotel  
Life," her friend "will not change here," although the hotel  
maid, apparently, is able to fantasize "leaving / this life,  
this hotel life." To Upton, any change is better than no  
change. "Kirsten’s Winter Adventure" retells an old story: a  
beautiful girl in a sleigh is overtaken by a mysterious rider.  
While a literal-minded reader may find this tale disconcert-  
ing, even sinister, Upton treats it with romantic irony: "She  
is gone! / The predictable will never happen to that child."  

The predictable is quickly shot through with darts of  
weirdness, if not violence. Two angry lovers, sitting in an  
ordinary restaurant, “do not slit each other’s gullets / and  
cry out / for a pickle of flesh" ("Occasional Poem"). As her  
train moves into Kalamazoo, across a benign landscape, the  
persona in "New Year’s Eve" suddenly asks the reader,  

"did I tell you that I knew a man / whose nose bled / the  
first time he put his face / against a woman’s breast?" In the  
artfully constructed "Raw for Plenty," the speaker is "raw"  
for the “plenty” of both love and fear: “What makes us  
want someone with us or gone? / So long to learn long  
division, so long to learn dread."  

The title No Mercy may suggest the linguistic and psycho-  
logical forthrightness of the "Confessional Poets" of the  
1950s and 1960s: Lowell, Berryman, Plath, Sexton. Upton  
however, is almost their polar opposite. Whatever happens  
in her poems happens at a distance: Their pain, anger, or  
revelation is muffled by an elegant veil of surrealism. Wea-  
ving this veil is Upton’s strength, but it is also, perhaps, her  
limitation. Of course, in choosing to suggest, rather than to  
proclaim, Upton is in good company. "Tell all the truth, but  
tell it slant," Emily Dickinson advised. Lee Upton has  
certainly heeded this counsel, in these well-wrought, elusive  
poems. —Enid Dame  

Lee Upton  

You’re Standing In My Light  
And Other Stories  

by Eleanore Devine  

Boston: Beacon Press, 1990, $17.95, 126 pp.  

In Eleanore Devine’s aptly titled first collection of stories,  
the main characters, mostly women, try to stand in their  
own light or move out of someone else’s. The stories, many  
previously published in small journals such as The Hoboken  
Terminal and the Menomonie Review, are set in Chicago’s  
North Shore suburbs.  

Each of Devine’s women are rebels in their own way,  
striving to carve a niche for themselves in a suffocating  
suburban pretentiousness they neither like nor understand.  
They are determined to make their own futures, even  
though they were taught to please others. Often change  
means doing something new. In "Marriage Is Such A Box,"  
Marion says, "Last week I changed a tire on Edens Ex-  
pressway. Bob kept telling me, ‘Everyone who is for ERA  
should learn to change a tire.’ So I did."  

While each of the main characters wishes to alter her life,  
she finds this to be harder than it seems. In the title story,  
Bette Carsons, an MIA widow and proprietor of a small  
bookstore, learns to stand up to her domineering mother. In  
"A Certain Difficulty in Being," Beatrice, a widow, reads  
Simone de Beauvoir, studies maps of Paris and dreams of  
returning to France while "mourning her life." Though she  
finds romance with an old acquaintance, she discovers that  
remarrying will not necessarily restore her sense of self.  

Because most of Devine’s stories have a similar theme,  
they risk sounding formulaic, and hence, boring. But this  
isn’t the case. Rather, it is the way each character handles a  
particular situation that makes Devine’s stories so engaging.  
The reader can’t help wondering what she might do in  
similar circumstances.  

—Jennifer L. Sacks