Model Artists

The Art of the Woman: The Life and Work of Elisabet Ney, by Emily Fourmy Cutrer.  
Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1988, $24.95, 224 pp.  
Utrillo’s Mother, by Sarah Baylis. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press,  
1989, $18.95, 246 pp.  

by Marilynn Lincoln Board  

Like many other academic disci-  
plines, art history is undergoing a  
radical reassessment as the result  
of feminist challenges. The collapse of  
the male-centered model of evolution  
has led to a re-examination of the tradi-  
tional canon of masters whose work once  
served as a fixed universal standard for  
all art, regardless of historical factors  
such as gender, class, and race. The ca-  
reers of women artists who were once  
ignored or relegated to marginal posi-  
tions are being studied with new appre-  
ciation for their alternative vision, and  
their lives are being reconstructed with  
an urgency that reflects the enthusiasm  
of contemporary feminists, who are  
finding many precedents for the present  
surge of artistic activity by women.  

But for some scholars, examination of  
the careers of women artists also pro-  
vides crucial evidence that the cate-  
gories of gender that have been assumed  
to be natural are in fact the result of a  
complex process of cultural construc-  
tion. The books at hand represent two  
distinct approaches to the task of re-  
creating the lives of women artists.  

The Art of the Woman: The Life and  
Work of Elisabet Ney, by Emily Fourmy  
Cutrer, is an academic monograph that  
documents the career of this neo-  
classical German-American portrait  
sculptor, who lived from 1833 to 1907.  
Intelligent and self-confident, Ney was  
the first woman to be admitted into the  
Munich and Berlin academies. Her  
commitment to monumental public  
sculpture violated the expectations of  
her culture, which confined women to  
the private sphere. Through a combina-  
tion of daring, flattery, and personal  
charm, she coaxed some of the “great  
men” of nineteenth-century Europe into  
modeling for her. Her early subjects in-  
cluded Schopenhauer (a testament to  
her persuasive powers, for he was a no-  
torious misogynist who discounted the  
possibility of female talent), Jacob  
Grimm, Bismarck, Garibaldi, and  
Ludwig II.  

Ney may have been involved in po-  
litical intrigue with Bismarck to convince  
Ludwig II of the wisdom of German uni-  
fication under Prussian leadership. In  
any case, she left Germany abruptly in  
1870, eventually settling in rural Texas,  
where she envisioned an idyllic life un-  
tainted by the corruptions of civiliza-  
tion. She did not sculpt for more than  

At Ease With Traditional Forms  

Julia Morgan: Architect, by Sara Holmes Boutelle. Photos by Richard Barnes.  
New York: Abbeville Press, 1988, $55, 271 pp.  

by Suzanne Koblentz-Goodman  

Julia Morgan: Architect is a gracefully  
written, lavishly illustrated book  
about a remarkable woman. Perhaps  
not surprisingly, it is also the first book  
to be written about this reticent artist  
who refused almost all acclaim while she  
practiced and who burned her office files  
and drawings when she retired.  

Those few who have heard of the pio-  
neer architect, born in San Francisco in  
1872, know her in all likelihood solely as  
the architect of William Randolph  
Hearst’s castle, San Simeon. In fact,  
Ms. Morgan’s architecture career en-  
compassed over seven hundred built  
commissions, including schools,  
churches, women’s clubs, YWCAs, and  
many residences large and small, elabo-  
rate and simple.  

That Julia Morgan was the first  
woman to gain entrance to the most  
prestigious architecture school of her  
time, the Ecole des Beaux Arts in Paris,  
was early demonstration of her talent  
and her determination. The high stan-  
dards of design, engineering, and crafts-  
manship with which she steadfastly pur-  
sued her architecture practice for the  
next half-century bore out her early  
promise.  

It is exhilarating to read about anyone  
who is single-mindedly devoted to excel-  
lence in his or her profession. All the  
more notable is this trait in a woman  
who chose to remain single in an era  
when marriage and children might so  
easily have proven major distractions.  

Perhaps her disciplined lifestyle,  
which apparently emphasized work to  
the exclusion of almost all personal life,  
was simply a logical response to an ex-  
traordinary talent; in any case, it stands  
in stark contrast to the frazzled “have-  
it-all” lives of so many late-twentieth-  
century women who have followed in  
Ms. Morgan’s professional footsteps. It  
was not beyond Morgan to work until  
ten or eleven o’clock every night in her  

I Fax 1989  

studio and then board a train Friday eve-  
ning for the long trip to San Simeon,  
where weekend after weekend, year after  
year, she supervised construction of the  
Hearst castle. Nonetheless, despite her  

Self-portrait. From Marie Laurencin: Artist  
and Muse, by Douglas Hyland and Heather  
McPherson (University of Washington Press)  

two decades while she devoted herself to  
her children and estate. When she re-  
sumed her career, her desire to sculpt the  
“great men” of Texas met with resistance  
in a frontier culture where both her gen-  
der and her European idealism were sus-  
pect. Cutrer juxtaposes Ney’s romantic  
preconceptions about America, moth-  
erhood, and the elevated mission of art  
against reality to create a tension that  
draws the reader through the book.  
Ney accepted the heroic, imperialistic,  
and patriarchal myths of her culture;  
her feminism was limited to her desire to  
participate in masculine domains of  
power. Cutrer also accepts the premises  

years of her architecture practice, she  
mastered the construction and office  
management skills necessary to a highly  
successful practice.  

If she could be faulted at all, says the  
author, it would be for work that was  
never bold, never at the cutting edge.  
Yet it was her very ease with traditional  
forms, coupled with her keen sense of  
her clients’ needs, that allowed her to be  
so popular with her rather bourgeois  
individual and institutional clients.  

Sara Holmes Boutelle spent fourteen  

Bear House, part of William Randolph Hearst’s Wyntoon estate,  
Julia Morgan, architect. Photo by Richard Barnes  

“workaholism,” those who knew her  
paint the picture of a kind and generous  
individual whose personal dealings with  
friends, colleagues, and employees —  
even employees’ families — were as bal-  
anced and harmonious as her architec-  
tural compositions.  

Morgan was fortunate to have her  
family’s recognition and support of her  
talent and ambition from an early age.  
At Berkeley, she mastered engineering  
as well as establishing friendships with  
wealthy sorority sisters, who steered  
many commissions to her over the years.  
At the Ecole des Beaux Arts she mas-  
tered historic styles as well as classical  
principles of design; and in the early  

years piecing together this fascinating  
woman’s life. The resulting book, like  
Ms. Morgan herself, concentrates on  
the work, using telling detail — both  
verbal and pictorial — to describe the  
achievements of this singular woman.  
Julia Morgan: Architect looks like a  
coffee-table book, but the treats it pro-  
vides are not all confectionary.  

@ Suzanne Koblentz-Goodman, an  
architectural designer, also publishes a  
magazine called Design Spirit (438 Third  
Street, Brooklyn, NY 11215; $15/3 is-  
sues), which explores such concerns as liv-  
ing in harmony with the earth and building  
bonds of community through art and design.  

of her own culture; her feminism is lim-  
ited to sensitivity to the obstacles faced  
by a woman in a male-dominated profes-  
sion. Her biography of Ney began as a  
dissertation in the American Civiliza-  
tion program at the University of Texas;  
hence it is structured within the con-  
ventions of scholarly writing. Its dis-  
embodied authorial voice speaks in an  
impersonal language emanating from a  
privileged position of assumed omni-  
science. Cutrer examines archival doc-  
uments in order to extract the facts of  
Ney’s career from myths about her life  
that were perpetuated both by local gos-  
sips who vilified the eccentric artist and  
by Ney’s own romantic “image of herself  
as a daring and righteous rebel.” Many  
details about Ney’s life are clarified, but  
the social and cultural issues that might  
have situated her career within a broader  
ideological context are slighted.  

Although Utrillo’s Mother, by  

Sarah Baylis, also examines the  

life of a female nineteenth-  
century artist, its approach contrasts  
with Cutrer’s in almost all respects. It is  
a stream-of-consciousness narrative,  
told in the fictionalized first-person  
voice of post-impressionist painter  
Suzanne Valadon (1865/6— 1938). At  
various points in her life, Valadon was a  
little-educated bohemian street urchin,  
a circus performer, a model for famous  
pictures by well-known male artists, and  
the mother of the autistic, alcoholic  
painter Maurice Utrillo. Given her  
lower-class background, she was more  
outwardly defiant of her culture’s expec-  
tations than was Ney. However, as with  
Ney, critical attention has tended to  
focus on the legends surrounding her  
colorful personality (particularly her li-  
aisons with much-studied men like Sa-  
tie, Renoir, Toulouse-Lautrec, and  
Degas) rather than on her work. This  
situation is reflected in the book’s ironic  
title, which identifies the artist by her  
relationship to her more famous (if less  
talented) son.  

But Baylis is unconcerned with estab-  
lishing the facts of Valadon’s life. After  
reading Utrillo’s Mother, one will find  
the “truth” about the artist more ambig-  
uous than before. “I’ve always been a liar  
— it runs in my family,” the narrator  
warns the reader in the opening lines.  
“Believe what you feel to be true,” she  
advises. On her frontispiece, Baylis cites  
French novelist Monique Wittig’s sug-  
gestion that women must “make an ef-  
fort to remember. Or, failing that, in-  
vent.” Her novel makes no claim to ob-  
jectivity.  

Unlike Ney, Valadon did not accept  
the heroic, imperialistic, and patriar-  
chal myths of her culture. She was an  
irreverent realist who mocked the ide-  
alized women who populated the paint-  
ings of the artists for whom she posed.  
“Just think of it!” the Valadon character  
says as she recalls her feeling about dis-  
playing herself in a line of models in  
hopes of impressing male artists,  

If women are ever accepted as they are  
— exhausted, possessed, angry and bar-  
tered; if ever the world sees that their  
arms are powered by muscles, that their  
bellies are full of guts and organs, that  
their eyes are cool with irony and their  
mouths are full of sharp teeth and furious  
words. . . then the world will have to  
change in every single particle, and  
women will not long be waiting . . . for  
their creators to choose them.  

Her vernacular language and impious  
tone remove art from its artificially ele-  
vated position of transcendence over  
issues like gender and class. Baylis’s  
feminism, like Valadon’s, demands  
more than equality within an already  
established system; it subverts the myths  
that have shaped Western culture.  

® Marilynn Lincoln Board teaches art  
history at SUNY Geneseo and writes on  
nineteenth- and twentieth-century  
European and American art.  

Belles Lettres @ 27