Women: a medley of voices |

THE MUSE’S TRAGEDY

and Other Stories

By Edith Wharton. Edited and with an Intro-
duction by Candace Waid, Ph.D. Although
she was best known for her many novels,
Wharton's mastery of the short story is aptly
demonstrated by this collection of 21 stories
written between 1899 and 1914.

SIGNET CLASSIC 0-451-52414-4 $4.95
February

READING BLACK,
READING FEMINIST
A Critical Anthology

Edited by Henry Louis Gates, Jr. Leading
literary critics examine and celebrate

the feminist and African-American literary
traditions in the works of such writers as
Maya Angelou, Alice Walker, Toni Morrison,
Lorraine Hansberry, and Gloria Naylor.
@MERIDIAN 0-452-01045-4 $12.95 June

REFUSING TO BE A MAN
Essays on Sex and Justice

By John Stoltenberg. These essays are
“some of the clearest, most compelling state-
ments of feminist thought on male sexuality
ever made...first-rate, accessible feminist
polemics.” — Booklist

@ MERIDIAN 0-452-01043-8 $8.95 May

WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH
CHANGED PLACES

A Vietnamese Woman’s Journey
From War to Peace

By Le Ly Hayslip with Jay Wurts. “A searing
and human account of Vietnam's destruction
and self-destruction.” — The New York Times
Book Review. “A wonderful, wondrous book
by a remarkable woman.” —Amy Tan

PLUME 0-452-26417-0 $8.95 May

Also available
PORNOGRAPHY
Men Possessing Women

By Andrea Dworkin. New introduction.
@ DUTTON 0-525-48517-1 $9.95

WOMEN ON WOMEN
An Anthology of American
Lesbian Short Fiction

Edited by Joan Nestle and Naomi Holoch.
These 28 stories from established and up-
and-coming lesbian writers offer a historical
overview of the genre as well as a showcase
of the most exciting new voices.

@PLUME 0-452-26388-3 $9.95 May

SHE CAME IN A FLASH

By Mary Wings. Featuring an intrepid les-
bian heroine, this quick mystery is “witty on
cult politics, metaphysics, and finances.
Wings has a nice, unsentimental, wry touch.”
— Kirkus Reviews

@PLUME 0-452-26384-0 $8.95 March

INTIMACY

By Susan Chace. In this story of one woman's
quest for salvation, “Susan Chace portrays
conditions of the heart with an extraordinary
vividness. Intimacy is a fine achievement, a
moving first novel by a writer of enormous
promise.” — Robert Stone

@PLUME 0-452-26375-1 $7.95 February

WIND
Stories

By Leigh Allison Wilson. “Gracefully ex-
pressed and emotionally satisfying...
Wilson has a strong voice, a surprising
imagination and intriguing characters...”
— Publishers Weekly

@PLUME 0-452-26383-2 $7.95 April

THE HOUSE OF FEAR
Notes from Down Below

By Leonora Carrington with an Introduction
by Marina Warner. Collages by Max Ernst.
One of the most original works of autobio-
graphical imagination since Andre Breton's
Nadja and Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar
@ DUTTON OBELISK 0-525-48540-6

$8.95 March

Prices subject to change.

Write the NAL Education Department at the address below for a

free Literature and Language catalog.

NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY NAL

A Division of Penguin, USA, 1633 Broadway, New York, NY 10019

SBIAN

12 lesbian actresses
11 acts of censorship
10 amazon treatises

LESBIAN
LISTS

A look at lesbian
culture, history,
and personalities
by
DELL RICHARDS

9 Broadway euphemisms
for the “L” word

8 holy days for lesbians

7 German lesbians

6 early black lesbian writers

5 lesbians and amazons on
coins

4 religious orders founded
by uppity women

3 lesbians fighting for
security clearance

2 black women who cross-
dressed

1 lesbian couple in the Bible

...and 100 more fascinating lists.

LESBIAN LISTS
BY DELL RICHARDS
$8.95 in bookstores, or clip this ad to order by mail
Cl Enclosed is $10.00 (postpaid) for one copy of LESBIAN LISTS.

name:

address:

city:

state: zip:

ALYSON PUBLICATIONS
Dept. C46, 40 Plympton St., Boston, MA 02118

Spring 1990

Fallen Women’s Studies

Girls Who Went Wrong: Prostitutes in American Fiction, 1885-1917, by Laura Hapke.
Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1989, $39.95 (HB), $19.95 (PB), 216 pp.

by Nikki Lee Manos

Books by women that address the

turn-of-the-century prostitute

and American attempts to “cope”
with her have been appearing with some
frequency for the past decade. The let-
ters of a reformed streetwalker, for ex-
ample, compose The Mamie Papers;
Ruth Rosen chronicles the repressions of
the anti-prostitution movement in her
scholarly study, The Lost Sisterhood.
Laura Hapke’s new book is not only
scholarly but also readable and informa-
tive — an impressive addition to a field
that might come to be dubbed “fallen
women’s studies.” She has certainly
broken new ground, for, as she points
out, few literary critics, feminists in-
cluded, have written on this subject.

The writers who created literary ver-
sions of the American harlot were, for
the most part, men. Such a “men’s club”
atmosphere, perhaps, is the reason fem-
inist critics have avoided studying these
authors. Indeed, the earlier era’s cru-
sading women seemed to invest their
energies in redeeming rather than im-
agining the fallen woman. Hapke makes
clear that male writers — from the still
well-known Stephen Crane to the long-
forgotten urban hacks of the 1890s —
did not, despite their claims, actually
produce works that defended the street-
walkers and bordello dwellers who peo-
pled their books. Girls Who Went
Wrong, importantly, confirms a paradox
at the heart of their fiction: a “fearful
denial of female sexuality.”

To “hedge their bets,” some of these
male authors avoided censorship by de-
picting crazed or spiritually dead seduc-
tion victims. Others, like Crane and the
then-famous Harold Frederic, sanitized
and romanticized the prostitute. Al-
though muckrakers in the Progressive
Era (1900-1917) claimed to introduce a
new realism into their portraits, they too
sidestepped the issue of the prostitute’s
sexual activity. We learn that one Pro-
gressive writer, in the best-selling, non-
pornographic House of Bondage, turned
his brothel captive into a kind of inves-
tigative reporter. Another such writer

Laura Hapke
ingeniously allowed his heroine, an al-
coholic and opium addict, to remain
innocent, “miraculously untouched” by
four years in the vice trade.

In well-documented chapters, Hapke
mines period sources such as urban
guides and medical books to place litera-
ture depicting the prostitute at the turn
of the century in a broader context. Her
informative discussion of the beliefs
about women’s chastity that dominated,
indeed obsessed, these decades is
thought provoking. Hapke makes each
writer come alive, notably, by incorpo-
rating often racy facts about his private
life, clarifying the hypocrisy underlying
unrealistic portrayals of the prostitute.
A concluding chapter offers further in-
teresting contrasts: prostitutes’ auto-
biographies are quoted extensively. The
illustrations of prostitutes from period
newspapers and reform tracts throw light
on Victorian attitudes toward this prov-
ocative subject.

Hapke shrewdly concludes that no
American writer of the day “could con-
vincingly portray the woman who so
threatened the late-Victorian ideal of
feminine purity.” And female sexuality,
as Hapke puts it in Girls Who Went
Wrong, “hired or otherwise,” still poses a
threat.

@ Nikki Lee Manos teaches at Mary-
mount College, Tarrytown, and writes
often on women and Victorian literature.

—Patchwork, continued

Pages is just a disaster.”

Nearly all the book editors I spoke
with were reflective, concerned about
gender-related issues, and willing to
spend an hour discussing their ideas
openly. Only Diane Donovan of the
Chicago Tribune challenged the general
line of inquiry, though she was willing to
field questions.

“Things have changed enough now
that we shouldn’t be singled out as
women book editors,” she said. “I don’t
consider that I’m here because I am a
woman and I hope nobody else does ei-
ther.”

Donovan, who noted that her paper
had a woman book editor in the 1930s,
said, “We don’t look at gender. To me,
a good book is a good book, a bad book is
a bad book, and it really doesn’t have
anything to do with whether it’s written
by a man or a woman.”

Sinkler and other female book editors
agreed that women have to avoid seeing
sexism behind every negative evaluation
of a book by a woman. “My feeling is you
can’t do affirmative action on books,”
Sinkler said. “You can’t pick a lesser
book over a better book.” But she added
that more books by women are being
reviewed now because five of the nine
staff members reading books are women.

Regarding reviewers, she said that
the NYT Book Review is building up its

roster of female reviewers, but that it is

challenging in specialty areas where
women do not yet have the name recog-
nition that the paper demands. Sinkler
noted a recent instance in which she was
questioned about why she had chosen a
particular woman to review a book: “I
was very much pressured about why we
went so low profile on the reviewer,” she
said. “It wasn’t so much a sexist question
— it was why didn’t we get a more fa-
mous person.”

Book pages at mainstream news-
papers have changed dramatically in the
last few years. Women are getting more
space, both as authors and reviewers.
Sexist language, assumptions, and tone
have not evaporated but these, too, are
changing, reflecting in large part the
women who have advanced into high-
level editing and management posi-
tions. At the same time, tight space and
demands that “newsworthy” books be
reviewed are realities in the newspaper
industry that are not going away.

Are the gains short-term? Will
women ever routinely be 50 percent of
the reviewers and authors on main-
stream newspapers’ book pages? The
answers to these and related questions
will not reflect what Dale Spender un-
covered less than 10 years ago: “the
motives and means of the men who are
perpetuating the injustice.” The answers
will largely reflect decisions by women.

® Deborah Price is the news editor of the
Detroit News’s Washington bureau.

Belles Lettres @ 27