Retrospective

Rebecca West

Rebecca West: A Life, by Victoria Glendinning. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1987, 

£14.95, 287 pp.

Rebecca West, by Fay Weldon. New York: Penguin Books, 1985, $4.95, 107 pp. (PB)  
Sunflower: A Novel, by Rebecca West, afterword by Victoria Glendinning. New York: 

Viking, 1987, $18.95, 276 pp.

The Young Rebecca: Writings of Rebecca West 1911-1917, selected and introduced by  
Jane Marcus. New York: Viking, in association with Virago Press, 1982, $25.00, 402 pp.  
The Literary Achievement of Rebecca West, by Harold Orel. New York: St. Martin’s 

Press, 1986, 235 pp.

The Fountain Overflows, by Rebecca West. New York: Penguin, 1985, $7.95, 435 pp. (PB)  
This Real Night, by Rebecca West. New York: Penguin Books, 1984, $6.95, 266 pp. (PB)  
Cousin Rosamund, by Rebecca West, afterword by Victoria Glendinning, New York: 

Viking, 1986, $16.95, 295 pp.

by Eileen Lotozo

Rebecca West was 90 years old

when she died in London in

1983. She wrote until very
nearly the end, contributing a pithy
essay to Vogue on how it felt to be 90.
Her life spanned a late Victorian and an
Edwardian childhood, two world wars,
the cold war, and the space age, and
there was little of it that she did not
comment upon in 21 books and hun-
dreds of reviews, stories, and essays. Dif-
ficult to categorize, she was a wonderful,
if sometimes undisciplined, novelist as
well as a redoubtable social and literary
critic. Her books on treason, St. Augus-
tine, and Yugoslavia coexist with fic-
tion like Harriet Hume, The Fountain
Overflows, and The Return of the Soldier,
which contains one of the most
breathtaking prose passages in English
literature.

West was born Cecily Isabel Fairfield.
She took her pseudonym from a play by
Ibsen when she was a young drama stu-
dent to assuage her mother who disap-
proved of her writing for the suffragist
paper The Freewoman. Throughout her
life, she went on acquiring names. Her
lover, H.G. Wells, called her Panther;
she became Mrs. Henry Andrews when
she married in her late 30s; and in 1959
she became Dame Cecily Andrews, bet-
ter known to the world as Dame Rebecca
West. She said, “My names clashed in
my head... I could not choose be-
tween them.” ©

To the observer it appears that West
succeeded impressively in negotiating
the thicket of demands and limitations
that most women face. She seemed to
choose all of her names — she was
thinker, writer, traveler, social activist,
mother, lover, wife. But losses, disap-
pointments, and secret failed dreams left
her bitter in the end. In her memoirs
(unfinished at the time of her death)
she wrote: “I was never able to lead the
life of a writer because of these two over-
riding factors, my sexual life, or rather
death, and my politics.”

Before she died, Dame West chose
two friends as her biographers: Stanley
Olson to write a full biography (forth-
coming) and Victoria Glendinning, a
shorter work. To some extent Glendin-
ning had the more difficult task: to distill
a daunting amount of written material
and the characters and events of a long
and full life into just 300 pages. She
concentrates on the early and middle
years: West’s development as a writer,
the long, difficult affair with Wells, trials
of single motherhood in an unaccepting
society, travels, a happy and productive
association with the United States, late
marriage, her emergence as an outspoken
critic of communism, and bitter an-
tagonism between herself and her son,
novelist Anthony West, that became a
sad vendetta.

Rebecca West: A Life is a sensitive ac-
count of a difficult subject. Sparing with
her interpretation, Glendinning strikes
just the right balance between West’s
literature and her life, between the tes-
timony of friends, the volumes of letters,
and the often fictionalized memories of

6 @ Belles Lettres

Rebecca West. Photo © by The Mansell :

Collection.

West herself. She once wrote,
“Everyone realizes that one can believe
little of what people say about each
other. . . even less can one trust what
people say about themselves.”

Rebecca West’s story is sadder than
we might expect, but it is also a story
of an extraordinary woman whose life
was an emblem of our times. Writes
Glendinning, “There is little that a
woman could have achieved, enjoyed,
and suffered during the decades when
women’s lives were being transformed
that she did not achieve, enjoy, and suf-
fer.” Her life, like much of the un-
finished work she left behind, like the
lives of women still, is an unresolved
plot.

Rebecca West, Fay Weldon’s slim con-
tribution to the Virago Lives of Modern
Women series is an exercise in fictional
biography. Weldon defends her aban-
donment of fact for fiction and her in-
vented conversations on the grounds
that “what is made up. . . is often truer
than what happens in reality; the latter,
drifting, chaotic, without shape or form,
and usually open to so many interpreta-
tions as to make nonsense of any attempt
to understand or define from the outside
what was actually going on in the in-
side.” But this shaping, this interpreting
is the biographer’s loving art, and I for
one would hardly declare all of their at-
tempts nonsense.

Weldon covers only a few days sur-
rounding the birth of West’s son An-
thony, fathered by Wells, at a bleak sea-
side lodging house. Unwed mothers were
a scandal in 1914, and as mistress of the
celebrated Wells, West was particularly
conspicuous. She was only 21, just gain-
ing a reputation as a brilliant writer —
the enfant terrible of the suffragist
socialist circles. And although she had
set out to be a “freewoman,” she had
not bargained for the difficulties of being
a freemother. West was even forced to
legally adopt her own child. Wells
helped support her and their son, and
he was a constant visitor, but he would
not divorce his wife to marry her. In his
experiment in autobiography, Wells in
Love, he says to Rebecca, “You could
never be a wife. You want a wife your-
self — you want sanity and care and

courage and patience behind you just as
much as I do.”

Weldon attempts to portray this com-
plex alliance through a series of epistol-
ary fictions she calls “Letters from the
Future to Rebecca West.” This is much
the same form Weldon used in the Letters
to Alice, wise missives from a sage writer
to a callow student. She is still the sage
writer, this time dispatching advice
(with the benefit of hindsight) to a very
young West. But the mail goes one way;
Rebecca does not have a chance to dis-
agree or defend herself. And the letters
are sometimes made awkward by the
need to include biographical facts; Wel-
don tells West things she already knows.

West often complained that too much
had been made of her affair with Wells.
“Just how important is something that
ends when you are thirty?” she asked.
Weldon’s book is an interesting, if un-
even, fictional experiment but a ques-
tionable biography. Although the vol-
umes in this series are meant as introduc-
tions to the lives of significant women
in the 20th century, I would not recom-
mend this book to someone unfamiliar
with West and her work.

Begun in the 1920s but never com-
pleted, Sunflower is a fictionalized ac-
count of West’s obsession with Lord
Beaverbrook. He was a newspaper ty-
coon and a dabbler in politics, whom
she met just before her final break with
Wells. Like Wells, he was older than
Rebecca, a small, homely man of great
charm. The strange, brief affair is still
somewhat of a mystery. Each destroyed
the other’s letters, and Sunflower reveals
little (West was never able to resolve
the sexual and emotional issues with
which the novel dealt). It seems that
she misinterpreted the seriousness of the
attentions of the womanizing Beaver-
brook and hoped for marriage. Their sex-
ual compatibility was also doubtful. The
failure of this relationship humiliated
West and fed her sporadic fears of some
womanly inadequacy. “It’s obvious that
men are terrified of me. I can’t imagine
why,” she said.

West’s fictional alter ego,

Sunflower, is a famous ac-

tress and longtime mistress
of an aging, married politician, Lord Es-
sington (modeled after Wells). Sun-
flower presents a side of West rarely
seen — unsure of herself as an artist and
a woman, bullied by her lover, desper-
ately tired of being the emotional nurse-
maid of a difficult, self-centered man.
She longs for marriage and motherhood,
for “some primitive, passive state of
being, to be one of the things, that have
no will but only use.” Despite this
bovine affinity, Sunflower’s thoughts are
continually filled with the most exquis-
ite Westian observations about people
and situations. West tries to create in
Sunflower a woman who is close to her
animal nature, waiting for some modern
neanderthal to club her on the head and
drag her off to his cave. Sunflower’s rich
mental world is at odds with that animal
nature. Frances Pitt (a barely disguised
Beaverbrook) is Sunflower’s unlikely
Tarzan, but he never really comes alive
as a character. The cruel, pathetic Lord
Essington is more fully drawn and
memorable.

The Young Rebecca: Writings of Rebecca
West 1911-1917 includes early work
published in the suffragist Freewoman.
West made her debut with a series of
mordantly witty book reviews. When
The Freewoman folded, she was an im-
portant force in reorganizing the
magazine into The New Freewoman, and
she continued on the staff until Ezra
Pound took over the magazine for mod-
ernist literary concerns (it eventually be-
came The Egoist). Also included in this

collection is her trenchant political
commentary for the socialist weekly, The
Clarion, a short story that appeared in
Wyndham Lewis’s Blast, and a long essay
on the life of Emmeline Pankhurst.
West was just 18 when she began to

write for The Freewoman, but her voice

was already clear and strong. She did

not so much develop as a writer but

rather hatched fully formed. In fact, it
is difficult to tell her early writings from
her later ones; a maturity of style was
there from the start, as was her wit and
far-flung intelligence. Through her re-
views and articles winds an extraordi-
nary parade of knowledge about agricul-
ture, literature, politics, history, and
psychology. She delighted in irrever-
ence, blasting Strindberg, needling
Wells; she even dared puncture the repu-
tation of the era’s most prominent
Mrs. Humphrey

ing writer.

She was a relentless feminist advo-
cate, effortlessly dismantling the doltish
arguments of male chauvinists and anti-
suffragists. In a review titled “Another
Book Which Ought Not to Have Been
Written,” she spears a little tome called
The Fraud of Feminism:

It is one of the most distressing books
I have yet endured. It is like answering
a call on the telephone and hearing no
words but distant shrieks and groans
and thuds. Woman is doing some-
thing dreadful: what it is one can’t,
from [the author’s] disordered sen-
tences rent by intractable commas,
quite make out.

The young West’s feminism was inex-
tricably bound to socialism. She wanted

friend Emma Goldman, one that did not
include dancing. In an essay about the
ascetic, underfed lives that many women
were forced to live, she wrote:

Decidedly what we need is a militant
movement for more riotous living.
Schoolmistresses must go to their work
wearing suffrage badges and waving the
red flag. The ladies of Hopkinson
House must stay out till two in the
morning, and then come back and sing
outside till the doors are opened.
And we must make a fuss about our
food. . . . I see the inmates of the
YMCA . . . pelting the central offices
with bread-and-butter and threatening
a general massacre of hens if the boiled
egg persists in prominence. Armies of
nurses would visit the homes of the
hospital governors and forcibly feed
them with that horrid breakfast dish,
porridge and treacle. And. . . some
day the blenching stockbroker shall
look down the muzzle of the rifle and
hand over his nice red-and-black beef-
steak to his pale typist. . . . Wages
would go up then.

In his preface to The Literary Achieve-
ment of Rebecca West, Harold Orel tells
us, with unctuous modesty, that he
hopes to say a few “interesting and useful
things” about Dame West’s moral stance
and the strands of philosophy that have
reappeared in her work and “to earn for
her, if possible, a wider audience.” It is
a good thing West has not had to depend
all these years on Orel and his pallid
analysis for her audience.

Orel manages to stir a slight interest
with two chapters, “Duties Owed to
God” and “Duties Owed to the State,”
in which he examines West’s political
journalism, crime writing, and quirky
literary criticism — her uncategorizable
books like St. Augustine, The Court and
the Castle, The New Meaning of Treason,
and A Train of Powder. His commentary
on the novels, however, is perfunctory,
and his discussion of West’s magnum
opus, Black Lamb and Grey Falcon, is
weak. Although Orel declares the book
West’s “finest contribution to litera-
ture,” he does not convey the scope of

— continued on page 15

Jury/August 1987