The Carpathians

by Janet Frame

New York: Braziller, 1988, $17.50, 196 pp.

If all of our conceptions of time and
place suddenly disappeared, would
memory become the only real field of
experience? Would language be neces-
sary to guarantee our existence? New
Zealand writer Janet Frame gives this
fascinating idea free rein in her latest
novel, The Carpathians, inspired by her
musings about the Gravity Star, “a
galaxy that appears to be both relatively
close and seven billion light years away.”
The Gravity Star “by itself could banish
distance, nearness, weight, lightness, up,
down, today, yesterday, tomorrow,” she
says.

And in the tiny town of Puamahara,
New Zealand, it does just that. People
living on Kowhai Street, whether they
have lived there for twenty years or two,
identify themselves as strangers and
newcomers. They set up temporary camp
in their “suburban comfortable” homes,
adding rumpus rooms, new wiring, over-
head garage doors, and flower gardens,
then camouflaging themselves in
“clothes patterned with flowers and
leaves, of all colours,” and talking con-
stantly of moving somewhere else.
When Mattina Brecon, a wealthy
stranger from New York, journeys to
Puamahara in search of the Memory
Flower, she discovers instead the threat
of sudden annihilation among the
uprooted, alienated residents of Kowhai
Street.

“You see,” Mattina explains to her
writer-husband when she returns to New
York, “I had to fight for my life, my very
days, and my point of view.” She talks to
him of memory, “not as a comfortable
parcel of episodes to carry in one’s mind,
and taste now and then, but as a naked
link, a point, diamond-size, seed-size,
coded in the world, of the human race; a
passionately retained deliberate focus on
all creatures and their worlds to ensure
their survival.”

The power of memory and its link
with language is the ambitious focus of
Frame’s story. The story itself is claimed
by three different authors in the course
of the novel. Its disjointed style lurches
us from everyday experience into the
world of Frame’s imaginings. And Frame
intends us to be uncomfortable there,
where our very selves are as threatened
as Mattina’s—by the loss of our Memory
Flower, our collective land-memory, by
the loss of our point of view, and of our
language.

“The Carpathians are a great moun-
tain system, extending from Bratislava
to Orsovo,” chants one of the characters
of this strange and vivid world. “You'd
have the Carpathians,” he repeats, revel-
ling in the sound of the cherished word,
“the Carpathians in your garden.” The
dissonance created by the character's joy
in language and his odd disjuncture of
places and dimensions is the secret to
the success of this extremely creative,
sophisticated novel. Frame’s skilled
prose and her powerful evocation of a
reality that is slightly out of kilter make
her novel both a pleasure and a chal-
lenge to read. Like Mattina, we do not
come out of the land of the Memory
Flower and the Gravity Star quite the
same as we went in. Frame successfully
dislodges our comfortable realities.

— Cecilia Konchar Farr

Centuries of Female
Days: Englishwomen’s
Private Diaries

by Harriet Blodgett

New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press,
1988, $29.95, 317 pp.

Centuries of Female Days offers an over-
view of Englishwomen’s private diaries
written between 1599 and 1939. As
Harriet Blodgett notes in her introduc-
tion, these diarists did not write “for
publication” or “for immediate reading
by a second party,” though their journals
were eventually published. The study is
quite impressive. Blodgett manages to
cite sixty-nine women writers, highlight-
ing nineteen additional diarists in the af-
terword. Although she includes well-
known historical figures, Blodgett
mainly quotes middle- and upper-class
women with “no special hold on fame.”

Blodgett initially discusses the history
and characteristics of the diaries as well
as the motivations and justifications for
diary keeping. She then devotes several
chapters to documenting how the jour-
nals represent a rich resource for
women’s thoughts and feelings on such
issues as women’s rights, marriage,
motherhood, female psychology, and
daughterhood. These diarists clearly
deferred to men, but they also com-
plained from time to time about the
power men held. Above all, they were
self-effacing. Charlotte Guest, for in-
stance, gave birth to ten children, man-
aged her husband’s business, established
schools for workers and children, and
mastered medieval Welsh. And yet
when Tennyson praised her translation
of the Mabinogean, she recorded in her
diary, “I... felt quite ashamed at my
own ignorance.”

I think Blodgett is right to see diarists
like Guest as composing an “engrossing
drama of female life.” It is “refreshing,”
as she notes, to read what these women
actually said rather than merely to read
about them. They fully accepted
society’s conventions yet were interested
enough in their own concerns, their
own voices, to record their thoughts and
feelings.

— Nikki Lee Manos

Interview, cont. from page 11

A lot of fraudulent deeds were signed
that allow the companies to mine the
coal. But the only kind of mining pre-
viously was deep mining. So even when
people did sign their rights away legiti-
mately, they only expected the compa-
nies to put a little portal in around the
mountain. And so now rights are used
for strip mines. I know a lot of people
who have had their land destroyed. But
they pay the property tax. The coal
company pays no property tax on bil-
lions of dollars of mineral rights. We are
trying to get a constitutional amend-
ment on the ballot that will change that.
Kentucky is the only state where it is still
allowed.

Girl in a Turban

Marta Morazzoni

Translated from the Italian by
Patrick Creagh

New York: Knopf, 1988, $16.95, 157 pp.

On the cover of Marta Morazzoni’s Girl
in a Turban, her first collection of short
stories, is a luminous painting by Jan
Vermeer entitled “Woman in Turban.”
The subject seems to lean toward us as if
she were about to offer a confidence, her
pensive face backlit, the drapery of her
turban a golden foil for the fire in her
evocative eyes. Her slightly enigmatic
expression, the exotic headscarf, and,
above all, the brilliance of light and
shadow aptly set the tone and texture
for the five memorable stories that fol-
low.

Lifted out of history and placed like a
jewel in the setting of each tale is a real
place, time, character, or work of art, a
device that allows a contextual unfold-
ing of relationship and personality. For
example, “The White Door” involves a
nameless maestro who has been invited
to use a luxurious hunting lodge on the
grounds of a villa. We are told that the
invitation was intended as a gift of tran-
quillity so the composer might at last
work in peace. In fact, we soon learn
that he has not written a single note
since entering the lodge. Like the jux-
taposition of history and invention,
homely detail and shadowy implication
play off against one another, and gradu-
ally we come to understand that the
nameless maestro is Mozart and that
Morazzoni is weaving a musical theme
that foreshadows his death.

In the drawing room of the lodge
stands a harpsichord of bewitching
beauty. “The matt black and pearly
lustre of the keys suggests an aristocratic
splendor of quietude such as the maestro
had so long desired and requested.” But
now the absence of sound oppresses him,
“and darkness and silence seemed hand-
in-glove with his lurking dread.” He has
never played on the instrument, another
sign of his “poisonous secret,” that his
work has come to a halt and he dares
not go further. In alternate waves of
light and shadow, sound and silence, the
theme is revealed—that death and loss
of creativity are synonymous.

— Faye Moskowitz

The rape of the land seems to be the domi-
nating metaphor when discussing these is-
sues.

Oh, absolutely. That is the most fre-
quently used metaphor for strip mining.
I see the mountains grow thin and the
shape of the terrain altered. Even deep
mining is an invasion. They make a hole
and just force themselves in.

Strip mining used to be done by going
around the crown of a hill and making a
ridge. Now they take off the whole
mountaintop, like a mastectomy. They
take the dirt and fill in the valleys with
it. It’s real loose and slips around a lot.

What contribution do you want to have
made with your writing?

Preservation, I think. Because things
are already gone. Regions in Storming
Heaven that existed in Kentucky before
mining came in have definitely now dis-
appeared. I want to bear witness and
remember people who are dead, people
who struggled to change things. If the
companies keep on and nobody speaks
up about it, then they will have suc-
ceeded. But when somebody points the
finger at them, somehow they are weak-
ened. It is important to say what was
there, what is there. 

Belles Lettres @ 21