Declaration of Interdependence

Born for Liberty: A History of Women in America, by Sara M. Evans. New York:

Free Press, 1989, $24.95, 383 pp., photos.

by Dana D. Nelson Salvino

Born for Liberty is a panoramic
view of women’s experiences in

America. Evans begins her study 

with “The First American Women,”
writing about Native American women
before the Anglo invasion. In Iroquois
society particularly, Evans sees a link
between Native and Anglo-American
women — the organized female commu-
nity — and her discussion here sets her
theme. Evans argues that even when
excluded from the “public” domain,
“American women effectively reshaped
the boundaries of that arena in ways that
have not been explored... By pio-
neering in the creation of new public
spaces — voluntary associations located
between the public world of politics and
work and the private intimacy of family
— women made possible a new vision of
active citizenship unlike the original
vision based on the world of small farm-
ers and artisans.”

Evans proposes that this new vision
arose through women’s organizations,
and she finds women strongest during
historical periods when these organized
affiliations were strong. For instance,
Evans sees the antebellum period, when
Anglo-American women organized on
behalf of abolition, factory and work
reform, and women’s rights, as a period
of empowerment, even in spite of the
“cult of true womanhood” that shaped
their ideological horizons. In contrast,
during the age of “flappers, Freudians
and all that jazz,” contrary to Zelda Fit-
zgerald’s famous proclamations on flap-
per liberation, Evans sees a crucial
breakdown in women’s organized com-
munity that was to persist through the
fifties and seriously hinder women’s is-
sues in the political arena.

Covering several hundred years’ his-
tory in little more than 300 pages (the
volume includes extensive notes, sug-

gestions for further reading and an in-
dex) is no mean feat. Evans draws exam-
ples from both individual and group his-
tory, and from diverse ethnic and class
groups. The pace is even and interest-
ing, and the rapidity with which she
must pass over her topics is an en-
couragement to further study (for which
she provides adequate direction in “Fur-
ther Reading”). Evans is at her best, I
think, when she provides cross-cultural

comparative analysis. For instance, she
points out how the cult of domesticity
and “true womanhood” was actually a
boon for Anglo-American women, who
benefited judicially from an easing of
sentences for mothers of stillborn or ac-
cidental deaths, and socially, from in-
creased networking among women. Con-
versely, as Evans observes, Cherokee
women were robbed of their traditional
power base, excluding them from new
structures of political authority and rep-
resentation.

As a far-reaching project, the study
has limitations. Its flattening of histori-
cal density is perfectly understandable.
Less understandable, however, is its
failure to attend fully to the histories of
ethnic women. Although Evans begins
with Native American women, and
turns her attention early to African-
American women in slavery, the real
thread uniting her narrative is the strug-

gles of middle-class Anglo-American
women, and to a somewhat lesser de-
gree, their working-class counterparts.
After the first few chapters, mentions of
women of color take on a perfunctory
quality, and Evans more often than not
misses good opportunities for the com-
parisons I found so useful. When she
discusses the formative influence board-
ing school had in building solidarity for
Anglo women, she might have discussed
its alienating effect on Native American
women and their tribal communities.
Asian-American women and Chicanas
barely figure in the history; Evans ac-
cords a scant paragraph to the Japanese
“nisei” (second-generation) women in-
terred in detention camps. Occasionally
inept remarks, like the one that ex-
presses amazement at African slave mar-
ital fidelity because such marriages “had
no legal status,” suggest a lack of careful
consideration.

In general though, her history is in-
formative and provocative in terms of
Anglo-American feminist experiences
in the 1980s and 1990s. I was struck sev-
eral times by the correspondence be-
tween historical and current events, for
instance, the persecution of lower-
income women as “bad mothers” in the
mid-1800s called to mind today’s treat-
ment of cocaine mothers. And Evans’
analysis of the flapper generation’s fail-
ure to reinforce the toehold gained by
their mothers rings of the urgency of the
“second generation” problem being dis-
cussed by today’s feminists.

In this way, Born for Liberty is an ex-
cellent text for evening reading, and for
introductory women’s history and wo-
men’s studies courses. It will provoke
questions about the past and the future,
and propel students to further study of
this rich history we have together.

@ Dana D. Nelson Salvino teaches
American literature and women’s studies at
Louisiana State University.

Women as creators of art, women as the subject of art, women as nearly invisi-
ble presences in art history.... Until now women and the visual arts is a subject
that has been neglected at worst and treated piecemeal at best—a monograph
here, a major exhibition there, a chapter in the leading texts.

Now, in this brilliant and eagerly-awaited study, the author provides a compre-
hensive, accessible and inspired look at ten centuries of women's involvement
in the fine arts and highlights their achievements from the Middle Ages to the

present day.

Like all World of Art paperbacks, WOMEN, ART, AND SOCIETY is well-made,
well-written, well-illustrated and well-priced.

243 illustrations, 50 in color.
(Also available in cloth, $24.95)

$14.95 paper

The World of Art...for more than meets the eye
Published by Thames and Hudson, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York 10110
Distributed by W.W. Norton & Company. Write for a free catalogue.

Spring 1990