The Plight of Intellectual Women

British Women Writers: An Anthology from the Fourteenth Century to the Present,  
edited by Dale Spender and Janet Todd. New York: Peter Bedrick Books, 1989, $19.95,  

925 pp. (PB)

by Katharine M. Rogers

This anthology offers richly var-

ied expressions of women’s views

of the world, often focusing on  
the particular problems they face. Many  
of the early selections portray women’s  
intellectual frustrations in a society that  
expected them to aspire only to be duti-  
ful wives and always to put others’ claims  
ahead of their own ambition. The fic-  
tion of Jane Barker, an intellectual and a  
celibate who wrote in the early eight-  
eenth century, expresses both her dis-  
content with traditional marriage and  
her misgivings about her failure to con-  
form. Galesia, the partially autobio-  
graphical protagonist of Barker’s A  
Patch-work Screen for the Ladies (1723),  
recovers from her involvement with a  
cold, capricious suitor by sharing in her  
brother’s medical studies; she soon finds  
these far more absorbing than ordinary  
girls’ prattle about beaux. But, although  
Galesia derives her only true satisfaction  
from learning, she worries that it makes  
her “unfit company for everybody; for  
the unlearned feared, and the learned  
scorned my conversation; at least, I fan-  
cied so.” She feels she is superior, yet she  
regrets that she cannot fit into the  
group. When a rich rake courts her, her  
father assumes that his wealth and brisk-  
ness will make him a good husband, and  
her mother assures her that she can easi-  
ly reform him with mildness and sweet-  
ness. Galesia is not convinced, but lacks  
the self-confidence to refuse the match;  
her problem is solved when the young  
man commits a highway robbery for a  
joke and is executed for it. There is no  
foreshadowing of this unlikely turn, yet  
it expresses Barker’s sense that men are  
unreasonable and irresponsible, and  
hence not entitled to rule women. Dale  
Spender and Janet Todd have expertly  
extracted the essence of this short novel  
in a mere fifteen pages.

Sing Soft, Sing Loud  
by Patricia McConnel

New York: Atheneum, 1989, $18.95, 246 pp

In the Afterword to Sing Soft, Sing Loud,  
Patricia McConnel quotes her former  
husband’s response to the title story of  
her collection: “I don’t believe that  
happened;” and “I don’t know why any-  
one would want to read something like  
that.” My response to his words was  
shock and anger. McConnel’s accounts  
of prison experiences are so utterly con-  
vincing, and her forthright, passionate  
style so skillfully balanced with admir-  
able objectivity and compassion that  
from the first chapter I began recom-  
mending the book to friends and local  
bookstores.

The book’s two main sections tell the  
linked stories of prisoners Iva and Toni  
through their own voices, which are  
blunt and direct but never offensive. We  

The Brontës, from British Women Writers

They also provide a well-chosen ex-  
cerpt from The Adventures of David Sim-  
ple (1744), by Sarah Fielding (Henry’s  
sister). She too was concerned with the  
plight of intellectual women in an un-  
sympathetic society. All Cynthia wants  
to do is read and learn, but her parents  
allow her to read nothing but silly ro-  
mances, on the grounds that “poring on  
books, would never get me a husband.”  
Her father arranges a marriage for her  
with a rich lout who wants someone to  
bear his heir, manage his household,  
and comply with his humors. No one  
can imagine why she refuses this match  
as legalized prostitution. When her in-  
dignant father cuts her out of his will,  
she finds that it is next to impossible for a  
lady to support herself. Her only resort is  
to become a companion to a rich wo-  
man, who constantly asserts superiority  
over her and expects her to suppress  
every inclination of her own. Actually,  
Cynthia’s dependent situation was typi-  
cal of women in general, including  
Fielding; they were expected to comply  

learn of the circumstances of their lives  
which led to their incarceration; of the  
numerous instances of physical and psy-  
chological cruelty they endured within  
the prison system; of the social dynamics  
between guards and inmates, and be-  
tween the inmates themselves; and of  
their heroic attempts to reenter the  
“outside” world, disabled as they are by  
their demoralizing institutional experi-  
ence, and lacking the self-esteem neces-  
sary to avoid repeat offenses.

McConnel’s electric, highly engag-  
ing fiction will challenge most readers to  
reconsider their own as well as society’s  
attitudes toward women in prison and to  
see the overwhelming need for changing  
the larger society in which “violence and  
poverty and despair are so pervasive that  
we don’t even have any hope to lose.”  
This book makes an impressive contri-  
bution. It has changed my life. It could  
change yours.

—Ingrid Wendt

Not only an awareness of oppressive suf-  
fering is evident in these poems but an  
acknowledgment of great bodily joy and  
the potential for healing:

Hips

soften and the spine,

a seaweed in the shallow spume,  
undulates like a musical  

string by the struck note,  
helpless with harmonics.

The final section of the book,  
“Lumens,” is a series of brief poems that  

are seemingly transparent, often  

Spring 1990  

charged with erotic knowledge and — or  
— shapely congruities:

I come from small seas littered with  
playful islands

Feel how my heart is shaped  

by that sheltering  

Broumas’s best poems, in turn, are  
shaped by both a spirit of play and the  
nurturance of friends, family, and  
lovers.

© Lee Upton is the author of a recent  
book of poetry entitled No Mercy.

with those around them in exchange for  
the financial support that social condi-  
tions prevented them from earning for  
themselves.

A century later, women could sup-  
port themselves by writing; but The  
Autobiography of Margaret Oliphant  
(1899) reveals the emotional cost to a  
woman of pursuing a career while meet-  
ing the obligations she felt to her family.  
Responsible for the financial and emo-  
tional support of her children, her  
brother’s children, and several feckless  
male relatives, Oliphant published al-  
most one hundred pot-boiler novels, as  
well as a flood of nonfiction. At the end  
of her life, she wondered whether she  
could have produced first-class work had  
she not been so pressured. When her  
brother’s children fell upon her hands,  
she had resolutely convinced herself  
“that to bring up the boys for the service  
of God was better than to write a fine  
novel, supposing even that it was in me  
to do so. ... It seemed rather a fine  
thing to make that resolution (though in  
reality I had no choice); but now I think  
that if I had taken the other way... it  
might have been better for all of us.”  
Fewer but better books might have  
earned her as much money, and she  
would have set them a valuable example  
of dedication to one’s work. Oliphant  
analyzes her dilemma with honesty and  
precision: She might not have written  
like George Eliot even had she been  
equally free of family obligations; per-  
haps she was happier making “a number  
of people comfortable” than she would  
have been dedicating herself to her art;  
she has “always had to think of other  
people, and to plan everything — for my  
own pleasure, it is true, very often, but  
always in subjection to the necessity  
which bound me to them.”

There are numerous fine and fresh  
modern selections in this anthology,  

such as two sensitive stories in which a  
woman’s plight is developed in terms of  
the cat she befriends, Radclyffe Hall’s  
“Fraulein Schwartz” (1934) and Doris  
Lessing’s “An Old Woman and Her Cat”  
(1979). For earlier periods, the anthol-  
ogy is strongest in its representation of  
minor writers, many of whom do not  
appear in comparable books. There does  
seem to me a disproportion in the his-  
torical coverage. For example, Aphra  
Behn’s The Rover (1677), a lively but  
conventional Restoration comedy,  
takes up 123 pages, whereas Frances  
Burney, a brilliant journal writer and  
important novelist, gets only eleven.  
The editors’ claim to have produced the  
first “collection of the contributions of  
notable British women writers” is mis-  
leading. Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gu-  
bar’s Norton Anthology of Literature by  
Women (1985, merely mentioned by  
Spender and Todd in a footnote) offers  
the same broad coverage of British  
women, although it includes non-  
British writers of English as well. British  
Women Writers is a useful supplement to  
The Norton Anthology, but it is not  
equivalent. Gilbert and Gubar provide  
vastly superior introductory material and  
notes and a better balanced representa-  
tion of major and minor writers. For  
those seeking a textbook or an introduc-  
tion to the field, their book is preferable.

@ Katharine M. Rogers, a research  
professor at American University, is the  
author of Feminism in Eighteenth Century  
England and co-editor of The Meridian  
Anthology of Early Women Writers.

NOTE: Janet Todd, co-editor of British  
Women Writers, is also the author of a new  
book of criticism entitled The Sign of An-  
gellica: Women, Writing and Fiction,  
1660-1800 (Columbia University Press,  
$42.50, 328 pp.).

Coffee House Press Qu  

Ft  

| Dancers & the Dance  

c Ti  

ON  

Dancers and the Dance  
SHORT STORIES BY SUMMER BRENNER  

These twelve stories evoke the lives of dancers on and off the  
stage: those who dance for pleasure, politics, or religion,  
those who dance in dreams, and those who can’t dance  
anymore. “Full of authenticities, sensitivities and wonderful  
insights into the world of dance.”  

Bend this Heart  

—Edward Villella  

Verging on the Pertinent  
SHORT STORIES BY CAROL EMSHWILLER  

In these stories, Carol Emshwiller uses tongue-in-cheek  
realism to explore the psychological make-up of contem-  
porary women. “I’ve loved Carol Emshwiller’s work for  
years! She creates people, situations, and combinations of  
words that make me read her sentences and paragraphs again  
and again for the sheer pleasure of reading.”  

—Grace Paley  

SHORT STORIES BY JONIS AGEE  

The New York Times named this a Notable Book of 1989. As  
the title suggests, these turbulent stories reveal the human  
heart: stubborn, alien, laid siege to, which must be broken,  
torn and patched to discover its own strength. “She is a  
remarkable craftsman of stories which combine speed with  

substance.”  
MY OWN  
} Alphabet  

Cz  
yas  

All titles $9.95, paper. Available at bookstores or send $1.50 with your order to:  

— Marge Piercy  

My Own Alphabet  
STORIES AND ESSAYS BY BOBBIE LOUISE HAWKINS  

Each chapter of My Own Alphabet is inspired by a letter of the  
alphabet. “Hawkins has collected some of her favorite  
quotations from other writers and combined them with her  
own meditations to create this winsome collage...an unclass-  
ifiable but altogether beguiling album.”  

—L. A. Times  

Coffee House Press, 27 N. Fourth Street, Minneapolis, MN 55401  

Belles Lettres @ 25