The Thinking Bosom

by Barbara Griffith Furst

George Sand, an intellectual  
and social force in her own time  
— but also mocked, vilified,  

and slandered — is now gaining some  
well-deserved attention as a writer and  
as a woman who thought ahead of her  
time. The Intimate Journal of George  
Sand was published sixty years ago and  
edited by Marie Jenney Howe, an  
American Unitarian Minister and a  
leading women’s rights activist. In the  
journal, the innermost workings of the  
mind of the largely self-taught Sand and  
her genius are everywhere apparent.  

For some, mention of Sand will con-  
jure up Merle Oberon in a peach satin,  
fur-bordered dressing gown, with Cor-  
nell Wilde as Chopin coughing blood  
onto the keyboard during the dreadful  
stay at Majorca — or the cigar-smoking  
bohemian wearing men’s clothes in  
nineteenth-century Paris. However, she  
was neither beautiful nor irresponsible.  
She was, in fact, hardworking, intro-  
spective, and energetic. She was a wife,  
mother, lover, breadwinner, loyal  
friend, and political activist who suf-  
fered greatly and wrote copiously to sup-  
port family, friends, and others in need.  
She became the de facto minister of in-  
formation under France’s short-lived  
socialist Second Republic of 1848.  

Most of this journal was written be-  
tween 1834 and 1839, when Sand was in  
her early thirties. By this time, she was a  
well-known literary figure and had been  
separated from her abusive husband for  
some years. The journal includes notes  
by her granddaughter, Aurore Sand,  
and was written in Paris and at Nohant,  
her country estate 200 miles south of  
Paris. Howe says in the introduction  
that  

When George Sand was normal she did  
her work. Whenever she lost her poise she  
wrote a journal. . . when her emotions  
upset her life she got rid of them in writ-  
ing, and these outpourings testify how  
much inner rebellion the tremendous per-  
sonality which was George Sand had to  
contend with, in order to do a man’s work  
in the world.  

Love was the dominant force in her  

life — love for her unstable and difficult  
mother, her children and grandchild-  
ren, Nohant’s neighboring peasants,  
her lovers, her friends, and God. She  
declares flatly, “It is love, not faith, that  
removes mountains.” Referring to her  
headstrong daughter, Solange, she  
writes to her son, Maurice, “It is evident  
that those who live for love cannot un-  
derstand the interior mechanisms of  
those who do not love.”  
She is ambivalent about God. Many  
of the social and moral tenets of the  
Church she considers misguided, but she  
believes in God nevertheless. If one is  
“receptive to the life of the spirit, we  
shall sometimes feel in the depths of our  
being that mysterious closeness of self  
and not-self which attests the presence  
of God in man.”  

She writes that she was born “impa-  
tient to die.” When she suffers, the  
thought of death sustains her. Suicide is  
“an inalienable right.” When she feels  
its pull, only the thoughts of her young  
children keep her from it. This focus on  
love and death makes her the quintessen-  
tial romantic, and her credentials for  
leadership in that cult are nowhere more  
evident than in the journal.  

We may be uncomfortable, if not  
impatient, with Sand’s unabashed  
opening of the heart, yet we marvel at  
every turn of her mind and pen — and  

8 @ Belles Lettres  

George Sand  

are perhaps a little envious when we  
remember that, ironically, in our coldly  
rational era our gurus and therapists  
advise “getting in touch with our emo-  
tions” to heal our psychic wounds.  

There is another side to Sand, how-  
ever, which relieves the pathos. Almost  
a hundred years before Jung developed  
his anima/animus theory, she conversed  
in her journal with Dr. Piffoel, her  
“masculine” side. “He” is the intellec-  
tual who cuts issues to the bone, devoid  
of emotion, logical, and clear. She  
chides Piffoel for being distant, objec-  
tive, proud, and impatient with her  
emotionalism but also admires him for  
these same qualities. When out of sorts,  
she writes, “Piffoel, dear friend, I be-  
lieve your liver is out of order.”  

Sometimes she voices amazement at  
this split within herself. In the autumn  
of 1838 she writes to Piffoel after a lapse  
of a few months. During this time her  
mother had died and she had prevented  
the kidnapping of her son by his father,  
rescued her daughter from the father,  
and traveled to the Pyrenees, pre-  
sumably with a new lover.  

to recur. Then when you are delirious,  
strengthen yourself by the certainty that  
you will recover your mental poise.”  
Obviously, Sand held herself together  
by brute strength.  

Although she had many close al-  
liances with men, both as peers and as  
lovers, she was also a devoted friend to  
many women, including Marie d’Ag-  
oult, Liszt’s mistress, who wrote under  
the pen name Daniel Stern. Sand felt  
that marriage was an enslavement, that  
laws regarding it were unjust, and that  
women’s need for men was “based on  
cupidity, sex, and vanity.” Man scorns  
his woman to the degree she gives in and  
to which he, in his fatuous self-  
confidence, “knows himself necessary to  
women.” She asks how women can  
“hold the tyrant and lighten the yoke.”  

Despite her suffering and disillusion-  
ment, Sand’s novels were about the  
simple goodness of peasants, marital  
bliss, and the triumph of good over evil.  
She summed up her paradoxical self as  
“very impressionable, carried away by  
my love of beauty, hungry for truth,  
faulty in judgment, often absurd, and  
always sincere.”  

This overview does justice neither to  
the journal nor to the woman, for its  
nearly two hundred pages also record her  
musings on art and life, a whimsical  
conversation with her eight-year-old  
daughter about “thoughts,” her worries  
about money, beliefs about child rear-  
ing, and a charming love letter from  
Piffoel to an injured baby warbler that  
Sand resuscitated and that sits on her  
pen, preventing her from writing. Her  
legendary friends also appear. At her  
most desperate over l’affaire Musset, she  
records the advice and sympathy she  
received within several days from De-  
lacroix, Liszt, and Heine!  

I first visited Nohant in October  
1964, out of season and, at that time, off  
the beaten track. The house, a modest  
chateau, is in a small village with a rustic  
church and churchyard, where all the  
Sands are buried. (Her children and  

Selected Bibliography of Books by and About George Sand  

From Academy Chicago:  

The Bagpipers, 1977, $7.95 (PB); Leone Leoni, 1978, $5.95 (PB); Indiana, 1978,  
$8.95 (PB); Lucretia Floriani, 1985, $16.95; Valentine, 1978, $8.95 (PB); The Intimate  
Journals, edited by Marie J. Howe, 1978, $7.95 (PB); Winter in Majorca and Letters to  

Marcie (forthcoming)  
From Shameless Hussy Press:  

The Haunted Pool, 1976, $5.95 (PB); Lavinia, 1977, $2.95 (PB)  

From DaCapo:  

Consuelo: A Romance of Venice, 1979, $8.95 (PB); Mauprat, 1977, $9.95 (PB)  

From other publishers:  

The Country Waif, 1977, University of Nebraska, $4.50 (PB); Marianne, 1988, Car-  
roll & Graf, $14.95; Lelia: The Life of George Sand, by André Maurois, translated by  
Gerard Hopkins. London: Jonathan Cape, 1953; George Sand: A Biography, by Curtis  
Cate. London: Hamish Hamilton, 1975; A Woman’s Version of the Faust Legend: The  
Seven Strings of the Lyre, 1989, University of North Carolina Press, $34.95.  

What a prodigious soul yours is, O my  
great Piffoel! If you drank the blood of  
your children in the skull of your best  
friend, I doubt if it would even give you a  
colic. The sun could fall down upon your  
nose without causing you so much as a  
sneeze. . . Your sang-froid is magnificent.  
You could eat a piece of granite as though  
it were a pat of butter, without ever  
breaking a tooth.  

Her coolness as Piffoel is also re-  
corded in two pages of advice for dealing  
with mental suffering. “When mental  
sickness increases until it reaches the  
danger point, do not exhaust yourself by  
efforts to trace back to original  
causes... Try to find the immediate  
daily causes. . . . Observe what you are  
doing or thinking to bring them on. In  
that way you may prevent them, or at  
least diminish their force.” And she goes  
on, “When your mental state is normal,  
try to realize that the delirium is bound  

grandchildren took the name Sand.)  
Our guide, an older woman who had  
been a family retainer, went ahead of us,  
turning on the lights in the shabby,  
charming, slightly damp house. From  
somewhere came the faint sound of  
Chopin playing the piano, and through  
the windows one could see the watery  
autumn sun filtering through the trees.  
The dining room table was set for dinner  
and had place cards for Liszt, Chopin,  
Marie d’Agoult, and others. One felt  
that the Sands and their guests would  
return at any moment.  

To quote Patricia Thomson in her  
preface to the Penguin edition of  
Sand’s Lettres d'un Voyageur,  

The heartfelt earnestness with which  
[Sand] philosophized and moralized ap-  

pealed to a wide public, and readers as  
ill-assorted as Charlotte Brontë and  
Dostoevsky, Matthew Arnold and Samuel  
Smiles, Turgenev and Jane Carlyle, Ge-  
orge Eliot and Mazzini, Emerson and John  
Stuart Mill testified to the stimulus and,  
at times, the comfort they derived from  
her musings — no matter how protracted  
they were.  

Chateaubriand called her the French  
Byron, and James enjoyed taking sly  
potshots at her. Her books gained a fol-  
lowing among the newly literate French  
populace. That she was such a giant is all  
the more remarkable because at that  
time women had few opportunities.  

So much larger than life was Sand, in  
fact, that after finishing Donna Dicken-  
son’s George Sand: A Brave Man, The  
Most Womanly Woman, (St. Martin’s,  
$25), I could not imagine what Dicken-  
son’s fuss was all about. Why does she  
feel Sand has fallen into obscurity and  
has to be defended so assiduously against  
attacks made both during her lifetime or  
after her death? Anyone listed as an au-  
thor seventy times in Books in Print and  
thirty times as subject (two of them  
modern biographies) has hardly dropped  
from sight. On reflection, however,  
Dickenson is correct. Sand was at-  
tacked, sometimes viciously and some-  
times vacuously, because she was an as-  
sertive woman. More often than not,  
the attacks reveal the fragility of the col-  
lective male ego rather than any basic  
flaw in Sand. She was variously called a  
thinking bosom, a writing cow, and  
even a latrine. Much of the criticism was  
couched in terms of her sexuality. In  
print, she was accused of nymphomania  
and lesbianism, all in an effort to pull  
her down.  

Dickenson has amassed and exam-  
ined an amazing amount of material, not  
only about Sand but also about her con-  
temporaries and the nineteenth-century  
European literary world. Dickenson  
opens the book with a clever vignette  
that describes a man who overcame a  
traumatic childhood and a “patchy”  
education to become a prodigious and  
much admired writer, who gently cared  
for his many mistresses despite their  
sometimes outrageous behavior, who  
generously supported friends and re-  
tainers, and who gave millions of francs  
away and raised two children by himself  
— in short, one who was admirable by  
almost anyone’s standards but was slan-  
dered because “he” was a woman.  

Using modern feminist theory,  
Dickenson examines the attacks, the  
attackers, and the double standards of  
the male-dominated literary world. One  
chapter considers the question of  
whether Sand was a feminist. She cer-  
tainly was in her plea for equal marital  
and property rights. Yet she was opposed  
to the vote for women, thinking that it  
would be bad for women, political insti-  
tutions, and society as a whole. Al-  
though somewhat startling at first  
glance, this view reminds one of con-  
temporary feminist Sonia Johnson, who  
argues that using the system’s methods  
(in this case, the vote) to garner power  
only strengthens the system, which  
needs to be replaced.  

Although Dickenson details the gross  
injustices done to Sand, the question  
arises as to whether it is possible to apply  
modern feminist labels or psychological  
theory to such free spirits. Because such  
personalities defy categorization, they  
are unique and vulnerable. One wonders  
what the “good lady of Nohant” and  
Flaubert’s “chère maîtresse” — trium-  
phant, fulfilled, and admired in her old  
age — would make of this belated effort  
to defend her.  

© Barbara Griffith Furst’s last Retro-  
spective for Belles Lettres was on Margaret  
Drabble.  

Winter 1990