Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, Virginia 22216  
301/294-0278  

%  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

¢  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
DESIGNER  

¢  

Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

¢  

Kamili Anderson  
Jane Bakerman  
Regina Barreca  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary K. Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Helaine Harris  
Susan Koppelman  
Faye Moskowitz  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  

4  

Jeanne Casey  
Adele Gorelick  
Carmen Johnson  
Catherine McDermott  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) ap-  
pears four times a year. It is available  
by subscription and is distributed by  
Inland Book Company, East Haven,  
CT; Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and  
Ubiquity Distribution, Brooklyn, NY.  
Member of the Coordinating Council  
of Literary Magazines. Funded in part  
by the Jenny Moore Fund and the Na-  
tional Endowment for the Arts.  

Subscription Rates  
$30.00/institutions; — $15.00/individ-  
uals; $12.50/students with photocopy  
of student ID; foreign + $9.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of books  
written by women, published by trade,  
university, and independent presses.  
Both scholarly and popular works are  
reviewed in the genres of fiction, non-  
fiction, poetry, biography, and criti-  
cism. Our purpose is to promote and  
celebrate writing by women and in  
doing so, to inform and entertain. All  
views are those of the individual  
authors.  

Correspondence  
Editorial correspondence and books  
for review should be sent to Janet  
Mullaney at 11151 Captain’s Walk  
Ct., Gaithersburg, MD 20878, except  
for poetry books and queries (send to  
Michelle Tokarezyk, 130 W. 16th St.,  
#61, NY, NY 10011) and mysteries  
(send to Jane Bakerman, RR 23, Box  
131, Terre Haute, IN 47802). Con-  
tributors should query first, send clips,  
and enclose SASE.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is accepted.  
Copy should be camera ready (stats or  
veloxes suitable for direct paste-up). If  
other forms are accepted (i.e., manu-  
script, negatives, photocopies, art  
boards), production charges will be as-  
sessed for typesetting or camera work.  
Deadline for space reservations is the  
first of the month, two months preced-  
ing the month of issue. Write for rate  
card or call 301/294-2078 or 301/949-  
1838.  

©Belles Lettres Inc.  

| Winter 1989  

British Women’s  

Presses  
by Shelley Anderson  

London is not only the political capital of  
Britain; it is also the heart of the country’s  
publishing world. And that world contains a  
number of thriving women’s presses. The  
Women’s Press, which celebrated its tenth  
anniversary in April, and fifteen-year-old  
Virago, which recently bought itself back  
from Random House and became an inde-  
pendent concern again, are two of the better  
known presses. Both have published hun-  
dreds of titles, which are available in main-  
stream and alternative bookshops through-  
out the country. Women’s publishing in Bri-  
tain is greatly helped by Feminist Book Fort-  
night, a two-week, nationwide promotion of  
women’s writing held annually since 1984.  

Charting the Journey is published by Sheba,  
a collective of two Black and two white  
women. The press, which has been publish-  
ing since 1980, has had a difficult time get-  
ting its books in mainstream shops such as  
W. H. Smith. Now that Charting the Journey  
was in Feminist Book Fortnight “we waltzed  
in snubbing our noses,” said Sue, a collective  
member. The book may be published by  
Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press in the  
States.  

The collective places a special emphasis  
on publishing the work of Black women. In  
1984 the press published A Dangerous Know-  
ing: Four Black Women Poets, the first poetry  
anthology by British-based Black women.  
The book was sold out within six months and  
chosen for that year’s Feminist Book Fort-  
night. One of the poets, Barbara Burford,  
also published The Threshing Floor and Other  
Stories through Sheba. (The book has re-  
cently been republished in America by Fire-  
brand Books.) Sheba is also the British pub-  
lisher of Audre Lorde’s works. The press also  
broke new ground by publishing other works  
by minorities living in England: Gifts from  
My Grandmother is a poetry book by Meiling  
Jin, a Chinese woman from Guyana; The  
Water’s Edge and other stories by Moy McCro-  
ry tells of the bittersweet experience of Irish  
women living in Britain.  

Sue, an American who has lived in  
England for twenty-five years, has noticed a  
definite difference between American and  
British women’s writing. “Americans tend  
toward a world view,” she said. “British  
women’s writing is more personal and intro-  
spective, almost shy. American feminists  
have developed a tradition of essay writing,  
although British radical feminists do write  
sharp political pieces. British women’s fic-  
tion is growing — a lot of women are still  
stuck in autobiography. I think it’s a question  
of confidence. The style of British women’s  
writing will develop in a distinctive way.”  

One small women’s press in London has  
published two science fiction books in recent  
years by British women: Onlywomen Press.  
Caroline Forbes’s The Needle on Full is a col-  
lection of lesbian-feminist sci-fi stories,  
while Anna Livia’s Bulldozer Rising is a novel.  
Anna Livia is one of two full-time workers at  
Onlywomen Press.  

While Onlywomen’s current selection  
includes American poets Adrienne Rich,  
Judy Grahn, and Marilyn Hacker and  
Sicilian-American novelist Dodici Azpadu,  
the press plans to return to its original policy  
of searching out new British lesbian-feminist  
writers. Anna Livia smiles when she de-  
scribes “the magical process of a writer find-  
ing a publisher.” However the process works,  
it has resulted in a number of firsts for Only-  
women: they published The Reach, Britain’s  
first lesbian-feminist short story anthology,  
which was reprinted within six months, and  
One Foot On the Mountain: British Feminist  
Poetry 1969-1979, one of the earliest  
women’s poetry collections, which has now  
been reprinted four times.  

There are a few other small presses that  
concentrate on publishing women’s work.  
BlackwomenTalk is one of the newest. It has  
published one book of poetry and is currently  
soliciting stories for an anthology. Brilliance  
Books, which has published forty titles since  
1982, is a gay and lesbian press that has pub-  
lished both new and old writers. “We always  
lose money on new writers,” editor and  
owner Tenebris Light said, but the press is  
still determined to publish new material.  
Light, who looks at 500 manuscripts a year,  
finds the current state of British writing “very  
exciting — writers have stopped looking at  
America and started looking to Europe.”  
Brilliance Books is the biggest publisher of  
books by and about Gertrude Stein in Bri-  
tain. The Alice B. Toklas Cookbook and a new  

CONTENTS  

VOLUME 4/NUMBER 2  

HISPANIC WOMEN  

Compatieras: Latina Lesbians (An  

Open Door: Stories and The Lizard’s Tail  

Reclaiming Medusa: Short Stories by Contemporary Puerto Rican Women  

edited and translated by Diana Vélez  
and Luisa Valenzuela  

You Can’t Drown the Fire: Latin American Women Writing in Exile  

Women’s Fiction from Latin America  

Contemporary Authors ..........  
Palm Latitudes...............--  

Eva Luna  

New Islands and Other Stories  

ASIAN WOMEN  

Desert Run: Poems and Stories ..  

Seventeen Syllables and Other Stories  

edited by Alica Partnoy  

edited by Evelyn Picon Garfield  

by Kate Braverman  

Chinese American Portraits: Personal Histories 1828-1988  

Lapse of Time  

REVIEWS  

Whoever Finds This: I Love You  
Letourneau’s Used Auto Parts... .  
A Boy Like Astrid’s Mother.....  
Second Chances ..........  
The Lord .... 00...  
At Risk...  
Beyond This Body  

The Life of Mary: A Poem-Novella ..........  
Octavia and Other Poems ......-  
Savings: Poems  

newest Heagaws CRE TERS by Ruthanne Lum McCunn  

by Wang Anyi  

by Faye Moskowitz  
by Carolyn Chute  
by Mae Bris  
by Hortense Calisher  
by Alice Adams  
by Soraya Antonius  

by Alice Hoffman  

by Charlotte Mandel  
by Naomi Long Madgett  
by Linda Hogan  

Under a Soprano Sky:  
No Man’s Land: The Place of the Woman Writer  

Century, Volume I: The War of the Word  

by Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar  
Color, Sex and Poetry: Three Women Writers of the Harlem Renaissance  

This Is About Incest by Margaret Randall  
Rebirth of Power: Overcoming the Effects of Sexual Abuse through the  
Experience of Others  

edited by Pamela Portwood, Michele Gorcey, and Peggy Sanders  

These Things Happen, Walking Distance,  

Women and Love.........-..--  
Mary Shelley: Her Life,  

‘The Passionate Nomad:  

by Shere Hite  
by Anne K. Mellor  

edited by Nina de Voogd  

Women and Disability: Essays in Psychology, Culture and Politics  

edited by Adrienne Asch and Michelle Fine  
The Miracle Hater...............-  
The Narrows...  

Caught ..  

Unholy Alliances ............  
Private War: Letters  

edited by Virginia Wolcott Beauchamp  
Wide-Race......  

Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity  

COLUMNS  

Belles Lettres Interview: Maxine Hong Kingston  
Marguerite Duras  

Retrospective: M:  
The Criminal Element  

Rediscovery: Frances Burney  

Correspondence  

Impressions: Beyond Jade Snow Wong, Briefly Noted, Latina Sisters,  

On the Cover: Alice Walker, author  

most recently of Living By the Word,  

Selected  

Writings 1973-1987 (Harper & Row, $15.95, 224 pp.). Photo by Lynda Koolish.  

translation of Sappho by Josephine Balmer  
are two of its best-selling books.  

Brilliance Books is fortunate in being to-  
tally independent from government grants.  
Both Sheba and Onlywomen Press receive  
arts council funding, and they are both wait-  
ing to see how the recently passed Section 28  
of the Local Government Bill will affect their  
funding. Section 28 makes it illegal for any  
local government to “intentionally promote  
homosexuality or publish material for the  
promotion of homosexuality.” Both presses  
agree that the law creates a climate of fear  
and self-censorship for writers. They are also  
concerned that sales to libraries and univer-  
sities, two institutions dependent on gov-  
ernment funding, will be affected.  

“Loans and grants are harder to get, even  
without the Section,” Anna Livia said.  
“Onlywomen Press was told last year by a  
London arts grant scheme not to apply.”  
London’s publishing world — lesbian, gay  
and heterosexual — rallied against the bill in  
an effort to prevent it becoming law, but  
failed. Women writers such as Angela Car-  
ter, Edna O'Brian, Fay Weldon, and Zoe  
Fairbairns have been especially active against  
the legislation. Bookshops have also opposed  
the new law. A month before the Section  
became law in late May, Jane Cholmeley of  
the women’s bookshop Silver Moon noted  
that a librarian who bought some lesbian ti-  
tles warned the bookshop not to put anything  
on the invoice that would indicate the books  
had a lesbian content. Section 28, said  
Cholmeley, “is a deliberate encouragement  
of bigotry.” Silver Moon bookshop, like  
Gay’s the Word bookshop, has already had  
packages of books imported from the States  
damaged and delayed by postal and customs  
authorities.  

Small presses, and particularly women’s  
and lesbian presses, have always had difficul-  
ties in surviving. Despite the problems of al-  
ternative distribution networks, lack of re-  
views, and poor cash flow, Sheba Press,  
Onlywomen Press, and Brilliance Books are  
intent on expanding their work. Section 28  
is simply one more obstacle.  

@ Shelley Anderson is a journalist who lives  
in Amsterdam.  

Belles Lettres @ 1