— Challenging, continued from page 11

The concept of dialogism is not only  
her subject but also her approach. As  
Frye explains, “dialogue — between  
disciplines, between systems and indi-  
viduals, between literature and life —  
becomes, then, a kind of definition of  
my eclectic perspective: a resistance to  
dichotomies through setting them in in-  
teraction with each other.” By releasing  
texts and theory from awkward stasis,  
she reveals “novelistic narrative as both  
analogue of and medium for the general  
processes of feminist analysis” and re-  
veals how such feminist understanding  
of the novel “can thus help to develop  
new paradigmatic plots and new perspec-  
tives on women’s lives.”

Frye’s first three chapters use percep-  
tion and cognitive psychology to explain  
the ways in which the novel is directly  
linked to daily life. Written with the  
sophistication but without the jargon of  
the leading semiotic theorists, Frye’s  
convincing account of the dynamic con-  
nection between living and telling is the  
cornerstone of her argument and is sure  
to be envied and imitated.

The transparency of the following  
chapter titles reflects her own principle  
of dialogism in structural operation:  
“Growing Up Female: Lives of Girls and  
Women and The Bluest Eye,” “Beyond  
Teleology: Violet Clay and The Stone  
Angel,” “Fragmentation, Complexity,  
and Wholeness: The Waterfall and The  
Golden Notebook.” As we watch pro-  
tagonists confront the “culturally de-  
fined heterosexual female ‘identity’ and  
the autonomous urge to self-definition,”  
we consider the poetics of the form with-  
out which they struggle and whose strug-  
gle becomes the telling “I.” How rare  
for a theoretical text to present original  
concepts while sounding such an in-  
spired call.

Feminist Aesthetics, edited by Gisela  
Ecker, is a lively, provocative reflection  
of German feminism that covers many  
areas of art (literature, film, architec-  
ture, music). All of these reflections are  
of outstanding quality and are unified by  
a consistent definition of feminism.  
Ecker’s introduction argues for a feminist  
rather than a feminine aesthetic, one  
that avoids essentialism, allows for a  
critique of the complicated traditional  
assumptions about art, and, most impor-  
tant, “indicate[s] a commitment which  
is relative to the historical moment with  
its specific necessities.” What consoli-  
dates the individual brilliance of these  
essays is the belief that “feminist aesthe-  
tic theory must insist that all investiga-  
tions into art have to be thoroughly gen-  
derized.”

Silvia Bovenschen (“Is There a  
Feminine Aesthetic?”) recommends a  
descriptive rather than a prescriptive  
aesthetics; Elizabeth Link (“The Self-  
Reflecting Woman”) suggests how such  
an aesthetic can avoid “being cir-  
cumscribed by the male gaze.” Sigrid  
Weigel (“Double Focus”) presents a con-  
vincing case for a feminist analysis of  
literature that is grounded in feminist  
poetics, whereas Heide Gottner-Aben-  
droth (“Nine Principles of a Matriarchal  
Aesthetic”) argues for a radically differ-  
ent feminist aesthetic. Novelist Christa  
Wolfe (“A Letter About Unequivocal  
and Ambiguous Meaning, Definiteness  
and Indefiniteness; About Ancient  
Conditions and New View-Scopes;  
About Objectivity”) presents criticism  
that literally speaks in a new form about  
a new form of writing and a new aesthe-  
tics, one that will “enable us to get closer  
to reality.” Gertrud Koch compares the  
components of the eroticism of Marlene  
Dietrich, Mae West, and Marilyn Mon-  
roe in her provocative analysis of the  
current state of feminist research on the  
cinema. Jutta Bruckner, a filmmaker,  
writes about feminist films and the need  
for a radical feminist aesthetics  
(“Women Behind the Camera”). Chris-  
tiane Erlemann (“What is Feminist Ar-  
chitecture?”) suggests radical conclu-  
sions to the problems of planning de-  

velopment and of creating female space,  
whereas Eva Rieger (“Dolce semplice”?  
On the Changing Role of Women in  
Music”) provides a history of this male-  
dominated field and describes the diffi-  
culty of women in gaining recognition.  
Renate Mohrmann uses a historical  
approach (“Occupation: Women Artist:  
On the Changing Relations Between  
Being a Woman and Artistic Produc-  
tion”) to show the connections in thea-  
ter, writing, and film. Gisela Breitling,  
whose own provocative art illustrates the  
text, discusses the problems, techniques,  
and aesthetics of women’s art (“Speech,  

Silence and the Discourse of Art”).

Twenty artists illustrate the text and rep-  
resent the artistic diversity that exists in  
Germany today. This exceptional col-  
lection provides an important explora-  
tion of German feminism and its milieu.  
It also offers an important reflection on  
common feminist goals and concerns  
and makes one hungry for more interna-  
tional exchange.

Women’s Writing: A Challenge to  
Theory, edited by Moira Monteith, pro-  
vides an English perspective on  
feminism that is unique in its arrange-  
ment. The book contains a fine collec-  
tion of “fragments” that create an “anal-  
ogy with women’s discussion, a model  
of collaboration rather than one of an-  
tithetical argument.” Lorna Sage’s essay,  
“The Available Space,” considers the  
possibility of writing as “free space” and  
uses Lessing’s Canopus series as an exam-  
ple. Nicole Ward Jouve draws on her  
own experience in “‘Her Legs Bestrid  
the Channel’: Writing in Two Languages”  
to present a fascinating geographical  
parallel to the problem of woman’s dou-  
ble voice. Linda Anderson’s intelligent  
essay, “At the Threshold of the Self:  
Women and Autobiography,” examines  
theories of autobiography and considers  
the diaries of Alice James, the diary-like  
works of Kate Millet, and the works of  
Virginia Woolf, for whom “the act of  
remembering and of writing come to-  
gether.” Michelene Wandor, in a per-  
sonal and moving essay (“Voices are  
Wild”), considers the development of  
her own poetic voice from her early days  
as a playwright to her growing awareness  
of herself as “Jewish, woman and  
feminist.” In “Feminist Literary Criti-  
cism in America and England,” Maggie  
Humm provides an intelligent overview  
of feminist literary criticism as she con-  
siders difference, theory, and “reader ap-  
proaches.” In the dynamic conversa-  
tion, “Women Talking About Writing,”  
Emma Tennant (Woman Beware  
Woman) and Sue Roe (Estella) discuss  
women’s writing, feminism, their own  
works, and their sense of being double  
while writing. Shirley Foster’s “The  
Open Cage: Freedom, Marriage and the  
Heroine in Early Twentieth-Century  
American Women’s Novels” provides a  
fresh analysis of how Kate Chopin’s The  
Awakening, Edith Wharton’s The House  
of Mirth, and Willa Cather’s The Song  
of the Lark “incorporate both protest and  
ambivalence into a traditional form.”  
And in the essay I found most interest-  
ing, “Feminism and Fiction Between the  
Wars: Winifred Holtby and Virginia  
Woolf,” Marion Shaw presents the sig-  
nificance of the split of feminists after  
the war into two camps — the equalita-  
rians who demanded parity with men  
and the “new” feminists who were in  
favor of protective legislation for  
women — by tracing an analogous split  
in the literary world between the realists  
of the Edwardian tradition and conserva-  
tive novelists such as Winifred Holtby  
and Vera Brittain on one side and Vir-  
ginia Woolf and Dorothy Richardson  
who opted for nontraditional forms, on  
the other.

Feminist Criticism and Social Change:  
Sex, Class, and Race, edited by Judith  
Newton and Deborah Rosenfelt, breaks  
new ground and is sure to be a classic.  
The introduction convinces readers of  
the need for a materialist-feminist ap-  
proach to literature; neither Marxist nor  

socialist criticism has incorporated the  
radical feminist critique, and  
mainstream feminism tends to ignore the  
rich diversity of underrepresented  
women by emphasizing the lone indi-  
vidual or the universal woman. As these  
editors show, materialist-feminist criti-  
cism offers the best of both approaches.  
“Villette,” by Judith Newton; “Aurora  
Leigh,” by Cora Kaplan; “Inverts and  
Experts: Radclyffe Hall and the Lesbian  
Identity,” by Sonja Reuhl; “Shadows  
Uplifted,” by Barbara Christian; “From  
the Thirties: Tillie Olsen and the Radi-  
cal Tradition,” by Deborah Rosenfelt;  
“Romance in the Age of Electronics:  
Harlequin Enterprises,” by Leslie W.  
Rabine; and “Real Women,” by An-  
nette Kuhn are, without exception,  
powerful examples of materialist  
feminism and of its ability to analyze  
that which falls between the cracks of  
other feminist interpretations. These es-  
says were previously published sepa-  
rately; together they speak even more  
forcefully, for they show that all other  
methods of literary criticism can be  
adapted to this approach and that both  
understanding and change require such  
richness and vigor. I recommend the  

book highly.

Making a Difference: Feminist Literary  
Criticism, edited by Gayle Greene and  
Coppélia Kahn, may be the best seller  
of all these collections because of the  
consistent quality and diversity of the  
individual essays. Exceptionally well-  
written essays by well-known feminists  
represent the tremendous range and di-  
versity of feminist approaches and con-  
texts and of the various relationships  
within feminism. Included are Greene  
and Kahn’s “Feminist Scholarship and  
the Social Construction of Woman,”  
Sydney Janet Kaplan’s “Varieties of  
Feminist Criticism,” Ann Rosalind  
Jones’s “Inscribing Femininity: French  
Theories of the Feminine,” Judith Kegan  
Gardiner’s “Mind Mother: Psycho-  
analysis and Feminism,” Cora Kaplan’s  
“Pandora’s Box: Subjectivity, Class and  
Sexuality in Socialist Feminist Criti-  
cism,” Susan Willis’s “Black Women  
Writers: Taking a Critical Perspective,”  
and Adrienne Munich’s “Notorious  
Signs, Feminist Criticism and Literary  
Tradition.” These fine essays engage the  
reader with what is most significant in  
the rapidly developing areas of feminist  
literary criticism. Each essay makes a dif-  
ference by contributing fresh insights to  
the debate in a focused area of study;  
together, they exhibit the difference  
feminism makes not only in literary criti-  
cism but also in the related disciplines  
that feminism has influenced.

The most spectacular of all the collec-  
tions of essays is The Poetics of Gender,  
edited by Nancy K. Miller. This book  
provides a scintillating record of the col-  
loquium on the poetics of gender at Col-  
umbia University in 1985, with con-  
tributions from renowned feminists. You  
will read these essays more than once or  
twice, for they are art. Monique Wittig  
has written the ultimate political man-  
ifesto on the gender of the personal pro-  
noun (“The Mark of Gender”), and she  
explains that it is “a criminal act, perpet-  
rated by one class against another.” Ann  
Rosalind Jones (“Surprising Fame: Re-  
naissance Gender Ideologies and  
Women’s Lyric”) creates a much needed  
model for analyzing the “sociotextual”  
aspects of the production and reception  
of women’s literary reputations. Alice  
Jardine (“Opaque Texts and Transpa-  
rent Contexts: The Political Difference  
of Julia Kristeva”) impressively cuts  
through the debates and problems in cur-  
rent theory to show us what may be most  
important of all: “an ethicity which, at  
least temporarily, might allow women  
to continue interpreting without being  
afraid of and without becoming victims  
of either modernity or feminism.”

If Jardine’s essay does not make your  
heart pound as it did mine, Susan Rubin  
Suleiman’s “Pornography, Transgres-  
sion, and the Avant-Garde: Bataille’s  
Story of the Eye” may. Suleiman reveals  
the implications and ideological assump-  
tions in the different ways a text can be  
read as she analyzes the readings of  
Dworkin, Sollers, and Sontag, who have  
interpreted the pornographic fiction of  
Bataille. Catharine Stimpson is at her  
best in “Gertrude Stein and the Trans-  
position of Gender”; Nancy J. Vickers’s  
clever analysis of the production and  
consumption of Cellini’s “Nymph of  
Fontainebleau” reveals, astonishingly,  
the significance of “The Mistress in the  
Masterpiece”; Mary Ann Caws argues  
for a “generativity . . . a permanent en-  
gendering which undoes the editing  
hand” such as she finds in the works of  
Virginia Woolf, Sylvia Plath, Dora Car-  
rington, Katherine Mansfield, and Alice  
James. Jane Gallop wittily engages us in  
her discussion of the significant “space  
between écriture and féminine” in “Writ-  
ing a Letter With Vermeer,” whereas  
Domna C. Stanton, wise to be wary,  
considers metonymic options for the  
maternal metaphor as it figures in the  
context of the “excessive, tumescent  
metaforeplay” of the modernists in her  
“Difference on Trial: A Critique of the  
Maternal Metaphor in Cixous, Irigaray,  
and Kristeva.” Sandra Gilbert and Susan  
Gubar persuasively suggest that “as mis-  
ogynistic reaction-formation against the  
rise of literary women became not just  
a theme in modernist writing but a mo-  
tive for modernism” in their superb  
essay, “Tradition and the Female Talent.”

By asking difficult and necessary ques-  
tions about the construction of sexual  
identity through reading and writing,  
Elizabeth Berg presents, in “Iconoclastic  
Moments: Reading the Sonnets for  
Helene, Writing the Portuguese Letters,”  
an escape to the “binary opposition that  
maintains the oppression of women.”  
And with marvelous scholarship in  
“Piecing and Writing,” Elaine Showal-  
ter brings us to value, ultimately, even  
the ragged edges of pieces in the accurate  
literary history. Naomi Schor’s pleasur-  
able reversal of traditional reasoning in  
“Reading Double: Sand’s Difference”  
convinces the reader to understand that  
it is not sexual difference in history but,  
instead, the manner in which “history  
inhabits sexual difference” that will  
allow us to “go beyond the current split”  
in criticism. Finally, in one of the finest  
essays in the collection, “Arachnologies:  
The Woman, The Text, and the Cri-  
tic,” Nancy Miller explains the exciting  
strategy of arachnology: “a critical posi-  
tioning which reads against the weave of  
indifferentiation to discover the embod-  
iment in writing of a gendered subjectiv-  
ity.” The exhilaration Gita May discus-  
ses in the concluding remarks to the col-  
loquium is certainly conveyed in this  
book, one of the outstanding achieve-  
ments of feminist literary criticism.

® Mary Libertin is Director of Compo-  
sition and Chair of the Women’s Studies  
Program at Shippensburg University.

Free Art

Five individuals who subscribe by  
August 1 will be eligible to win color  
art posters celebrating novels by  
women from North Point Press:

Ghost Dance by Carole Maso (repro-  
duction of a fashion painting by  
Sonia Delaunay) and A Servant’s  
Tale by Paula Fox (an original Hidy  
design). These are $10 posters do-  
nated by North Point. Subscribe  
today!

| 14 @ Belles Lettres July/August 1987