Short Stories

A Call to Arms Against Clichés

The Melting Pot and Other Subversive
Stories, by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. New
York: Harper & Row, $16.95, 230 pp.

by Merrill Joan Gerber

The “subversive” material in

Lynne Sharon Schwartz’s new

collection, The Melting Pot and
Other Subversive Stories, is the healthiest
kind — the kind that tells the truth and
thereby “overthrows from the founda-
tion” (see Webster’s definition of “sub-
vert.”)

In the story “The Melting Pot,” a
young woman, having received a pro-
posal of marriage from her lover (isn’t
this the dénouement women are sup-
posed to crave?), laughs and tells him
“You’ve seen too many Fred Astaire
movies.’ But she is afraid. She doesn’t
want to belong to anyone forever.” She
reflects that “as a small child, she was
quite obedient,” but now that she is an
adult, her life is regarded as one of dis-
obedience.

This “life of disobedience,” which
many of Schwartz's characters embrace,
is the struggle to act in accordance with a
world one actually sees and knows to be
true; rarely is it a gratuitous desire to
rebel for the sake of getting attention or
revenge.

In the brief (barely six) pages of the
story “The Subversive Divorce,”
Schwartz presents the essence of what
could have been a 300-page novel; she
explores the scalding contest between
man and wife; distills the nature and
psychology of love, forgiveness, resigna-
tion, and grace; and lets us know that
“Marriage is an illusion . . . True mar-
riage [is] a thing that cannot exist be-
cause of the nature of human nature.”
And, finally, “the only true and beauti-
ful and possible marriage is a child.”

Each story seems to be, in its own way,
a call to arms against the clichéd think-
ing we are fed in order to hide from us the
unflattering truth about the nature of the
human soul. In “The Two Portraits of
Rembrandt,” the daughter of a violent-
tempered man confesses that when “I
hear nowadays the psychological lan-
guage urging family members to settle
differences by calm discussion, to reveal
their feelings, to be ‘open’ . . . I get a
sense of comic unreality . . . I feel like
shouting out what I want and hearing
others shout back, and slugging it out
with ever more pungent insults.”

An incredible toughness is at the
heart of Schwartz’s vision of life: We are
here, she tells us, and what is, is. Why
not face it head on without flinching?
And, at all costs, without cant or senti-
mentality.

What could beckon for a more senti-
mental treatment than the death of a
child’s hamster? (In fact, three hamsters
die in the story “What I Did for Love.”)

And tears, grave digging in the park, a
burial at sea. But the mother of Martine
(named, we are told, for Martin Luther
King — idealism is fine, it is just hypo-
crisy we have to watch out for) finds it
difficult to love hamsters, which she
considers to be nothing more than fat
rats. She knows what is important: She
has learned to see things hard and clear.
As an x-ray technician, she observes:
“Most of the time, you find the patients
either have cancer or not, and while you
naturally hope for the best each time,
you can’t help getting to feel less and
less, because a certain percentage are al-
ways doomed regardless of your feelings.”

When her husband dies suddenly
while driving his cab, she has “no illu-
sions that I’ll ever be joining him soon,
or late. . . I lie there remembering how

[ 6 ® Belles Lettres

There are trips to the vet, a child’s grief -

Lynne Sharon Schwartz.
Photo by Thomas Victor.

it felt with his arms and legs flung over
me and can’t believe I’m expected to get
through decades without ever feeling
that again.” Later, she realizes that
someday he will “turn into the man I had
in my youth, instead of what he is now,
my life.” When summer comes, she sees
her daughter off to camp: “It was hard,
her going off on the bus, with the typical
scene of cheery mothers and fathers
crowding around waving brown lunch
bags, but I forced myself through it and
so did she. I would force myself through
the rest of my life if I had to.” She stays
home and takes care of another charge,
Martine’s sick guinea pig, “stroking him
as if I really loved animals.”

The dilemma that Schwartz’s charac-
ters face in most of these stories is one of
discomfiting incongruence: Our in-
stincts and experience tell us one thing
and society tells us another. How do we

behave when we know we are being lied
to?

The irony is a bit heavy in “The Last
Frontier,” when a poor New York family
without a place to live takes up residence
on the set of a sit-com, but Schwartz’s
style is so engaging, and the idea so ap-
propriate and ludicrous, that the reader
is charmed to the end.

The most brilliant and powerful of the
stories is “So You’re Going To Have a
New Body.” Here, form and content
teach a perfect union as the ordeal of a
woman who must have a hysterectomy
unfolds in a deadly, breezy medical-
brochure tone: “Take good care of your-
self beforehand to be sure of a healthy,
bouncing new body. Ask your doctor all
about it. He can help.”

Can he? He examines his patient in a
room with a painting “showing an assort-
ment of common tools — a hammer,
screwdrivers, wrenches, and several
others you cannot name. . . a sort of
all-purpose handyman’s kit.” After the
surgery, “You peer down, then up into
the face of the young man peering along
with you, and you say, ‘I know it sounds
weird, but those actually look like staples
in there.’ ‘They are,’ he says.” Sur-
realism, cruelty, the first hot flash.
“Don’t laugh now! A wave of heat swirls
up and encircles you, making you sway
dizzily, and the odd thing, no one has
mentioned this — it pulsates. Pulses of
heat. Once long ago . . . you counted
the pulses of an orgasm, something you
are not sure you will ever experience
again.”

An appointment is arranged with the
doctor; when he “at last enters, he utters
a cheery greeting and then the usual:
‘Slide your lower body to the edge of the
table. Feet up in the stirrups please.’ . . .
You contemplate him going from one
examining room to the next ... it
strikes you that his maximum-efficiency

setup might serve equally well for a
brothel and perhaps already does. This is
a brothel surrealized.”

At her six-month checkup, when she
explains her problems to him and he de-
nies her symptoms by saying “Not
everyone reacts the same way. . . some
people are special cases,” she decides
that “this is the last time he will be seeing
— no, seeing is wrong, since he doesn’t
look, he looks at the wall behind your
head — the last time he or any man will
be examining your body. There is no-
thing he can tell you about how you feel,
for the simple reason that he does not
know. How can he? . . . his being in an
advisory capacity on any matter con-
cerning your body is both an atrocity

. . . and an absurdity.”

What Schwartz reveals in this tour de
force is how the entire medical profes-
sion looks at the wall behind every
woman’s head. By choosing the voice of
a second-person narrator, by recreating
with her perfect ear the sound of “doc-
tors’ language” (the patient’s doctor reas-
sures her not to worry — everything can
be cured by “Nature’s way” — he means
pills, some of which have grave warnings
included in the bottle with them),
Schwartz presents us with the terrifying
portrait of what hysterectomy really is, as
well as demonstrating a compelling proof
that no doctor is willing to tell a woman
the truth about it. (“The Melting Pot”
was reviewed in the October 11, 1987,
New York Times Book Review by Perri
Klass, who is a doctor and writer, and she
neglected this story altogether!)

Please: I urge you all to read “The
Melting Pot” and become subversive.

® Merrill Joan Gerber’s most recent pub-
lished book is a collection of short stories,
Honeymoon (University of Illinois Press).
Her most recent unpublished book is her
novel, The Hysterectomy Waltz.

Chiseled-Out Characters

and a Russian Candide

Fair Augusto and Other Stories, by Laura Kalpakian. Graywolf Press (P.O. Box 75006, St.

Paul, MN 55175), 1986, $8.00, 250 pp. (PB)

Bop, by Maxine Chernoff. Coffee House Press (P.O. Box 10870, Minneapolis, MN 55440),
1986, $9.95, 126 pp. (PB) [Also available in a Vintage Books edition]

by Fran Snyder

I used to read when I was a teen-

ager: absorbed, at times even
lost, and happy to be on a journey. A
confident storyteller, she writes in the
serene past tense. She takes all the time
she needs and draws all the narrative
space she wants in order to set up her
characters, to set them breathing, to let
them act. Each story is a new world, each
character a peculiar inhabitant.

One of Kalpakian’s talents is for cut-
ting cardboard figures and, right before
our very eyes, fleshing them out to such
unexpected proportions that the life in
them exceeds the bounds of their
creator’s words. She writes about immi-
grant Jews and Armenians, working-
class women, upper-class wives, academ-
ics, teenage girls, sad husbands, young
men; they live in small towns, college
towns, big cities, European cities. Even
in her least successful stories, they always
engaged me; they compelled me to listen
to them and surprised me.

Several characters originate or pass
through the Mormon desert town of St.
Elmo, which is the setting of Kalpakian’s
two best stories, “Sonata in G Minor”
and “And Departing Leave Behind Us.”
In the first, Gideon Douglass, a 15-year-
old student at St. Elmo High School,
class of 1909, is led astray from strict

I read Laura Kalpakian’s stories as

Mormon principles by Dr. Lucius Tip-
ton, cigar-smoker, atheist, scoffer, and
loyal friend to his fatherless family. The
doctor disturbs Gideon’s staid, strictly
ordered world by introducing him to for-
bidden influences: the skeletal pelvis,
excepting which “we’re all universally
the same,” male and female alike, and to
Professor Rabinowitz, “a violinist, an ar-
tist, if you will,” whom Gideon’s girl-
friend calls “a hirsute foreigner and. . .
unconverted Jew.” Gideon's challenge is
an adolescent's: how to judge a man
when your heart loves him and your
mind is roused by him but the authorities
that rule your world pronounce him
“doomed.”

Gideon’s sister, Afton, narrates the
second story, which takes place on Gid-
eon’s graduation day. He is Valedicto-
rian, overdressed, and despite last
doubts, no longer a boy. Afton, a 16-
year-old woman, is smart and self-as-
sured, as is Kalpakian’s choice of her as
narrator. Unlike Gideon, Afton belongs
where she is, and from her rooted
perspective she sees and accurately,
idiosyncratically, describes the first wav-
ering steps that will lead Gideon away
from their childhood home.

Us four girls left right after Gideon’s
speech because we had to get the party
ready and besides, we was all glad to go

Laura Kalpakian.
Photo by Caroline McCallister.

home and strip off our clothes for a time
and work in our drawers. And work it
was. Me and Eden decided we'd all
perish if we didn’t have some shade so
we took two clean white sheets and tied
them across the tops of the trellises that
face one another and hold up our grape-
vines. The vines was thick and leafy
and dusty and the grapes was a hard
coppery green. The desert wind kept
snapping the sheets away from us, but
finally we got them fixed to the trel-
lises, one side at a time. Then the four
of us moved the kitchen table out
underneath the sheets, though Cissa
is so little — and so lazy — she wasn’t
any help at all. She kept moaning about
the heat until Eden told her to go soak
her head and Lil had to stop her from
doing just that.

Me, I stood there for a minute. I love
the smell of bleach in the noonday sun.
My nose tingles and I always think
something nice will happen on a day
you smell bleach in the sunlight.

Gideon is “just full of words,” Afton
says, but his are graduation phrases,