Rediscovery

Claire Myers Spotswood (Owens)

by Miriam Kalman Harris

My story begins with an arrest-
ing portrait in the library di-
rector’s office at Texas Wo-

man’s University, home to an impres-
sive archive on Texas women. “Claire
Myers Owens graduated from TWU in
1916 with a bachelor’s degree in domes-
tic science,” Elizabeth Snapp, the direc-
tor of the library, volunteered as my eyes
lingered on the portrait hanging behind
her. There, a beautiful and formidable,
yet gentle and even vulnerable woman
seemed to participate in our discussion,
casting an enigmatic gaze (of approval?)
and demanding an audience to her own
concerns.

“She took up Zen Buddhism at age
seventy,” Snapp continued, “and stud-
ied transpersonal psychology. She gave
lectures and interviews and wrote books
almost up to the time of her death.”

Books? Did she say books? Perhaps
this was the remarkable writer resting in
obscurity I had come seeking.

A fantasy adventure with a heroine
— its ideas found so threatening that a
New York library banned it in 1935 —
was among her writings, Snapp told me.
But when I asked to see Claire’s work,
the library director replied that the file
was still being processed.

Snapp tried to interest me in the
other collections, but that portrait fol-
lowed me home and haunted my dreams
that night. The next day, I asked for a
second interview that led the library di-
rector to trust me with the work and life
of Claire, a woman by whom she too had
been enchanted.

Claire’s is a story of self-discovery
that begins in 1896 in Rockdale, Texas
—a small Bible Belt town that surfaces
as “Smug Harbor” in her fiction. It ends
four published books, numerous essays,
articles, and unpublished manuscripts;
three husbands; and eighty-seven years
later in Rochester, New York, in a Zen
Buddhist colony. Her fundamentalist
Baptist parents disinherited her when
she set out on her own path. Neverthe-
less, Claire’s struggles were rarely eco-
nomic. Rather, they were internal and
intellectual: her drive to define herself as
autonomous against a world that defined
her an aristocrat. During each phase of
her life, Claire encountered obstacles
that threatened to rob her of her
hard-won self-awareness, but she always
emerged in charge.

I am aware that I risk undermining my
subject by referring to her as Claire, but
the history of her professional name dic-
tates my decision. In her long writing
career, she published as Claire Myers
Spotswood, Claire Myers Wanders, and
Claire Myers Owens. Claire is the one
name she used consistently.

Claire’s first novel, The Unpredictable
Adventure: A Comedy of Women’s Inde-
pendence is a feminist kunstlerroman that
draws on her pursuit of intellectual free-
dom and spiritual enlightenment. Tel-
lectina, the heroine, leaves Smug Har-
bor (her hometown in the Land of Err
where the only language spoken is Hal-
fish) to travel in the “Forbidden
Country” of Nithking (an anagram for
thinking), where Reasonese is spoken.
An allegorical pattern is established
through anagrams: People and places
become symbols of obstacles and insig-
hts, goals, and psychological condi-
tions. The heroine strives to reach the
top of Mount Certitude, where she will
be able to look out on the “Truth” and
attain her ultimate goal, self-realization.

The name Tellectina Femina Chris-

Winter 1990

tian embodies aspects of her psychologi-
cal identity: Tellectina, the intellec-
tual, curious, aggressive, male-modeled
self, is pitted against Femina, the pas-
sive, unworldly, ladylike, nurturing,
seductive, and male-identified self.
These two “natural sisters” meet unex-
pectedly during Tina’s first day at college
and thereafter emerge and converse as
separate selves, arguing and foiling each
other to win control.

Each persona is a component of a psy-
chically whole female that cannot come
together because each has been split off
from the other by the moralistic up-
bringing that the surname represents.
“Christian” represents the superego
underpinning the two personae, which
appear, disappear, divide, and reunite
throughout the novel.

Aunt Sophistica Tellectina Christian
serves as mentor. She is a fun-loving,
independent woman who defies the
world to call her spinster or to monitor
her sexual freedom. For example, young
Tina questions Aunt Sophie concerning
labels: “If a grown-up woman’s not mar-
ried and not an old maid, what do you
call her?” “I’d call her a damned intelli-
gent woman!” Sophie answers. “To say
nothing of natural and courageous.”

As Tina sets off into Nithking, Aunt
Sophie tells her not to be careful, but to
“be wise and rush in where fools fear to
tread” and to let desire be her guide.
“Abandon yourself recklessly to the pas-
sion of living. ... Be the grand
amoureuse of life.”

Aunt Sophie speaks with humor and
joy. Truth is not found on Mount Certi-
tude but on Mount Ghaulot (to laugh)
“where the atmosphere is so clear one
can see to the very ends of the earth.”
The most painful lesson Tina must learn
is that there is no place called Certitude,
no such thing as a “predictable” adven-
ture.

Tina gets lost in the desert of Dotbu
(doubt) where she meets the woman
Noequist (the question of women’s role,
which is the central focus of the novel).
She gets caught in a tangle of Sillidinous
Vines, whose deadly poison creates a
rash of disillusionment and despair,
which she cures with the healing powers
of the drug Cianite Vitigrew (creative
writing).

Throughout, Tina embodies a phi-
losophy of free love and communal liv-
ing. Femina ensnares men with her fem-
inine charms and Tina struggles to hold
their interest through reason and ideal-
ism, without sacrificing her autonomy.
Although Tellectina falls for Elam
Domitann (dominant male), he loves
Femina. Their arguments, during their
tempestuous affair and brief marriage,
explore female dependency. He calls her
“inconsiderate” for wanting to work;
she insists that he doesn’t want a “real
person” but a “bowl of jelly” to mold.

Indeed, her marriage to Elam repre-
sents a compromise of her convictions as
a free spirit, being agreed to only when
rumors of their illicit relationship
threaten their teaching careers. Al-
though Elam’s death frees her, it does
not resolve her split personality. Tina
sets out again while grief-stricken Fem-
ina disappears, and the two halves re-
main divided.

In Reinventing Eve: Modern Woman in
Search of Herself, Kim Chernin writes
that her search for self evolved into a
search for the ancient mother goddess. It
was a quest for a pre-Judeo-Christian Eve
that became a search for the “Woman
Who Is Not Yet”: “The New Eve, a cul-
tural heroine, sets out on an epic quest.
She must leave the father world in order

to retrieve the long-lost primordial

mother.” In this sense, Tina, like her

author, becomes a “New Eve.”
According to Chernin,

When a woman, divided within herself,
seeks for wholeness and authentic power,
the mother goddess speaks. From dreams,
from nature, from memory, she leads our
development forward by guiding us into
the past, to... reexperience... the
mother in her majesty, before we [lost] the
fundamental roots of female being.

In Tina’s case, the call of the mother
goddess comes from the Seven Siren Is-
lands, a world designed in an elaborate
metaphorical scheme. (And if the
anagrams prove frustrating at times,
they are an amusing relief to patches of
philosophical rhetoric.) Here Tina is
initiated into the “native orgies,” and
Femina’s personality rises to its greatest

The Unpredictable Adventure

strength. The first island is named for
the Art of Life (Forta Feli), the last for
the Art of Love (Forta Velo). In be-
tween are five islands that represent cul-
tural arts. The Sirens (the senses) serve
as priestesses to the mother goddess
Yeta-Bu (beauty). They lead Tina on a
tour of the first six islands that awakens
her to sensuality as foreplay to Tina’s
initiation into the “Mystery of Mys-
teries” that awaits her on Forta Velo.
The young priest Cho-tu, whose
touch all women love, escorts Tina to

the temple, buried in the very heart of
the jungle, in a perfect state of preserva-
tion. Two beautifully molded columns of
white marble lay recumbent in the deep
grass — like the thighs of some fallen
goddess — while beyond them rose a low
white dome with a strange Gothic door-
way stained a dull red. Above this, the
temple was ornamented with small twin
domes strangely modeled and wonderful to
see, the tip of each being faintly dyed
with red.

In this sanctuary monumentalizing female anatomy, Tina (to her dismay) discovers Femina already en-
gaged in rituals with the high priest Pas-
sino in their worship of the god Ecstaci.
In language that moves between satire
and poetry, the author describes the
fourteen preliminary rituals the priest
must perform before he can enter the
temple. To serve Ecstaci, he must be-
come a connoisseur in erotic love.

The ceremonies begin with a tribute
to the male idol, “composed of some
plastic red material ... which when
sufficiently heated” — by Femina of
course — “was capable of expanding til
the god stood erect like a divine athlete;
so lifelike, so strong and muscular, so
full-blooded that the turgid veins were
actually visible beneath their delicate
covering.”

Although Tina is not impressed,
Femina is. The following thirty pages of
ritual — filled with innuendoes and puns
— create a sexual mythology that cele-
brates woman’s creative power and her
self-expression. Tina’s apprehension in

the face of the “indecent beauty” of the
island and the passion of the rituals re-
flects her need to overcome the rem-
nants of her repressive upbringing. Al-
though as a proponent of free love, Tina
has been involved intimately with men,
Femina interceded each time to experi-
ence the romance and passion, leaving
each persona dissatisfied.

When Femina chants “The
Vaginae,” the “Woman’s Song of Ec-
stasy,” she teaches her sister to celebrate
female creative power:

I am a flower, full blown... a luscious
tropical fruit lain long under the Southern
sun, a bed of lotus blossoms opening wide
voluptuous petals... His eyes and lips
and hands a swarm of hungry bees that sip
and rifle me of all my honey. I am the
earth — the parched and hungry earth

... wherein all the rivers of the world fill
and rise and rush headlong to the primal
sea, when ecstasy moves within me.

Finally Tina, reluctant but primed,
follows Femina and the priest into the
temple for the final initiation ceremony.
Tina struggles to keep “her eyes open
and her mind calm [but] her lids grow
heavy and her thoughts rise and fall
upon delicious waves of sensation.” She
is swept away as Femina whispers in her
ear: “In this moment of white heat we
become one flesh — godlike — her-
maphroditic — dual oneness without
beginning and without end — perfect
and whole.” At last in the temple of
Yeta-Bu, in the presence of Ecstaci,
Femina and Tellectina merge into one
being.

Tellectina cannot let go for long;
such emotional intensity threatens her
conviction that she still has much to
learn. She escapes on a freighter, the
Esse McMoon (common sense) and sets
out to scale the heights of Mt. Certi-
tude. But the sisters, touched by the
powers of the Mother Goddess, are for-
ever transformed by the experience of
being androgynous. As Tina departs,
she leaves Femina, by now a religious
fanatic dedicated to Ecstaci, on the is-
land chanting joyfully.

Contemporary feminists are on the
alert for “bad” women, who make great
“sheroes.” That a library banned the
book was my first signal that Claire’s life
and work deserved a closer look. For
through this book, not only do we learn
more about what women need to know
about themselves, we observe, once
again, the repression of what women
need to know in general.

Claire spent the rest of her life telling
her stories. Although she did not write
the seven fantasy adventure sequels
Doubleday contracted for, she published
three autobiographical accounts of her
spiritual search. Some of her work shows
literary quality and intellectual achieve-
ment; elsewhere it is chatty and clichéd;
but all of her writing offers insights into
the ongoing struggle women share in
their quest for self-definition.

Claire’s life might be viewed as an
“unpredictable adventure,” yet the
novel foreshadows many of the concerns
of her later years. Written in midlife,
The Unpredictable Adventure fictionalizes
Claire’s youthful struggle for autonomy.
The myths she creates enact the birth of
a feminist heroine who at age thirty-nine
questioned double standards that di-
vided women against themselves. But
her struggles were not in vain. At age
eighty, she proclaimed: “my conscious
mind and my unconscious, reason and
intuition, the masculine and feminine
principles, [are] functioning together
harmoniously. I [feel] whole, beautifully
whole, as nature intends us to be.”

© Miriam Kalman Harris is a writer and
researcher who is looking for a publisher to
reprint The Unpredictable Adventure.

Belles Lettres @ 15