Illinois Short Fiction

Scenes from the Homefront, by Sara Vogan (133 pp.); Legacies, by Nancy Potter (134 pp.); and Beyond This Bitter Air, by Sarah Rossiter (132 pp.) Bloomington: University of Illinois Press, 1987, $11.95.

by Elisabeth Stevens

The need for love — and the cor-

rosive cost of doing without it

— are the themes that unite these three short story collections from the distinguished Illinois Short Fiction series of the University of Illinois Press.

The outstanding collection by far is Scenes from the Homefront, 11 stories by Sara Vogan, a San Franciscan who has published a novel and won a National Endowment for the Arts fiction award. The quality that distinguishes Vogan is her highly personal imagination, her ability to move easily and convincingly from everyday experience to far-out fantasy. Her stories are set in homes, bars, fishing boats, and towns such as Shenandoah, Pennsylvania, that don’t sound unusual but are because Vogan makes them so.

In the title story, she convincingly depicts a senile grandfather who relives the Civil War and a half-blind father who couldn’t get into World War II but wants his son to go to Vietnam. In “The Strength of Steel,” she unsentimentally portrays a steelworker father who moves his unhappy family annually, always hoping for a job nearer to Pittsburgh, the “sun” of his universe.

Even stronger than these well-written studies of fathers who love obsessive ideas more than those around them are the two stories in which Vogan deals with birds. Not since the late William Goyen’s “The White Rooster” has there been a narrative such as Vogan’s “The Crane Wife.” This is the story of the lonely, childless wife of a traveling journalist. During a New England blizzard in late winter, she waits for her husband to return from a tropical assignment. Her unexpected visitor is a crane who is as tall as her refrigerator when she admits him to her kitchen. To feed the bird, who looks “like a tall white-robed lover dancing in her living room,” she ventures out to the store despite storm warnings. Driving home through the smothering snow, she believes that “Tonight she would feel the softness of crane-feather cloth, her cheek against the pure white feathers of his breast.”

Even odder and more difficult to describe is Vogan’s fascinating and unique “The Confession of the Finch,” a magical tale told by a bird who lives only through the souls of a succession of gypsy fortune tellers. The fatal fault of the finch’s ninth and last gypsy is that she lies — sadly betraying her own dreams and visions. As in “The Crane Wife,” the bird represents inner truth and the need for love that merges body and spirit.

Vogan’s first-rate explorations of obsessive and unusual attachments carry an impact that is lacking in the 14 stories that make up Legacies by Nancy Potter, an English professor at the University of Rhode Island whose short fiction has appeared in literary magazines. Potter’s drab depictions of loveless individuals facing isolation, aging, and death feature middle-aged female narrators. Typically divorced, disoriented, and doing lowly jobs, these heroines repeatedly fail to cement heartfelt connections with parents, ex-husbands or would-be lovers, and recalcitrant children.

In Potter’s “Safe Home,” the mother of a “bad seed” daughter takes refuge in her parents’ house when her brief marriage fails. The daughter grows wilder; the parents grow feeble. After careening across the country, the daughter joins an exploitative cult and then dies of pneumonia as her mother struggles unsuccessfully to think of “something important to say to her, some honest blessing.”

In Potter’s title story, “Legacies,” a divorced woman who works in a zoo returns to her empty childhood home in Nebraska after the death of her mother, from whom she has long been alienated. Her gay brother joins her at the old place after years of separation. She puts on her mother’s coat; he dons his father’s suit. With an unsmiling bitterness common to many characters in this collection, he muses in the parents’ kitchen: “Can you remember one good meal here? Or a happy one?” Then, touching the dusty table, he adds: “When I think of loneliness, I think of them sitting here together.”

Potter’s prose is flat, conversational, tiresome. Nevertheless, the gray world she evokes — a world in which sex is avoided and past failures cast shadows over the present and future — is sometimes enlivened by nonconforming and endearing male characters. In “The Bigamist,” an old man, after outliving two concurrent wives, is ready at 75 to marry again — and he has his eye on the narrator. In the final story, “Talking to Trees,” a rural father refuses to allow an indifferent wife and an irritated and embarrassed daughter to inhibit him. Lovingly, he makes birdhouses, plans funerals for cows and birthday parties for cats, and above all treasures “the prettiest days, the most delicate trees, the most handsome rambler, the sweetest eating corn, the best stands of lady slippers.” When Potter’s next collection is published, one hopes it will feature more of her feisty men and fewer women who can’t seem to enjoy anything anyhow. The whining tone of most of Potter’s stories is indeed dreary, but at least her characters are three-dimensional. Unfortunately, Sarah Rossiter, in her collection titled Beyond This Bitter Air, is not always able to evolve convincing individuals from stereotypes. Rossiter, who lives in Weston, Mass., and has written young adult fiction and a novel, focuses on the universal craving for nurturing — and in the broadest sense, motherly — love. Her characters are isolated mothers, lonely wives, unloved children, and burdensome, aging parents seen in situations that are far from unusual.

In Rossiter’s “Combinations,” the would-be-artist mother of six fails to convince her oldest son that he is, indeed, the one she loves most. In “Civil War,” the old father who has had a stroke is revived, not by his daughter, a photographer who sees but cannot feel, but by his 29-year-old companion, a woman who consults horoscopes and is instinctual and undemanding.

Both of these stories, unfortunately, are marred by triteness. The conversation between the doting mother and the teenage son in “Combinations” is unconvincing, and the “surprise” ending is too pat. The old man in “Civil War” is an endearing but familiar stock character, and his daughter not much more than an unfeeling foil. Yet Rossiter’s best story, “Question of Light,” suggests she is capable of writing in greater depth.

The heroine is a lonely wife and mother who has long suffered from cancer. When she finally learns the disease is gone, she lets her best friend think the opposite for an afternoon because she so desperately needs the loving support and sympathy that only her friend provides. Although marred by an overwritten ending in which the sufferer looks out the window and “all she sees is night,” this one at least evokes a bit of mystery about motivation and response.

In considering these collections together, several things stand out. The first is that they all deal with loneliness; the second is that remarkably few strong love relationships between men and women are portrayed. Isolation, it seems, is the common malaise, and strong medicine is needed. Potter and Rossiter may be dispirited malingerers, but Vogan has the panacea. It is the straight shot of imagination that animates her fictions like adrenalin.

Elisabeth Stevens has been an art critic for major newspapers and writes short fiction and poetry. Her most recent books are Fire and Water: Six Short Stories and Children of Dust: Portraits & Preludes. A widow, she lives in Baltimore with her teenage daughter.

“He’s Indian, Grandpa.”

“Apache?”

“From India, Dad. He speaks British English.”

Teddy laughed. “You know, Grandpa, it’s a shame that you’re sick, but it'll be really nice getting to know you better.”

Degan closed his good eye and decided not to open it again until they left.

The title story, “Bop,” is her best. Oleg Lum, a lonely Russian, meets Claire and Carrie Remm, a husbandless and fatherless mother and daughter. To the solitary, immigrant Lum, they are prospective family. Lum brings Claire a little boy, Bop, as a sort of engagement present. Bop was lost on the beach; Lum is lost in America. They come as orphans to the doorstep of the women, freshly bathed and dressed. But Claire Remm tells Lum that Bop is not an American name, merely a gurgle the baby boy has made, and he must be given over to the police. The parents of Bop claim him, and Lum ponders the loss of the boy and the loss of an umbrella he left on the el: “Why in America is it easier to find a lost baby than an umbrella costing nine dollars? But I worry most for sandy American baby who is found on the beach like a walking rubbish heap called Bop. He is a dirty, hungry little immigrant. I give him a new life visa, which police revoke.”

Lum is a Candide figure — charming, ingenuous, and unwittingly clear-sighted. He wants to love and be loved, and he is the only one of Chernoff's characters who does so without self-consciousness. Lum is a sad sack, but you feel that he is wiser and saner than the city surrounding him. He is fresh and sweet. Aside from Lum (and to a certain extent Degan), this collection is populated by repositories of the fallout of anxious, unhappy times. Chernoff writes well but her world is too tight, too controlled. I wonder how she would handle a novel: I would be eager to watch her range over wider spaces and give her characters more air.

Fran Snyder lives and writes in New York.