very teacher and student of writ-
ing is familiar with the old refrain
“You have to find your voice.” I
am continually impressed with the
number of first-published writers who
have accomplished that difficult task. I
think automatically of Christine Bell
(Saint), Laura Kalpakian (Fair Augusto
and Other Stories), Bobbie Ann Mason
(Shiloh and Other Stories), and now, Val-
erie Sayers and Kaye Gibbons. At a time
when a generation of artists — musi-
cians, actors, and writers — is dying out,
it is heartening to think that the 1980s
is spawning a new generation of writers
that promises to make history.

I have only praise for Valerie Sayers’
first novel, Due East. The plot moves at
a brisk clip, revealing in one surprise
after another the inner lives of its cast
of interesting characters, mostly through
the alternating point of view of Mary
Faith Rapple and her father Jesse. Sayers’
command of language and dialogue and
her powers of description are awe-inspir-
ing. She compresses much into a few
words, in the way that accomplished
short story writers do. She has an un-
canny knack for choosing the perfect
word to evoke a mood or idea. Consider,
for example, the effect of the word pranced
in the following sentence: “But he did
feel guilty, so he did take the list, and
found himself in the Piggly Wiggly on
Saturday morning, surrounded by the
working women of Due East, who had
all come from the beauty parlor and who
seemed to know exactly where every-
thing was and pranced around behind
their shopping carts delighted with their
own efficiency.”

The novel opens with the idea that
the folks in Due East, South Carolina,
think Mary Faith Rapple is crazy. It all
began with something she had said to
her father:

“All I’d said was that I didn’t want to
wear choir robes anymore, that I
thought Dr. Beady’s version of Jesus
made him sound like a right-wing
dictator, and that I had my own little
visions before I fell asleep. I had been
complaining of dizziness, too, but I
hadn’t meant for my father or his
friends to think I was on the brink. In
all this time, though, they hadn’t
forgotten it, so someone’s eyes always
followed me through Due East. I didn’t
mind. It was like having a dog trailing
after me, or a guardian angel.

Mary Faith is several months preg-
nant and waiting for her father to
notice. She is beginning to think he will
never notice, that she will get through 9
months and a delivery, and that one
night he will say, “How did that baby
get to the supper table?” As I said, this
story moves fast. Jesse does notice
(within another page) and is off in
search of the father before you can count
to 10; he does not accept Mary Faith’s
explanation that perhaps it is like a vir-
gin birth.

Mary Faith tells us that the father was
a sensitive boy who read Dostoyevski
and drew political cartoons. After she
seduces him, he is wracked by guilt and
commits suicide. His identity is ulti-
mately revealed to Jesse, but by that
time Jesse has taken a tumultuous jour-
ney through his own heart and mind.
Most notably, he has an affair with Nell
Dugan, who is the antithesis of the de-
ceased wife that he and Mary Faith un-
consciously still mourn. The affair, the
details of which are poignantly drawn,
leads him to an awareness of his loneli-
ness, which in turn, paves the way for a
reconciliation between him and his
daughter.

Characteristically, the reconciliation
is not smooth, nor do Mary Faith and
Jesse acknowledge it in words to one
another. In the maddening way of
characters in a Victorian novel, Mary
Faith and Jesse do not communicate the
things that would unite them. They test
one another. Each longs to be under-
stood by the other; each strives to heal
the wound of loss they both still feel.

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987

But each waits for the other to fulfill
these longings — Mary Faith waits for
tangible signs of acceptance and support
from Jesse; Jesse thinks he has given
signs and awaits acknowledgment from
Mary Faith.

In the closing scene, Mary Faith and
Jesse are still at odds over their expecta-
tions of one another, but Sayers subtly
implies that the baby, who has by its
very arrival made them a whole family
again, will be the force that dissolves
their loneliness and alienation. Far from
being crazy, Mary Faith has created a
new existence for herself and her father,
ensuring a guardian angel for each.

—Deanna D’Errico

Valerie Sayers. Photo by Alex Gotfryd.

By the time (well into the novel)
that the origin of her last name
is revealed, readers have already
come to cherish Ellen Foster. She is an
uncommonly strong little girl who has
survived insufferable circumstances and
abuses: her mother’s suicide, attempted
sexual abuse by her father and his
friends, mental and physical abuses by
her grandmother, mental abuse by her
aunt, her father’s death, and the obtuse
probing of a school psychologist.

Through all this, it is a miracle that
old Ellen (as she appropriately refers to
herself, for she is wise beyond her years)
does not lose herself. She is the embodi-
ment of tenacity, surviving with the
tools of intelligence, sensitivity, a strong
will, and a remarkable sense of humor.
She fends off her father’s advances by
locking herself in her closet; when that
no longer works, she runs away. She has
the sense to hoard money and to limit
her possessions to what will fit in a small
box. When the court hands her over to
her grandmother, who blames Ellen for
her daughter’s suicide, she takes up the
gauntlet of penance that her grand-
mother throws down: She is forced to
live and work like her grandmother’s
Black fieldhands. When she must stay
with her aunt and cousin, who clearly
resent her presence, she thoughtfully
stays out of their sight and battles their
ill will with a show of kindness. Ellen
makes the best of any situation.

Her efforts to find a home fail, and
when her aunt turns her out, Ellen takes
charge of her destiny. She has observed
a woman at church, a single woman who
has taken in several unwanted children.
(When she asks about them, she is told
that they are “the Foster family” — thus
Ellen chooses her last name.) She puts
on her best dress and presents herself
and her box on the woman’s doorstep.
Ellen endears herself to the kind woman
by offering her the $160 she has saved:
“But I want to pay you that money so
we can keep this all on the up and up
.... You get the money and I stay here
until I graduate from high school. How
does that sound?” A few more details
and the deal is clinched:

And then she got teary-eyed and I told
her there was just a couple of things I
needed to know before I unloaded my
box and settled in that room she
mentioned. What’s that? Well I need
to know if you are pretty healthy or if
you have a disease or bad habits like
drinking. Also are you generally
friendly or do you have days when you
act crazy or extra mean? Why Ellen? I
just need to know. OK. I’m healthy as a
horse. Nobody here drinks or smokes.
And to have a house full of children I
think I’m pretty even-tempered. How’s
that? Thanks I said. That’s exactly
what I needed to know. . . . And
while she fixed supper I unpacked my
box and laid down to look out the
window. I was glad to rest. My arms
were sore from toting the box and even
when I laid out flat and still my legs felt
like they were walking again. But I
would not move ever from here.

This passage is indicative of the art-
ful, simple, humorous style with which
Ellen tells her tale. Using a technique
that is not itself original but that is mas-
terfully employed, Gibbons has Ellen
relay her story by interweaving past and
present in alternate chapters. The
technique works because the reader
simultaneously sees where Ellen has
been and where she is going — the ef-
fect of which is that Ellen herself is
made the essence of the novel. The book is
physically beautiful as well — it is small
(5½ x 7½) and pristine with an evoca-
tive photograph called “Unmade Bed,”
which forms the headboard, if you will,
of the cover.

—Deanna D’Errico

Kaye Gibbons

Mildred Peacock, an undered-
ucated, Black, single mother
(divorced), is struggling to
raise her five children in a harsh, north-
ern urban environment. She suffers the
stereotypical slings and arrows of pov-
erty, anguish, and despair. Yet no one
suffers more than the reader, for Terry
McMillan’s writing is as dismal and erra-
tic as the lives of the characters she
creates in her first novel, Mama.

The novel has no “hook,” no out-
standing or magical literary quality that
might elevate it to the level of entertain-
ment or rapture. The inauthentic,
stilted dialogue and amateurish prose
mar this story of lives on the brink, lives
that elicit neither insight nor sympathy
due to the author’s lack of stylistic con-
trol. The characters come across as piti-
able nobodies going nowhere fast, pre-
sented as they are without any of the
embellishment that is required of even
mediocre fiction. We are left to view
them as vicious victims of the vicious
cycles of poverty, ignorance, and poor
judgment.

With irresponsible and often reckless
abandon (for which McMillan, I pre-
sume, desires that we blame “the sys-
tem”), Mildred neglects her children,
save for an inconsistent concern for their
material well-being. She repeatedly mis-
spends her meager funds, then evades,
with no particular style or flair, her cred-
itors across the country. She is also ad-
dicted to any number of substances, as
is her oldest daughter (who is allowed
second voice in the story), and her hap-
less only son. UnsucceSsful in her at-
tempt to portray Mildred as the tough,
stoic, resourceful, Black woman —
doing what she gotta do — McMillan
instead creates a character for whom a
reader — even one not in search of his
or her “mother’s garden” — would be
hard pressed to feel compassion for.
Mama makes you want to cry “Uncle.”

— Kamili Anderson

sit oneooe

for Mama by Dale Gottlieb.

Jacket illustration

“To be mad and shamed. To
have a home and give it up.
To be an aged man, to be
alone in the dark wood.” Reading these
words, one might imagine the pro-
tagonist of Joanna Scott’s Fading, My
Parmacheene Belle to be a contemporary
Lear, suffering and searching for the wis-
dom to match his years. Unfortunately,
Scott’s nameless narrator, a man in his
70s whose wife of 53 years dies leaving
him bereft, fails to discover the truth
about his family or himself. In his fisher-
man’s fable, he presents himself as an
outcast and embarks on a cyclical quest
to “discover the source” of his wife and
himself by traveling to her oceanside
home. Unlike Lear, however, he lacks
the ability to grow in wisdom, human
sympathy, or love.

In a fit of anger after his wife’s funeral,
the old man flings a chair, striking and
perhaps killing his retarded son whom
he calls the “Idiot.” Fleeing into the
woods, he unexpectedly meets a 15-year-
old runaway who shares her candy bar
and her wild stories. The “mermaiden”
triggers an ambiguous mixture of sexual
desire and protective parental instinct
in “Old Tom Trouble.” Taking off in his
Buick Skylark, the two wind their way
through rough country escapades, small-
town scams, and the blighted urban un-
derground whose inhabitants provide a
rare moment of solace. In the seaside
section with its carnival-like characters,
the girl commits suicide, and the old
man returns home still suffering, still
searching, still alone.

Scott’s first novel, though highly in-
ventive as well as intelligent and clever
in its sustained use of fishing metaphors,
disappoints because her main character
is unsympathetic, and her message is
finally unclear. Setting aside syntactical
aberrations that suggest ramblings of an
old man in distress, the reader finds
Scott’s narrative disruptive in other
ways. The dominant tone of bitterness,
blame, and self-pity coupled with the
selfish and contradictory nature of the

— continued on page 15

Belles Lettres © 9