Belles Lettres Interview

by Mickey Pearlman

“The floor vibrates” in Irini

Spanidou’s fifth floor apart-

ment “between the Korean
greengrocer and Bartley’s Bar” in
Greenwich Village when she is trying to
write, because “the guys who live down-
stairs work in a disco and play their mu-
sic very loud.” They have, she says,
“very fancy equipment. I am able to
write with this and people having quar-
rels. The only kind of noise that bothers
me is television. It’s a harsher noise with
continued interruption; it’s too much to
tune out.” But as for the wailing ambu-
lance sirens, raucous New York Univer-
sity students, the street merchants sell-
ing everything from tacos to t-shirts, and
the cacophony of New York life, “what
happens is that when I concentrate, I
stop listening.”

God’s Snake, a partially autobio-
graphical first novel, concerns a child
caught between the dictatorial and re-
pressive cruelty of her father, a Greek
officer of two verbs: “to obey” and “to
command,” and the indifference and
fragility of her beautiful but emotionally
crippled mother. Spanidou’s readers can
be thankful for her powers of concentra-
tion.

Spanidou has not blocked out much
of human experience beyond the noise,
however, because God’s Snake, as Doris
Lessing has noted, has “the harsh sim-
plicity of a Greek myth . . . a very old
story, as much as it is a new one.” It fol-
lows the classic pattern of a monomyth
because it contains a journey, an initia-
tion into experience, a withdrawal for
meditation, a search for self, the trials of
experience, and a confrontation with
death. But it is an unusual mythic story
in its use of a young girl as a wandering
hero. Spanidou says that she “made the
hero a girl because, to some extent, the
book is autobiographical, so I saw no
reason to change the sex of the charac-
ter. About one-third is true and the rest
is made up. In the book I am working on
now, it was a more conscious, deliberate
choice.”

God’s Snake is also a novel about evil
and entrapment. Each chapter inter-
weaves the destructive and regenerative
qualities of people and animals and is
dominated, in ascending evolutionary
order, by a snake, crow, calf, deer, or
dog. The animals replicate or suggest the
savage potential of the child molesters
and the child beaters, the sad and sensi-
tive orphans, and the lonely women and
tuberculars who populate this novel. If
these are not people who believe de-
voutly in evil, they are characters who
“accept its existence and believe that
evil is connected to God, not separated
from him. You can’t get one without the
other. They don’t worship it; they un-
derstand its existence. That,” she says,
“is in the ancient Greek culture . . .
treachery and jealousy. The Gods were
not pure — their virtues were coun-
teracted by weakness. There was an ac-
ceptance of the complexity of both na-
ture and human nature. So you have
beautiful sunlight and earthquakes.”

Like the other women in God’s
Snake, the mother is a human version of
an orphaned and victimized animal.
Anna’s grandmother — melancholic,
enigmatic — is a woman thwarted by
destiny. And her unmarried and married
aunts who hunger for love and buy felt
hats because, as they tell Anna, they are
“durable,” all live lives of opposition and
of submission. Like the animals and the
soldiers who are Anna’s father’s subor-
dinates, they learn to obey.

Spanidou says Anna, the protagon-
ist, is missing more than a strong
mother. All the things that would make
her strong — a sense of place, solidarity,
and permanence — are denied her. But
Anna is not caught in the web of her
mother’s inadequacy. “Somehow the
child is not influenced by that, because
she tends to identify with the father. She
sees defeat in the women characters.”
The father, demonic and degrading
though he may be, Spanidou explains,
“also encourages her, even though he
has a negative effect and he makes her
feel bad about being a woman.” To per-
severe, “she has to deny the fact that she
is a girl.” There is a decidedly androgy-
nous quality about her. “She has to deny
any identification with the mother in
order to get out.”

Anna’s father, like her uncle and
grandfather, gorges himself on ideas of
maleness that feed on anger, control,
and mastery. Her father, particularly,
lives by the dictum that “you are a man
or you are cannon fodder.”

Spanidou adds that the “lack of
roots in her development works in
Anna’s favor. She has to define herself
from inside because as an army daughter
you are always moving, and whatever
you have attained in one place will be
challenged in the next.” Anna does not
belong anywhere. She is the product of
separation and, by extension, of loss.
Hers is the nomadic loneliness of the
army brat, the strained solitude of the
outsider, the sadness of the unnurtured
child.

You lie on the sofa all day, washed in

fog,

your heart twittering like a thrush among
prickly branches.

You think you're that last black tree
before the beach, the one

that trembles so close to the cliff edge it
seems to have

one toe in the abyss.

Occasionally another transformation
might move poems into yet deeper real-
izations. “You Meet the Real Dream
Mother-in-Law,” for instance, holds
remarkable promise. After all, Aphro-
dite (mother to Psyche’s husband) is the
ultimate mother-in-law. Yet for all its
potential, the poem fails in its final
lines. The sort of transformation that
would raise this work to a higher plane
does occur, however, in “The Cure.”

You get on your feet slowly, you're as
strong as anyone now,

at last you can stand up for yourself;

you’ve become a natural marvel, a
beautiful pink nettle.

Even your mother would scream
if she touched you.

Gilbert works particularly well with
sexual material, revealing the beauty of
a woman’s body and a man’s fear of it in

“What He Hates/What He Loves.”

Irini Spanidou. Photo by

L. Thomas Victor

separation and, by extension, of loss.
Hers is the nomadic loneliness of the
army brat, the strained solitude of the
outsider, the sadness of the unnurtured
child.

Spanidou’s next book, Fear, will take
place in Salonika, Greece’s second-
largest city. It covers one year of Anna’s
life, where, for the first time, “she is in a
school with all girls and that is confin-
ing, all those girls in uniforms.” She goes
back and forth from authoritarian father
to a world of women. “It is the same girl
and the same situation,” Spanidou says,
“but I’m focusing more on the relation-
ship between Anna and her mother,
who becomes the central figure.”

Spanidou named her protagonist
Anna because it is “sturdy and simple,
yet beautiful. I didn’t want a name that
was too rare, too pretty, or symbolic of
something — a flower or Mary. I liked
the repetition of the A’s. I wonder why
the name has appealed to so many peo-
ple on so many different levels. It sounds
pure to me.”

Spanidou is currently teaching at
Sarah Lawrence, from which she gradu-
ated after moving to the United States at
the age of eighteen. “Teaching there is
strange since it is now more than twenty
years later. When I first went back, the
students were still unpacking their
things, and I could see the fear, the ex-

citement, the sense that their lives are
ahead of them, whereas I am sort of mid-
way over mine. So at first it made me feel
sad, with lots of regrets for my youth and
wishing I were starting over.

At Sarah Lawrence, where Spanidou
studied with Grace Paley, she was writ-
ing “New York stories.” When asked if
all novelists have to use their childhood
in an early book to get it out of the way,
she replied, “Most people have. Some-
times it comes out indirectly. It’s a mat-
ter of catharsis rather than of using ma-
terial or describing events; it is a way of
understanding the experience and of not
being haunted by the pain or the confu-
sion that you might have grown up with.
I think once you’ve done that, you can
project other characters more fully. A
lot of material was beginning to intrude
into my work; I had not wanted to con-
front it. It needed to get out.”

What adds to the interweaving of
memory and fiction for Spanidou is that
some of “the relatives in God’s Snake did
not exist, so there is a lot of confusion.
Even close friends who know about my
life will suddenly ask me about a person
from the book.

Part of the considerable power of
God’s Snake is the way in which it forces
readers to reevaluate their own re-
lationships with parents and other au-
thority figures and to estimate the degree
of damage that is a natural component of
childhood. Pain intervenes in the proc-
ess of obtaining knowledge but, as
Spanidou reminds us, it also generates
an understanding of power and evil, of
fragmentation and continuity, of the
heaven and hell of childhood. One
senses that for Spanidou this process will
be an enervating but exhilarating work
of a lifetime, and that she will weave and
reweave those twisted threads of a me-
mory that is both mythic and poignant.
She remains, after the critical success of
God’s Snake, a slight, short-haired,
unadorned woman with a steel-edged
intelligence and an exceptional ability
to listen. This is a writer who knows
about pain and who is correct when she
says, “I say what I say in my work, and I
believe that is sufficient.”

© Mickey Pearlman is the editor of
American Women Writing Fiction: Me-
mory, Identity, Family, Space. She is
coauthor of the forthcoming Inter/Views:
Talks with America’s Writing Women,
from which this interview was excerpted.

Canny. Like the aunts she writes of who
cook in “The Summer Kitchen,” she
demonstrates purposeful attention.

Cool and below it all,

my aunts labored among great cauldrons
in the spicy air

of the summer kitchen: in one kettle
tomatoes bloomed into sauce;

in another, ivory pasta

leaped and swam;

the trout that Uncle Christopher brought
back

from the Adirondacks gave up

the glitter of its fins

to the glitter of Zia Francesca’s

powerful knife.

Stevie Smith’s wit and revelatory
quirkiness, Wakoski’s sensuality and
honesty, Sarton’s craft and spirit, and
Gilbert’s willingness to foray into new
depths are qualities that make these col-
lections among the more interesting to
appear recently. “All that it takes / to
make a knife new or a word / Is the subtle
exchange of a life,” Sarton wrote. It is
that sort of ongoing labor that may re-
ward our reading of these poets.

@ Lee Upton writes frequently on poetry
for Belles Lettres.

Belles Lettres @ 11