Centenarians

Marianne Moore (1887 — 1972)

The Complete Prose of Marianne Moore, edited by Patricia C. Willis. New York: Viking,

1986, $24.95, 723 pp.

Marianne Moore: Subversive Modernist, by Taffy Martin. Austin: University of Texas Press,

1986, $16.95, 151 pp.

by Ruby Riemer

Marianne Moore was editor of  
The Dial when “The Waste  
Land” was published in  
November 1922. In his Autobiography  
William Carlos Williams writes of the  
poem: “Our work staggered to a halt for  
a moment under the blast of Eliot’s  
genius which gave the poem back to the  
academics.” Instead of chiding  
Marianne Moore for her support of  
Eliot, however, Williams pays tribute to  
her: “Marianne Moore, like a rafter  
holding up the superstructure of our un-  
completed building... was our saint  
in whom we all instinctively felt  
our purpose come together to form a  
stream. Everyone loved her.”

On balance, Moore was always fair in  
her editorial endeavors and kind in her  
criticism. Indeed, she would rarely de-  
viate from Leo Stein’s advice to “never  
review a book unless essentially in sym-  
pathy with it.” Thus despite her sincere  
attachment to Williams and to Ezra  
Pound, who “some years ago” asserted  
“that there could be ‘an age of awaken-  
ing in America’ which would ‘over-  
shadow the quattrocento,’” Moore re-  
mained independent and broadly ap-  
preciative in her literary judgments  
throughout a writing career that span-  
ned over six decades of the 20th century  
until her death in 1972.

In observing the evolution of Moore  
as a major 20th-century American poet,  
Taffy Martin notes that, although  
“there were American writers” like  
Eliot, and even Pound, who were “anx-  
ious to leave,” there were those who were  
“just as determined to ‘stay put’ and find  
modernism at home.” Martin confers  
upon Marianne Moore and William  
Carlos Williams roles of “chief poets  
among the dogmatically American mod-  
ernists” who, in paying “attention to  
ordinary objects,” set out on “a relent-  
less search for an illusive concept — ‘the  
American idiom.’” She makes much of  
the notion of modernism as it relates to  
Moore, yet goes on to cast Moore, if  
somewhat assertively then also rather  
intriguingly, in a subversive light — as a  
heretic of the very modernism that “was  
a literary response to the challenge of  
living in the inhospitable world of the  
twentieth century.”

But were the stars of the modernist  
movement in America — Pound, Eliot,  
Moore, Williams, E.E. Cummings, Ste-  
vens, and, in retrospect, H.D. — really  
conscious modernists? Moore never uses  
the term modernism in any of her writ-  
ings. Nor is “modernism” “a term [that  
any of] those writers applied to their  
own work.” Patricia Willis notes this in  
her catalog Marianne Moore: Vision Into  
Verse, prepared for the Rosenbach  
Museum and Library exhibit in  
Philadelphia to honor the centenary of  
Moore’s birth on November 15, 1887.  
Modernism is, rather, a term that con-  
temporary literary critics such as Martin  
herself now use to designate a few gifted  
and original writers of the first quarter of  
the 20th century who sought to differen-  
tiate themselves from their literary for-  
bears.

The early 20th century was itself a  
metaphor for modernity that seemed to  
bring with it a warrant to break with the  
past, not simply to undermine estab-  
lished literary traditions, but as Moore  
explains in The Dial, in praise of Amy  
Lowell, to nurture an American grain  
that would in turn nurture the poetic

2 @ Belles Lettres

imagination on American soil. The  
Dial’s publication under Moore between  
1921 and 1929 signifies that radical  
literary moment. Consequently, if her  
reverence for Eliot suggests the possibil-  
ity of “subversiveness,” it also points to  
her dedication to supporting those in-  
volved in special searches for literary  
roots in the past. Such searches would  
lead ultimately to a promise of legitimiz-  
ing in the present an American ver-  
nacular out of the fragments of a broken  
past.

As illustrations of the purpose of that  
search, Willis urges us to note Pound’s  
preoccupation with Greek and Chinese  
history, Eliot’s with “Christian rebirth,”  
and even Williams’s with pagan Europe.  
Stevens too expressed a certain Fran-  
cophilia, while Moore examined “the  
world of natural history where exotic  
flora and fauna bespoke moral values  
corroded by modern man.” Willis re-  
minds us further: “The verse these poets  
created reflected not only their in-  
formed interest in European culture; it  
also responded to the exploded surface  
of the West at the time of World War I,  
seeking in its shards and fragments the  
material for poetry.” Modernism begins  
here, with an unsettled awareness of the  
past as fragments.

Moore’s own world of poetry, like  
that of Elizabeth Bishop’s with whom  
she has sometimes been compared, was  
expressed through fragments represented  
by found objects and odd events. News-  
paper articles, paintings, and such insig-  
nificant everyday items as a shoe-polish  
can provided astonishing inspiration.  
Joseph Cornell’s collages appealed to  
both poets, because the artist could, by  
juxtaposing actual objects in small  
boxes, transform spaces into evocative  
scenes. Such refragmentation,  
moreover, resulted in a type of sur-  
realism that was not alien to either  
Moore’s “synthesizing, collector's” or  
Bishop’s “linear, exploring” sen-  
sibilities, as described by John Ashbery.  
Moore carried this scrutiny of every-  
thing existing over into her critique as  
well. On Williams’s In The American  
Grain, she writes, for example, “We rec-  
ognize a superbly poetic orificeria of  
meaning and material — in the idols,  
the jasper, the birds of prey, ‘the lions  
and other animals of the cat kind,’ the  
wrought stone and wrought leather, the  
silver, the gold.’”

Still, as late as January 11, 1966,  
Marianne Moore could write in the  
Christian Science Monitor of the response  
to her own work: “Always, in whatever I

Marianne Moore. Photo © Rosenbach Museum  
& Library.

wrote — prose or verse — I have had a  
burning desire to be explicit; beset al-  
ways, however carefully I had written,  
by the charge of obscurity.” The Com-  
plete Prose of Marianne Moore shows to  
what extent Moore was indeed wronged  
by this charge. Not since the appear-  
ance of Predilections (1955) have we so  
fine an opportunity to read and study  
the elegant and captivating prose of one  
whose “literary fastidiousness is, for the  
most part, implicit in precise, brilliant  
thinking” — a comment Moore made in  
extolling some of her own favorite  
American writers, James, Poe, Stevens,  
Pound. Moore’s expansive citing of de-  
tails and sharp focusing on the essential  
point of the text under review result, as  
this collection reveals, in an illumina-  
tion of the works of her contemporaries,  
whether they be poets, pundits, trans-  
lators, biographers, or critics. All in all,  
this voluminous collection constitutes  
the work of a consummate critic and  
gracious individual.

feeling “by the writer’s technical in-  
sights.” But Helen Vendler sees Moore  
as one who

set herself firmly against one sort of  
American writing — the breezy  
rhetoric of native oratory, the afflatus  
of romantic sentiment, the optimism of  
self-help — and just as firmly [placed]  
herself in alliance with another  
American attitude toward words: our  
pragmatic, taxonomic, realistic  
conviction that words are useful,  
practical, and exact.

The “aesthetic-moral mathematics” that  
Moore found in Elizabeth Bishop’s North  
and South exemplifies Moore’s under-  
standing of the scientific, or mathemati-  
cal, and moral use of words that permit-  
ted Moore to dismiss any conflict be-  
tween feeling and self-restraint.  
Nevertheless, Moore’s sincerity in  
these years turned at times into a severe,  
assertive earnestness. In a tribute to Paul  
Rosenfeld, a poet, in The Nation (1946)  
she writes: “America must learn to sub-  
ordinate itself to a religious feeling, a

In deciding the merits of her own writing, whether poetry or prose,  
her rule was “justice to the meaning. . . when you do justice to  
the meaning, stop.” She borrowed quite naturally a Confucian  
sense of measure that revealed itself both in her moral-aesthetic  

beliefs and in her indomitable hold on life.

All the prose Moore wrote, except for  
some of her letters, is here. In the future,  
these too may be issued by the Rosen-  
bach Museum and Library to which  
Moore bequeathed her works and ar-  
tifacts. The Complete Prose includes  
Moore’s short stories published in Typyn  
o’Bob during her Bryn Mawr years and  
a few reviews, notably from Poetry, The  
New York Times, and The Egoist, printed  
soon after her graduation in 1909. This  
early period, from 1907 to 1919, is suc-  
ceeded by The Dial years (1921-1929)  
when reviews, essays, notes, and com-  
mentaries in The Dial make up the bulk  
of her writings. A less productive prose  
period (1931-1947), after The Dial’s de-  
mise, finds Moore expanding her review  
outlets in places such as Poetry, The New  
York Herald Tribune, The Criterion, and  
The Nation. The post-World War II  
years (1948-1968), another prolific  
prose period, witness Moore’s entry into  
the popular culture of sports and fashion,  
while her interest in poetry and art con-  
tinues. Letters to editors, dust jacket  
blurbs, booklists, questionnaires, and  
other miscellaneous short pieces com-  
plete and add to the variety of the prose  
in this volume.

In a sense, although The Dial years  
justified Moore’s position as a major wri-  
ter, her middle years — between the  
wars and during World War II —  
broadened her base of recognition as a  
connoisseur of words. In her prose, as  
in her poetry where quaint juxtapositions  
permit “real toads” to live in “imaginary  
gardens,” her intended contradictions  
come to be regarded as emblems of the  
writer herself, or trademarks, as are the  
objects and creatures that inhabit her  
poems. For example, in “The Poem and  
the Print” published in Poetry (1933),  
Moore writes: “Sometimes to the West-  
ern mind, damaged by intellectual  
power, Japanese Uta-poems or Hakku-  
poems are disturbing because they are  
not disturbing.” Her reviews, moreover,  
seem now more simply written than be-  
fore, yet they reach more deeply into  
the text to illuminate.

The encyclopedic knowledge that in-  
formed Moore’s writing also enhanced  
her skill in making aesthetic decisions.  
Her effort, however, to see all things  
with seemingly equal notice and apprecia-  
tion — to experience “the rapture of  
observation” that she attributed to  
Henry James — may not on the surface  
seem to square with Moore’s own ex-  
pressed need to be selective, to modify  

sense of the whole life, or be dragged  
down into the slime.” In an earlier re-  
view in The Nation (1941) of Louise  
Bogan’s Poems and New Poems one sees  
clearly one woman admiring the courage  
of another woman. Both women are  
poets in search of their own strengths as  
Americans, still living out the trauma  
of the end of the frontier. Moore speaks  
of the “fact as well as [the] mystery that  
weakness is power, that handicap is pro-  
ficiency, that the scar is a credential,  
that indignation is no adversary for  
gratitude, or heroism for joy.” Moore  
was not a feminist by any means, and  
she never revealed her wounds. “There  
are medicines,” she would say instead.  
In these mostly post-World War II years  
Moore addressed Americans to consoli-  
date their virtues and their values, to  
remain original, and to act wisely and  
justly. A mature, moral, even religious,  
sensibility ripened in her at this time.  
Like W.H. Auden, she sought forgive-  
ness through “faith and purity, a cure so  
potent we need never know panic or be  
defeated by Self.” The age of anxiety  
was even more an age of yearning for  
moral rebirth.

Another shift evolved during her later  
years (1948-1968) when Moore would  
write: “My sense of literature is one of  
giving, not diminishing.” Generosity  
had now become a creed. In one inter-  
view she exhorted, “We should judge  
ourselves by the least that we are, and  
judge others by the most that they are.  
Rate other people as high as we can.”  
This is the highly pitched sense of the  
worth of the other in Moore that allowed  
Williams in turn to call her “our saint.”  
Moore knew how to judge matters and  
how to value people. Ezra Pound had  
always been her guru; Wallace Stevens,  
her aesthetic idol; and William Carlos  
Williams, her true poet—friend. In decid-  
ing the merits of her own writing,  
whether poetry or prose, her rule was  
“justice to the meaning . . . when you  
do justice to the meaning, stop.” She  
borrowed quite naturally a Confucian  
sense of measure that revealed itself both  
in her moral-aesthetic beliefs and in her  
indomitable hold on life.

Canonized by this time, Moore had  
at last joined a group of literary saints  
of her own reckoning. Her reliance on  
others for her own sense of authority  

— continued on page 15

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987