muse. Her work was not evidence of what she could do,

but of what she was." The obstacles to women trying to
enter the arts, to making a living at it were — and still are —
considerable.

Still, it is surprising how many women artists there were
before Mary Cassatt and Berthe Morisot, who became
famous as members of that now-favored group, the Impres-
sionists. For example, in seventeenth-century Italy there was
Artemisia Gentileschi, who painted in the dramatic style of
Caravaggio. Her painting “Judith Decapitating Holofernes"
(based on a biblical story in which a widow kills an enemy
general) is a daringly bold depiction of female heroism. Her
self-portrait is also notable for its robust naturalism. In "Self
Portrait as the Allegory of Painting" (1630s), Gentileschi
lifts her brush with a muscular forearm, her eyes focused
squarely on the canvas before her.

In the France of Louis XVI, the gracious and industrious
Elisabeth-Louise Vigée-Lebrun was the favorite painter of
Marie Antoinette. For all that one might disagree with her
Loyalist persuasion, Vigée-Lebrun was a superb portraitist
and, according to Chadwick, largely self-taught. A most
determined professional, Vigée-Lebrun even painted be-
tween labor pains when she was giving birth to her daugh-
ter. Years later, she proudly created a loving depiction of
herself and her child entitled "Portrait of the Artist with Her
Daughter" (1789). And there were still many other women
who took up the artistic calling in less enlightened times
than ours.

“Romanies at Epsom" (1938), by Laura Knight. From Five Women
Painters by Teresa Grimes, Judith Collins, and Oriana Baddely
($29.95, 1989, 191 pp., distributed by Seven Hills, 49 Central
Ave., Cincinnati, Ohio 45202). This profusely illustrated and
thoughtfully annotated book focuses on British artists who were
renowned in their time and deserve to be better known in ours.

Throughout Chadwick’s book we think of other "real
questions" — one of them being “how were women artists
able to practice their art?" Virginia Woolf answered pithily
for writers in A Room of One’s Own: "A woman must have
money and a room of her own if she is to write fiction."

It is clear that the first necessity is economic, and, fortu-
nately, some women have indeed won greater economic
independence in the world. However, the other necessity, it
seems to me, is emotional. Whether to have, as in the case
of Woolf, a supportive husband or, in the case of painter
Rosa Bonheur, a supportive woman lover — or perhaps
mother or community or whatever. A great many women
painters, for example, had fathers or mothers who were
painters or artists, too, and obviously encouraged their
daughters. When emotional support is cut off or unavailable,
women — like sculptor Camille Claudel, who lost the sup-
port of longtime mentor Rodin as well as of her family,
then ended up losing her mind — can become derelict and
self-destructive.

The good news is that with awareness of women artists of
the past, there is also a greater awareness (and number) of
women artists of the present. I find it curious, however, that
whereas women artists of the past may have been hidden
from us, contemporary women artists have been obscured
for a somewhat different reason: their art itself may often be
inaccessible because of over-conceptualized, esoteric presen-
tations and mannerisms.

A recent milestone show called "Culture and Commen-
tary: An Eighties Perspective" at the Hirshhorn Museum in
Washington, D.C., was organized by a conscientious cura-
tor who included five women among the fifteen artists

selected to represent a decade. However, puzzlement was
the common public reaction to this show, which was domi-
nated by a New York in-group sensibility. When art can no
longer be approached directly by a non-expert viewer, then
something has gone wrong.

Whether due to lack of space, time, or inclination, Chad-
wick does not deal with such modern issues. However, she
does provide a wonderfully terse interpretation of such
artists as sign-maker Jenny Holzer and self-photographer
Cindy Sherman, both of whom were in the Hirshhorn show.
“Appropriating codes which have great social power, decon-
structing them to expose their inconsistencies and ideology,
using fragments and refusing wholeness, artists reveal the
ways that codes of meaning are entrenched in the dominant
culture."

An art historian and university professor, Chadwick has
digested voluminous research for us. Given the survey
nature of this book, perhaps it is inevitable that treatment of
subjects seem cursory and many sections read like laundry
lists — names of women, names of their works, and names
of exhibitions. Chadwick also suffers from the dry, overly
careful prose to which art historians are prone, and while
her feminist sympathies are evident, her voice is needlessly
murky and tentative. All the same, as a reference and as a
succinctly presented introduction to the world of women
artists and their vision throughout the centuries, Women,
Art, and Society is invaluable.

Scarlet-Cheng is a Washington, D.C., area freelance
writer specializing in features on literature, art, and culture,
which have appeared in The Washington Post, The World
and I, and other publications.