the mainland and dispatching her articles and letters, a  
hostile crowd murmured all around her but attempted no  
physical abuse.  

Later she claimed not to  
have noticed. The next  

day, two Sicilian doctors  
who had come to Ischia to  
help in case of an epidemic  
were expelled from the  
island because they were  
not natives. Stormy seas,  
which would have made a  
crossing to the mainland at  
least uncomfortable if not  
actually dangerous, gave  
the remarkably fearless  
Colet an excuse to wait at  
least a little while longer  
before leaving Ischia. But, on Sunday, November 12, a  
crowd surrounded the palace, threatening to kill Colet if she  
were not gone by nightfall. All the servants, except one little  
boy who remained loyal to Colet and vowed to guard her  
with his life, fled the palace. At 5:00 p.m., when it looked  
as though the mob was about to carry out its threat, Captain  
Fiorentini, summoned from Procida, came racing up to the  
palace with his chief aide. Fiorentini and the valiant aide  
held the furious villagers outside the gate at gunpoint until  
the arrival of their garrison frightened off the crowd.  

She begged for  
just one more  
day to set up an  
ad hoc hospital  
in one wing of  
the palace.  

The immediate threat over, Fiorentini and Colet spent the  
rest of the evening discussing poetry. Together they read  
Hugo’s latest collection, which the poet had just sent to her.  
Colet tried to persuade the garrison commander to give her  
enough protection to allow her to stay on Ischia until she  
could prove to the superstition-laden populace that their  
fears were unscientific and unreasonable. Fiorentini could  
not guarantee her safety or that of any troops stationed in  
the palace, but, since no cases of cholera had as yet been  
reported near enough the palace to implicate Colet, he  
allowed her a brief reprieve. On November 15 the inevitable  
happened — a villager was diagnosed as having cholera.  
Now Colet had to go. Again she begged for time — just one  
more day to set up an ad hoc hospital in one wing of the  
palace — which Fiorentini reluctantly granted her.  

Finally, out of excuses and cognizant of her hosts’ genu-  
ine fears, Colet agreed to leave Ischia the next morning. "I  
spent the night packing my trunks and the next day, by the  
light of a splendid dawn, which made this beautiful island  
float in liquid gold, I left, my heart crushed. I loved it; I  
always dreamed of seeing it again some day." But these  
were Colet’s last words on the beautiful island she had so  
loved, for her dreams of returning to Ischia were never  
realized.  

¢ Barbara Meister researched this article in the archives in  
the library at Avignon. She lives in New York City.  
Author’s Note: All quotations are from Les Derniers Abbés  
by Louis Colet, published in France by Dentu in 1986. The  
translations are my own.  

So many books,  
So little money  

Browse through a Daedalus catalog and be  
amazed at the wide selection of books on literature, art  
and the sciences, all at 50 to 90 percent off list price.  

You'll find many of the authors featured in  
Belles Lettres: Annie Dillard, Mary Butts, Nadine  

Gordimer, Carole Maso, Bobbie Ann Mason, Louise  
Erdrich, Virginia Woolf, Marianne Wiggins, Zora Neale  

Hurston, Fay Weldon and many others.  

Send for your free catalog today!  

Daedalus Books.