Belles Lettres Interview

“Extraordinarily Ordinary” Ntozake Shange talks to Jewelle

Gomez about facing down the dragons of patriarchal language

and passing on the Black woman’s traditions of survival.

“Sometimes we drug ourselves with
dreams of new ideas. The head will
save us. The brain alone will set us
free. But there are no new ideas still
waiting in the wings to save us as
women, as human. There are only
old and forgotten ones, new
combinations, extrapolations and
recognitions from within ourselves,
along with the renewed courage to try
them out.” — Audre Lorde, from
“Poetry Is Not a Luxury,” Ikon,
Fall/Winter, 1982/1983.

Ntozake Shange’s new novel,
Betsey Brown (St. Martin’s
Press, $12.95, 207 pp.) is a

wonderfully old-fashioned experience,
yet it is also something more. It is an
ordinary childhood, sometimes my own,
perhaps yours, re-imagined with pristine
clarity and imbued with a visionary
perspective. Thirteen-year-old Betsey
moves through her world (St. Louis,
1959) with a tantalizing combination of
childish oblivion and sensual
engagement that makes the personal
and political events of her childhood
searingly immediate. Not only does
Betsey have to endure the exquisite
pain of adolescence and first romance,
but she is also inextricably bound to
the fortunes of the rest of Black
America, whose struggle directly
influences her childhood. Court-ordered
integration invades her private world,
sending her across town to a hostile
school. At home her father, Greer,
struggles to counteract discrimination
and self-hatred by turning his home
into a carnival of Afro-American music
and history. Yet throughout the
concurrent melodramas of youth and of
the “Movement,” it is the universal
quality of Betsey’s life that Shange
wants to impress upon us.

In a recent telephone interview with
Shange, I suggested that both she and
Audre Lorde (in her “biomythography,”
Zami) had created mythological
characters out of their own lives in
their work. “I wouldn’t want Betsey to
be considered larger than life,” she
responded. “I’d rather have her be
considered ordinary. Maybe her family’s
a little eccentric, but I’d like Black
people to think about whimsical and
courageous little girls as ordinary.

That’s important.”

EES

Above and right: Directing students at the
University of Houston.

It is this quality of the ordinary in
her own life that Shange continues to
search out in order to reconstruct the
creative atmosphere that gave birth to
her most famous work, for colored girls
who have considered suicide when the
rainbow is enuf, which was produced on
Broadway in 1976. In spite of the
turbulent racial politics that shaped her
own youth and the insidious sexual

September/October 1985

politics that later made her a saint in
the eyes of some (White, male critics
and women — Black, White, feminist
or not) and a curse on the lips of
others (most Black, male critics and
rearguard Black Nationalists), Shange
remains clear about the elements of

Ntozake with Savannah. “I will not look at my
photo and say, ‘Why didn’t you do something to help?’”

day-to-day living that sustain her work.
“I'm not quite a recluse, but I do like
to work by myself. Theater requires a
lot of interaction with other people,
and I’m just not ready for that. I like
the spontaneity of performance pieces.
That’s one of the reasons I haven't
been able to stay in a show more than
six months. I really like to change the
words or move the poems or do
something. But people want to see
what their friends saw!”

In spite of this disgruntlement, she
is working on a play about Billie
Holiday for the Tricycle Theatre in
London and on the book for a musical
version of Betsey Brown for the New
York Shakespeare Festival. She shapes
both projects from the less frenetic
environs of Houston, where she has
lived since 1983.

“There’s so much hype and pressure
in doing New York theater, even if you
do ‘off off off Broadway.’ I decided it
wasn’t worth it. I'd rather work down
here because I’m primarily concerned
with the worth of the work and the
breadth of my skill. It’s not that I don’t
ever want to have a show in New
York, but I think these years of
working more singularly have given me
a better sense of what I want to do
with my talent as opposed to what I
should do with my talent. I don’t like
being expected to do certain kinds of
things. In New York there are too
many shows to go see, too many hurt
feelings, too many meetings in bars. I
can’t do all that. I want to go to dance
classes, go riding a horse, take my
daughter to Astro World, so many
ordinary things.”

The kind of strain and isolation that
Shange describes does affect her work.
Spell #7, produced at the New York
Shakespeare Festival in 1979, was full
of brilliant visuals and womanly wit,
but it displayed little of her theatrical
or literary fire. And A Daughter's
Geography (1983) did not sustain the
level of poetic imagery and emotional
involvement of either for colored girls or

her vastly overlooked poetry collection,
nappy edges. Shange’s proficiency at
capturing the vibrant essence of
ordinary things extraordinarily makes
her writing moving. And it is clear that
the support of a well-defined
community makes Shange excel. In for
colored girls, Shange reached back to
the things that many of us have said to
ourselves but not out loud: our
disappointment and anger at self-
involved lovers, as well as our profound
reliance on our survival knowledge.

Betsey Brown continues this artistic
tradition by expertly recreating the
rhythms of language and movement
that Black women often take for
granted. In the novel she easily links
three generations of experience with the
poignant reveries stirred when Vida
catches a glimpse of her granddaughter
Betsey’s first kiss:

Vida turned to go indoors, but the
breeze tickled her ankles a wee bit,
reminding her: once she was courted
and treated real sweet. Once she was
courted and swept off her feet in a
dingy ol’ roadhouse out on the islands
where her folks woulda died had they
known she was parading in hose and
satin where throats got cut and
women were easily had... . In
those times a kiss was very personal.
Very committin, like a ring or a first
waltz.

Shange’s forte is recognizing the
distinct way that Black people, whether
southern or not, whether educated or
not, can turn a phrase, connect words,
create a syncopated pattern — the way
they see society from a skewed angle
that refuses sanctity to the prevailing
authority. She creates a world within
that exists only for itself, even while
living in pitched battle with racism and
capitalism. Through the eyes of Betsey
we see the rift that skin color can cause
within an Afro-American family and
the internal class conflict that remains
largely unexamined by critics of Black
literature.

Repeatedly it is in the ordinary
(which is so specific to each of us) that
Betsey learns the ways of the world.
When she feels betrayed by her
mother’s middle-class complacency, she
runs away from home to Mrs. Maureen,
her friend who operates a beauty shop
in a less affluent part of town. In the
light of early morning, Betsey’s possible
savior is revealed to be the madam of a
whorehouse, but still Betsey has come
to the right place. The lessons her
mother might have tried to teach are
played out for her here.

Regina, who had once embodied
Betsey’s romantic ideal, is now preg-
nant and abandoned at Mrs.
Maureen’s. Yet it is not Regina’s
bitterness that enlightens Betsey but her
tenderness and pragmatism. The every-
day reality of a woman who is preparing
to be alone with her child teaches
Betsey that she can create herself as the
“queen of the negro veiled prophet” (a
play on a peculiar parade held every
year by the White community) and
that the city is truly her domain. She is
then free to struggle for the race or
dance until dawn or both.

When Betsey’s mother, Jane, runs
away from home to protest Greer’s
involvement of the children in a civil
rights demonstration, it is a most ex-
traordinary, ordinary woman who
arrives to watch over the family. Carr-
ie, big in her country ways, sees
through the pretensions of middle-class
life. She drinks wine, polishes the
crystal, and has an affair with the
gardener — all the while imparting the
knowledge of survival.

It is Carrie’s view of life that Betsey
finally acknowledges as the standard.
Carrie appears peculiar to the adults
around her, wearing two dresses in
layers tied at the waist with a thick
rope. But she is practical and sensual
and makes few apologies for herself or
her appetites. She appreciates the dis-
parity between the glittery, pop icons
like the Supremes, singing in controlled
harmony, and the “trashy” urgency of
Ike and Tina and the Ikettes. The hard
edge of poverty does not prevent her
from being as queenly as any Motown
royalty. Betsey’s emerging womanhood
comes not from symbols or milestones
but from significant actions and
moments, many of which are repeated
until they take on the resonance they
deserve. More than anything else, the
revelations of Regina's continued
capacity to love and Carrie’s self-
sufficient value system provide Betsey
with a framework for her independence.

It is Shange’s feminist perspective
that allows her to draw out the “old
and forgotten” essences of Black
women’s lives. After graduate school,
Shange taught in the Women’s Studies
Department of Sonoma State University
in California, where she found her
voice and the support of various
women’s groups. “I do believe in the
destruction of the patriarchy,” she says,
“and I also believe what Judy Grahn
says — ‘We have to kill the king’s
English.’ That’s part of our jobs as
writers. I try to do that. A lot of Black
women don’t want to accept our part of
the responsibility for our oppression,
and I’m just not free to do that. I will
not look at my daughter 20 years from
now and have her ask me ‘Well, why
didn’t you do something to help?’ I feel
obliged to pay attention to and be an
advocate for, in some artistic way that’s
satisfactory, the dramatic changes in
attitude in the lives of women and
children in this country.”

continued on page 10

Belles Lettres © 9