To Touch  
as We Can  

The Bobby-Soxer, by Hortense Calisher.  
New York: Doubleday, 1986, $17.95,  
281 pp.  

by Joyce Kornblatt  

The nameless actress-narrator in  

Hortense Calisher’s arresting  

novel about female identity  
speaks: “A strange household, when  
properly observed, was layered like a  
street. I was learning my vocation, even  
before I knew its name. However I was to  
perform it — if not in pain or words, then  
perhaps by sacrificing bits of my own flesh,  
almost in the way Knobby pincered for me  
a quail’s egg or a minute ear of corn [gifts  
brought by the Japanese houseboy], this  
observing adventure I was fitted for.”  

And so in a voice both dreamy and  
precise, mannered and unguarded, candid  
and oblique, this “modern girl” of the  
1950s draws the reader into her own  
family’s household, tunnels down through  
the layers from obvious facts to buried  
secrets. The story shocks: Her father’s  
“mistress” turns out to be a man who,  
upon his death, wills the narrator’s  
mother much of his estate. The mother  
has had her own lover — Craig Towle, a  
local boy who became a famous womanizing  
playwright — who returns to the town  
to marry the bobby-soxer and winds up  
being sued for neglect by the girl’s parents  
when she dies from toxemia. The narrator  
herself collaborates with Towle on a play  
he is writing about her dead Aunt Leona,  
also known as Leo — a hermaphrodite  
whose own strange and poignant story  
reads like a separate novella within the  
book.  

Eventually, the narrator also succumbs  
to Towle’s seductiveness, and her  
mother’s lover becomes, briefly, her own.  
“The room thickened, or our bodies did,  
toward each other, with the swelling that  

comes like a seventh sense.” When she  
marries the respectable Bill Wetmore, it is  
in full knowledge of the fact that she can  
never share her “true self” with him; she  
remains a woman outside the solace of  
convention, or easy solutions, but  
solutions are not what she is after: “How  
quickly we lose the mysteries we solve;  
how beautiful the rest remain.”  

Such courage permeates this novel,  
becomes the source from which its pithy,  
resonant, and demanding voice emerges.  
Why not? Courage demands attention, a  
close reading of life, the refusal to skim.  
From childhood on, Calisher’s heroine  
resists the lies with which parents try to  
protect children from the realities of adult  
experience. “I think that in the end we  
hope our children will know everything  
about us. It helps the burden, on both  
sides. I look at my own and think — yes,  
everything.”  

She models her strong character on  
those around her. “My mother’s style lay  
in always going ahead with what she  
wanted to do, which she always saw  
clearly,” and she wills her daughter that  
focused assertiveness. From her father,  
the narrator learns the loyalty of the heart  
— often lived out in the guise of infidelities,  
sexual confusion, desertions of one for  
another — and a tenderness, finally, toward  
everyone. “I accept it,” he tells her simply  
when she asks him how he can abide her  
brother's attraction to the father’s new male  
companion, and she understands how  
inclusive such acceptance is.  

Her grandmother, Nessa, offers grit  
and style and shares the story of Leona/  
Leo, about whom the narrator says, “I  
strained toward Leo with whatever  
empathy I had been born with, or  
learned.” Their talent is a formidable one:  
“Though I can despise people in small  
ways, I cannot hate them. They interest  
me too much.” It is more than interest  
that she feels for others; by the book's  
end, the reader has had the privilege of  
encountering a rare spirit whose  
magnanimity runs deep.  

I am standing at the double knot of  
my own legend, as we all are, in  
every part of every nation, and most  
of all in the nation of the dead. All  
lives are legendary. I haven’t yet  
gathered in all the threads of my  
own, nor will I ever. Others will do  
that for me. This is the cued house  
where I learned that the hours flow  
under the hand like holy braille.  
That we are all one flesh — and that  
the flesh has eyes until the end.  

It is fitting that such a passage — such a  
good-hearted and intelligent novel —  
should come to us from Calisher, the new  
president of American PEN and a woman  
whose generous sensibility shines on the  
pages of all the 17 books she has written.  
Other reviewers compare her to James and  
to Proust; I think she is unique, a writer  
whose dazzling delight in language serves a  
vision profoundly tender and knowing and  
absolutely indifferent to the stereotypes  
that rein in the lives of most men and  
women. In one of The Bobby-Soxer’s most  
moving scenes, the narrator peers in on  
her blind neighbors, the Evamses, who  
are making love, “naked and entwined in  
a swoon of touch.” It is Mr. Evams who  
will teach her that “we are all of us one  
creature.” In the end, it does not matter  
whom we love, or how. “What is sex,  
after all, but a question the body answers?”  
Whom did her parents love more,  
each other or their lovers? Whom does  
the narrator love, Craig Towle or her  
husband? Was Aunt Leona male or  
female, or both, and what might that  
imply about everyone else? “We must  
touch as we can,” the luminous prose  
counsels. Such wisdom liberates. Read  
The Bobby-Soxer. It is a brave and lovely  
book.  

© Joyce Kornblatt is the author of  
Nothing to Do With Love, White Water,  
and the forthcoming Breaking Bread. She  
teaches writing and literature at the University  
of Maryland and The Writer’s Center,  
Bethesda, MD.  

— Firsts, continued  

Pineda has erected and vaulted a  
series of obstacles that would stymie a  
lesser writer. She has created a suspenseful,  
thrilling tale with a flawless sense of pacing.  
Helio is a character we come to love without  
pity and locate deep within ourselves.  
Society’s shadowy closets come under scrutiny as  
she probes the dark corners of prejudice —  
rejection of the distinctive, the different,  
the misunderstood. And Pineda shows clearly how  
fear turns us into beasts.  

Face is nevertheless a novel of considerable hope.  
Helio’s face is left in disrepair, but a hint of  
future improvement follows. It is when he finally  
takes control of his circumstances that he transcends  
all limitations imposed on him. Whether he achieves  
success in his physical transformation is no longer at  
issue; more significant transformations have taken  
place. Pineda is telling us that we are all changed  
by life, demonstrably so, and that despite debilitating  
setbacks, change is life, and so change is always  
valuable.  

Family love, with its terrible and  
wonderful connections, is the bedrock of Ellen  
Currie’s novel, Available Light. Caught in  
circumstances that would be tragic if they were not so  
hilarious, are Kitty; her gambling saxophonist lover,  
Rambeau, who has left her; Eileen, so desperate to get  
pregnant that she has absorbed another woman’s  
implanted womb in a New Jersey parking lot; fat,  
disagreeable Dorinda, pregnant by Eileen’s husband,  
Gordon, but living with Rambeau; and the sisters’  
mother, Mick. Mick, “Our  

8 © Belles Lettres  

Ellen Currie. Photo by Tom Views  

Lady of the Perpetual Cardigan, is 40  
years out of the slums of Belfast, pink  
and white and tough as a boot. We call  

[her] The Mick to defuse and defang her,  
but it’s no use whatsoever.”  

How these enchanting characters  
resolve their different desires requires  
plotting worthy of Shakespeare. Currie  
never fails to garner our rapt attention  
and affection for the characters and for  
their credence, dignity, and tart wit.  
Chapters juxtapose Kitty’s first-person  
narrative with Rambeau’s confessional  
letters and everybody’s “Dreams and  
Secrets.” The hilarity is periodically  
halted by passages outlining pasts of  
almost unrelieved misery: Rambeau’s  
abandonment by his mother, Mick’s  
abandonment by her Irish husband,  
Kitty’s terrible conviction that she  
caused her own father’s death. “ ‘What  

about poor Kitty?’ Rambeau says. ‘Kitty  
turns around thinking she’s a murderess.  
What’s God’s judgment on that?’  
‘You're God’s judgment on Kitty,’ Mick  
says contentedly, ‘It was an accident’!”  

Currie’s perspicacious prose hurtles  
through intriguing new uses of verbs and  
completely bypasses peripheral scenes of  
little consequence. The story’s unexpected  
twists and turns are perfectly aligned with  
a voice and style that are sure, deft, and  
wizardly. Currie’s mastery of the one-liner  
begs reading aloud: “If you don’t straighten  
out your life, Kitty, I am going to tell  
your mother.” “You must know more about  
sex than I do, you're single.” In the midst  
of being aggressively seduced by Dorinda,  
Rambeau, resisting, thinks, “This is  
your fault, Kitty. It’s your fault, Kitty.  
It’s your fault this woman is happening  
to me.” Later Kitty queries Eileen, “Do  
you think it’s because of our father? All  
this trouble we’re having?” “What  
trouble? This is not trouble we’re having,  
this is just life we're having.” “I  
sincerely hope you're wrong.”  

The things that support and sustain  
these characters are not their jobs or  
professions, not the material possessions  
they seek comfort from, not even their  
hopes and dreams. They find dignity and  
direction, despite their meandering  
shenanigans, in the connections they  
have with each other. A surfeit of love  
and goodwill informs all of their  
actions. Currie is telling us that we  
learn, as well as we are able, from what  
we do, and we do the best we can.  

@ Leslie Carper teaches English at  
Memphis State University and is completing  
a short story collection, Miracles of Modern  
Medicine.  

ESSAYS BY  
NANCY MAIRS  

“Like reading a fascinating private journal.” — Kirkus  

“The difficulties and despairs  
through which she has passed  
have left Nancy Mairs with  
unique and moving stories to  
convey, as well as with a strong  
voice to tell them.”  

—Perri Klass, New York Times Book Rev.  

“These essays are not only  
honest . . . they pay no homage  
to that imprisoner of female  
lives, the appropriate.”  
—Carolyn Heilbrun  

“Astringent, unsentimental,  
witty, bracing, provocative,  
often skeptical, often fun.”  

—Beryl Lieff Benderly, Washington Post  

“Like doing some high, hard  
mountain-climbing with a fearless  
and experienced guide.”  
—Ursula K. Le Guin  

“There are triumphs here—of  
will, style, candor, thought and  
even form.” —Los Angeles Times  

“Original, nervy, and memorable.  
She writes like a poet, and  
like a survivor.” —Hilma Wolitzer  

“Will refresh the mind of just  
about anyone who reads it.”  
—All Things Considered  

“These essays are brilliant. No  
feminist, male or female, can  
afford to miss them.”  

—Carolyn Kizer  

$15.95, at bookstores now  

University of Arizona Press  
1615 E. Speedway, Tucson, AZ  

Lesbian & Feminist  
Books  
for Good Reading  
and Gift Giving  

Cartoons  
Essays  

Novels  

Pamphlets  

Poetry  

Short Stories  

Firebrand  
Books  

141 The Commons  
Ithaca, New York 14850  
(607) 272-0000  

Write for a free brochure.  

Jury/August 1986