—————————————————————————————EE =

B

Merrill Joan Gerber has written passionately since the age of
seven, and when she saw her words in print at the age of
eighteen, decided, “There was to be no other life for me.”
This interview is excerpted from a correspondence between
Gerber and Susan Koppelman, a literary scholar of the short
story by North American women writers.

In her afterword to the Feminist Press edi-
tion of The Revolt of Mother and Other
Stories by Mary E. Wilkins Freeman,
Michele Clark writes, “At the end of 1882,
when she was already living alone in Brat-
tleboro, Harper’s Bazar accepted the story,
‘Two Old Lovers.’ The editor enclosed a
check for twenty-five dollars and an appre-
ciative, encouraging note. The story had
been turned down by Century, Lippin-
cott’s, and the Atlantic Monthly. ‘I did not
walk home,’ she said, forty years later. ‘It
was before the days of the airplane. . . but
I flew.’ ” When did you first want to write?
When did you start writing? How did you
feel the first time you were ever published?

I recently found a composition note-
book written when I was seven; it’s filled
with poems I wrote to the ladies in my
aunt’s little home-run beauty shop, such
as “My aunt has a customer, her name is
Sadie, I like her very very much, for she
is a nice lady.” (Apologies.) When I was
thirteen, a boy in my class invited me to
the movies; afterwards I wrote a story
called “First Date” and sent it immedi-
ately to Seventeen magazine, that place
of dreams (beautiful girls, glowing make-
up, and love stories). It never occurred
to me not to describe what it was like to
be alive. Writing, in fact, was the only
place one could be totally honest; in all
other areas of life the opposite was re-
quired. This put a great strain on me; it
was an acrobatic feat always to have to
say the correct (untrue) thing. I wrote to
be honest, to be alone, to be under-
stood. I have a memory of myself at fif-
teen: we were living in Miami Beach but
had driven back to Brooklyn to visit my
grandmother, who was ill. I set myself
up in the cellar, my old black portable
on a bridge table, and removed myself
(as I always had to) from the commotion
upstairs: the family arguing, babbling,
boring one another to death. They could
never understand me. (And who could?
God-who-understands-all-things did
not seem to me to be in evidence in
Brooklyn in the ’40s and ’50s of my
childhood.) For a time I had been sent to
“religious instruction,” but when I re-
ported to my mother that the rabbi told
us we would go blind if we ate bacon, she
told me to forget about leaving school
early. She had nothing but contempt for
the Yiddish language, the accents of the
immigrants, their religious and dietary
practices, the cultural habits of her for-
bears. She wanted none of it for me.

My father went to shul, and he hoped
for a kosher home, but my mother
obliged him for a couple of weeks after
their marriage and then she quit forever.
My father was an antique dealer; when
he bought out estates he always brought
the books home to me. These were joy-
ous events, his coming home at night
and setting down cartons on the living
room floor. I always arranged the con-
tents in tall piles beside my bed. The
“best” books went on the bottom, to be
saved for last. These were Nancy Drew
mysteries and books about collies. I
made a rule for myself that I had to read
all the books, even the awful ones about
the Civil War and medical diseases. I
didn’t have to read all of every book, but
I had to give each one a fair chance. I got
up an hour early to read before school.
Sometimes there were duplicates; my
father always urged me to give the extra
book away to a friend. He didn’t under-
stand that two books were twice the
treasure; also that I had no worthy
friends.

16 @ Belles Lettres

My mother had an affinity for only
one book: the dictionary. She spent
hours teaching me to rhyme. She wrote
prize-winning jingles, songs, and per-
sonalized greeting cards, triumphant
that she didn’t have to buy expensive
drug store cards (but scornful of anyone
who cared about getting them). My
mother yearned toward education and
kept as models in her mind her gentile
teachers who had no accents and who
dressed in tailored clothes; however,
despite her burning intelligence, she
never finished high school. She went to
business school and learned the skills
that would eventually allow her to sup-
port her widowed mother and unmarried
sister, with whom we lived till I was
fourteen. My mother, a superb typist,
taught me how important typing was; I
won a medal for it in eighth grade. The
pleasure of writing, for me, still includes
the pleasure of typing.

My earliest publications were of po-
ems: in the P.S. 238 (Brooklyn) literary
magazine (“Seven a.m. the alarm starts
in beepin’ and I start to think ‘what a
swell day for sleepin’ ” — heavy influ-
ence of my mother) or, in high school, a
creation called “Summer’s End” (“When
the flaming sun sets early and the leaves
tremble and fall, I know that summer is
over and winter heralds its call”). My
first stories were in the Miami Beach
High School “Embryo.” My first pub-
lished piece in a national magazine was a
poem about a squirrel that appeared in
The Writer in 1956 when I was eighteen.
Not knowing they had accepted it, I dis-
covered it in print in the reading room of
the library, where I went daily to read
the new quarterlies. I can still feel the
chill I experienced seeing it there — my
words, my name. There was to be no
other life for me.

At the University of Florida, I met
the great writing teacher of my life,
Andrew Lytle. He taught his favorite
writers, among them Flannery O’Con-
nor and Katherine Anne Porter. I ab-
sorbed some of the great southern tradi-
tions — not the least of them being the
sense of the sinister behind the ordinary.
I was in so many ways out of my element,
Brooklyn girl that I was. I was, also,
clearly in it.

In college I sent stories regularly to
Seventeen (it wasn’t until 1989 that they
finally published one)! In 1959, one of
my stories won Honorable Mention in
Mademoiselle’s short story contest; in
1960 (when I was a graduate student at
Brandeis) I began selling stories to
Datebook. I acquired an agent, who sold
them for $100 each. At that time, I had
decided to go on for a PhD. I applied for
a grant and was told by the (famous,
male) head of the English Department,
“Merrill, you’re only a girl and only a
writer. There are men who need these
grants more than you do.” I left and got a
job at Houghton Mifflin. About that
time, I wrote “The Cost Depends on
What You Reckon It In,” about an old
woman in a Jewish rest home in Brook-
lyn. My agent advised me that it was
“too maudlin” and that I should stick to
teen stories. I sent the story myself to
Mademoiselle, who bought it straight-
away. I left the agent, applied for a
Stanford Writing Fellowship, and be-
came pregnant, all at once. When I
learned I had won the fellowship, I was
due to have a baby in three days! My
husband urged me to accept the offer. I
did. We had our baby daughter and

moved to California.

The first two stories I wrote for the
fiction workshop sold immediately to
Redbook and to The New Yorker. (How
easy it seemed this life was going to be!)
But I saw that while the men in the pro-
gram were busy with their subjects, writ-
ing about war and drugs and politics and
sex, I was mining a different vein —
with stories about the birth of a new baby
and the funeral of a beloved relative.

I had three daughters within five
years; I wrote fiction all the years I was
raising them. I managed to stay within
the proper form for a woman of my gen-
eration (housewife), but I had my secret
sustenance: writing stories. I was a
“working mother,” but no one knew it!

Tell us more about your mother. Is she
proud? How do you feel about how she feels
about your work? Did you ever worry about
embarrassing your family? About the eth-
ics, about the familial repercussions, of us-
ing their lives as your “material”? (See Dale
Spender’s The Writing or the Sex — the
chapters about how men steal women’s life
stories and their literary material).

Merrill Joan Gerber

It’s the heaviest worry of my life. My
first story bought by Redbook was “about”
a young woman with a new baby whose
mother comes to stay. Expecting a de-
lightful visit, the daughter sees instead
how fraught it is with misery, tension,
hostility, embarrassment (she is nursing
the baby and cannot bare her breast in
the same room with her mother and hus-
band). Her mother, who has borrowed
on her husband’s life insurance policy to
get money for airfare, has to leave early
to avoid the increasing pain of the visit.
They all pretend she is leaving because
she has caught a cold and doesn’t want
to give it to the baby!

After Redbook bought the story, it
occurred to me that it would now appear
in eight million magazines, and no
doubt turn up in the dentist’s office
where my mother would surely see it.
After much agonizing, I talked with my
mother and gave her the money I got for
the story, as a kind of offering. But since
then, I have not been able to pay off the
world, and I have risked much by not
sacrificing my only talent. I have been
disowned by a few relatives. My mother
is proud of me and has taken the position
that this is what writers have to do. I
have not given her my last two books;
I’ve explained that there is no need for
her to get upset. I wish I had told all my
relatives long ago what another writer
told hers: that they can read her books if
they want to, but she won’t give the
books to them, and she won’t discuss her
work with them.

How do you feel about Redbook? I know
that you have had more stories published
there than has any other writer. I also know
that many if not most literary critics don’t
consider Redbook an outlet for “serious” lit-
erature. That, of course, is a common
ramification of sexism — if it’s a publication
read primarily by women, it can’t be worth

Belles Lettres Interview

much. And yet — for instance — Mary E.
Wilkins Freeman and many of the other
important nineteenth-century writers
(women, that is) first published in equiva-
lent periodicals (e.g., Harper's Bazaar).
These periodicals paid well and reached a
large audience of literate and literature lov-
ing women readers, creating for these
writers reputations as literary professionals.
From the women’s periodicals, they were
recruited by the so-called “general opinion”
magazines, such as the newly created At-
lantic Monthly, which commissioned a story
by Rose Terry Cooke for its first issue.

The fact that Redbook was interested
in my reflections about life with small
children was a great boon to me. On the
other hand, they preferred a light touch
and a happy ending. I couldn’t foresee
what the consequences of my publishing
there, and in other women’s magazines,
would be. When my first novel, An
Antique Man, was published in 1967,
Time magazine sent a photographer who
spent the day at my house, photograph-
ing me and my three girls; the negative
review ended with a comment in the
vein of: “Gerber, who writes for the
women’s magazines, fixes it all up with a
happy ending.”

Though I’m grateful that Redbook has
bought forty-two of my stories, I feel this
has stood in the way of my achieving a
literary reputation and of being awarded
literary grants. I imagine the judges are
appalled by the kind of titles given my
stories by the magazine editors (“Ten
Cents Worth of Love,” “Hold Tight, My
Love”). It is true that I can’t write all I
know in a Redbook story, but I can write
with honesty, conviction, and grace. I
don’t consider my women’s magazine
stories to be “formula.” Cynthia Ozick
once said that I have “many arrows in my
quiver,” a generous way to regard my
more popular fiction and my young adult
novels. There’s a fine line between
commercial and literary fiction. Redbook
reprinted my 1964 Sewanee Review story
“Approval,” and Seventeen reprinted my
Fiction Network 1985 prize-winning story
“Hairdos.”

Do you agree that there is a renaissance of
the American short story? If so, why do you
think it is happening, and how does it affect
you?

I am told about such a “renaissance,”
but I’ve seen no sign of change in the
way my work is regarded. Most of my
stories are still rejected by magazines. I
have three collections still unpublished.
(One, Mozart You Can’t Give Them, is a
series about an old Jewish woman living
alone in Los Angeles. My former agent
explained why no publisher took it: “A
geriatric book, Merrill. What can you
expect?”) Another collection contains
stories that were published in literary
magazines, but that’s been turned back,
too, as was a collection from Redbook. If
there is a renaissance, it hasn’t found its
way to my door.

I have two unpublished novels as
well. The Hysterectomy Waltz was proba-
bly written before its time, and maybe by
now its time has passed. It’s about a
woman who refuses to accept the tradi-
tional views about hysterectomy even as
she hands herself over to the establish-
ment (medical and otherwise), which
takes her apart for all the wrong reasons.
Wisecracking, full of black humor, and I
terrified, she “waltzes” through the ex-
perience and tries to come out as whole
as she can. Most publishers found this
approach disconcerting. They wanted
an “operation novel,” and what they got
was an irreverent discourse, by turns bit-
ter and ironic, fatalistic and cheeky.

The Victory Gardens of Brooklyn is a
700-page novel set in New York at the
turn of the century, and it follows the
lives of three sisters, children of immi-
grants. Because my novel fits the genre
of “family saga” but isn’t written to for-