Literary Lights

May 15, 1990 is the centenary of the
birth of Katherine Anne Porter, and two
commemorative volumes mark the
event: Letters of Katherine Anne Por-
ter, selected and edited from her prodi-
gious output by Isabel Bayley, her liter-
ary trustee (Atlantic Monthly Press,
$29.95, 642 pp.), and The Collected
Essays and Occasional Writings of
Katherine Anne Porter (Houghton
Mifflin, $12.95, 496 pp.). In the fol-
lowing excerpt from a 1924 letter to the
editor of Century magazine, taken from
the latter volume, Porter defends her
choice of subject matter:

I have been accused by Americans of a
taste for the exotic, for foreign flavors.
Maybe so, for New York is the most for-
eign place I know, and I like it very
much. . . . all my life I have lived among
people who spoke broken, laboring
tongues, who put on with terrible dif-
ficulty, yet with such good faith, the ways
of the dominant race about them. This is
true here in New York also, I know: but I
have never thought of these people as any
other than American. Literally speaking, I
have never been out of America; but my
America has been a borderland of strange
tongues and commingled races, and if they
are not American, I am fearfully mis-
taken. The artist can do no more than
deal with familiar and beloved things,
from which he could not, and, above all,
would not escape. So I claim that I write
of things native to me, that part of
America to which I belong by birth and
association and temperament, which is as
much the province of our native literature
as Chicago or New York or San Francisco.
All the things I write of I have first
known, and they are real to me.

In a letter written from Paris in 1963 to
Flannery O’Connor (from the Letters
volume), Porter takes on reviewers:

Here is that news cutting I mentioned,
and I see you are on the same page at
least with Mary McCarthy, “whose place
in contemporary American letters is so
very particular one can only compare her
(reputation) to that of Madame Nathalie
Sarraute with us.” There is such a thing as
fractured English too. Well, anyway, it’s a
pretty good review of your now celebrated
Brave Men Do Not Run in the Streets,
meaning I am sure, that they are Hard to
Find, or Do Not Grow On Bushes. This
Kanters is the man who keeps writing
about the “Jewish Renascence” in
American literature, and seems to think
the American short story began with
Dorothy Parker, but just the same, he
nearly knows what he is reading in your
stories, he is limited but good as far as he
goes: but a man who thinks of Sarraute
and Parker, McCarthy and O’Connor in
the same review is not to be trusted in the
long run; and a nice long run you're going
to have, that’s certain. And you will for
some time find yourself teamed with any
number of unlikely running mates — I was
for years upon years compared with
Katherine Mansfield. My own view was,
and is, that we were both women, both
named Katherine, and both wrote short
stories, and there the resemblance ends.
Then it was Willa Cather. Then it was
Hemingway and even Faulkner, now and
then. And now I have graduated into the
society of Flaubert, Melville, Stendhal,
Henry James, and even Tolstoy. Fast
company, I call it, and it does me no
earthly good, and it is the device of
lazy-minded third-rate reviewers who can’t
read... They have heard these names or
perhaps know certain persons who have
read them, but I daresay that is all.

® One of the stellar events of this
publishing season is the release of
Congenial Spirits: The Selected Letters
of Virginia Woolf (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $24.95, 472 pp.), edited
by Joanne Trautmann Banks from the
six volumes already available. A great
writer who was also a great letter writer,
Woolf works her magic in every entry
one samples. So that this issue will get
out before Doomsday, I am going to stop
sampling and present these two succes-
sive letters to Vita Sackville-West:

16th March 1926

[...] I like your letters I was saying,
when overcome by the usual Hogarth Press
spasm. And I would write a draft if I
could, of my letter; and so tidy them and

30 @ Belles Lettres

7

Katherine Anne Porter. Photo by George
Platt Lynes.

compact them; and ten years ago I did
write drafts, when I was in my letter
writing day, but now, never. Indeed,
these are the first letters I have written
since I was married. As for the mot juste
you are quite wrong. Style is a very simple
matter; it is all rhythm. Once you get
that, you can’t use the wrong words. But
on the other hand here am I sitting after
half the morning, crammed with ideas,
and visions, and so on, and can’t dislodge
them, for lack of the right rhythm. Now
this is very profound, why rhythm is, and
goes far deeper than words. A sight, an
emotion, creates this wave in the mind,
long before it makes words to fit it; and in
writing (such is my present belief) one has
to recapture this, and set this working
(which has nothing apparently to do with
words) and then, as it breaks and tumbles
in the mind, it makes words to fit it: But
no doubt I shall think differently next
year. Then there’s my character (you see
how egotistic I am, for I answer only
questions that are about myself) I agree
about the lack of jolly vulgarity. But then
think how I was brought up! No school;
mooning about alone among my father’s
books; never any chance to pick up all
that goes on in schools — throwing balls;
ragging: slang; vulgarity; scenes; jealousies
— only rages with my half brothers, and
being walked off my legs round the Ser-
pentine by my father. This is an excuse: I
am often conscious of the lack of jolly
vulgarity but did Proust pass that way? Did
you? Can you chaff a table of officers?

a

29th March 1926

[...] a ghastly party at Rose Macau-
lay’s, where in the whirl of meaningless
words I thought Mr O’Donovan said Holy
Ghost, whereas he said ‘The Whole
Coast’ and I asking ‘Where is the Holy
Ghost?’ got the reply ‘Wherever the sea
is ‘Am I mad, I thought, or is this wit?’
‘The Holy Ghost?’ I repeated. ‘The
Whole Coast’ he shouted, and so we went
on, in an atmosphere so repellent that it
became, like the smell of bad cheese,
repulsively fascinating: Robert Lynds,
Gerald Goulds, Rose Macaulays, all talk-
ing shop; and saying Masefield is as good
as Chaucer, and the best novel of the year
is Shining Domes by Mildred Peake; until
Leonard shook all over, picked up what he
took to be Mrs. Gould’s napkin, discov-
ered it to be her sanitary towel and the
foundations of the tenth-rate literary re-
spectability (all gentlemen in white waist-
coats, ladies shingled, unsuccessfully)
shook to its foundations. I kept saying
‘Vita would love this.’ Now would you?

® North Point Press, which has pub-
lished a number of beautiful reissues of the
work of M.F.K. Fisher, has collected
the introductions she wrote for both her
own and other people’s books under the
title Dubious Honors ($9.95, 212 pp.,

PB). This is the renowned “art of eating”
writer on Japanese cuisine:

At its best, it is inextricably meshed with
aesthetics, with religion, with tradition
and history. It is evocative of seasonal
changes, or of one’s childhood, or of a
storm at sea: one thin slice of molded fish
puree shaped like a maple leaf and deli-
cately colored orange and scarlet, to cele-
brate autumn; a tiny hut made of carved
ice, with a little fish inside made of
chestnut paste and a chestnut made of fish
paste, to remind an honored guest that he
was born on a far-north island; an artfully
stuffed lobster riding an angry sea of curled
waves of white radish cut paper-thin, with
occasional small shells of carved
shrimp-meat tossing helplessly in the
troughs. . .

All this delicate pageantry is based on
things that we Westerners are either una-
ware of or that we accept for vaguely sen-
timental reasons. Some of us still eat fish
on cue, or matzo, because both priests and
parents have taught us to, without much
thought about anything but how good they
will taste. The past is not as important as
the present, nor is religious symbolism
open in our thoughts. As children raised
in lands of plenty, we do not learn to
count on a curl of carrot and one fried
ginkgo nut to divert us from the fact that
the rest of the food on the plate consists
of an austere mound of rice and two
pinches of herb paste. We have never
been taught to make little look like much,
make much out of little, in a mystical
combination of ascetic and aesthetic as
well as animal satisfaction.

® Viking has published two beautiful
books that will add to the lore of a favor-
ite children’s author as they round out
her character and accomplishments:
The Journal of Beatrix Potter, 1881-
1897, transcribed from her code
writings by Leslie Linder, and Beatrix
Potter’s Letters, selected by Judy Taylor
(both $29.95). “From about the age of
fourteen until she was thirty,” says
Linder, “Beatrix Potter kept a Journal in
her own privately invented code-

writing.” From 1952 until 1958, Linder
worked at cracking the code. After suc-
ceeding, he wanted to get the journal
published. In the process, he dealt with
relatives who required that passages re-
flecting badly on the family be expur-
gated and publishers who deemed the
work overlong. The text of this edition
restores the cuts, which show Potter’s
sense of humor and reveal her thoughts
about church affairs. Linder, who was
obsessed with Potter, had the definitive
collection of memorabilia and art relat-
ing to her work; he donated it all to the
Victoria and Albert Museum before he
died in 1973. A forthcoming Viking
volume Beatrix Potter’s Art will un-
doubtedly feature many works from his
collection.

Potter’s journal entry of October
2nd, 1894, conjures up a Brigadoon:

I had no cause for disappointment except
the unavailing regret of a last sight of the
pretty stream, sliding so silently under the
great burdock leaves. The streams here
have no joyous boisterous rush like High-
land Burns, but there is a happy peaceful-
ness about them, especially the solitary
Bowmont. Such gentle solitude, no howl-
ing wilderness, but corn, cattle and sheep,
rich and prosperous and well attended
beyond the seeming capacity of scattered
herds and farm laborers.

I am sure, driving for miles among
these lonely cornfields and deep silent
woods, and on the grassy slopes of the still
more quiet hills, I have thought the whole
countryside belonged to the fairies, and
that they come out of the woods by
moonlight into the fields and on to the
dewy grass beside the streams. There are
not many hedgehogs, which are fairy
beasts, but there are the green sour
ringlets whereon the ewe not bites, and
how without the aid of the fairy-folk of
fosterland could there be so little mildew
in the corn?

I was somewhat disturbed in these
pleasing reflections by getting my feet wet
in the long grass, but I took three rather
pretty pictures near the pool below West
Learmouth...

A Special Issue
Winter, 1990

THE AMERICAN VOICE

SILENCING

On The Suppression of

Writing,

And Writers

Who Because Of Gender,
Race, Class Or Sexual

Preference

Prejudices

Have Been Suppressed,
Censored Or Otherwise
Silenced, By Society,
Family, The Government,

Etc....

available at bookstores or by subscription
$12 one / $20 two / $26 three years

Name

Address

City

State/Zip

to 332 W. Broadway, Louisville, KY 40202 USA

Spring 1990