PHSee2eeeeeeoeee  
Order Now! and we  
pay postage on all  
pre-publication  

orders. Send your  
payment to: Peri  
Spinsters/ Sea  

Rebecca  
Gordon  

Foreword by  
Barbara Smith  

from  

Nicaragua  
‘ Py 4  

Aunt Lute, Leave A Light Letters From  
On For Me Nicaragua  
Jean Swallow Rebecca Gordon  
$8.95 $7.95  

NEW! Borderlands/La Frontera by Gloria Anzaldua  

Half prose and half poetry, Borderlands/La Frontera gives the reader the  
overwhelming experience of growing up among conflicting cultures and  
sub-cultures. Not since editing the award-winning This Bridge Called My  
Back has Gloria Anzaldua undertaken a work of this magnitude.  
Historically, she traces the migration of Aztecs through the U.S.  
Southwest into Mexico; mythically, she traces the split of the serpent  
goddess, Tonantsi, into good (the virgin, Guadalupe) and evil (the  
whore, Coatlicue); personally she traces her life on the Texas-Mexican  
border and the damage done to the mestizas who grow up in the no-  
woman’s-land between cultural expectations. Finally, Anzaldua,  
emerging as a needed Chicana philosopher of our time, captures the spirit  
of hope and unification that the survivors of borderlands have to offer  
modern cultures. Prose in English. Poems in Spanish and English.  

190 pp., 5½ x 8½, $8.95, ISBN 0-933216-25-4, May 1987  

NEW! Wing Women of Hera by Sandi Hall  

This is the first in a trilogy of science fiction novels by Sandi Hall. (Many  
U.S. readers will remember her very popular British release, Godmothers.)  
In her usual fast-paced prose, Hall moves us between two unlike planets,  
Maladar and Hera: one, burdened by layers of ice, its population the  
victims of a rigid and machine-like government; the other, “sculpted to a  
strange beauty,” its lovely winged creatures living in a bright, sensual  
present; both caught up in an unwanted destiny. Hall’s feminist vision,  
evident in her creation of complex social structures, provides a solid base  
for the visually erotic Wing Women of Hera. Readers will eagerly await the  
next two books from the Cosmic Botanists trilogy.  

225 pp., 5½ x 8½, $8.95, ISBN 0-933216-26-2, May 1987  

Spinsters | Aunt Lute  

BULK MAIL  
U.S. POSTAGE  

PAID  

PERMIT NO. 190  
RICHMOND, VA