Talking Vines and  
Whispering Rocks  

Mama Day, by Gloria Naylor. Ticknor &  
Fields, New York, 1988, $18.95, 311 pp.  

by Karla F. C. Holloway  

Voices of both the past and the  
present weave and texture  
Mama Day, Gloria Naylor’s  

third novel, intertwining the characters  
with their ancestry to create a resonant  
confusion of legacy and reality.  

The story is set in Willow Springs, a  
fertile island where events have closer  
ties to the island’s past than to the main-  
land’s present. The weight of the is-  
land’s legacy is borne by the ancestral  
figure of Sapphira Wade who “don’t live  
in the part of our memory we can use to  
form words.” In consequence, sounds  
echo and resonate through this story,  
collapsing the legend of Sapphira into  
the events of the present.  

Miranda (Mama) Day is Sapphira’s  
great granddaughter. She and her sister  
Abigail, descendants of the seventh of  
Sapphira’s seven sons and descendants  
of the slaves who were deeded the island  
through Sapphira’s conjuring, are the  
contemporary residents of Willow  
Springs. Ophelia, known on the island  
as Cocoa, is their great niece and grand-  
daughter, and it is she who is both  
endangered and protected by the living  
legacy of the conjuring woman.  

A love story that is at once beautiful,  

haunting, and enraging centers the  
novel. Cocoa has left the island of her  
birth to live in New York City. Mama  
Day and Abigail maintain their connec-  
tion to her by sending packages of lav-  
ender water and herbs, to help her cele-  
brate the island festival of Candle Walk  
(a ceremony whose origins are domi-  
nated by Sapphira’s memory) or pack-  
ages that extend the island’s protective  
shelter to her while she lives away. But it  
is in New York City that Cocoa meets  
George, her lover and husband. Naylor  
immediately circles George with a dan-  
gerous aura. He is motherless and has  
been taught, from his earliest days in a  
foster home, that “only the present has  

Gloria Naylor  

potential.” The lovers’ fate is eventually  
tied to George’s acknowledgement of a  
past he has been instructed to deny. His  
voice, ironically etched both with trag-  
edy and hope, admonishes Cocoa when  
she takes him to Willow Springs that she  
“had not prepared me for paradise.”  

Cocoa’s telling is framed by the  
memories of the women, both living and  
dead, who are her ancestors. A constant  
melancholia edges her voice — a warn-  
ing for the reader to remember the his-  
tory of the island, which is so isolated  
from the mainland that it is unmapped  
(its atmosphere was “more than pure, it  
was primal”); which smells “like for-  
ever”; which is their gathering place.  

A narrative voice that uses “we” and  
“ours” to recollect the story of Willow  
Springs invites the reader’s voice to join  
its community of tellers: “Think about  
it: ain’t nobody really talking to you  
. . . the only voice is your own. . . you  
done just heard about the legend. . .  
without a single living soul really saying  
a word.” This voice, ancient and aware,  
connects the story’s events and main-  
tains a multiple presence over them.  

Once they have “crossed over” to the  
island, George and Cocoa (the “we”)  
join Mama Day and Abigail (the “us”)  
who have been the narrative voices of  
the island’s generations, and the island’s  
grayish dust and purple flowers gather to  
tell the story. The “other place,” the  
house in the woods whose gardens face  
east and were once tended by Sapphira,  
is the locus of the magical events. The  
house’s potential leaks from it to touch  
Mama Day, who also has those ancient  

powers and must use them when she is  
threatened by another conjure woman  
who dares to use her powers against the  
children of Miranda. This is the conflict  
of Naylor’s novel, and it is heightened  
by the power of a natural world in which  
talking vines and whispering rocks and  
malevolent winds threaten to sweep  
across the island and take hold just when  
Mama Day needs to gather up that en-  
ergy to save herself and those she loves.  

Twice before, in The Women of  
Brewster Place and Linden Hills, Naylor  
has constructed communities whose  
sources have generated the nature of  
their present. But here, in Willow  
Springs, Naylor reaches farther back,  
into “rhythms older than woman,” to  
places further east than the island that  
borders Georgia and South Carolina, to  
memories so distant that their existence  
in the present provides evidence that the  
community survives through an inti-  
mate bonding of place and persona.  

Such bonding resonates through this  
exquisite and poignant story. Sound tri-  
umphs in Mama Day because the com-  
bined echoes of voice, memory, and the  
natural world are the sustaining and  
hearty vibrations of all life.  

© Karla F. C. Holloway is an Associate  
Professor of English at North Carolina State  
University in Raleigh. She is the author of  
The Character of the Word: The Texts of  
Zora Neale Hurston and co-author of New  
Dimensions of Spirituality: A Biracial and  
Bicultural Reading of the Novels of Toni  
Morrison.  

Memory and Transformation  

In Other Words: New Poems, by May Swenson. New York: Knopf, 1987,  

$16.95, 134 pp.  

Unremembered Country, by Susan Griffin. Copper Canyon Press (P.O. Box 271, Port  
Townsend, Washington 98368), 1987, $9.00, 140 pp.  

The Queen of Swords, by Judy Grahn. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987, $14.00, 178 pp.  
Second Hand Coat: Poems New and Selected, by Ruth Stone. Boston: David R.  

Godine, 1987, $10.95, 134 pp. (PB)  

Travelling with Coyotes: Poems & Diary, by Jennifer Moyer. Spoon River Poetry  
Press (P.O. Box 1443, Peoria, Illinois 61655), 1987, $4.00, 33 pp. (PB)  

by Kathe Davis  

The poets reviewed here range in  

age from their thirties to their  

seventies, from unknown to  
famous, and their publishers from major  
houses to small presses, but all offer  
uniquely female insights in gratifyingly  
worthy packages. They share as well a  
calm concern with memory as reclaim-  
ing women’s experience. And in all of  
them, woman’s primal association with  
nature, so often the ground for male  
oppression, is reappropriated as a source  
of power.  

May Swenson is one of our finest liv-  
ing poets. This book, her first in ten  
years (since New and Selected Things  
Taking Place in 1978), is celebratory in  
its energy and its exuberance of lan-  
guage. Beginning “In Florida,” it seems  
based on actual living experience there;  
but, for Swenson, as for Wallace  
Stevens, Florida also represents a condi-  
tion of perpetual fecundity. However,  
Swenson’s art accepts rather than op-  
poses the abundance and variety of na-  
tural growth so alarming to Stevens. An  
easy metamorphosis is the order of the  
day, even from plant to animal and  
back: A gecko’s “fat cravat” is “apricot”;  
fruit opened “discloses miniature / mon-  
key faces.” Swenson’s linguistic play  
seems rather a verbal analogue of this  
natural shape-shifting than an attempt  
at control.  

The book’s pièce de résistance is  
“Banyan,” thirty pages of what the jack-  
et calls “a mock philosophical prose-  
poem.” In fact a charming story narrated  
by a wooly monkey, it is often rhymed  
and metered, and “philosophical” only  
in the sense any thoughtful observer is.  

Ruth Stone is slightly older than  

Swenson, and has a similar stubborn  
long-tested courage of conviction,  
though she is only now becoming well  
known. This book (also the first new  
one in more than ten years) contains  
selections from her three earlier vol-  
umes, many on conventional “women’s  
topics”: husband and lovers, her three  
daughters, domestic details. But there is  
nothing conventional in her attitudes,  
and her very attention to these matters  
enacts a revaluation of women’s experi-  
ence:  

I could see the older black woman  
in the bus station,  

pus running down her leg, gushing  
out of her,  

the policeman coming to take her  
away. What were hats  

and fur shawls when I knew that?  
She never left me.  

Stone has undergone a change, a turn  
toward conscious effort that she de-  
scribes in the earlier poem called “Meta-  
morphosis”: “now she is gone who slept  
away my life, / And I am ignorant who  
inherited, / Though the head has grown  
so lively that I laugh.” The new poems’  
small portraits of remarkable “ordinary”  
women accumulate a sympathy that fi-  
nally spurs an almost inevitable protest:  
“Who can bother naming all those  
women churning butter, / leaning on  
scrub boards, holding to iron bedposts,  
/sweating in labor?” “Pokeberries”  
claims her Virginia origins, then ends:  

No amount of knowledge can shake  

my grandma out of me;  

or my Aunt Maud; or my mama,  

who didn’t just bite an apple  

with her big white teeth. She split  

it in two.  

Homey autobiographical narrative sud-  
denly opens into “revisionist mythology”  

(in Alicia Ostriker’s phrase). Stone’s  
plain language and deceptively trans-  
parent surfaces lead over and over again  
to this sort of small explosion. Even  
when the subject alone is so gripping  
that artless telling seems enough, it is  
her imaginative yet starkly honest vision  
that powers the language. Stone’s  
world, like Swenson’s, is alive with vital  
forces; her “Translations” are physical as  
well as verbal. And that metamorphic  
energy is a source not only of deep ac-  
ceptance and hope, but also of humor,  
even whimsy.  

Revisionist mythology is what Judy  
Grahn does with a vengeance. She has  
taken Helen of Troy back to her origins  
in a much older matriarchal myth of  
Inanna, and then forward again through  
all her possible avatars, from the Tarot’s  
Queen of Swords, to Kali, to Perse-  
phone, to the contemporary American  
woman who is the hero of this “Play with  
Poetic Myth.” Grahn’s irreverent, antic  
wit turns revision to hilarity. Helen de-  
scends “belowworld” in a redemptive  
sacrificial act (“predating the Christian  
story of the Resurrection by several  
thousand years,” Grahn notes), but  
spends her time in the Lesbian Crow Bar  
“reduced to nothing.” Nothing is the  
bartender: “Nothing does the job better  
. . . Nothing matters! Nothing is sa-  
cred!” The ever-present puns run deeper  
than joking, though when they pile up  
to a tour de force, they prompt the pro-  
test, “A pun is the lowest form of twit.”  

The poem ends with Helen address-  
ing the Queen of the Underworld, “O  
Lady, Lady of the changing shapes, /  
help me remember / how to dance in  
place; when to witness, / when to har-  
ness, / when to charge with all my  
forces.” Returned home, she “dusts and  
straightens,” but her surroundings now  
“suggest that her house is the universe  
itself.”  

Susan Griffin’s poems are exquisitely  
spare renderings of hyper-consciousness.  
The lyricism that made Woman and Na-  
ture: The Roaring Within Her a revolu-  
tionary critical book is still present, but  
it is stripped to the point of starkness.  
Vision can produce joy: in “Three Love  
Poems” the lover is seen as lit up “like  
Einstein” by the sheer power of thought.  

But such open awareness is also an  

invitation to pain. The love poems, and  
warm funny portraits of an imaged ideal  
“Our Mother,” are followed by the ex-  
cruciating “Prayer for Continuation &  
(1985) On the Edge,” which is full of the  
pain of destruction. Yet these poems are  
not about blame or punishment, and  
they reject despair. Their tightly wound  
urgency asks only that we remember and  
know: “how is it I can say this / so that  
you will / see too what I have seen.” The  
same love shapes personal and “politi-  
cal”: “The mind is vast / what we know  
small. / Do you think we are not all /  
sewn together?”  

There are no contradictions here, but  
a reshaping of our categories. The vol-  
ume concludes with a poem called  
“Happiness” and the lines: “This / is the  
paradox of vision: / Sharp perception  
softens / our existence in the world.”  

Jennifer Moyer writes honest poems  
about rough outposts and strange cities,  
also in the plain style. But the constant  
travel they depict doesn’t by itself justify  
the telling, and too often no further  
point is clear. Though the locations are  
always rustic or seedy, the effect is still  
touristy: too many postcard scenes, col-  
orful details offered apparently only for  
their own exotic sakes.  

In the diary (interestingly, not taken  
from her diary) Moyer unfortunately  
uses a past present tense. It is difficult to  
believe that anyone really writes in her  
diary: “July 4 We dip water out of a pool  
on the rock and make cocoa and apricot  
biscuits over the coals.”  

The most affecting thing about this  
book is an unnamed unhappiness that  
often appears in odd actions or breaks  
out in random imagined violence: “Our  
heads are like a pile of cantaloupe. I’d  
like to take a meat cleaver and hack  
them to pulp, slice my kneecaps off to  
make them even.” But we don’t know  
the cause, or, again, the point. This  
book holds back, doesn’t open a  
woman’s life and mind the way the oth-  
ers do. Nonetheless, the Queen of  
Swords in her second-hand coat travell-  
ing with coyotes through unremembered  
country makes for fine poetry.  

© Kathe Davis is an associate professor  
at Kent State University.  

JULY/AUGUST 1988  
© 1988