Nature as Muse

The Ghosts of Who We Were, by Phyllis H. Thompson. University of Illinois Press, 1986,  
$8.95, 62 pp. (PB)

Rooms Overhead, by Betsy Sholl. Alice James Books (138 Mount Auburn St., Cambridge, MA  
02138), 1986, $7.95, 71 pp. (PB)

The Rings of Saturn, by Diane Wakoski. Black Sparrow Press (24 Tenth St., Santa Rosa,  
CA 95401), 1986, $9.00 (PB), $17.50 (HB), 122 pp.  
All Aberration, by Terese Svoboda. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1985, $10.95 (HB),  
$6.95 (PB), 69 pp.

Contra La Violencia, by Barbara Moraff. White Pine Press (73 Putnam Street, Buffalo, NY  
14213), 1985, $4.00, 25 pp. (PB)

by Mary Young

Why, in this age of speed and  
technology, do so many  
contemporary poets cling to  
using nature imagery in their poems? Is  
it a stubborn refusal to reckon with the  
computer age, a subconscious attempt  
to push back the tide of the encroaching  
21st century? The boundaries of the  
natural world are shrinking; coastlines  
are eroding and huge bodies of water are  
being polluted with toxic wastes daily.  
One can foresee a time when flowers  
will choke before budding. And will all  
the wonderfully varied forms of wildlife  
be allowed to exist for many more years?  
Although this knowledge is particu-  
larly disturbing to many women writers,  
it is often too frightening to confront  
head on. For the natural world has al-  
ways been women’s territory, the cyclic  
their domain. Themes of change, such  
as the budding flower, the phases of the  
moon, the births of children and deaths  
of loved ones, have occupied women’s  
writing for centuries. The poetry of  
women has been an attempt to record  

impressions, feelings, and natural events  
in such a way that truths emerge and  
mysteries are communicated. Today,  
more than ever before, we need such  
poetry, if only to assure us that natural  
beauty still exists and can inform our  
lives with meaning.

The voices in these five volumes of  
poetry engage in a whole-hearted cele-  
bration of an envisioned natural world.  
Phyllis H. Thompson, who has lived in  
Hawaii, San Francisco, upstate New  
York, and New Mexico, exploits the  
sensuous possibilities of plant life and  
landscape. The sheer beauty of her  
dense, lyrical poetry awakens us to the  
physical lushness of these places, but  
even more, we see that they have taken  
root in her imagination and have been  
transformed. In The Ghosts of Who We  
Were, breathtaking scenery is described  
in language so rich and sharp that it  
makes us shudder with delight. Yet be-  
neath the lovely surface runs a dark un-  
dercurrent of emotion. Here is a place  
beyond beauty, beyond perception,  
where unseen forces have left lasting and  
often painful impressions. Perhaps these  

Mirrors for Readers

Ruth Hall and Other Writings, by Fanny Fern. Edited with an introduction by Joyce W. Warren.  
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986, $30.00 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 391 pp.

O Genteel Lady! by Esther Forbes. Academy Chicago Publishers (425 N. Michigan Ave.,  
Chicago, IL 60611), 1985, $7.95, 297 pp. (PB) Originally published 1926

A Mirror for Witches, by Esther Forbes. Academy Chicago Publishers, 1985, $7.95, 214 pp.  
(PB) Originally published 1928

by Dana Nelson Salvino

Is it in feminine novels only that court-  
ship, marriage, servants and children  
are the staple? Is this not true of all  
novels? — of Dickens, of Thackeray,  
of Bulwer and a host of others? Is it  
peculiar to feminine pens...?  
Seriously — we have had quite enough  
of this shallow criticism on lady-  
books... Whether ladies can  
write novels or not, is a question I  
do not intend to discuss; but that some  
of them have no difficulty in finding  
either publishers or readers is a matter  
of history; and that gentlemen often  
write over feminine signatures would  
seem also to argue that feminine  
literature is, after all, in good odor  
with the reading public.

This is the spirited reply that  
Fanny Fern (Sarah Payson  
Willis Parton) sent the New  
York Ledger in response to a sneering  
comment printed in the New York Times  
in 1857 on women’s writing. Her com-  
ments touch on issues that rage even  
today and make an important point on  
the subject of women’s novels: The sub-  
jects are no less women’s than men’s,  
and often the judgment of quality asses-  
ses not the content of the work but the  
sex of the author. That is, if a society  
does not value women (as Fern fre-  
quently complains in her column) it does  
not value women’s writings (even  
though it may consume them avidly!).  
Fern’s comments were apparently per-  
tinent because her work, along with that  
of many other prominent women writers  
of her time, is now being reprinted,  
brought back to surface after being all  
but ignored for decades. Writers like  
Fern and Esther Forbes have long been  
“objectively” overlooked for literature  
classes because of their (inferior)  
feminine subject matter. But close  
scrutiny of their work belies the plebeian  
grave to which it has been assigned: The  

work is complex, full of quirky ironies  
and subtle sarcasm and, above all, it is  
fun!

Ruth Hall, as editor Joyce Warren tells  
us in her excellent introduction, is  
largely autobiographical. The main  
character, like Fern, was widowed early  
and was abandoned by relatives on both  
sides. Ruth Hall expresses the trademark  
of Fern’s career. Warren explains that,  
although Fern was outspoken in favor of  
women’s rights, she was mostly admired  
by her readers for her “womanly/  
motherly” sentiments. Warren’s selec-  
tions from Fern’s newspaper columns  
also reveal this complexity in Fern’s so-  
cial attitudes: Matching the pieces she  
wrote on women’s rights are the articles  
that uphold the traditional role of  
mother and wife. Although that may  
initially disappoint some of us today, it  
is important to observe Fern’s full polit-  
ical stance, for in writing about the joys  
of motherhood she also contributes what  
we might see as companion pieces that  
castigate men for their double standards.

Clearly, Fern valued familial institu-  
tions, but she placed the responsibility  
for their maintenance on both sexes.  
And she saw the weakness inherent in  
women’s sentimentality as she publicly  
hoped for the end of sentiment and  
warned her readers that “the sugar-plum  
game is well-nigh ‘played out.’” She was  
an outspoken social critic who dared, on  
the 4th of July, to indignantly comment:  

“I’m glad we are all free; but as a  
woman — I shouldn’t know it, didn’t  
some orator tell me. Can I go out of an  
evening without a hat at my side?  
Can I have the nomination for  
“Governor of Vermont,” like our  
other contributor, John G. Saxe?  
... Can I even be President? Bah —  
you know I can’t. “Free!” Humph!

Most important, she was read by her  
public. In her own words, her ability to  

find readers and publishers is a “matter  
of history” — one that we have much  
to learn from!

Esther Forbes is also a social critic,  
but her style is much more subversive  
and understated. In O Genteel Lady, she  
presents Lanice, an accomplished, in-  
telligent, and attractive young lady who  
sets off for the city to build her life.  
Lanice begins a career as a writer after  
abandoning art. She writes an important  
chapter on the history of witchcraft for  
her scholarly uncle’s book and secures a  
job writing fiction for a magazine. From  
the beginning, and despite her ability to  
achieve on her own terms, she falls con-  
stantly under the influence — both pro-  
fessional and romantic — of dominat-  
ing men. Interestingly, she has a cousin  
who is an ardent suffragist and who tries  
occasionally to convince Lanice of the  
folly of her passive acceptance of societal  
standards. Lanice pays little attention to  
Pauline, and the narrator, who ap-  
parently identifies with Lanice, pushes  
notions of suffrage to the side, along with  
the rather unladylike and unattractive  
Pauline. We see, however, that Lanice’s  
eventual and largely unquestioning ac-  
ceptance of women’s place in society ex-  
tinguishes the characteristics that may  
have taken her beyond that place.  
Notably, Forbes follows Lanice beyond  
the traditional wedding day closure, and  
the subsequent chapters at once confirm  
and subvert the happy ending.

A Mirror for Witches also cannily under-  
mines its apparently straightforward so-  
cial message:

A Mirror for Witches, in which is  
reflected the Life, Machinations and  
Death of Famous DOLL BILBY, who,  
with a more than feminine perversity,  
preferred a Demon to a Mortal  
Lover. Here is also told how and why  
a Righteous and Most Awful  
JUDGEMENT befell her, destroying  
a Corporeal Body and Immortal  
Soul.

Apparently toeing the standard  
theological and social line, Forbes subtly  
provides alternate readings of the history  
as she tells it. Her commentary on social  
judgment is acute: She portrays a Doll  
Bilby who is branded as an outcast from  
the beginning by the community and  

who eventually becomes convinced of  
her sympathies with the devil. But every  
shard of evidence against Doll is shown  
to be based on social misjudgment and  
misreading. The evil that is ascribed to  
Doll is more conceivably projected on  
her by the evil natures of those who  
indict her. Forbes points out, “if one  
does not believe in witches, then how  
in devils, and if not in devils, how then  
in Hell? — and Hell is, as all know, the  
fundamental principle on which good  
conduct and Christian faith are built.”  
Forbes builds irony upon irony and, in  
retrospect, the reader must experience  
a sense of discomfort at the title, A Mir-  
ror for Witches. Who is mirrored? Who  
are the real witches?

These books provide not only enjoy-  
able reading but food for thought on our  
role as readers. What are the processes  
by which we judge the worth of novels,  
of people? How much of that judgment  
is a reflection of the object? How much  
is a reflection of the reader and of the  
social attitudes mirrored in us?

@ Dana Nelson Salvino has an MA in  
English literature and writing from Michi-  
gan State University. She is currently writ-  
ing, teaching, and studying for her PhD.

Jury/August 1987 |