CHILDREN’S CORNER  
Birds, Trees, and  

Dinosaur Knees  

Is it a pop-out carousel of painted horses  
in a spin? Does it make you clap along to  
a chorus of frogs that dance and grin?  
Are children bouncing and flipping to  
countless rabbits on a page while reading  
in bed? Does it open up a world where  
young readers can hop out and jump in?  
If so, you have probably discovered the  
wonder and magic of children’s books.  

There are so many good books from  
which to choose that it is difficult to be-  
lieve that some think that children just  
do not want to read. There are books  
that glitter and hang as ornaments on  
trees, books for the bathtub and read-  
along books on tape. There are even  
miniature Halloween treat books to drop  
in that goblin’s bag. Some young readers  
want the fantasy of fairies and magic  
wands. Some want blue furry monsters  
and giant yellow birds. Then there are  
those who want dungeons, dragons, and  
the risky business of choosing your own  
adventure. Yes, dear friends, there is  
more to life than Saturday morning car-  
toons, rock music, and video games.  

An encouraging bit of information  
appeared in an article written last year in  
Publishers Weekly by Kiane Roback and  
Kimberly Olson Fakih:  

Enrollments in schools are climbing and  
are expected to reach an all-time high in  
1996, with just over 35,200,000 students  
in kindergarten through eighth grade.  
Thirty-five million children means 35  
million readers.  

The authors state that children’s pub-  
lishers “clearly have the challenge of  
providing new and varied materials for  
these readers.” The challenge is for all of  
us who love reading to provide an even  
broader range of books now that can  
capture the hearts and stimulate the  
minds of nonreaders today. One of the  
greatest gifts you can share is the never-  
ending joy of reading.  

A favorite back-to-school activity for  
many years has been to have youngsters  
collect leaves and paste them on paper to  
decorate the classroom. I know you have  
seen them on school windows or have  
been that dazzled first-grader holding out  
your hands to catch the perfectly colored  
leaf to take to Ms. Teacher. Well, au-  
thor George Ella Lyon has given us A B  
Cedar: An Alphabet of Trees (Orchard  
Books, $14.95, 32 pp.) to help identify  
those leaves. The book contains large,  
well-illustrated pictures of leaves for  
twenty-six trees from Aspen to Zebra-  
wood. One of the most pleasing things  
about this book is that the illustrator,  
Tom Parker, used varying shades of  
brown and pink on the hands holding  
the leaves. There was also an effort to  
use subtle differences in the shapes of  
hands and fingernails so that this book  
serves as a great nonsexist, nonracist  
guide for any age group to learn about  
trees and the ways in which we use  
them. At first glance the tight place-  
ment of the letters on the cover layout is  
distracting because the alphabet seems  
to be out of order. This one detail can  
befuddle the old trained eye or the newly  
programmed preschooler, taking away  
from an otherwise beautifully illustrated  
alphabet of trees.  

Just as there seems to be no end to the  
variety of alphabet books, there is an  
endless fascination with dinosaurs and  
prehistoric animals. You think you have  
the last word on brontosaurus and along  
comes Erni Cabat’s Magical World of  
Dinosaurs (Great Impressions, $16.95,  
64 pp.) and Magical World of Pre-  
historic Animals ($16.95, 56 pp.).  
Both books feature the poetry of Lollie  
Butler. The humor of her poetry and a  
brilliant collection of twenty-five fluo-  
rescent prints make these books a must  
share. Pronunciation keys are on each  

Spring 1990  

# JOANNE JIMASON  

page to help in naming Pachycephalo-  
saurus (PAK-ee-CEF-al-oh-SAUR-us)  
or Oviraptor (o-vee-RAP-tor).  

Oviraptors, from “Ernie Cabat’s Magical  
World of Dinosaurs”  

Children Who Can  
Fly and the Evidence  
of Things Unseen  

What a joy it was to read that Harcourt  
Brace Jovanovich was to reissue Virginia  
Hamilton’s trilogy, The Justice Cycle.  
The trilogy centers around the lives of  
four youngsters whose supernatural  
powers lead them into unknown worlds  
and adventures that make Star Wars and  
Back to the Future seem like comedic  
spinoffs of a more imaginative mind.  
Hamilton’s thorough knowledge of  
African folklore, history, and spiritual-  
ity combined with her excellent ability  
to write about and for children is at the  
core of these three tales. I was immedi-  
ately hurtled back to my own youthful  
days of being the only girl born smack in  
the middle of six boys. I had to push my  
way to the front to prove I was not afraid  
to accept the challenge of a nickel-  
and-dime dare: jumping from the middle  
of the bridge and not getting your feet  
wet when you land at the edge of the  
river. Or breaking into the lumberyard  
after closing: climbing to the top of a  
tin-roofed woodshed, running at top  
speed, and flying for a moment before  
landing in a heap of sweat and jarred  
nerves before the security guard ap-  
peared. Such was the price of being one  
of the boys. Such is the power of Hamil-  
ton’s writing — returning you to forgot-  
ten moments.  

Justice and Her Brothers ($3.95,  
304 pp.) is Book One in the Justice cy-  
cle. Justice is an eleven-year-old girl  
who, along with her twin brothers,  
Thomas and Levi, becomes part of a unit  
with extrasensory powers. They are  
joined by Dorian Jefferson, the son of a  
neighbor woman who was attracted to  
their community by a powerful unseen  
force that locks all of them into a journey  
from the snake beds of the Quinella  
Trace to a future place called Dustland.  

Justice is often left in the care of her  
brothers while her mother returns to  
college during the summer, and her fa-  
ther is at work. Levi is more the care-  
taker than Thomas, who spends much of  
his time frightening his brother and sis-  
ter. Thomas calls the shots for the  
neighborhood boys and his identical  
twin, Levi. He hates his sister and is  
cruel to Levi whenever he wants to tor-  
ture her. While none of them are aware  
of their supernatural powers at this  
point, they are aware that there is some-  
thing unusual about the relationship  
between the twins:  

Levi had begun running frantically around  
and around. He had started screaming in  
this terrifying wail. Fat, slimy worms had  
covered his chest and back. Black,  
blood-sucking leeches all over his legs.  
The river had to have been full of them.  
They'd been the most scary, the most  
devilish things to see.  

Their dad had hurried with matches,  
lighting two, three at a time for the bigger  
leeches. Burning the beasts off Levi.  
Levi's body jerking, shivering. His  
screaming was the worst forlorn sound the  
whole time.  

Justice was never to forget this scene  
and the look on Thomas’s face, the way  
he had dropped his fishing rod and  
jumped to his feet before anyone else  
knew that Levi was bolting out of the  
water:  

Justice jumped away from the edgewater,  
startled by the suggestion of her own  
mind. He [Thomas] knew what was going  
to happen before Levi ever got out of the  
water!  

Young Justice, in her attempts to be as  
tough as the boys, tries a daredevil bike  
stunt that nearly gets her killed while the  
gang rushes to the Quinella Trace to  
gather snakes for The Great Snake  
Race. She only irritates the boys at this  
point and further incurs the wrath of  
Thomas who has created The Great  
Snake Race competition. She redeems  
herself, however, when she wins The  
Great Snake Race without even know-  
ing the rules or being invited to partici-  
pate. It is Thomas who decides that all  
the snakes must be returned to the Qui-  
nella Trace, which becomes the place  
from which the four members of the unit  
are projected into Dustland.  

Cover from Justice and Her Brothers  

Dustland ($3.95, 224 pp.) is the sec-  
ond book in the cycle. This is one for the  
silver screen. Justice, who has learned a  
little about her powers from Mrs. Jeffer-  
son, is now less intimidated by Thomas  
as she leads the unit (Levi, Thomas,  

THE COUNCIL OF LITERARY  
MAGAZINES & PRESSES.  
(formerly CCLM) is pleased to announce the  
winners of THE 1989  
GENERAL ELECTRIC  
FOUNDATION AWARDS  
FOR YOUNGER WRITERS  

Cathy Smith Bowers for poetry published in  

The Georgia Review.  

Connie Deanovich for poetry published in  

New American Writing.  

Cori Jones for fiction published in  
The Iowa Review.  

Natalie Kusz for a literary essay published in  

The Threepenny Review.  

Sigrid Nunez for fiction published in  

The Threepenny Review.  
These awards honor excellence  

discovered through the work of America’s  

literary magazines.  

This year’s judges were: Frank Chin,  
Linda Hogan, and Michael Pollan.  

The 1989 Awards cap a seven-year award  
program founded by the General Electric  

Foundation in 1983.  

CLMP  

666 Broadway, New York, NY 10012  
(212) 614-6551,  

Dorian, and herself) into the dry, harsh  
no-light of Dustland. The children must  
come to terms with the fact that they  
cannot return home unless they cooper-  
ate and use their extrasensory gifts to  
outsmart the multifarious creatures that  
disrupt their journey. Their first en-  
counter is with a female animal who also  
has the power to mind trace. She is  
called Miacis. Justice reaches out to  
Miacis, strokes her, and becomes her  
master. Miacis becomes a much-needed  
ally as the unit struggles with three-  
legged slakers, wormlies, and Thomas’  
continued desire to be cruel. He breaks  
away, crippling the unit in his effort to  
get home to the comfort of familiar  
beings.  

The Gathering ($3.95, 224 pp.;  
Book Three) catches the time travelers  
between the present and the future  
known as Dustland. Justice becomes the  
“Watcher” and the balance of the unit’s  
strength. Thomas is the Magician. Levi  
is the Sufferer. No surprise there.  
Dorian is the Healer. They have been  
called on a mission to lead a group of  
thirsty Dustlanders, the slakers, into a  
distant future. Other life forms are dis-  
covered in the process, and the unit is  
charged with battling off evil forces for  
the futures of all. They come to know  
the fate of our own threatened Planet  
Earth and the purpose of their journey.  
These books are written for ages twelve  
and up. They are affordable, a delight to  
read, and are written by one of the most  
highly acclaimed writers of contempo-  
rary works for children. Virginia Hamil-  
ton is a three-time winner of the New-  
berry Honor Books Award. She has been  
awarded the Coretta Scott King Award  
twice, the Boston Globe-Horn Book  
Award three times, the Edgar Allan Poe  
Award and the Ohioana Book Award  
twice. Her hands should be sculpted and  
placed in the great writers’ hall of fame  
for the difference she makes in children’s  
literature.  

@ Joanne Jimason is a writer and former  
volunteer reading tutor. She has taught  
writing workshops for the elderly and is the  
parent of two boys, 10 and 13. She is also  
the author of two books of poetry.  

i"  
eA A  

Belles Lettres @ 15