Irish Writers

Sombre Tones

Territories of the Voice: Contemporary Stories by Irish Women Writers, edited by  
Louise DeSalvo, Kathleen Walsh D’Arcy, and Katherine Hogan. Boston: Beacon Press,  

1989, $19.95, 270 pp.

by Maxine Rodburg

The Ireland in Territories of the  

Voice is harsh and alienating. It  

is a place that is hostile to  
women on both sides of a grimly con-  
tested political border. The fact that the  
protagonists of the stories in this collec-  
tion have survived with their voices  
seems miraculous, given the social land-  
scape in which they must utter. Both  
Northern Ireland and the Republic have  
been battered by centuries of oppres-  
sion, the source of which seems less  
often the British Crown than the paro-  
chialism of stern near-theocracies.

In these anguished lands, most  
women trudge a narrow and oppressive  
route between kitchen, church, and  
obstetrician, with an occasional guilt-  
ridden detour to the clandestine hotel  
room or the abortionist’s office in Lon-  
don. They are lonely, though married;  
without contraception most have many,  
many children. There’s no divorce, no  
legal abortion. Domestic violence is  
common and not often commented on,  
so deeply does it form an intrinsic motif.  
Mrs. Morrisey, who cries for the child of  
her unmarried and ostracized daughter  
in Harriet O’Carroll’s “The Day of the  
Christening,” makes rational count of  
her lot: “If Morrisey wasn’t the best,  
maybe he wasn’t the worst either. If he  
did not give her a penny, at least he did  
not knock her about, she could close her  
ears to this talk, and what was it to her  
what he did outside the house?”

Even Hell (short for Helen), the  
savvy adulteress and veteran of frequent  
abortions in Maeve Binchy’s “Shep-  
herd’s Bush,” confides “I don’t really  
understand all those things they give you  
in the family planning clinics, jellies,  
and rubber things, and diaphragms.” It  

A Common Voice that  
Refutes Terrorism

Louise DeSalvo

is depressing to hear Hell matter-of-  
factly prepare May, the anxious pro-  
tagonist, for life as the mistress of mar-  
ried men. But even more depressing is  
May’s vow to conceal her abortion from  
Andy, her boss and first married lover,  
because “Andy might be against that  
kind of thing. He was very moral in his  
own way, was Andy.” And after the  
abortion, May’s future promises nothing  
in the way of anger felt, injustice  
fathomed, wisdom gained. She’ll be fi-  
nancially poorer by two hundred of her  
own hard-earned pounds, while Andy  
babbles on of “his investments.”

Love bruises and wounds in this  
Ireland, even in the distant memory of  
Juanita Casey’s “One Word.” And the  
fleeting relief of humor, affection’s po-  
tent signal and comrade, appears only in  
Edna O’Brien’s brilliant “Sister Imelda,”  
the story of an unusual affection between  
a young girl and a cloistered nun. In-  
stead, the majority of these women take  
note of but are long past mourning the  
loneliness and isolation of their daily  
lives. Their sexual interactions are at  
best harried and illicit; at worst, and  
more frequently, they’re a kind of  
drudgery that inevitably results in yet  

another mouth to feed.

Women in Ireland, by Jenny Beale. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987,  

$10.95, 219 pp. (PB)

I Am of Ireland: Women of the North Speak Out, by Elizabeth Shannon. Boston: Lit-  

tle, Brown, 1989, $17.95, 264 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

Although few would argue that  

social change comes quickly,  

the Republic of Ireland is proof  
positive that it can, indeed, happen.  
Just two decades ago, for example,  
women in the republic had far fewer  
rights than their peers in other Western  
European countries, shackled by a blend  
of Roman Catholic misogyny, cultural  
acceptance of male superiority and insti-  
tutional sexism that rendered women  
second class.

Contraception was illegal. Divorce  
was constitutionally banned. And abor-  
tion was a crime. Single mothers and  
women separated from their spouses  
were ineligible for welfare payments.  
Women were openly discriminated  
against in education and employment,  
and by the tax and welfare systems.  
Worse yet, a “marriage bar” prohibited  
wives from working in civil service or  
other occupations, and an “illegitimacy  
law” stigmatized children born out of  
wedlock.

Although the situation today is surely  
far from rosy, a significant number of  
changes have left women closer to equa-  
lity than they might have anticipated.

Family planning was legalized for mar-  
ried couples in 1979. Maternity leave  
was instituted in 1981. And virtually  
overnight, many unmarried mothers  
began keeping their children and choos-  
ing to live openly as single parents. Al-  
though divorce is still proscribed, the  
number of separated couples is on the  
rise, as is the number of unmarried  
couples living together. The “marriage  
bar” has been lifted, and women’s writ-  
ing groups, feminist publishers, self-help  
groups, lesbian information services,  
sports clubs, rape crisis centers, art  
groups, women for disarmament, and  
Christian feminist alliances are prolifer-  
ating. “Women today are generally bet-  
ter educated and more articulate, and  
want to make choices about how they  
live their lives rather than conform to a  
particular role,” says British writer Jenny  
Beale in Women in Ireland. “Many  
women are aware of the big differences  
between themselves, their mothers, and  
their daughters. . . . The homogeneity  
of attitudes in Irish society is gone.”  
Unfortunately, sexism is not. Like  
any country in the throes of change, a  
backlash has sprung up, and right-  
wingers are attempting to reverse trends  

another mouth to feed.

Perhaps most disturbing is the way  
these women remain isolated — not  
only from their men but from each other  
and from themselves. They are tragically  
far from seeing each other in ways that  
can alter and ease their lives. In Emma  
Cook’s moving and complex “The  
Foundress,” the intuitive understanding  
between two adult sisters breaks down  
whenever the younger’s philandering  
husband beds and impregnates her.  
Only when the elder goes mad does the  
younger begin to acknowledge the sis-  
ters’ collective loss. In Evelyn Conlon’s  
“Park-Going Days,” the wives of a  
nameless town dutifully feed and tend to  
their husbands, then hurry outdoors  
with their children during the few days  
of sunshine. A childless wife named Rita  
sometimes passes them but the gathered  
mothers “delayed, to let her go on. They  
were sick of her kind. . . . They turned  
their noses up and pulled their curtains  
down.”

In one of the collection’s most heart-  
breaking stories, Leland Bardwell’s  
“The Dove of Peace,” the narrator re-  
members her martyred younger sister,  
recurrently abused and eventually raped  
decades earlier by their father. Recount-  
ing the neighbors’ reaction, the narrator  
says, “Of course they knew why I was  
screaming. While we lived in our fools’  
paradise, imagining that only the head-  
mistress knew, everybody in the village  

Julia O’Faolain, one of the authors an-  
thologized in Territories of the Voice. Her  
latest novel is No Country For Young Men  
(Carroll & Graf). Photo by Mark Gerson.

they claim will destroy the family. Fend-  
ing off these attacks — and defending  
the scant progress already made — has  
limited feminist achievement. Hence,  
says Beale, little has been done to sys-  
tematically challenge the exclusion of  
women from the institutions that regu-  
late daily life: the legislatures, trade un-  
ions, religious bodies, and medical and  
educational boards.

Through interviews with twenty-  
seven women ranging in age from four-  
teen to eighty-seven, Beale provides a  
lively and fairly comprehensive look at  
the situation in the Republic of Ireland.  
History mixes with folklore, local cus-  
tom with attitudes in flux, as we are  
brought inside a conservative nation  
struggling to survive. A stark economic  
picture of a country whose “best and  
brightest” are leaving in droves rounds  
out our introduction to an Ireland in cri-  
sis. Although Beale does not address the  
impact of the “Troubles in the North” on  
the families in the South — a glaring  
omission — Women in Ireland is an in-  
triguing look at women determined to  
participate in the struggle for the long  
haul, women who could easily have  
thrown up their hands in despair, and  

was exulting in my sister's pregnancy.”  
But the nadir of social animosity occurs  
in Margaret Barrington’s “Village With-  
out Men.” When the women of a mythi-  
cal village learn that their sole surviving  
boy has matured and is drawn to the  
young schoolteacher, they batter the  
outsider with stones and drive her away.  
Though nothing melodramatic at-  
tenuates this vision of emotional and  
physical poverty, nothing compassionate  
alters it either. It is an ugly, harrow-  
ing scene that speaks to the darkest parts  
of human nature.

The problem with too many of these  
stories is not that they don’t labor long  
and hard to show the tough realities of  
today’s Irelands, but that we close the  
collection dazed only by grief, without  
any sense of a chance for change. These  
women somehow survive, but they are  
too beaten and worn to live fully. Al-  
though the stories ring true, they rarely  
offer what fiction must: a brief moment  
of insight, a sense of the poignancy of  
life’s ambiguities, of possibility, of epi-  
phany — of the sustaining redemption of  
human free will. And despite the bitter  
Irish “Troubles,” there is no revolution  
on the landscape that promises more  
openness to women. The future stays  
distant and, oddly, timeless for people  
who rarely find solace, let alone pleasure  
or union.

Perhaps there is no way out in a cul-  
ture so intent on enslaving its women,  
but I don’t think the writers believe this:  
after all, to write is to hope, to be con-  
vinced that words can have power. And  
the multitude of stories in this collection  
proves that Irish women are writing. Yet  
for now that writing too often falls short  
of achieving art’s transformative reso-  
nance, of creating stories in which ex-  
perience is not only recorded but ren-  
dered into something greater, some-  
thing worth living for.

Maxine Rodburg is a fiction writer  
whose work has been published in various  
literary quarterlies. She teaches writing at  
Harvard University.

backed away from an all-too-powerful  
Catholic hierarchy. That they have not  
done this is inspiring, and reinforces the  
truism that “sisterhood is global.” For as  
the world’s women stand up and declare  
their desire for equality and justice,  
dominos do begin to fall, and nation af-  
ter nation is forced to respond.

Unless, of course, that country is at  
war, in which case all effort goes to re-  
solving the conflict or “making do” until  
the situation improves. Such is a tall  
order for Northern Ireland, a tiny area  
that has been separated from the Repub-  
lic for nearly seventy years. While the  
lot of women has improved slightly over  
the past two decades, much of the im-  
provement has been gleaned because  
women have had no choice but to as-  
sume leadership after the men they re-  
lied upon were imprisoned or killed.

Protestants and Catholics, working  
class, upper class and poor, politically  
involved and apolitical, no woman in  
Northern Ireland has escaped the  
Troubles. Virtually everyone knows  
someone who has died, yet they plod on,  
rearing children and living their lives.  
“They have to have a baby in two weeks,  
change a diaper in five minutes, get a  
meal on the table in one hour, get to the  
shops before closing, give granny her  
medicine in 30 minutes, get a child to  
bed in two hours, get a teenager out of  
bed in 10 minutes. If they have a job  
outside their homes,” writes Elizabeth  
Shannon in I Am of Ireland, “the present  
bears down on them even more insis-  
tently.”

Shannon is describing working-class  
women, but her book takes great pains  

Spring 1990