War as Women Saw It

Arms and the Woman: War, Gender, and Literary Representation,  
edited by Helen M. Cooper, Adrienne Auslander Munich, and Susan  
Merrill Squier. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1989,  
$32.50 (HB), $12.95 (PB), 348 pp.

Wave Me Goodbye: Stories of the Second World War, edited by Anne  
Boston. New York: Viking Press, 1989, $18.95, 274 pp.

by Mary Anne Schofield

In the preface to the American edition of The Demon  
Lover, Elizabeth Bowen observes that “all wartime writing  
is ... resistance writing," and the two collections Arms and  
the Woman and Wave Me Goodbye illustrate the veracity of  
such a claim. The editors explore the resistance fantasies  
that dominated the 1939-1949 fictional period: female resis-  
tance to male power, minority resistance to the oppressive  
majority, and fictional resistance to the grim realities of  
war. Both collections focus on war as the dominant narra-  
tive theme of that watershed decade.

Wave Me Goodbye provides first-hand accounts of the  
female experience of war, concentrating on British women  
(of the twenty-eight stories, five are by Americans). Editor  
Anne Boston chose stories that examined "the people’s  
war." As she explains: “authenticity is given precedence  
over polished prose, and if a graphic semi-documentary  
sketch seemed a more truthful response than a highly crafted  
‘literary’ exercise, or added a different aspect to the range  
of experience, I chose it." Thus, her collection represents a  
thoroughly believable picture of the home front war. The  
authors spare nothing in their often grisly accounts of a  
wartime survival that depended on preserving reason during  
an insane time. Boston’s comments on the wartime necessity  
of short fiction are highly interesting in light of Jane  
Marcus’s essay “Corpus/Corps/Corpse: Writing the Body  
in/at War" in Arms and the Woman, because, as Marcus  
argues, short fiction, like the war text, is often ellipsized,  
broken because of the events of the war. Boston’s presenta-  
tions include "surreal accounts of fantasy and breakdown,  
popular romance, a black fable against war, a propaganda  
story" in tales that trace the “ritual of war" from the wom-  
an’s point of view; many of the results are startling. What  
she underscores is that the fictions set in the war environ-  
ment are not necessarily “about" war. Yet the stories "are  
no more restricted to women’s subjects ... than they are to  
female protagonists.” Pat Frank’s "The Bomb" is the best  
example, for it combines the language of formula romance  
with bomb-making technology.

This juxtaposition is the key to the majority of the stories  
reprinted in Boston’s collection. The writers continue to  
emphasize the daily triviality of their lives in an effort to  
stave off the mad, fragmentary inhumanity that war creates.  
Thus they emphasize things like shopping queues, the home  
front, deserted wives, dull jobs, deceived husbands, bad  
schools, and group squabbles.

Noteworthy are stories by Rose Macaulay, Elizabeth  
Bowen, Jean Rhys, and Anna Kavan — all of whom portray  
the insidious onset of madness. The stories from the postwar  
period, especially those of Jean Stafford, Beryl Bainbridge,  
and Elizabeth Taylor, further underscore the doubts, misun-  
derstandings, and ambiguities of the war. Rather than pro-  

viding a momentary reprieve from the horrors of the war  
(the length is greatly determined by what could be read  
while waiting for the "All Clear" sirens, on journeys to the  
"safe" countryside, etc.), Boston argues that the fiction  
turned more introspective; in the face of the madness, vio-  
lence, and deprivation of war, the short fiction offered an  
emotional exploration of the psyche.

The necessity of war stories is  
critically and brilliantly exam-  
ined in Arms and the Woman.  
The editors begin by quoting  
Jean Elshtain (the author of  
Women and War), who re-  
marks; "neither women nor  
war is a self-evident category  
... War is an object of dis-  
course central to historic under-  
standings of politics in the  
West. Without war stories,  
there would be many fewer  
stories to tell." The observation  
is proven apt as the three edi-  
tors assemble essays of wide-  
ranging appeal and impeccable  
scholarship. The essays explore  
myriad war stories: Arthurian  
battles, the Trojan War, the  
French Wars of religion, the  
Civil War, the Crimean War, the  
two World Wars, the  
Arab-Israeli conflict, and the  
nuclear age. Like Wave Me  
Goodbye, they explore the feminine rhetoric that counters  
the all-pervasive, western literary tradition that celebrates  
“arms and the man." The essays and short stories work  
together to “decenter the ideology" ("the ancient essentialist  
war myth") that keeps men on the front line and women on  
the home front. Cooper, Munich, and Squier tell us spe-  
cifically that this collection “examines the relationship be-  
tween war and gender as figured in literature." Both collec-  
tions examine the shifting boundary of gender lines and  
battle lines; the domestic realm no longer serves as a retreat  
from war or politics as the battleground moves into the  
home front arena.

In addition, both collections explore the conjunction  
between the military and the amorous. The majority of the  
stories included in Wave Me Goodbye can be labeled love  
stories and concern the trope "in which love figures as both  
sexual congress and sexual reproductivity." (One is remind-  
ed of the sixties chant: Make Love, Not War!) In war  
accounts since the Iliad, women who make babies are  
linked with making arms (both limbs and weapons). Both  
books explore the perpetual dualistic structure: of the mili-  
tary male and of the pacifist female. In Wave Me Goodbye,  
we note the increasing demobilization and destruction of this  
two-tiered myth of warlike male and peaceloving female.  
And as the editors conclude: "Historically, women’s new  
roles as war workers, ambulance drivers, soldiers, and  
terrorists, as well as victims of total war, put to rest the  
notion of inherently peaceable women, inherently warlike  
men." These new jobs, together with changes in contracep-  
tion, form a new warlike woman.

Virginia Woolf’s “Thoughts on Peace in an Air Raid  
Shelter" graphically encapsulates the themes of both collec-  
tions, for she urges a "mental fight" that would reposition  
women in a gender structure that sees them only as weapon-  
less spectators at war.

James Logenback examines the three simultaneous battles  

Kay Boyle, featured in  
Wave Me Goodbye