The Making of an Anthology

by Diane Yen-Mei Wong

In 1985, Asian Women United of

California, a nonprofit organiza-

tion, received a grant from the
Women’s Educational Equity Act
(WEEA) Program of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Education to produce a new col-
lection of works by and about Asian
American women. The last such book
had come out in the early 1970s. The
editorial board, of which I am a member,
had already produced four well-received
books with WEEA funds. Our first book,
With Silk Wings, was a compilation of
profiles of Asian American women
working in nontraditional jobs; the Dear
Diane books included questions and
answers dealing with problems faced by
young Asian American girls. The books
all had a local focus: Bay Area women
formed the core of the profiles and Bay
Area youths and counselors gave input
on the questions and answers.

This new anthology, however, was to
be very different. After several meetings,
the board decided to obtain submissions
not just from people we knew and not
just from the West Coast, where we all
happened to reside at that moment. Our
call for writings went to friends, strangers,
Asian American and women’s
studies programs, and writers and resear-
chers. We used myriad approaches, in-
cluding news releases to community
media, bilingual letters to ethnic associ-
ations and institutions, phone calls, and
personal letters.

The lengthy outreach process finally
resulted in submissions from the differ-
ent targeted ethnic groups nationwide.
After the final deadline had come and
gone, we discovered that we had about
three times the materials that could
eventually be accepted. Despite all our
efforts, including special outreach to
some of the newer immigrant groups, we
did not receive works from Muslim and
Pakistani women or Cambodian and
Laotian women. We had succeeded,

however, in getting pieces about
Chinese, East Indian, Filipino,
Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese

American women. We decided to in-
clude information about the missing
groups in our overview essay.

The editorial board now had its real
work cut out for it. Each of us reviewed
the pieces about our own ethnic group;
in addition, several of us read all the
Asian American selections, and two
other editors read all the creative works.
With briefcases and tote bags stuffed with
manuscripts, we met and we met and
we met. Unlike stereotyped quiet, pas-
sive Asian American women, we fought
and we argued. We felt a responsibility
to ensure adequate representation of our
particular community’s experience, and
we all wanted only the best writing in
the book. Many pieces underwent sev-
eral revisions before the board made its
final decision.

The editors were all experienced writ-
ers and editors. Poet Janice Mirikitani
and writer/performer Emilya Cachapero
had edited many anthologies of creative
writings and oral histories and had their
own work published. Elaine Kim, Asian
American Studies professor at the Uni-
versity of California — Berkeley, had
published a book on Asian American
literature. Historian Judy Yung had co-
edited a collection of writings done by
Chinese American immigrants and was
completing a book on Chinese women
in America. Jane Singh had written
about South Asian women, and Sucheta
Mazumdar had written articles about
Asian American women. The lone man
on the board, Chung Hoang Chuong,
had written articles on Southeast Asians
and worked as a special consultant to
local school districts. I had authored the
Dear Diane books and worked as a news-
paper editor and reporter.

In other words, we all thought we
knew what the process would entail. Un-

fortunately, we underestimated the anx-
iety, frustration, and anger we would
face. Anxiety because we did not have
equal representation of all groups; frus-
tration because manuscript length pre-
vented us from accepting all the good
pieces we had received; anger because
we each could not have our own way.
Fortunately, though, we also underesti-
mated the joy, excitement, and close-
ness we would encounter. Joy over the
quality and quantity of the community’s
response; excitement over the discovery
of new writers; closeness stemming from
our extensive, intensive, and honest in-

teractions with each other.

Making Waves, as we titled the anthol-
ogy, contains new works that represent
the wide range of experiences of many
ethnic groups, including new immig-

rants and refugees. We are all proud of
the manuscript we submitted to the pub-
lishing companies that expressed an in-
terest in the book. We have informed
the publishers that we would like the
book to come out quickly because of the
timeliness of some of the pieces and be-
cause the writers had all agreed not to
submit their pieces to other publications
until after the book comes out.

So the ball is in their court now, and
we must calmly await their response. Re-
maining calm, however, is not easy —
even though Asian American women
are supposed to be long-suffering and pa-
tient. Every time the phone rings, I jump
for I am sure it is about the book; the
daily mail will surely include word from
a publisher, I say to myself as I rip
through the envelopes.

Anticipation adds to the pleasure,
they say, but it can also cause stress.
The one year I had promised to Asian
Women United as the coordinating

editor of the anthology has turned out
to be over two years now, with the end

not yet visible. Thankfully, Asian
Women United has other projects that
must be completed this year, and they
absorb my time and energy. As executive
director, I am overseeing production of
our new video on Asian American
women’s stereotypes, development of
booklets and pamphlets on issues facing
American-born and immigrant women,
and implementation of workshops for
teachers. Still, every time the phone
rings or the mail is delivered. . .

Note. Making Waves: Asian American
Women’s Writings is scheduled for release
in late 1987. For information, contact
AWU, 3538 Telegraph Ave., Oakland,
CA 94609.

© Diane Yen-Mei Wong is executive di-
rector of Asian Women United of Califor-
nia, a nonprofit group that produces books
and videos about Asian American women.

Priceless Images

Chinese Women of America: A Pictorial
History, by Judy Yung. Seattle: University
of Washington Press, 1986, $24.95 (HB),
$12.95 (PB), 128 pp., including 132 photos,
maps, and graphs.

by Diane Yen-Mei Wong

At a time when the American

political climate is less hospit-

able toward immigrants, it be-
comes even more important to take a
closer look at the roots of America’s di-
verse population. The history of
minorities is often overlooked in the tell-
ing of the American story; even more
so is the history of women of color. In
Chinese Women of America, Judy Yung
has provided an intimate, fact-filled look
at immigrant and American-born
women of Chinese ancestry. With words
and numerous illustrations, this San
Francisco-based historian has painted
the first in-depth picture of this group of
pioneer women.

There is no better introduction to the
lives of Chinese women in America than
this book. The narrative is somewhat
dry, but it is simple and concise. The
information and style reflect a sensitivity
to issues and an adherence to facts. Both
are characteristics readers should come
to expect from Yung, who also co-edited
Island, a collection of poems written by
immigrants detained at an immigration
center at the turn of the century.

What brings color to the text are the
personal stories and photos provided by
the women Yung interviewed or re-
searched. The women trusted her with
their stories. The photos are especially
valuable. For example, the contented
looks on the faces of the Lee sisters (with
their violin and piano) in the “Second
Generation” section and the serious
countenance on Nancy Chew’s face in
the “American-born Chinese Women”
section are priceless and would not have
been accessible to readers except
through Yung’s efforts to find and inter-
view these women. A few have appeared
in other books, but many are from pri-
vate collections of the women, their
families, or organizations. Much care
and thought has gone into their selec-
tion, and understandably so, for Yung
originally intended this book as a catalog
to accompany her widely acclaimed
photo exhibit on Chinese women in
America.

Each of the book’s chronologically
placed subsections begins with some his-
torical, social, and economic
background on the women and the
period highlighted. These narrative por-
tions, although informative, sometimes
are too abrupt, too simplistic. For in-
stance, with only a few paragraphs Yung
explains the complex reasons behind the
increase in self-esteem of Chinese
American women during the 1960s and

1970s. Yet we have to applaud Yung for
choosing to take a look at these recent
decades. Many other writers tend to neg-
lect this period because its recency
makes the perspective difficult to pre-
sent.

Yung succeeds, though, primarily be-
cause of her own long-time commitment
to, and understanding of, issues such as
affirmative action and the impact of im-
proved U.S. — China relations. She has
also ably confronted the oft-quoted er-
roneous stereotype of successfully assimi-
lated Chinese American women. She
notes that many come from families with

multiple wage-earners, and they work
longer hours and live in areas with
higher costs of living; others are recent
immigrants and refugees living in near-
poverty. Yung does not just present the
easy-to-accept picture; she is dealing
with the reality of life for these women.

Her book concludes with the thought,
“New territories have yet to be charted,
but the path already broken by Chinese
women in America will make it easier
for their daughters to participate fully in
American society.” This young histo-
rian’s admirable work goes a long way
in smoothing out the path for all of us.

In the section on the rural life of the late 1800s, one photo causes one to
pause and study the surroundings of the two women in it. They are in formal
Chinese dress, next to a new American bicycle and a sewing machine — aspects
of the good life in America that they want relatives in China to see. After a
moment of study, however, you'll notice that the women are standing in front
of a grease-stained cloth backdrop nailed crudely to posts, and on the very edges
of the photo are a broom, a dirt street, and a Chinese shrine set on rough
boards. From the World War II era, there is a photo of Rose Ong. She looks
like a strong, capable woman and is writing a letter while seated before portraits
of her 6 sons, all of whom were in the armed forces. In so many of the photos
Yung gathered, there is daring and perseverance concentrated in these Chinese

— Donna Stewart

May/June 1987 Belles Lettres @ 3