Becoming as an Eagle

Nothing to Declare: Memoirs of a Woman Traveling Alone, by Mary  
Morris. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988, $17.95, 241 pp.

by Barbara Griffith Furst

Were one to invoke the  
distinction between  
tourists and travelers,  

Mary Morris would be considered the  
quintessential traveler. She immerses  
herself in a place completely — good and  
bad, exotic and mundane. She writes  
that travel is “like a drug.... As a  
traveler I can achieve a kind of high, a  
somewhat altered state of con-  
sciousness. . . . While the journey is on  
buses and across land, I begin another  
journey inside my head, a journey of  
memory and sensation, of past merging  
with present, of time growing insignifi-  
cant.”

Morris, a writer of fiction who cur-  
rently teaches in California, went “in  
search of a place where the land and the  
people and the time in which they lived  
were somehow connected.” Settling in a  
poor district of San Miguel de Allende,  
an artists’ and expatriates’ colony, she  
eschewed the company of American  
pseudo-intellectuals (one of whom was  
writing the “big” novel about impotence  
and his experiences in Vietnam) and  
developed a genuine attachment to her  
neighbor Lupe who lived in cheerful  
squalor with a swarm of children.

Although it records events and re-  
flections, this memoir is above all a  

The Making of The  
African Queen  

by Katharine Hepburn  

New York: Knopf, 1987, $15.95, 131 pp.

Fury comes naturally to Katharine Hep-  
burn. Trust does not. Her first book, The  
Making of The African Queen (or How I  
Went to Africa with Bogart, Bacall and  
Huston and Almost Lost My Mind) takes  
us on a behind-the-scenes tour of that  
film — from choosing the wardrobe and  
surviving press interviews to hunting  
with director John Huston and nearly  
getting trampled by elephants. But the  
backbone of the book is the develop-  
ment of a trusting working relationship  
between actor and director. At first,  
Huston’s stop-and-smell-the-roses way  
of living and working baffled Hepburn  
and put her in “a state of total fury, in-  
security, and indecision.” As an actor, she  
felt “all hands and feet” and “[couldn’t]  
imagine being directed by him.” She was  
finally won over by Huston’s gentle  
charm and genius. His famous compari-  
son between the character she was play-  
ing and Eleanor Roosevelt was “the god-  
damndest best piece of direction I have  
ever heard . . . and I was his from there  
on in.”

Her text is informal, a conversational  
dialogue with the reader, with herself,  
with Huston, and occasionally others.  
Her descriptions are lively, her humor  
understated, and she has an eye for detail  
— whether telling us about the natives’  
canoes or Huston’s eyebrows. The book  
focuses on the surroundings and cir-  
cumstances of creating The African  
Queen. The author does not put herself  
in an emotional context beyond that  
situation. Family and friends (even the  
Bogarts) are mentioned rather briefly.  
But she gives us a close-up of an extraor-  
dinary country, of the experience of  
making a film, and of herself as adven-  
turer and actor — enduring, endearing,  
demanding, vulnerable. It is an enjoy-  
able book, with great photos. I only wish  
Hepburn as daughter, as sister, as friend  
had also been included.

— Mary S. Parisoe

July/August 1988

Mary Morris. Photo by Thomas Victor.

meditation. We are with Morris as she  
battles her way through loneliness and  
alienation in a strange place and as she  
deals with an electric typewriter and  
power outages, a bedroom suddenly in-  
fested with insects, and life-threatening  
illness. She writes about the open sewer  
at the end of the street and Lupe’s tod-  
dler’s bloody diarrhea and about the  
splendor of the high sierra where it is  
always spring, where the sky changes  
from aquamarine to scarlet sometimes in  
a single day, where an ethereal old  
woman lives in a cave in the mountains,  
and where the huge cactuses form “a trail  
of crucifixions.”

These crucifixions are a leitmotif of  
the book, but there are resurrections as  
well. Filth is juxtaposed with beauty,  
pain with pleasure. Morris searches for  
stability and permanence, for warmth  
and affection, and finds it in Alejandro,  
a gentle Aztec, who makes wonderful  
soups for her and cares for her when she  
is ill. (So much for the machismo of La-  
tin men. It was, after all, an American  
lover who gave her a black eye before she  
came to Mexico.) She writes when she is  
first with Alejandro that a “feeling came  
over me that came from deep inside. I  
could not pinpoint it, but I felt a great  
love within me. Not for a man or a  
woman but for a way of being.” And yet,  
though staying with him for extended  
periods in his concrete block apartment  
in Mexico City, she could not remain.  
His apartment and his attention were  
too confining.

From her house in San Miguel,  
Morris goes on extended odysseys laced  
with adventure and near mishaps as she  
visits Chiapas, Yucatan, Guatemala,  
and Honduras. She spends long hours on  
old, uncomfortable, and crowded buses,  
sometimes with another American  
woman and sometimes alone. She goes  
by horseback through a rain forest in  
which one can feel the humidity like a  
weight, and where the insects, the  
stickiness, and stillness threaten to  
smother. But once through the forest  
she sees in the distance what appear to  
be streamers of color coming down a  
mountain. They are Mayan Indians  
coming to a market, the inhabitants of  
each village dressed in the specific color  
of that village.

She sleeps in a hammock on the  
Caribbean coast and on straw mats in  
cheap jungle hostelries, gets chased by a  
barracuda while snorkeling alone in the  
Gulf of Mexico, and is courted by a  
lovesick boy through the locked door of  
a hotel room. She describes lonely jun-  
gle paths to Aztec and Mayan ruins,  
climbing pyramids in the heat and hu-  

Erratum: The photo purportedly of  
Herbjorg Wassmo in our last issue  
was actually of another Seal Press  

author, Ebba Haslund.

midity, and the long vistas from the top.  
She also describes women, children,  
and old men scavenging through a gar-  
bage heap at a bus station for food and  
other castoffs left by “rich” travelers.  
Morris has a blind date with a crazy rev-  
olutionary in Honduras and stays in the  
garden paradise of an American in the  
highlands of Guatemala.

Back home in San Miguel, she helps  
Lupe prepare small cakes in the shape of  
coffins and skulls to celebrate All Saints  
Day at the cemetery. “Death was every-  
where for days. In town all the stores  
were selling the little cakes and cookies,  
sugar candy and funeral wreaths, and  
everyone was laughing and happy and  
having a wonderful time.” At the ceme-  
tery there are many people who put  
flowers on the graves and eat and drink  
with gusto. Morris asks Lupe to promise  
to bury her in the Mexican section  

should she die in Mexico rather than in  
the American section, which is well-  
groomed, serene, and lonely.

As she prepares to return to the  
United States, Morris visits the blood-  
soaked valley of Mexico and the pyramid  
at Teotihuacán, the place “where  
Quetzalcoatl opposed Huitzilopochtli  

. . . the place where the female princi-  
ple warred against the male principle.”  
She writes, “I have come to sacrifice  
myself as the warrior knights did. To let  
my heart be plucked out so I can become  
an eagle and fly closest to the sun.” One  
feels that she has indeed succeeded. As  
its title suggests, when one puts the book  
down one is left speechless.

© Barbara Furst, who has lived and trav-  
eled much abroad, shows no signs of hang-  
ing up her traveling shoes.

When I Am an Old Woman

When I Am an Old Woman I Shall Wear Purple, edited by Sandra Martz. Papier-Mache Press  
(34 Malaga Pl. E., Manhattan Beach, CA 90266), 1987, $10, 192 pp. (PB)

by Margaret Randall

The many facets of our redefini-  

tion through feminism have  

brought us to a knowledge of our  
multifaceted selves: daughters and  
daughters who are also mothers; Black  
and Hispanic women, Native American  
women, women of Asian origin; les-  
bian, bisexual, and heterosexual  
women; women of varying abilities and  
disabilities; the young barely beginning  
to be women and women who are aging  
or “old” (the term itself requiring con-  
stant redefinition). In each identity we  
have had to wage our own battles for our  
place in the mirrors of our literature.

As women growing older, we are in-  
debted to Barbara Macdonald and  
Cynthia Rich for their groundbreaking  
Look Me in the Eye (essays published sev-  
eral years back by Spinsters Ink) and to  
Calyx (a feminist literary journal that  
devoted an issue to work from and about  
older women). Broomstick is a magazine  
of writing by and for women over 40  
with a less literary, broader-based  
readership. And the Boston Women’s  
Health Book Collective recently pro-  
duced a much-needed Ourselves, Grow-  
ing Older.

When I Am an Old Woman I Shall  
Wear Purple is a logical next step: a col-  
lection of poetry, fiction, and photo-  
graphic images — by men as well as  
women — about women aged and  
aging. The excellent title poem  
(“Warning” by Jenny Joseph) first  
caught my attention in Ain’t I A  
Woman: Poems of Black and White  
Women, edited by Illona Linthwaite and  
published last year by Virago (London).  
The new anthology is an uneven, rather  
amateurishly put together volume that  
nevertheless contains some exciting  
poetry, prose, and photography.

Although well-printed and cleanly  
produced (the unusually large type  
suggests it is aimed at including an older  
readership — great!), there is no intro-  
duction to explain why or how selec-  
tions were made, the context in which  
the project evolved, or anything about  
the press. The anthologist’s name is  
nowhere on the book’s cover or title  
page, and in fact I am only assuming the  
press’s editor is also the editor of this  
collection. In the last pages, under the  
heading “Papier-Mache Press Distribu-  
tion Service,” there is information  
about T-shirts and posters. I would have  
foregone that in exchange for more  
about the anthology itself.

This said, I want to insist on the  
sometimes wonderful inclusions, by un-  
known as well as better-known writers.  
Especially moving to me are “A Place for  
Mother” (a series of ten poems about the  
aging and death of her mother, and then  
her own aging, by Joanne Seltzer);  

“Gracefully Afraid” (a charming story by  
Mary Anne Ashley); Marie Kennedy  
Robins’s “Dear Paul Newman,” Bettie  
Sellers’s “A Letter from Elvira” (both  
short poems); “Near Places, Far Places”  
(a narrative by Sarah Barnhill); “Tin of  
Tube Rose” (a story by Sandra Red-  
ding); and “Two Willow Chairs”  
(another by Jess Wells). “Here, Take  
My Words,” by Karen Brodine, is a fine  
prose poem, made more poignant,  
perhaps, by the fact that the poet  
reached her own death brought on by  
breast cancer, presumably after the an-  
thology went to press. Every one of Lori  
Burkhalter’s photographs is a beautiful  
evocative image, which — along with  
some of the other photos — adds a great  
deal to the book.

A fairly broad range of voices can be  
heard in the pages of this anthology:  
some conversational, some “literary,”  
some ethnic, others clearly from the  
greatly aged themselves. As I say, it is an  
uneven collection; where are voices like  
those of Meridel LeSueur, May Sarton,  
Gwendolyn Brooks? But then, when no  
guidelines have been offered as to ambi-  
tion or limitation, it is difficult to speak  
of success or failure.

One can be disappointed in poems  
such as Hyacinthe Hill’s “Reaching to-  
ward Beauty,” with lines like “In this au-  
tumn of my being... ”. But then one  
turns a couple of pages and delights in  
“Clearing the Path” by Elisavietta  
Ritchie:

My husband gave up shoveling snow at  
forty-five because, he claimed,  
that’s when heart attacks begin.

Since it snowed regardless, I,  
mere forty, took the shovel, dug.  
Now fifty, still it falls on me  

to clean the walk. He’s gone on  
to warmer climes and younger loves  
who will, I guess, keep shoveling for him.

In other seasons here, I sweep  
plum petals or magnolia cones  
to clear the way for heartier loves.

I recommend this book because so  
little attention is given to work from,  
out of, and about women aging, and  
because there is certainly enough of  
value in this collection to warrant  
owning it. “Gracefully Afraid” and  
“Two Willow Chairs” alone are worth  
the purchase price.

@ Margaret Randall is an American-  
born writer almost deported because of the  
critical nature of her writing. Her most  
recent book titles are Albuquerque:  
Coming Back to the USA and This Is  
About Incest. She is a visiting professor of  
English at Trinity College in Hartford.

Belles Lettres @ 19