IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Feminism for the Health of It

Weaving together her unique humor, word
creations, and astute analysis, former NOW President
Wilma Scott Heide moves beyond social critique to
offer feminism as a values transformation in language,
higher education, research, activism, health care,
economics, the media, and international policy. Nine
visionary essays; index.

164 pages, $8.95

A Feminist Legacy:
The Ethics of Wilma Scott Heide and Company

An intriguing account of the life and work of
Wilma Scott Heide, President of the National
Organization for Women in the early ‘70s. Haney's
unique approach of "ethics as story" creates an
intimate and inspiring portrait of this impassioned
feminist leader who lived her values. Includes 10
rare photographs, index.

208 pages, $12.95

Peace and Power:
A Handbook of Feminist Process

A long awaited and much requested handbook for
putting feminist ideals into group action. This
concisely written and practical handbook presents
ways to move beyond typical power games and create
alternatives for both personal and group growth.

54 pages, $4.95

Margaretdaughters, Inc.
P.O. Box 70
Buffalo, NY 14222

$1.50 shipping for the first book and $0.50 for each additional book.
Please add 200 cents and applicable sales tax. Canadian & International: Payment in
US dollars via international bank money order or postal money order only.
International postage other than Mexico and Canada: include an additional $6.00.

Carson McCullers by Louis Dahl-Wolfe, from A Photographer's
Scrapbook (1984, St. Martin’s Press). Reproduced by permission.

This photo

can be yours

Subscribe, renew, or buy a gift sub-
scription by August 15 to be eligible
for our expanded subscribers’ draw-

Jury/August 1986

WOMEN’S STUDIES
IN COMMUNICATION

The Journal of the Organization for Research on
Women and Communication of the Western
Speech Communication Association

Featuring descriptive and empirical
studies, book reviews, and syllabi
concerning gender and communication
deriving from such perspectives as
interpersonal communication, small group
communication, organizational communication,
the mass media, and rhetoric.

YEARLY SUBSCRIPTION
(Includes membership in the Organization for
Research on Women and Communication)

$12.00 Regular
$15.00 Institutional
$8.00 Student

Send check to: Sonja Foss, Department of
Speech Communication, University of Denver,
Denver, CO 80208

MANUSCRIPT SUBMISSIONS

Send four copies prepared in accordance with
The MLA Style Sheet to:

Karen A. Foss, Department of Speech
Communication, Humboldt State University,
Arcata, California 95521

DEAR "EST
GODDESS

TRANSLATIONS OF
LATVIAN FOLK POEMS

by Eso Benjamins
Published by Current Nine Publishing

The Dearest Goddess—suppressed for thousands of years—is becoming the great theological issue
of the 1980s. The folklore of the Latvians makes a significant contribution to the discussion.
Current Nine Publishing is pleased to present this translation of Latvian women’s folk poems
addressed to the Dearest Goddess. The poems are lyrical conversations based on traditions and
observances, both recent, as well as thousands of years old. Most importantly, they show the
nature of an established feminine cultural psyche. This book is must reading and a must for the
library of every informed woman and man today. Dearest Goddess. $7.95. Include $1.50 for
handling and postage. Make check or money order (U.S. funds) to: Current Nine Publishing,
Code BLDG, P.O. Box 6089, Arlington, VA 22206

Please send

1-year subscription[s] or 2-year
subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is my
check or money order in the amount of payable to
Belles Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a
photocopy, or handwritten copy.

The books donated by Daedalus, Washington, DC are as follows:
Louise Dahl-Wolfe: A Photographer’s Scrapbook
Assault on Mt. Helicon: A Literary Memoir
Mary Barnard: A contribution of $ is enclosed
Alice James: A Biography
Jean Shrouse: 
Eleanor Perényi: Minor Characters
Joyce Johnson: 

Belles Lettres @ 15