tensely developed and stable sense of  
place, Hospital’s work glances from  
town to town and country to country.  
Canada is only one part of this family’s  
second-generational wanderings, es-  
pecially on the part of Emily Carpenter.  
The story operates with a Proustian eye  
for detail, taking signals from such sim-  
ple cues as a gazebo or a branch of hon-  
eysuckle and parlaying these into the  
rich, rambling associations of personal  

history.  
Emily’s 8-year-old boy Adam pro-  
claims: “I’m a citizen of the world. . . I  

was conceived in Canada and born in  
Australia and now I am being educated  
in England.” This effectively reflects the  
stage of Tiger, and although the novel  
does not ever ultimately settle in  
Canada, Emily’s sense of dislocation and  
homelessness suggests a particularly  
Canadian sense of displacement.  
Emily’s decision to attend with Adam  
her parent’s 50th wedding anniversary  
marks an affirmation of the importance  
of family as the source of personal stabil-  
ity and strength. Hospital’s writing  
vibrates with sensual imagery, linking  
ideas to flesh, words to blood. It is a kind  
of writing that seems to insist that all  
realities are mediated by physical con-  
tact. The symbolic family blood link  
recurs metaphorically throughout this  
novel.  

Although Alice Munro does not  

openly confront the issue of  

what it might mean to be Ca-  
nadian in her collection of interrelated  
short stories, The Beggar Maid, her  
stories maintain a strong sense of geog-  
raphy and location that implicitly hint  
at the characters’ self-images and  
identities. Issues of wealth and poverty  
are inextricably linked to those of place,  
the impressionistic repercussions of  
“flat, unremarkable countryside” or  
“views of mountains and ocean...  
stone and timbered mansion.”  

Rose, the collection’s protagonist, is  
obsessed by a need to come to terms with  
the poverty of her upbringing, especially  
with the temptation to romanticize and  
escape it. She struggles with conflicting  
feelings over her past, and, as her escape  
becomes more tangible — her father  
dies, she leaves home and joins a  

wealthy husband — she begins to hold  
more firmly to this struggle connecting  
her to the past, as if it held the essential  
seed to her identity. We are told that  
“Now that she was sure of getting away,  
a layer of loyalty and protectiveness was  
hardening around every memory she  
ever had.”  

Rose is set up from the start to be a  
character divided. Her father is absent  
much of the time — physically and  
mentally. He is a dreamer and an arti-  
san, sickly and demanding. Her step-  
mother, Flo, is down-to-earth, almost  
crude in her insistence upon practical-  
ity; she likes “the details of a death.”  
There is a straightforward solidity, a  
reality in the lives of the poor that Rose  
misses since she has moved into  
affluence. The dreams of love, sexuality  
and gentility come apart for Rose as she  
enters their realms. The image of the  
“Beggar Maid” is a masculine fantasy of  
what it means to be female and helpless.  
For Rose, who aptly eventually becomes  
an actress, it is an image to hide behind  
and manipulate, but it is never a reality  
for her.  

Mavis Gallant’s first novel,  

Green Water, Green Sky, set  

mostly in Venice and Paris,  
addresses the concerns of homelessness  
and elusive self-identity in the works of  
these other writers. Florence, with her  
exotic name and expatriate upbringing  
has no private history or roots, much less  
a secure present reality. This novel  
centers on Flor’s deterioration and,  
juxtaposed with this, her mother Bon-  
nie’s determination to survive. As such,  
Green Water transcends issues of  
national identity, much like Joyce Carol  
Oates’s and Virginia Woolf's internal  
voyages of troubled women.  

Florence never achieves any reliable  
sense of self. As a pretty child then  
beautiful woman, she is a social com-  
modity, an object desired by anyone  
who sees her. In perpetual exile, follow-  
ing her mother from one resort to the  
next, she has no anchor, no immediate  
center. One symptom of her incipient  
madness is her environment’s sudden  
and spontaneous fluidity: “It was like an  
earthquake, except she knew there were  
no earthquakes here. It was like being  

Skeletons  
in the Well  

Family Linen, by Lee Smith. New York:  
Putnam, 1985, $15.95, 272 pp.  

by Melani McAlister  

At age 47, Sybill Hess is too old  

to be imagining things. Her life  

is far too tidy, her existence in  
Booker Creeks, Virginia, too settled for  
the chaos that accompanies her revela-  
tion: Sybill, it seems, has witnessed her  
mother Elizabeth ax-murdering Sybill’s  
father. But Elizabeth dies of a stroke  
before Sybill can confront her, and the  
family mourning rapidly evolves into a  
search for skeletons down the family  
well.  

Thus the plot thickens in Lee Smith’s  
latest and most amusing novel. Readers  
of Smith’s earlier books will recognize  
familiar themes in Family Linen — family  
crises, the significance of history and the  
retelling of the past in order to keep it  
alive, the dramas of small town and rural  
life. Smith looks critically but lovingly  
at the modern South as it becomes  
wealthier and more homogenized. She  
examines the strange interweaving con-  
nections of family, and writes in-  
sightfully about the hold of the South —  
the haunting draw of its frank human-  
ness and its unapologetic insularity.  

May/June 1986  

Lee Smith. Photo by Josh: Seer.  

Lacey, the “intellectual” of the family  
who now lives in Chapel Hill, North  
Carolina, provides commentary on the  
lives of the Hess family. One senses that  
Lacey is Smith’s mouthpiece, and that is  
unfortunate. For the most part, how-  
ever, the characters speak for them-  
selves, without conduit, and it is  
Smith’s technique of writing each chap-  
ter from a different point of view that  
gives the book its richness and its wit.  

Each of the voices through which  
Smith writes has a delightful integrity, a  
trueness. Sean, for example, is the  
14-year-old son of Sybill’s sister Myrtle  
and her husband Don. Myrtle and Don  
are models of middle-American  
achievement: Don is a dermatologist;  

Janette Turner Hospital. Photo by Rodney Bowes.  

drunk, except that she never drank any-  
more.”  

Gallant’s novel also examines people  
who exist without centers: Mother  
Bonnie affects a drawl and a tragic, ex-  
aggerated sense of the past, and she is  
close friends with a man who invented  
his childhood. They exist as if through  
mirrors and sleight of hand. Green Water  
does not possess the subtlety of Gallant’s  
later fiction, but it does exhibit those  
classic configurations of madness, dis-  
location and tortuous relationships that  
mark the woman’s and the Canadian’s  
struggle for preservation.  

Margaret Laurence’s The Stone  

Angel is part of her Manawaka  

collection, one of a series of  
tales set in the same Canadian prairie  
town. Like Tiger Pit, The Stone Angel  
spans three generations, which we see  
through the flashbacks, vagaries and  
insights of 90-year-old Hagar Shipley.  
The stone angel that marks Hagar’s  
mother’s grave functions also as the  
novel’s reference point. The angel upon  
her pedestal is a graven idol, worshipped  
as Canadian women might be wor-  
shipped for being rare and frightening  
sparks of beauty in a terrible land. The  
angel’s doubleness — her salvation and  
softness encased in cold marble and  
physical isolation — is Hagar’s as well.  

their home is furnished in tasteful pinks  
and greens; they drink martinis in the  
afternoon and take courses in couples  
communication and parent effectiveness  
training. Sean is a rebel, and Smith  
portrays him with both sympathy and  
humor.  

I hate all this active-listening shit.  
Ever since they learned it last year  
in that class, you can’t have a de-  
cent conversation with them. If you  
ever could. But now I mean you  
come home from school really pissed  
about something, I mean really  
pissed, and they say something like,  
“Gee, son, you're very angry!” and  
then if you say “Well yes, I am  
pretty goddamn angry,” they say  
“Yes! Yes, you are! I can tell you’re  
angry!” and that’s it. Then they  
smile a big faggy smile and go off  
whistling or something, and you feel  
like shit. You feel worse than you  
did before. There must be some  
other part to it, some part they  
didn’t learn or the class didn’t get  
to, like in History the way they  
never finish the book.  

Smith’s gift is to write readable fic-  
tion, fine bedtime novels with plots that  
weave back and forth in time and  
characters that engage. She has a  
remarkable eye (and ear) for the  
characteristic detail — the way Clinus  
makes hush puppies in the middle of a  
summer afternoon; or the feel of the new  
Piggly Wiggly grand opening, where a  
country and western band is playing in  

The story moves through a relatively  
short period focusing upon Hagar as she  
weakens and enters into mortal combat  
with her children over whether or not  
she will enter a nursing home. The inte-  
rior story of Hagar’s past covers her 90  
years and gestures beyond. The Stone  
Angel demonstrates an intensity and a  
justice involved in the juncture of  
women and nature in the writing of  
Canadians.  

It is no accident that four of the five  
books reviewed — Atwood’s excepted  
— feature an aging female as one of the  
central characters. The notion of an  
individual history, a world created with-  
in one lifetime, unlike the rambling  
ancestries of England and Europe, il-  
lustrates the way women create homes  
within the wilderness. The long life pro-  
vides a sense of continuity, of survival in  
an otherwise unknown place. These  
older female characters must be stone  
angels to defend and nurture the homes  
and lives they bring into the wilderness.  
Stone angels are of heaven and earth, a  
connection between past and present,  
love and impregnability, even, dare I  
say, mind and body. As one of Hagar’s  
final acts, she lies upon a death bed,  
holds a glass of water for herself, and  
states: “I wrest from her the glass, full of  
water to be had for the taking. I hold it  
in my own hands.”  

A Canadian woman, even at the final  
moment, she holds her own glass; by her  
own hand will she ward off her thirst.  

Diana Abu-Jabar has an MA in En-  
glish literature from the University of  
Windsor. She is currently a candidate for  
the PhD in literature at the State University  
of New York at Binghamton.  

Note: Graywolf Press has several short  
story collections by Mavis Gallant (PB),  
and her most recent collection, Home  
Truths, was published by Random House  
last year. The Diviners by Margaret  
Laurence is available in a Bantam/  
Windstone paperback edition. Penguin  
has in print several short story col-  
lections of Alice Munro, in addition to  
The Beggar Maid. Janette Turner Hospi-  
tal’s latest novel, Borderline, was  
published by Dutton last year.  

the parking lot; or the way Fay, who  
keeps getting fatter and crazier, quotes  
the National Enquirer.  

At the same time, Smith uses those  
details to comment on the changing of  
the South — on the inevitable  
“Americanization” of it. McDonald’s  
and K-Mart and Diet Coke invade and  
pervade the small towns; the young  
stylist in the beauty shop looks at Vogue  
and dreams about somebody coming in  
to ask for a punk look — a little green on  
the top. The South is incorporating the  
world “outside,” taking in wealth, tak-  
ing in television and its culture, and yes,  
losing something of itself in the process.  

But something remains too — some-  
thing in the rhythm of hot Saturday  
afternoons browsing at junk stores, in  
the way folks say “Don’t be a stranger  
now” when you leave. Smith does not  
explore those contradictions so much as  
she chronicles them — bites them off for  
the tasting. She writes of a family, and a  
town, that is lurching forward yet still  
connected to its past, to its individuality  
and its story. Smith offers up her era and  
her place — much as Dickens and  
Woody Allen have offered up theirs —  
not uncritically, but with sympathy and  
gentle humor, and the desire to capture  
it before it is gone.  

Melani McAlister is on the staff of  
Mobilization for Survival in Boston. Last  
year on a Fulbright in Cairo she studied the  
Egyptian women’s movement.  

Belles Lettres @ 3