When Lions  
Learn to Write  

Dessa Rose, by Sherley Ann Williams. New  
York: Morrow, 1986, $15.95, 236 pp.  

by Kamili Anderson  

Special joys are derived from read-  

ing Sherley Anne Williams’ out-  

standing Dessa Rose: the thrill of  
pursuing a carefully constructed plot, the  
empathy or antipathy one is made to  
feel for the characters, and then, the  
catharsis that follows the resolution of  
the action. To be invited to view an  
undistorted picture of a world that is an  
eclectic and electric callaloo of history,  
culture, language, and tradition, adds  
yet another dimension of pleasure. And,  
that “slavery eliminated neither heroism  
nor love,” as Williams shows in Dessa  
Rose, is testament to the tenacity of the  
human spirit and to the inherent weak-  
ness of a system that kept two races of  
people woefully ignorant of their better  
natures and of each other.  

Like William Styron’s Confessions of  
Nat Turner, the story of Dessa Rose is  
based upon historical accounts from that  
era. Unlike Styron’s fictional Nat  
Turner, whose essence is so wrongfully  
distorted, Williams’s protagonist is al-  
lowed to “speak herself free.” Whereas  
Nat Turner still awaits a literary in-  
terpreter worth his sacrifice (as historian  

Lerone Bennett states), Dessa Rose deftly  
captures the tortured soul of America’s  
peculiar institution from the victim’s  
perspective. Williams further supersedes  
Styron’s questionable motives in fic-  
tionalizing that period by providing ver-  
isimilar characterizations of the Blacks  
and Whites who inhabited it.  

Dessa Rose is prefaced by words from  
the narrative of Frederick Douglass, who  
early sought to explain the transmogrify-  
ing effects of slavery. “You have seen,”  
he wrote, “how a man was made a slave.”  
Williams, herself a scholar of Afro-  
American literature and a widely-re-  
garded poet, offers a compelling counter-  
point; the primary mission of her novel  
is to reveal the impact of slavery upon  
the female of the species.  

The novel begins in 1847. Dessa’s  
ferocious exploits in an uprising on a  
slave coffle heading south have brought  
her momentary notoriety. Unable to flee  
with the others because she is pregnant,  
she has been recaptured and sentenced  
to death. Her execution has been de-  
layed until after the birth of her saleable  
child. Adam Nehemiah, an unctuously  
condescending “expert” on slave man-  
agement, interviews Dessa for his book,  
The Roots of Rebellion in the Slave Popu-  
lation and Some Means of Eradicating  
Them. Dessa winds Nehemiah through  
recollections of her early life: of the  
younger brother sold away; of the mother  
broken down by grief and burden; and  
of her tender, irreverent lover, Kaine,  
whose baby she carries at such cost to  
her own freedom. Kaine’s death at the  
hands of their master was the catalyst  

that initiated Dessa’s retaliations against  
her enslavement. To a shocked  
Nehemiah, Dessa confesses: “White  
men existed because they did; Master  
had smashed [Kaine’s] banjo because  
that was the way he was, able to do what  
he felt like doing. And a nigger could,  
too. This was what Kaine’s act said to  
her. He had done; he was. She had done  
also, had as good as killed Master.”  

In Nehemiah’s eyes, Blacks are but a  
readily exploitable source of capital.  
Dessa is “the darky,” “a virago,” the  
fiendish “devil woman,” who “had at-  
tacked white men and aroused other nig-  
gers to rebel.” So preoccupied is  
Nehemiah with interposing his own  
theories upon Dessa’s tale, and so resis-  
tant to his invasiveness is she, that the  
gist of her revelations eludes him. His  
account of the uprising is understandably  
different: “The toll in life and property  
had been horrifying. Five white men had  
been killed, [the slave trader] had lost  
an arm, thirty-one slaves had been killed  
or executed; nineteen branded or flog-  
ged: Some thirty-eight thousand dollars  
in property destroyed or damaged.”  

Yet, Nehemiah’s denial of the com-  
passion he feels for Dessa erodes his self-  
esteem. His empathy is warped by his  
smug assuredness in the propriety of slav-  
ery. With his conscience so torn,  
Nehemiah takes Dessa’s escape as a per-  
sonal affront. Her recapture becomes the  
obsession that reduces him to pitiable  
vileness.  

Ironically, Dessa’s compatriots from  
the coffle return to liberate her on the  
evening before Independence Day.  

The muscles of her calves and thighs  
protested some and it took all of her  
concentration to keep their protests  
from drowning out the remembrance of  
her feet. She didn’t speak. She didn’t  
think either. She was free; maybe not  
as free as she would ever be but she  
knew, without needing to think about  
it, that she’d never be less free than  
she was now, striding, sometimes  
stumbling toward a place she’d never  
seen.  

En route to Sutton’s Glen, the men assist  
Dessa with the birth of her child. She  
is allowed to recuperate in the half-  
finished mansion and the young White  
mistress of the plantation, guided by  
maternal instincts (she is also nursing  
her own baby) nurses Dessa’s distressed  
infant, much to the Blacks’ amazement.  

The second part of the novel, “The  
Wench,” is told from the perspective of  
Rufel Sutton, who has been abandoned  
by her husband and whose isolated plan-  
tation has become a refuge for runaway  
slaves. She is depicted as an engaging  
young woman from genteel Charleston  
society, whose sensitive and artistic na-  
ture had been all but crushed by her  
brash, planter-turned-gambler husband.  
In her privileged position as a southern  
White woman, Rufel has been insulated  
from the darker sides of slavery. Since  
childhood, her deepest affectional bonds  
had been to her faithful Black  
“Mammy,” who died shortly before  
Dessa’s arrival, and who had run the  
plantation since the departure of Rufel’s  
husband.  

— continued on page 15  

Refracted Colors  

9 Plays by Black Women, edited by  
Margaret B. Wilkerson. New York: New  
American Library, 1986, $4.95, 508 pp.  
(PB)  

by Rosemary Curb  

Only rarely does a woman, es-  
pecially a Black woman, or a  
Black man disturb the  
monotonous representations of White  
middle-class woes — often father-son  
power struggles or clashes of values — in  
the history of American theater. Yet, it  
is Black women who have created some  
of the most provocative American  
drama, not only exposing blatant  
stereotypes, but then striding forth with  
visions of personal and collective power.  
Margaret Wilkerson’s succinct introduc-  
tion to 9 Plays opens: “Black women are  
a prism through which the searing rays  
of race, class and sex are first focused,  
then refracted. The creative among us  
transform these rays into a spectrum of  
brilliant colors, a rainbow which illumi-  
nates the experience of all humankind.”  
Wilkerson then summarizes the his-  
tory with passionate comments about  
the double bind which Black women  
must battle in the creation of their art:  
the “equality” of oppression under  
slavery and its racist aftermath plus the  
struggle for sexual equality. She includes  
discussion of plays by nine women writ-  
ten and performed before 1950, the date  
of the earliest play in the present collec-  
tion. Today, drama by Black women has  
transformed political struggle into  
mainstream culture, notably Lorraine  
Hansberry’s sudden Broadway success A  
Raisin in the Sun in 1959 and Ntozake  
Shange’s explosively feminist choreo-  
poem for colored girls who have considered  
suicide when the rainbow is enuf in 1975.  
Both playwrights are represented in this  
collection by less well-known pieces.  
The nine selections fall neatly into  
two time periods: three before the cur-  
rent women’s movement (1950-1966)  
and six between 1975 and the present.  
Wilkerson analyzes the insidious damage  
created by images of the neutered  
domineering mammy and the oversexed  

12 ® Belles Lettres  

floozy as masking Black women’s vul-  
nerability to sexual exploitation. A com-  
mon thread is how damage done in the  
past lives on in the present. Several plays  
present the same characters in two diffe-  
rent time periods or generations in order  
to spotlight the causes of rage burning  
out lives in chemical or emotional addic-  
tions and self-hatred. From early teens  
through old age the women portrayed  
experience exploitation, loneliness, frus-  
tration, disappointment.  

Beah Richards first performed A Black  
Woman Speaks in 1950 for the White  
organization, Women for Peace. It won  
an Emmy Award 25 years later and  
opened the first National Festival of  
Women’s Theatre in Santa Cruz in  
1983. The impassioned monologue chal-  
lenges White women’s racism: “in  
bloodied skirt/ and in slavery,/ reaching  
out adulterous hands/ killing mine and  
crushing me.” Richards wails over  
White women’s ignorance of privilege  
(“consumed in hate,/ used up in idle-  
ness/ playing yet the lady’s part,/ exiled  
in vanity”), which enslaves Black  
women by pitting Black and White  
women against each other, and cries out  
to mend the historic rift.  

Wise and generous efforts to under-  
stand the causes of separation appear in  
finished pieces and fragments by  
Hansberry, whose brief career was cut  
short by cancer at age 34. With A Raisin  
in the Sun she became the youngest and  
first Black playwright to win the New  
York Drama Critics Circle Award. Less  
known pieces, such as the excerpt from  
Toussaint in the present volume, reveal  
Hansberry’s relentless grappling with  
ambivalence. Creole Lucie taunts her  
French husband Bayon de Bergier with  
her perception of Toussaint L’Ouver-  
ture’s political potency and her vision  
of the revolution he will lead.  

Best in the collection is Wedding Band  
by the equally wise and generous Alice  
Childress, first Black woman to have a  
play professionally produced off-Broad-  
way, 1955 Obie Award winner for Trou-  
ble in Mind, and prolific novelist. Her  
most important play, Wedding Band  

(1966) presents the tragedy of an inter-  
racial love affair between two ordinary  
working-class people in South Carolina  
during the First World War. Black  
seamstress Julia Augustine cannot save  
White Herman, a baker, from either his  
racist heritage or the laws that militate  
against them or fatal influenza.  

Aishah Rahman’s musical Unfinished  
Women Cry in No Man’s Land While a  
Bird Dies in a Gilded Cage (1977) depicts  
the lives of five young women at the  
Hide-A-Wee Home for Unwed Mothers  
who are trapped in fertile bodies while  
struggling to decide whether to keep  
their babies.  

I want to go! I want to live! I got  
visions! I want to do crazy things like  
walk down the Champs Elysee with a  
panther on a leash like Josephine  
Baker. But a man will stop a woman.  
Someway, somehow, he just man-  
ages to pump you full of babies and  
insecurities and turn you into a rag  
doll that only lives through him.  

Meanwhile, the life of legendary  
saxophonist Charlie Parker withers away  
in Pasha’s boudoir. Charlie Chan, as  
minstrel carnival barker, links the birth-  
ing and dying environments, creating  
the dynamic theatricality that makes  
Rahman’s musical a current classic.  

In The Tapestry (1975) by Alexis De-  
Veaux, the law student Jet holds her  
saxophone-playing boyfriend Axis at bay  
while she studies for her bar exams and  
while her best friend Lavender succumbs  
to him. In Jet’s recurring nightmare she  
confronts her law professor leading a  
choir in her bathroom: “I’m not no sac-  
rificial chicken/ spirits I have to be  
ready/ give me what I need/ for the  
morning.” Betrayal strengthens Jet’s re-  
solve to triumph.  

Whereas Jet succeeds, saxophone sen-  
suality seduces and eventually crushes  
the spirit of Lena in Brown Silk and  
Magenta Sunsets (1985) by P.J. Gibson.  
Lena relives past lust by reviving life-size  
paintings of her musician lover Roland,  
her mentor and rival Veeda, and her  
rejected and suicidal daughter Fendi.  
Veeda calls the irredeemably lost Lena  
“one of those lust witches” for corrupting  
everyone she touches with her insatiable  
sensuality. The cheap scotch Lena pours  

into an expensive decanter is a symbol  
of her wasted life.  

The other three recent plays show  
Black women surviving by selling them-  
selves in traditional ways: as performers,  
whores, beauty queens, wives. Ntozake  
Shange’s Spell #7 (1979) features perfor-  
mers under a huge minstrel mask rapping  
about their struggles to survive, the mask  
being a symbol and mirror of playing the  
false self as defined by White racist cul-  
ture. Like Shange’s other plays, Spell #7  
dramatizes scenes and monologues un-  
ified by poetic rather than narrative con-  
tinuity.  

The Brothers (1982) by Kathleen Col-  
lins represents concentrated rage sim-  
mering in one middle-class family and  
dished up via the animosities of the  
wives of four brothers, a sister, and a  
mother-in-law. The brothers themselves  
never appear on stage. Conflict focuses  
on star athlete Nelson, who takes to his  
bed in 1948 on the day Gandhi died and  
who dies — perhaps smothered by his  
frustrated and furious alcoholic wife —  
on the day Martin Luther King, Jr., is  
assassinated. The women seem unaware  
that their own lives have trickled away  
as hopelessly as Nelson’s.  

Elaine Jackson’s Paper Dolls (1983)  
mocks beauty contests. M-E and Lizzie  
judge Miss International Sepia 50 years  
after their own brief fame as queen and  
runner-up. Through their strutting and  
sparring they deflate the degrading  
Topsy, Beulah, Poo-key, Caledonia,  
and Mammy stereotypes. With viva-  
cious theatricality the play highlights  
daily suffering and ordinary triumphs of  
all women who confront and reject cul-  
tural constraints to become sexual com-  
modities.  

Wilkerson’s modest title camouflages  
the historic significance of 9 Plays by  
Black Women. Neither a random grab-  
bag nor a meager gleaning of a narrow  
field, it is an important and outstanding  
first collection. The fact that nine  
equally strong collections could be as-  
sembled, considering Black women’s  
prismatic creativity today, does not de-  
tract from the brilliance of this one.  

® Rosemary Curb teaches dramatic liter-  
ature and women’s studies at Rollins Col-  
lege in Florida.  

May/June 1987