Reprints: Women and Work by Laura HAPKE

In Margaret Deland’s The Rising Tide, a 1916 novel on what her era dubbed the "New Woman," the protagonist accuses her brainless, decorative mother of being a parasite. Not sparing herself, she admits: "I am, too. But there’s this difference between us, mother: I am ashamed and you are not." The conservative Deland does not permit her heroine to do more than utter this brutally candid speech, and soon consigns her to the patriarchal suitor whom she marries. Like so many turn-of-the-century works in the subgenre of the New Woman novel, fighting words are undercut by a retreat into the security of domesticity.

Jane Addams and friends. From the Jane Addams Memorial Collection at the Library of the University of Illinois at Chicago.

Not so for the fictional and real-life women at the heart of the reprints reviewed here. The central figures of four of these books grapple with their shame at what the introduction to one of the works, Jane Addams’s 1910 autobiography, terms "genteel passivity." Two other texts, about working-class women, depict their responses to the feminine struggle for dignity and meaningful work. Ironically, in the last text to be discussed, a talented actress about to succeed in her profession, not troubled with the problem of breaking away from affluence or having to support herself in adversity, can only wrest defeat from the jaws of victory.

Early on in her Twenty Years at Hull-House (University of Illinois Press, 1990, $10.95, 238 pp., PB), Jane Addams, the celebrated social reformer and founder of one of the nation’s first social settlements, stakes out her territory: "the great world of moral enterprise and serious undertakings." Like Deland’s heroine, she experiences guilt at upper-class idleness, but there the resemblance ends. Deland’s protagonist flees life; Addams and her friend Ellen Starr purchase the decaying Hull mansion in an immigrant section of Chicago and respond to community needs by establishing everything from clubs to playgrounds to a co-operative boarding house for working girls.

Reading her memoirs, one is constantly reminded of the moral energy that infused Addams’s social purpose. Memorable phrases abound. On the rarified education of genteel young women, she writes, "This is what we were all doing, lumbering our minds with literature that only served to cloud the really vital situation spread before our eyes." On her sense of her own mission: “keenly conscious of the social confusion all about us and the hard economic struggle, we at times believed that the very struggle itself might become a source of strength." There are many ways to read Twenty Years at Hull-House. For scholars of social history, James Hurt’s admirable introduction provides an important overview. For feminists interested in what Kathryn Kish Sklar has termed the "community of women reformers," which Hull House in the 1890s represented, the book is an excellent source. But for the rest of us, charting Addams’s transit from cloistered girlhood to New Womanhood, and then beyond to greatness, is reward enough.

One is similarly impressed in reading the selected letters and speeches of Addams’s colleague in the struggle for social justice, Lillian Wald. Founder of the Visiting Nurse Service and the Henry Street Settlement in New York in 1893, just four years after the birth of Hull House, Wald was another of the period’s remarkable women who moved out of bourgeois comfort and marriage-oriented socializing to an arduous vocation. Wald helped found the field of public health nursing. As Lillian D. Wald, Progressive Activist (The Feminist Press, 1989, $7.95, 97 pp., PB) reveals, Wald’s interests were legion. This volume, edited by Clare Coss, is a rich resource for those wishing an introduction to Wald’s achievements. In addition to her letters to philanthropist Jacob Schiff, who aided in her social welfare undertakings, there are speeches on exploited working women, on suffrage, and on the folly of war. The editor’s own homage, a playlet titled "Lillian Wald: At Home on Henry Street," takes place the night before the pacifist Wald is to meet with President Wilson to discuss the entry of the United States into World War I.

Over eighty years later, in her 1906 speech "Organization Amongst Working Women," Wald’s indignation at the oppression of that exploited group is still compelling. She blasts "the sex antagonism, the blind rage against [women] for taking men’s places, and the consequent disparagement ... of the girls in their attempts to take their place in the industrial world." A letter giving an account of her early nursing activities illuminates the social history of female immigrants on the impoverished Lower East Side. And a 1915 speech to Vassar students, as Coss notes, argues forcefully that "for a woman to agitate for the rights of women was ... imperative for their happiness ... ethical, ladylike, and womanly."

Such, too, is the message of Elia Peattie’s 1914 novel The Precipice (University of Illinois Press, 1989, $8.95, 242 pp., PB). Indeed, one feels that if Addams or Wald had chosen to write fiction to rouse the affluent women they grew up with to social action, their works would have resembled The Precipice. Peattie, a Chicago newswoman and social activist, admired and was friendly with Addams, and transfers that respect to her fictional social worker Kate Barrington. Like