Retrospective

Margaret Drabble

by Barbara Griffith Furst

Shortly after I began to reread

Margaret Drabble’s novels in

preparation for this retrospective,
I dreamed I met a faceless academic and
said to her, “She’s going to be very diffi-
cult to deal with.” The dream puzzled
me. Writing about one of today’s most
stimulating novelists and one, more-
over, whose books are fun to read should
not be any problem.

Well, as dreams usually do, this one
held a modicum of truth. Drabble’s nov-
els are incisive and lively portrayals of
middle-class British life, and she has
written ten in twenty-five years, begin-
ning when she was in her early twenties.
The difficulty lies in trying to capture
their content and spirit in a single at-
tempt. Furthermore, Drabble defies cat-
egorization. Her style is old-fashioned
and straightforward — nothing experi-
mental here. She follows the tradition of
Austen, Eliot, and Hardy and yet writes
in and about an era of high technology
and spiritual sterility. She speaks about
romantic passion with great poignancy
yet without being cloying. Her work is
intensely female-centered, her women
are educated, often capable and profes-
sional, and occasionally ruthless. Yet
she is not an outspoken feminist. Her
stories are about middle-class people —
some upper and some lower — but not
about class as such. She poses the sour,
narrow Methodism of the industrial
North and Midlands against the hedo-
nism of intellectual and artistic London.
And underneath their tough, modern
shell, her women and men in the later
novels are vulnerable and often filled
with regret. Drabble obviously loves
England and its literature, landscape,
and tradition. At the same time, she
despairs of its current economic and so-
cial conditions.

Margaret Drabble was born in Shef-
field in 1939 to a nonpracticing Metho-
dist mother and Church of England fa-
ther, attended Cambridge, married an
actor and had children young, divorced,
and then married Michael Holroyd, the
biographer. In addition to novels and
short stories, she has written a biography
of Arnold Bennett, who also wrote
about the Midlands, books on Thomas
Hardy and Jane Austen, and a literary
“travelogue” — A Writer’s Britain. More
recently, explaining her long absence
from the fiction scene, she was editor of
the newly revised Oxford Companion to
English Literature.

Drabble’s protagonists, mostly edu-
cated, attractive, and talented women,
have paralleled her own stages in life.
Thus, her first novel, A Summer Bird-
Cage, published in 1962 when she was
twenty-three, is about Sarah, young,
aimless, and recently graduated from
Oxford. She is unexpectedly called back
from an extended stay in France to at-
tend the wedding of her sister Louise to a
wealthy novelist, though Louise loves
someone else. The sisters’ latent rivalry
is dissected, and the plight of bright,
talented, and educated English women
examined. As Sarah explains,

I used to fancy myself as [a don].
But I’ll tell you what's wrong with
that. It’s sex. You can’t be a sexy
don. It’s all right for men, being
learned and attractive, but for a
woman it’s a mistake. It detracts
from the essential seriousness of the
business. . . . You’d soon find
yourself having to play [sex] down
instead of up if you wanted to get to
the top, and when you've only got
one life that seems a pity.

10 ® Belles Lettres

In The Garrick Year, Emma Evans, a
young mother of two children, is mar-
ried to an actor who has been offered a
season at a festival in Hereford. Resent-
fully, the energetic and sometimes con-
trary Emma packs up and moves to the
provinces, giving up the recent offer of a
job at the BBC. Even in her unhappy
exile, however, Emma exalts in the joy
of motherhood. (There are few writers
who are as lyrical as Drabble about breast
feeding.) She also has an affair with an
unlikely suitor that is consummated after
a series of zany, domestic crises. In this
second novel, Drabble displays an un-
canny knack for portraying a particular
profession, in this case, the theater. She
does this again and again, viewing from
the inside, as it were, the law, archaeol-
ogy, real estate speculation, psychiatry,
and academia.

Margaret Drabble. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

The puritanical side of Drabble

emerges in The Millstone, about a

young scholar living in her par-
ents’ London flat while they “do good”
in Africa. Until recently, despite several
flirtations, Rosamund had remained
chaste. Then, after a single encounter
with an affable BBC announcer, she
finds herself pregnant. She decides to
bear the child, unbeknownst to the fa-
ther or her parents, while simultaneous-
ly completing her dissertation on
Elizabethan sonnets and finding a uni-
versity position. While mulling over her
situation before the birth of the baby,
she says “I was reared to believe that the
endurance of privation is a virtue, and
the result is that I believe it to this day.”
She has no idea what to expect of birth
or motherhood, and the story revolves
around her adoration of her infant
daughter, the horror of learning that the
child has a mortal but operable heart
defect, and the nightmare of dealing
with a cruel hospital administration. In
the end, however, we leave her a single
parent, professional, strong, and look-
ing to the future.

Several themes are brought together
in Jerusalem the Golden that will recur in
Drabble’s later work. Celia, a bright,
attractive student at the University of
London from a dour nonconformist fam-
ily in the Midlands meets Clelia Den-
ham, a woman her own age from a family
of novelists, poets, and actors. Much is
made in the book of the similarity of
their names. In the Denham household,
she is at once in the land of her dreams,
her own “Jerusalem, the golden” of the
Methodist hymn. Clelia is everything
Celia wants to be. Clelia’s attractive,
rather scattered but caring novelist
mother also is everything Celia could
have wished in her own grudging, nega-
tive, suspicious parent. She and Clelia’s
older brother Gabriel fall in love al-
though he is married. His wife is a pale,
beautiful, quiet, reclusive, fashion-plate
whom he is unable to reach and who

often sits weeping in their house with its
tattered furniture, peeling wallpaper,
and children’s boots and tricycles clut-
tering the hallway. Her type also will
return in Drabble’s work. Celia knows
that she will have to pay a price for her
idyll with Gabriel and, therefore, can-
not afford to let herself be too happy.

Drabble in The Waterfall again exam-
ines romantic passion, guilt, and pun-
ishment but this time in the extreme.
The book opens with Jane Gray (the
tragedy of whose namesake is not to be
lost on the reader) preparing for the
birth of her second child, after her hus-
band has left her, alone in a London
house in winter waiting for the midwife.
Jane is absolutely passive. Despite the
pushing, pulling, and tugging, with a
minimum of pain she bears a child in a
room that has been heated to steaming.
Immediately afterward, her cousin Lucy
comes to spend the night. The next day,
Lucy’s husband James arrives to stay
with Jane, and Lucy goes home. James
returns alone for several days, bringing
food and caring for Jane tenderly. Al-
most imperceptibly, the shy dependent
woman and the quiet man fall in love.

We are spared no detail of the “damp-
ness” of childbirth and of breast feeding,
of warm and rumpled sheets, of lank
hair, and dirty diapers as James finally
crawls into bed with her and her baby to
sleep the night. Although a third person
presents Jane in the beginning as a pale,
neurasthenic, dependent woman, the
second chapter begins with Jane herself
speaking with harsh morality.

It’s obvious that I haven't told the
truth, about myself and James. How
could I? Why, more significantly,
should I? An interesting query,
though interesting perhaps to myself
alone. And yet I haven't lied. I’ve
merely omitted: merely, profes-
sionally, edited. This is dishonest,
but not as dishonest as deliberate
falsehood. I have often thought . . .
that the ways of regarding an event,
so different, don’t add up to a
whole, they are mutually exclusive:
the social view, the sexual view,
the circumstantial view, the moral
view, these visions contradict each
other; they do not supplement one
another, they cancel one another,
they destroy one another.

The innocent paradise turns into hell.
Jane waits for James every day to
brighten her otherwise dull life, con-
vinced that he, a racing-car driver, will
meet with sudden and fiery death.

Drabble came into her full powers
in her next two novels, The
Needle’s Eye and The Realms of
Gold. The Needle’s Eye is the story of

Rose Vassilou — born of wealth,
shabby, thoughtful, and slightly dis-
organized — who gives away all her

money to build a school in Africa against
the wishes of her parents, friends, and
opportunist husband. She lives with her
small children in a shabby house in a
rundown part of London and attempts to
practice the ideals she was taught, in
return for which she is considered ec-
centric if not outright mad. Much of the
story is told by Simon Camish, a lawyer
to whom Rose quietly mentions at a
party that her former husband is trying to
wrest custody of their three small chil-
dren from her. Simon’s shallow and
wealthy wife is in America; despite his
own misgivings, he is drawn into Rose’s
predicament.

There she sat, her pale, anxious,
nervous face smiling, her hands
behind her head as she leant back

in the chair, her dry frizzy
greeny-yellow hair, her grey-checked
Viyella shirt, her flat chest lifting
only very slightly, as there was so
little of it, and it struck him sud-
denly, painfully, that it was dreadful
audacity to think of loving a whole

person like that, a whole person so
entirely there and so fully existing,
a person with a history survived, a
person who had made herself so
carefully.

The children are kidnapped by their fa-
ther, and the story is played out against
the machinations of the British legal
system about which Drabble evidently
did considerable research.

Upon first picking up The Realms of
Gold, I was struck, as an anthropologist,
by the accuracy and humor with which
Drabble conveys the atmosphere of an
international conference of archaeolo-
gists. Frances Wingate, well-known dis-
coverer and excavator of an obscure but
scientifically exciting Sahelian site, ar-
rives at her hotel on the Mediterranean
after a long trip. She unpacks her suit-
case, puts out the photos of her four,
young children, pours herself a stiff
whiskey to put in time before dinner,
and then begins to weep — for no good
reason. She gives an excellent paper the
next day and condescendingly fields
mundane questions from the floor. She
has divorced the father of her children,
finished an affair with Karol, a loving
but feckless college teacher whom she
still loves, and comes from a family of
depressives, suicides, and alcoholics.
She worries that she also may have in-
herited these tendencies, which she be-
lieves were bred in the bones of the
northern British tribes.

She suffers from an abscessed tooth

that must be pulled and later un-

dergoes surgery for removal of a
benign breast tumor. Her predicaments,
despite their painfulness, often border
on the slap-stick, like the evening
Karol’s wife comes to her house and
smashes glasses, vases, plants, statues,
and ancient pots and potsherds. How-
ever, Frances is tough and resilient and
finds great joy in her four, boisterous
children who carry on despite the storms
that threaten to engulf her.

The Realms of Gold has many layers.
Archaeology is a metaphor for Frances’s
search for meaning in her life — a life
that is after all good in the midst of so
much suffering. An octopus, water, and
frogs and other things that thrive in
primeval mud play a large role. As a
child visiting her grandmother in the
fens, she spent hours flat on her stomach
gazing into ditches full of slimy, crawling
things. Once she and Karol make love
beside a muddy road. Then, attracted by
a strange noise, they look down a drain-
pipe to see hundreds of little frogs happi-
ly climbing all over each other and
chirping.

When an old and forgotten aunt dies
alone in an ancient cottage, Frances
must make the funeral arrangements. In
doing so, she finds several lost relatives
including a geologist cousin, who is al-
ways looking at rock strata and who
knows her work. We leave Frances set-
tled and fulfilled. After all this searching
and “digging,” she comes upon her own
realm of gold as she did in the Sahel —
not necessarily one of the great classical
civilizations, but one of great value nev-
ertheless.

Distinctly different in subject and
tone from Drabble’s former novels is The
Ice Age. As its name suggests, it is pessi-
mistic. Anthony Keating, thirty-eight,
a bankrupt, London real estate specula-
tor, is living alone in the Yorkshire
Dales recovering from a heart attack and
awaiting the arrival of Alison, his lover,
a former actress and the mother of a ce-
rebral palsied child. Alison has gone off
to a backward Iron Curtain country
where her other daughter, Jane, a re-
calcitrant, late adolescent, is in jail after
a toad accident. In London, an elderly
friend of Alison and her husband,
James, has been killed by an Irish Re-