Asian Women

Foreign Alt Your Life

Desert Run: Poems and Stories, by Mitsuye Yamada. Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press (P.O. Box 908, Latham, New York 12110), 1988, $7.95 (PB), $17.95 (HB), 102 pp. Seventeen Syllables and Other Stories, by Hisaye Yamamoto. Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 1988, $9.95 (PB), $19.95 (HB), 140 pp.

by Scarlet Cheng

Too frequently, special presses produce works that appeal only to rarefied tastes. Kitchen Table, which unabashedly subtitles itself a "women of color press," has brought us two impressive works from Japanese American writers that are at once real revelations of the self and of American culture.

One is a collection of short stories by Hisaye Yamamoto, the other poetry and two short stories by Mitsuye Yamada. Both women have had long careers in writing. Yamamoto began writing as a teenager and later published in Partisan Review and Harper’s Bazaar, as well as smaller publications. Arranged chronologically, her stories in Seventeen Syllables span forty years and are fascinating social history, showing us the changing face of race relations, as well as Japanese-American self-perception.

Chinese American Portraits: Personal Histories, 1828-1988 by Ruthanne Lum McCunn

San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1988, $29.95 (HB), $16.95 (PB), 176 pp. (photos)

The Chinese are an especially private people. Although a century and a half of Chinese immigration to this country has elapsed, the history of their arrival, struggle, and endurance has been hidden, even from succeeding generations of Chinese Americans themselves. Ruthanne Lum McCunn’s compilation of biography and photography in Chinese American Portraits addresses that history in a personal and quietly moving way. With its specific life stories and snapshots, this is a collective family album of the Chinese people in this country. Each individual tale enlarges in her narrative to become a mirror for the whole. The story of Yung Wing, the first Chinese to graduate from Yale University, represents early attempts of the Chinese to gain Western education. Mary Bong, who managed to save enough money for a passage from China to Vancouver in 1895, when she was fifteen, spent the next sixty years struggling to make ends meet. Hers is the story of the tenacious pioneer spirit. Settling in frontier Alaska, she worked until the end of her days, from restauranting to mining, to trolling for fish. When the Exclusion Act was finally repealed in 1943, she applied for American citizenship so that she could vote. Once asked if she would go back to China, she replied, "I'll never go back. China seems like a faraway dream." The dilemma of mixed marriages is examined through the family story of Arlee Hen, the offspring of a time in Mississippi history when Chinese immigrants married black women. In the same chapter, the caption to a photograph of Anglo-Chinese Edith Eaton (looking very WASP and Edwardian in a high white-collar blouse) tells us she was tormented by her marginal identity. Even her parents, she wrote in her autobiography, Leaves from the Mental Portfolio of an Eurasian, "would never understand. How could they? He

Winter 1989

Yamamoto avoids sentimentalizing her people, making these some of the frankest stories of Japanese-American life I have read. Couples of this "model minority" have arguments; a husband gets hooked on gambling; another husband is violently jealous of his wife’s success as a haiku poet; a wife has a romance with the hired hand; a child wishes her parents dead.

Particularly striking is the writer’s honest treatment of cross-cultural themes, especially relationships between Japanese-Americans and other minorities. Despite being strangers in a strange land, Asians can discriminate even against one another, especially when we find ourselves identifying with the majority culture. In "Wilshire Bus" a drunkard harasses an older Chinese couple, "Why don’t you go back to China, where you can be coolies working in your bare feet out in the rice fields?" Unstopped, he continues to embellish on his insults. For main character and fellow passenger Esther, "because she was Japanese, not Chinese, [she was] therefore in the present case immune. Then she was startled to realize that what she was actually doing was gloating over the fact that the drunken man had specified the Chinese was the unwanted."

It is only after the drunkard gets off the bus that anyone dares speak. A white bystander lamely apologizes, " ‘I want you to know,’ he said, ‘that we aren’t all like that man.’" This is a scene many of us who have gotten on the wrong bus will recognize. It is all the more startling to read in print because somehow we have managed to forget it in order to go on with life.

Clockwise from left: Hisaye Yamamoto (photo by Carol Chen) and Mitsuye Yamada, both writers, and Leah Hing (from Chinese American Portraits), aviator and mechanic.

Also remarkable is how many of Yamamoto’s characters are playing against typecasting: an unambitious Japanese drifter in "Las Vegas Charley," an illiterate white woman in "Reading and Writing,” a hardworking Filipino (neither "indolent" nor "gaudy" as the Japanese has categorized his race) in "Yoneko’s Earthquake." These brief close-ups of social realism make us recognize the rich diversity of our culture and the quirky uniqueness of each individual.

Mitsuye Yamada in "Desert Run" writes of the past with more nostalgia, more wistful lyricism. For her, too, of course, the past of prejudice and discrimination stings, but she fondly conjures up memories of grandmothers, of O Bon celebrations, of friends who have passed away.

Born in Kyushu, Japan, and raised in Seattle, Washington, Yamada is old enough to have been moved with her family into a concentration camp during World War II. She teaches English at Cypress College in California; her first volume of poetry, Camp Notes and Other Poems, was published by Shameless Hussy Press in 1976.

Yamada’s poetry has the terse blend of emotions and imagery: the twist of words that creates the twist of vision that makes poetry alive for us. And to it, of course, she brings the weight of her cultural experience — the pain of living in a foreign country and knowing yourself a foreigner all your life, from the way you look, to the way you think, to the way you talk.

Her work is dappled with Japanese phrases. Fortunately, Japanese transliterates well into English (the Japanese call the English spelling of Japanese words "romaji"), and it is worth pronouncing the words in your head as you read. Whether you know Japanese or not, the short syllables add a Japanese cadence to the mental recitation.

—continued on page 11

More Than the Basics

Lapse of Time, by Wang Anyi. San Francisco: China Books & Periodicals, 1988, $8.95 (PB), $16.95 (HB), 235 pp. by Scarlet Cheng

Fiction from the People’s Republic of China intrigues us because we long to understand something of the long-hidden psyche of that important but remote nation. When one picks up Lapse of Time, a collection of stories from thirty-five-year-old writer Wang Anyi, we expect revelation.

Revelation is not exactly what we get with this second of China Books’ "New Chinese Fiction" series, but we do get some glimpses. The winner of several Chinese literary prizes, Wang has been praised for her "refined" and "elegant" style. It is unfortunate that we cannot assess this ourselves, due to some awkward translations of the material.

Still, it is easy enough to identify Wang’s subject matter: ordinary urban dwellers, living in Shanghai where the author grew up. They lead a lean but remarkably tenacious existence. Despite the constant struggle for food, jobs, and living space (the basics) they get by with compassion and good humor.

Even shopping for a fish can be a travail. In "The Base of the Wall," a young girl arrives at market only to "see a line of bricks, broken baskets, and stools strung out in front of the counter. From recent experiences, she knew that these stood for people; they were people’s tokens. She sighed and took her place honestly at the end of this strange line, lined up behind a tile."

The author belonged to a cultural performance troupe in 1972, and personal experience illuminates "The Stage, a Miniature World," spiced with acute observations of power struggles in such a group. Designed to promote national culture, the fictional troupe finds itself stooping to featuring an electric guitarist because audiences crave the new. In another update to the times, the simple but competent stage manager Fukui finds himself replaced by a party bureaucrat who "had no idea about the rules of discipline for a cultural troupe though he was familiar with the army’s ‘three rules and eight points for attention.’" At first shaken by his displacement, Fukui plods on until finally rehabilitated.

Change is much of what these stories are about: in the political and social environment, in family fortunes, in the self. Having lived through the upheavals of the Cultural Revolution as a youth, Wang often spins stories around the dilemmas and contradictions during and after that tragic time.

The novella "Lapse of Time" takes us through some ten years of the Cultural

—continued on page 11

Belles Lettres @ 9