Short Reviews

Buffer

From CPU

To Printer

The Women’s Computer

Literacy Handbook  
by Deborah L. Brecher

New York: New American Library/Plume,  
1985, $9.95, 254 pp.

Whether you know nothing, some-  
thing, or a lot about computers, you  
should read this book! If you think a  
computer is a wild technological beast,  
you will learn to look it in the eye with-  
out fear. If you know a little already, you  
will now be able to walk into its cage. If  
you have already come that far, reading  
this book will enable you not only to ride  
the beast, but to teach it some tricks as  
well. Regardless of what you know, you  
will appreciate the refreshing clarity  
with which Deborah Brecher explains  
the mechanics and terminology of com-  
puters. She writes with intelligence and  
humor — and with a simplicity that is  
sometimes downright homespun.  
Brecher follows two effective rules:

Call Me Woman  
by Ellen Kuzwayo

No technical words are used without first  
being defined, and all definitions are  
based on things you already know. She  
uses mundane analogies (cooking being  
the primary one) and familiar objects  
such as typewriters, bathtubs, au-  
diotapes, and file cabinets to explain  
even the most complex ideas. But do not  
be fooled by this seeming simplicity (and  
by examples that may seem corny to  
those more experienced) — this book is  
packed with essential information and  
will stand us as a comprehensive refer-  
ence work.

The book is based on the curriculum  
of the Women’s Computer Literacy  
Project, a 2-day seminar created by  
Brecher (who is also founder of the  
National Women’s Mailing List) when  
she discovered that “there really wasn’t  
any good beginning place to learn about  
computers in general. Particularly,  
there was nothing available that made it  
easy for women to gain these skills with-  
out being patronized, put down, or  
paralyzed by unnecessary fears.”

Add to Brecher’s list of credits a sense  
of purpose. In the introduction she  
states: “A common myth is that you  
need to be a mathematician or a scientist  
to understand how computers work.  
This myth is as dangerous as it is wrong,  
because it serves to trigger women’s  
traditional math/science phobias, with  
the result, of course, of keeping women  
out of the field.” This book, and the Lit-  
eracy Project itself, are testaments to her  
belief that women can and should (“it  
will be only a short time before all jobs  
are computer dependent”) learn about  
computers.

— Deanna Cook

The Orchid House  
by Phyllis Shand Allfrey

San Francisco: Spinsters Ink, 1985,  
$7.95, 266 pp. (PB)

Newspaper reports about South Africa  
become a personal reality on reading  
Kuzwayo. One cannot remain unaf-  
fected by this woman’s suffering and  
courage. It is the testimony of Black  
South African women who are defining  
themselves into a new reality, often  
breaking from traditional patterns of  
existence. We move with Kuzwayo from  
the security of home and family to rejec-  
tion. After the death of her grand-  
parents and mother there is no one to  
whom she can turn for guidance. She  
struggles out of a harrowing marriage and  
narrowly escapes with her life. She feels  
the stigma of divorce deeply but is sur-  
prised that people still accept her and  
entrust her with positions of power.

The beauty of her story is in the grad-  
ual unfolding of her hidden potential.  
Each new crisis or decision reveals an-  
other facet of her personality. Here is a  
woman charting her own path, often  
breaking new ground. She draws  
strength from, and is in turn encouraged  
by, other women who have chosen to  
dedicate themselves to working together  
to fight both racism and poverty. We get  
an insight into how women, both rural  
and urban, are organizing themselves to  
work to overcome institutionalized and  
traditional biases.

In writing this autobiography  
Kuzwayo makes two significant ideolog-  
ical decisions: To tell her story only in-  
sofar as it is representative of women in  
South Africa and to depict the positive  
side of their organizational struggle. She  
chooses not to address the issue of con-  
flict between people of color in South  
Africa. It is a pity that her preaching  
tone and her emphatically Christian  
framework devalue an otherwise very  
moving story of Black women’s life in  
South Africa.

— Geetanjali Singh

12 Belles Lettres

Three Continents Press (1346  
Connecticut Ave., NW, Washington, DC  
20036), 1985, $20 (HB), $10 (PB),  

235 pp.

Halfway through this extraordinary  
novel, Miss Stella fears that her son will  
come down with a fever once again.  
“She went out on the portico and looked  
down on the land, sighing as if her heart  
had broken and the wind was whistling  
through it. ‘Beauty grows like a weed  
here,’ she said, ‘and so does disease.’ ”

The land that Phyllis Shand Allfrey  
populates with characters of her im-  
agination is the Caribbean island of  
Dominica. People who know say it is  
Dominica — the climate, the politics,  
the metaphysical landscape. Madam  
and the Master, heads of a White Creole  
family, buy an estate called L’Aro-  
matique where, under the scrutiny  
of the Black servant Lally, the three  
grown daughters return home. Stella  
comes from a marriage in America where  
they grow “only useful trees,” and her  
life has been similarly circumscribed.  
Through Joan and her friendship with  
the Black Baptiste, Allfrey explores the  
politics of the emerging underclass. But  
if Joan is the idealist, it is the hedonist  
Natalie who, with her money, protects  
the drug-addicted Master and his wife.

First published in 1953, The Orchid  
House has been compared with Wide  
Sargasso Sea, the 1966 novel by Allfrey’s  
fellow Dominican Jean Rhys. Both  
books explore the decaying White  
family in a southern clime, a theme that  
Faulkner perfected in The Sound and the  
Fury. If Allfrey has not achieved the  
acclaim of Rhys and Faulkner, it is per-  
haps because her soft complexity appears  
so effortless, so artless. Her land of  
beauty and disease is so real that it seems  
not to have a human creator.

— Lisa Forestier

Joe Jones  
by Anne Lamott

North Point Press (850 Talbot Ave.,  
Berkeley, CA 94706), 1985, $15.50,  
242 pp.

Anne Lamott’s third novel should give  
heart to anyone tired of academic up-  
per-middle-class fiction. The lives in Joe  
Jones are lived in Jessie’s Cafe — what  
Lamott calls “a broken-down waterfront  
dive” on San Francisco Bay. The  
characters are marginal, colorful, and  
for the most part endearing, chief among  
them the cafe’s cook Louise, an  
attractive, overweight, self-educated  
nurturer whose drive to band-aid the  
emotional wounds of those around her  
forms an ironic thematic undertone for  
the book. Episodic and domestically  
detailed, the plot wanders among her  
relationships with Jessie, the cafe’s  
elderly owner; Willie, Jessie’s gay  
grandson and Louise’s close friend; var-  
ious cafe regulars; and the Joe Jones of  
the title, Louise’s “current ex,” a child-  
man whose excuses, dramatics, and  
general immaturity have worn out even  
her compulsive tenderness.

Lamott has an amazing eye both for  
visual detail and the subtleties (and ex-  
cesses) of inner states, especially as  
Louise agonizes over whether to take Joe  
Jones back and organizes her spiritual life  
around the needs of others. It is that  
spirituality — the question of what atti-  
tude to take in relation to the miseries  
and beauties of ordinary life — that gives  
the book a transcendent sweetness and  
superiority. If in her future work Lamott  
can leave behind her choice of a present  
tense narrative voice laden with italics  
and topical references, that superiority  
will be even more clearly evident.  
— K. Deborah Taub

Anne Tyler. Photo © by Diana Walker.

The Accidental Tourist  
by Anne Tyler

New York: Knopf, 1985, $16.95, 355 pp.

To read a novel by Anne Tyler is a  
deeply satisfying experience for a lover of  
fiction, and this novel is among her  
best. As in her other books, eccentric,  
awkward, and even vaguely unattractive  
people brush up against circumstances  
and one another until the eccentricities  
first come into sharp relief and then wear  
away, so that character is exposed and  
often changed.

Macon Leary, a writer of travel books  
for people who dislike leaving the com-  
forts and familiarity of home, also wants  
to “take trips without a jolt.” His atti-  
tude toward life is the same: He tries, as  
his estranged wife Sarah says, to “skip  
through life unchanged.” His reaction to  
travel and life events — his son Ethan’s  
murder and Sarah’s leaving — is to  
organize his life more tightly and to  
withdraw from all but superficial human  
contact. Circumstances prove too much  
for him, however. Ethan’s dog starts to  
attack people, and the regular veterinary  
hospital refuses to board him when  
Macon is about to go on a trip. By  
chance Macon takes the dog to the  
Meow-Bow Animal Hospital, where he  
meets Muriel Pritchett. Although also a  
denizen of Baltimore, Muriel — with  
her wild hair, poor grammar and pro-  
nunciation, and promiscuous back-  
ground — is of a country entirely dif-  
ferent from Macon’s. She is a fighter, a  
taker of risks.

Macon tries to ignore her and to  
withdraw again into his “orderly” life.  
But his organization goes too far, and the  
escapes into familiar routine and family  
prove inadequate. As he falls apart  
emotionally and physically, he is forced  
to call on Muriel for help. Gradually  
through contact with her Macon grows  
from a mass of eccentricities into an au-  
tonomous individual able to make dif-  
ficult decisions and, despite his pain, to  
experience joy.

Macon’s disintegration and rein-  
tegration are presented with Tyler’s  
special blend of humor and melancholy  
and with the accretion of telling detail  
that works superlatively on linguistic  
and symbolic as well as descriptive  
levels. This is truly a book to savor.

— Ellen Dykes

May/June 1986