Have You Met  
Ms. Jones?  

How I Became Hettie Jones, by Hettie Jones. New York: Dutton, 1990  
$18.95, 304 pp.  

by Linda Hamalian  

B.... 1958 and 1965, Hettie and LeRoi Jones were  
thick into Greenwich Village Beat life. They listened to  
Mingus at the Five Spot, hung out with hip writers and  
artists at the Cedar Tavern, and edited Yugen, a literary  
quarterly devoted to "a new consciousness in arts and let-  
ters." A tender and intimate account of an interracial mar-  
riage, How I Became Hettie Jones provides a nostalgic trip  
back to a time when too much sex, drugs, or booze more  
often meant lost time rather than a ticket to an AIDS ward  
or Daytop Village. And with this memoir Hettie has her day  
in court, so to speak, responding to Amiri Baraka’s cold  
version of their seven years together in The Autobiography  
of LeRoi Jones. (His description of the early days of their  
relationship: "We liked talking to each other, apparently.  
Maybe we liked sleeping with each other, but there was  
never any passion.")  

From the start, Hettie uses her artist’s eye to describe the  
voyage that she would have to make if she were going to  
escape the stifling future her middle-class Jewish parents  
from suburban Queens had envisioned for her. (To her  
dismay, a friend predicts that she will end up in Mamaroneck  
with Marjorie Morningstar.) On Sunday trips to visit  
family in Newark, she stops with her parents at Katz’s on  
Houston Street, one of the ugliest crossways of New York  
City. But for Hettie it is a "mysterious reach [that] seemed  
to hold, river to river, some secret old New York that  
hadn’t ceased to exist.... Laurelton never spoke of that  
place, just as they would never see my return to it." Firmly  
planted in a tiny Morton Street flat in the Village, Hettie  
dons the “official” black tights of the Beat "chick" and tries  
acting and writing. She rejects the sacred texts of her liberal  
arts education: "I imagined the nine letters of N.e.w.  
C.r.i.t.i.c. as the nine Supreme Court Justices, presiding  
over all that was robed and respectable." In place of the  
"goyische Mozart and Chopin" she had practiced as a child,  
she turns to jazz, which helps her understand why she had  
"always looked for the wrong notes on the piano." Working  
as a secretary, she meets LeRoi Jones, another aspiring  
poet. When she becomes pregnant by Roi for a second time,  
they marry. His career thrives, and though a loving and  
devoted mother of two daughters, Hettie bristles at her  
confinement. The constant flow of writers and artists  
"crashing" at their Chelsea apartment gives her the illusion  
that she is still part of the scene: But she is more earth  
mother, orchestrating large spaghetti dinners, hauling shop-  
ping carts full of wash home from the coin-op laundry. She  
is still managing editor of Yugen but, unlike her husband,  
she works at the kitchen table, the better to assume domestic  
responsibilities.  

Posing at times as a detached observer, Hettie dramatical-  
ly captures the irony of her position as the wife of LeRoi  
Jones. She would have been proud to bring him home to  

Laurelton: "He was even-tempered, easy, kind, responsible  
and everyone else liked him too — I thought he was such a  
good catch!" Hettie believes that race is not an issue be-  
tween them: “race disappears in the house — in the bath-  
room, under the covers, in the bedbugs in your common  
mattress, in the morning sleep in your eyes." Yet she is  
conscious of the "lady and stud" stereotype some people  
project upon them.  

On occasion she is intimidated into lying about his  
identity — to a woman conducting a survey; to the family of  
Roi’s white Air Force buddy who is beaten up while helping  
Roi move some furniture. During her first months in the  
Village, Hettie had auditioned for The Threepenny Opera  
but the stage manager insisted on a couch test, so she relin-  
quished her chance at the part. Seven years later, this same  
man directed LeRoi Jones’s The Slave, and Hettie, feeling  
as if she were in her worst nightmare, has to contend with  
everyone’s assumption that she is the prototype for Grace,  
the white female character who calls her Black ex-husband a  
"nigger murderer" and who perishes when her house is  
bombed.  

However, as much as Roi wanted Hettie to disappear, she  
stayed very much alive — writing poetry and editing child-  
ren’s books about Native Americans and African-American  
women. Not long after she becomes a single parent, she  
joyfully discovers that she "no longer needed what women  
were taught to live for!" She decides not to marry again.  
Strong in her sense of herself and her accomplishments, her  
days of accommodation are over.  

® Linda Hamalian teaches literature and writing at William  
Paterson College. Norton will publish her A Life of  
Kenneth Rexroth next spring.