Belles Lettres Interview

Jeanette Winterson’s wholly original,  
humorous way of up-ending conventional  
wisdom proved to characterize her  
thinking as well as her writing during a  
recent telephone interview with Suzanne  
Scott and Lynne M. Constantine.  
Winterson was in New York promoting  
her latest book, Sexing the Cherry.

«

We’re always interested in what motivates people to  
write books. How did you come to be a writer?

It wasn’t intentional! I never wanted to be a writer because  
it seemed to me you had to struggle for years and years and  
never get anywhere. Particularly, you never made any  
money. And if you were brought up poor, as I was, poverty  
is not an attraction. Scribbling in a garret is something only  
people with private incomes can do.

I did try to get various jobs when I left Oxford, but I was  
splendidly unsuccessful. Eventually, during my second go at  
trying to be an editor at Pandora Press, I was so bored and  
fed up when I realized I wasn’t going to get the job that I  
began telling the person in charge various stories — some  
true and some apocryphal — about my early life and Pente-  
costal evangelism. She said to me, “If you can write it the  
way you tell it to me, I'll buy it." And that’s how Oranges  
Are Not the Only Fruit came into being and how I came to  
be a writer.

Exactly how autobiographical is Oranges?

Well, if I were to tell you, you’d be the very first person I  
ever told. Everyone wants to know how autobiographical it  
is, and the truth is, I can’t remember.

An extraordinary fact about Oranges is that you do not  
come off as unsympathetic to Pentecostalism, despite a  
rather frank depiction of its grim and stultifying world  
view. Was that a way of writing the story, or is that the  
way you feel now?

I learned very early on that bitterness is nobody’s friend.  
I’m not a bitter person. I find that both compassion and  
laughter have allowed me to get free from what was a rather  
dreadful upbringing. I always like to see the other side  
because there always is one.

Although in many ways I think the charismatic or evan-  
gelical movements are extremely dangerous, I also know  
that they believe sincerely in what they’re about. And if you  
can’t understand these people, you can never really portray  
them.

Oddly, people who read Oranges tend to come down  
resolutely on the side of the heroine even though she chal-  
lenges the three things many people hold most dear — the  
normality of heterosexuality, the sanctity of the family, and  
the notion that the church is about love and not about pow-  
er. I think this happens precisely because Oranges isn’t  
bitter: There’s enough space left for people to think it  
through.

a) a

That’s a hallmark of all three of your novels —  

a lot of space.

I hope so, because I think that reading is not a passive act.  
It’s a creative act. It’s a relationship between the writer and  
a person the writer will probably never meet. I think it’s  
very wrong to write in a way that leaves no room for the  
reader to maneuver. I don’t want to get in the way. What  
I'd really like to do is to perform the Indian Rope Trick —  
go higher and higher and eventually disappear.

There is a considerable  
stylistic leap between  
Oranges (1985) and The  
Passion (1987). How did  
that change come about?  
After a long silence and a  
lot of worry and anxiety.  
Oranges in England was a  
huge success, and I was  
taken aback by it. Whenev-  
er you do something that’s  
a success, a hundred peo-  
ple pop up and say, "Why  
don’t you do this next or  
that next?" Any good idea,  
and somebody wants to  
milk it to death. I was not  
prepared for that sort of interest in me because I am, in  
many respects, a retiring person. I wondered how I could  
possibly find my own voice again in the midst of all this  
noise. It often does silence writers. And I was being told  
who I was and how to write. I’d spent all my life trying to  
get out of people telling me what to do. So I sacked my  
agent and I wouldn’t go back to the same publisher. In  
effect, I started again.

It was an enormous risk, but it paid off. When I was  
calculating, I said, "Well, all right, I could do what every-  
body says, and I’d be all right for a few years, then what  
would I have? Nothing. Whereas if I do it this way, and it  
does work, it will be absolutely mine."

Jeanette Winterson.  
Photo by Barry Lewis

Sexing the Cherry (1989) follows in the same stylistic vein  
as The Passion. It’s so dense and rich — how long did it  
take you to write it?

I think writing is a process that starts long before the writer  
actually writes and probably goes on long afterward. It’s  
rather like the way the Arabs weave rugs. They don’t stop.  
They just cut them off at a certain spot on the loom. There  
is no particular beginning or end. So it was with Sexing the  
Cherry. It came out of notes of sorts, and the end of it ran  
into other projects.

Your love of literature and fondness for literary allusion  
are evident in both The Passion and Sexing the Cherry.  
What writers did you read as a child?

That really came about when I went to Oxford and found  
out that there were far more books and writers than I had  
ever thought possible. As a child I was very narrow. I  
learned to read from the Bible. There weren’t any other