% ‘T O quailing, Mrs. Gaskell!  
| | No holding back.” Patrick  
AN Bronte, father of the artis-  
tic Bronte children, used these words  
when he urged Elizabeth Gaskell to be  
Charlotte’s biographer. The Life of  
Charlotte Bronte, begun in 1856, just a  
year after Charlotte died, threatened to  
be a hard task. Mrs. Gaskell traveled to  
Haworth and other cities where  
Charlotte had lived. She revealed the  
horrors of the Bronte children’s school-  
ing. She described brother Branwell’s  
seduction by the mother of his pupils.  
She recreated his alcoholic rantings in  
the small house he shared with his sisters  
and father. She wrote about the deaths  
of all Charlotte’s siblings and then the  
death of the biography’s subject herself.  
And when the book was finished, Mrs.  
Gaskell faced a shocked reaction and  
accusations of slander.  

But Elizabeth Gaskell needed no  
fighting words. As a novelist, story  
writer, and biographer, she was not one  
to quail or hold back. Throughout her  
life as a writer, she showed courage in  
her choice of subjects, writing sympa-  
thetically about poor industrial workers  
in two novels and a seduced girl in  
another. She experimented with fic-  
tional forms like realistic, pastoral, and  
historical novels and surreal ghost sto-  
ries. Any notion that Elizabeth Gaskell  
was a “typical” Victorian lady novelist  
— conventional, brainless, just some-  
one’s “Mrs.” — has to evaporate when  
her real achievement is judged.  

A popular writer in her own time, she  
sold thousands of copies of her books. In  
addition, she published stories and serial  
versions of her novels in the periodicals  
of the day like The Cornhill and Charles  
Dickens’s Household Words and All the  
Year Round. In our time, she remains a  
moving, amusing, eye-opening  
storyteller. Her masterpieces Wives and  
Daughters and Cranford are perpetually  
popular. Not only does she paint con-  
vincing pictures of the Northern town  
and countryside she knew, she also sends  
the imagination careening with great  
adventures and moody mysteries.  

~ Elizabeth Cleghorn Stevenson  

m= Gaskell, born in London in 1810,  
J lived in the North of England  
until her death in 1865. She wrote six  
novels, two novellas, more than forty  
stories, many incidental essays, that first  
biography of Charlotte Bronte, and  
enough letters to fill 942 published  
pages. She produced all this work in the  
midst of a fulfilling marriage, the rearing  
of four daughters, a busy social life, and  
an active religious commitment.  

After her mother died and her father  
remarried, Elizabeth was taken as an in-  
fant to the North of England. In the  
small market town of Knutsford near  
Manchester, she grew up amid a large  
and lively extended family of influential  
Unitarians. It was an unusually free  
childhood for a nineteenth-century girl.  
She roamed the countryside, visited  
many welcoming homes, enjoyed good  
schooling.  

Most important, she learned the Dis-  
senting creed that encouraged her self-  
reliance. Denied access to establishment  
university education and the profes-  
sions, Unitarians — her close relatives  
— expressed their intellect and creativi-  
ty in business, science, and the arts. In  
religion, as critic Patsy Stoneman sum-  
marizes their beliefs, “Unitarians be-  

14 @ Belles Lettres  

lieved that every human being has the  

qualities — reason and love — for self- _  

government and social responsibility.”  
As a result, they resisted narrow creeds  
that censure the promptings of other  
people’s consciences. They understood  
that women, just as much as men, faced  
the moral challenge to make a meaning-  
ful life. This liberal and egalitarian re-  
ligion formed Mrs. Gaskell’s world view.  
In contact with her Dissenting kin,  
Elizabeth became an attractive, spritely  
woman eager for life. When she married  
the young Unitarian minister William  
Gaskell, it was for love based on shared  
friends, respect, and religious beliefs.  
William Gaskell preached from the  
Cross Street Chapel in Manchester,  

Drawing of Elizabeth Gaskell  
by Catherine McDermott  

where the young couple went to live in  
1832. At that time, manufacturing,  
especially cotton-weaving mills, made  
Manchester rich and busy. It also cre-  
ated misery in the new industrial work-  
ing class. The Gaskells’ religious ethic  
moved them to work among the poor.  
They taught Bible and secular literature  
to factory hands; they brought food and  
middle-class know-how into the hovels  
of poor families. When their only son  
died in infancy, Elizabeth began to write  
for publication stories that she had been  
telling her family for years.  

For the next eighteen years, she pur-  
sued a demanding writing career while  
she maintained an active family, social,  
and religious life. She traveled exten-  
sively to Europe and to vacation retreats  
in England when possible. She was an  
influential novelist in a period of the  
greatest English writers.  

In 1864, she arranged with her pub-  
lisher, George Smith, to save the pro-  
ceeds of her last works for a special pur-  
pose: she bought and furnished a new  
home in the South of England as a sur-  
prise on William Gaskell’s retirement.  
As her daughters and she finished the  
task, and as she was writing the last  
chapters of Wives and Daughters, Mrs.  
Gaskell died suddenly of a cerebral hem-  
orrhage in the Hampshire house at the  
age of fifty-five.  

‘YY y looking closely at four of her  
|S) novels, we can get an idea of her  
)__/ major themes and methods. In  
her first novel, Mary Barton, published  
in 1847 when the author was thirty-  
seven years old, she portrayed “those  
who elbowed me daily in the busy  
streets.” Elizabeth Gaskell relied on her  
own observations, not current economic  

theories like laissez-faire, to tell the story  
of proletarian families she knew. They  
lived in fetid squalor, starved of food,  
light, and fresh air. They struggled to  
retain their dignity while wages fell,  
prices rose, and their work killed and  
maimed them. They wanted, a contem-  
porary observed, “a Dante to record  
their suffering.” As their Dante, Mrs.  
Gaskell told their tale “as if I were speak-  
ing to a friend over the fire on a winter’s  
night and describing real occurrences.”  

Those occurrences, the plot of Mary  
Barton, involve varied characters: mill  
owner, labor organizer, male and female  
factory hand, each represented in au-  
thentic homely speech and manner.  
The events culminate in political fail-  
ure, murder, and the death of John Bar-  
ton, the character who is the moral cen-  
ter of the novel. Like Dickens, the au-  
thor creates sympathy for her characters  
— and the real people they represent —  
through the medium of a compelling  
narrative.  

The overnight success of Mary Barton  
helped revive the novel of social con-  
science in England. It carried Elizabeth  
Gaskell into London’s literary circle.  
She came to know all the literary lights  
of her time, to befriend Charlotte  
Bronte, to write for Charles Dickens.  
Mary Barton also brought accusations  
that the author, who was temporarily  
anonymous, was an enemy to “his” class.  
Once her critics knew her identity, she  
suffered more personal insults: a minis-  
ter’s wife, a woman, should be silent  
where men’s expert judgment about  
profit-and-loss was concerned. The  
reactions did not sway her. Here as later,  
Mrs. Gaskell trusts her own observa-  
tions; she will not hold her tongue.  

The diatribes against Mary Barton  
made her unhappy, but she chose for her  

next major work a subject more contro-  

versial than the pathos of Manchester’s  
working conditions. In Ruth (1853),  
Elizabeth Gaskell tells the standard Vic-  
torian cautionary tale of an innocent girl  
seduced and abandoned. But she tells it  
with a profound difference that once  
again shocked her readers.  

Because of her tolerant religious faith  
and her experience with poor women in  
Manchester, Mrs. Gaskell expresses  
sympathy for her heroine. This was un-  
usual in the fiction of the 1850s. Con-  
ventional stories about seduction blame  
the “fallen woman” for her “sin” and  
condemn her to the streets or death for  
giving up her prized virginity. In Ruth,  
the heroine is indeed seduced by a man  
she loves and bears an illegitimate child.  
Yet the story emphasizes how vulnerable  
is the orphaned Ruth. It understands  
sexual love and describes the idyll with  
her seducer as a sensual wonder.  

He took off her bonnet, without,  
speaking, and began to place her  
flowers in her hair. . . she resem-  
bled a rose of June; the great,  

heavy, white flowers drooped on  
either side of her beautiful head,  
and if her brown hair was a little  
disordered, the very disorder seemed  
to add a grace.  

Posing as a widow, Ruth is sheltered by a  
minister’s family, who help her rear her  
illegitimate son. Like Hester Prynne,  
she devotes herself to child and commu-  
nity and grows to moral awareness.  
When the seducer returns to offer mar-  
riage, Ruth rejects him. At the end of  
the novel, Mrs. Gaskell cannot resist an  
emotional deathbed scene typical of the  
age, but through most of her story she  
has traced the atypical path of a woman  
who becomes a mature moral agent in a  
stiff-necked community that becomes  
caring.  

What an uproar this novel caused!  
The author felt like “St. Sebastian tied  

to a tree to be shot at with arrows” when  
reviewers and moral watchdogs circled  
around her baying their little moralities.  
She says her piece, however — “No  
quailing, Mrs. Gaskell. No holding  
back” — on the plight of young women  
in a paternalistic society. She advances a  
compassionate, Christian resolution for  
that plight.  

fo N ounterpoint to her topical tales  
q of urban strife are the novels  
‘A Elizabeth Gaskell placed in  
English country towns. Like Knutsford  
where the author grew up, these villages  
retain history, natural beauty, and the  
rhythm of the seasons. In Cranford, the  
small masterwork of 1852, nearly all the  
characters are single women whose gen-  
teel poverty is observed by a young nar-  
rator: “My next visit to Cranford was in  
the summer. There had been neither  
births, deaths, nor marriages since I was  
there last. Everybody lived in the same  
house, and wore pretty nearly the same  
well-preserved, old-fashioned clothes.”  
Cranford reveals Mrs. Gaskell’s fas-  
cination with the artifacts, clothing,  
manners, and attitudes of two genera-  
tions before. Lace at the bosom, correct  
cap on the head, opinions at the ready,  
Miss Matty and Miss Deborah Jenkyns  

“travel occasionally in sedan chairs, wear  
“pattens to lift them above the muck of  

the street, read The Spectator. They have  
to acknowledge that things change,  
even in Cranford, however. “There  
were many old ladies living here then;  
we are principally ladies now, I know,  
but we are not so old as the ladies used to  
be when I was a girl.”  

Mrs. Gaskell admires her Cranford  
ladies while she smiles at them. Their  
peace is disturbed, not by labor strikes  
and wild passion, but by quiet events:  
the return of a traveler, the holiday ball,  
the occasional marriage, a death. So  
they suck the meaning out of every mor-  
sel of life. They embody the gentleness,  
sanity, restraint, and respect for others  
that make life sweet. These are the same  
values that triumphed over greater odds  
in the novels of social conscience dis-  
cussed earlier. They are, in fact, the  
precepts of the Unitarian faith that  
shape all her work.  

Under different names, the emble-  
matic village of Cranford appears in  
Mrs. Gaskell’s other pastoral novels.  
She loves such villages but knows their  
gossipy narrowness. Between their  
strong traditions and their limitations,  
these villages test character and preserve  
simple wisdom for the young women  
who grow up there. They also provide  
drama and humor in the novels.  

Wives and Daughters (1865), her mas-  
terpiece, dramatizes the choices offered  
in such a small village, now called Hol-  
lingford. Like most of Mrs. Gaskell’s  
protagonists, Molly Gibson is a mother-  
less girl. The daughter of a country doc-  
tor, she is invited to the Towers and the  
Squire’s Grange, the great homes near  
Hollingford, where she observes the idi-  
osyncrasies of aristocrat and landed gen-  
try. She takes on the role of daughter  
and sister to the Squire’s family. When  
she gains both a self-centered step-  
mother and a beautiful stepsister, Molly  
discovers new secrets, all played out in a  
few miles of Hollingford.  

In this teapot of a setting, Mrs. Gas-  
kell creates a tempest of character in  
danger that equals anything by George  
Eliot or Charlotte Bronte. Like them,  
the author attends carefully to the rituals  
of courtship as they affect her heroine.  
Courtship is the crucial prelude to mar-  
riage. In nineteenth-century marriage, a  
young Englishwoman yields her prop-  
erty, her body, her future children, and