hattanized, it’s that I won’t....
they say, ‘Hitch your wagon to a star’:
I say, ‘Hitch your cart to the calf’s
tail.’ You’ll beat the wagon to it in
the swiftest and biggest race of all.”
Or Dinah, the Bronx Zoo gorilla,
“three feet of the newest womankind
in the world.” “The largest and most
splendidly satisfying thing in Dinah’s
life is herself. She would rather stand
well in her own estimation than upon
a social footing.” Barnes indeed.

The Messerli foreword disappoints
by never moving beyond hints and
signals. It stirs more mystery about
Barnes than it dispels. In 1973,
Barnes supposedly bemoaned to him
the fact of outliving her own genera-
tion. He writes, “For as early as 1930
— when she admitted to Donald
Ogden Stewart that she wouldn't
really mind dying — she must have
already felt something close to that.”
Surely this lugubrious mythmaking
misses a major aspect of Barnes. In
these early years, Barnes began con-
structing her lifelong persona that we
later see in letters to contemporaries
— the aging lady-on-a-stick, the
set-upon crone — only to become
that personality long before her
dotage. “Me? An old lady working
against time like an idiot . . . photo
of your humble servant (near 77)
looking like Holbein’s Erasmus.”

Like the rangy and encrusted
literary styles she used, this persona
became her armor, a much-
embellished verbal brocade that
draped not only her Rue St. Romaine
apartment, but shrouded her early
sexuality, her life with Thelma Wood,
her alcoholism, the affairs of the
thirties and forties, and especially the
economic realities of her life. Survival
read like a litany of small bequests
from wills and donor-friends.

Why do we play a game of literary
hide and seek — “Tracking the Wild
Biographer’s Fallacy” — with this rel-
atively young talent of Barnes? After
all, she lived for 90 years, wrote for a
full 70. Should we, as the com-
mentary suggests, so readily find in
the Stewart piece the key to all her
art? Canonical debuts are risky. It
seems to me that we need to hear a
great deal more of the collective tal-

ents and voices of “The Barnes” before
we overdetermine her place in modern
letters. Who is to say that Nora play-
ing raisonneur to the Doctor’s
thoughts on the night is any more
Barnes than the woman who mimed
Sir Francis Rose in the town square in
Tangier? Is the spicy old lady who
threatened Eliot with her ivory-and-
iron cherub’s head cane more Djuna
than the author of several twilight
melodramas?

Certainly more Barnes is better
than less. Still, there is a great deal
missing from this book of interviews
— textually and contextually as well
as canonically. Where the reader
might have expected guidance — or
at least sorted facts — from the pref-
ace, there is little. Even the date and
place of publication — whether a
piece appeared in the New York
Telegraph or in Vanity Fair, under
“Djuna Chappell Barnes” or “Lydia
Steptoe” — is left to the reader to
surmise. A scholar might find it useful
and necessary to compare the kinds of
commercial writing done by Barnes —
for the tabloids, the slick magazines,
or the more sophisticated periodicals.

Another trademark of Barnes's
early journalism is the bold, vigorous
and at times parodic illustrations that
dominated the center of the Sunday
World or Telegraph. As large as 6 by
12 inches, embodying the wit of
Oscar Wilde, the style of Alastair or
Beardsley, these drawings suggest a
critical dialogue between text and
illustration that is missing in In-
terviews.

Divorced from literary or historical
context, Barnes’s journalism makes no
sense. She seems to be a groupie at
the stage door of the famous. She and
her contemporaries, including Alice
Duer Miller, Jane Grant, and Dorothy
Parker, followed Margaret Fuller who,
70 years before, visited factories, in-
sane asylums, and coal mines, writing
Tribune dispatches about social and
educational inequities. Fuller was even
lowered on a bucket into a Newcastle
coal mine, but was also versatile
enough to interview famous artists and
writers, as did Barnes.

Too many questions are never
asked within the tightly circumscribed

Lillian Russell

world of Interviews. Why did Barnes
feel it important to drop — or bury
— biographical facts? What was the
place of the journalistic audience, the
role of privilege, and the relation of
gender to status in the newspaper
world? (I think of Dorothy Parker,
playing piano for dance classes before
Vogue offered her $10 a week in 1916.
As she wrote painful autobiographical
stories about failed love affairs,
abortions, and social misfits, the in-
dustry publicized her ouija board, her
one-liners, and her feather boas.)

Too, what principle of selection
governed the editors’ choices here?
Why Coco Chanel and not Jeanne
Lanvin? What was the relation that
Barnes perceived between the aging
theatrical women here and their con-
temporaries in her Book of Repulsive
Women (1915)? Where does her focus
on the nature of illusion and staging
in these interviews intersect with
Barnes’s other art?

To fail to ask such questions, to
choose prematurely the art or voice of
the “real” Djuna, is to uphold, once
again, narrow selection as a kind of
evaluation. For it matters very much
what we do with the “lost” works of
women writers we find and where we
put them, canonically speaking. After
a certain point in feminist research,

celebratory feelings become wasteful
economics in need of more assurance
that lost writers will stay found in the
history of literature.

A last observation is that the
“Who's Who” biographical sketch that
precedes each interview is more dis-
tracting than informative. These
megafootnotes not only set a tone
contrary to Barnes’s unfolding of each
personality, but also privilege fact
over art. It seems a lot to ask of a
reader to digest the thumbnail
histories of everyone from James Joyce
to Flo Ziegfeld. We do not have
medievally trained memories for the
16 plays Raymond Sovey designed.
Rather we are likely to remember
what Barnes says about him: “You
would meet this sort of chap in one of
a dozen European museums, mentally
fingering the stuffs in the gowns once
worn by queens come to a bad end.”

For the witting reader, faced with
the factual overload of the com-
mentary, selection had its way over
fact. I recalled what celebrities had
died of, not what they said or did.
Gaby Deslys, for example, the music
hall crooner who received a $70,000
pearl necklace from the King of
Portugal, died of throat cancer. Dia-
mond Jim Brady’s final kidney stone
rivals his diamond vest buttons. And
despite her incense and porcelain
Chinamen, Lillian Russell once
starred in “The Pie Rats of Penn
Yan.” She died in Pittsburgh, not the
Orient, not long after Warren Hard-
ing appointed her investigator of
immigrant problems.

Somewhere between the cluttered
prefaces and the display of personality
in each interview lay this perfected
Barnesian irony. It has apparently
gone as undetected by the editors as
the infelicitous marriage of names
from Nightwood: Nora Vote.

® Mary Lynn Broe is Associate Pro-
fessor of English at SUNY-Binghamton.
She is the author of Protean Poetic:
The Poetry of Sylvia Plath and the
forthcoming Silence and Power: A
Reevaluation of Djuna Barnes
(Southern Illinois University Press). She
is working on a book about the life of
Caresse Crosby.

The Coffin of
Childhood

by Linda Pastan

Early Spring, by Tove Ditlevsen.
Translated by Tiina Nunnally. The Seal
Press (312 S. Washington, Seattle, WA
98104), 1985, $8.95, 227 pp. (PB)

autobiography of a poet without

having read any of her poems, but
it only took a page or two of Early
Spring to convince me that Tove
Ditlevsen must indeed be a poet to be
reckoned with. Her gift for metaphor
is what struck me first. “Childhood,”
she tells us, “is long and narrow like a
coffin and you can’t get out of it on
your own.” And a few pages later:
“Childhood is dark and always
moaning like a little animal that’s
locked in a cellar and forgotten. It
comes out of your throat like your
breath in the cold, and sometimes it’s
too little, other times too big. It
never fits exactly.” Clearly the author
is playing with language, practicing
her metaphors as if they were scales
on the piano. Yet language itself is
never the whole point of this book.
Early Spring is first and foremost a
story of the anguish and humor of
growing up.

Part One, “Childhood,” deals with

Ditlevsen’s earliest years in the poor,

E is strange to read the

September/October 1985

Tove Ditlevsen

working class neighborhood of
Vestebro in Copenhagen. We are
given an unflinching picture of the
gritty, sometimes hopeless
circumstances of poverty and
ignorance that surrounded her. Yet
the radiance of her language and the
resilience of her spirit shine through,
and we feel as if we are merely caught
in a fairy tale cruelty, a bad
enchantment that will certainly be
dispelled by the end of the story.
“Istedgade is my childhood street
— Its rhythm will always pound in my
blood and its voice will always reach
me.” This place that she describes so
vividly is peopled with odd characters
in whom we utterly believe, although
they are often drawn in with a few
brief strokes. There is her mother who
would “get dressed with violent and
irritated movements, as if every piece
of clothing were an insult to her.”
There is her father who is “big and
black and like the stove, but there is
nothing about him that I’m afraid of.”
There are Scabie Hans and Pretty
Lili, and Ruth, the friend who tries to
teach her shoplifting:

When Ruth swears, it isn’t ugly or
offensive because her voice is so crisp
and fine, like the little Billy Goat
Gruff. Her mouth is red and heart-
shaped with a narrow, upturned
upper lip, and her expression is as
strong as that of a man who knows
no fear. She is everything that I’m
not, and I do everything she wants
me to do.

Perhaps it is the use of the present
tense, as well as the highly colored
details, that help give such immediacy
to Ditlevsen’s story. By the time we
come to Part Two, we feel as though
we know and have already lived with
her family for years.

One of the ironies of Early Spring
is that in the second section,
“Youth,” Ditlevsen looks back on the
difficult childhood we have just read
about as if it had been a happy one.
In fact the whole tone of the book
shifts here from the shadows of her
childhood to the almost comedic
aspects of her adolescence. As we
follow her from job to job (maid,
kitchen worker, clerk, secretary) and
as we meet her string of gawky, un-
suitable boyfriends, it is the humor
that is emphasized, for Ditlevsen is
able to laugh at herself even as she is
describing the genuine pain she went

through. It is not that she turns away
from the darker aspects of life. In the
background, Hitler is coming to
power. In the foreground, her aunt is
dying of cancer, and we are told
“Death is not a gentle falling asleep as
I once believed. It is brutal, hideous,
and foul smelling.”

But Ditlevsen is a survivor, and it
is through poetry that she plans to
escape from the confines of her world.
Although we always know she will
succeed, we still watch in some
amazement as she actually does
become a writer, selling her first poem
and then, with what seems like ease,
having a whole book published.

It is impossible for me to judge the
accuracy of this translation, because I
do not read Danish. But the English
of Tiina Nunnally seems not only
perfectly colloquial but fully transpar-
ent, and I was hardly ever aware that
I was not reading the story in its
original language.

Early Spring is a haunting, per-
ceptive book, full of pain and in-
telligence. “I know that every person
has their own truth, just as every
child has their own childhood,” writes
Tove Ditlevsen. By the quality of her
art she has made her childhood

momentarily ours.

® Linda Pastan is a poet whose sixth
book, A Fraction of Darkness, will be
published by Norton this fall.

Belles Lettres @ 3