As this issue of Belles Lettres was  
going to press, we received Ida Fink’s  
book of Holocaust stories, A Scrap of  
Time (Random House, 1987). I had  
mentioned the book in “Impressions”  
but had not read it. I opened the book  
and read “A Spring Morning,” which  
I felt compelled to excerpt since there  
was no time for a review. I was unable  
to read any further that day; I was  
wracked with psychic pain and found  
myself weeping uncontrollably. My  
grief was mingled with wonder at the  
writer’s artistry, yet I felt uneasy that  
I could even think of aesthetics in the  
context of such horror. For I knew that  
Fink’s stories are not fiction; they are  
true episodes told to her or to people  
she knew.  

— Janet Mullaney  

“Mela,” he whispered, “is this a  
dream?”  

“You're not dreaming, Aron.  
Don’t just sit there. Put something  
on, we’ll go down to the storeroom.  
There’s a stack of split wood there,  
we can hide behind it.”  

“The storeroom. What a joke. If  
I thought we could hide in the  
storeroom we'd have been there  
long ago. In the storeroom or in  
here, it’ll make no difference.”  

He wanted to stand up and walk  
over to the window, but he was so  
heavy he couldn’t. The darkness  
was already lifting. He wondered,  
are they waiting until it gets light?  
Why is it so quiet? Why doesn’t it  
begin?  

“Aron,” the woman said.  

Again her large eyes surprised  
him, and lying there on the bed in  
her clothing—she hadn’t undressed  
for the night—she seemed younger,  
slimmer, different. Almost the way  
she was when he first met her, so  
many years ago. He stretched out  
his hand and timidly, gently,  
stroked hers. She wasn’t surprised,  
although as a rule he was stingy with  
caresses, but neither did she smile.  
She took his hand and squeezed it  
firmly. He tried to look at her, but  
he turned away, for something  
strange was happening inside him.  
He was breathing more and more  
rapidly, and he knew that in a mo-  
ment these rapid breaths would turn  
into sobs.  

“If we had known,” the woman  
said softly, “we wouldn’t have had  
her. But how could we have known?  
Smarter people didn’t know. She’ll  
forgive us, Aron, won’t she?”  

He didn’t answer. He was afraid  
of this rapid breathing; he wanted  
only to shut his eyes, put his fingers  
in his ears, and wait.  

“Won't she, Aron?” she repeated.  

Then it occurred to him that  
there wasn’t much time left and that  
he had to answer quickly, that he  
had to answer everything and say  
everything that he wanted to say.  

“Are those trucks coming for us,  
Papa?” she asked, and he could no  
longer hold back his tears. The child  
knew! Five years old! The age for  
teddy bears and blocks. Why did we  
have her? She’ll never go to school,  
she'll never love. Another minute  

or two...  

Suddenly his heart began to  
pound, and his temples were  
drenched with sweat.  

He bent towards the child again,  
seeking the strength that flowed  
from her silky, warm, young body.  
He still didn’t know what he would  
do, but he did know that he had to  
find some chink through which he  
could push his child back into the  

world of the living. Suddenly he was  
thinking very fast. He was surprised  
to see that the trees had turned  
green overnight and that the river  
had risen; it was flowing noisily, tur-  
bulently, eddying and churning; on  
that quiet spring morning, it was  
the only sign of nature’s revolt.  
“The water is the color of beer,” he  
said aloud, to no one in particular.  
He was gathering up the colors and  
smells of the world that he was los-  
ing forever. Hearing his voice, the  
child squirmed and looked him in  
the eye.  

“Don’t be afraid,” he whispered,  
“do what Papa tells you. Over there,  
near the church, there are a lot of  
people, they are going to pray. They  
are standing on the sidewalk and in  
the yard in front of the church.  
When we get there, I’m going to  
put you down on the ground. You're  
little, no one will notice you. Then  
you'll ask somebody to take you to  
Marcysia, the milkmaid, outside of  
town. She'll take you in. Or maybe  
one of those people will take you  
home. Do you understand what  
Papa said?”  

“Go straight to the church,” he  
whispered and put the child down  
on the ground. He didn’t look back,  
he didn’t see where she ran, he  
walked on stiffly, at attention, his  
gaze fixed on the pale spring sky in  
which the white threads of a cloud  
floated like a spider web. He walked  
on, whispering a kind of prayer, be-  
seeching God and men. He was still  
whispering when the air was rent  
by a furious shriek:  

“Ein jüdisches Kind!”  

He was still whispering when the  
sound of a shot cracked like a stone  
hitting water. He felt his wife’s  
fingers, trembling and sticky from  
sweat; she was seeking his hand like  
a blind woman. He heard her faint,  
whimpering moan. Then he fell  
silent and slowly turned around.  

At the edge of the sidewalk lay a  
small, bloody rag. The smoke from  
the shot hung in the air—wispy, al-  
ready blowing away. He walked over  
slowly, and those few steps seemed  
endless. He bent down, picked up  
the child, stroked the tangle of  
blond hair.  

“Deine?”  

He answered loud and clear, “Ja,  
meine.” And then softly, to her,  
“Forgive me.”  

He stood there with the child in  
his arms and waited for a second  
shot. But all he heard was a shout  
and he understood that they would  
not kill him here, that he had to  
keep on walking, carrying his dead  
child.  

“Don’t be afraid, I’ll carry you,”  
he whispered. The procession  
moved on like a gloomy, gray river  
flowing out to sea.  

The Little Virtues  
by Natalia Ginzburg  

New York: Seaver Books: 1986, $13.95, 110  
pp. [translated by Dick Davis]  

Italian novelist Natalia Ginzburg dedi-  
cates this collection of disparate essays  
to “a friendship which, like all real  
friendships, has passed through the fire  
of violent disagreements.” In this simple  
gesture, Ginzburg reveals her conviction  
that what matters most in our lives is  
hardest won.  

Ginzburg is no stranger to fires of vio-  
lence. Raised in prominent socialist cir-  
cles between the world wars, she saw  
numerous friends and family members  
persecuted for their anti-Fascist beliefs.  
Her opening essay describes the months  
she and her first husband spent in politi-  
cal exile. Ginzburg evokes both quiet  
sadness and sharp homesickness, recall-  
ing almost lovingly a big green stove,  
evening walks in the snow, special dump-  
lings proudly concocted by the  
dressmaker Crocetta. Still she recog-  

— Unorthodox, continued from page 3  

frivolity.” Though Morton continues to  
assert that the marriage is a good one,  
referring throughout to her husband as a  
dear friend and lover, it is clear that her  
power to earn money consistently poses  
a serious threat to his ego.  

Different forms of subtle and overt  
sexism and anti-Semitism remain con-  
stants in this text. What I find particu-  
larly impressive and useful is the com-  
plexity with which Morton elaborates  
the social fabric of the times and the  
ways in which she documents the com-  
monalities and differences among and  
within particular groups: the quarrels  
between Protestants, Catholics, and  
Jews of diverse nationalities; the differ-  
ences in class and degrees of assimilation  
among different generations of Eastern  
European, German, and Sephardic Jews  
in small cities as well as in New York.  

The book ends in the narrator’s 38th  
year, when she seems to have reached a  
point of maturity in her own eyes. There  

— Messiahs, continued from page 4  

secret bloodlines — even the Queen of  
Sweden may be a “descendant of Mar-  
rano nobility.” Heidi calls Lars a “refu-  
gee imposter”; he calls her the same.  
Adela, who may be Dr. Eklund’s daugh-  
ter, says that she and her Polish mother  
have spent their lives slipping across  
borders, living like bedouins. Her story  
of recovering the lost Schulz manuscript  
is preposterous but, nevertheless, de-  
tailed. Lars does not believe it, but he  
has no story of his own to counter it. He  
knows that her tale “was as probable as  
anything else in the wilderness of  
Europe 40 years ago,” while he has “only  
this rush of blood... his own certainty  
grown out of him like a fingernail” that  
Schulz is his father, that the messiah  
exists.  

Ozick has struggled with the com-  
mandment that forbids idol worship; she  
has decried art as mere aesthetics. She  
has spoken earnestly and movingly about  
the need in literature for a moral voice.  
This book continues her warning: Do  
not look to art for redemption. Beware  
false messiahs. But the book falls flat.  
Ozick can write beautifully and ele-  
gantly, but here the prose is over-  
wrought, anxious. Instead of reading, in-  
stead of feeling carried along in trustwor-  
thy hands, I felt anxious, too. Page after  
page, I remarked to myself how clever  
it all was, how the symbols were so care-  
fully planted, the words so exact and  
controlled. In this book, you can see the  
threads. Ozick is a skilled artisan, but  
the garment seems unfinished and the  
fit uncomfortable.  

Also, her demands on her characters,  

———=|  

recognizes the fragility of these comforts; the  
memoir concludes with a short account  
of her husband’s death in a Nazi prison.  

Ginzburg flinches, but she continues.  
Just as she confronts the immediacy of  
political life, so she explores her own  
vocation as a writer, the vice of silence,  
“the danger of cheating with words that  
do not really exist within us.” Each reve-  
lation is couched in the concrete:  
Ginzburg wears worn shoes because she  
understands “what is not necessary.”  

What is necessary, she writes, is adult  
assumption of “a little compassion,” and  
these essays are indeed beautiful and  
challenging reminders of our obligations  
to each other. Ginzburg’s message, en-  
capsuled in the title essay, is to teach  
our children  

. not the little virtues, but the great  
ones. Not thrift but generosity and an  
indifference to money; not caution but  
courage and a contempt for danger; not  
shrewdness but frankness and a love of  
truth; not tact but love for one’s  
neighbor and self-denial; not a desire  
for success but a desire to be and to  

know.  
— Shuli Lamden  

is something wonderfully open about  
the ways in which Morton allows the  
narrator's development and that of her  
children and husband to unfold with  
candor and good humor. With great dis-  
cretion, she even mentions her own sex-  
ual initiation; she does not gloss over  
the problems that arise in the family as  
she and her husband try to balance  
careers with home life and intimacy; nor  
does she prettify in order to make politi-  
cal points about women’s rights or  
Jewish pride. Only the fact that she and  
her husband never seem to bump up  
against each other's differences as Jew  
and gentile rings false.  

This is a fascinating book, thoroughly  
modern, and yet, entirely a product of  
its period. Men and women, Jews and  
gentiles alike can learn much from this  
text, for its problems resonate strongly  
into our own time.  

@ Evelyn Torton Beck is the editor of  
Nice Jewish Girls: A Lesbian Anthology  
and is head of the women’s studies depart-  
ment at the University of Maryland.  

always strong, this time seem overbear-  
ing. “Not everyone has to exist,” Lars  
says, when he has accepted his abandon-  
ment and given up the dream of Schulz  
as his father. No one in The Messiah of  
Stockholm seems to exist. It is an essay,  
with characters. The author’s ideas are  
larger than the lives she creates. They  
are cerebral creatures who do not  
breathe.  

Perhaps she intends this. One cannot  
— whether artist, forger, false messiah,  
swindler, or orphan — resurrect the  
dead. One can only make them up, and  
why do that? Why resuscitate the gassed  
and dispersed Jews, the geniuses shot,  
the great art lost? Europe will not be  
repopulated. Still, Lars Andemening  
wanted to be “Europe’s savior,” Heidi  
says.  

He was one of the century’s casualties,  
in his own way a victim. He took on  
everyone’s loss; everyone’s foolish  
grief. Foolish because unstinting.  
Rescue was the only thought he kept in  
his head — he was arrogant about it, he  
was steady, he wanted to salvage every  
scrap of paper all over Europe... all  
those obscure languages in all those  
shadowy places where there had been  
all those shootings — in the streets, in  
the forests. He had attached himself to  
the leavings of tyranny, tragedy,  
confusion.  

She ends: “There’s no one else like  
him.” Why does the heart of the reader  
not break for such a man? There is  
something missing in this book.  

® Fran Snyder is a writer who edits the  
Jewish Women's Resource Center Newslet-  
ter in New York City.  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987