Contemplating Lesbian Life

The Lesbian Body, by Monique Wittig. Translated from the French by David Le Vay. Boston:

Beacon Press, 1986, $7.95, 165 pp. (PB)

Lesbian Philosophy: Explorations, by Jeffner Allen. Palo Alto, CA: Institute of Lesbian

Studies, 1986, $9.95, 119 pp. (PB)

A Faith of One’s Own: Explorations by Catholic Lesbians, edited by Barbara Zanotti. The
Crossing Press (Box 640, Trumansburg, NY 14886), 1986, $8.95, 202 pp. (PB)

by Suzanne Scott

“As naturally as a tree puts out

leaves, I fell in love with

women,” writes Jayne Young
in her essay, “Coming Out, Coming
Home,” in A Faith of One’s Own. Surely
most lesbians can add their “Oh, yes!”
to such a statement. Yet, however natu-
rally love may happen between women,
the act of reflecting on the lesbian ex-
perience by talking about it and trying
to give it an intellectual, moral,
spiritual, and philosophical framework
within the constraints of a male-oriented
and male-dominated culture has been
fraught with conflict, danger, and fear.

Until the past two decades, lesbian
life was largely a hermetic, self-protect-
ing, deeply private—and hence frag-
mented—world within the larger
culture. To most lesbians, the less atten-
tion paid to lesbian life, the better for
everyone. Lesbians felt protected by the
silence of the heterosexual culture on
the subject of lesbianism and sought to
perpetuate the silence by keeping their
private lives out of the public eye. As a
result, open declarations of the power
of erotic love between women or the
building of a philosophy around female
principles were taboo, even among les-
bians; they were expressed only within
the safe confines of a cult novel or a
late-night, visionary conversation
among friends.

Fortunately, much has changed in the
last 15 years. Lesbians have asserted
their right to celebrate love between
women and to ponder the repercussions
of the lesbian way of life on how lesbians
meet and understand and value the
world. Two new nonfiction books, Les-
bian Philosophy: Explorations, by Jeffner
Allen, and A Faith of One’s Own: Ex-
plorations by Catholic Lesbians, edited by
Barbara Zanotti; and a revolutionary
novel first published 14 years ago and
out of print for nearly a decade, The
Lesbian Body, by Monique Wittig, are
important contributions to the quest for
insight into lesbian life. Each book
courageously celebrates the power of
love relationships between women to
transform everything, from love, sex,
and pleasure to thought, spirituality, and
values. In their poignant, tough-
minded, and sometimes outlandish as-
sertions, these books make it inescapably
clear that to label oneself a lesbian is a
revolutionary act.

In the author’s note to The Lesbian
Body, Wittig asserts that lesbian texts
written by women, exclusively for
women, and “careless of male approval”
have become possible only within the
context of the current women’s move-
ment. Yet few feminist authors have
chosen to challenge the language, sym-
bols, and artistic conventions of the
male literary establishment in so
thorough and uncompromising a fashion
as Wittig does. Wittig literally rends the
language of men to break its power to
exclude her experiences. In place of the
pronoun je, (“I”), which Wittig sees as
obscuring the gender of the speaker and
perpetuating the linguistic delusion that
women and men speak of the same re-
ality when they say “I,” she writes j/e,
a severed version in which she finds the
hope of wholeness for women.

The severed pronoun j/e is emblematic

of all the severing and reassembling that
goes on in Wittig’s world. Even the les-
bian body must be symbolically rent by
the loving woman in order to create a
new order of love between women. In
the Amazonian landscape Wittig imag-
ines, lesbians affirm each other by celeb-

rating discrete body parts; by listing the
tissues, sinews, bones, and organs; by
translating the romantic impulse into a
fascination with nitty-gritty physical
being. The resulting images are not al-
ways pleasant; in fact, passages such as
this might well be upsetting if taken out
of context:

I am unable to stir, I await an apotheosis

a glorious end in this place where the
primary colours are not lacking, I tremble
before the bright red efflux from your
arteries, I see it turn to black in drying
stains and patches all around you and on
my body, I see the dark blood emerge
from the blue of your veins, in places it is
congealed violet, I am illuminated by the
gold and black of your eyes, I do not seek
my life from you, I follow you closely, I
hear your most precious blood as it leaves
you, it makes a lancinating fabled music
my adored one to which your voice and
mine do not contribute.

Because so much of the language Wit-
tig uses has been sullied by the violent
impulses of men against women, Wittig’s
novel represents an enormous risk. But
ultimately, she succeeds. Wittig’s prose
represents a re-memberment rather than
a dis-memberment of woman, a celebra-
tion of all that makes up a woman’s life.
The goddess behind the narrative is Isis,
who collects the scattered fragments of
the lesbian body and reassembles them,
bringing “the real body violently to life.”

Like Wittig, Allen challenges lesbians
to rend male concepts and re-member
them to fit the ways in which women
experience the world. Why do lesbians
accept the male definition of violence
as synonymous with destruction, Allen
asks. Why must their vision of the future
be either an inversion of patriarchy
(“nonviolent by male definition”) or a
mere continuation of patriarchy (“vio-
lent by male definition”)? Instead, she
writes, lesbian violence could be a
different thing entirely:

A lesbian violence is not anti-life or pro-
death, for it exhibits absolutely no equa-
tion between violence and destruction. A
lesbian creation and exercise of freedom, be-
friending and loving what is gentle and dear,

is violence. First, a lesbian freedom is vio-
lence because it is dangerous to patriarchy,
unrecoverable by it. Secondly, a lesbian
freedom is violent in that it is dangerous to
any aspect of myself that continues to function
within the society of Mothers. I want to lose
all that is unfree, that reproduces the ide-
ology of patriarchy. I want to live, in
rupture with heterosexual virtue and its
fragmentation of my existence, a genuine
wholeness, harmony, and exuberance.

Although these words may sound like
just so much verbal game-playing, Allen
shows how poignantly they can come to
life in an unflinching description of her
own rape and its aftermath: her compul-
sion to drink glasses of water and take
innumerable showers, her on-guard
stance in public places. But after the
horror of the rape, she finds in the les-
bian community “a strength whose
buoyancy and resilience the rapist can
never penetrate and before which he
must, eventually, die.” This violent
power of the lesbian community be-
comes a paradigm of how women can
ultimately stop rape. As Allen explains,

Dance to a Kiss. Chalk on red paper (12” x 15”) by Lorraine Inzalaco.

Wittig’s work has had an enormous
influence on radical lesbian feminist
thought. In many respects, Jeffner
Allen’s Lesbian Philosophy: Explorations
owes its fierce, poignant, poetic, and
provocative impulses to Allen’s deep
familiarity with The Lesbian Body. Allen
acknowledges Wittig’s influence on the
content; the stylistic influence, too, is
readily apparent. What Allen incor-
porates most thoroughly from Wittig is
the sense that no male concept is sa-
cred—particularly not male concepts of
women’s bodies.

Allen calls upon lesbians to explore
and question their most basic (and some-
times most laudable) ethical and
philosophical values as male constructs.
The most controversial part of Allen’s
book may be her reconsideration of non-
violence as a male construct that costs
women their freedom. “The heterosex-
ual virtue which binds women to male-
defined nonviolence is preeminently
self-destructive,” writes Allen, “leading
to the sole form of action permitted to
women: martyrdom and suicide.”

“In a world of female friendship and free-
dom, rape becomes a form of violation
against which all women act to secure
that it never exists again.” And as a
corollary, preserving the freedom and
safety of lesbians becomes a central con-
cern of all women, not just of lesbians
themselves, because the lesbian com-
munity is the place where women’s re-
membering begins.

Some lesbians may dismiss Wittig and
Allen as visionaries, dreamers who ex-
press the poetic soul of the lesbian com-
munity without admitting the brute fact
that our society need not tolerate revolu-
tions because it has the might to crush
them. A Faith of One’s Own will give
these pragmatists a harder nut to crack.
Although this anthology differs from
Lesbian Philosophy and The Lesbian Body
both in content and style, the transform-
ing power of the female imagination is
visible from the introduction to the clos-
ing essay. The women who contributed
to this anthology wrote from the
framework of Roman Catholicism, but
there is a sense that their process is a

universal one that lesbians can under-
stand intimately, regardless of their re-
ligious heritage.

A Faith of One’s Own is the testimony
of visionary women who have stubbornly
insisted on their right to make their
spiritual visions real, livable, and practi-
cal, even within the rigid, male-domi-
nated, homophobic environment of the
Catholic Church. All of the con-
tributors to A Faith of One’s Own under-
stand the contradictions inherent in the
term “Catholic lesbian.” But, as Barbara
Zanotti writes in her introduction, “The
lesbian faith we embody stands in sharp
contrast to the patriarchal tradition into
which we were born, a tradition whose
interpreters taught us to distrust our pas-
sions, to deny our bodies, and to surren-
der our energies to male interests in
honor of a male god.” One by one these
writers take us on a journey, which is
the same for each writer, to reveal the
power of lesbian feminists to rend the
patriarchal tradition and to thereby
create a new, unified tradition that com-
prehends women’s experiences.

—continued on page 5

The Needle on Full
by Caroline Forbes

Onlywomen Press, 1985, $7.95, 267 pp.
Distributed by Inland Books, 22 Hemingway
Ave., East Haven, CT 06512.

A writer need never apologize for work-
ing in a particular genre, especially when
the writing is as full and exciting as it
is in Caroline Forbes’s book of lesbian,
feminist, science fiction stories, The
Needle on Full. Pulling together all the
elements—lesbianism, feminism, sci-
ence fiction—into an artful whole that
grabs readers is no mean feat. Too often
readers have to settle for one element
or the other, like a great sci-fi adventure
that ignores women or a strong feminist
statement with little literary impact.
Forbes has woven them all together with
wit, intelligence, and urgency.

Each of the nine tales has its own
universe. The title story resounds with
an ominous Orwellian echo (Forbes has
stolen this adjective for herself). Its main
character must decide whether to return
to the monotonous horror of life with
her husband or steal their car, the pri-
mary tool for survival, and strike off
beyond the country’s forbidden para-
meters with a young lesbian who is es-
caping the drudgery that the future
promises. The hitchhiker’s sensual
seduction is tinged by her practical need
for the car, which makes the housewife’s
awakening even more poignant.

“The Visitors” has a playful tone from
the opening sentence: “She was in the
middle of doing the dishes when they
landed in the back garden.” Here Forbes
takes a familiar theme (visitors from
outer space meet the man on the street,
or the woman at the sink in this case)
and creates a new context that is both
more real and more fanciful. She man-
ages to reimagine the future, not just
project the acceptable status quo, so that
her characters, be they housewives or
aliens, are never monolithic representa-
tions.

“The Comet’s Tail,” actually a
novella, is a thoughtful, chilling story
about two women sent into space alone
for 20 years. Forbes is not afraid of the
multiple levels on which they must con-
front each other. She pushes them to-
gether and pulls them apart with the
rhythm that is real life, even when it is
dominated by the shadow of “mission
control” from several light years away.

This collection of precisely crafted
stories is for sci-fi fans—and for all of us
who feel passionate about the quality of
our lives today and what we want to
leave for the future.

—Jewelle Gomez

March/April 1987