The Geometry of Ordinary Life

Thirteen Stories, by Ursule Molinaro. Kingston, NY: McPherson, 1989, $16.00 (HB),

$9.00 (PB), 122 pp.

Positions with White Roses, by Ursule Molinaro. Kingston, NY: McPherson, 1989,

$8 (PB), 104 pp.

by Lynne M. Constantine

Every page of a work by Ursule
Molinaro crackles with intelli-
gence. Molinaro, who in addition
to being a novelist and story writer is an
accomplished playwright, translator,
and painter, uses her wide range of refer-
ence to enter the recesses of the human
psyche, with a self-imposed discipline to
avoid mere incident and concentrate
instead on the telling details that form
the basic geometry of human life.
Thirteen represents the fruits of that
discipline, and it is a collection of osten-
sibly simple, sometimes outlandish tales
given unusual power by their clarity of
incident, emotional compression, and
startling imagery. Unlike many
avant-garde writers, Molinaro does not
scorn temporal sequences, narrative
threads, or beginnings-middles-ends in
her stories. Consequently, her work is
far more accessible than that of other
experimental writers, whose innova-
tions are not always as organic and com-
pelling as the works she presents here.
Each story has its own delights.
Some, like “The Cyclotaur,” in which
an aging film editor watches her younger
lover unpredictably metamorphose into
an out-of-control half-man, half-
motorcycle, contain unforgettable im-
ages of love gone awry and passion
cooled. Others provide off-kilter lessons
on the eternal optimism of the
loins—such as the understated, hilari-
ous “A Late-Summer Stranger to Her-
self,” in which a recently divorced
woman entertains her ex-husband’s
nephew only to realize in the course of
the visit that she is completely un-

dressed. All, however, are about the
ways in which social interaction reflects
a timeless, relentless unfolding of hu-
man necessity, patterns laid down in the
dim past whose inevitable repetition in
the contemporary world often leads to
sudden, shocking tragedy.

Positions with White Roses, published
in 1983 and now reissued in paperback,
is, like the stories in Thirteen, a tour de
force of patterns and unfolding patterns,
rich with psychological insight and tense
with narrative restraint. Molinaro’s
spare, sharp style works like a scalpel,
dissecting the inner life of an emotional-
ly disturbed family with unerring skill.
The novel, Molinaro says, is “in the
form of a cross,” a multilayered image
that initially conjures up the family of
four’s unvarying seating pattern at the
dining room table (the “positions” of the
title, organized around a similarly un-
varying floral centerpiece) but which
ultimately recalls a grave marker, a fit-
ting image for the novel’s extraordinary
conclusion.

As in all her work, Molinaro is con-
cerned with the skeleton beneath the
flesh, the elegant geometry of seemingly
ordinary interactions. Unlike her short
stories, which present no more than a
single perspective on a character’s
moment of awareness or revelation,
Positions with White Roses shimmers with
perspectives, like a cubist painting or
like Gertrude Stein’s famous dictum
“rose is a rose is a rose is a rose”—each
successive perspective providing a new
inkling of what is “really real.”

From the perspective of the mother in
Positions, for example, life is secret mi-
sery within a gilt exterior. Her husband,
she insists, secretly tortures her,

A Novel by Martha Bergland

their legacy.

Louise Erdrich, and others.

woman.

A FARM UNDER A LAKE - neeie

In this breathtakingly gentle novel, two
farm families struggle to retain the love which
first brought them together and the land which is

“This fine first novel is marked in all aspects by
deftness, honesty and compassion.”
— Publishers Weekly

THE INVISIBLE ENEMY
Alcoholism and the Modern Short Story

Edited by Miriam Dow and Jennifer Regan

Fifteen superb short stories which demonstrate
the destructive power of alcohol on those who
suffer from alcoholism as well as the people
surrounding them. Includes work by Joyce Carol
Oates, Frank O’Connor, Raymond Carver,

THE COURTSHIP OF JOANNA
A Novel by Catherine Gourley

In this richly crafted first novel, Catherine
Gourley brings alive the bleak and grinding
reality of life for Irish immigrants in a Penn-
sylvania coal mining town during the 1880s.
Joanna, at sixteen, leaves her farm family to
become housekeeper for a widowed miner and his
mother, and in doing so, finds herself as a

A Farm |
| Under A Lake |
i eee} i

MAKTNY RERGENED

Cloth, $16.00

The Invisible
Enemy

Paper, $9.50

COURT-
SHIP OF
JOANNA

CATHERINE
GOURLEY

a novel

Paper, $8.00

GRAYWOLF PRESS

P.O. Box 75006 ° St. Paul, MN 55175

Summer 1989

Ursule Molinaro. Photo by Bernard Gotfryd

screaming at her when no one else is
around, flaunting his infidelities and
conspiring to have her locked up in a
mental institution. Even now, when her
husband has been incapacitated by a
stroke, she believes he is carrying on
with their closest neighbor, a woman
who has heretofore been her friend and
ally. The proof, she says, is in the diary
she has been keeping all the years of
their marriage, with dates and even the
times of his mad behavior and flagrant
betrayals. In her emotional captivity,
she sees herself as living a life parallel to
that of Mary Stuart, lied to and betrayed
by even the most loving of her captors.

Her story of the secret life of her mar-
riage is utterly convincing and conso-
nant with the emotional tone of the
family’s interactions. And yet, as the
story unfolds and perspectives overlimn,
the mother’s truth becomes confusing
and contradictory. The neighbor ac-
cused of treachery is a lesbian, con-
firmed as such by one of the family’s
daughters, who is herself living with a
woman doctor in New York. The damn-
ing diary has disappeared, ostensibly
stolen by the husband. The two daugh-
ters relentlessly side with their father
and look suspiciously on their mother’s
behavior.

The Magician’s Girl
by Doris Grumbach

New York: Macmillan, 1987, $16.95,
220 pp.

In The Magician’s Girl, Doris Grumbach
again displays her fascination with the
process of constructing women’s lives in fiction. Grumbach has approached the
task before in traditional narrative
forms, such as the fictional autobiog-
raphy that structures her 1979 novel
Chamber Music and the invented biog-
raphy that forms the subject of The La-
dies (1984).

In her latest book, Grumbach retains
the traditional biography’s trappings:
the apparent primacy of chronology, the
implication of cause and effect, the
sense that behind each life lies a knowa-
ble explanation. However, the true
principles at work in her fictional biog-
raphy of Minna Grant are far removed
from chronology and causality.

To expose these principles, Grum-
bach organizes Minna’s story as a trip-
tych, its three concurrent stories inter-
woven throughout the book. The key
incidents of Minna’s life form the tri-
ptych’s center panel. The center is
flanked by panels containing incidents
from the lives of her Barnard College
roommates, Liz and Maud. The panels
echo and reflect each other, each one
telling a complete story and participat-
ing in a larger story involving all three.

Through this triple perspective,
Grumbach succeeds in imagining
Minna’s life the way women in general
construct their personal histories. On
the one hand, the dramatic events of
childhood, adolescence, marriage,
childbirth, and death appear like images
in a photo album, sharply detailed and

And yet the father is a curious char-
acter, too. A Jewish physician in his
native Italy, he had fled to San Fran-
cisco to escape the fascists and chose to
make his living in the land of opportuni-
ty as an “unctuous undertaker.” Bland
and genial, he can still wax suddenly
enthusiastic about the origins of the
guillotine, leaving everyone to wonder
about the depths of violence and mad-
ness that may be hidden there.

The novel’s most stirring lesson in
emotional geometry, however, is in the
relationship between the daughters.
One of them, called only “the visiting
daughter,” has come back to her parents’
home after a seven-year absence. She
and her twin Laura have always lived as
half-lives of each other. Laura is a beau-
tiful woman with a congenital deformi-
ty. She imagines herself to be the
seventeenth-century French writer and
sensualist Ninon de Lanclos and secretly
lives this fantasy through the erotic ad-
ventures of her sister. The visiting
daughter is an unattractive woman with
Laura’s voice, who ritualistically accepts
as lovers the men her sister has inflamed,
experiencing sex with them not as her-
self but as Laura’s alter ego.

The moment of the novel is the
moment of disentangling their linked
fantasies. Molinaro creates a perfect,
perfectly shocking conclusion, fearful in
its symmetry, as inevitable as the con-
clusion of a classical tragedy.

Molinaro’s voice is distinctive among
contemporary writers. Extraordinarily
sensitive to the nuances of emotion, she
chooses to represent that knowledge in a
crystalline form: hard, glittering, and
flawlessly constructed of edges and an-
gles in precisely calculated positions.
She is funny in the way Lear’s Fool is
funny, relentless as a Greek tragedian,
and surgically honest about her insights
into the inner lives of women.

® Lynne M. Constantine is a freelance
writer and critic who divides her time be-
tween Washington, D.C., and Lost River,
West Virginia.

permanent in form. Yet the same events
take on another outline in the collective
story of what sociologists call Minna’s
cohort—women of her own age who
share her moment in history.

Liz and Maud define Minna as a neg-
ative defines a photograph, reversing
light and shadow, reflecting alternative
destinies for a young woman at Barnard
College in 1939. Like a Delphic sybil,
Grumbach refrains from interpreting
these destinies. She leaves the reader to
sort out the complex interactions of fate,
heredity, historical moment, and indi-
vidual personality in shaping the course
of Minna’s life, to make what the narra-
tor calls “inspired guesses” at the “in-
scrutable enigma” that forms the core of
a person’s identity.

As in Grumbach’s previous novels,
connections among women are the chief
source of creative power. Liz, the only
surviving member of the trio at the
novel’s end, grows as a photographer
when she finds a woman to become her
life partner. Maud, a poet who kills her-
self when the tension between art and
life becomes unbearable, finds her audi-
ence posthumously when Minna and Liz
rescue her poems from her mad (male)
former professor.

By the end of the novel, Minna’s life
truly seems inextricable from those of
her friends. Grumbach suggests this
mystical community by having events
from one woman’s life echo in
another’s. Early in the book, Liz’s
grandmother is killed in a freak car acci-
dent; decades later, a second car acci-
dent claims Minna.

The Magician’s Girl fully reflects
Grumbach’s mature skill as an artist.
Rich in detail and dense in texture, it
impresses itself on the mind, coming
back again and again to pose questions
about the nature of self and identity.

—Lynne M. Constantine

Belles Lettres |