The book’s shortcomings, however,  
are unfortunate ones. The essays on  
South African novelists Bessie Head and  
Nadine Gordimer and Ghanaian Ama  
Ata Aidoo are mostly plot summaries,  
which weaken the collection. Otherwise,  
few stones are left unturned. Topics  
covered include the stereotypical por-  
trayals of women in African literature;  
how African women writers use litera-  
ture to convey the inequities of sexism,  
tribalism, and classism in contemporary  
African society; and the tradition  
of the resistance heroine in African  
literature.  

One of the contributors states that “a  
song of praise begins at home.” These es-  
says maintain that the woman’s role as  
symbol and essence in African literature  
will not be relegated to the realm of  
minor character. Likewise, the presence  
of the African woman writer cannot be  
underestimated; both deserve the full at-  
tention of critical examination.”  

A companion volume to this one is  
Ngambika: Studies of Women in Afri-  
can Literature, edited by Carole Boyce  
Davies and Anne Adams Graves, a 1986  
title also from Africa World Press. Like  
the later volume, Ngambika (which  
means “help me to balance this load”)  
contains essays on female writers and on  
women as portrayed by male writers.  

— Decameron, continued from page 5  

The idea for exchanging stories with her  
roommates gives readers a glimpse into  
the art scene in Leningrad, whereas Olga  
the shipyard worker relates tales center-  
ing on the daily struggles of the working  
class, especially the housing shortages  
and lack of privacy. Through Galina, a  
dissident’s wife who bravely smuggles  
samizdat out of the forced labor camps  
and Zina the “tramp,” an ex-inmate, we  
learn about the horrendous conditions  
women and men face in the Soviet labor  
camps. In fact, all of the women are  
mouthpieces for the reality of life for  
women in the Soviet Union: sexual as-  
sault, alcoholism, unsafe abortions, lack  
of artistic and creative freedom, and  
everyday shortages of goods and foods.  

“Do you think women in the West have  
any concept of the joys of life? Can  
they understand the delight of the girl  
who has managed to find a bra in her  
own size by skipping the queue, or the  
joy of the housewife who (bought) a kilo  
of smoked sausage . . . Of course not! I  
think they have a poor life. It lacks  
substance.”  

“Yes, they don’t experience our  
joys,” laughed Galina. “I wish we  
didn’t have to either!”  

I found the stories about rape most dis-  
tressing. As in any country, rape is com-  
mon in the Soviet Union, and prosecu-  
tion is futile. The victims are stigmatized  
and lose their jobs, housing, and, in ef-  
fect, end up like Zina the tramp, by  
being sent to the labor camps where  
more rapes occur. I was especially dis-  
turbed by Galina’s story. She was en-  
route to visit the camp where her dissi-  
dent husband is interned, and she  
brought a lot of food from Moscow for  
him. A truck driver who was also a zek  

— Wickedary, continued from page 4  

meanings, inspiring new interpreta-  
tions, writing styles, and structures, and  
inviting other languages and words by  
women. The way Daly plays with the  
concept of background and foreground  
hints at new ways of apprehending. The  
stunning illustrations by Sudie Rakusin  
add a delightful visual element to the ex-  
perience of The Wickedary. Passive read-  
ing and academic detachment are sub-  
verted as the book engages the active im-  
agination, intellect, and emotion of the  
reader. One does not have to agree with  
Daly on everything in order to take up  
the wonderful challenge she poses.  
Mary Daly and those in cahoots with  
her relentlessly raise questions and make  

March/April 1988  

Looking Forward  

Gloria Naylor, Iris Murdoch, Muriel  
Spark, and Anita Brookner all have new  
novels out or about to come out, and we  
will be reviewing them soon. Special  
sections in the works include more short  
stories, Down Under: Part II, and Asian  
and Native American writing. Look for  
retrospectives on Mary Lee Settle and  
Margaret Drabble, an interview with  
Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, and a redis-  
covery piece on Mrs. Gaskell.  

Maria Thomas  
(labor camp prisoner) gave her a lift and  
assumed she was the wife of a camp guard  
rather than of a fellow zek simply because  
she had so much food with her. He raped  
her but became sorrowful when he dis-  
covered that she was really a dissident’s  
wife. Oddly enough, it was Zina who  
took the rapist’s side after hearing  
Galina’s story: “[It was] a good thing you  
understood him and forgave him, or he  
might have done something to himself.”  
The other women agreed. How sad that  
these women did not consider rape a  
crime regardless of who the victim is.  
The British translation of this book  
made me feel twice removed from the  
Russian, but at least the translator had  
the sensitivity not to have the less edu-  
cated characters speak in cockney as so  
many British translations of Russian fic-  
tion do (how often I had to suffer reading  
awful renditions of Tolstoy’s peasant  
characters saying improbable things such  
as “it'll be a bit o’ a lark, guvnor”).  
Nevertheless, I was able to feel a part of  
the book and even among the women in  
that hospital ward as though I was in a  
bed, calmly waiting for my turn to tell a  
story. And that is the real charm of this  
book; Voznesenskaya made the women  
appear real and vital with their ideas,  
strong feelings, contradictions, and ac-  
complishments. When I finished the  
book, I wished that The Women’s De-  
cameron would last another 10 nights,  
but I feel that I shall hear more about,  
and from, Julia Voznesenskaya.  

® Irene Zabytko teaches women’s studies  
in Vermont state colleges. She is co-editing  
an anthology of Slavic women writers and is  
completing a collection of original fiction.  

connections that cannot be ignored.  
Daly states: “the Leading Questions that  
act as Guides invite, attract, beckon,  
prompt, inspire, teach, warn... . for  
example, what does it mean on a day to  
day level to live with integrity on the  
boundary of patriarchal institutions?  
.... Leading Questions are First Ques-  
tions inspiring us on the Quest of Being.”  

I, for one, am grateful to Mary Daly for  
illuminating, with a great blaze of  
Gynaesthetic, Pyroglyphic language,  
these questions that are at the heart of  
our collective feminist journey.  

® Debra Schultz is a freelance writer who  
works for the National Center for Research  
on Women.  

— Poems, continued from page 5  

she dug the point of her pen into her  
notebook. When Feinstein writes about  
her, she cannot avoid adjectives like  
“ferocious,” “reckless,” and “fierce.”  
Tsvetayeva “gulped at love” — there was  
hardly a moment when she was not pas-  
sionate about some man or woman —  
and wrote poetry with frenzied concen-  
tration, often patterning groups of  
poems around one theme, “in cycles like  
whirlpools.” She called herself “concen-  
tric.”  

Tsvetayeva saw poetry as “an explo-  
sion,” a “breaking in,” the poet as some-  
one always bursting constraints, pushing  
toward “immensity in a measured  
world.” Unable to read the poems in  
Russian, I must rely on Feinstein’s trans-  
lations and her sometimes frustratingly  
inadequate notes to glean a sense of her  
verbal inventiveness and primal power.  
Her rhythms — syncopated, emphatic,  
percussive — have been compared to  
Stravinsky's. With her sudden pauses,  
stabbing attacks, and ringing repeti-  
tions, she creates an analogue in sound  
to the wrenching emotions and extrem-  
ities of her experience. Feinstein’s trans-  
lations satisfy the ear; her work with  
taped recitations of the Russian originals  
paid off. (I wish the translators of  
Ratushinskaya had listened more atten-  
tively; too many of their versions sound  
awkward and simply unmusical.)  

Although Feinstein depicts Tsvetayeva  
as a tireless doer — we glimpse her  
as she gathers firewood, cooks, and  
stokes the stove — she also emphasizes  
her subject’s disdain for everyday physi-  
cal realities. “I take no account of the ex-  
ternal,” Tsvetayeva wrote. “Everything  
that I love changes from an external  
thing to an inward one.” She lived by  
signs and omens, cherishing as talisman  
the lion plate that embodied the spirit of  
her old friend Max Voloshin, or the  

smoking crystal necklace a Czech friend  
gave her. Preferring letters to face-to-  
face encounters with the likes of Rilke  
and Pasternak, she could bestow on the  
former “a kiss without lips.” Tsvetayeva  
sought in love an ecstatic surrender in  
which she would be swept away, carried  
aloft by some violent wave. Just as in  
love she became “a cave that the waves  
entered,” so in the act of poetic creation  
she felt she was the recipient of a visita-  
tion. She saw the poet as a sleeper who  
has no choice but to dream, “obeying an  
unknown necessity.”  

Tsvetayeva’s soul required her to write  
poetry as her heart, before it broke, had  
no choice but to pump blood.  
Ratushinskaya had to write while im-  
prisoned in order to preserve her sense of  
self and to expose the inhumanity of the  
jailkeepers. For a Russian poet, there is  
another sense in which poetry becomes a  
necessity, one having to do with that  
country’s tradition of honoring the poet  
as prophet and soothsayer. Ratushinskaya’s poems can be considered subver-  
sive only in a country seduced by poetry’s  
vatic power. Should she remain in the  
United States, Ratushinskaya will ex-  
perience exactly what Tsvetayeva did in  
exile: the loss not only of readers in her  
native language, but of a culture that es-  
teems poetry. Tsvetayeva said during her  
exile: “From a world where my poems  
were as necessary as bread I came into a  
world where no one needs poems. . .  
where poems are needed like — dessert.”  
She might have been eavesdropping on  
her one-time lover, poet Osip Man-  
delstam, who grew impatient when  
someone bewailed the plight of Soviet  
poets. “Why do you complain?” he  
would ask. “Poetry is respected only in  
this country — people are killed for it.”  

® Emily Leider wrote Rapid Eye Move-  
ment and Other Poems and edited her  
grandmother's memoir Yesterday: The  
Memoir of a Russian Jewish Family.  

-  

By Ella Cara Deloria  
Biographical sketch by Agnes Picotte  
Afterword by Raymond J. DeMallie  

Sixth Grandfather.  

“A unique portrayal of nineteenth-century Sioux Indian life, un-  
equaled for its interpretation of Plains Indian culture from the  
perspectives of women.”—Raymond J. DeMallie, author of The  

Waterlily is a novel of the Dakotas, written by Ella Cara  
Deloria, herself a Sioux and an accomplished ethnologist. In it, she  
sought to record and preserve traditional Sioux ways through an  
imaginative re-creation of life in the camp circle. April. xii, 244  
pages, publisher's preface, biographical sketch, afterword. $19.95  

NEBRASKA  

University of Nebraska Press - 901 N 17 + Lincoln 68588-0520  

Belles Lettres @ 15