Black Literary History

Specifying: Black Women Writing the American Experience, by Susan Willis. Madison:  
University of Wisconsin Press, 1987, $19.95, 186 pp.

A Life Distilled: Gwendolyn Brooks, Her Poetry and Fiction, edited by Maria K. Mootry and  
Gary Smith. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987, $27.50, 304 pp.

Gwendolyn Brooks: Poetry and the Heroic Voice, by D. H. Melhem. Lexington: University  
of Kentucky Press, 1987, $25, 270 pp.  
by Elaine R. Ognibene

Susan Willis borrows her title and  
organizing principle from Zora  
Neale Hurston’s Dust Tracks on a  
Road: “Dat’s Big Sweet,” my landlady told  
me. “She got her foot up on somebody.  
Ain’t she specifying?” When Big Sweet  
is name calling in a way that unites her  
with the community at the expense of  
the object of attack, she provides a  
model for a rhetorical relationship and  
for a form of narrative integrity that Wil-  
lis believes are embodied in the work of  
contemporary black women writers.

Willis examines the work of Zora  
Neale Hurston, Paule Marshall, Alice  
Walker, Toni Morrison, and Toni Cade  
Bambara in a context that emphasizes  
history, culture, and literary technique.  
According to Willis, each writer is a  
modernist of sorts who communicates a  
previously ignored or buried history. In  
addition to being a historian who docu-  
ments problems of a capitalist society,  
each writer is also a visionary who ex-  
presses alternative modes of work, com-  
munity, and economy through narrative  
strategies that serve a “specifying” func-  
tion.

Stating that no other body of litera-  
ture so “cogently” gives voice to the  
change from rural to urban society, Wil-  
lis argues that the fiction of Black  
women writers can better convey  
change, because for Black women, “his-  
tory is a bridge defined along mother-  
lines.” Journeying along motherlines  
provides a “geography of migration” in  
two other ways. First, Black women have  
access to the past from oral histories  
passed on from grandmother to mother  
to daughter. In addition, they are repro-  
ducers of workers. Second, as producers,  
Black women have a history in the labor  
force. Because modes of work define his-  
torical epochs, they have first-hand  
knowledge of slavery, sharecropping,  
domestic, and wage labor. For these  
reasons, Black women writers under-  
stand history as both period and process.

History, Willis writes, is embodied in  
how the novels tell stories. Focusing on  
the writers’ literary modes, she demon-  
strates how metaphor and anecdote  
especially are essential aspects of the  
writers’ ideas and style; for these writers,  
the medium is indeed the message. The  
medium in this case is the “four-page for-  
mula”: short pieces that shape a novel,  
embodying a storytelling tradition that  
establishes a teller—listener relationship  
between author and reader analogous to  
the rhythms of daily life as they evolved  
in an oral, agrarian culture. In the works  
of Black women writers, the “popular or  
underclass” becomes the source of histor-  
ical definition, and the “articulation of  
contradiction” to the status quo that  
they represent emerges as the crux of the  
narrative.

Willis proceeds from Hurston, a pre-  
cursor of modernism whose narrative  
style “occupies a midpoint between  
‘specifying’ and metaphor,” to Bambara’s  
postmodernist perspective where narra-  
tive disarray denies interpretation and  
suggests a world where meaning no  
longer pertains. Willis weaves a fine,  
rich fabric of literary analysis for each au-  
thor’s work that pulls together threads  
from gender, race, and class. Although  
sometimes overdressing a novel in Marx-  
ist attire that appears ill fitting, or over-  
using a term like bourgeois, Willis makes  
a significant contribution to a growing  
body of literary criticism about Black  
women writers with her original insights  
into often-written-about works. In addi-  
tion, she identifies continuities among  

12 @ Belles Lettres  

the works, for example, returning to  
Black community, the female body as a  
medium for metaphors of history, and  
mothering as a cultural as well as a per-  
sonal imperative, which illustrate clearly  
how black women’s writing imparts his-  
tory in an alternative and crucial way.

By revealing how utopian transforma-  
tion depends on a radical reconstitution  
of domestic life and space — that is, ex-  
panding changes inside the house to the  
world outside — Willis illustrates well  
how the writing of Black women recon-  
structs a society that “privileges people  
over profits, domestic activity over wage  
labor and spontaneous consumption  
over routine.” Thus the dominant tradi-  
tion is subverted and the reconstructed  
feminine is made common ground for  
“transformed human social relationships  
and the alternative futures these shape.”  
In doing so with clear and incisive prose,  
Willis provides a model for critical  
analysis and a fertile field for future ex-  
ploration.

Zora Neale Hurston

A Life Distilled: Gwendolyn Brooks,  
Her Poetry and Fiction and Gwendolyn  
Brooks: Poetry and the Heroic Voice aim to  
right a wrong and explain Brooks’s con-  
tribution to American literary tradition.  
The first, a collection of critical essays,  
offers chronologically a wide range of  
perspectives and original insights into  
both her well-known and often-  
neglected works. The second, a biocriti-  
cal study, obfuscates, as the author’s  
messages fail to reach out with clarity.

The first section of A Life Distilled con-  
tains general essays, some of which seem  
limited, repetitious, and needlessly  
abstract in their attempts to establish  
Brooks’s importance in American and  
Afro-American literature. Houston  
Baker, Jr. and George Kent place Brooks  
in a traditional literary frame: Baker fo-  
cuses on Brooks’s negotiation between  
“black and white American literary tra-  
ditions,” and Kent traces “existential  
tensions” in her work. Kenny Williams  
illustrates well how Brooks, conscious of  
the relationship between place and life,  
makes Chicago “symbolic not only of  
every black ghetto, but of isolation  
wrought by modern life.” William Han-  
sell and Norris Clark offer opposing  
views on later phases of Brooks’s career.  
Hansell finds a “positive black mili-  
tancy” in her poems of the 1960s,  
whereas Clark, reiterating Kent’s ideas,  
emphasizes Brooks’s “universal” ap-  
proach, arguing that Brooks possesses a  
“unique individualism devoid of racial  
polemic or black rhetoric.” That state-  
ment and Clark’s closing comments, in-  
cluding how Brooks differs from the  
Black masses for whom she writes, open  
this essay to question. R. Baxter Miller  
finds the overriding quality in Brooks’s  

poetry to be a humanistic affirmation of  
the “ontological self.” Unfortunately,  
however, he rarely defines abstract  
terms, especially those related to  
humanism, and he repeats much that  
can be found in earlier essays.

Essays in the second section trace  
Brooks's poetic vision in themes within  
single volumes, including Erlene Stet-  
son’s examination of an unpublished  
manuscript, “Songs after Sunset,” and  
Gary Smith’s fine analysis of Brooks’s  
children’s poetry, in “Bronzeville Boys  
and Girls.” In another essay, Smith finds  
17th-century metaphysical poetry a vital  
key to understanding “The Children of  
the Poor” and concludes that Brooks  
learned that a “genteel sonnet form”  
could be used “as a devastating instru-  
ment of social protest.” The remaining  
six essays offer feminist perspectives in  
diverse fashions and degrees, to often  
provide brilliant, new insights into well-  
known works like The Bean Eaters or The  
Anniad. Focusing upon gender as well as  
race, they place Brooks in relationship to  
other women writers and, if read care-  
fully, provide an implicit interpretation  
of Brooks as a thematic forerunner of  
contemporary Black women writers.

The collection concludes with two  
critical approaches to Maud Martha. Bar-  
bara Christian examines it as a feminist  
novella, running counter to the tone of  
the “Negro Novel” of the time; Harry B.  
Shaw discusses the social theme of  
Maud’s war with beauty. He reveals mar-  
tial metaphors but strangely ignores posi-  
tive points in Maud’s continual recrea-  
tion of herself.

Critics of biography from Leon Edel to  
Alice Rossi include selectivity, unity,  
and probing the public self to reveal the  
private person as characteristics that  
contribute to a good biography. “The fig-  
ure under the carpet,” Edel would say.  
D.H. Melhem’s study of Brooks does not  
meet these criteria. Her style is disrup-  
tive; she dislocates focus as she fails to  
select only significant details. Her bio-  
graphical information consists of about  
15 pages of data, most of which can be  
gleaned from Brooks’s Report from Part  
One or public relations printouts. “New”  
information includes Brooks’s corres-  
pondence with Harper and Row, espe-  
cially with Elizabeth Lawrence, her  
editor of 20 years. Items like Lawrence’s  
letter of March 1945 confirming  
Brooks’s decision on how she would  
order her poems for “A Street in Bronze-  
ville,” however, hardly reveal clues to  
the private person.

In addition to being short on biog-  
raphy, Melhem’s book is long on para-  

— Beloved, continued from page 4  

the river, forgets the death he has helped  
deliver his people from, and informs Paul  
D. about Sethe’s killing her child. It is  
the act of someone removed from the liv-  
ing death of slavery, someone who has  
begun to think of himself simply as a citi-  
zen. And the rest of the Black commun-  
ity, which has traditionally welcomed its  
fleeing sisters and brothers, including  
Baby Suggs and Sethe, suffers a similar  
metamorphosis. They lose sight of the  
simple African joy of sharing and the  
magic that makes a little go a long way.  
They become jealous and vain, rejecting  
Baby Suggs and then Sethe, both of  
whom remain close enough to their ori-  
gins to survive even if survival means  
death.

Morrison weaves many delicate as-  
pects of survival, love, and community  
in a highly poetic manner. The narra-  
tive, although told mostly in fragmen-  
tary flashbacks, is direct. In some cases,  
however, it is lyric, as when Morrison  
tells of the neighbors’ disaffection from  
Baby Suggs and Sethe, or of Denver’s  
fear of her mother and devotion to Be-  
loved. The subtlety and ambiguity of the  
language sometimes does not stand up to  
the harsh facts that shape those feelings.  
When Sethe expresses shame for fondly  

remembering the sycamores of Sweet  
Home and not the men who were  
lynched from them, Morrison success-  
fully encapsulates the complexity of our  
relationship to slavery in a short, poetic  
paragraph. But to understand the bruised  
bond between Denver and Sethe and  
Denver and Beloved we need more than  
the single chapter narrated by Denver  
late in the book that gives only slight in-  
dication of the fear and loneliness  
Denver has lived with all of her life.

Beloved is my sister. I swallowed her  
blood right along with my mother’s  
milk. The first thing I heard after not  
hearing anything was the sound of her  
crawling up the stairs. She was my  
secret company until Paul D. came.  
And I do. Love her. I do. She played  
with me and always came to be with me  
whenever I needed her. She’s mine,  
Beloved. She’s mine.

This is a striking parallel to Beloved’s  
surreal explication of her obsession with  
Sethe; however, a stronger grounding in  
what life was like for Denver, Sethe, and  
Baby Suggs before the slaveowner ar-  
rived to take them back might have tied  
the characters together more tightly.  
This is not to say that Beloved is in any  
way a disappointment, except in that we  
want more of it. Sethe refers often to her  
“rememory” of the past, and it is this that  

March/April 1988