her fate to her husband. Yet, ignorant of  
sex and money, she becomes acquainted  
with that future husband during a com-  
plicated social minuet that can confuse  
and blind her. Mrs. Gaskell is con-  
cerned that whereas marriage requires  
trust and understanding, courtship offers  
mere pretense. In Wives and Daughters,  
several couples maneuver through fool-  
ish courtships into marriages, variously  
unsuccessful.  

Only Molly meets the challenges of  
rivalry, misunderstanding, and scandal  
to become her best self. Having gradual-  
ly selected the values she needs to be a  
decent person in a new age, she makes a  
self-respecting life with a “new man,” a  
young scientist modeled on Charles  
Darwin.  

This is not a didactic novel, how-  
ever. It spills over with comic characters  
like the town gossips and the lord and  
lady at the Towers. It observes social  
classes and records the vital drama of  
families. Since it is about wives and  
daughters, the novel focuses most in-  
tently — like a fairy tale— on Molly and  
her stepmother, Mrs. Gibson, the most  
vivid in Elizabeth Gaskell’s gallery of  
lively characters, silly, desperate, and  
finally humorous. Mrs. Gibson’s  
speech, “And now cover me up close,  
and let me go to sleep, and dream about  
my dear Cynthia and my new shawl,” are  
the last words the author wrote before  
she died.  

Wives and Daughters is funny and  
compelling. It dramatizes the quiet pat-  
tern of days and then the crises in  
Molly’s life. It exposes along the way the  
dangers of maidenly ignorance, the hy-  
pocrisy of courtships, the snobbery of  
villagers, the loneliness of the heroine.  
It resolves all the tensions comically,  
with victory for sanity and generous  
feeling.  

Readers in her lifetime under-  
stood the genius of Elizabeth  
Gaskell. Yet when later theorists  
survey her work, they express bewilder-  
ment. Her brand of domestic realism  
confuses some readers, particularly the  
male critics who define the canon of val-  
uable literature. Where — they wonder  
— can we “place” a storyteller who ex-  
poses harsh conditions in factories and  
yet elegizes the tranquil life of the  
country? Is she a serious political writer?  
Or is she merely a lady novelist?  

More recent theorists puzzle over her.  
What can they make of a writer who  
chronicles women’s suffering yet be-  
lieves women sometimes find solace in  
marriage and in religion? Could she be  
sufficiently feminist?  

This confusion has trivialized Gaskell  
criticism for years. Recently, however,  
under the bright light of feminist study,  
the artistry of this fine writer has come  
clear again. In a new critical study, Patsy  
Stoneman succeeds in defining the uni-  
fying force behind the variety of Mrs.  
Gaskell’s interests: a steady resistance to  
aggressive authority. She hates bullying;  
in her fiction the bully learns restraint.  

This central theme — containment  
of power — shapes the novels set in in-  
dustrial Manchester, where the  
factory-owner exercises aggressive au-  
thority by exploiting his workers. In the  
pastoral novels, fathers, even the most  
gentle ones, exert mindless authority  
over wives and daughters.  

Although Mrs. Gaskell’s stories  
dramatize runaway power in business  
and domestic spheres, they also show  
how it can be curbed. Under the tute-  
lage of intelligent women, the dominant  
male figures reconsider how they treat  
their dependents. Especially in the early  
works, authority softens through the  
intervention of religious teaching.  
Sometimes the aggressive man changes  
because grief or danger reminds him that  
life is more important than precept.  
The saving grace in Mrs. Gaskell’s  
novels is the capacity to care for others,  
that is “to care for” in both senses of the  
term: to love and to take care of. In her  
fictional world, according to Patsy  
Stoneman, “caring for others requires  
not subservience and conformity but  
courage and independence ... Her  
heroines have achieved that sense of  
self-worth which is the prerequisite for  
political action . . . [They] share in the  
creation of values.”  

Part 1988  

THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + BY JANE BAKERMAN  

For many folk, the month of May  
means strawberries, wild flowers,  
firming up vacation plans, and  
spading garden plots, but for members of  
Mystery Writers of America, May calls  
for another sort of plotting entirely. May  
means Edgar Week when MWA mem-  
bers gather in New York City to present  
the Edgar Allan Poe Awards honoring  
outstanding members of the crime-  
writing community. The Edgars are to  
mystery writers as the Oscars are to film  
makers.  

This year, the MWA outdid itself,  
combining Edgar Week with the Fourth  
International Crime Writers Congress,  
which drew a truly international crowd.  
It was a huge, week-long seminar/  
celebration, and most members of the  
Congress enjoyed both the working and  
the playing, the formally scheduled  
meetings and the informal get-  
togethers, in about equal measure. Mary  
Higgins Clark, Congress Chair; and  
Elaine Budd, Program Chair, and their  
committee members deserved — and got  
— generous praise for a job well done.  

In the plenary session, during which a  
number of questions about the current  
status of crime writing were raised,  
Dorothy Salisbury Davis spoke briefly  
about the impact the women’s move-  
ment has had on mystery fiction, sug-  
gesting that women writers are “opening  
up themselves” and using their own per-  
ceptions (as opposed to tradition or for-  
mula) to achieve greater psychological  
reality in their work. Noting that  
though women have long ranked among  
the most important and successful crime  
writers, reviews of works by male writers  
still far outnumber reviews of books by  
women, Davis stressed the desirability of  
equal attention for comparable work:  
“It’s time for it.”  

Actually, members of Sisters in  
Crime, the women’s caucus, so to  
speak, of MWA, are addressing Davis’s  
latter point. Members analyze major  
sources of book reviews, documenting  
the frequency with which journals in-  
clude books by women crime writers. In  
undertaking such projects, Sisters in  
Crime enhances its value as a network of  
individuals with common interests.  
Members — women writers, editors,  
and booksellers — from all parts of the  
country speak warmly of the support this  
relatively new organization offers them.  

For fledgling crime writers, some of  
the informal discussions about method,  
about locating an agent and publisher  
(also the subject of a panel), and about  
the very hard work necessary to create  
good fiction were as valuable as the  
planned events. Writers read bits of one  
another’s work in order to make sugges-  
tions, explained how they juggled  
schedules that include extensive writing  
sessions, family obligations, and a “reg-  
ular job,” which pays the rent until they  
make the best-seller lists, and urged one  
another to keep at it. Examples of good  
comradeship abounded.  

The Edgar Dinner itself was a gala af-  
fair, members having “dressed to kill” as  
instructed in the invitations. Diners  
were assigned tables, and the seating  
plan turned out to be a minor mystery.  
Insofar as I could tell, everyone found  
her proper place even though no one was  
able to decode the numbering system  
which identified the tables. However,  
there was nothing murky about the main  
event of the evening, the awards pre-  
sentation. Among the works tapped for  
Edgars were Aron Elkins’s Old Bones,  
best mystery novel; Deidre S. Laiken’s  
Death Among Strangers, best first mystery  
novel; and Sharyn McCrumb’s Bimbos of  
the Death Sun, best original paperback  
novel. On the nonfiction scene, In-  
troduction to the Detective Story by Leroy  
Lad Panek was dubbed best biograph-  
ical-critical study, and Richard Ham-  
mer’s CBS Murders was named best  
fact-crime work. Recognizing their  
long, distinguished careers, MWA  
named Phyllis A. Whitney a Grand  
Master of the mystery and presented  
Ruth Cavin, editor, with the Ellery  
Queen Award. Also honored were An-  
gela Lansbury and Vincent Price for  
their outstanding work in mystery enter-  
tainment.  

First Kill All the Lawyers, by Alice  
Storey (Pocket Books, $3.50, 220 pp.),  
is a very good paperback original.  
Samantha Adams, recovering alcoholic  
and crack newspaper reporter, returns to  
her home town, Atlanta, to take per-  
haps the world’s best job: She pretty  
much sets her own hours and selects her  
own assignments. Although Storey  
tends to telegraph coming developments  
a bit too vigorously (it’s unmistakable  
that dinner conversation in the opening  
scene will incite Sam’s dangerous inves-  
tigation into corruption among rural  
sheriffs), she has her material well under  
control. An appealing cast of charac-  
ters, echoes of an old romance, and ex-  
tensive local color — some charming,  
some disturbing — enhance the plot. If  
good old boys don’t sit around telling tall  
tales on hot Georgia afternoons, they  
should; the one incorporated into First  
Kill All the Lawyers is neatly presented in  
one of the book’s best scenes.  

The Woman Sleuth Anthology: Con-  
temporary Mystery Stories by  
Women, edited by Irene Zahava and  
published by The Crossing Press ($6.95,  
177 pp.), is an unusually strong collec-  
tion (the first of a planned pair) of a  
dozen stories by writers whose names are  
not yet household words. A dandy array  
of sleuths includes a mother-daughter  
team, a professional private eye, and  
Alice B. Toklas and Gertrude Stein.  
Good fun in themselves, the stories also  
alert readers to new talent; it will be in-  
teresting to see these authors’ crime-  
writing careers develop.  

With Worm of Doubt (Scribner's,  
$14.95, 191 pp.), M.R.D. Meek will  
please her established fans and attract  
others. Good as Hang the Consequences,  
The Split Second, and In Remembrance of  
Rose were, her fourth novel is even bet-  
ter. Frelis Lorimer wants to hire some-  
one to get rid of her husband’s Irish mis-  
tress. Although he is uncertain of exact-  
ly what services Frelis might want from  
him, Lennox Kemp, a lawyer with a  
damaging episode in his past, refuses to  
act for her. Nevertheless, when Eileen  
Dolan’s murder and the kidnapping of  
Frelis’s young son follow close upon one  
another, Kemp is drawn into the case.  
Very well realized characters enhance  
the intricate plot which surprises  
through the last paragraph in the grand  
tradition of English mysteries.  

The dust jacket of Ma  
by Joan Smith (Scribner’s, $15.95, 185  
pp.) features rave reviews that do not  
fulfill their promise. Smith is a theater  
critic still learning her craft as a fiction  
writer, and disappointment with the  
novel’s well-conceived but awkwardly  
rendered early scenes is sharpened be-  
cause the blurbs have created such high  
expectations. The unlikely inciting ac-  
tion — Loretta Lawson, English aca-  
demic and feminist scholar, borrows a  
friend’s Paris flat only to discover that  
she’s probably shared the apartment  
with a murdered corpse; then she returns  
to London without reporting her suspi-  
cions to the police — does not draw one  
quickly into the story, largely because  
events are reported rather than drama-  
tized. However, the novel gains enough  
cohesion, energy, and power from the  
details of Lawson’s subsequent long-  
distance investigation to make the tricky  
ending intriguing rather than frustra-  
ting. A Masculine Ending will please  
many lovers of the English mystery and  
some feminists.  

Cliffhanger Press (P.O. Box 29527,  
Oakland, CA 94604-9527) features  
HRS of a Regional Nature,” and its  
collection by Arlene Shovald  
($6.95, 187 pp.) is a readable mixture of  
crime, romance, and the supernatural  
set in small-town Colorado. Editor Les  
Rogers heads the staff of The Rosewell  
County Sun, frets about his recent di-  
vorce, grieves over the absence of his  
three little boys, and tentatively begins a  
relationship with Rhonda, one of his  
reporters. When another paper — a  
weekly shopper — prepares for publica-  
tion, stories mysteriously appear on Les’s  
video display terminal before the dis-  
asters they report take place. In order to  
understand what is happening, Les and  
Rhonda must uncover events from the  
distant past, and their efforts to stave off  
a tragedy predicted by their video ghost  
include a tense car chase. Les and  
Rhonda are interesting characters, and  
Kill the Competition is a promising first  
novel.  

Our resident Mistress of Crime, Jane  
Bakerman teaches at Indiana State and is a  
widely published commentator on the genre.  

Susan P. Willens wrote her doctoral  
dissertation on the comic vision in Gaskell’s  
novels and used Wives and Daughters as the  
basis of a recent Smithsonian Institution  
course on 19th-century novels by women.  
Note: Many of Gaskell’s works are availa-  
ble from Viking/Penguin. Patsy Stone-  
man’s book on her was published in 1987 by  
the Indiana University Press as part of the  
Key Women Writers series.  

Belles Lettres @ 15