Challenging the Language

Reading Women: Essays in Feminist Criticism, by Mary Jacobus. New York: Columbia

University Press, 1986, $25.00, 316 pp.

The Newly Born Woman, by Héléne Cixous and Catherine Clément. Translated by Betsy
Wing, foreword by Sandra M. Gilbert. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986,

$12.95, 169 pp.

The Politics of the Feminist Novel, by Judi M. Roller. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986,

206 pp.

Living Stories, Telling Lives: Women and the Novel in Contemporary Experience, by
Joanne S. Frye. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1986, $28.00 (HB), $12.95 (PB),

250 pp.

Feminist Aesthetics, edited by Gisela Ecker. Translated by Harriet Anderson. Boston: Beacon

Press, 1985, $9.95, 187 pp. (PB)

Women’s Writing: A Challenge to Theory, edited by Moira Monteith. New York: St. Martin’s

Press, 1986, 196 pp.

Feminist Criticism and Social Change: Sex, Class, and Race in Literature and Society,
edited by Judith Newton and Deborah Rosenfelt. New York: Methuen, 1985, $29.95 (HB),

$12.95 (PB), 291 pp.

Making a Difference: Feminist Literary Criticism, edited by Gayle Greene and Coppelia
Kahn. New York: Methuen, 1985, $9.95, 273 pp. (PB)

The Poetics of Gender, edited by Nancy K. Miller. New York: Columbia University Press,

1986, $25.00, 303 pp.

by Mary Libertin

We define and negotiate the

realities of our lives through

language. We interpret
others, ourselves, and our world through
it; we construct our identities and our
institutions with it. As we use language
individually and collectively, we shape
it or alter it. The language that existed
before our births will not be the language
that exists after our deaths, for language
reflects changes in society. In 1889, the
word feminist did not appear in the im-
portant Century Dictionary. Today,
feminist appears in dictionaries and refers
to a person who believes in economic,
social, and political equality between
the sexes. Because equality is such an
important ongoing struggle and because
language is the medium of change and
exchange, feminist literary theory has
become a sophisticated arena of activity.

Feminist literary theorists challenge
old, inadequate concepts of reading and
writing. They have branched into the
realm of psychoanalysis, where they
have engaged in an important dialogue
with the ideas of Freud and with those
of his famous French disciple, Jacques
Lacan. They have revised Marxist crit-
icism into what is now called feminist—
materialist criticism, which analyzes
networks of oppression. They have made
the principles of deconstructionism, as
found in the philosophy of Jacques Der-
rida, relevant to the operation of lan-
guage and logic in both the real and the
textual worlds. Current feminist literary
theorists tend to respect plurality and
the importance of engaging in dialogue
because they do not want to create other
oppressive institutions. Although they
may disagree about whether theory and
practice can be separated or about the
use of the word feminist to describe their
own work, they have changed literary
theory. Looking at the impressive work
in current feminist literary theory, we
can say with Audre Lorde in “A Song
for Many Movements” that “our uses
have become more important than our
silence . . . our labor has become more
important than our silence.”

It is no coincidence that the five col-
lections of essays reviewed here describe,
with individual focus and international
force, the diverse, highly charged re-
volution that feminism participates in
and encourages. The collections are also
unified by an emphasis, in three of the
four major works by individual authors,
on the relation between psychoanalysis
and dialogics as it is used as a strategy
with or within feminism. Today, the
languages of literary criticism and in-
terpretation are becoming feminist, and
to ignore the change leaves one in
jeopardy of becoming mute or immaterial.

The genius of Mary Jacobus’s Reading
Women: Essays in Feminist Criticism is
that she places “immunity in question”
with an original feminist reversal of
theory. In what will be seen as one of
the most brilliant feminist texts of our
decade, Jacobus places the two basic
texts of interpretation, psychoanalysis

Jury/August 1987

and feminism, in a radical correspon-
dence. She states that the realization
that the notion of femininity is a construct
rather than a given “demands a reread-
ing of the text of psychoanalysis.” She
thus shrewdly situates feminism “within
the exchange that constitutes it, within
the differences which divide it from any
self or essence, any unified position.”

Reading Women teaches a double pro-
cess of reading into and reading with:
We are reading woman as an effect of a
chain of texts rather than as the gender
of the reader or the writer. With intel-
lectual exuberance and a deft reading of
the texts, Jacobus shows that theories of
psychoanalysis, sexual difference, and
realist narrative are constructed and “re-
semble one another in needing to mar-
ginalize the terms which constitute them
(respectively hysteria, femininity, and
fictionality).” Thus “hysteria, women,
and the uncanny are the points of insta-
bility which threaten to expose theory,
sexual difference, and ‘reality’ as them-
selves the product of representation, as
constructs.” Jacobus’s success in con-
vincingly presenting the significance of
such a revision of interpretation and rep-
resentation is impressive.

Those familiar with Jacobus’s previ-
ously published essays, four of which are
included here, will be impressed with
their new value in the context of her
approach. The three new essays and the
preface in Jacobus’s section, “Anna
(WH)o’s Absences: Readings in Hys-
teria,” present her monumental reread-
ing of Freudian psychology and of the
representation of women’s writing. She
asks, “What if the features of hysterical
narrative — narratives both by and
about ‘hysterical’ women, reenacting the
hysterical disorders they present — turn
out to embody the repressed (because
disruptive, unassimilable, and con-
tradictory) aspects of all narrative? What
if they inscribe a hysteria that might as
well be called masculine?” Jacobus’s
answers to these questions involve us in
amazing considerations of feminist liter-

“Woman Reading.” Charcoal on paper (22” x 28”) by Lorraine Inzalaco.

ature: of Gilman’s The Yellow Wallpaper
in the essay, “An Unnecessary Maze of
Sign-Reading”; of George Eliot’s “Lifted
Veil” in the essay, “Hysterics Suffer
Mainly from Reminiscences”; and of the
text of psychoanalysis itself in “Taking
Liberties with Words.” She shows with
clarity and with how “remembering and
forgetting, omniscience and irony, dou-
ble one another in analytical and hyster-
ical narrative.” Thus, when she notes
“there are no surprises after all,” the
reader feels the effect quite powerfully.

Equally impressive is the section
“Women and Theory.” In “Dora and
the Pregnant Madonna,” she used Julia
Kristeva’s theories to reveal that the mis-
sing mother in Freud may be his “way
of denying the materiality of signs,” a
remarkable rereading that returns the
reader to current feminist theory with
the energy of an epiphany. Perhaps her
most brilliant essay is the concluding
“Reading Correspondences,” which is
filled with as much wordplay and pun-
ning as those of the French theorists
whose corresponding strategies she
“takes issue with” and puts “on the line”
by insisting that “the feminist letter de-
rives its meaning (and its refusal of
meaning — its unreadability) from the
feminist ‘plot’ or narrative in which it
is installed.” No student of interpreta-
tion — literary, feminist, or psycho-
analytic — will be able to ignore this
text for long.

Those who are unfamiliar with
Héléne Cixous’s “Laugh of the Medusa”
or with the excerpts from “Sorties” in
Signs or in Marks and de Courtivron’s
New French Feminisms will want to read
her complete essay, in addition to
Catherine Clément’s essay, “The Guilty
One,” along with their concluding
dialogue, “Exchange,” in the translation
of this 1975 feminist classic, La Jeune
Née (The Newly Born Woman). This
book contains an exceptional introduc-
tory essay, “Tarantella of Theory,” by
Sandra Gilbert, which prepares the
Anglo-American reader for this radical
text by stunning us with the depth of
rage and desire in writers from Dickinson

to Rich and by fending off objections to
possible charges of essentialism and
hyperbole. Gilbert correctly shows that
écriture féminine is fundamentally a polit-
ical strategy that “redress[es] the wrongs
of culture through a revalidation of the
rights of nature.” Catherine Clément
rivets the reader with her post-Lacanian
explanation of how women are in the
“imaginary zone” that culture creates for
what it excludes, and she notes that
what is at stake in history is “the whole
evaluation of psychoanalysis as a
therapeutic function.” Clément shows
that the role of the hysteric is “indeed,
what keeps the very history of
psychoanalysis going” and that the hys-
teric and the sorceress “are old and worn-
out figures, awakened only to throw off
their shackles.” Indeed, at the end of
this critique of women’s place in

psychoanalysis, we find that these figures
no longer exist. Cixous’s posthysterical
text leads the reader through the rebirth
of women into a utopia.

In this utopia, the écriture féminine,

women have been borne out of

hysteria, and they remember what
has been repressed. They are unafraid
and laughing. As Cixous explains,
“Everyone knows that a place exists
which is not economically or politically
indebted to all the vileness and com-
promise. That is not obliged to repro-
duce the system. That is writing. If there
is a somewhere else that can escape the
infernal repetition, it lies in that direc-
tion, where it writes itself, where it
dreams, where it invents new worlds.”
Bisexual, the newly born woman “dis-
places and reviv[es] the question of dif-
ference.” Bisexuality is “the location
within oneself of the presence of both
sexes, evident and insistent in different
ways according to the individual, the
nonexclusion of difference or of a sex,
and starting with this ‘permission’ one
gives oneself, the multiplication of the
effects of desire’s inscription on every
part of the body and the other body.”
Readers will be borne upon Cixous’s
flight through the “dawn of phallocen-
trism” — the rewriting or appropriation
of texts of the past, from the Greeks
through Shakespeare, from Freud
through Joyce. As Cixous tells Clément,
“this is a high point in the history of
women.” This fine translation provides
a classic example.

The Politics of the Feminist Novel, by
Judi M. Roller, is disappointing because
it lacks an informed feminist—historical
context. Roller does provide an interest-
ing discussion of 25 feminist novels writ-
ten in English, ranging from Kate Cho-
pin’s The Awakening to Alice Walker’s
The Color Purple. Generally, Roller con-
siders the relation between the political
novel as generic category and the
feminist novel as a valid subset. Her
chapter titles — “Authority and Auto-
biography,” “Fragmentation Versus
Unity: The Shattered Novel,” “The En-
dings,” “Portrayals of Slavery and Free-
dom” — suggest both the strengths and
weaknesses of her approach, which is an
analysis of theme and technique in clus-
tered novels without an explicit focus
that could clarify her political insight.
Roller’s tendency to apologize for the
political nature of feminist novels is re-
vealed in her appendix: “Literature need
not be apolitical to be ‘good’ or even
‘great.’ It is often only our definitions
that make it seem so.” Her major critical
source is Irving Howe’s Politics and the
Novel, and her references are to critical
works that generally precede 1980. Al-
though her insight into individual
feminist novels is sometimes valuable, I
expected much, much more.

On the other hand, I cannot praise
enough the achievement of Joanne S.
Frye’s book, Living Stories, Telling Lives:
Women and the Novel in Contemporary
Experience, which is an original explora-
tion of the poetics of feminism and nar-
rative form. Frye reveals experience as
an ongoing dialogue between a speaking
“I” and the stories that we have learned
from others. Women, especially, must
be critical of the stories that they hear
about themselves and about other
women in our patriarchal society. To
recognize the internal dialogue between
these stories and “I” is essential. To tell
the story of that “I” is a political act.
Frye does not believe that telling the
story of women’s lives requires learning
difficult techniques from a (supposedly)
sacred canon of untouchable literature.
She shows the power of the narrating
“I” and explains how women can effec-
tively use it.

— continued on page 14

Belles Lettres @ 11