The Terror of Recognition

Shadow Bands, by Jeanne Schinto. Princeton: Ontario Review Press, 1988,

$9.95, 164 pp. (PB)

Everything You’ve Heard Is True, by Frances Sherwood. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins

University Press, 1989, $14.95, 119 pp.

by Ilona Popper

Painters talk of a “slow” picture.

The eye moves slowly around the

canvas as details gradually be-
come imprinted and then remain in-
delibly in memory. In Shadow Bands,
Jeanne Schinto writes slow stories. Al-
though there is a muted quality to each
of them, certain tenacious images keep
floating back.

Rosario, a first-generation Italian
now in his seventies, pins laundry to a
clothesline. The white of the laundry
brings back “Snow-bound,” a poem he
recited in elementary school. The poem
represents a life that changed completely
when his father mysteriously disap-
peared. Rosie continually reviews his
life in terms of this event. If it had not
happened, he would have had an educa-
tion, would have married differently,
lived differently.

Rosie feels old age is a trap, bringing
him more and more under the control of
his wife, Ignatia. In another lasting
image, we see him spying on her. “He
watched her with narrowed eyes from
the bathroom window, unseen.”

Now after sixty years, he learns the
truth about his father and realizes his life
was never what he thought it was. The
story floats between two images: Rosie
hanging laundry, thinking about
“Snow-bound,” and Rosie ready to
leave, chasing crows off his car and fall-
ing in the snow.

Schinto writes about the extraordi-
nary moments in the lives of ordinary
people: Rosie and Ignatia, teenage girls
from the suburbs, a retired Black police-
man. Her characters are unselfcon-
scious. The moments that shock them
may seem simple, but they engender
revelations.

In “The Original Dog,” Franklin sits
on his stoop, watching Dream Boy work
out in the alley and delivering silent
monologues to the boy. Franklin has no
one but his small, pedigreed dogs that
arrived the day his wife died. To him,
Dream Boy represents something futile,
yet alive:

Once, in the early part of the summer,
from his kitchen window, Franklin saw
the boy throw himself down between two
garbage cans and cry, banging his head
against the rough concrete. Franklin paced
for a minute or two, clenching and un-
clenching his fists. Then, he smiled,
reached up and flipped the radio dial till
he found some lilting music, turned up the
volume, and pointed the radio out the
window.

In a baffling event, Franklin loses
both the boy and his two dogs. Upon

LOVE AND SURVIVAL IN THE
LAST POLIO WARD..
They meet and fall in love in a
hospital, having both been struck
by polio on the same night. Their
story explores the issues of
disability, love, and courage.

This reader found the novel full
of the usable truth — May Sarkon

LIGHTNING IN JULY

a novel by

Ann L. McLaughlin
Paperback, $8.98.

Available from your bookseller or,
direct from the publisher:

John Daniel & Co., PO Box 21922
Santa Barbara, CA 93121 (please
add $1.50 per order for shipping.)
Or call 1-800-ALL BOOK.
MC/Visa accepted,

38 © Belles Lettres

Jeanne Schinto

their return, Franklin suddenly sees
himself as others do, a helpless, lone-
some old man.

Such revelations terrify characters
like Franklin because they cannot call
out for companionship or help. Franklin
hates his weaknesses, his unvoiced feel-
ings. But these feelings become over-
whelming, unbearable.

Mira lives with her parents in one half
of a duplex. Their family is one of their
neighborhood's growing majority of
middle-class, white homeowners. Mi-
ra’s home is renovated, clean, and
modern. Charlie, a Black boy, lives in
the duplex’s rat-infested, unrenovated
side. Both children suffer from neglect,
but the similarities in their lives are ob-
scured by the differences in their back-
grounds.

At the end of “Shadow Bands,” Mira
sneaks onto her porch, injured in a racial
attack in the park. She sees her younger
friend Charlie, who had been injured in
a family fight. “His black eyes flashed at
her with hope,” but because Charlie
passively contributed to her assault,
Mira withdraws her friendship. Like
most of Schinto’s characters, she cannot
bear her own vulnerability.

The stories move quickly in Frances
Sherwood’s collection, Everything
You've Heard Is True, but her charac-
ters, while superficially remarkable, are
undeveloped. They often stand as fig-
ures more than people: the sexy, tough
woman, the political prisoner, the
immigrant, the interracial couple.

The stories are entertaining, some-
times moving and powerful. In “Lessons
in Love,” we mourn with Susan, so
openly crossed and wounded in love,
and we rejoice with Flynn, in “Me at the
Gas Station,” when he finally goes home
after turning his back on his lost mar-
riage and his immigrant life.

All Sherwood’s stories have the qual-
ity of a good yarn. “Arrowheads” begins
with the sentence, “Cats was an excep-
tion,” and from that moment the reader
expects someone exceptional. But Cats
never becomes more than a mythical
figure. Because we cannot identify with
her, Cats’s quirky, moody life seems
more and more repetitive. She becomes
sealed off from her lover and we must,
like him, walk away from someone who
seems no longer exciting, only sad.

Although they delight us with their
invention, too often Sherwood’s stories
slip away, leaving no lingering image or
voice.

® Ilona Popper’s poems have appeared in
Earth's Daughters and the anthology Back
in My Body.

Elaine Hobby
THE VIRTUE OF
NECESSITY

"English Women’s Writing 1649-88

“This arrestingly original volume brings to
visibility and decodes the prolific, political writings
of around two hundred seventeenth-century
women. Elaine Hobby’s provocative and ground-
breaking reassessment is an exciting model of
interdisciplinary feminist scholarship applied to a
critical area of seventeenth-century history.”
—Moira Ferguson, University of Nebraska

cloth $29.95 / paper $11.95

Mary S. Gossy

THE UNTOLD STORY

Women and Theory in
Golden Age Texts

“[Gossy] allies the concept of the ‘gap’ with woman,
madness, heterodoxy and other ‘deviancies’ that
refuse the constraints of unitary, totalistic thinking,
bringing a feminist reading to recent trends in
literary theory. The study opens heretofore

untouched Spanish texts to a theoretically well
developed feminist reading.” —Ruth El Saffar,
University of Illinois, Chicago

“In Spanish Golden Age studies, feminism has
barely made a dent. This book will be revolution-
ary ....it is brisk, daring, and eye-opening.”
—Barbara Johnson, Harvard University

A volume in our Women and Culture Series.
cloth $22.95

Michigan residents, include 4% sales tax.

Buys, THE UNIVERSITY OF
MICHIGAN PRESS

Dept. FL P.O. Box 1104 Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106

Coffee House Press

Verging on the Pertinent
SHORT STORIES BY CAROL EMSHWILLER

In this startling collection, Carol Emshwiller uses tongue-
in-cheek realism to transform the ordinary, domestic world
into something truly odd, metaphorical, allegorical, satirical and fantastic. “Carol Emshwiller’s stories are a world
unto themselves.” —The New Republic

$9.95, paper

My Own Alphabet

STORIES & ESSAYS BY BOBBIE LOUISE HAWKINS
Each chapter of My Own Alphabet is inspired by a letter of
the alphabet. Monologues, vignettes, stories, essays and
quotations portray Hawkins' personal vision of what makes
the world go ‘round. “Hawkins jogs memory and induces
fantasy...bits and pieces of varying length are juxtaposed
and, once fit together, the life of a woman emerges.”
— Publishers Weekly
$9.95, paper

MY OWN

“Alphabet

Bend this Heart

SHORT STORIES BY JONIS AGEE

As the title suggests, these turbulent stories reveal the
human heart: stubborn, alien, laid siege to, which must be
broken, torn and patched to discover its own strength.
“These odd, original stories, keenly alive with language,
make the heart and mind work.”

—Amy Hempel, The New York Times Book Review

$9.95, paper

Yes! Please send me:

copies of Verging on the Pertinent at $9.95

copies of My Own Alphabet at $9.95

copies of Bend this Heart at $9.95
Please enclose check with order and include $1.50 postage/handling.
Name:

ADDRESS:
City/ State/ Zip: 
Coffee House Press, 27 North Fourth Street, Minneapolis, MN 55401

Fat 1989