I am a broken reed, and a neurotic one too — [keep casting loving looks at the gas oven, if only it were more up-to-date, poor darling . . . as it is (dated about 1911 I should think) I haven’t the heart.”

Spalding, also the biographer of Roger Fry and Vanessa Bell, fleshes out Smith’s rather anemic popular image: that of a spinster genius who shunned the outside world, preferring to share nearly all of her life with her aunt. In reality, Smith ventured into a few romances and had a broad group of friends, Spalding amply shows. The pen that could be so biting in her poetry was absolutely devastating in her frequent book reviews and commentaries on fellow writers. (She dismissed poet Allen Ginsberg, for example, as “hot air.”) She battled publishers who resisted her drawings, which she argued were inextricable from her writing. And her diminutive frame contrasted sharply with the dynamic public reader who captivated audiences when she became in vogue again in the 1960s.

Yet Spalding’s mining of Smith’s fiction for details about her life is sometimes unsettling, leaving the reader to confront such ambiguities as “if Stevie’s fictional account of the school is accurate.” Even more disconcerting is her armchair analysis of Smith’s sexual makeup. One example: “The phobia aroused in her by snakes (she would change carriages if a person boarded a train with snakeskin bag or shoes) invites an obvious conclusion,” the biographer suggests. Right, she hated snakes.

Stevie Smith. Photo by Jorge Lewinski

But, overall, this is an exemplary biography, distinguished by sinewy writing and keen analysis of Smith’s diverse work. Spalding uses a thick-bladed knife to pry open a very private and crusty shell, exposing a versatile and talented artist.

When Pecola Breedlove eats Mary Jane candies, she melts into a fleeting, magical world reserved for white girls with blond hair and blue eyes. “To eat the candy is somehow to eat the eyes, eat Mary Jane,” Toni Morrison writes in The Bluest Eye. “Love Mary Jane. Be Mary Jane.” In a culture where to count is to be white and male, Pecola goes mad, finally content in her belief that she too has blue eyes.

This type of psychological and physical acrobatics by female and ethnic minority characters is the focus of Roberta Rubenstein’s Boundaries of the Self: Gender, Culture, Fiction (University of Illinois Press, $24.95, 256 pp.). Rubenstein explores how gender and race “combine in the unique personality” of writings by Toni Morrison, Leslie Silko, Maxine Hong Kingston, Penelope Mortimer, Margaret Atwood, and Marilynne Robinson.

Rubenstein takes a familiar idea — that women have trouble with emotional boundaries — and tracks it through the work of the six writers. “Constriction of the growth of the self is implicitly linked to restrictive or oppressive cultural circumstances,” Rubenstein argues. So, in these writers’ work, we find characters who have blurred or distorted egos, disturbed family relationships, deformed or mutilated limbs, and symbiotic or even incestuous attachments.

Rubenstein finds Morrison’s work particularly suited to her thesis in its recurrent theme of “energy and passion released self-destructively when there is no positive outlet for its expression.” In Sula, for example, Sula chops off part of her finger and Eva Peace sets her son on fire because they cannot exist as separate adults.

Self-mutilation and destructiveness can also be seen in the Chinese culture explored by Kingston. Footbinding and female infanticide resonate in The Woman Warrior and contrast with the author’s ruminations on female power. What if, for example, women were once so powerful that their feet had to be bound? “The invention of a potent magical self is a kind of defensive fantasy that imaginatively counteracts the experience of insignificance and the generalized contempt for females in Chinese culture,” Rubenstein writes.

Blurred or confusing boundaries are not always debilitating, Rubenstein concludes of Robinson’s truly remarkable first novel, Housekeeping. The eccentric Sylvie Fisher finds “housekeeping is the opportunity to commune with the absolute, to merge boundaries, to meld the human and natural worlds by accumulation of rather than resistance to nature’s encroachment,” she notes. Housekeeping “is revealed to be not the endless battle to maintain domestic order . . . but rather the profound activity through which essence is discovered and recovered.”

Rubenstein’s sections on Morrison and Robinson are especially effective, although she shows a confident hand throughout. Her writing is at times abstruse, but her insights are ample.

@ Deborah Price is the news editor of the Detroit News’s Washington bureau.

@ “Patchwork” will appear regularly with reviews of literary biographies and criticism, as well as reports on trends and people of related interest. Its inspiration is the perennial women’s craft in which pieces of cloth, oftentimes scraps of seemingly incongruous shapes and colors, are resourcefully stitched together to produce a harmonious quilt.

Ethnography, that is, the defining of one’s subjective ethnicity as mediated through language, history, and ethnographical analysis . . . far from being a ‘camouflage’ and an ‘escape,’ [Dust Tracks] does indeed exemplify the ‘paradoxes of her personality’ by revealing a fluid and multidimensional self that refuses to allow itself to be framed and packaged.”

Lionnet declares that “The reactionary potential of a separatist search for a unitary and naturalized identity is a well-known danger on which I shall not dwell here. Only a well-understood feminist politics of solidarity can protect us from such a danger.” This seems a good note on which to end. Anglo-American feminist criticism, with its insistence on all-encompassing categories and closure, must give way to the flow, the openness, suggested by French feminist approaches. Diverse reading strategies are essential if, as critics, we wish to free women to tell the whole truth of their lives, in Isadora Duncan’s words, or if we wish to free the truth already told in women’s autobiographies.

@ Elizabeth R. Baer is Provost and Dean of the College at Washington College in Chestertown, Maryland.

Belles Lettres @ 21

The Blue Nature by Suzanne Hamilton Free

New York: St. Martin’s, 1989, $19.95, 418 pp.

Maddie Cameron, a middle-aged mother of three, is given to the blue nature, “that special quality of mind that all the family’s most driven achievers had: restless, intense, wanting neither and both of every choice of philosophical options, subject to soaring highs and sinking lows.” Or does she, as a minister’s wife and helper — a self-described “Cheshire cat Christian” who edits the sermons, irons the holy cloths, and decorates the altar — suffer from the stifling roles she has accepted?

On first glance, The Blue Nature is a retrograde novel. It tells the story of a woman living a 1950s-esque existence, untouched by feminism or even modernity. Often depressed, she does what she has to to get by, packing lunches, tending the house and functioning as a lady of the Church. But Maddie still has a lot of time on her hands, and Suzanne Hamilton Free is expert at sending her back into the cauldrons of childhood and adolescent memory to ascertain what went wrong. Her writing is exquisite, her conclusions compassionate and life-affirming.

As Maddie delves into her past, we are made privy to an intellectually driven, sometimes wacky, sometimes staid family that is at once old-fashioned and proper, quirky and untraditional. Growing up under the thumb of Mom, Dad, Grandma Bert, and Granddaddy, Maddie recalls being exceptionally fond of Uncle Deane, an eccentric scientist given to long, exploratory visits to Alaska. While working on an unspecified Navy project during the heights of the Cold War, Deane vanished without warning. The oft-absent family member, the fair-haired boy of the Cameron clan, threw off the balance of familial harmony.

As the adults around her attempt to unscramble the mystery of Deane’s disappearance, confronting an unsympathetic military and forced to rely on their own teetering intuition, Maddie is given an inside view of parallel pathologies: that of society and that of the Camerons. Not yet a teenager, Maddie finds the process scary, confusing. In desperation, she withdraws. And because the adults are so preoccupied with finding out what happened to Deane, Maddie’s needs are subsumed. Later, in her marriage, this pattern will repeat itself. Or will it?

The Blue Nature is an unusually touching first novel. It is filled with probing questions and philosophical debate, and each of the many characters is well drawn and sympathetic. Far from being atavistic, it makes no judgments as it delves into Maddie’s tormented psyche, revealing with candor, grace, and wit the demons inside.

As she emerges from one depression, Maddie recalls a statement by Kafka: “A great book functions like an axe for the frozen sea within us.” The Blue Nature unleashes a panoply of emotions (I cried repeatedly throughout). Reflecting on my own family and the mental illness often evidenced, I was compelled by Free to examine the scars and bruises anew. I thank her for encouraging the thaw.

—Eleanor J. Bader

and Robinson are especially effective, although she shows a confident hand throughout. Her writing is at times abstruse, but her insights are ample.