Interview, continued

Shange names writers who have
nourished her work and her life: Zora
Neale Hurston, Olga Broumas, Jessica
Hagedorn, June Jordan, Susan Griffin, and
Kitty Tsui, Toni Morrison, Geraldine
Kudaka. Each is a writer who has faced
down the dragon of patriarchal language
and kidnapped the king’s English with
an eye toward its realignment, if not its
destruction. The male writers she turns
to — Ishmael Reed, Amiri Baraka,
Mario Vargas Llosa, Enrique, Pablo
Neruda — certainly have a perspective

THIS BRIDGE CALLED
MY BACK

Writings by Radical
Women of Color

Cherrie Moraga and
Gloria Anzaldúa, eds.
Classic collection of writings
by Native American, Asian
American, Latina and
Afro-American women.
Reflects “an uncompromised
definition of feminism by
women of color in the U.S.

CUENTOS

Stories by Latinas
Alma Gomez,
Cherrie Moraga and
Mariana Romo-Carmona,
eds.

A collection of thirty
stories by Latinas from
the U.S. and Latin
America. Includes se-
lections in English and
Spanish with a bilingual
introduction.

ex Comrades
IS SUSPICIONS

rice seal

_ poems by

AAD ACQUIR

with an introduction by:
Audre Lorde

that is less feminist (if at all), but they,
too, are language warriors.

Shange is a powerful force in the
struggle to rethink how we use words.
In some of her work (See No Evil, a
collection of essays; Sassafrass, Cypress
& Indigo, a novel) she blasts through
English structures, revealing musical
underpinnings that refuse to be bound
to American shores. In Betsey Brown,
Shange is delicate in her recreation and
amplification of the cadences of
Afro-American speech and the particu-
lar vision from which it grows. Her
move to Houston affords her the time,
privacy, and tranquility she needs to
mine the centers where lies the under-
standing of Betsey and the other Black
women characters she creates. Here she
can look inside her own experience,
which was much like Betsey’s, to find
the resources and to reproduce the
unique vision Afro-Americans bring to
the literary world.

The only correct writing is
truthful writing that comes
from inside your spirit.

At the University of Houston,
where Shange teaches acting, playwrit-
ing, fiction, and poetry, she begins
each semester with the admonishment
to her students to undertake a similar
approach to their own work: “My job is
to help them discover their own voices,
to help them have some clarity about
how they articulate what is going on
inside themselves, inside their
characters, in the world around them,
and a sense of the preciousness and
strength of one’s own voice as opposed
to mimicking the styles of anybody.
Reading other novelists or poets is
supposed to nurture your own peculiar
voice, not strap it down into something
that’s correct. The only correct writing
is truthful writing that comes from in-
side your spirit.”

When Ntozake Shange puts the cat
out and sits down to her typewriter now
with fresh flowers, sparkling water, two
packs of cigarettes, Latin music or Cecil
Taylor on the stereo, she no longer has
to dress up “weird” to work as she did
in New York, where she was noted for
her extravagant scarves and eye-
catching jewelry. I imagine her bent
over her machine, typing furiously for
hours or gazing out of the window,
wondering where to find a case large
enough to fit her oversized violin or
what time she should leave to pick up
Savannah from piano lessons. Outside
the window, securely perched on the
tree limb that is her secret hiding
place, Betsey Brown is cheering her on
in that persistent search for the ordinary
level of living that replenishes us all.
At the end of the novel, Betsey comes
to fulfill her own aspirations. She draws
strength from the knowledge that
“Carrie would have said there was
nothing dishonorable about being an
Ikette, either.”

@ Jewelle Gomez is an associate in the
Literature Program of the New York State
Council of the Arts and is the author of a
forthcoming collection of vampire stories.

10 @ Belles Lettres

261 pp., $8.95

HOME GIRLS

A Black Feminist
Anthology
Barbara Smith, ed.

Fiction, poetry,

political analysis and
essays by 35 contributors
brings together a decade
of Black feminist writing
and organizing.

“In terms of teaching,

sharing, caring, healing,

and liberating, Home Girls

is one of the most im-

portant books in the history

of Black women’s writing.”
-Alice Walker

400 pp., $10.95

FOREWORD:

A Leap Forward, continued

credit these stories as remarkable
evidence of the survival of an ideal
despite the abuse and debasement it
has borne.

Another type of ideal that survives
in the writing of these contemporary
Chinese women is more aptly labeled
Confucian than Marxist: the ideal of
the quietly submissive woman. In
Zhang Jie’s “Love Must Not Be
Forgotten,” for example, a writer
contents herself for the better part of
her adult life with fantasies about the
man she loves but cannot marry. It
may be a long time before a Chinese
writer can permit a central female
character to have an extramarital
affair, without horrible consequences
for the “immoral” woman.

But the fact that at the heart of
Zhang Jie’s story is a woman’s fertile
fantasy life is a major literary
breakthrough. Zhang's writer is
obviously also worlds apart from the
Marxist ideal, the mythical model
worker with no thoughts beyond
service to the socialist reconstruction
of China. Even more novel is Zhang’s
young narrator, the daughter who
learns through her late mother’s diary
what it means to passionately love a
man and, as a result, decides not to
marry her handsome but inarticulate
suitor. Her decision to find the man
she really wants or never to marry at
all is nothing short of heroic in a
society that still puts enormous
pressure on women to marry.

Gladys Yang observes in her
preface to this collection that there is
no women’s liberation movement in
China and that none of the stories in
this collection openly expresses the
need for one. Yet in calling attention
to the problems and desires of women,
these works add a dimension of
realism to the portrayal of women
previously unknown in the literature
of the People’s Republic of China.

Note: Panda Books (Beijing) will
soon publish story collections by Shen
Rong and Zhang Jie. China Books
(San Francisco) and Zed Books
(London) plan to co-publish Zhang
Jie’s novel Laden Wings.

@ Diane Dewhurst Belcher is a
lecturer in the English Department at
Ohio State University. She spent
1982-1983 as a “Foreign Expert” at the
Branch College of the Beijing Foreign
Languages Institute in China. She has
contributed reviews to several journals
and is writing an article on the feminine
ideal in Dickens.

Emons: —
CHERRIE MORAGA
GLORIA ANZALDÚA

ri

TONI CADE BAMBARA

A COMRADE IS

AS PRECIOUS AS
A RICE SEEDLING
Mila D. Aguilar

with an introduction
by Audre Lorde
Poems by the Filipina
activist, journalist and
teacher who has been
imprisoned in the Phil-
ippines since August, 1984
by the Marcos regime.
37 pp., $4.50

245 pp., $7.95

NARRATIVES

Poems in the Tradition
of Black Women
Cheryl Clarke

Clarke considers her
Black, lesbian and fem-
inist identities to be the
“filter of her imagination”
in a work which points

to a courageous new
Afro-American women’s
poetry for the 1980s.

60 pp., $4.95

:-CUENTOS:

| Stories by Latinas

Shipping: Add $1. for first book, $.25 for each additional.

P.O. Box 2753-BL New York, N.Y. 10185

The Ordeal of Elizabeth Vaughan
A Wartime Diary of the Philippines
Edited, with an Introduction, by Carol M. Petillo

“When World War II broke out, Elizabeth Vaughan and her two small children were interned
by the Japanese. Her diary records, with deep sensitivity and a high degree of observation
(Vaughan was a sociologist) the internees’ sufferings and their primitive surroundings” —
Library Journal. $24.95

Sacred Groves and Ravaged Gardens

The Fiction of Eudora Welty, Carson McCullers,
and Flannery O’Connor

Louise Westling

Set against the background of southern society's often rigid code of behavior for its women,
Sacred Groves and Ravaged Gardens examines the strongly willed efforts of Eudora Welty, Flannery
O'Connor, and Carson McCullers to realize their own particular visions of womanhood in their
lives and in their works. $22.50

Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation in
1838-1839

Frances Anne Kemble

Edited, with an Introduction, by John A. Scott

“The University of Georgia Press has restored a rightful classic to print”—Atlanta Magazine.
A leading nineteenth-century British actress married to a Georgia planter, Fanny Kemble broke the
complacent code of the antebellum South when she published this penetrating account of slaves and
their masters. $9.95 (paper)

Women of Fair Hope
Paul M. Gaston

Women of Fair Hope follows the dreams and achievements of three extraordinary women—an early
feminist reformer, an educator, and a freed slave—whose individual desires to create a fairer, more
equitable society led them to play important roles in the Utopian community of Fairhope. $13.50

G 'The University of Georgia Press
Athens, Georgia 30602

Coming up in Belles Lettres

Interviews with Faye Moskowitz, Sheila Fugard, Josephine Jacobson, May Sarton,
and Judy Grahn. Overviews of the careers of novelists Anita Brookner and Molly
Keane and of science fiction writers Marion Zimmer Bradley and Margaret St.
Clair. Feminist literary criticism by Phyllis Rose and Barbara Christian. The
Norton Anthology of Literature by Women. The life of Clara Schumann, the diary of
Alice Dunbar-Nelson, and the letters of Paula Modersohn-Becker. Rediscoveries of
Dorothy Richardson, Sybilla Alermo, and Marina Tsvetaeva. Children’s Christmas
book suggestions. Small press books — A Piece of Mine by J. California Cooper
from Alice Walker's Wild Trees Press and Other Weapons by Luisa Valenzuela from
Ediciones del Norte. Novels by Ann Tyler, Violet Trefusis, Monique Wittig, Jean
Rhys, Buchi Emecheta, and Merce Rodoreda. Short stories by Muriel Spark,
Marguerite Yourcenar, Elizabeth Taylor, and Virginia Woolf. Poetry by Chicana
poets, Gwendolyn Brooks, Linda Pastan, Maxine Kumin, and Marilyn Hacker.
Autobiographies by Winnie Mandela and Janet Frame. Letters by Janet Flanner.
Biography of Wilma Scott Heide.

September/October 1985