I Know I Am  
Important,  
Because I Feel It  

The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking For Ourselves, edited by  

Evelyn C. White. Seattle, WA: The Seal Press, 1990, $14.95,  
295 pp. (PB)  

by M. Stephanie Ricks  

When talking about the social and political condition  

of Black Americans, Fannie Lou Hamer, the civil rights  
activist, said, “We are sick and tired of being sick and  
tired." The Black Women’s Health Book: Speaking For  
Ourselves appropriately co-opts that sentiment and gives  
voice to the dismal state of health experienced by a frighten-  
ing number of Afro-American women.  

Angela Davis, in her discussion of the politics of Black  
women’s health, struck a chord that served as the catalyst  
for editor Evelyn C. White’s book project. Many of the  
other contributors have since become active in the women’s  
health care movement. Davis states that, "standing at the  
intersection of racism, sexism, and economic injustice,  
Black women have been compelled to bear the brunt of this  
complex and oppressive process."  

The contributors, who submitted poems, essays, personal  
reflections, and interviews, represent a diverse group. We  
encounter community activists, health workers, journalists,  
and foundation presidents whose writing is at times uneven  
but whose voices are always apparent. And despite the fact  
that they represent various regions, social backgrounds, and  
life experiences, each woman is anchored in her commitment  
to empower the community of Black women. Cumulatively,  
they offer a compelling assortment of historical data,  
health statistics and information, gritty “womanist" advice,  
and inventive strategies for turning the tide on the down-  
ward spiral of Black women’s health.  

In contrast to the remarkable medical and technological  
advances made by the health-care community, Black women  
make up a disproportionate number of the patients who test  
positive for the AIDS virus and are overwhelmingly struck  
with other potentially fatal diseases like cancer, lupus,  
hypertension, and diabetes.  

Byllye Avery, founder of the National Black Women’s  
Health Project, outlines how her organization was the out-  
growth of a desire to improve the overall health of Black  
women through “empowerment, healing, and self-love." By  
examining the social conditions that disenfranchised Afro-  
Americans and the sexism in the Afro-American communi-  
ty, Ms. Avery and NBWHP’s satellite programs have con-  
structively addressed some of the debilitating effects of  
neglect, abuse, and exclusion that jeopardize the well-being  
of Black women.  

Vanessa Northington Gamble and Denise Alexander detail  
the obstacles they confronted in their quests to become a  
doctor and a dentist, respectively. Dr. Gamble “had to face  
the fact that not everyone believed a Black woman could be  
or was qualified to be a physician," and related how on one  
occasion a resident introduced the “three white, male  

medical students as "Dr." and me by my first name."  

Melissa Blount charts an impressive and informative  
historical piece on Black women physicians beginning with  
Rebecca Lee, the first Afro-American woman to receive a  
medical degree, just one year after the Emancipation Procla-  
mation was signed in 1863. These pioneers fought boards  
that grudgingly doled out internships and appointments to  
administrative positions, and with single-minded determina-  
tion prevailed against the medical establishment.  

Problems that Black women have had concerning their  
health include the role sexism plays in the type and quality  

Candace Coughlin  

Evelyn C. White. Photo by  

of care that they receive. Women as “active partners" in the  
decisions made regarding their health care is a fairly recent  

phenomenon. That Black women are doubly burdened under  
the weight of racism and sexism is additionally problematic.  

Audre Lorde, a scholar and poet, relates in "Living with  
Cancer" how she was told by a physician after the detection  
of a possibly malignant tumor in her liver that, "If you do  
not do exactly what I tell you to do, right now, without  
questions, you are going to die a horrible death." When she  
questioned the necessity of a proposed biopsy the doctor  
said, "Well, you look like an intelligent girl."  

Julia A. Boyd, a psychotherapist, issues in her offering,  
"Ethnic and Cultural Diversity in Feminist Therapy: Keys to  
Power" a challenge to white, female mental-health practitio-  
ners: that they broaden their understanding of cultural par-  
ticularities influencing the socialization of women of color,  
to determine how therapy will best serve them.  

Jewelle L. Gomez and Barbara Smith, in a freewheeling  
discussion on homophobia, violence against women, and  
sisterhood, address the problems of sexism in the Afro-  
American community. Gomez says, "That if one embraces  
the principles of liberation, gay liberation, and feminism,  
then you have to assault the sexual stereotype that young  
Black girls have been forced to live out in the African-  
American community," one that primarily defines them as  
wives, girlfriends, and mothers, not as individuals first. The  
psychological impact of "Black women as property" often  
translates itself in violence and abuse directed against wom-  
en — another health hazard.  

Access to quality health care and the ability to practice  
good health maintenance are both integrally linked to one’s  
economic health. Many of the personal essays illustrate how  
the absence of a substantive economic base results in poor  
health and compounds health problems.