Literature’s Black Sheep:  
Stretching the Definition  

Women of Vision: Essays by Women Writing Science Fiction, edited by Denise DuPont.  

New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988, $14.95, 163 p  

The Best of Pamela Sargent, edited by Martin H. Greenberg. Chicago: Academy Chicago,  

1987, $16.95, 322 pp.  

by Ann Kottner  

Science fiction has always been lit-  

erature’s black sheep, the bastard  

child of Gothic and Romantic fic-  
tion, as some critics—notably Brian Al-  
diss—would have it or a separate phe-  
nomenon rising triumphant (if not shin-  
ing) from the morass of pulp fiction of  
the 1930s. At one time, even writing  
about science fiction as serious literature  
could kill a promising academic career  
and forever relegate you to the fringes of  
respectability, with the members of the  
Society for Creative Anachronism.  
Science fiction was the realm of bug-  
eyed monsters, hardware, buxom bim-  
bos, scientists, and “clean-limbed fight-  
ing men” like Edgar Rice Burroughs’s  
John Carter of Mars. It was certainly no  
place for a woman, although there were  
a few trespassers like Andre Norton and  
Marion Zimmer Bradley. Or at least that  
was the case with most of what I read in  
the 1970s.  

The situation is considerably better  
today, as the essays collected by Denise  
DuPont show. Science fiction now has a  
number of journals of criticism, a pres-  
tigious writers’ workshop (the Clarion)  
held each summer at Michigan State  
University, and some gifted women writ-  
ers who have stretched its definition.  
DuPont approached several writers  
whose books I devoured as I grew up and  
many more whose work I have only  
begun to enjoy. I turned immediately to  

Ursula K. LeGuin’s essay, then to Anne  
McCaffrey’s and Bradley’s to find out  
what made them want to write science  
fiction/fantasy, of all things. What I  
found was a great relief to my psyche. I  
am not, after all, the only person in the  
world who lives half of her life as some-  
one else somewhere else only partially  
connected to reality. I am not the only  
woman who likes science fiction as  
much for its adventure story plots as for  
its thought-experiments (this from Brad-  
ley and Alice Sheldon/James Tiptree,  
Jr.). I no longer have to wonder if I  
should write under a male pseudonym to  
“penetrate” the publishing world.  

Although a definite feminist slant is  
present in the questions, brisk debate is  
found on the alleged difference between  
voices of men and women and their  
styles of writing, on the impact and util-  
ity of feminism in writing, and on the  
development of characters. If DuPont  
had given these highly imaginative writ-  
ers a broad topic to discuss, rather than  
specific questions to answer, the results  
might have been both more interesting  
and more insightful. But the collection  
remains valuable as a source of inspira-  
tion to would-be writers and a good in-  
troduction to some of the best in the  
science fiction field.  

One of the most moving of these es-  
says was written by Pamela Sargent, who  
released a second collection of her own  
stories in 1987. In her essay, she writes  
about what she left unsaid in the intro-  

A Door Into Ocean  
by Joan Slonczewski  

New York: Avon Books, 1987, $3.95 (PB)  

Joan Slonczewski’s novel of ideas, A  
Door into Ocean, presents a powerful  
study of pacifism and is among the liter-  
ary works that are closing the imaginary  
gap between serious fiction and science  
fiction. Even we who read little science  
fiction have the uneasy feeling that it  
may well be imagination’s last defense  
against modern literature: the storyless  
story; the nonheroic hero; the neuro-  
logical made psychological made patho-  
logical.  

Despite a nod to this defense, how-  
ever, many of us can muster up little  
curiosity about the alternative worlds  
created by science fiction writers. For  
one thing, who enjoys the cutesy lan-  
guage that strives so awkwardly to be  
“other”—character names full of con-  
sonants, clothes full of iridescent fibers,  
and forces of nature called seaswallowers  
and starworms? Yet, with the new phys-  
ics coining neologisms as quickly as we  
can say “quarks,” some of these biases  
simply have to go.  

Aficionados assure the stodgier that  
science fiction is—as it has always  
been—a forum of ideas: Consider the  
works of LeGuin, Lessing, Huxley, Russ,  
and so on. Science fiction is, in this  
view, a mode of cultural criticism that  
bows down neither to the great gods of  
science nor to those of literary criticism.  
In terms of Slonczewski’s book, this  
study of civilization involves the endless  
battle between if not quite good (Shora)  
and evil (Valedon), then certainly be-  
tween the forces of law and order and  
the forces of justice and a completely  
pacific anarchy.  

What is also richly present in Slonc-  
zewski’s book is allegory. Door into  
Ocean reads as a kind of Pilgrim’s Progress  
in which a young male character,  

Spinel, must evolve from ignorance and  
indifference to galactic understanding.  
His teachers in human evolution are the  
Sharers of Shora, the women who repre-  
sent advances of personality working in  
harmony with advances in science.  
Quite simply, their human natures have  
evolved beyond justifying aggression as a  
virtue, an option, or a necessity. The ag-  
gressions of the Valedon forces, posing  
under the usual guises of law and re-  
ligion, seem shoddy, base, and mean-  
spirited. The Valedon characters are not  
evil by nature; Slonczewski makes  
several of them strong and sympathetic.  
Yet they are, finally, twisted—duped by  
inculcated fears.  

The Sharers, as an evolved species, re-  
fuse to fight force with force. Herein lies  
the tension. To the allegorical Sharers,  
there is no excuse for violent behavior;  
it is but one face of fear. After pinpoint-  
ing the fact that fear is the problem,  
things move briskly along in a plot that  
even Roosevelt could follow. And yet  
the confrontation between the pacifists  
and the—well, “activists” doesn’t seem  
the correct term—is riveting. The battle  
between the Sharers and those who  
might best be called the Forcers is al-  
most epic, with every major force from  
the sea to erstwhile demigods interven-  
ing.  

Nevertheless, the face-off between old,  
patriarchal, aggressive means and newer,  
matriarchal, pacific ones is powerful and  
complicated. An added dimension (cer-  
tainly not just an otherworldly one) in-  
forms this book. Perhaps it is this: to  
find one of the most arresting studies of  
pacifism locked inside all these strange  
territories and characters—Shora and  
Valedon, Merwen and Realgar—is, by  
any literary measure, cause for praise if  
not astonishment.  

And, if this were not meritorious  
enough, Slonczewski has balanced  
science and fiction in a way that brings  
credit to the genre. She is part Rachel  
Carson, part Ursula LeGuin. For ex-  

duction to this collection, but the stories  
say far more about her as a writer and  
person. Sargent crosses genre boundaries  
as easily as most people cross streets and  
with as little fuss. She writes about the  
personal and social consequences of  
cloning in “Clone Sister” and of pre-  
natal sex selection in “Fears.” “The Old  
Darkness” is a deliciously scary horror  
story; several others deal with various  
manifestations of that old standby, ex-  
trasensory perception, in thoughtful and  
sometimes amusing ways (as when  
humans begin to overhear animals talk-  
ing in “Out of Place”). The common  
thread in all of these is the outcast,  
which is not peculiar for the kind of per-  

son Sargent says she once was but is for  
the woman who edited some of the first  
collections of science fiction by women  
in her Women of Wonder series. Sargent  
has been instrumental in integrating  
women writers into the once-predomi-  
nantly male territory of science fiction  
through her own writing and has also  
helped draw to science fiction the seri-  
ous attention it deserves.  

Ann Kottner spends the time she is not  
working in the Center for History of Phys-  
ics gathering stories on the streets of New  
York City and pursuing a doctorate in me-  
dieval European history at New York Uni-  
versity.  

From Vampires to Space Opera  

The Hidden Side of the Moon, by Joanna Russ. New York: St. Martins, 1988, $7.95, 240 pp.  

by Madelyn Arnold  

Almost everyone knows some of  

Joanna Russ’s writing. It seems  

as if everyone has an opinion,  
too; yet many of those who know her  
political works ignore her science fiction  
(and vice versa). And neither group  
knows of her nongenre (non-science)  
fiction. Thus not everyone knows the  
artistic breadth of her writing. Or her  
whimsy:  

The trouble with men is that they have  
limited minds. That’s the trouble with  
women, too.  

Or that she has won both major  
science fiction awards, that How to  
Suppress Women’s Writing is on many  
college reading lists, or that her publish-  
ed works range from novels to articles to  
finely worked short fiction. I believe the  
latter is her forte. What distinguishes  
this latest of her short story collections is  
its unusual stylistic range.  

They had discovered immortality. Oh,  
not for people, not at all. It was Houses  
that were immortal.  

Not everyone knows Russ spins good  
yarns. She is known as an intensely in-  
tellectual writer with a rich vocabulary,  
style, and sense of drama, so it surprises  
some to realize that she writes to be en-  
tertaining (frightening, funny, consol-  
ing) in a way that other “intellectual”  
writers rarely care to. She courts a wide  
readership because she wants, as she  
states often, for women to read her writ-  
ing. So she is sexy, diverting, shocking.  

Gentlemen ... That would be murder.  
I’ve never murdered; I’ve only given the  
people the power to choose one course of ac-  
tion or another. Is it my fault that they al-  
ways choose wrong?  

Having published her first science fic-  
tion story in her teens, Russ apparently  
never got over the knack. These twenty-  
eight stories appeared from 1959 over  
the next quarter century. In plot and  
voice they range from ghost stories, to  
vampire stories, to space opera, to what  
are very much women’s stories.  

I could not hold my glass. I put it down  
and tried to think of something to say,  
something provocative, something witty,  
something ambiguous, but not a word came  
to my lips, and instead I found myself  
loosening the pins in my hair.  

She crafts a careful romance. She will  
also sometimes contrive to baffle her  

reader, as is her reputation, with a story-  
line as tortuous, as jarring as a game of  
chess played with a new set of rules.  

Because, I say the woman mountain, I  
Am The Decider Who Decides That To  
Make A Real Bang You Must Use A Real  
Bomb. Anything Else Offends Me.  

Over the last thirty years, science fic-  
tion has picked up a handsome following  
among feminists. Early in women’s lib-  
eration—a term that strikes her as just  
tight—science fiction writer Russ helped  
create a fandom expressly interested in  
how “women’s issues” are handled in  
that more creative genre. She herself is  
explicit, even fanatical, about women’s  
issues, and in her stories the lessons and  
political issues sit as backdrop. But back-  
ground they remain, else no art, and an  
artist she certainly is—from murals to  
miniatures. Besides which, she is funny  
and satirical.  

‘Eegh! Argh! Argh! Eegh!’ cried Sheila  
Sue Hateman in an uncontrollable ecstasy  
as the giant alien male orchid arched over  
her, pollinating her every orifice. She—yes,  
she—she, Sheila Sue Hateman, who had  
always been frigid, nasty, and unrespon-  
sive! ... how ... she had avoided men who  
were attracted to her bee-stung, pouting,  
red mouth ... luscious behind, and proud,  
upthrusting breasts (they were a nuisance,  
those breasts, they sometimes got so proud  
... that they knocked her in the chin.)  

I think it is fair to say that thumbnail-  
ing certain books is self-aggrandizing  
and also unhelpful. When the words and  
the writer are excellent, all a reader  
needs (who is at all prepared for the  
genre) is to be exposed to the writing.  
The would-be reviewer can only hope to  
divert a little of the glory. Perhaps to  
quote:  

She smiled when she saw me. At the door  
we had sketchily kissed the air, with the ef-  
fusion of feeling that vanishes exactly as it  
blossoms and leaves one embarrassed and  
holding nothing.  

One meets people who are going to  
write someday. They are waiting for a  
settled life, a vacation, a life conducive  
to belles lettres. Then there is Joanna  
Russ. Since the fifties.  

Madelyn Arnold, a Seattle sci-tech  
and fiction writer, is the author of the novel  
Bird-Eyes.  

Backbone of a caretaking system. The  
“lifeshapers,” “clickflies,” “whitetrances,”  
and the “doorclosers” can all be  
tolerated, even enjoyed, if the reader is  
deeply interested in issues of evolving  
human nature. Given this novel’s  
strengths, Ursula LeGuin is probably  
right in her conversation with Anne  
Mellor of Stanford (Women Writers of  
the West Coast) when she insists that  
“the critics are lagging” and are, indeed,  
impoverishing the study of literature by  
excluding works of science fiction.  

—B.A. St. Andrews  

Spring 1989