by Leslie A. Moushey

Some struggles in life are inevita-
ble and inexorable, requiring ac-
tive resolution. The nine books
reviewed here confront directly one of
life’s more difficult problems: creating
identity — as individuals and as women.

Two of these books challenge the
concept of women’s culture. Is the Future
Female? argues that women and men
alike are ultimately disserved by the pur-
suit of world feminization. The author,
Lynne Segal, calls for a socialist agenda
that restructures society as a whole,
freeing both sexes from traditional roles
to experience the full range of possibili-
ties within a “responsive” system. Her
examination of feminism is iconoclastic,
yet well-grounded in feminist literature.
She reviews the emphasis of popular
feminism on the special nature of
women’s culture, arguing that this per-
spective, a retreat to the “traditional
consolations of the powerless,” over-
emphasizes an enemy in order to
strengthen the affirmation of woman-
hood we need in the face of so many
unattained goals.

If there is any enemy, she asserts, it is
society. Violence, like many of femi-
nism’s concerns, is more a matter of
ill-structured power relations than of
male dominance. Socialist governance
of power structures will achieve the goals
of feminism through solving the material
problems of poverty and racism. Because
of its more commonly shared focus, this
socialist feminism will open the
women’s movement to women currently
ignored — women who hold what we
now label as male viewpoints, poor
women, women of all races — showing
us “how we can support each other, des-
pite our differences.”

Inessential Women tackles this same
task of redefining feminism to include
more women. Elizabeth Spelman me-
thodically analyzes the white middle-
class generic feminism used as a standard
for women’s causes. She traces the con-
cept of “woman” historically as not only
a gender-specific definition but also
race- and class-specific: from the manly
soul of Plato’s female philosopher ruler
and Aristotle’s distinction between
women and female slaves, to Simone de
Beauvoir’s focus on white middle-class
women and the implications of Nancy
Chodorow’s gender-focused works.
Spelman outlines some fundamental
differences among women and explains
that relying on the concept of an essen-
tial “womanness” has the effect of mak-
ing individual women inessential as the
details of their lives become irrelevant.
“The phrase ‘as a woman’ is the Trojan
horse of feminist ethnocentrism.” Her
observations of feminism’s limits are
unfortunately easily verifiable (just look
at a clip of the recent white middle-class
pro-choice march).

Demon Lover, on the other hand, is a
provocative study of male versus female
culture, the sexual appeal of violence for
men, and the pervasiveness of male ter-
rorism in our world. Not only does Ro-
bin Morgan thoroughly describe ter-
rorism, she brings the reader beyond intel-
lectual discussion into the hard-hitting
world of experience. Men have brought
into the world some horrible monu-
ments to their sexual idolatry: the de-
mon lover, the union of love and death,
the “high” of war, the righteousness of
terrorism. Morgan traces these themes
through history and identifies the vic-
tims — not only those we see, but also
the women who join in these causes,

Summer 1989

The Search for Identity

colonized into the armies of men to en-
act men’s plans. Her experiences as the
colonized female terrorist clinch her
argument that “all issues are women’s
issues to be defined in women’s ways and
confronted in women’s ways.”

Reconciling the dissonance between
encouraging women’s culture and liber-
ating both sexes, between objectivity
and subjectivity, and between chaos and
order preoccupied Ruth Benedict, one
of America’s foremost anthropologists.
Margaret M. Caffrey’s excellent biog-
raphy, Ruth Benedict: Stranger in this
Land, is scholarly, feminist, and ac-
cessible. Benedict worked to open soci-
ety for the fulfillment of all, but she also
fought for women’s ideas. She organized
cooperative freedom in her projects,
opening the definitions of work and of
humanity; she devised brilliant applica-
tions of cultural relativism and synergy;
and she relentlessly argued the equality
of intuition and science. Caffrey exten-
sively researched Benedict’s life from
birth to death: The reader follows Bene-
dict through her successes and failures,
past the barriers to self-actualization
imposed on her by carryovers of Vic-
torian society, and observes her probing
mind with new appreciation as she
comes into her own, a heroine of
women’s history.

Sexual Science further illuminates
Victorian contexts through an erudite,
readable intellectual history of
nineteenth-century “scientific” at-
tempts to define men on the basis of
physical anthropology and social Darwin-
ism — all at the expense of women.

Members of “A Woman’s Club, Brunswick,
Maine, 1895-1898.” Courtesy of Harold
Lewis, Photo International

geniuses and more feeble-minded.”
These wild ideas were both so absurd and
so pervasive that one does not know
whether to laugh, to cry, or to scream.
But Victorian women were feisty too.
The Sound of Our Voices, by Theodora
Penny Martin, documents self-teaching
study clubs organized by middle-class
American women who were not radical
or wealthy enough to attend colleges but
who knew the importance of scholarly
inquiry. And there were many of them:
By the early 1900s, 5,000 clubs were
registered with the General Federation
of Women’s Clubs, reflecting the prob-
able existence of 50,000 to 100,000
clubs. Martin convincingly depicts the
commitment and intelligence of these
women through numerous quotes, sam-
ple minutes of meetings, and photo-
graphs. She shows the breadth of inter-
ests these women pursued, from a club
“with a desire to extend our knowledge
by study, to investigate for ourselves the
leading questions of the day and to attain
and enjoy a higher intellectual, social,
and moral culture” to one in which “the
sole work of the club has been the study
of parliamentary law and usages.” Her
book is warm and personal, often using
quotes from the records of actual mem-
bers: “In the fall of 1873 the general sub-
ject was ‘The History of Painting’; my
special topic ‘The Venetian School.’
Think of it friends! A person who knew
nothing of art principles, who had never
seen a painting. . . with such a theme!”

Alternative education pursued by
women of course did not end with the
devolution of these clubs. The Shape of
Red is a compilation of letters written
between Ruth Hubbard and Margaret
Randall. The two met in Nicaragua and
began a correspondence to help each
other explore the events and patterns in
their lives. They worked to solidify their
identities through the theme of in-
sider/outsider relations in society,
events, people, mothering, science,
Judaism, sexuality, Cuba, themselves.
We are all insiders, outsiders, or both at
various times in our lives. These letters
are not merely personal inquiries; they
reach beyond private theory or static
statement to be openings for discussion
and thought, for learning. Hubbard and
Randall disclose their lives to us and ele-
vate learning to an intimate, nondefen-
sive form of intellectual and emotional
growth, and in this way they bring the
reader to a more profound understanding
of their theme. Skipping the absolutes of
formal scholastic exposition, Hubbard
and Randall cast the reader’s thoughts
into the matrix of their ideas and feel-
ings: “What you have here is not the
shade of red. . . [but] the shape of red.”

Two books open new doors to the
identities and realities of nonwestern
women. Women of Deh Koh spotlights
the lives of mountain village women in
Iran. The author, Erika Friedl, drew on
her twenty years among these women to
chronicle their lives in a dozen authentic
stories. Friedl’s rich descriptions evoke
rarely glimpsed scenes with numerous
and varied characters. Common life
themes — rape, marriage, birth, death
— are imbued with the unique perspec-
tives of the people from this little-known
region. These stories tell the dreams and
realities of the women of Deh Koh: the
reader learns how a nontraditionally
single woman maintains power in her
family, the opinions of the community
about a woman accused of thieving, and
the elusive nature of facts and truth in
Deh Koh. This essential anthropologi-
cal artifact is also enjoyable to read.

The women of South Africa live in a
society about which we have many con-
cerns but limited information. Uprooting
Poverty, the result of the Second
Carnegie Inquiry into Poverty and De-
velopment in Southern Africa, is an
exhaustive work reflecting more than
300 studies of poverty in South Africa. It
focuses intensively on the political and
economic complexities of the racial and
class problems in this country and pro-
vides information not found in news-
papers. The unique section on women is
small, but the coauthor and the many
women who researched the project were
obviously careful to keep women up
front, so that the reader does not lose
sight in the general reading that women
are suffering. Political stances need
thought, and thought is certainly pro-
voked by Wilson and Ramphele: Op-
tions for creating change in the future
are evaluated, difficult questions asked,
and answers attempted. Though many
of the assumptions and conclusions are
certainly open to debate, this book gives
at least a foundation for that debate.

The problem of identity is not re-
solved simply; but intellectual, emo-
tional, and spiritual inquiry is a feminist
tradition. As we continue to search for
answers, these books lend a few more
voices to our colloquy and, perhaps,
some guideposts along the way.

@ Leslie A. Moushey is one of our resi-
dent Renaissance women.

Coming in Belles Lettres

“Patchwork,” a new column by Deborah
Price, featuring literary biographies,
women’s book series, and sundry other
subjects; a rediscovery of Vina Delmar
by Carolyn Banks; a retrospective of Lois
Gould by Jane Bakerman; women’s
autobiographies; children’s books;
women travelers; women and science;
Irish writers and publishers; the “South-
ern Hemisphere” column; and our relia-
ble assortment of reviews and inter-
views. Don’t miss an issue — subscribe

or renew today!
Belles Lettres @ 9