Left: Early woodcut by Dora Carrington, probably commissioned by the Hogarth Press (Tate Gallery). From Carrington: A Life by  
Gretchen Holbrook Gerzina (Norton, 1989, $24.95, 329 pp.). A member of the Bloomsbury circle, Carrington died relatively young but left  
an artistic legacy the importance of which has only just begun to be appreciated. Right: Duotone photograph "Baby Bluebird, Bird  
Pageant/Jackson/1930s" by Eudora Welty from Eudora Welty Photographs (University Press of Mississippi, 1989, $49.95). Welty worked  
for the WPA as a photographer before she began publishing short stories, and she continued for decades afterwards. Besides being a  
priceless record (mostly of a long-vanished South), the book is beautifully designed and printed, as befitting the sensibility of this woman  

whom we find is an artist with the shutter as well as with the pen.  

Mercy, Pity, Peace and Love  
by Rumer and Jon Godden  

New York: Morrow, 1990, $16.95, 160 pp.  

Ten or twelve years ago, a billboard overlooking Bombay’s  
Marine Drive exhorted drivers-by to “only give alms to  
those without arms." The same Indian culture that induces  
beggars to maim themselves in an attempt to solicit more  
money also distances the more fortunate from the tragedy of  
poverty. In the best of the thirteen stories in Mercy, Pity,  
Peace and Love, Rumer and Jon Godden reveal some of the  
guises Indians assume to shield themselves from the wide-  
spread display of human abjection.  

In the title story of this collection, Ganesh, a doctoral  
student preoccupied with his thesis on "the nature of human  
love," lazily shops for gifts with his father. Oblivious to the  
mass of impoverished humanity choking the dry Calcutta  
streets, Ganesh mentally cartwheels through various catego-  
ries of love. His exasperated father finally exposes Ganesh’s  
conceit (and unwittingly his own): "What do you know  
about love?... Human nature is a very curious thing ... I  
never really thought about it, but I do think you ought to  
help me choose these earrings for your wife."  

In "Miss Passano," another story about insulating emo-  
tions, the title character agonizes over the violence suffered  
by animals and the plight of stray dogs. Yet the pleas of  
beggars and the needs of her orphan niece elicit only indig-  

—8—  

nation. Returning from her father’s funeral with new pets  
for her menagerie, Miss Passano ruthlessly beats her young  
protégé for accidentally dropping a birdcage down a flight  
of stairs. Thus, she thwarts the one member of her house-  
hold who might have provided a tangible source of love.  

Although many of the stories in Mercy, Pity, Peace and  
Love open with provocative premises, the authors’ vision  
often does not accommodate the depth of their subjects. A  
fairy tale veneer undercuts the troubling issues at the crux  
of the book. Conflicts that ought to loom large in the emo-  
tions of characters are frittered away by facile distinctions  
and unconvincing solutions.  

In "Rahmin," for example, a foreign writer’s careless  
insult injures the pride of an Indian tailor who has managed  
to stave off the indignity of begging by embroidering hand-  
kerchiefs. The writer’s sudden understanding that Rahmin  
must have seen her home as “an enormous palace filled with  
unattainable riches" is unabashedly simplistic.  

Rumer and her late sister Jon Godden divided much of  
their time between India and England. Both are capable  
writers and have published numerous books for adults and  
children over the past fifty years. But for a book dedicated  
to Sarasvati, India’s goddess of the belles lettres and fine  
arts, Mercy, Pity, Peace and Love reveals the authors’  
quixotic inspiration more than it embodies their literary  
accomplishment.  

— Nina Mehta