Mystic,  
Psychotic,  
or Impostor?  

Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian  
Nun in Renaissance Italy, by Judith C.  
Brown. New York: Oxford University  
Press, 1986, $14.95, 206 pp.  

by Rosemary Curb  

Stanford historian Judith C.  
Brown discovered Benedetta  
Carlini while researching the  
economic history of communities near  
Florence. In Immodest Acts she has  
created a fascinating, although  
fragmentary, story of a powerful, in-  
telligent, ambitious, lusty woman in five  
chapters, with an introduction placing  
the story in its historic context of our  
modern obsession with what Michel  
Foucault calls scientia sexualis, an  
epilogue, and an appendix of trans-  
lations of original documents.  
Although the first four chapters appear  
much like a saint’s life, in its final chap-  
ter Immodest Acts grinds inexorably  
toward catastrophe in full tragic fashion,  
with even an unmasking for a finale.  

In 1590 Benedetta’s parents wel-  
comed her birth as so miraculous that  
they promised to give her to God in  
religious life. In 1661 at age 71  
Benedetta died in a convent prison.  
Early chapters on the family and the  
convent set the stage for Benedetta’s rise  
and fall. Even in early childhood she  
was graced with divine favor. When the  
devil, disguised as a vicious dog, tried to  
drag her away, her guardian angel, who  
was concealed in the body of a  
nightingale and whose song Benedetta  
regulated at her whim, protected her. In  
1599 at age 9 Benedetta entered the  
Theatine convent of Santa Maria Nuova  
in Pescia. For the rest of her life,  
Benedetta’s fortunes were tied to the  
convent, which she helped to increase  
in size, prosperity, and influence.  

In 1619 the convent was granted  
complete enclosure by papal bull. The  
nuns elected Benedetta their first  
abbess. Since 1613 she had been having  
visions of Jesus along with troops of an-  
gels who rescued her from wild animals  
and local Pescian ruffians and brought  
her to a beautiful enclosed garden.  
When a larger convent was built,  
Benedetta walked in an ecstatic trance  
while angels that nobody else could see  
strewed her path with invisible flowers.  

Nightly, however, as she confided to  
her confessor, her body became a  
battleground for warring supernatural  
forces. As a sign of her victory Jesus  
granted her the highest mark of divine  
favor, the Stigmata, the visible wounds  
of the crucifixion, which burst in a flash  
from the crucifix onto her body. Con-  
vinced by her confessor’s questioning  
that her visions were of divine and not  
diabolic origin, Benedetta allowed  
herself to enjoy them. One night Jesus  
came to her and tore her heart from her  
body. After three days without a heart,  
Benedetta submitted to Jesus as he  
opened her side and inserted his much  
larger heart. (In reporting Benedetta’s  
visions Brown discreetly resists analyzing  
their erotic imagery.) Finally Jesus de-  
manded that Benedetta give herself to  
him in a public marriage to be attended  
not only by the congregation of nuns but  
by local secular and ecclesiastical au-  
thorities. In a trance Benedetta spoke as  
Jesus, praising her own virtues, linking  
her fate to that of the whole of Pescia,  
and commanding that she be “empress of  
all the nuns.”  

Fearful that Benedetta’s influence  
was getting out of his control, the pro-  
vost of Pescia immediately relieved her  
of her post as abbess and began in-  
vestigating the authenticity of her  
visions. From May to August, 1619,  
following meticulous ecclesiastical  
guidelines designed by men accustomed  
to straining at corporeal gnats to extort  
the truth about the spiritual realm, the  
provost examined Benedetta and inter-  
rogated her fellow nuns and her con-  
fessor. Unable to denounce the content  
or the process of her visions as heretical  
or diabolic, he concluded that Bene-  
detta was a true mystic and reinstated  
her as abbess.  

Three years later the papal nuncio  
from Florence opened another in-  
vestigation and reversed the original  
judgment. Bartolomea Crivelli, a young  
nun assigned years before to sleep in  
Benedetta’s cell to help in her battles  
with the devil, confessed what both the  
ecclesiastical and secular fathers would  
judge to be an unspeakable, unnatural  
sin:  

For two continuous years, two or  
three times a week, in the evening,  
after disrobing and going to bed  
waiting for her companion, who  
serves her, to disrobe also, she  
would force her into the bed and  
kissing her as if she were a man she  
would stir on top of her so much  
that both of them corrupted  
themselves because she held her by  
force sometimes for one, sometimes  
for two, sometimes for three hours.  

Bartolomea’s testimony, quoted in  
detail in the appendix, portrays a far dif-  
ferent Benedetta than her own accounts  
or those of her followers. The second  
investigation portrays the abbess pursu-  
ing the unwilling younger nun with  
rapacious lust and eventually seducing  
and forcing her into sin. Both nuns  
testified, however, that it was not  
Benedetta herself who “corrupted”  
Bartolomea but the angel Splenditello  
assigned by Jesus to guard Benedetta.  
Furthermore, Benedetta’s stigmata and  
mystic wedding band were shown to be  
fraudulent: She had pricked her own  
wounds with a needle and smeared her  
finger with saffron. The papal nuncio  
sentenced her to spend the remaining  
(35) years of her life in solitary con-  
finement. Nevertheless, after her  
death, she was buried in the Church and  
once again roused the adulation of the  
townsfolk, who venerated her as a saint.  

Was Benedetta a saint briefly de-  
ceived by the devil or her own psychosis?  
Or was she a shrewd and lusty man-  
ipulator? Was she a lesbian? I assume  
that women have always been loving  
women emotionally and sexually (es-  
pecially in convents). The relatively  
recent term, lesbian, satisfies a hunger  
for classical heritage. Today lesbian  
identity accompanies a political con-  
sciousness of collective struggle against  
historic sexual taboos as well as the  
historic hatred, fear, and oppression of  
women.  

Brown leads readers to judge  
Benedetta to be less culpable than were  
the standards by which she was meas-  
ured. How could a brilliant woman with  
administrative finesse exercise her tal-  
ents in 17th-century Italy? She could  
not aspire to be Pope or even a grand  
duke. The convent offered the only  
career for an ambitious woman, where  
she could rise through the ranks to  
become abbess.  

The historic account suggests that  
Benedetta was not only a sensual and  
imaginative woman, but a vain, ego-  
tistical, and impatient one. She had no  
satisfactory channel for any of her  
powers. Because she could not imagine  
anything but heterosexuality, she had to  
assume a male persona in order to seduce  
her fellow nun. Thus she was not con-  
scious of being a lesbian, even though  
she may have been sexually oriented  
toward women. Furthermore, Bene-  
detta’s confinement in the culturally  
defined subordinate female role and her  
perception of her situation as divine  
appointment rather than political  
accident is not what today we consider  
lesbian consciousness. On the other  
hand, what most terrified and enraged  
the men who judged and condemned her  
was her slipping out of her assigned  
female place and threatening to disrupt  
their tenuous but viciously maintained  
power over the people. Women who are  
condemned for being uppity by the same  
sort of men today, regardless of sexual-  
ity, are called lesbian.  

Immodest Acts is more than a biog-  
raphy or even an economic history in  
miniature. Benedetta Carlini is one  
among thousands of powerful women  
whose lives were buried or erased by  
male historians. More than that,  
Brown’s book cracks open another door  
to shed light on the central phobia of  
patriarchy: the fear and hatred of  
women’s erotic power unleashing chaos,  
exploding the male order of civilization,  
melting the links in the Great Chain of  
Being.  

@ Rosemary Curb is co-editor with  
Nancy Manahan of Lesbian Nuns:  
Breaking Silence, released in March 1986  
by Warner Books.  

WOMEN  
and AGING  

Elizabeth Layton  

An Anthology by Women  

Her Strength Is In Her Convictions  

Art, poetry, fiction, essays, interviews,  
and bibliographies on the topics of ag-  
ing and ageism. Features work by 64  
contributors including: Baba Copper,  
Imogen Cunningham, Ursula LeGuin,  
Meridel Le Sueur, Barbara Macdonald,  
Anne Noggle, Alicia Ostriker, Marge  
Piercy and Margaret Randall. The  
largest proportion of the aging popula-  
tion is composed of women who have  
been ignored not only by society and  
the media but by feminists as well. This  
anthology provides insights into the  
problems, concerns, and images of  
women’s aging. Available January  
1986. 264 pp., (37 pp. art). $12.00.  
ISBN: 0-934971-00-5.  

CX Books  

PO BOX B, DEPT. H CORVALLIS OR 97339  

10 @ Belles Lettres  

— Interview, continued  

want to get into highly emotional poetry,  
Theodore Roethke and John Berryman  
are as emotional as any woman.  

BP: Are women as creative artists  
affected by not having had real power?  

JJ: Isn’t that true of any group that has  
been oppressed? It’s nonsense to pretend  
otherwise: It’s a statistical fact. Being  
oppressed in America, whether it’s Black  
people or women, inevitably breeds a lack  
of self-confidence, an ambivalence about  
success.  

BP: What is your estimation of con-  
temporary poetry?  

JJ: What's the Dickens quote, “It is the  
best of times, it is the worst of times.”  
There is more good poetry — I am not  
speaking of great poetry, which, alas we  
don’t have a great deal of, but good sound  
poetry that not only merits reading but has  
real caliber — being written than in any  
other period in my lifetime. On the other  
hand, there is unquestionably more total  
trash being turned out than at any other  
time. After 4 years on the NEA Literature  
Panel and 2 years of judging national con-  
tests in which there were hundreds of sub-  
missions, I probably have as good a grasp  
of what is being done in contemporary  
poetry as anyone. I don’t think any good  
poet is going to be threatened by a flood of  
terrible poetry. So I say let the flowers  
bloom, let all the flowers bloom.  

BP: Do you think that the pluralistic  
concerns of society are having an effect?  

JJ: I think there are a great many things  
feeding into contemporary poetry that it  
has never had to cope with before. There  
were so many common assumptions 75  
years ago that have shattered now. All of  
us, including me, God knows, are con-  
fused about contradictory political and  
ethical issues in which no matter what you  
do you come out wrong. The more  
troubled a society you get, the more poetry  
you are going to get — good and bad.  

BP: What is the role of a poet?  

JJ: I think that you have to consider  
the individual gift. I don’t approve of the  
Ivory Tower approach. I like to see poets  
embroiled in life, involved as human  
beings even if it isn’t what activates your  
poetry. The danger is that society pushes  
poets into situations where they feel they  
are a separate, excluded group who have  
to stand off and make statements. Poets  
are very conscious that they are not writers  
whom the average person reads, under-  
stands, or identifies with. Very literate  
people who are up on history, biography,  
and novels haven’t read a poem since  
“Hiawatha.”  

BP: What is the next step in your  
work?  

JJ: In what I'm doing now, the scope  
has widened and there is something from  
my whole life that goes into each poem.  
The poems have got to be deeper and  
wider. The recent poems are more con-  
cerned with universal things that are also  
highly personal — themes like life, death,  
love, honor, loneliness, betrayal — ex-  
periences that condition everyone's life.  

There is always the risk that once you  
leave the personal, you get into rhetoric,  
and if there is no universal root, you get  
personal statements with no wider appli-  
cation. I would hope that I will continue  
to examine each poem in light of that. I  
wrote a poem called “The Sea Fog,” about  
the fog coming around this vessel and all  
the doors and stairs being changed and  
finally coming down to the stateroom in  
total isolation looking in the mirror and  
saying, “Who are you? Do you really have  
any idea who you are?”  

BP: When you say “Who are you?”,  
who should one be?  

JJ: Again I come up strongly for dif-  
ferences. For me it would be integrity,  
speaking of what you really have learned,  
what you really know, not what someone  
wants to hear, or what you think is going to  
advance your worth, or what is going to  
be most remembered. I think that when  
poetry or religion or patriotism or art is  
manipulated for personal gain, it’s the  
bottom line, or, as my kids say, the pits.  

BP: In a lecture, “One Poet’s Poetry,”  
you said, “The essence of poetry is the  
unique view — the unguessed rela-  
tionship, suddenly manifest. Poetry’s eye  
is always aslant, oblique.” What do you  
mean by oblique?  

JJ: Poetic vision doesn’t see things  
head on. The poet’s angle of perception is  
not like any other. Emily Dickinson said it  
best: “Tell all the truth but tell it slant.”  

® Betty Parry is a writer, an editor, and an  
arts advocate.  

May/June 1986