Belles Lettres Interview

In September when new students arrive at Macalester College, their parents often come to the  
English department looking for Susan Allen Toth. It is not Toth the professor of English or the  
scholar they seek, but the Toth who wrote two exquisitely crafted memoirs: Blooming: A  
Small-Town Girlhood and Ivy Days: Making My Way Out East. These books leave  

many readers wanting to say something to her.

Readers of all ages and from all parts of the United States whose own coming-of-age ex-  
perience may have little external correspondence to Toth’s Iowa girlhood and Smith College  
education find her work touches a chord of memory. Toth renders experience with amazingly  
exact sensory detail: Readers feel the heat of an Iowa cornfield, hear the bustle and tension of a  
swimming pool, and can almost taste the Sunday dinners she remembers. The vividness of her  
homesickness at college, her effort to excel academically, and her enthusiasm for Greek art  
and English novels make readers recall their own college days with the pains and occasional  
pleasures of growing up. So skillfully does Toth achieve this that some reviewers thought she  

had written about things she did not mention.

My interview with her in January 1986 is a formal continuation of the conversation of col-  

leagues. — Patricia Kane

Were you surprised that so many readers of  
Blooming and Ivy Days wrote to you?

I have been astonished and delighted  
by the hundreds of letters I’ve had from  
readers, at least partly because I myself  
have never had the habit of writing an  
author whose book I’ve liked. I’ve  
thought about it but not done it. I guess  
I’ve always felt he or she was too far off,  
too uninterested in hearing from me. So  
I really appreciate the energy and de-  
termination it takes to sit down and do  
it. The letters I’ve received haven’t  
been what I might think of as your  
average fan letter; they don’t usually go  
on and on about what a wonderful writer  
I am. Instead the woman says that she  
enjoyed Blooming or Ivy Days, that it  
brought back memories of her own life.  
Then she goes on to share them with  
me, and usually goes into some real de-  
tail about who she is and what she does.  
After Blooming, which has a chapter —  
actually it’s my favorite chapter — about  
swimming pools, I got lots of letters that  
began, “Let me tell you about my own  
swimming pool, where I swam as a  
child,” and then took off from there. In  
Ivy Days, there is a very painful chapter  
about academic pressure and competi-  
tion — a chapter called “Summa” — and  
that seemed to elicit memories about  
similar pain that my readers had ex-  
perienced. I have been enormously  
touched by the intimacy and warmth of  
these letters.

Do you have a theory about why so many  
wrote to you?

Yes, I’ve thought about why I’ve  
gotten this kind of letter. A few of my  
readers have actually said, “I grew up in  
Texas — or a small town in New York  
State — or in the 1940s, or 1960s, or  
even 1930s — but you have written  
about my life.” I think that women have  
been led to believe that their ordinary,  
daily lives are not worth recording, or  
talking about, or reliving. They read  
novels and stories that make them think  
that unless they have had at least one  
intense, tragic love affair — preferably  
more — or held an important post in  
government or business, or maybe  
traveled in foreign countries, or parti-  
cipated in some public event, or run  
away from home — things like that —  
their lives have been dull and meaning-  
less. What I think they learn from my  
two memoirs is that an ordinary life isn’t  
ordinary: It is full of intense feeling,  
which we learn to discount and to hide  
from ourselves. Partly because it’s so  
painful to remember how much we cared  
or suffered. So we tell ourselves  
whatever it was that caused so much  
feeling was trivial, and we forget it. And  
then there’s the sheer dailiness of most  
women’s lives — we live immersed in  
detail, and that’s what goes into making  
up the larger issues and feelings. I think  
I’ve helped some women remember  
those details and learn to value them.

What pleased you most about the response  
of critics? What surprised you?

I’ve been surprised both by the  
widespread reviews I got — I was, after  
all, an unknown and virtually un-  
publicized writer — and by the fact that  
the reviews concentrated so fully on  
what was said, rather than how it was  
said. I work so hard on my style, such  
things as prose rhythm and paragraph  
organization and pace and so on, that I  
sometimes felt a little sorry so few  
reviewers commented on those effects.  
Of course, that’s the combination of an  
English teacher and a writer’s ego speak-  
ing.

What made you decide to write memoirs  
rather than turning your experience into fic-  
tion?

Several editors, in fact, suggested  
that I turn some of the early chapters of  
Blooming into fiction. They didn’t think  
anyone would be interested in a straight  
memoir. But somehow, though I’ve  
written fiction, and even some fairly  
straightforwardly autobiographical fic-  
tion, I just couldn’t pretend that these  
things had happened to someone else.  
They had happened to me. It was more  
important to me to get it down right, to  
capture my memories as accurately as I  
could and to understand how I felt at the  
time, than to worry about a whole set of  
new characters with different lives. Of  
course, I changed names and slightly  
altered some situations, in order not to  
embarrass anyone, so I was fictionalizing  
in a very slight degree. And once I had  
started writing in the first person, I  
couldn’t stop. Truth-telling seemed to  
be essential. It was something like  
therapy.

Why have you decided not to write any  
more memoirs? How are you making the  
transition to another form?

I’m sure I'll continue to write per-  
sonal essays, a form I find very con-  
genial. But I really don’t want to write a  
direct sequel to Ivy Days. Partly I feel I  
couldn’t write openly and honestly  
about people and events so close to me in  
time. Those people would be hurt, and  
life could become very uncomfortable. I  
don’t think I have the right to expose  
others in my work — only myself. I want  
to protect some of my own privacy, as  
well. Even Joan Didion doesn’t tell all!  
Instead, if it works, I am going to try a  
kind of mixed form for my next work, a  
sort of fictional memoir about a grand-  
mother of mine I never knew. She lived  
and died in western Minnesota, and she  
seems to have led a very ordinary life.  
But I want to see if I can make her come  
alive for me. She died before I was born,  
and I’d like to know what she could tell  
me about who she was, and maybe who I  
am.

January/August 1986

Do you think of yourself as a writer?

Yes, I finally do think of myself as a  
writer. It took quite some time for me  
not to feel apologetic about saying that  
— “I’m a writer” — because writing does  
not always have the central place in my  
life. For 16 years I’ve been a full-time  
teacher, though this year and next I’m  
teaching only one course a semester. My  
writing has to be done on vacations,  
sabbaticals, and unpaid leaves. And  
when my daughter was two, I became a  
single parent. My home life was incredi-  
bly absorbing, and now that I’m married  
again, after 11 years alone, it’s time-  
consuming in different — better, but  
still absorbing — ways. Then after the  
first book came out, I was afraid it might  
be a fluke. Only after Ivy Days did I real-  
ize that I was going to continue writing,  
and how important that would always be  
to me.

Susan Allen Toth. Photo by Melissa  
Martina.

What writers do you admire? Were there  
models for the kind of writing you wanted to  
do?

The most important influences on my  
writing were probably the 19th-century  
American realists and, in this century,  
E. B. White. I remember being im-  
pressed by William Dean Howells’s de-  
fense of everyday life as a subject for fic-  
tion, even by Emerson’s line that went  
something like, “What would we know  
the meaning of? The meal in the firkin,  
the milk in the pan.” Then I did my  
doctoral dissertation on some New Eng-  
land local colorists, all women. Sarah  
Orne Jewett in particular was a model for  
me; she made the details of ordinary life  
absolutely translucent. She knew  
women’s lives were important, and she  
wrote about them with a prose that is  
much like poetry. Mary Wilkins Free-  
man, Alice Brown, and Rose Terry  
Cooke all taught me a lot too. As for  
E. B. White, when he died recently, I  
felt a kind of personal bereavement. He  
made so many of us aware of the power of  
the individual voice — of how hard but  
entrancing it was to write as if one were  
actually speaking. I remember also being  
impressed by Joan Didion when I first  
read her pieces in Life in the 1960s. She  
wasn’t afraid of writing intensely and  
directly about her own life.

Do you find that teaching and scholarly  
work interfere with your work as a writer or  
do they contribute to it?

Alas, yes, they do interfere with it.  
Teaching draws from the same sources of  
emotional energy that writing does, and  
I find it almost impossible to do both at  
once. Also, when I’m teaching a partic-  
ular writer, I’m so involved in his or her  
voice and style that my own tends to sink  
underground. And then there’s the  
problem of being so impressed by what  
you're teaching that you feel hopeless  
about contributing on your own. I  
mean, who can read a chapter of  
Middlemarch and then confidently sit  
down at a typewriter? On the other  
hand, I welcome the chance to escape  
the solitude and introspection of writ-  
ing.

How would you describe the attraction  
writing has for you? Why are you willing to  
devote so much energy and time to it?

I write for several reasons, and others  
I probably don’t recognize. My mind  
gets cluttered with images, memories,  
and feelings, and I feel better when I get  
them down on paper in an organized way  
— rather like cleaning out an attic. I  
also like to find patterns in chaos, to try  
to make a shape out of what seems a  
shapeless mess of feelings and ideas. And  
if I can help others — readers like the  
ones who write to me — to make some  
shape of their lives, too, then I feel as if I  
am doing something very worthwhile.  
Finally, I love words. I always have. I  
love the sound and shapes of words and  
sentences, the music of it all. So it’s a  
sensuous occupation.

How has your being a feminist influenced  
your scholarly and creative writing?

Being a feminist influences every-  
thing — the way you live, not just the  
way you write. I think I have in-  
stinctively turned to literature by  
women, for example, when I wanted to  
read someone who would speak to my  
heart as well as my mind. I still feel  
passionately about George Eliot, Jane  
Austen, and Virginia Woolf, for ex-  
ample, and I would much rather read a  
contemporary novel by a woman —  
whether it’s Fay Weldon, or Margaret  
Drabble, or Joan Didion, or Doris Less-  
ing — than one by Updike or Malamud  
or Barthelme. It is hard for me to imagine  
being a thinking woman today and  
not being a feminist. In my writing, I  
steer very clear of polemic, though; I try  
to embody things rather than to explain  
them. One or two critics — someone in  
Ms., as I remember — read Blooming and  
Ivy Days rather superficially, I thought,  
because they were worried I wasn’t  
enough of an overt feminist. I think it’s  
all there in the life I write about: This is  
what it was like to grow up in a male-  
dominated society, uncertain of one’s  
rights and needs as a woman, reaching  
out for women’s friendship in a time  
when it was taken for granted — before  
the word “sisterhood” had been applied.

Are the 80s a good time for a woman writ-  
er? If not, what are the problems? If they  
are, what makes them so?

Yes, I think the 80s are a wonderful  
time for women writers. We are struggl-  
ing to discover what is particular and  
peculiar about a woman’s voice and ex-  
perience, and we are beginning to see  
what the parameters of a patriarchal  
society are. We listen to each other, and  
we learn.

Belles Lettres @ 9