Sexual Craving and

Emotional Obsession

The High Road, by Edna O’Brien. New York: New American Library, 1989, $8.95

(PB)

by Mary Titus

The High Road is Edna O’Brien’s

first novel in over ten years. This

extraordinarily prolific writer began her career with The Country Girls in
1960, the first in a fine trilogy that
traced the gritty struggles and eloquent
rage of Irish women fighting the modern
city, the confines of marriage, and, most
of all, their dependence on men.
O’Brien’s constant themes are destruc-
tive relationships, marked by sexual
craving and emotional obsession. These
have given her work some notoriety. At
least five of her novels were banned as
obscene in Ireland, and early commen-
tary on her work often repeats this la-
ment: “how can a good convent-
educated Irish beauty from County
Clare” write so explicitly about the sex-
ual relations between lay men and wo-
men, priests and women, and, as in The
High Road, women and women?

Like O’Brien’s earlier work, The High
Road is written in the confessional first
person, but in this novel she leaves
Ireland, her usual setting, for a lush vil-
lage in Spain. Her somewhat autobio-
graphical narrator, Anna, also a suc-
cessful Irish writer, seeks healing and
renewal after a long, addictive, debili-
tating love affair. The novel opens on
Easter and weaves imagery of Christian
sacrifice and resurrection into its dense
tapestry. As O’Brien works to exalt
Anna’s passivity and craving to the stat-

us of a symbolic quest, with attendant
shades of Joyce and Yeats, the resulting
narrative often seems laborious and self-
conscious. In long, expendable pas-
sages, the garrulous expatriate artists
and dilettantes of Anna’s acquaintance
hold forth on everything from Cardinal
Newman to Clint Eastwood.

Yet the novel’s faults are mingled
with its pleasures. The rich, descriptive
prose is gorgeous at times, especially
when O’Brien turns to the natural
world. Yet moments later its excess be-
comes tiresome. Here are flowers at a
restaurant:

Geraniums festooned the surrounds,
coral-colored, flagrant like cockscombs,
tumbling out of terracotta pots, the incar-
nation and the emanation of redness that
was not fire or flame but rather like a
powder, a primordial rouge altering what-
ever it touched. Likewise the roses,
thrilled and thrilling, the whole garden
agog, the laid tables like altars waiting for
their rite.

The central plot raises similar mixed
feelings. Anna seeks to forget a man she
loved in England, to overcome her
longing for him, to make new mem-
ories. She is attracted to a young local
woman who works at her hotel arranging
flowers for the rooms. Catalina becomes
the focus of an array of symbolic im-
agery: she is Venus rising from the sea-
foam, a wood nymph, the hyacinth girl.

Queen Lear
by Molly Keane

New York: Dutton, 1988, $17.95, 233 pp.

The protagonists of Molly Keane’s nov-
els are usually the large and decaying
houses of the ‘Anglo-Irish aristocracy
that provide the setting for absurd char-
acters, hilarious situations, and Irish
black humor. Keane, well into her eigh-
ties and recently “rediscovered,” wrote
novels in the 1920s and 1930s under the
name of M.J. Farrell. Her current work
is fondly nostalgic but laced with acid.

Queen Lear begins before the First
World War and ends after the Second.
Nicandra, an Irish heiress, is raised by
her absent-minded, horse-breeding fa-
ther (she is named for one of the family
champions) and wealthy, dotty, tip-
pling, devoted Aunt Tossie — her mo-
ther’s widowed sister. As the story
opens, a cheerful and eager-to-please
eight-year-old Nicandra tries desperate-
ly to be of service to parents, aunt, ban-
tam hen, and other assorted creatures.
Nothing goes right, and her beautiful
and adored mother, after tying her to a
chair at the lunch table until she eats her
spinach, disappears forever within hours
after the farm manager is driven away
with all his possessions. Here, the es-
tate, Deer Forest, is lovingly described
inside and out as are its wily and eccen-
tric servants. The furniture, though well
polished, is worn and the fine carpets
threadbare.

Nicandra becomes a beautiful and
guileless woman with a wealthy and
conniving best friend and a very attrac-
tive, opportunist husband whom she
adores, having rejected the decent but
dull man who loves her. Aunt Tossie
buys the young couple a house and pro-
vides the funds for breeding horses.
Always in the background of Nicandra’s
story and marital drama is the old house
where her small, impeccably dressed,
and increasingly impoverished father

4 @ Belles Lettres

“I don’t remember the word sex occurring.
There was a tremendously romantic outlook.
When I was awfully young, on my very first
walk-out I thought I’d practically reached
heaven, and where had I got to? Practically
nowhere!” From Writing Lives (Virago).

has gratefully allowed Tossie to take
control. (Reduced to trimming the lawn
himself and long deprived of horses, he
drives a power mower with great élan.
One day, taking a turn too closely, the
mower flips over and throws him in the
best sporting tradition!)

At the end Nicandra returns to Deer
Forest and tries to move a resisting and
aged Aunt Tossie back into the house.
She is happily ensconced in a leaking
house trailer parked just outside and is
well looked after by the village idiot
turned general factotum. Her dead par-
rot, now stuffed and lice-ridden, is in his
old cage, and her whiskey is within arm’s
reach of her bunk in the cupboard with
the chamber pot. Ironically, just as
Nicandra begins at last to assert herself,
she is sabotaged by the house and its
inmates.

Among other things, Keane has a
wonderful time with the unmentioned
but ever-present sexuality of her charac-
ters. And, despite its subject matter and
the age of its author, there is no sign of
decrepitude in this funny but sad book.

—Barbara Furst

of “The Wasteland,” natural, sensual,
primeval. When the two women finally
make love, Anna finds renewal. Their
night together is, for her, a return to the
womb, it is “tenderness, rabidness; hun-
ger; back, back in time to that wander-
ing milky watery bliss.” The moment il-
lustrates O’Brien’s view of sexuality. To
draw from an interview:

The reason I think on the whole that
women are more discontent than men is
not just that they get old sooner or that
they have the vote, or that they haven’t
the vote, or that they bleed, but that
there is, there must be, in every man and
every woman the desire, the deep prime-
val desire to go back to the womb. Now
physically and technically really... a
man partly and symbolically achieves this
when he goes into a woman. He goes in
and becomes sunken and lost in her. A
woman never, ever approaches that kind
of security.

In The High Road, security comes to
Anna when she makes love to Catalina,

Kate O’Brien

Exile of the Heart

and this seems to be O’Brien’s central
intent. Yet other implications of the
scene are disturbing. Although there is
delight and initially some gaiety in the
women’s affair, Catalina is too much a
symbol, a sort of native Other. We see
her only through Anna’s eyes, where she
comes to represent the natural, sensual
world. With her wealth, mobility, and
sophistication, Anna, in turn, resem-
bles a colonial power, who can subject
an undeveloped culture to its own fanta-
sies and then exploit it for its own fulfill-
ment. Certainly the affair fulfills Anna,
but it brings Catalina alienation and
violence. And ultimately this does not
seem to concern O’Brien. The novel
does present Anna’s expatriate friends as
exploitative and debauched — they
spend their time drinking, having sex,
and shopping — but Anna is never really
implicated in their corruption. When it
comes to Catalina’s fate, blame is pri-
marily directed at the primitive morality
of her village’s culture. At the close of
The High Road, Anna has had her sexy
experience and can fly back to her First
World comforts or, perhaps, on to
another Third World thrill.

Edna O’Brien’s fans may find pleas-
ures in The High Road; its prose is cer-
tainly astonishing, rich, and intel-
lectually allusive. Although I cannot
recommend it, this criticism does not
extend to O’Brien’s other work. If read-
ers seek acquaintance with this ex-
tremely talented and prolific Irish
writer, they should turn to The Country
Girls trilogy.

® Mary Titus teaches in the English
Department of St. Olaf College, North-
field, Minnesota.

The Land of Spices, by Kate O’Brien. New York: Virago, 1990, $7.95, 285 pp. (PB)
The Ante-Room, by Kate O’Brien. New York: Virago, 1990, $7.95, 317 pp. (PB)

by Kathleene West

Many readers are consistently
grateful to Virago for the
beautiful books of discoveries

or the welcoming back of women writers
who slide all too quickly into the neth-
erworld of Out of Print. We can be es-
pecially glad to welcome back two Kate
O’Brien books.

O’Brien was one of the first Irish
women writers I read. From an English-
language bookshelf in Reykjavik, to a
jumble sale in Cambridge, to an Am-
erican bookstore in Paris, I collected her
books, indulging in the triple irony of
exiled reader, writer, and books. Al-
though writing in bile is not an indige-
nous Irish trait, it’s a common theme,
one easily shared by women with our
history of denial, exclusion and “man’s
world” surviving.

As these two books are Irish books,
they are Catholic. The Land of Spices is
set within a convent that is not only a
community but an educational institu-
tion, giving the reader a novel about
women at work, with the management,
politicking, gossiping, grooming of pos-
sible successors, the delicate dealings
with men. Convent as corporate struc-
ture is not just a metaphor. “She might
have been a very successful business
woman,” says the Mother Superior of
her mentor, “if she hadn’t happened to
be something of a saint.”

It is another dash of spice to learn the
novel was banned in Ireland in 1942 for
essentially a single sentence, which
would be wrong to reveal. It’s fore-
shadowed in the novel’s narrative that
follows the Reverend Mother’s (at
forty-three, self-described at “a precari-
ous age”) effort to make “The land of
spices, something understood.”

Characters in both novels try to un-
derstand love and what it, or lack of it,
does to them and those they observe.
The main character in The Ante-Room,
Agnes Mulqueen, an externally con-
trolled, internally roiling woman, is
quite like the Reverend Mother in The
Land of Spices. They both seek the spiri-
tual love of God to protect them from
the shocking ravages of human/physical
love. Can we not be “a little less than
desolate?” Agnes wonders.

It seems that everyone in her proper
bourgeois Irish family loves inappro-
priately. There’s a love triangle: two
sisters and a husband. There’s a dying
mother worried excessively how her
syphilitic, wastrel son will survive with-
out her love. There’s a cunning nurse
who has figured it out. In times of des-
peration, they — we — cling to rituals,
in this case, the rituals of Catholicism.
But this family praying together is a sorry
parody of the old adage. The ending is a
jolt (possibly a bit melodramatic), but
O’Brien gives us a situation we can rec-
ognize, an attempt to deal with the ter-
rible passion of a world “sick of perpetual
kissing and yearning.”

O’Brien writes of women who must
withhold and uphold themselves and
others in order to achieve their own in-
ternal freedom, passionately earned and
fiercely kept. Her exquisite language,
like her memorable characters, is ele-
gantly wrought and ordered with an in-
tensity that will not soon leave the
reader.

@ Kathleene West is a poet who teaches
at New Mexico State University and is the
poetry editor of Puerto del Sol. Her last
book, Water Witching, is available from
Copper Canyon Press.

Spring 1990