Making the Beautiful Real

We Stand Our Ground: Three Women, Their Vision, Their Poems, by Kimiko Hahn, Gale Jackson, and Susan Sherman. Artwork by Josely Carvalho. IKON Inc. (P.O. Box 1355, Stuyvesant Station, New York, NY 10009), $9.95, 159 pp. (PB)

by Rachel Guido deVries

We Stand Our Ground is a col-  
lection of work by three  
women who trust themselves  

enough to write with an urgency that  
demands we look at the world the way  
they see it. This kind of writing comes  
most often from writers with a strong  
sense of their ethnic origins. A deeply  
rooted belief in the power of politics  
comes from home, and often the home is  
made, for those of us who know no  
home but the one we create, out of lan-  
guage that reveals our otherness. In this  
home is something we want that is not  
yet there—something simple, yet abso-  
lutely elusive: freedom and equality. Out  
of that desire we begin redesigning our  
world, offering a vision that can make  
the beautiful real.

We Stand Our Ground begins with a  
section called “Three Voices Together:  
A Collage.” Here, Kimiko Hahn, Gale  
Jackson, and Susan Sherman share ex-  
cerpts from letters, discussions, and  
taped conversations occurring between  
July and October of 1987. Immediately,  
each woman talks about her identity,  
her home. Here is Kimiko Hahn.

I was four and very confused about  
nationality, about being “American.” (I’m  
half Japanese-American) ... physically, I  
look Asian. Could I be Japanese and  
American? Part Japanese? ... When I was  
nine we lived in Japan ... The children in  
my Japanese school called me “amerikajin”  
or “gaijin” (literally “outsider”). I never felt  
fully “at home.” My poems address this ...  
for example, “Instead of Speech,” or “Her  
First Language.”

Gale Jackson:

On my mother’s side my people are African  
Caribbeans from Jamaica.... The women in  
my house spoke several languages. They  
have, as Jamaicans, a dual concept of home.  
They say home and mean Jamaica even here  
while they live in the psychic space that  
they’ve created in this country, which they  
also call, in a way, home.... I remember  
longing to be grown so I would have stories  
to tell and a language of my own.

Susan Sherman:

I like the word “origins” because to me it  
means not only your childhood or your roots  
... but what continues, what makes your  
work, your daily life possible... My  
childhood was characterized by a lack of  
roots.... I never knew where my  
grandparents were from, my parents never  
spoke of it.... Partly from fear, partly  
because they wanted desperately ... to fit in.  
I am Jewish.... that was thought of then in  
racial, not religious terms.... The poems I  
wrote when I was a teenager were about my  
own life, my own dreams, written in my own  
language, unsure and poor as it was.

Each writer’s concept of home—the  
powerful sense of self and family it can  
engender, with its ability to alienate—is  
closely tied to a desire to use language  
that creates the new as it describes the  
familiar. By beginning with visions  
firmly grounded in their origins and  
femaleness, the writers unify the book;  
their language is intense, emotionally  
precise. The poems examine culture and  
politics, the pleasures of love, friendship,  
and aging—and all with an eye that re-  
fuses to waver from truth, that continu-  

ally asks why. In “Facts,” Sherman  
writes: “in my class / I ask / ‘What is a  
fact’? / A student answers / ‘What you  
hear on the five o’clock news.’ /... He  
doesn’t even know ‘Why?’ And that  
question must be asked and answered,  
Sherman says, “to break down the artifi-  
cial and imposed separation between  
words and actions, poetry and real  
people’s lives.”

The recognition of barriers, and then  
breaking them down, is a theme running  
through We Stand Our Ground. In “In-  
stead of Speech,” Hahn writes about  
“the reflection of Noh actors making  
‘your heart throb,’” and then: “this is  
home. This is home the way a home /  
will never admit you / because you are  
by definition alien and female.”

One of the most powerful poems here  
is Jackson’s “a poem to begin again.”  
This is the final stanza: “it begins with a  
woman looking for a beginning and  
finding / her own hands a weapon a  
balm. it begins with or without / chick  
or child, heat or hot water, contemplat-  
ing bellevue or / a woman's shelter to  
escape the cold that’s crept in / on the  
edge ... / walking towards someplace no  
bus goes called home.”

In “home,” dedicated to “benjamin  
moloise the poet and our brothers in the  
mines,” she shows a home made alien by  
“the state”: “the day they hung the poet  
/ for crimes against the state / his mother  
stood outside / prison gates / bells tolled  
/ a policeman looked out / said: / ‘you  
can go home now / he’s dead.’ ”

That this alienation is caused by the  
isolationist and often violent beliefs and  
policies of people and their governments  
that Sherman alludes to earlier is just  
one of many times the artists in We  
Stand Our Ground write from a place of a  
“common ground.” It is a ground of cer-  
tainty, making real what is often painful,  
yet in its truth always beautiful. It asks  
us to notice, to confront—by asking  
why, by sharing language, and by  
making home, for all of us. Sherman’s  
“Love Poem” concludes the book and  
describes a sensibility of Hahn and Jack-  
son too: “if you were to ask me what de-  
fines me / how I place myself in the  
world / I would say this poem ... / as one  
who wants to reach out / endlessly who  
wants to feel / endlessly that question /  
that is our lives.”

This is a book for everyone to read, re-  
membering all the while to ask the  
“question / that is our lives” full of the  
belief of the question’s necessity, never  
fearing the answer, gathering courage to  
begin to answer it ourselves. I thank the  
voices in We Stand Our Ground for re-  
minding me of the power and light we  
yield when we listen to one another and  
begin to make real the world the way we  
all know it needs to be.

@ Rachel Guido deVries is director and  
cofounder of the Community Writers’ Pro-  
ject, Inc., in Syracuse, NY, and author of  
the novel Tender Warriors. She has re-  
cently completed Cave Songs, a collection  
of poems, and is working on The Lost Era  
of Frank Sinatra, her second novel.

Barbara Tuchman, Historian @ 1912-1989

Friendship of a kind that cannot easily be reversed  
tomorrow must have its roots in common interests and shared beliefs,  
and even between nations, in some personal feeling.

20 © Belles Lettres

—“Friendship with Foreign Devils”  
Harper’s, December 1972

AMERICAN

WRITING FICTION

Mickey Pearlman, Editor

232 pages

112 pages $6.00 paper May

“trench” poets. 240 pages

AMERICAN WOMEN WRITING FICTION  
Memory, Identity, Family, Space

Mickey Pearlman, Editor.

A jargon-free critical discussion of ten important  
contemporary novelists: Bambara, Didion,  
Erdrich, Godwin, Gordon, Lurie, Oates, Phillips,  
Schaeffer, and Settle. Excellent bibliographies.  
“Pearlman and other contributors serve as  
sure-footed guides to contemporary American literature” —Booklist.  
$20.00 cloth, $10.00 paper

FEMINIST LITERARY CRITICISM  
Explorations in Theory  
Second Edition

JOSEPHINE DONOVAN, Editor. This widely cited, pioneering work  
will soon be available in a second edition with a new introduction and  
a bibliography of feminist critical theory from 1975 to 1986. Indispen-  
sable to an understanding of the development of feminist theory.

DEMON LOVERS AND THEIR VICTIMS  
IN BRITISH FICTION

TONI REED. In the first historical and structural exploration of the  
demon-lover motif, Reed argues that the demon-lover drama has sur-  
vived the centuries because it represents a powerful projection of evil  
arising from repressed personal and social conflicts. Will interest all con-  
cerned with gender role conflicts in literature and with the mutual  
influence of folklore and more formal writings. 176 pages $18.00

WOMEN’S POETRY OF THE FIRST WORLD WAR

NOSHEEN KHAN. This important study retrieves from oblivion the  
wartime experience of women in England as rendered in their poetry.  
In exploring the impact of the war on women on the home front, Khan  
gives priority to the long-term effects of private suffering and social  
change, in contrast to the male ideals of heroism exemplified in the  
$25.00

A readable,

Inquiries and major credit card orders, phone toll-free 1-800-666-2211. Send mail order to:  
University Press of Kentucky, P.O. Box 6525, Ithaca, NY 14851.

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS OF KENTUCKY

Reacting to Trouble, continued

but no real trouble to anyone. They  
believe in their own quietness. How  
they react when trouble and temptation  
arises astounds no one more than them-  
selves.

Trouble is fodder for the denizens of  
The Purchase of Order, Gail Galloway  
Adams’s collection that won the  
Flannery O’Connor Award for Short  
Fiction. Located largely in the South  
and Southwest, these stories revolve  
around characters searching for change.

These characters have names like  
Marva Jean, Billy Lee, Orleen. They say  
things like “though you know me as a  
person who waits tables at Brady’s  
Boarding House, that ain’t me at all.” It  
is familiar ground, resounding with  
echoes of O’Connor, Eudora Welty,  
Carson McCullers and Truman Capote,  
although, to her credit, Adams struggles  
to create her own variations. In one  
story, “Bow Wow and Good-bye,” she  
alternates a seriocomic Southern voice  
with a more sensible, reflective one. A  
mother writes to her daughter, describ-  
ing an aunt who is experimenting with  
different methods of driving herself in-  
sane. “I heard a noise and thought the  
cat had choked on a hairball, so I  
flickered on the light and there sits Wil!  
Big as you please and she opens her  
mouth and screeches.” To which the  
daughter replies, “The answer was that  
Wilma, having done research, was now  
embarked on a field experience.”

Adams is best when she is giving inti-  
mate details of her characters—so inti-  
mate, in fact, that the reader seems to be  
spying rather than reading. Describing a  
family of men in “Inside Dope,” Adams  
writes: “Their hair is always cut the same  
... and around each ear is pared an arch  
the color of their palms, their soles, and  
underneath their underwear ... some-  
how you are always aware of them from  
the navel down.” We do not need to be  

told that the narrator is smitten with  
one of these men, actually her own  
brother-in-law. We feel what she means  
when she says “the itch of lust is in the  
air.”

The title story concerns a comfortably  
retired couple who spend most of their  
summers driving around in a van hunt-  
ing for another couple they once knew.  
Lou and Marlon Maxey have always  
been peripatetic, moving from Alaska to  
Louisiana to Tampa to Alabama. Lou  
has gotten attached to the shifting land-  
scape—a way of keeping mortality at  
bay. “Whenever she went back to the  
town Marlon came from she saw the  
same people walking down the same  
streets. They’d die in the same frame  
houses they lived in, she thought.” Yet  
now that her children are grown, she  
spends too much time looking backward  
at all the places they have left. What is  
not clear is whether or not we are sup-  
posed to find her nostalgia admirable.  
Certainly it is unclear why she is so at-  
tached to the Dillons, the couple they  
are searching for. We understand that  
Lou thinks she has lost something pro-  
found, but never understand what it is.  
According to the narrator, the Maxeys  
“are looking for a family ... without  
whose presence everything in life has  
been more pale.”

A novel demands participation in part  
by sheer length; a short story has less  
time to enthrall. It has to reach out from  
behind the bars and collar the reader if  
it is going to make an impression. The  
stories must work together to create a  
new and particular view of the world.  
Unfortunately, what sometimes happens  
is that the reader finishes a collection of  
short fiction feeling as if Wild Kingdom  
has stampeded by. These menageries  
however, are worth the tour.

@ Suzanne Berne teaches writing and  
writes frequently on fiction for Belles  
Lettres.

Spring 1989