Clothes Make the Woman

Men and Women: Dressing the Part, edited by Claudia Brush Kidwell and Valerie Steele. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989, $40.00 (HB), $24.95 (PB), 226 pp.

by Holly Hall

During the early years of this century, the policewoman’s uniform mixed traditional symbols of femininity with those of authority. The uniform included a badge and gun, but women also wore skirts, heels, and white gloves. Instead of a holster, female officers carried their guns in two-compartment purses: One side held the gun and the other cosmetics.

Today, this seems ridiculous. “Have you ever tried to get a gun or handcuffs out of a purse?” one policewoman asked, as she looked back at her earlier days on the force. This is only one example of the many ways in which clothing exemplifies a deep-felt conviction that men and women should remain easily distinguishable in appearance, according to Men and Women: Dressing the Part, edited by Claudia Brush Kidwell and Valerie Steele.

Another example of sartorial separation, according to Steele, occurred in the medical profession. Whereas the stereotypical image of both doctors and nurses is garbed in white, that color had totally different origins in the working clothes of men and women of medicine. The white uniform of nurses — almost universally women — evolved from the fact that nurses and maids dressed nearly identically in the last century. Both wore starched, white aprons and caps, which was not surprising given the fact that “nurses were also expected to perform cleaning tasks.”

For doctors, the wearing of white emanated from the laboratory. A white lab coat came to be associated with scientific rigor and sanitation, “a connection that reinforced the contemporary image of the doctor as a scientist. . . . The white coat became even more significant as health care shifted decisively from the home to the hospital.” Before the lab coat and the benefits of sterilization became widely known, doctors commonly wore black frock coats that were seldom cleaned and washed their hands only after an operation.

These days, with male and female police officers dressing identically, private practitioners discarding their lab coats, and nurses refusing to dress alike, it seems that gender-separating clothing may be relaxing its hold on at least some parts of the working world. Not so, however, in other realms. Take a chapter on children’s clothing, for example. A hundred years ago, male and female children under the age of five both wore dresses, a fact that obviously had little or no bearing on the child’s later sexual identity.

Today, however, the large majority of parents would be appalled at the notion of dressing a son in skirts. In fact, baby clothes have become more and more sex-specific, the authors argue. “Christening gowns remain the one remnant of the practice of dressing both boy and girl babies in trailing white dresses, although today’s infant male need not suffer the indignity of wearing girls’ clothes at all. Christening suits, with vests, short trousers, and satin bow ties, have made it possible for parents to eliminate every hint of femininity from their sons’ wardrobes.”

Baby clothes may reflect a greater truth: the need we have for clothing to reflect the differences between men and women. The authors make a strong case for there being no truly androgynous clothing. Despite the fact that men and women are dressing more alike than ever, this development is primarily due to women’s adoption of traditionally male clothing and even to their pursuit of body types — flat stomachs and well-defined muscles — historically associated with masculinity. But, asks Steele, “is there really something better about men’s bodies and men’s clothes that women want to have, or have we been drawn to symbols of personal freedom and power?”

Dressing the Part

Claudia Brush Kidwell and Valerie Steele

Designer Rudi Gernreich predicted in 1970 that men and women would be wearing unisex fashions by 1980, and the designer had at least one fashion show in which reluctant male models were coaxed into skirts. Yet, the authors note, Gernreich’s prediction has not come true, and his approach “implies that appearance has the power to cure the male-female contest. The evidence gathered in this book argues directly against such logic.”

An important part of the authors’ evidence is “Challenging Gender Symbols,” a chapter by Shelly Foote. A look back shows that society has been threatened time and again by a blurring of gender roles in clothing. In the 1850s, when dress reformer Amelia Bloomer introduced trousers for women, any “Bloomer” appearing in the outfit was ridiculed and taunted.

A similar response greeted men’s adoption of long hair during the 1960s. Whereas this fashion revolution enjoyed more success, it still aroused the same response. Long-haired males were the focus of hostility, as one billboard proclaimed in 1968: “Beautify America: Get a Haircut.” Twenty-year-old cartoons show fathers looking askance at their daughter’s long-haired date or mistaking the young man for their daughter’s same-sex friend. “As these . . . instances show,” writes Foote, “when one sex adopts a potent gender symbol from the opposite sex, the response is immediate. Many people fear that more than just outward appearance is being changed.”

Men and Women: Dressing the Part provides few answers to the questions it raises concerning the strong, societal need to separate the sexes in clothing. Yet, it does enrich our understanding of fashion, a seemingly fickle field that many authors have been unable to predict or explain, except to say that fashion’s one constant is an ever-changing nature.

@ Holly Hall is a writer and editor for the Chronicle of Philanthropy. She writes frequently on fashion, her abiding interest, for Belles Lettres.

Mary Heaton Vorse: The Life of an American Insurgent

by Dee Garrison

Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989, $27.95, 375 pp.

Although the name Mary Heaton Vorse was vaguely familiar, I opened Dee Garrison’s book with a mixture of dread and anticipation. Would this be a highly academic, long-winded treatise on an obscure woman, an effort to satisfy publish-or-perish demands, or would I be introduced to a leftist foremother of audacity, courage, and quick-witted creativity?

Luckily, Vorse proved to be the latter — a spunky, deft organizer and journalist who dedicated most of her ninety-two years to chronicling the lives of the working people of the world. Born into privileged splendor in Amherst, Massachusetts, Vorse came of age in the Victorian 1880s and 1890s. She spread her wings at the turn of the century, discovering that her ability to write could earn both money and recognition.

By hobnobbing with such greats as Mark Twain, Theodore Dreiser, Mother Jones, and Maxim Gorky, she sharpened her sensitivity to left-wing causes and developed intellectually. By 1911, two events converged to change her life and move her forever from the comforts of middle-class complacency and repose. First came revelations about skyrocketing infant mortality rates in New York City, a crisis that occurred because milk was produced in unsanitary conditions leading to bacterial contamination. A campaign for pasteurization was victorious, but Vorse was incensed at how hard they had to fight to win this concession. “The wealth of a few,” she noted, “was paid for all over the world by the lives of little babies.” Second, the Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire, in which more than 100 seamstresses died because they could not escape the locked building, brought Vorse into direct contact with the brutal hardships facing working women.

Over the next fifty years, she reported labor battles — always from the workers’ perspective and always with an eye for women’s activism — from Lawrence, Massachusetts, to Passaic, New Jersey, Gastonia, North Carolina, Harlan County, Kentucky, and Flint, Michigan. Her feminism, like her partisan labor support, was central to her, and membership in the progressive Heterodoxy Club brought her into sisterhood with dozens of luminaries and exposed her to freethinkers, free lovers, communists, socialists, anarchists, and liberals.

Although proudly part of the U.S. left, Vorse eschewed communism and the American Communist Party. Instead, she envisioned a libertarian society, where women and men would be equal partners, where racism and sexism would be eradicated, and where workers would own the means of production and decide the direction of their lives.

But as solid as her political convictions were, Mary Heaton Vorse was plagued by inner demons and the residual effects of an upper-class upbringing on her day-to-day life. A single mother of three — two marriages ended when her husbands died and one ended in divorce — she was unsettled by the need to earn a living to support her family. Away from home for long stretches at a time, she left her children with family members or paid caretakers. Throughout her life, she blamed herself for her offspring’s failures, sure that her absence was at least partly responsible and guilty because she recognized that she enjoyed work away from home far more than parenting or homemaking. Drugs and alcohol helped ease the conflicts for a time, but morphine addiction in the 1920s rendered her weak and unproductive. Although she eventually detoxified and lived until 1966, it was only as an octogenarian that she came to terms with her role as a mother, eventually reveling in the fact that her children “embraced their mother’s most important beliefs and most cherished values and made them their own.”

With psychological insights and a feminist eye for female suffering and triumph, Dee Garrison has written an unusual, fast-moving and exciting biography. It is full of details about important working-class struggles and provides an incisive look at a number of Vorse’s political allies and adversaries. Mary Heaton Vorse, “a woman of invincible spirit and fearless courage,” is an exemplary role model for those of us striving to change the world.

—Eleanor J. Bader

Belles Lettres @ 13