Far Reaches of Imagination

Labrador, by Kathryn Davis. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1988, $17.95, 225 pp.

by Suzanne Scott

With Labrador, Kathryn Davis

transforms a literary com-

monplace — a young girl’s
transition from childhood to adulthood
— into a brilliantly original story told in
a demanding yet rewarding style. Each
sentence is rich with arresting and
thought-provoking images — and so
powerful is Davis’s talent that these
images do not merely ornament the
story. They are the story.

The power of the imagination to give
spiritual meaning to reality is at the
heart of Labrador. The protagonist is
Kitty, a fourteen-year-old trapped
within a stifling 1950s family. Kitty’s
mother knits constantly and calls her
daughters “Sweetheart”; her father
drinks too much and endlessly scribbles
research notes he will never use onto
yellow pads. The Irish housekeeper,
with a superstition for all occasions, rep-
resents the depths of the family’s spiri-
tual life. Kitty only barely lives within
these circumstances, spending much of
her time instead inside an imaginary
world where she is not even the child of
her family: The Nurse-of-Becoming
conjures up Kitty and her sister, Willie,
from the steam of a teapot. In this world
Kitty’s guide is Rogni, an angel who tells
her stories and conjures up fires that
burn nothing.

Kitty’s deepest tie to her family is her
adoring, obsessive love for her older sis-
ter, Willie. Beautiful, clever, and gre-
garious, Willie asserts her independence
through a precocious worldliness, and
she is Kitty’s ideal and inspiration.
Kitty’s preoccupation with being with
Willie, winning her attention and ap-
proval, and understanding her form the
core of the novel. Even its structure
underscores the obsession. Except for
Rogni’s stories, it takes the form of a
long letter to Willie, sustained through-
out in the second person (a difficult feat
attempted by only a handful of other
novelists).

The obsession with Willie, though
life-sustaining for Kitty in her airless
household, is also stifling. Describing
Kitty’s first memory of Willie going off to
school, Davis writes:

“Kitty,” you said to me, and the
black oval of your mouth was so
close to my face that I thought my

Revelation
by Peggy Payne

New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988,
$18.95, 314 pp.

Peggy Payne’s intriguing first novel is an
expansion of her short story “The Pure in
Heart,” which won several awards,
mention in Best American Short Stories,
and inclusion in the anthology New Stor-
ies from the South. The hero, Swain
Hammond, is the intellectual minister
of a Presbyterian church in Chapel Hill,
North Carolina — a university town
where the congregation is as cool and
intellectual as the pastor. As Swain
stands in his backyard one summer eve-
ning, God begins speaking to him. Lit-
erally. Swain knows at once that if he
tells his congregation, he opens himself
to ridicule. If he does not, he is not
much of a minister. So he tells — and
the church elders advise him to seek
professional help. In the short story,
Swain’s account is intense and forceful,
as his metaphysical experiences are jux-
taposed against the practical demands of
his congregation and he moves from
despair to “undeniable joy.”
Transformed into a longer work, the
effect of Swain’s experience is necessari-

12 ® Belles Lettres

name gave off a smell like milk.
“Say, Goodbye. Say, Goodbye,
Willie.”

But my love for you tied my
tongue, and then you whirled
around and all I could see was the
sparkling absence of you. . . .

Later in the novel, the night before
Willie is about to move out of the house,
Davis heightens the emotional impact of
Kitty’s anxiety about being separated
from her beloved sister by recalling that
earlier incident, and reusing the nurtur-
ing image of milk:

“Kitty,” you whispered, and I
thought I would burst into tears,
because your breath still smelled the
way it had so many years ago, as if
you had just finished lapping milk
up from a saucer — as if the next
thing I would feel would be your
tongue lapping against my cheek.

By going to the isolated reaches of
Labrador with her grandfather — the
only person who seems to prefer Kitty
over Willie — Kitty undergoes an initia-
tion, traveling to the far reaches of her
imagination and returning home with
new knowledge that liberates her. Davis
economically shows the profound im-
pact of the journey in the final pages of
the novel, when the entire family has
come to Labrador for the grandfather’s
funeral. Kitty brings home a lake trout in
the middle of winter, a parting gift from
Rogni fished out of a frozen lake, and
watches Willie eat it.

You chewed and swallowed. Then
you looked at me and your face was
lit up with inexplicable happiness.
“It’s so sweet,” you said. “I never
expected it would be this sweet.”

In this world, Willie. That is
how a miracle happens in this world.

Peggy Payne. Photo by Les Todd.

ly diluted. Most of the rich, lyrical pas-
sages in the book are also in the shorter
piece, where their compression gives
them a force they lose here. Yet in its
way, the novel is as successful as the
story because of what it gains — an ex-
ploration of character that is impossible
in less than two dozen pages and several
added plot elements.

Much more than the short story,
Revelation allows Swain to act on what
has happened, not just talk and feel. He
has deliberately hidden himself behind a
wall of good, upper-middle-class man-
ners. When his experience of God is
doubted in a very house of God, by peo-
ple whose approval he values, Swain’s
veneer begins to crumble.

Soon after his revelation, a boy is
accidentally blinded in a church
cleanup, and Swain, already distraught,
makes a desperate attempt at faith heal-
ing. Perhaps, he believes, his mission is
to invoke the divine power he has felt.
The blind boy, Jakey, is momentarily
moved: “His hand is so hot. What's
happening? . . . I’m going, flying back-
ward. . . . My arm is like fire spreading
everywhere. Wow, look, Mom!... . I
can see everything.”

And then the door blew open, all

by itself, on its hinges, and in
poured the miraculous air that we’ve
been breathing ever since.

Davis’s language is sumptuous and
sensuous. Her use of extended metaphor
and symbolism, especially as she juxta-
poses Rogni’s tales with Kitty’s story,
creates a dense and compelling land-
scape of irony and ambiguity. Kitty,
theorizing about angels, says to Willie:

A long time ago we began trying to
capture the images of angels, paint-
ing them into borders of man-
uscripts, or carving them across
tympanic arches, their garments
falling in rigid folds along their
flanks. What we didn’t know is that
they have been doing the same

Bird-Eyes
by Madelyn Arnold

Seattle, WA: The Seal Press, 1988,
$8.95 (PB), 201 pp.

“Incorrigible just means you make them
pay.” This is the bitter wisdom of Latisha,
the sixteen-year-old lesbian “incorrigible” at
the center of Madelyn Arnold’s wrenching
first novel. Set in the back ward of a mental
hospital in the 1960s, Bird-Eyes shows how
the self-interest, stupidity, and boredom of
those in authority lead to casual cruelty and
violence — an abuse of power that mirrors
the world outside.

Latisha knows the brutality of power in
both worlds. She was abused by her father,

Madelyn Arnold

introduced to heroin and prostitution by a
woman lover who took her in when she left
home, and then relegated to a mental hospi-
tal by the courts because no one knew what
else to do with her. In the hospital, she lives
a nightmarish life surrounded by disturbed
and violent fellow patients, exploited by
both men and women on the hospital staff.
Yet she refuses to surrender to madness or to
the “cures” that promise peace but render the
other patients mindless and soulless. She

But ultimately the faith healing fails,
and Swain is left more vulnerable than
ever. He finds himself acting in un-
precedented, sometimes childish, ways.
He punches a congregant, kisses a
woman he has lusted for most of his life,
rages over his parents’ ignoring him
many years before. When his wife of
fourteen years unexpectedly becomes
pregnant, he is forced to confront his
long-standing aversion to having chil-
dren. Not until he is driven close to
madness is he finally defended — and
accepted — by the very people he
thought had abandoned him. Like the
character in Graham Greene’s The Pot-
ting Shed who dreams about meeting a
lion, he discovers that the lion does not
eat him after all, but only licks his hand.

In her short story, Peggy Payne moves
her readers by setting the supernatural
powerfully against the mundane. In her
novel, she does more. She lets her char-
acters deal head-on with large issues
from which they have tried desperately
to insulate themselves, and triumph on
their own terms. If God’s voice was the
raison d’être of the story, in the novel it
is only a forceful catalyst, and the book
succeeds because the events are played
out on a compellingly human stage.

—Ellyn Bache

thing with us. . . . The angels see
us as snakes of light, plotted against
the dark backdrop of eternity. We
can be differentiated, one from
another, only by our shapes, and it
is these upon which the angels
seize, inventing stories. Our lives,
Willie.

Labrador’s narrative twists and layers
of symbolism require the reader’s full
attention. But Davis provides com-
mensurate rewards. Her novel is at once
bizarre and remarkable, a tour-de-force
performance signaling a major literary
talent.

@ Suzanne Scott is a writer and critic
from Washington, D.C., and Lost River,
West Virginia.

palms her medications to keep her mind
clear, her only sense of self-possession re-
maining in her exercise of memory, wit, and
the power of observation.

The emotional center of the novel is Lati-
sha’s friendship with Anna, a deaf woman
hospitalized for depression by her unwitting
family, who believe they have done the best
thing for her. They refuse to believe that her
psychiatrist — a casually sadistic bureaucrat
who seeks out his patients’ wellsprings of
individuality and mercilessly dams the source
— has forbidden her to communicate using
sign language. Latisha teaches Anna to sur-
vive the inhuman environment of the hospi-
tal, while Anna provides Latisha with the
only genuine, nonexploitive human contact
in her life. Yet even this minimal connection
is ultimately prohibited by the psychiatrist,
precipitating the novel’s climactic acts of
violence and defiance.

Arnold creates Latisha’s world with com-
passion and without sentimentality. The
details of life in a mental institution are real-
istic without being lurid. Arnold succeeds in
avoiding sensationalism because of Latisha’s
unique voice, at once matter-of-fact and
passionately outraged:

Anna had to learn that some
things are completely illegal, which
means it really pisses them off and
they really give it to you: sideroom
you, clap you in a jacket, shock
your head off. If they’re really pissed
off, they don’t completely knock
you out when they shock you, and
people can hear you screaming all
the way out in the yard. These il-
legal things are: you can’t have
money on you, you can’t go any-
where without a pass, and you
can’t be queer. . . . All these bans
mean that you violate rules very
carefully, when you finally do.

By creating this child-woman’s voice,
Arnold succeeds in the difficult task of letting
us experience from the inside the world of an
outsider. The novel is tough and un-
compromising in its indictment of legiti-
mized brutality. Yet it is also devastatingly
funny: The scenes between Latisha and Dr.
Kim, the psychiatrist, are wickedly hilarious
satire. Arnold’s skillful writing makes
Bird-Eyes a painful but enriching experience.

—Lynne M. Constantine

Grandmother
had
No Name

Wang Anyi

LAPSE OF TIME
by Wang Anyi

Short stories by a talented young writer who
represents the new generation in China.

ISBN 0-8351-2031-7....cloth....$16.95
ISBN 0-8351-2032-5....paper....$8.95

GRANDMOTHER HAD
NO NAME
by Alice Lin
Three generations of Chinese women. A lifetime
that spans China, Taiwan, America and China
again.

ISBN 0-8351-2034-1....$9.95
fa CHINA 2929 Twenty-fourth Street

BOOKS San Francisco, CA 94110
& Periodicals, Inc. 415/282-2994