Girl With a Monkey  
by Thea Astley  

Ringwood: Penguin Australia, 1987,  
$5.95, 144 pp.  

Thea Astley’s first novel, first published  
in 1953, resonates for every reader old  
enough to recall youthful leave takings,  
those sheddings of people and places  
that remain as indelible memories. This  
early work tells a story of departure.  
Vital but discontented, Elsie, the  
twenty-two-year-old schoolteacher her-  
oine is feeling stifled in a culture-less  
small town in tropical North Queens-  
land, Australia. She is desperate to get  
out. The novel alternates smoothly be-  
tween the slow, dragging hours of her  
last year in town and lyrical flashbacks  
that deftly uncover her frustration at  
work and her romance with Harry, an  
uneducated laborer twelve years her  
senior. He is fascinated by Elsie and by  
the access she offers to a world of art and  
education that has been denied him.  
Elsie, trying to shuck the inhibitions  
of her Catholic girlhood, finds herself  
amused, attracted, repelled, and moved  
to pity by this powerfully built, but terri-  

bly vulnerable, lover. Slipping out of  
class and background has been the major  
excitement of her school year, yet the  
gap between them is wide. When Harry  
presses for commitment, she panics.  
Getting out proves to be a challenge.  
Astley has us glued to Elsie’s trail as she  

BY AND ABOUT  
AUSTRALIAN  
WOMEN  

Literature & Fiction  

On Dearborn Street  

Miles Franklin  

First paperback of major “Chicago” novel by  
author of My Brilliant Career — PB $8.95  
The Estuary  

Georgia Savage  

“A novel in the manner of an American  
Southern gothic . . . bears comparing with the  
work of Carson McCullers.” — Age PB $9.95  
(Fall 1988)  

Circles of Faces  

Mary Dadswell  

Stories of women young and old by  
prize-winning writer. PB $9.95  
Self-Possession  

Marion Halligan  

A novel documenting much of the  
superficiality and sexism of the early days of  
feminism. PB $9.95  

WOMEN IN  
UNIVERSITY  

Australian Authors Series  

Women in the University:  
A Policy Report  

Edited by Brian G. Wilson and  
Eileen M. Byrne  

Based on data from the University of  
Queensland. PB $10.95  

| JULY/AUGUST 1988  

Susan Afterman  

Poems of life on farms in Australia and  
Israel. PB $7.95  

Biography  

Point of Departure: The  
Autobiography of Jean Devanny  
Edited by Carole Ferrier  

Inside view of the gifted writer, feminist, and  
tireless Communist of the ’30s and ’40s. HB  
$34.50  

Pioneer Aviator: The  
Remarkable Life of Lores  
Bonney  

Terry Gwynn-Jones  

Both a glamorous socialite and an aviator of  
international significance, Bonney flew the  
open cockpit planes of the ’30s.  

University of  

Queensland Press  
250 Commercial Street  
Manchester, NH 03101  

faces Harry’s frightening response to  
what she began so lightly.  

Seeking something beyond the sur-  
rounding dull conformity, Elsie struggles  
to set herself free to travel on. But always  
there is that fear, central in the lives of  
women in the 1940s and 1950s (if not  
beyond), that she may never find a man.  
She determines not to be driven through  
loneliness into the blind alleys that sur-  
round her but finds herself haunted by  
the spectre of a solitary future.  

Astley offers Elsie, and the reader, a  
sampling of small town loneliness as  
background to the central conflict.  
There is Laura, for example, another  
schoolteacher, who is driven to pretend  
that the married man she is involved  
with is not a compulsive womanizer,  
congenitally unfaithful in all of his re-  
lationships. There is Elsie’s landlady,  
abandoned by her husband, sewing all  
week to earn her living and cooking  

Sunday dinners for her father-in-law. So  
powerful is the physical setting that it  
comes close to being a character as well,  
working inexorably on the human lives  
it envelops — the unbearable sweating  
heat, the floods that turn “backyards”  
into “lakes,” and the houses perched on  
stilts that look like “swamp birds.”  

Although sometimes Astley sum-  
marizes rather than develops, her hero-  
ine engages the reader in her carefully  
defined exploration of departure — the  
banal goodbyes, the savoring of last  
looks, the finality of endings. Readers  
already familiar with the larger and  
darker complexities of Astley’s later  
works will find in the novel a lighter side  
of this rewarding author. For new read-  
ers, Girl with a Monkey provides a pleas-  
urable introduction.  

—Phyllis Fahrie Edelson  

Mutuwhenua, The Moon Sleeps, by Patricia Grace. New York: Penguin Books,  

1986, $4.95, 155 pp. (PB)  

The Dream Sleepers and Other Stories, by Patricia Grace. New York: Penguin Books,  

1980, $4.95, 106 pp. (PB)  

Electric City and Other Stories, by Patricia Grace. New York: Penguin Books, 1987,  

$5.95, 97 pp. (PB)  
by Eleanor J. Bader  

Patricia Grace is a masterful  

writer, a Maori New Zealander  

whose words are to be savored and  
slowly digested. Lyrical and deceptively  
simple, her writing conveys soaring  
emotions wrapped in working-class,  
indigenous sensibilities. From the ban-  
tering of children on a fishing expedition  
to the aging process, from wife beating  
to the pros and cons of assimilation,  
Grace’s work touches universal themes,  
yet her subject matter has a rare fresh-  
ness to it, thanks to her observant eye  
and uncanny knack for describing the  
minute realities of day-to-day life. Her  
stories are compelling, raw.  

Take teenaged Star, a young girl  
whose academic prowess has pushed her  
into a special program for the gifted. In  
“Letters from Whetu” (“star” in Maori),  
a short story in The Dream Sleepers, class  
and race are confronted head on. “I  
sometimes do a bit of a stir with Fisher,  
like I say yous’ instead of you. It always  
sends her purple . . . What lengths I go  
to, it’s really pathetic. I mean, she’s  
okay, but I’m a bit sick of being her hon-  
ourable statistic, her minority person  
making it.” Later, the adolescent ex-  
presses her ambivalence about staying in  
school: “Slitting the throat of a sheep  
and hanging it up kicking seems to be a  
real thing, and even though it’s some-  
thing you can do and I can’t, I still want  
to know about it... I know it must  
sometimes be all right to have blood on  
your hands. Or if not blood then dirt, or  
shit — on the outside where you can see  
it. You see I’ve got this bad idea that I’m  
sitting here storing all the muck up-  
inside me, getting slowly but surely shit-  
tidden.”  

Being Maori in a predominantly  
Pakeha (white, European) world is a  
theme that winds through much of  
Grace’s work, a river of mixed emotions  
that provides an undercurrent of uneasi-  
ness in the people she has created. Is as-  
similation always bad? Are all white  
people the enemy, to be feared and  
avoided? Are the old ways the only  
ways, or even the best ways? Questions  
largely without answers, making us  
think, making us pause in our hustle and  
bustle.  

An old man in “Journey” (from The  
Dream Sleepers) is seen trying to recon-  
cile urban development with respect for  
the land. “Couldn’t talk to a hill or a  
tree, these people . . . Couldn’t go  
round, only through. Couldn’t give life,  

only death. But people had to have  
houses and ways of getting from one  
place to another. A man had to eat.  
People had to have houses, had to eat,  
had to get from here to there — anyone  
knew that.”  

But Grace’s acuity is visible in areas  
other than race and class as well, from  
her humorous look at childhood terrors  
to the many manifestations of sexism.  
One particularly sparse story, “The Ge-  
ranium” (in Electric City and Other Sto-  
ries), wastes no words in describing the  
agony of a battered wife and mother,  
whose only joy, sustenance even, comes  
from slowly reading every item in the  
weekly newspaper.  

Linda, the main character in Mu-  
tuwhenua, raises troubling questions  
about how women learn sex roles. Al-  
though she chooses to marry a white  
New Zealander, breaking tradition and  
exhibiting a tenacity that is startling,  
she also falls into traps not of her own  
making. Thus, she relies on her spouse  
“to help and protect” her. Infuriating as  
it is to find such phrases in print, the  
reader is given a context for this asser-  
tion. What else could she — a poor  
Maori, daughter of a fisherman — ex-  
pect? Real life and fantasy have con-  
spired to provide her with few options.  
Women at home are respected and even  
revered, but their spheres of activity are  
well defined. Literature, a world that  
Linda relishes, also offers few role mod-  
els. “We didn’t become famous or have  
interesting or extraordinary lives of our  
own,” she says of the books she has read,  
“or even uninteresting and ordinary  
lives. We either got ourselves into what  
is known as ‘trouble,’ or we lay about  
giving some bloke hot sex. And that was  
all. Except sometimes we did ridiculous  
things in Pakeha kitchens, like ringing  
the fire-alarm instead of the dinner-gong  
because we didn’t know the difference.”  

Children are present in many of  
Grace’s short stories, giving the writing  
a spunkiness that lightens and embel-  
lishes the realities she presents. Perhaps  
their voices are what make her writing so  
precious and remarkably beautiful.  
Whatever it is, they — and the novel as  
well — are balm for the spirit and fuel for  
antiracist and antisexist activism.  

@ Eleanor J. Bader is the news editor of  
New Directions for Women and a regular  
contributor to the Guardian Newsweekly.  

Belles Lettres © 7