clocks  
LP &  
oat  

3  
3  
°  

by Deborah Price  

“THE LITERARY GROUP IN PARIS was predominantly male,"  
George Plimpton recalls of the Paris Review’s fledgling  
years. "I think that was because of the auspices upon which  
a lot of them were there, namely the military."  

Yet even in the 1950s, women took on important roles at  
the magazine, including managing editor, and today the  
masthead boasts Deborah Pease as publisher and numerous  
other women as editors. "They’ve been substantially in-  
volved with the success of this magazine," Plimpton, the  
editor-in-chief, said in a recent interview.  

The Review, founded in 1953 in Paris, has become  
synonymous with the publication of early work of those  
destined to be acclaimed writers. Of women, the Review’s  
list includes Mona Simpson, Susan Minot, and Joy Wil-  
liams. "Those meant a lot to us because the Review was  
where they were first published," Plimpton says. Other  
well-known women whose work has been published in the  
Paris Review include Adrienne Rich, Erica Jong, and Anne  
Sexton.  

"The idea of a literary magazine being sexist one way or  
the other just isn’t in the cards," Plimpton says. “You sit  
there and hope that people will come and help you; that the  
manuscript you open up is a good one, whether it’s written  
by somebody called Louisa or Louis."  

Plimpton recently waded through more than thirty-five  
years of writing published by the magazine to compile an  
anthology. In the resulting collection, The Paris Review  
Anthology (Norton, 1990, $25, 645 pp.), only about twenty  
percent of the writing is by women. But what is lacking in  
quantity is found in quality, as the works by women are  
uniformly superb and memorable. They include:  
© "Classified Ad" by poet Kate Ellen Braverman, who  
poignantly compressed the lonely life of a female teacher  
into an entry in a personal column. The clipped lines and  
simplistic language emphasize the teacher’s dull life: “I  
embroider, I sing./I am punctual and clean." But her pas-  
sion, her dream, is "to love a blue-eyed man/and have blue-  
eyed babies,/sleek and smooth as cats."  
© "The Poet of Ignorance” by Anne Sexton, who is pre-  
dictably dark and brilliant. Her problem, she reveals, is:  

There is an animal inside me,  

clutching fast to my heart,  

a huge crab.  

The doctors of Boston  

have thrown up their hands.  

They have tried scalpels,  

needles, poison games and the like.  

The crab remains.  

It is a great weight.  

I try to forget it, go about my business,  

cook the broccoli, open and shut books,  

brush my teeth and tie my shoes.  

I have tried prayer  

but as I pray the crab grips harder  

and the pain enlarges.  
© "Television," a brief poem by Ann Stevenson that sug-  
gests a similar self-loathing and battered female psyche:  

Hug me, mother of noise,  

Find me a hiding place.  

I am afraid of my voice.  

I do not like my face.  
© "You Leave Them," a moving short story by Mona  
Simpson. The writer captures the painfully close relationship  
between a mother and daughter in a series of tense scenes as  
the two travel to Hollywood with little more than dreams of  
the girl becoming a television star. The writing is excep-  
tional, as Simpson weaves between the two, whose age and  
responsibilities create an almost unconquerable gap.  
© "What I Did Last Summer," an unassuming account by  
Betty Eppes of meeting J.D. Salinger. This is my favorite  
selection. Eppes reminds me of the indefatigable Miami  
Herald reporter Edna Buchanan. She not only persuaded  
Salinger to meet, but hid a tape recorder inside her blouse  
sleeve and managed to have enough composure after their  
conversation to track the recluse down in town and snap a  
few photographs (which are included). After her article ap-  
peared, she too became the object of much curiosity:  

I have an accordion-file stuffed with job offers, letters,  
requests ... people seemed to come out of the woodwork  
wanting things from me. There were two motion-picture  
companies who tried to get me to go back up there to con-  
vince Salinger to make a movie! In a way I guess it was a  
kind of education about what Mr. Salinger had gone through  
himself and what had turned him into the kind of person I  
found.  

© "Great Moments in Literature," a series of storyboards  
illustrated by Roz Chast, a New Yorker cartoonist. The