Eye with “Quiet as it is kept.” Alice  
Walker’s The Color Purple starts “I can’t  
tell anybody but you God.” I think that  
this is a theme in women’s writing:  
“How can I break silence?” Also there  
are great taboos in the tribe, family  
secrets, skeletons in a closet. But there is  
the dilemma for the writer: “I am a  
writer, I am a person who must tell.”  
There is the struggle of how to find the  
voice when everyone conspires and or-  
ders you to put all these things away.  

How did your family react to the disclosing  
of community secrets in The Woman War-  
rior? Was it difficult for you to take respon-  
sibility for breaking a tradition of silence?  

At first I said to myself: “I must write  
this.” Then I tried to fool myself by  
thinking that I didn’t have to publish it.  
I even started thinking that the work  
could be published after my death, and  
then everything would be fine. All of  
that was fooling myself so that I could  
keep going. Then I did publish it, think-  
ing that it was only in English and there-  
fore my parents and most of their friends  
would not be able to read it. When it  
was published in Chinese, I felt very  
much afraid. Some people read one  
chapter and didn’t continue, feeling that  
it was too horrible. So they never saw  
that in The Woman Warrior there is a  
reconciliation of beauty.  

However, I’ve been very surprised at  
the reaction of some of the people that  
were in the book. Even recently the  
nephew of Crazy Mary wrote to me  
saying that he was so glad about the  
compassion that I have shown writing  
about his aunt, that when he read the  
book he understood his family better.  
The novel as a form pushes you towards  
reconciliation. You look at the most hor-  
rible things that you know about life and  
the form itself says that you must under-  
stand. You make others understand, and  
the whole experience takes the form of  
true love. I think that this is why people  
say that there is compassion; it is the  
same as understanding.  

The reaction among Chinese-American  
women with respect to The Woman War-  
rior has been diverse. Some question the ac-  
curacy of the work, if it is considered an  
autobiography.  

I think the reaction on the part of the  
men has been much worse because the  
women have ended up being very sup-  
portive, but the men haven’t. I think it  
is the same problem with the Black  
women writers and the Chicana writers.  
Men would prefer that women don’t  
write.  

Why do you think the Chinese-American  
women are writing more than the men?  

I don’t know! Some say that women’s  
brains are better developed verbally.  

Chinese-American literature is growing  
now, although there is a literary tradition  
that precedes the present generation of  

Foreign All Your Life (continued from page 9)  

Ironically, language itself becomes an  
anomaly in “Drowning in My Own Lan-  
guage.”  

the open half  
of me is sinking on a small  
land mass into the sea  

as I watch rows  

of animated people in  
white suits  

converse on dry  

land inches away without seeing  

me single-handed  

Sinking, the “I” calls out “tas-keh-  
tehhh” (the Japanese word for “help”)  

Winter 1989  

writers. Do you see an evolution from the  
former literary tradition, for instance from  
the writing of Jade Snow Wong?  

I am not sure that I got help from a  
former generation of Chinese-American  
writers except for Jade Snow Wong; ac-  
tually her book was the only available  
one. Our education was on British and  
American literature. As far as Chinese  
literature is concerned, I think I was  
very lucky to have parents who were  
literate and would read stories to us. By  
hearing them, I was immediately trying  
to find a brand new voice. I thought,  
though, that I was working from noth-  
ing. The new Chinese-American litera-  
ture has emerged with the interest in  
ethnic studies since the 1960s, but by  
that time I was already writing.  

Toni Morrison says that she is writing  
the books she wanted to read; well, it’s  
the same thing with me. We didn’t have  
the help; we invented everything. There  
were hardly any characters that looked  
like us. For a while I was teaching at a  
school where there were Asian-  
American people, mostly Japanese, and  
in their essays they wrote always about  
blonde, blue-eyed women. They did not  
have models because they didn’t see  
people that looked like them on  
television; and of course, they didn’t  
read. Their models were archetypes,  
stereotypes that had nothing to do with  
themselves; and of course, the stories  
were very bad. They were stories about  
people they didn’t know anything about.  

In some of her writing, Jade Snow Wong  
uses the third person narrator as a sign of  
modesty. Was it troublesome for you to  
decide which person to write in?  

I thought I should have the trouble!  
[She laughs.] It seems so normal for me  
to write in the first person, in fact I  
thought there was something wrong with  
me, that I was so selfish, so egomaniacal  
that I couldn’t write in any other way.  

me”) but they cannot hear her. And  
even “hellllllI[lIlpp” is somehow “still /  
wrong language.” But someday, “I will  
come up for air / in another language/ all  
my own.”  

Mitsuye Yamada and Hisaye  
Yamamoto have indeed found their own  
language in tongues that both success-  
fully express their own Japanese-  
American experience and convey some  
of that experience to us. Being foreign  
while on holiday is a temporary incon-  
venience, but being foreign all your life  
is a strange and often painful exile.  

@ Scarlet Cheng, a picture editor at  
Time-Life Books, writes on film, art, and  
culture for The Washington Post and Rice  
Magazine.  

I’m just now learning to write in the  
third person.  

Do you see any common trends in the  
Chinese-American literature that is being  
produced now?  

Yes, there is a very close look at what  
remains, a willingness to say that there is  
a Chinese culture that remains. We  
wonder whether we have anything to do  
with what is going on in Asia at all. Peo-  
ple question whether there is something  
specifically American, but also there is  
this wish to treasure every little piece  
that’s left. We tend to use images that  
are Chinese because there is a sense that  
all has gone away, that all is going to be  
washed out. People are treasuring old  
people, and that gets it right back where  
it used to be. [Laughs.] There is a lot of  
anger and dismay towards ourselves for  
letting it disappear.  

One trend in the work of Black American  
women writers is to bring in historical  
women. Is there a similar tendency in  
Chinese-American writing?  

Yes, yes. This is happening here too;  
trying to find who the heroines were.  

Do you see an evolution in your work?  

Well, the language in The Woman  
Warrior, now that I look at it, seems to  
be very stilted and complicated. It was  
because I was trying to find a language  
for a very complicated story. As I worked  
into China Men, my goal was to have a  
very lucid language so that people did  
not have to stumble with the words. I  
wanted it to be very clear, like glass, that  
people could look through the language  
into the story. I find China Men a better  

More Than the Basics (continued from page 9)  

Revolution, through the eyes of Duanli,  
a mother of three used to a life of  
privilege and comfort. The Revolution is  
a shock to her and her class. Strangers  
move into the first story of their house;  
property is appropriated by revolutionary  
committees. Struggling to make ends  
meet, she resorts to selling off old  
clothes, to selling household furniture,  
to babysitting at home and, finally, to  
getting a factory job. Although fortune is  
eventually restored, the widening world  
has left its lasting mark on Duanli’s con-  
sciousness (we hope).  

These stories provide unique insight  
into the workings of modern Chinese  
society with its many social problems,  
marital discord, neighborhood squabbles,  
and continuing class warfare, in addition  
to “the basics.” Wang Anyi does reaffirm  
that generosity, compassion, and the  
Chinese humor can survive all that.  
However, although the physical features  
of this world fascinate, the writing too  

written book than The Woman Warrior.  
I think that the language in China Men  
doesn’t call attention to itself, whereas  
in The Woman Warrior it seems that I  
keep saying “look at my language.”  

For the book I am writing now, I feel  
that I wanted to free myself from being  
constrained, and I wanted to use another  
voice of mine which is very modern,  
very slangy, a hip 1960s language, which  
I love. So I’m doing a very modern, dif-  
ferent voice. I also move from first per-  
son to third person, moving out to see  
more, understanding other people,  
seeing them rather than myself. I am  
getting great joy writing about people  
who are completely different.  

Also, the shape of the book is dif-  
ferent. When I started writing The  
Woman Warrior I didn’t think I could  
write a long book, so I did the five inter-  
locking pieces and each one was like a  
short story or an essay. I know the book  
has a very complex form but all there is  
is trying to take small parts and doing a  
mosaic with it. All I could do then was  
small pieces. China Men differed in that  
there I would have a myth and then a  
modern story and then a myth, because I  
was trying to see what myths have to do  
with lives today; and since usually they  
don’t have much to do, [she laughs] they  
got separated. I think that the book that  
I am writing today has a coherent long,  
long [laughs] structure. It is not jumping  
back and forth; it has a chronological  
order without rising action and climax at  
the end. I think I found an ending this  
time.  

Also, when people read The Woman  
Warrior they think that they learn some  
Chinese, but actually I use very little. I  
always translate; I always figure out a  
way to find the equivalent. In my new  
book, I am using the most modern slang;  
for some reason, it gives me lots of room.  
Sometimes I put passages of straight  
Chinese without translating it. It makes  
me feel very good about the looseness of  
modern American language that allows  
everything to come in. And, you know,  
all there is, is that that’s the way life is.  
There is nothing artificial about it; it is  
not that the writer thinks it should  
sound beautiful but that the people  
around you speak like that.  

So I think that in writing a book that  
has a lot of slang I come closer to the  
way people talk than the way they do in  
The Woman Warrior. I guess The Woman  
Warrior is an “I” book, it is the voices  
that I hear inside myself; whereas, in my  
new book it is the voices that I hear  
around me.  

@ Angeles Carabi teaches American  
literature at the University of Barcelona;  
her interview with Toni Morrison appeared  
in our July 1988 issue.  

often approaches reportage and lacks  
emotion and depth. The title story  
seems especially bogged down in an ex-  
cess of quotidian detail: we are told  
down to the last fen (a Chinese cent)  
what the household expenses are.  

In reviewing the last New York Film  
Festival, critic Vincent Canby argued  
that movies from emerging nations tend  
to be more about societies than about  
individuals. This strikes me as the key  
failure of Lapse of Time. The stories are  
so preoccupied with the mechanics of  
group survival and interaction that they  
often seem impersonal.  

It is when we get glimpses into real  
individual emotions and motivations,  
even the wistful teenage girl longing for  
an impossible lover in “And the Rain  
Patters On,” that the stories come alive.  
This literary uptightness is also the by-  
product of decades of cultural repression  
under totalitarianism, so it may be some  
time before Chinese fiction finds its  
voice. Let us hope that glasnost will seep  
behind the Bamboo Curtain, too.  

Belles Lettres @ 11