Catherine Parke Speaks With Top Stories Editor Anne Turyn

A cluttered room on the second floor of a Chelsea storefront is the home of Top Stories Press and its editor, Anne Turyn. Turyn, who is also a writer and professional photographer, says her aim is to publish quality prose fiction that, because of its offbeat, experimental nature, might not have a chance in the trade books marketplace. Over the past nine years, Turyn has published fiction that makes a cumulative postmodern feminist literary and political statement. In the world of Kathy Acker’s New York City in 1979 (Top Stories #9), a world inhabited by prostitutes and lesbians, the new feminism is pictured as a guerilla conspiracy among these women. In their street-smart ways, they have long ago figured out that language is political. The so-called world is always someone’s world, and thereby not the world belonging to and run by someone else. The new underground feminism of street women who look back on Gloria Steinem and Ti-Grace as being “so straight” adopts as its credo going to “as many extremes as possible.” Valuing above all else “anything that destroys limits,” they use language as violently as they live.

Janet Stein’s Shattered Romance (Top Stories #12) exposes the fallacy that romance and art are private, aesthetic, apolitical experiences. Exploiting the genre of the comic book romance, Stein narrates the decline of art and romantic love into symbols of late 20th-century capitalism. Art and romance have become merely forms of property and measures of power. Stein’s knockabout cartoon strips portray a world of violence and melodrama where women turn the tables on men: Prostitutes decide to make a business of killing their male clients, and two nurses at a welfare clinic plot to castrate the male gynecologist. Stein gives us a black comic view of the world of shattered romance from the perspective of women who have begun, with a vengeance, to pick up the pieces.

Real Family Stories (Top Stories #13) by Turyn is a half-joking, half-serious inquiry: “What is this thing we call ‘the family?’” The narrative weaves in and out of a series of photographs, resonant with the kind of trivial but familiar details of family life found in every household’s photo album: a woman about to step into her motor home, a little girl adjusting her costume before a tap dance recital, people sitting at the dinner table and lying on the beach, someone stretched out on a sofa with the dog, another blowing out the candles on a birthday cake. Although we have never seen these people before, we somehow already know them. We have snapped their pictures or posed for the ones they took of us. And yet at the same time, as these photographs accumulate, they begin to render strange this thing we call “family.” These scenes we know so well begin to seem mysterious and obscure, as if they were happening to some other race on some other planet. “All families have strange stories,” one of the unnamed speakers observes. Real Family Stories invites us to join in making up strange stories to go with its pictures and perhaps even add a few from our own family albums.

Among my favorites is Top Stories #10, Lynne Tillman’s Living with Contradictions, with illustrations by Jane Dickson. It tells the story of Julie and Joe who live in a modern “feudal relationship.” Victims of the contemporary loss of intimacy (“Intimacy,” the narrator observes, “is something people used to talk about before commercials”), they live literally at odd angles to one another. Dickson’s illustrations of Julie and Joe picture their life as an existence of awkward contiguity and juxtaposition. They never look directly at one another; they never quite touch. As the narrator observes with post-Freudian tongue-in-cheek: “Ambivalence is just another word for love, becoming romantic about the unconscious.”

The two most recent issues are double numbers (Five, #23-24, and Tourist Attractions, #25-26). They are bonanzas, with work by 20 writers, including Tama Janowitz, Constance DeJong, Lynne Tillman, Susan Daitch, and Gary Indiana.

TOP STORIES #12

You began publishing Top Stories in 1978, and 26 numbers have now appeared. How did this one-woman press come about?

I graduated from Antioch College in art, having taken only one literature course in college because high school had ruined literature for me. Antioch has a work/study program. On one job I worked for a carnival. We stopped in Toronto on tour and I ran into a small press there, the Coach House Press. I saw their books, got their catalogs, and was very impressed. I started thinking about how I was going to be graduating in a year, about having to support myself — not working in the cafeteria anymore! I thought, well, an honorable way to earn money would be in the book business. The next year I moved to Buffalo and began studying photography and reading around to find people I liked.

Which writers impressed you then?

Christine Brooke-Rose, Walter Abish, and Ursule Molinaro. Meanwhile I went to Europe and came back to go to school at Buffalo. I took writing classes with Abish and Federman, got my MFA, and became more involved with Hallwalls (Art Space), eventually becoming one of their program organizers in 1978. About this time, one of the women in our printing class, Ann Rosen, bought a press and began printing. It was a little quick-copy press. She ended up doing really extraordinary, very exact work. That undertaking was important because it showed me what you can do if you try for quality on a small budget. I'd heard about people starting presses, but actually to see one makes a real difference. By the end of 1978, starting a press was what I wanted to do.

Were there other small press publications that influenced you?

I had seen the Black Sparrow pamphlets for 50 cents, and Treacle had had a few books out about that time, which I liked very much. So I started thinking in terms of making available in small, inexpensive, booklet form the kind of writing that I liked and that seemed so hard to find, more of a booklet than the Black Sparrow but cheap like that, a periodical devoted to new writing, one author per issue. So I went to the Director of Hallwalls and asked if there was any money for a magazine. He said if I would take over the writing program, I could do the magazine. I got out the first three issues of Top Stories on the money he gave me. It turned out to be my salary, too. I decided to start with Donna Wyszomierski, and Top Stories #1 came out January 1979. We just used a typewriter for the first one. Ann Rosen printed it. The following summer I asked Laurie Anderson if she would like to do an issue, and then Pati Hill. The first year our budget was $600. The printer was doing it cheap because she had charity status. By the time we published #6 we had begun to get a few grants.

The Village Voice wrote up Top Stories a few years ago. You've been mentioned in the “Books in Vogue” section, and you appeared in a New York Times piece on New York writers and publishers. You were called one “of the most innovative voices on the scene” — Does that mean you've arrived?

I don’t think so. But it does mean that some of my original ideas were realized. When I came out with the first issue by an unknown writer, I hoped that at some point, in some unfocused “future,” people would look at Top Stories as a series and that if they enjoyed some issues, they’d go back and look at others. I think that is what has “arrived.”

How about the way The Village Voice described Top Stories as “punk chic feminist.” Is that how you think of yourself?

Oh, it’s fine, though there’s no overt feminist ideology guiding my work. Nowhere does Top Stories say that it publishes only women. A lot of people don’t even notice it. I don’t know, I think the word “feminist” is a hard one. Obviously you have to define it first before you begin deciding who is one and who isn’t. But as far as Top Stories’ editorial policy goes, I'd like to keep the scales tipped in favor of women writers. It wasn’t until #6 or #7 that I realized Top Stories were all by women. That hadn’t been a conscious policy. As far as the ideology goes, I'd rather just keep Top Stories women if there’s good stuff available by women writers.

How do you find the writers you want to publish?

Now I’m receiving piles of unsolicited manuscripts, but until recently, they were all solicited. Janet Stein, for instance, came through an introduction. Her work just happened to hook up with my own at that time. I was working on a photo novel and had been doing a lot of research into comics. Jane Dickson, who had illustrated Top Stories #10, called me up and said I should go look at Janet Stein’s work, that it was funny. So I did, and I just loved it. Even though it wasn’t scheduled, I decided to do a Janet Stein number right away.

And Stein's Shattered Romance turned out to be one of your bestsellers.

I don’t really know what my bestseller is. The Laurie Anderson has sold the most copies, but it’s also been out the longest. I don’t tend to think in those terms.

Money is the bugbear of small presses. How does Top Stories come out financially?

I always stay within budget. Also, I have a commitment to keep the writers and artists I’ve already published in print. When I started Top Stories, I knew I was publishing an unknown writer in the first issue. I never questioned the fact that during the first few years the sales were only a few hundred dollars.

— continued on page 10

It is a pleasure to have Staying with Relations back in print. It reminds us once more of the fineness of Rose Macaulay’s talent, her astuteness about character, and her gift for displaying, just right, the dramatic elements of the story.

$9.50 paper

—Elizabeth Hardwick

The Ecco Press

26 West 17th Street  
New York, NY 10011

PLEASE WRITE FOR THE COMPLETE ECCO CATALOGUE

Belles Lettres @ 9