Rediscovery

Lorine Niedecker

“Between Your House and Mine”: The Letters of Lorine Niedecker to Cid Corman, 1960 to 1970, edited by Lisa Pater Faranda. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1986, $26.95, 261 pp.

From This Condensery: The Complete Writing of Lorine Niedecker, edited by Robert J. Bertholf. The Jargon Society (1000 W. 5th St., Winston-Salem, NC 27101), 1985, $30.00, 336 pp. [Distributed by Inland Book Co., 22 Hemingway Ave., East Haven, CT 06512]

by Jan Clausen

The work of Lorine Niedecker is as resolutely and fruitfully rooted in a single place as that of any other modern North American poet. Born in rural Wisconsin in 1903, Niedecker lived all her 67 years in that state, many years outside Fort Atkinson on Lake Koshkonong where her German-American father fished for a living and eventually left her a modest property. She came from a generation — and a class — of midwesterners for whom hard work and frugality were central values and to whom the everyday workings of nature usually seemed much more vivid and real than the cultural and political matters that preoccupied educated folks back east. It was not a community that expected to spawn poets or would have known what to do with one had Niedecker proclaimed herself locally; characteristically, she did not. She worked as a proofreader, later a cleaning woman. True daughter of her milieu, she never moved around much: Canada was all she knew of foreign countries. Yet alongside the striking economy of her language and scarce cash she practiced an exquisite economy of experience and might accurately have paraphrased Thoreau: “I have traveled much on Blackhawk Island.”

Niedecker did attend college briefly, worked for a time on the Federal Writers’ Project, and visited the Objectivist poet Louis Zukofsky in New York City. Much is made by her editors of his influence on her work. They also stress the importance of her later connection with Cid Corman and his magazine Origin for her sense of herself as a writer. Yet in these overwhelmingly male circles she was once again an oddity, the “poetess” of contemporaries’ patronizing praise. Her poems frequently address her anomalous position as an artist in the home community where work was physical and sex-specific, and there is considerable irony evident in her treatment of certain famous women-among-men (Abigail Adams, Mary Shelley). Yet on the topic of her own outsiderhood in the world of letters she was strangely — or strategically — inarticulate. Possibly her celebrated decision to retire from the social and literary fray represented not simply the courageous recognition of what depth of solitude her poetry demanded (though clearly this was a factor), but also the self-preservative instinct of a woman artist who lacked the temperament to contend at close range with the likes of the crabby, self-involved Zukofsky.

“Between Your House and Mine” focuses on Corman’s poems and Zukofsky’s career to an extent that probably would have deterred me from reading past page 20 were it not for the delight of many patches of pure Niedecker. These are rarely personal in tone, but some complement the poems’ chronicle of a “life by water”: “No flood at home but mud, a soft new driveway. We watched the ice go quietly out of the river (last weekend). On one small cake stood a gull, riding backwards.” Others show her mulling over the philosophical and creative problems embedded in her daily round:

Lorine Niedecker.

. . once again, somewhat caught up in things. Your life, I think, is comparatively free of things — as mine was tending before my marriage. I thought this morning as I “painted”: painting (and you paint what you love) takes away desire of possessing things. (By the way? if you’ve ever painted, wasn’t it odd the first few times to get the silence in that art after being used always to words? You are the only one who can carry over the silence into poems)

Editor Lisa Pater Faranda has heavily annotated the letters with biographical information, comments on Niedecker’s artistic development, and explanations of references to the small press poetry scene of the period. In the absence of a biography, I was grateful for the thorough research and Faranda’s empathetic, carefully considered approach to her material. I was disturbed, however, by her lack of sensitivity to feminist and class issues. For instance, she never discusses the significance of Niedecker’s choice to surround herself almost exclusively with male friends and correspondents. Al Millen, Niedecker’s non-intellectual housepainter husband, is treated as something of an embarrassment. From This Condensery contains mostly poetry, but also a few radio plays, a long short story, and appreciative pieces on Zukofsky and Corman. The prose is of minor interest, except as it illuminates her core endeavor; the poetry is unique, indispensable, and of surprisingly high overall quality for a collected edition. It has been edited with exhaustive attention to Niedecker’s penchant for perpetual revision and her habit of rearranging the order of short poems. (Ironically, this costly academic machinery is now lavished on a poet who, in her lifetime, had trouble persuading her small press publisher to send a free copy of her book to a would-be reviewer!) Alternative sequences make for a good deal of repetition; From This Condensery is wonderful, but not necessarily the best introduction to Niedecker. The Granite Pail, a selection lovingly edited by Corman and published by North Point Press, affords a more immediate grasp of the essence and evolution of her art.

That art, as she indicated in a letter, moved between two magnetic poles of inspiration, two impulses she saw as partially contradictory, the “folk impulse” and “silence”:

I wrote to LZ of the quiet and he wrote: “Cid at his quietest is the most steadily passionate of the young.”

He cites your hello in Quarry Sunday and I cite “each man an empire when he enters/a silence.” Passion in sound, noise... however, isn’t it closer to art when it’s still enough (deep enough) to become ice? .... I'm a little worried — not really, though — about my own folk impulse lost — lost? — on the way to the ice.

Throughout her writing life, but especially at the start, she delighted in making brief, highly condensed poems from “folk conversation.” One of the best examples of the effect she achieved is a piece reminiscent of William Carlos Williams’ “The Last Words of My English Grandmother,” but unmatched in its grim concision, the force with which it conveys the dying mother’s personality, and the sinister and tragic bond it establishes between matriarch and poet:

Old Mother turns blue and from us, “Don’t let my head drop to the earth. I’m blind and deaf.” Death from the heart, a thimble in her purse.

“It’s a long day since last night. Give me space. I need floors. Wash the floors, Lorine! — wash clothes! Weed!”

Some of the early work is pointedly political:

We know him — Law and Order League — fishing from our dock, testified against the pickets at the plant — owns stock.

Later she would express conventional liberal sentiments, and she wrote admirably of “J.F. Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs,” dead Adlai Stevenson, and Winston Churchill. During the Vietnam War she mentioned to Corman her concern that writers who involved themselves in protest would be deflected from poetry. What she never lost, however, was her fascination with her parents’ troubled, beautiful lives, and the sustaining “source,” the “weedy speech” that had its roots in her childhood.

The second pole of her work, stillness and depth, was what guided her increasingly throughout her last decade. Gradually she evolved a highly compact, yet more flexible, sustained form that allowed her to entertain many levels of experience in a single poem of several pages. As always she was inspired by the natural world that supplied her with nearly everything she needed: companionship, consolation, instruction, metaphor.

Rather surprisingly in light of Niedecker’s objectivist beginnings, this poetry is explicitly philosophical, both in its direct statement of certain long-pondered precepts (“O my floating life/ Do not save love/ for things/ Throw things/ to the flood”) and in its ever-present concern to comprehend the true relationships amongst individual lives, human history, and vast environmental forces. Hence her fascination with Charles Darwin, her researches into the past of the Lake Superior region, and her rhythmic reworking of early memory, until

red Mars

rising tides the sloughs and sluices of my mind with the persons on the edge

This is an austere vision: the “human bean/ . . . just up/ from swamp trouble” is not the measure of all things, not by a long shot. Yet it is far from pessimism or disillusionment. In the end, her art is not “ice,” as she drastically forecast, but “soft/ and serious — / Water.” She pulled off what she so movingly prescribed in one of her letters to Corman: “arrest it at moments into quiet, enduring love.”

Niedecker’s poetic solution to the philosophical and aesthetic problems she faced was culturally influenced, psychologically specific. It might even be said that she invented a way to harness the legendary coldness of the Northern European societies that colonized the upper Midwest, as elsewhere resourceful populations put geothermal energy to work. Her “be alone/ . . . Go home where the green bird is” will not appeal to all comers. Yet I cannot help thinking that there is some nutrition here, some kernel for poets to peck at in the snow. At a time in the history of women’s writing when the original incendiary feminist “Break the silences!” has dwindled to little more than a catchphrase, Niedecker points toward an underlying silence sorely in need of mending.

® Jan Clausen is a poet, fiction writer, and critic. Her most recent book is Sinking, Stealing (Crossing Press, 1985). She is at work on a second novel.

Belles Lettres @ 11