Drawing on History —  
Real and Imagined  

Homage To The Light, by Cynthia LeClaire. Black Swan Books Ltd. (P.O. Box 327, Redding  
Ridge, CT 06876), 1985, $6.00, 64 pp. (PB)  

Memories of the Future: The Daybooks of Tina Modotti, by Margaret Gibson. Baton Rouge:  
Louisiana State University Press, 1983, $6.95, 52 pp. (PB)  
Civil Blood, by Jill Breckenridge. Milkweed Editions (P.O. Box 24303, Minneapolis, MN  
55424), 1986, $9.50, 212 pp., engravings (PB)  

Flight Patterns, by Lisa Ress. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1985, $10.95,  
76 pp.  

by Paula Uruburu  
American poets from Anne  
Bradstreet to Sylvia Plath  

have looked at the way the  
small, sometimes homely, moments in  
their lives share what Margaret Gibson  
identifies in her new book of poems as  
the “spirit of querencia, a gazing back  
through the distance towards home.”  
This spirit permeates the works of Le-  
Claire, Gibson, Breckenridge, and Ress,  
all of whom demonstrate a facility for  
transforming personal and public history  
into poetic and remarkably controlled  
yet haunting visions of the past, pres-  
ent, and future.  

In her first collection of poetry, Hom-  
age To The Light, Cynthia LeClaire fuses  
formal address and archetypes drawn  
primarily from Greek myth with per-  
sonal, intimate emotions. In doing so,  
LeClaire succeeds in taking what the  
poet W.S. Merwin calls “the risks of art”  
in a number of finely crafted poems. Un-  
like those modern writers who seem to  
drift amid chaos and revel in their  
apocalyptic visions of the human condi-  
tion, LeClaire provides an antidote to  
the “accumulated poisons” that have  
wrenched apart and obscured the purity  
and vitality of “the parted lovers,  
Reason and Desire.” In the best of her  
poems, LeClaire’s own desire to “cele-  
brate the eternal order” reaffirms that  

amid the fiery passions of Eros that di-  
rect so much of our lives and the dark-  
ness of Thanatos that waits for us in the  
shadows, “there is something rather  
than nothing, and darkness only be-  
cause there is light.”  

Like the female figures who support  
the crumbling yet still beautifully pro-  
portioned and ordered Greek temple  
that adorns the cover of Homage To The  
Light, the verses that are the most suc-  
cessful and that unify the volume both  
emotionally and intellectually are those  
in which LeClaire speaks through vari-  
ous personae drawn from ancient myth,  
such as Sappho, Cassandra, Iphigenia,  
and Medea. LeClaire raises the crucial,  
urgent, and intimate moments of love  
and death in her characters’ lives to the  
level of the eternal and universal, al-  
ways conscious of the formal possibilities  
of poetry. Her “Sappho” exclaims:  

Fill me with your wild raspberry wine!  
Ravish me with your dark whisperings  
Fire is ever ancient, ever new;  

Morning held by Night is no less pure.  
Never have I feared your beams of light.  

Because LeClaire’s vision encompasses  
the myths and processes that are part of  
the greater eternal order of Nature, Homage  
To The Light is filled with sensual colors  
(cobalt, ochre, black, and gold) and im-  
ages of the natural world. In her “earthly  

Of Epic Proportions  

Love, Death, and the Changing of the Seasons, by Marilyn Hacker. Arbor House (235 East 45  
St., New York, NY 10017), 1987, $7.95, 212 pp. (PB)  

Fragments From the Fire: The Triangle Shirtwaist Company Fire of March 25, 1911, by  
Chris Llewellyn. New York: Penguin Books, 1987, $7.95, 70 pp. (PB)  

by Michelle M. Tokarezyk  

Women poets are increasingly  
writing collections of narra-  
tive poems that tell a story,  

much as a novel does. Marilyn Hacker  
and Chris Llewellyn have written two of  
the most outstanding books in this  
genre. Love, Death, and the Changing of  
the Seasons, Hacker’s fourth book, is  
primarily a sonnet sequence (although  
other stanzaic forms are used). It traces  
the narrator’s love affair with a younger  
woman from the initial attraction to the  
painful break-up. While the formalism  
is characteristic of Hacker’s work, the  
themes in this volume are more far-  
reaching. As its title implies, the book,  
like Shakespeare’s sonnets, suggests that  
love is a central experience that evokes  
numerous emotions, ranging from joy,  
to awareness of mortality, to jealous in-  
security.  

The ambition of Hacker’s theme per-  
haps inspires a more energetic use of  
form and language than was seen in  
earlier volumes. I was repeatedly im-  
pressed by the freshness of her imagery  
“Sweetheart,/ your body is a text I need  
the art/ to be constructed by”), her con-  
trol of the sonnet form, and the sheer  
beauty of her language (“let me lie down  
beside you as the dark/ studded by  
Broadway windows”). In short, this  
book is a stunning chronicle of a love re-  
lationship. And while it is not a politi-  
cal work, it implicitly makes a strong  
case for the power of lesbian love.  

One of Hacker’s former students,  
Chris Llewellyn, also chooses a narrative  
mode for her stunning first book, which  
won the 1986 Walt Whitman Award,  

Fragments From the Fire. Llewellyn spent  
two years researching this notorious  
sweatshop fire in which dozens of im-  
migrant women and children died, par-  
tially because their bosses, fearing union  
agitation, had locked the doors. Such  
potent material could easily be  
polemicized by a self-described labor  
poet. But Llewellyn never falls into this  
trap. Instead, she recreates the lives of  
people involved, and lets the tragedy  
speak for itself. Often the characters’  
voices are noteworthy for their under-  
statement. For example, a derelict at  
the scene of the fire says “I’d rather/ the  
dry heaves from dogcheap rotgut/ or the  
D.T.s than seeing brothers/ search for  
their sisters or/ mothers calling their  
sons.” Later, a young girl describes an  
elegant doll: “One Mamselle in ashes-  
of-roses held a pink parasol./ At her  
feet, a white batiste shirtwaist was dis-  
played./ The kind Mama made at  
Triangle. Back before the Fire.”  

Throughout the collection Llewellyn  
juxtaposes the immigrants’ dreams with  
the reality they find in American life.  
Her intent is suggested in the Biblical  
quotes that introduce each section: The  
poet is acting as prophet, alerting the  
nation to its terrible wrongs. In this  
haunting, well-crafted work Llewellyn  
certainly succeeds in prompting reflec-  
tion on the immigrant experience and  
labor movement.  

@ Michelle M. Tokarczyk, a consulting  
editor to Belles Lettres, is an assistant pro-  
fessor of English at Rutgers University and  
a poet whose work has appeared in many  
small magazines.  

world of shades,” purple clouds hang  
above the “gaudy clamor of roofs,” and  
one can see “clear to the jagged borders  
of the underworld.” “Helios,” the moon,  
and “The Ocean Pond” help define our  
existence and are the central elements  
that add the color and an “elemental”  
structure to her verses. People whose  
brains are “wet with fire” fall prey to  
their “burning desires” and “fiery loins.”  
And though in poems like “In  
Memorium Mundi” and “Moon’s La-  
ment” images of “glass tombs,” “blue  
coffins,” and “jeweled caskets” prevail,  
ultimately fruit is born out of “charred  
remains.” For LeClaire, there is a cer-  
tainty and raw power in the light that al-  
ways follows the darkness, and like her  
“Pygmalion Retold,” she convinces us in  
this volume that she “lets her soul out/  
that she might take in Eternity.”  

Like LeClaire’s volume, Margaret  
Gibson’s third book of poems, Memories  
of the Future: The Daybooks of Tina Mod-  
otti, is an imaginative, emotionally  
charged, self-conscious search for an  
equivalent for her contemporary  
thoughts and feelings about love, be-  
trayal, death, and hope in the past life  
and history of another — the beautiful  
Italian actress, photographer, and polit-  
ical activist, Tina Modotti, who died of  
a heart condition in 1942. Known only  
to a small number of cinemaphiles as an  
extra in Erich Von Stroheim’s silent film  
masterpiece Greed or as a photographer  
whose long neglected photographs can  
now be seen at the Museum of Modern  
Art in New York City, at the Philadel-  
phia Museum of Art, and several other  
institutions, Modotti is called back to  
life vividly and often poignantly in Gib-  
son’s poems.  

Having spent the greater part of her  
adulthood as a political activist — as  
the companion of Edward Weston in  
post-revolutionary Mexico in the 1920s,  
as a nurse in Madrid during the Spanish  
Civil War — Modotti would seem to be  
a fitting subject for a book (two biog-  
raphies of her were published in 1982).  
But in Memories of the Future, Gibson  
takes both the extraordinary and some-  
times prosaic facts of Modotti’s life and  
transforms them into poetry. Based on  
the daybooks that she imagines Modotti  
to have kept near the end of her life,  
Gibson envisions Modotti as a woman  
of great vitality and poetic sensibility,  
as one who possessed a penchant for in-  
trospection and who underwent a series  
of protean changes during periods of  
great political and social upheaval. Gib-  
son creates a striking volume that starts  
with shimmering memories of Modotti’s  
childhood in Friuli and ends at “Home,”  
where she realizes “None of us has time  

The Riverhouse Stories:  
How Pubah S. Queen and  
Lazy LaRue Save the World  
by Andrea Carlisle  

Illustrated by Mary Narkiewicz  

Calyx Books (P.O. Box B, Corvallis, OR  
97339), 1984, $7.95, 125 pp. (PB)  

This delightful collection of vignettes  
began as a birthday present from the au-  
thor, Andrea Carlisle, to her lover,  
Sandra. Luckily for us, and despite some  
initial reluctance on the part of an  
editor, these stories are available to all  
readers. There is something here for  
everyone: fantasy, humor, romance, and  
adventure. An adult may choose to read  
the book all at once, savoring the full  
flavor of Carlisle’s slightly eccentric  
characters. A child might enjoy hearing  
a story or two read at bedtime, along  
with an extra minute to delight in Mary  
Narkiewicz’s winsome drawings. Indeed,  
there may be too many topics and stories  
covered for Carlisle’s own good! When  
told that these stories could be read and  
enjoyed by everybody, the aforementioned  
editor promptly complained,  
“there’s no publishing category called  
everybody.”  

This anecdote fits quite nicely into a  
discussion of the book’s main characters.  
Pubah S. Queen, electrician cum frus-  
trated inventor, and her lady love Lazy  
LaRue, writer and sometime tax credit  
analyst, embrace (literally if they could)  
just about everyone and everything that  
comes their way. These stories deal with,  
quite simply, their love of life, good  
friends, and most of all each other. The  
following passage, typical of Carlisle’s  
style, so simple yet so full, elaborates on  
the latter topic: “Lazy loved Pubah and  
loved loving her. Out past the edges of  
the world’s agreement, beyond even her  
own standards, her own approval, the  
rules of her childhood, beyond even her  
own mind, she loved her and loved lov-  
ing her.”  

This is just one sample of a book full  
of the joy of just living. Carlisle has  
drawn her characters with much detail  
and a lot of care. Let us hope that just  
because it defies categories this gem of a  
book will not be overlooked by dis-  
criminating readers.  

— Nancy J. Seeger  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987