Humor, Poignancy, and Intrigue:

The Fiction of Elizabeth Jolley

Woman in a Lampshade. Australia: Penguin Books, 1983, $6.95, 229 pp. (PB)  
The Well. Australia: Penguin Books, 1987, $16.95, 176 pp. (PB)  

The Newspaper of Claremont Street. New York: Viking, 1987, $14.95, 116 pp.  
Palomino. New York: Persea Books, 1987, $15.95, 260 pp.  

Stories. New York: Viking, 1988, $17.95, 312 pp.  

by Suzanne Scott  

Elizabeth Jolley, a prolific and  

compelling Australian writer,  

only recently has begun to receive  
the recognition in this country that she  
enjoys in her own. A storyteller of the  
first order, Jolley uses themes familiar in  
the works of twentieth-century authors  
— in particular, those of isolation and  
exile — in refreshingly new ways. Her  
novels and short stories are often marked  
by shocking, dramatic events, creating  
suspense that mounts for the reader as  
the consequences of the events rever-  
berate through her characters’ lives. Her  
books are almost impossible to put  
down, and they leave the reader hungry  
to discuss them with someone.  

To find writers with whom to com-  
pare Jolley’s work is difficult, because no  
one is quite like her. Her richly original  
characters, her irreverent sense of hu-  
mor, and her sometimes grotesque  
plotlines are reminiscent of Southern  
writers, especially Flannery O’Connor  
and Carson McCullers. But the similari-  
ties are superficial. O’Connor and  
McCullers could not operate in Jolley’s  
moral terrain — a harsh, spare landscape  
in which good and evil give way to a  
welter of variations between them and in  
which redeeming insight is rarely given  
to anyone, not even to outsiders.  

Jolley’s characters are exiles, isolated  
in some sense from the communities in  
which they live or work. The principal  
characters are nearly always lonely  
women, disenfranchised and obsessed  
with some need — for love, land, com-  
munity. In her longer works, such as The  
Well and Palomino, Jolley dissects the  
deep pain and tragedy that can grow  
from obsessive love. In shorter novels,  
such as The Newspaper of Claremont  
Street, and in her collection of short sto-  
ries, however, Jolley finds mostly humor  
— albeit black humor — in human ec-  
centricity and need.  

Both The Well and Palomino are inti-  
mate portraits of obsessive love by a  
lonely, isolated, mature woman for a  
younger one who comes under her care.  
In The Well (a winner of Australia’s  
prestigious Miles Franklin Award),  
Hester Harper, a lonely, single woman,  
cherishes her companion, Katherine,  
whom she took in as a young orphan.  
Hester’s brooding, solicitous love shel-  
ters Katherine, who in many respects  
seems oblivious of her crucial impor-  
tance in Hester’s life.  

The obsession to protect Katherine is  
at the heart of the novel’s dramatic inci-  
dents. As the novel opens, the women  
are returning to their farmhouse from a  
party that Hester had attended only for  
Katherine’s sake. Hester lets Katherine  
drive home; on the way, she hits some-  
thing on the railroad tracks near their  
farm. “ ‘Turn off the lights,’ [Hester]  
says. ‘We don’t know if there’s anybody  
on the track.’ And then in a trembling  
low voice she calls softly, ‘It’s not a roo,  
Katherine. It’s not a roo. Don’t come  
out, it’s too horrible.’ ” Hester’s obses-  
sion with keeping Katherine with her  
drives her to cover up the accident — an  
act that, ironically, shatters the illusions  
of safety and security both require to su-  
stain their tenuous bond.  

Jolley builds her characters from the  
inside out to reveal their strange and  
mysterious makeups. For Hester’s psy-  
chological portrait, Jolley uses one of her  
characteristic techniques — the flash-  
back. Hester’s isolation, we learn, is the  
self-isolation of the tragically disap-  

pointed. As a young girl, her attach-  
ment to her governess, Hilde, and to the  
happy times they shared were shattered  
by Hilde’s miscarriage of the baby of  
Hester’s father. Hilde is whisked away in  
the early morning hours, never to be  
seen again. When Hester’s father ex-  
plains that she will go to boarding school  
and that she might be lonely at first,  
Hester realizes that even in Hilde’s terri-  
ble pain, she must have communicated  
that thought to her father. “He would  
never have thought about it himself but  
Hilde, thinking as usual about Hester,  
gave him gentle words to pass on.”  

The tenderness of Hester toward  
Katherine and her almost frantic need to  
keep Katherine with her are more clearly  
understood through such flashbacks.  
Despite the dramatic plot with stark in-  
cidents that border on madness, Jolley’s  
techniques lend the characters an almost  
frightening psychological reality.  

The relationship at the heart of The  
Well is similar to that which forms the  
core of Palomino, first published in Aus-  
tralia in 1980. Here the lover is Laura, a  
fiftyish gynecologist barred from prac-  
ticing her profession; the beloved is  
Andrea, a young woman caught in the  
grip of an incestuous love for her now-  
married brother. The incidents in  
Palomino are even more lurid and im-  
probable on the surface than those of  
The Well. Andrea turns out to be the  
daughter of a woman for whom Laura  
had an unrequited passion twenty years  
earlier, and the daughter, like her  
mother, is unhappily pregnant. The  
violence of dammed-up love is more at  
the surface here, when we find that  
Laura had been stripped of her cre-  
dentials and sent to jail because she  
murdered a colleague for whom she had  
cherished a long, unspoken, impossible  
passion.  

The ardent affection between Laura  
and Andrea quickly erupts in an intense  
physical relationship, the depth of  
which surprises both women. Jolley’s  
daring use of shifting points of view re-  
veals the inner processes of each woman  
as she puzzles out the meaning of the re-  
lationship and the effect it may have on  
the burden of guilt, suffering, and past  
love she brings to it. Jolley’s style in  
Palomino is fluid and emotional, yet not  
sentimental. For example, Laura recalls  
the night she drove Andrea home with  
her after they meet — for a second time  
— at a dinner party.  

I can’t believe she is really here  
with me. ... I suppose I ought to  
feel tired but I don’t. She must be  
tired. During the long drive she  
slept, sometimes she leaned, as she  
slept, lightly against me. I wanted  
to protect her. I felt so much fond-  
ness for her. It seemed like a fore-  
taste of even greater happiness than  
that secret joy of being beside  
someone you love while she is  
asleep. Perhaps this is really “the  
secret bliss the lover knows.”  

This timeless bliss gives way to  
revelations of past and present  
circumstances, renunciation  
eventually becomes the only path  
available to either woman. Each returns  
to her separate exile for reasons that  
emphatically affirm that love does not  
conquer all. Ultimately, Palomino seems  
the most painful and dispirited of Jolley’s  
works, the one in which self-isolation  
appears to be a choice that, once made,  
cannot be unmade.  
In most of her other writing, Jolley  
takes a far less bleak view of what lies in  
store when the isolated reach out to  

July/August 1988  

Elizabeth Jolley: “I do see a ridiculous side  
in human nature because I don’t think we  

can live without it; and if I’ve portrayed that,  

it isn’t out of cruelty, it is just that I think it  
helps us to get through.” Photo by Tania  

Young.  

make their dreamed-of connections  
real. Woman in a Lampshade is a collec-  
tion of short stories in which the reader  
constantly expects a sad outcome and  
repeatedly is fooled. The opening story,  
“Pear Tree Dance,” features a gossip  
known to all as the Newspaper of Clar-  
emont Street — Weekly for short.  
Weekly, a cleaning woman with hands  
“rough like nutmeg graters,” knows  
everything about everyone. But no one  
knows anything about Weekly. A car is  
her only possession; as she goes from  
house to house cleaning, she dreams of  
someday having a tiny piece of land of  
her own. Finally, after saving her mon-  
ey, she has enough to buy some land —  
five unpromising acres, forty miles from  
the town, with nothing on them but a  
tin shack for tools. Weekly buys it with-  
out seeing inside the shack.  

Naturally, the reader fully expects  
her to be disappointed in her purchase  
before the story ends. But in an ironic  
twist, when Weekly reaches her land  
after work that day, she discovers that  
the little, tin building, while certainly  
no palace, is much more than a tool  
shack. “After having nothing, she  
seemed now to have everything, a bed,  
table, chairs, and a kitchen, a wood  
stove and two toasting forks, a kettle and  
five flat irons. There was a painted cup-  
board too, and someone had made cur-  
tains of pale-blue stuff patterned with  
roses.”  

Jolley repeatedly plays with the  
reader’s expectations in this collection  
of stories. In “Wednesdays and Fridays,”  
an irritated landlady writes a series of  
letters each Wednesday and Friday to  
her impossible boarder, Mr. Morgan.  
After a while, however, we learn that  
the boarder is the woman’s spoiled son  
who lives with her, does not have a job,  
will not pay her any rent, keeps an out-  
board motor in her room, brings his girl-  
friend Pearl around for meals (and  
sleep-overs), and makes up to his  
mother by sending her flowers and choc-  
olates that her charge accounts pay for.  
The irony Jolley treats us to is the eternal  
ambivalence of maternal ire.  

Donald, No more presents please.  
You know I never use lipsticks and  
certainly never a phosphorescent  
one. You must be off your brain.  
Though I suppose there is always a  
first time.  

Your loving landlady,  

Mabel Doris Morgan  

The title story, “Woman in a Lamp-  
shade,” juxtaposes an eccentric writer's  
creation of a story with the weird hap-  
penings of the moment. Jasmine  
Tredwell, married to an emeritus profes-  
sor of neo-Byzantine art who listens to  
Mahler through headphones, picks up a  
young male hitchhiker on her way to the  
farm where she seeks solitude for writ-  
ing. The unlikely couple share a bed but  
not in the usual way. She dons a lamp-  
shade and holds the typewriter on her  
lap to write as he tries to sleep. “[The  
lampshade] was light and it fitted her  
perfectly. It was like a garden-party hat  
only more foolish because it was, after  
all, a lampshade. To wear the lamp-  
shade suggested the dangerous and exot-  
ic while still sheltered under a cozy do-  
mesticity.” The actions of the story Jas-  
mine is writing parallel her interaction  
with the young man. In fact, Jasmine  
seems to confuse the young man in her  
story with the young man she took to her  
farm. Ultimately, she abandons both.  

The Newspaper of Claremont Street, a  
novel expanding the story of Weekly in  
the collection Woman in a Lampshade, is  
Jolley at her wittiest and most macabre.  
Jolley provides added insight into the  
character Weekly by taking the reader  
back to her childhood and introducing  
Weekly’s mother, who had cleaned  
houses for thirty years and had been sent  
to prison for stealing — a crime moti-  
vated by her desire to give her spoiled  
son Victor everything he wanted.  

Stories, Jolley’s most recently pub-  

lished book in this country, is  

actually two collections of short  
stories: “Five Acre Virgin” and “The  
Travelling Entertainer.” Here Jolley’s  
irony is strongly reminiscent of Flannery  
O’Connor — a sharp-pointed knife to  
peel away social pretension and a knife  
with which her needy characters inflict  
wounds on themselves. In the first story,  
“Another Holiday for the Prince,”  
another mother with a spoiled son comes  
to a less happy end than do the mother in  
“Wednesdays and Fridays” and Weekly’s  
mother. Here Jolley tells the story from  
the daughter’s point of view, capturing  
both the language and the spirit of the  
youngster. “My mother always called  
him the Prince, she worried about him  
all the time. I couldn’t think why. He  
was only my brother and a drop-out at  
that. Dropped out from school and then  
dropping in and out of one job after  
another sometimes not even staying  
long enough in one place to get his pay.”  
In this story, the mother ends up going  
to jail for “borrowing” a car from the lady  
for whom she works. She wanted to take  
the ungrateful, unmotivated Prince to  
the beach.  

In the second section of Stories, “The  
Long Distant Lecture” is a hilarious  
first-person story from a man’s view-  
point. The reader rides the wave of his  
stream of consciousness as he travels —  
and gets lost — on his way to present a  
lecture about how certain writers ap-  
proach death. “That death is a part of  
living I find unquestionable, and keep-  
ing one hand on the skull, like St.  
Jerome, has become a part of my life.  
There is to me a strange fascination  
about the ways in which the writer  
presents the long illness and subsequent  
death. My lecture is called ‘The Death-  
bed and the Chaise Lounge.’ ” Through  
the man’s thoughts, Jolley pokes fun at  
the pretension of artsy types: “The din-  
ner party seemed to go on forever last  
night with people trying to outwit one  
another through literature and music,  
nodding heads and waving hands.”  

Stories’ finale, “Self Portrait,” is un-  
like any of the other pieces in the collec-  
tion — a direct account of Jolley’s own  
life and the events that influenced her  
writing. In this moving piece, “A Child  
Went Forth,” Jolley reveals her own  
experiences of exile. “At the age of  
eleven I was sent with my father’s reluc-  
tant permission to a Quaker boarding  
school in rural Oxfordshire. Being  
brought up as a Quaker is not the same as  
being a Quaker by birth. I was an exile  
on the edge of the Birthright Quakers.”  

Jolley turns those experiences of ex-  
clusion into powerful works of art. Her  
ideas, characters, and storylines make  
the reader’s mind hum for days after the  
books are finished. A large part of the  
pleasure of reading Jolley is responding  
to how she continually rethinks her ob-  
sessions, looking at them from yet  
another original, unforgettable angle.  

© Suzanne Scott is a writer and critic in  
Washington, D.C.  

Belles Lettres @ 3