Belles Lettres Interview

Asked how she feels about winning a Pulitzer Prize, Alison Lurie responds: “For a minute you're Kellogg’s Corn Flakes... People are designated to be It for a certain length of time.”

Interviewer Molly Hite, for one, is glad Lurie is going to be It for a while.

One plausible theory about women’s writing is that whole genres of it are still invisible because most of the people who represent literature to us — “mainstream” reviewers and critics, academics, editors, and publishers — are effectively blinded to the possibility that such genres could even exist. A signal case in point is feminist comedy, which has passed unnoticed for virtually all of its history because of the widespread apprehension that feminist and comedy are somehow mutually exclusive terms: If a work is feminist it cannot be funny; if it is funny, it is clearly not feminist. This illogical conception has obscured the wit of major novelists from Charlotte Brontë to Virginia Woolf to Doris Lessing, all of whom are too often stigmatized as being humorless. But worse than this, the presumption that feminism necessarily condemns a writer to a tone of unrelieved seriousness has consistently denied the political edge in works by popular comic writers Dorothy Parker, Nora Ephron, and most recently, Alison Lurie, whose novel Foreign Affairs won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction last year.

Foreign Affairs is a funny romance that is also, and very poignantly so, about romance, especially about the requirements of youth and beauty that a whole literary tradition upholds as essential to any heterosexual coupling. “In most novels it is taken for granted that people over 50 are as set in their ways as elderly apple trees, and as permanently shaped and scarred by the years they have weathered,” Lurie’s omniscient narrator (with George Eliot inflections) informs us. Perhaps the cannily named, 54-year-old protagonist Vinnie Minor is somehow condemned to become “a minor character in her own life.” But Vinnie’s situation also proceeds from an even less palatable truth, which is that the requirements of youth and beauty apply differently to men and to women. For women, youth and beauty are the only grounds that will permit them to be chosen. In her youth, the plain Vinnie married a man “who was on the tearful rebound from a particularly aggravating beauty and, like a waterlogged tennis ball, had rolled into the nearest hole.” The novel explores this grimly comic rendering of sexual politics, arriving at a cautiously upbeat conclusion only after taking us through a far more cynical subplot, in which the character who seems to be a conventional romance heroine is destroyed by the conventions of romance.

Why did so little of the feminist emphasis of Foreign Affairs come out in the overwhelmingly laudatory reviews? What kept the reviewers from seeing the politics? What they saw was Lurie herself, who was 54 when the novel came out; who is, like Vinnie, an English professor specializing in children’s literature; and who is employed by Cornell University, which was always thinly disguised in her writing as Corinth University in Corinth, New York. The reviewers tend to assume that if a novel is in any way autobiographical, then it cannot really be anything else — critical, calculated, analytical, satiric, certainly not feminist.

“Well, I understand the impulse,” said Lurie when I asked her how she feels about being identified with her own creation. “It’s something that we see in a lot of criticism. It’s so much easier and more interesting to imagine that this person exists, and to conflate the author and the character, the author who’s a distant background presence whom you don’t know. Today self-presentation has been elevated into a kind of art. A lot of celebrities are in the business of manufacturing and then acting out a persona, which at least sometimes I think they can’t tell from themselves after a while. So naturally it’s assumed that’s what a writer is doing, too.” A great deal of Foreign Affairs is about acting out a persona and the dangers this involves, so it seems especially ironic that anyone would assume that Lurie is in the self-presentation business. But, as she observes, “a lot of people come to a book with an idea of what it should say.”

Despite the disclaimer, she has always had devoted readers who seem to value her novels for precisely the things they do say. “I think that normally my books are read by middle-aged women,” she says. “If I get a little attention then other people start reading them. I think the Pulitzer was a kind of fluke. I don’t know the internal politics, but usually the Pulitzer Prize goes to a book which I guess you’d have to say in some way celebrates America. Well, mine just isn’t the kind of book that’s supposed to win this prize. The kind of book that does win the prize is like, oh, the ones that won before and after — Bill Kennedy’s, Alice Walker’s, and Larry McMurtry’s. All of them are essentially about people from the working class struggling against fate, hardship, and bad luck, and winning through. Well, that wasn’t my experience.”

But her experience as a middle-class woman has certainly equipped her to reveal how little privilege inheres in traditional female roles. When I taught her classic novel about the breakup of a marriage, The War Between the Tates, a number of students were enraged by the situation of the faculty wife Erica Tate and suddenly aware that their own mothers were in very similar situations. “Oh, I’m very sympathetic to Erica,” Lurie says. “What I’m afraid people won't be able to see is what it’s like to be a housewife with no job and dependent on a man in that period. It’s very hard for anyone younger than Erica and me to think back into that situation. I sometimes wonder if many of the heroines in novels written 20 years ago are just going to be incomprehensible to women today. That was a period in which if you got an abortion, you could die from it. This was a period in which you were economically dependent on your husband, and the kind of job that you could get if you split up with him paid almost nothing, and you didn’t have any education that could prepare you for any other kind of job than a secretarial one. Men assumed that they were superior and a lot of women believed this too. It’s a world that’s changed so fast that it’s hard for my students to believe in it, almost.”

I wondered how many of them come to believe in it after they get out of college, whether most women’s lives encompass more possibilities than they did in the 1950s and 1960s, and we talked for a while about the new generation of young women writers, several of whom Alison has taught and mentored. “A lot of them are in this unsettled situation,” she observes. “They write about their past, and that’s a world that seemed to hold together at least to some extent, although a lot of them still write about their parents’ marriages. But they haven’t yet started their own families; they’re just drifting. And I just don’t know what they’ll write about or who they'll become.”

Why did so little of the feminist emphasis of Foreign Affairs come out in the overwhelmingly laudatory reviews?

How did she arrive at a perspective that allowed her to write so penetratingly about the kind of lives that women of her generation were leading? Jane Austen seems important, particularly for Lurie’s early works (Lurie’s first novel, like Austen’s, was called Love and Friendship). “Well, I’ve always admired her and particularly back when I hadn’t read so much fiction,” she says. “I admired her more than anyone.” I note her use of the past tense. “Oh, I still admire her, but at that point I hadn’t read — oh, a lot of things hadn’t been published. I hadn’t read any Doris Lessing to speak of; I hadn’t read any Edith Wharton to speak of; these women writers were more or less unknown at the time that I started reading fiction.” The problem, she observes, is not that women don’t write or don’t get published, but that their works don’t stay in print. If women do not write “enduring” prose, the transience of their work is a function of the publishers who allow them to go out of print, and feminist scholarship and feminist publishers have changed the situation. “I think the Virago series, for instance, has done a lot to make women feel that if they write something it could last,” she says. “I have to say that they’ve published some things that maybe shouldn’t have been revived; they’ve almost gone too far in some cases; but in the beginning you just knew that anything with that dark green border would be good. It was not terribly difficult to get a book about women, love, families and middle-class society published, but the assumption was that it would be gone in a year or two, that it was ephemeral; it was like a women’s magazine. So Virago gave a kind of legitimacy as literature to all these writers, writers like Willa Cather or Olivia Manning or Elizabeth Bowen, who were beginning to be completely forgotten. And now they’re remembered and people are teaching them.”

I ask Lurie whether it is important to have women as teachers as well as women writers who are part of the curriculum. “I don’t think a woman writing student has to have a woman writing teacher,” she says, “but I think the situation that I had when I was in college — I didn’t have a single woman teacher — is very discouraging. I remember being in Harvard lectures in which the professor who taught a course in Milton would get up and begin, ‘Now, gentlemen, last time...’ And there would be about 10 or 15 women in this class of 50 or 60 people, but he didn’t see us; we were invisible to him. That’s bad for the morale. Worse for the women who wanted to be professors themselves. Mary Ann Radzinowicz, the distinguished Miltonist, was at Radcliffe with me, a couple of years ahead, and she was in this class; think of what determination it must have taken to be a Milton scholar.”

I remind her of her own determination, especially recently, when she drew national attention to the protests against Cornell’s investment policy in South Africa by choosing to be arrested during the course of a sit-in. “It was the right year for me to do it,” she says. “This kind of attention is ephemeral. And you might as well cash in on it for some good while it’s going.”

I object that her Pulitzer was genuinely earned, although I admit to a certain vested interest: Despite everything I knew about publishing trends and the politics of the literary awards, I had predicted that Foreign Affairs would get the prize. “I have mixed feelings about this,” she says. “It doesn’t change the book; not one single word in the book is changed; it’s not any better than it was. Its effect on the human being is at best neutral, so what’s it all about? It’s a result of the society we live in. For a minute you're Kellogg’s Corn Flakes and then it passes by, and somehow it doesn’t have any relationship to reality except that when people believe in it, it does: It’s like a religion. People are designated to be It for a certain length of time, different lengths of time. Then everybody assumes that they’re It, but they’re no better than they ever were before; they aren’t any better than the other people who aren’t It this year. It’s an artificial business; the whole thing is artificial.”

I’m willing to buy the argument; it has a great deal to do with the same kinds of forces that give women’s writing a curtailed lifespan. But I am also very glad that Lurie is going to be It for a while, not the least because this means all her books are back in print — indeed, on display in the most unlikely bookstores. Someone is bound to notice what she is doing, and then feminist comedy may begin to intrude itself into the sensibilities of the literary mainstream, perhaps not to the extent that it becomes an acknowledged genre, but at least to the point where it is no longer dismissed as a self-evident contradiction in terms.

Molly Hite teaches English at Cornell University and is writing a book-length study of contemporary feminist narrative.

Bod Building

Do you suffer from soft and flabby writing? Build up your work with professional advice from The Constructive Critic.

Take advantage of 450 years of combined writing experience to help you tone up your skills. Whether your specialty is in fiction or non-fiction, your work will be personally matched to a professional in that field of writing.

Give your writing strength.

For more information write The Constructive Critic. Women in Communications, Inc., P.O. Box 9561, Austin, Texas 78766 or call Shirley Gipson 512/346-9875.

Belles Lettres @ 9