Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

o  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  
®  
Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
e  
Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
%  
Celia McEnaney  
ADVERTISING REPRESENTATIVE  

°  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ institu-  
tions; $15.00/ individuals; $12.50/  
students with photocopy of student  
ID. Classroom Discount: Indi-  
vidual issues or yearly subscriptions  
$2.00 an issue for classes of 10 or  
more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose  
is to promote and celebrate writing  
by women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, send SASE for  
a copy of the Guidelines for Review-  
ers. All views expressed in Belles  
Lettres represent the views of the  
individual authors.  

Submissions  
Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Deanna D’Errico or call 703-524-  
7743. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

Jury/August 1987  

Letters  

I was very pleased to see your rediscovery  
piece on Vernon Lee [Sept/Oct, 1986], but  
I was also depressed by Harold Acton’s strong  
spinster-baiting approach, which in the end  
cast such a heavy coat of dust over her por-  
trayal that it threatened to rebury her. It  
makes it suitable that she should look so  
miffed in the wonderful photograph you  
printed of her.  

Essentially, his picture of Lee is one of a  
literary “tiger,” sharp of tongue and cold of  
heart, one which he then proceeds to declaw  
by reiterating his leitmotif that she was a  
puritanical maiden who remained “forever  
innocent,” and therefore diminished, first as  
a woman but also as an artist.  

She was not so innocent. And, while she  
did belong to a class of “English spinsters of  
intellectual cast,” this was a very politically  
important class in the late Victorian period,  
at a time, incidentally, when one in four  
women would never marry (See The Spinster  
and Her Enemies, by Sheila Jeffrey, Pandora  
Press, 1985). Actually, some chose not to  
marry, in order to be able to pursue a career  
and fulfill their intellectual or artistic poten-  
tial. This was the case with Lee, who believed  
that marriage deprived women of intellectual  
staying power.  

More central to Acton’s patronizing im-  
pulse is the notion that sexual activity with  
men is vital to the health of women, because  
without it they become either bitter and  
twisted, or gushingly sentimental. His seem-  
ingly humane concern for the plight of the  
unmarried Lee (“Would marriage possibly  
have changed her?) masks a cultural ideology  
which sets femaleness and autonomy in con-  
flict. In the case of Lee, this autonomy was  
crucial. She made an early commitment to  
the life of the mind, and her mother backed  
her wish to train for art and literature, not  
for marriage and domesticity.  

Acton’s essay also leaves out the enorm-  
ously important humanist dimension of her  
sense of humor. To give one characteristic  
example, in her essay on “The economic  
parasitism of women” (in Gospels of Anarchy)  
she explains, tongue in cheek, that what con-  
verted her to the cause of women’s emanci-  
pation was the expression, used by Mrs. Stet-  
son in her book Women and Economics,  
“Women are oversexed.” The phrase, she is  
“sorry” to explain, “does not mean over-  
much addicted to sexual indulgence” but sim-  
ply that women are first and foremost defined  
and confined by their gender. That is hardly  
the remark of a prude.  

In his description of her spinsterly personal  
life, Acton finds the need to stress the highly  
platonic aspect of her friendships with  
women, thereby raising our suspicions rather  
than eclipsing the fact that her romantic at-  
tachments were for women. Lee, who sup-  
posedly despised men, also had many male  
friends (and these certainly were on that high  
platonic level). She was not excluded from  
the company of literary men such as Carlo  
Placci or Maurice Baring, or Berenson, or  
H.G. Wells or Shaw, as well as her early  
admirers, Browning and Pater. Here Acton  
does a great injustice to her capacity for both  
gratitude and generosity toward her friends  
by unscrupulously truncating the descriptions  
she sent her mother. Of Browning, she said  
that his great charm was in being an unaf-  
fected grandfatherly type, meaning a com-  
plete gentleman as opposed to the usual  
minor writers who were mere poseurs. And  
as for Pater, if she did describe him as heavy,  
shy, and dull-looking, she also added that  
he was the man who had been the most civil  
to her in London. She also appreciated his  
simplicity and having spent many a delightful  
evening with him and his sisters as their  
house-guest.  

Finally, it must be pointed out that, con-  
trary to Acton’s assertion, the realities of the  
past were not far more important to her than  
those of the present. While she did succeed  
in brilliantly evoking the Renaissance and  
the Italian 18th century, she was also a most  
passionately engaged and often controversial  
analyst of the present. She not only addressed  
many contemporary issues, such as the  
feminist movement and vivisection, and  
challenged leading thinkers such as William  
James and Bergson in her Vital Lies (1912),  
but more important, she almost single-hand-  
edly took on the unpopular stance of pacifi-  
cism during World War I. Rather than look-  
ing back, she came to feel, in her maturity,  
that she was born in a world not yet ready  
for her, or as she put it, in French: “Je suis  
venue trop tôt dans un monde trop jeune.”  

Viola G. Thomas  
Cambridge, MA  

CONTENTS #&  

MEDIEVAL WOMEN WRITERS  
2 A Small Sound of the Trumpet  

Medieval Women Writers  

3 Mystic and Pilgrim: The Book and the World of  
Margery Kempe ...........c:ccssecescnvensesesenseeenees  

REVIEWS  
5 American Wives: Thirty Short Stories by Women  

8 The Ghosts of Who We Were  
Rooms Overhead  
The Rings of Saturn .  
All Aberration  
Contra La Violencia  
Ruth Hall and Other Writings ...............  

10 This Child’s Gonna Live  
Eva’s Man ...........00006 .  
Things That Divide Us: Stories by Women  

Se eres edited by Faith Conlon, Rachel da Silva, and Barbara Wilson  

11 Reading Women: Essays in Feminist Criticism ............. by Mary Jacobus  

The Newly Born Woman ....... by Héléne Cixious and Catherine Clement  
by Judi M. Roller  
by Joanne S. Frye  
edited by Gisela Ecker  
Women’s Writing: A Challenge to Theory ...... edited by Moira Monteith  

The Politics of the Feminist Novel .............::.:02ceeeees  
Living Stories, Telling Lives  
Feminist Aesthetics  

Feminist Criticism and Social Change  

ceseesseceeeeseeceueessesenees edited by Judith Newton and Deborah Rosenfelt  

Making a Difference: Feminist Literary Criticism  

SUK SNH nes UeENES Nemec VRE Hae edited by Gayle Greene and Coppelia Kahn  
edited by Nancy K. Miller  

13 Women of the Left Bank: Paris, 1900-1940 ............. by Shari Benstock  

COLUMNS  
4 Rediscovery: Rose Macaulay  

6 Retrospective: Rebecca West  
[with reviews of Rebecca West: A Life, by Victoria Glendinning; Rebecca  
West, by Fay Weldon; The Young Rebecca: Writings of Rebecca West  
1911-1917, edited by Jane Marcus; The Literary Achievement of Rebecca  
West, by Harold Orel; and Sunflower: A Novel; The Fountain Overflows;  
This Real Night; and Cousin Rosamund, by Rebecca West]  

9 Belles Lettres Interview: Alison Lurie  
12 Impressions: Middle Aged Women, Skirting the Left Bank, Briefly Noted  

VOLUME 2/NUMBER 6  

Ree tere eee by Margaret Wade Labarge  
Medieval Women’s Visionary Literature . edited by Elizabeth Alvilda Petroff  
edited by Katharina M. Wilson  
Wayward Nuns in Medieval Literature ............ by Graciela S. Daichman  

by Clarissa W. Atkinson  

edited by Barbara H. Solomon  

7) Betrayed .......ccceecceeecneeceseccnseeeeceuseeeeeesseeseeeseneeens by Amalie Skram  
Condor and Hummingbird .................cceeecseseeeeees by Charlotte Mendez  

ECO EETSZWERAICESCR by Phyllis H. Thompson  
by Betsy Sholl  
by Diane Wakowski  
.. by Terese Svoboda  
. by Barbara Moraff  
by Fanny Fern  
O Genteel Lady! and A Mirror for Witches .............064. by Esther Forbes  

ch P50 eepeans eoaeeny yet eewees Hee by Sarah E. Wright  
seeeee by Gayl Jones  

On the Cover: Christine de Pizan, medieval scholar and author, in her study. She is the  
author of The Book of the City of Ladies, published by Persea Books. Forthcoming from  
Persea are a biography by Charity Willard and A Medieval Woman’s Mirror of Honor:  
The Treasure of the City of Ladies.  

How To Perform Amazing  
Feats of Pecuniary Prestidigitation  

We're betting on you to help us take advantage of a tremendous oppor-  
tunity for your/our magazine. The Jennie Moore Fund has awarded us a  
matching grant of $2,500. Yes, just like on those public tv commercials —  
but you get to read about it instead of being dunned loudly and mercilessly  
in the middle of a program. The fund will match any amount we are  
able to raise up to the aforementioned sum — ultimately netting us  
$5,000.  

If you read Deanna D’Errico’s “State of the Union” address in the May  
’87 issue, you know what a spiraling effect an influx of funds such as this  
will have on the continued success and development of Belles Lettres,  
the editors of which perform amazing feats of pecuniary prestidigitation  
to bring you a pristine magazine every other month.  

Any size contribution is welcome, and those over $25 will be acknowl-  
edged in the magazine. The effects of your strong, clear indication that  
you support the writing of women will multiply far beyond the debit in  
your checkbook. Send us a contribution today! And thank you for your  
continued partnership in promoting women’s writing.  

Belles Lettres @ 1