Legacy of Abuse

Three Daughters, by Anna Mitgutsch. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987, $15.95,  
216 pp. Translated from German by Lisel Mueller.

by Barbara Griffith Furst

Reading Three Daughters is an

ordeal. This story of child

abuse in several generations of  
an Austrian family begins in the mid-  
1920s. The patriarchal farmer routinely  
beats his daughter Marie on the slightest  
pretext with whatever object is at hand,  
rapes his ailing wife within hours after  
childbirth, and, after her death, rapes  
one of his several daughters.

The adult Marie marries a weakling  
and acquires the house, clothes, and  
other appurtenances of the petit  
bourgeoisie in a small town where she re-  
mains bitter and socially isolated. She  
beats her daughter Vera from an early  
age, taking care, of course, to be sure  
that the results will be hidden by cloth-  
ing. She has at least refined her father’s  
techniques in order to keep up appear-  
ances. Vera, the narrator, spares us no  
harrowing detail of the beatings, the  
child’s terror and suffering, her tension  
before the beatings, and her feelings  
that somehow she deserved them.

The Squire  
by Enid Bagnold

New York: Penguin/Virago, 1987/1938,  

$6.95, 271 pp. (PB)

“There is nothing so difficult to remem-  
ber as sexual love,” remarks Enid Bag-  
nold’s title character, an aristocratic  
British mother of four dubbed the  
“Squire” by her obedient household. To  
Bagnold’s autobiographical protagonist,  
memorable love is familial: What need  
of passion when there are so many young  
lives hinging on one’s own?

As the novel opens, the capable  
Squire is nearing the end of her fifth  
pregnancy. In her businessman hus-  
band’s unresented absence from Eng-  
land, she is contented that she alone  
shall usher in this birth. No mishap greater  
than the defection of the cook, a traitor  
who cannot rejoice in yet another child,  
mars the serenity of the Squire’s house-  
hold community. The narrative is in  
many ways a demonstration of her con-  
trol: She marshals the servants; carries  
on a series of gently admonitory conver-  
sations with young Henry, Jay, Lucy,  
and Boniface; and renews confidence in  
her strength for what lies ahead.

Among this poetic novel’s most  
memorable passages is the Squire’s medita-  
tion on her unborn child:

Now, at the table, behind the fall of  
the tablecloth, behind the sheath of  
skin, hanging head downwards between  
cliffs of bone, was the baby, its arms all  
but clasped about its neck, its face  
aslant upon its arms, hair painted upon  
its skull, closed, secret eyes, a diver  
poised in albumen, ancient and epic,  
shot with delicate spasms, as old as  
Pharaoh in its tomb.

The Squire is both poetry and social  
history. It combines astonishing imagery  
with an observant if complacent evoca-  
tion of upper-class English domestic life  
before World War II. It is most interest-  
ing, though, as ideology. Bagnold de-  
nies the fragility of women in the last  
days of pregnancy; the Squire is a  
“female male,” “a pyramid of birth.”  
Bagnold’s heroine is almost mythic in  
her belief that no untoward event can  
affect the coming of memorable love.

— Laura Hapke

8 ® Belles Lettres

“Get me the carpet beater,” [Marie]  
commanded, “get me the cudgel.” This  
was a wooden stick the thickness of an  
arm, which split in two during the  
course of my education. The broken  
cudgel was itself significant evidence of  
a culpability so great that it could never  
be punished fully. Had she been  
completely just she would have had to  
beat me to death. I owed the fact that  
she continued to let me live to her  
sacrificial mother love, which, like the  
grace of God, was not earned and could  
never be repaid. . . . What happened  
after the moment when I hesitantly  
handed her the instrument of  
chastisement I don’t remember; I only  
know all hell broke loose. . . pain and  
pain and pain in a rhythm that the  
body recognized almost instantly and  
against which it could not protect  
itself.”

After the beatings, the mother col-  
lapses on the floor in a swoon “breathing  
heavily and stretching out full-length,  
exhausted as from the completion of  
hard labor, and I stood there terrified,  
with my heart racing and the pain gone  
suddenly numb. Was she about to die of  
exhaustion, had she fainted, all because  
of my guilt, the hard work I had caused  
her?”

Equally painful to read is Vera’s mem-  
ory of her attachment to her mother and  
the comfort, for instance, of curling up  
next to her in the big bed — from which  

the father has long since been evicted —  
and trying to sleep, though plagued with  
insomnia and bedwetting that would  
inevitably bring further beatings. Simi-  
larly, the mother Marie, despite her  
hatred of her father and her resentment  
toward her more favored sisters, is hap-  
piest when she returns to the farm for a  
working visit. Both victims associate  
security with punishment.

Vera eventually attends a university.  
After her mother’s death, she struggles  
to free herself from her ghost by becom-  
ing unkempt, undisciplined, and sexu-  
ally promiscuous. She marries, has a  
child, and by divorce, attempts to spare  
herself and her daughter the emotional  
violence of an unhappy marriage. Vera  
feels she has, despite her best efforts to  

Anna Mitgutsch

break the chain of abuse, failed her  
daughter who yearns for the reconcilia-  
tion of her parents and to be part of a  
complete family. However, compared to  
the childhoods of Vera and Marie and  
despite the child’s unhappiness, there is  
little evidence that the abuse or its ef-  
fects have really been passed on to the  
“third daughter” as the title suggests.  
One is not convinced that the child is  
any more affected by her parents’ dif-  
ficult divorce than other children would  
be.

As it unfolds in all its horror, the  
story is told in exquisitely cool and  
analytical prose. One feels one is read-  
ing a psychiatric case study written  
either by a very literate therapist or by a  
brilliant patient after long and arduous  
therapy that, sadly, fails. For even in the  
end, when Vera resists her mother’s  
ghost, Marie “always wins, in the name  
of obedience, reason, and fear.” The  
book is reminiscent of another European  
novel that is an unabashed psychiatric  
case study, The Words to Say It by the  
French author Marie Cardinal. In both  
instances, the narrators have been able  
to distance themselves from extremely  
painful childhoods to document with  
precision and without flinching the path  
to maturity and, in the Cardinal book,  
to health as well. Even though I was  
drained after reading Three Daughters, I  
came away with great admiration for the  
author. The book is a tour de force, and  
the writing, despite the content, is un-  
cluttered and elegant.

® Barbara Griffith Furst is a writer and  
editor in the international health field who  
lives in Washington, DC.

Struggles and Celebrations of  
Mothers of Lesbians

Different Daughters: A Book by Mothers of Lesbians, edited by Louise Rafkin. Cleis Press  
(P.O. Box 14684, San Francisco, CA 94114), 1987, $8.95, 154 pp. (PB)

by Suzanne Scott

Different Daughters is a book of  
essays by 25 women who have,  
with varying degrees of diffi-  
culty, faced the fact that their daughters  
are lesbians. The book ably de-  
monstrates that to come out of the  
closet as the mother of a lesbian is, in  
some ways, even more difficult than  
coming out as a lesbian. The mother of a  
lesbian is often alone in her struggle to  
understand what lesbianism is and what  
it means in her daughter’s life. No one is  
available to help her purge the internal  
demons that tell her to reject her daugh-  
ter. And other people are all too ready  
to blame Mom for her daughter’s “prob-  
lem.” That over half of the mothers  
whose stories appear in this collection  
chose to use pseudonyms underscores  
what Louise Rafkin points out in her in-  
troduction: Being the mother of a les-  
bian, even in the 1980s, carries a  
stigma.  
Different Daughters is a testament to  
the courage, resilience, and strength of  
these 25 women. Even so, the book does  
not show a greeting-card version of  
mothers as eternally loving, long-suffer-  
ing, accepting, and self-sacrificing,  
exempt from negative feelings and irra-  
tional behavior. Most of these mothers  
admit that they came to accept their  
daughters only after a difficult and pain-  
ful process. The editor’s mother, Rhoda  
Rafkin, candidly admits that her initial  
reaction was “I don’t need another prob-  
lem, why can’t my kids be normal?”  
What is stunning about these essays,  
however, is the degree of honesty be-  
tween the generations and the tenacity  
with which these mothers cling to their  
daughters. They dare to work toward  
trust and understanding despite their  
own discomfort and even distaste. Some  

of these women suffered personally for  
their daughter’s choice. Rheba Fon-  
tenot, the pseudonymous author of “A  
Very Public Statement,” whose daugh-  
ter announced on national television  
that she was a “Black lesbian feminist,”  
found herself ridiculed and ostracized by  
her community, including her church.  
Fontenot writes, “I felt betrayed. I felt  
anger. I felt embarrassment.” Yet  
mother and daughter persevered, de-  
spite bitter feelings and a six-year es-  
trangement, and the essay ends with the  
encouraging words, “Many things are  
getting better.”

Although these women are by no  
means a representative sample of  
mothers of lesbians, they demonstrate  
that even if a mother reacts badly to her  
daughter’s revelations, that does not  
have to be the end of the story. And  
they remind lesbian daughters of a truth  
they might not want to think about: If  
they are going to share their lives and  
feelings openly and honestly with their  
mothers, they implicitly give their  
mothers permission to share their feel-  
ings too. A two-way dialogue may be  
painful, but it represents the only hope  
for healing a wound in the mother—  
daughter bond, a wound that is, at least  
in part, socially constructed.

Rafkin’s introduction chronicles the  
difficulties she had in getting anyone to  
write for the book. Even so, she man-  
aged to put together a diverse group — a  
feminist therapist, several women from  
strongly traditional cultures (white,  
middle class), Blacks, Asians, and even  
several who themselves are lesbians.  
And despite their obvious differences,  
many of their gut-level reactions turned  
out to be the same. Will my daughter be  
able to live a well-adjusted, happy life?  

Will she be lonely? Will she be in  
danger? What about grandchildren?  
Will she give up her ethnic and cultural  
heritage? Will she still love me? Will  
she still want me to love her?

A number of the mothers whom Raf-  
kin finally recruited for the book are as-  
sociated with Parents and Friends of  
Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG), a support  
group that helps many mothers break  
through isolation and misconceptions to  
attain a supportive, loving relationship  
with their daughters. PFLAG brought  
many of these women to recognize that  
they did not want to be estranged from  
their children. Says D. Clarke, in “An  
Open Letter to Mothers Whose  
Daughters Happen To Be Lesbians,” a  
lesbian mother really has to consider  
just one question: “When did society’s  
opinion or approval become more im-  
portant to you than the chance for hap-  
piness for your own child?”

It is important not to be distracted by  
the uneven quality of the selections. For  
one thing, nearly half of the essays are  
edited from transcripts — a difficult  
feat, and one that Rafkin manages with-  
out losing the individuality of each  
woman’s voice. But the power of this  
book ultimately lies not in the aptness of  
certain phrases or the uniqueness of  
each author’s self-expression, but in the  
very ordinariness of the women who re-  
veal themselves here. These are women  
who matter-of-factly tell stories of ex-  
traordinary courage and steadfastness to  
the real truth of motherhood.

Ultimately, the women in Different  
Daughters hold out hope that if mother  
and daughter can stand the pain, the  
mother-daughter bond can transcend  
the crisis of the daughter’s coming out. I  
hope lesbian daughters will courageously  
package this book off to their mothers.  
Sometimes what a mother needs most is  
to know that she is not alone in her fear  
and confusion.

® Suzanne Scott is a freelance writer  
and critic in Washington, DC. She is a  
“different daughter” and the mother of a  
“different daughter.”

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988