continued

The third and final collection is con-
cerned with “the sexual politics of the
Latina seeking to control her destiny.”
Of the three sections, the stories in-
cluded here are the most varied. They
seem to be less those of Latinas and
more of women in general. They run
a gamut of experience, from “Pesadilla”
(Nightmare), the story of a lesbian
couple whose apartment, which they
have worked so hard to make home, is
broken into—repulsive, violating gra-
ffiti flooding the walls—to “Sin Luz”
(Without Light), the story of a woman
who, having conceived during a forced
sexual encounter with her husband and
miscarried in her seventh month of
pregnancy, believes that the child was
destined not to live because of the
nature of the sexual act.

These cuentos are stories both con-
fronting and unsettling, but always im-
mediate. They record a voice that has
not often been heard in this country
and one to whose existence much of
the public has heretofore remained
oblivious. Although some of the stories
are not accessible to an English-speak-
ing audience, one hopes they will soon
be translated and followed by similar
collections of equal, if not greater,
caliber.

Maria Quintana is the manager of a
literary bookstore in Washington.

Are We Ready

To Listen?
by Monica J. Neal

Lesbian Nuns: Breaking Silence, Rose-
mary Curb and Nancy Manahan, Eds.
Naiad Press, 1985, $16.95, cloth, $9.95,
paper, 383 pp.

I say about this book: “Pictures—it
even has pictures! As if a book about
lesbian nuns was not daring enough
already!” Certainly some will be
hooked by the volume’s sensational
potential, but Rosemary Curb and
Nancy Manahan have not collected
these personal stories of 49 former and
present sisters simply to raise a ruckus.
Lesbian Nuns: Breaking Silence emerges
because the painful, mystifying experi-
ences of many religious women have
only gradually given way to healing
and empowerment, and this book is
possibly an important step in that pro-
cess for many women.

In these autobiographical accounts,
Manahan and Curb have succeeded in
drawing out many voices that challenge
notions patriarchal that religion would
like us to keep—that nuns have no
sexual feelings and especially that les-
bians do not exist. Of course the voices
differ in many ways. The years spent in
religious commitment range from one
to fifty. Only nine of the women are
still nuns, a few of the rest still practice
Catholicism, and many have adopted
feminist rituals to express their spiritu-
ality. The nine remaining in vowed
community life differ on their ap-
proaches to intimacy and genital ex-
pression, some foregoing sexual activ-
ity, others redefining celibacy to include
some relationships with genital con-
tact. Several stories demand attention
to issues of race, class, and culture,

Sentenced
To Life

by Zita Dresner

This Place, by Andrea Freud Loewen-
stein. Pandora Press, 1985, $14.95, 440 pp.

This Place, a first novel by Andrea
Freud Loewenstein, is a book that
I had wanted to like a lot more
than I actually did. Set in a Boston area
women’s prison, the novel interweaves
the stories of four women: Ruth, a
therapist at the prison; Sonya, a new
art therapist; Candy, a young white
inmate serving time for prostitution;
and Telecea Jones, a schizophrenic
black woman serving a life sentence in
connection with a murder. The author,
who taught writing at a women’s prison
for three years, chose a unique en-
vironment to depict and a potentially
compelling way of exploring the inter-
locking experiences of those who live
and work in that environment. How-
ever, she did not exploit those choices
successfully enough to maintain my in-
terest for over four hundred pages.

From the beginning, I found prob-
lems with the structure of the novel.
Each “chapter” is headed by the name
of one of the four main characters.
Although this device is intended to
weave together the strands of the four
women’s lives into a unified plot with
a climax that involves all of them, it
also detracts from the full realization of
what, to me, is the strongest element of
the novel: the depiction of prison life.
The use of Ruth and Sonya as central
characters, for example, shifts the set-
ting outside of the prison—for example,
to Sonya’s loft, to the apartment that
Ruth shares with her lover, Victor—or
focuses, within the prison, on the
therapy rooms and offices.

Since Telecea is feared and shunned
by the other inmates and lives primar-
ily inside of her own head, the sections
devoted to her also limit the presenta-
tion of the prison environment. It is
through Candy that a broader pan-
orama is depicted; and some of the
richest and most affecting scenes in the
novel are those that simply show the
inmates interacting with each other,
supporting each other, coping with life:
whereas many simply reveal the devas-
tating consequences of breaking a
taboo so deep that the words to name
it were hard to find.

Yet, in their variety, the journeys
often follow similar paths. Although
usually more aware of God’s call than
of their sexuality at the time, some les-
bians were attracted to the powerful
sense of sisterhood and the active,
dynamic nuns they knew. Once in the
convent, however, they were warned
against “particular friendships” —
intense bonds with other nuns that
would detract from their overall com-
munal ties. Inevitably these sisters
formed “p.f.’s” anyway, and some of
these friends even ventured into sexual
expression.

The context for discovering their
sexuality was marked by either hostility
and duplicity or by some support to
integrate their lesbianism into their
religious life. Even with support, the
process of owning an invisible sexuality
posed difficult questions about celibacy
and community. Many did not want to
leave, and for these women there has
been tremendous grief at the loss of the
sense of sisterhood they had known.
For those who have stayed, the com-
munity has continued to be a powerful
experience they do not want to lose.
One reason why the book’s sensual-
ity, occasional humor, and honest
detail could be easily exaggerated as
sensational is that the women’s nearly
consistent experience of pain and rage
is very difficult to handle. Who would
not want to turn away from stories of
devastating repression and the ques-
tions it raises? Sometimes it would be
much easier to get excited about the
before-and-after photographs than it
would be about the scars and the chal-
lenging new vision these women relate
and does.

Because the characters seem typecast
and their connections with each other
too pat, I found it difficult to care about
them, especially since the changes that
occur in their lives during the course of
the novel struck me as more negative
than positive. Ruth, in the process of
“finding herself” and “getting in touch
with her feelings,” becomes involved
with Sonya and ends up losing her job
at the prison and her relationship with
Victor. Sonya, to escape her responsi-
bility in the affair with Ruth and in
Telecea’s attack on an inmate, quits her
job at the prison and runs away to New
York—just as at the novel’s opening
she had run to Boston to deny an
earlier failure. Candy is released from
prison and hopes to start a new life
with Billy (who has preceded her out of
prison) and to train for a straight job;
however, neither the relationship nor
the program works out and she goes
back to hustling. Finally, Telecea, after
retreating more deeply into her de-
lusional world and encouraged by
Sonya’s validation of her visions as
artistic, attacks an inmate who dies.
Sonya is then sent to a computerized
prison in Kansas where all human con-
tact is lost to her.

Perhaps it is unrealistic and old fash-
ioned to expect characters in a con-
temporary work of fiction to learn
something from their experiences that
makes them stronger or wiser, but I was
disappointed that these characters did
not seem to be enlarged, enlightened,
or affected in any positive way by their
experiences. Being in or out of prison,
staying in or leaving a relationship,
connecting or disconnecting from
people or jobs that involve commit-
ments to people are not developed in
the novel as meaningful alternatives.

If, in Loewenstein’s view, they are not
and if, in her view, the characters are
imprisoned in different but equally
destructive ways by whatever choices
they make, relationships they have,
and neuroses that afflict them, then I
at least want to be shown how or why
they are so imprisoned. For me, the
novel did not provide this clarification
and left me without a concrete compre-
hension of “this place” either as entity
or image.

Zita Dresner teaches literature at the
University of the District of Columbia.

in their stories.

Two features of Lesbian Nuns, how-
ever, call us back to receive the book in
its entirety: First, Curb and Manahan’s
introductory comments impress upon
us that, although not all nuns are les-
bians, the book does confront serious
myths and breaks centuries-old si-
lences. Second, the contributors them-
selves will not let us walk away un-
affected. They dare to assert themselves
and look us in the eye from their
photographs, as if to say, “I am here. I
have slowly learned to name and cele-
brate my life, rejoice in my sisters, and
face what needs to be done. Together,
we are powerful. And no one will take
that power away from us again.”

Monica J. Neal attends Union Theologi-
cal Seminary in New York City and plans
to graduate with the Master of Divinity
degree in May.

Belles Lettres © 7