A Few Handfuls of Seed

Thousand Pieces of Gold: An Autobiographical Novel, by Ruthanne Lum McCunn. Design Enterprises (P.O. Box 14695, San Francisco, CA 94114), 1986, $10.95 (HB), $5.95 (PB), 308 pp., photos. [Also available in a Dell paperback, $3.95]

by Diane Yen-Mei Wong

Ruthanne Lum McCunn, an Asian American born in San Francisco’s Chinatown and raised in Hong Kong, has the rare ability to understand two cultures with intimacy and imagination. Her early exposure to Chinese culture gives her the ability to comprehend the cultural values and peasant poverty that could lead a father to sell his daughter. At the same time, her British education and life in America enable her to share those Chinese ideas, values, and emotions in ways that Westerners can understand and accept. And this is what is needed in the telling of the life of Lalu Nathoy, who later became known as Polly Bemis. Born in 1853 into a peasant family whose existence is threatened by drought and raids, Lalu is sold to bandits for a few handfuls of seed that will keep her parents and siblings from starving. From the book’s earliest pages, Lalu comes alive. We feel her desperation as she pleads with her father to let her work the fields rather than being sold; we share in her fear as she is forced to ride off into the night with the bandits.

As Lalu makes her way to America as a slave, the same sense of intense reality leaps from the pages. Our own faces may blush with the humiliation Lalu feels as she steps out for the first time in full “hurdy-gurdy girl” regalia — corset, red dress, high heels, and make-up. Our own eyes may fill with tears as she tries bravely to accept what seems to be the inevitable death of Charlie Bemis, the man she has come to love; our own hearts may beat more rapidly during the two-man poker game that forever changes her life.

The book’s vividness reflects a mind that is in touch with both historical fact and well-developed imagination. Although Lum McCunn talked to people who actually knew Nathoy and read contemporaneous documents about her, she had to rely on her own understanding of the two different cultures, value systems, and behaviors to make the

— Full Story, continued

me Miyo Silk.

Arai, Haru’s mother. From Samurai and woman’s role. Yamazaki calls Yamada a feminist but only briefly acknowledges that Yamada’s views on motherhood may be a bit traditional.

Because Yamada was advised never to reveal the truth about her early years in America, her past as a prostitute was not revealed until Yamazaki began research. Yet, even this book does not tell the full story because information on those years is incomplete, inaccurate, or nonexistent, as Yamazaki points out. However, in her zeal to present the story of a prostitute who makes good, Yamazaki perseveres with speculations and stories about people and places that might have been significant, even when it is clear that the section on Yamada’s life as a prostitute is more about her search for evidence than about Yamada’s life. Then, upon Yamada’s move to Japan, the book’s tone is changed totally: It becomes a biography, one based on facts. Yamazaki would have fared better by focusing just on these later years.

Whereas Yamazaki spends too much time on herself, Haru Reischauer does not devote enough to herself in Samurai and Silk. Most of this long book recounts the history of the author’s two grandfathers — one a samurai statesman, the other a peasant-turned-silk-magnate. Admittedly, their stories are fascinating and enlightening, especially because Reischauer has used her family’s own history and photos to illuminate dramatic and swift changes in an entire country’s cultural mores and customs during the turn of the century. However, for those readers interested in discovering more about the role of Japanese women in Japan or in America, this book provides only brief, tantalizing, yet frustrating, passages.

The most satisfying section is the author’s introduction. These personal statements provide a strong backdrop for the book. She speaks of her own experiences of the conflicts between cultures: She is a product of Japanese birth and of Western education. Her youth was a time when other Japanese found her family too American and her Illinois schoolmates still considered her Japanese. Reischauer’s mother insisted on raising the children to be “strong, independent individuals” even though these traits ran counter to accepted Japanese values. The tension Reischauer felt as a child remained, although it lessened somewhat, even when she returned to Japan as the wife of U.S. Ambassador Edwin O. Reischauer.

One activity that comforted her throughout the years was researching the lives of Prince Matsukata, her paternal grandfather who helped stabilize the country’s financial and political development, and of Rioichiro Arai, her maternal grandfather who helped establish the silk trade with America. Her research resulted in this book.

Although the men’s stories are comprehensive, Reischauer’s work, unfortunately, includes very little about the women in her family — indeed, the women are conspicuous by their absence. This omission may reflect her own biases, but it is also indicative of the historical Asian preference for recording men’s history and not that of women: There may not be any information available about the women. Matsukata’s story, for instance, contains only a few references to his relationship with his wife Kesako, mostly just to explain that she and the children went from one city to another. One notable exception is the description of Kesako’s reliance on her strict Confucian upbringing in order to survive the early years of marriage when food and money were scarce. Arai’s wife Tazu comes alive in a few passages about her work with charities.

In short, do not look for a thorough treatment of Japanese women’s roles in Reischauer’s book. Read it instead as a history of two unique Japanese men and for the added bonus of finding out a little about women and their roles.

The development of the relationship between Nathoy and Bemis is particularly well done. We read how Bemis befriends and protects her from the time she arrives in the frontier town of Warrens, Idaho, and how over the years love replaces that friendship. The growth we see between the two people is not a storybook romance: It is a real bond built upon openness, mutual respect, and sharing adversity and good times. At a time when relationships between Whites and Asians were rare and frowned upon, they had to overcome much to stay together, and we witness their victory over discrimination and self-doubt as well.

Without making it obvious, Lum McCunn has managed to educate readers about the institutional and individual racial discrimination that existed against Asians in those frontier days — they could not buy land, people considered them to be less than human. Lum McCunn has also provided a living refutation of the stereotypical helpless, passive Asian American woman. Here is a strong, passionate woman of action who not only fights for her own survival but also twice rescues the man she loves.

Thousand Pieces of Gold is thoroughly enjoyable. Lum McCunn has discovered a genuine heroine and given us all a chance to become acquainted with her. There is already talk about putting Nathoy’s story on the screen, but do not wait for the movie. Get the book now. It is well worth it.

UQP BOOKS BY AND ABOUT AUSTRALIAN WOMEN

Gender, Politics & Fiction

Australian Twentieth-Century Women’s Novels

Edited by CAROLE FERRIER

“A serious book which attempts to place this unique category of writers within the general field of world novelists and the realm of feminism as well.” Choice PB $14.50

Polly Bemis, sold into slavery at a young age, persevered to win her freedom and the respect of her community in Warrens, Idaho. From Chinese Women of America.

Thea Astley... is one of Australia’s most honored writers, possessed of a highly individual style and a strong vision of modern life. These are two of her best novels.

A Descant for Gossips PB $8.95

An Item from the Late News HC $17.95

Kate Grenville... writes of women moving away from conventional behavior in these superb short stories. Bearded Ladies HC $15.00 / PB $8.95

Olga Masters... started her career as a writer after raising seven children. She is praised for the brilliance of her evocation of women’s lives in the Australia of her youth.

Loving Daughters: A Novel PB $8.95

A Long Time Dying: A Novel PB $8.95

The Home Girls: Short Stories PB $8.95

Barbara Hanrahan... writes elegant, luxurious fiction about sexual exploitation, social injustice and middle-class mores. These are four of her novels.

The Frangipani Garden HC $19.25 / PB $7.95

The Peach Groves HC $12.00 / PB $6.00

Where the Queens All Strayed HC $12.00 / PB $6.00

Dove HC $17.50 / PB $7.95

Marion Eldridge seeks to convey the emotional emptiness of Australian life in her stories. Walking the Dog and other stories University of Queensland Press

250 Commercial Street Manchester, NH 03101

May/June 1987