——— SS

Impressions

Briefly Noted

A veritable Who’s Who of
contemporary women
writers populate the pages

of Deep Down: The New Sensual
Writing by Women, edited by Laura
Chester (Faber & Faber, $17.95, 313
pp.). I am pleased to find assembled this
wide range of writing on a subject that
was once taboo for women. Standouts
that come to mind are Mona Simpson’s
story “Lawns,” which I have read else-
where and consider infinitely more af-
fecting than her novel Anywhere But
Here; Ntozake Shange’s vignette about a
woman’s right not to be on call sexually;
and Susan Minot’s painful evocation of
the sexual anomie of monied adoles-
cents: “The more girls a boy has, the
better. He has a bright look, having
reaped fruits, blooming. He stalks
around, sure-shouldered, and you have
the feeling he’s got more in him, a fatter
heart, more stories to tell. For a girl,
with each boy, it’s like a petal gets
plucked each time.”

“The question is often asked of me
now, ‘Are you still a feminist?’ as if it
were possible for me to be anything
else,” says Germaine Greer in her intro-
duction to The Madwoman’s Under-
clothes: Essays & Occasional Writings
(Atlantic Monthly Press, $17.95, 305
pp.). “Everything I learn reinforces my
conviction that the only corrective to
social inequality, cruelty and callous-
ness, is to be found in values which, if
we cannot call them female, can be
called sororal. . .. I travelled, not to
bring the gospel of liberation to the hea-
then, but to learn from other women
what women are and can be. With a
couple of magnificent exceptions, an-
thropologists in the past have been ei-
ther actually male, or unsexed as I was by
their isolation from women and
women’s concerns. . . . In everything I
was their pupil; in everything I have
written I hope can be found the imprint
of my love and respect, admiration in-
deed, of poor women, women’s
women.”

In Silver (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$18.95), Hilma Wolitzer takes up the
story of Paulie and Howard Flax, who
were newlyweds in her second novel, In
the Flesh. As their silver wedding anni-
versary approaches, the tarnish on their
marriage is unmistakable. Wolitzer’s
narrative creates an electric current as
she switches back and forth from his to
her perspective as the couple deals with

Subscription Bonuses

Winners of books from the
drawing announced in
our March issue were

Betty McLaughlin-Meyer (The Robber
Bridegroom by Eudora Welty, in an edi-
tion illustrated with woodcuts by Barry
Moser from Houghton Mifflin); D.
Kasprzyk (The Way Paver, stories by
Anne Devlin); R. Denmark (The Seven
Ages, a novel by Eva Figes); E. Brooks
(Miss Venezuela, stories by Barbara
Wilson); Rita McCullough (Daughter
of the Hills, a novel by Myra Page); Jean
Swallow (Queen of Swords, poetry by
Judy Grahn); Emily Conklin (Taking
Leave, a novel by Janet Shaw); Lois
Czapiewski (Civil to Strangers,
posthumous polyglot by Barbara Pym);
Betty Day (Mary Shelley, a biography
by Muriel Spark); Sally Sims (Prisons
We Choose to Live Inside, essays by
Doris Lessing); Kathleen Light (Persian
Nights, a novel by Diane Johnson);
Cathy Stasz (Of Love and Shadows, a
novel by Isabel Allende); Buda
Kajer-Crain (Ridin’ the Moon in
Texas, illustrated essays and poems by
Ntozake Shange); and Michelle
Cloutier (How I Grew, memoirs by

20 Belles Lettres

Germaine Greer. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

his heart attack, his second affair (which
precipitates a separation), and the preg-
nancy of their son’s girlfriend. The re-
captured glow at the novel’s end is
earned, the grandchild’s birth echoing
the rebirth of their marriage. Along the
way, authentic, lived-in lives are
evoked — the couple’s relationships
with children and friends, their work,
and their sex lives (early on Paulie re-
members making love with “rapture and
invention”).

Irish playwright Anne Devlin’s
first book of short stories, The Way-
Paver (Faber & Faber, PB) administers a
bracing dose of unnerving plot twists.
These are the heroine’s reflections in
“The House,” as she meets the woman
who will ultimately appropriate her
identity:

Alice sensed my insecurity the
moment I arrived. “Gosh!” she said.
“As well as everything else I’ve
heard about you — you would have
to be beautiful!” She laughed, biting
her lip. I was foolish enough to
believe that when a man or a
woman tells you that you are beau-
tiful it means they like you. If I
have learned anything from that
time, I have learned what a fallacy
that is. Beauty does not excite
pleasure; more often it inspires
envy, resentment, anger, hate, but
rarely pleasure. In my experience
most human beings are too maimed
to let beauty pass them by; few have
the humanity to leave the wild
flower on the hillside, to take their
moment of pleasure and be gone
with just looking. Lately, I have
become fat and dull, I don’t attract
their anger or hate or resentment
anymore.

Mary McCarthy). If your friends love
books, tell them to subscribe to Belles
Lettres. They might win one!

This issue’s books — which go to ran-
domly selected individuals who send in
subscriptions, gift subscriptions, and
renewals moments after reading this
paragraph — are as follows: Willa Ca-
ther: A Literary Life by James Wood-
ress; Willa Cather: The Emerging
Voice by Sharon O’Brien; Gone to
Soldiers by Marge Piercy; Celebration
by Mary Lee Settle; Paris Was Yester-
day by Janet Flanner; Iola Leroy by
Frances E. W. Harper; Women’s
Voices from Latin America, edited by
Evelyn Picon Garfield; Abigail Adams:
A Biography by Phyllis Lee Levin; The
House with the Blind Glass Windows
by Herbjorg Wassmo; and Market
Street by Xiao Hong. You may indicate
your preference(s) if you like. And don’t
forget to write “Jenny Moore Fund” on
your subscription blank so that your sub-
scription or contribution can apply to-
ward our $2,500 matching grant, the
total of which we have almost achieved!

In our September issue we will an-
nounce who won One Hundred Flowers
by Georgia O’Keeffe, our grand offering
from the May issue.

Many will think I am a cultural
ignoramus to have come to an apprecia-
tion of Dame Agatha Christie at age
thirty-five—and to have done so via a
television program, the PBS series of
Miss Marple stories. I know it won’t be
stealing any thunder from our new resi-
dent mistress of crime, Jane Bakerman,
to recommend an audiotape of Miss
Marple mysteries read by PBS’s Joan
Hickson, available from Listen for
Pleasure (Miss Marple Investigates;
One Colomba Drive, Niagara Falls, NY
14305). Hickson, a real pro, is great at
doing all the voices. In these selections I
particularly enjoy how Miss Marple’s
“womanly” knowledge and insight into
human nature help her solve the mys-
teries. Another new release from Listen
for Pleasure is Northanger Abbey; write
for a complete catalogue.

They were independent women,
often property owners, who spoke up for
themselves, refused to be meek. They
often deviated from sexual codes and
mouthed heretical opinions, such as
that women could be preachers. These
were the women most likely to be
hanged as witches, and they are the sub-
jects of Carol F. Karlsen’s book The

Shere Hite. Photo by Rikke Andersen.

Devil in the Shape of a Woman:
Witchcraft in Colonial New England
(Norton, $22.95, 416 pp.). Funny how
unsurprising are the traits characterizing
the “witches” that the author uncovers
in this “pioneer” work.

Shere Hite’s massive new report,
Women and Love: A Cultural Revolu-
tion in Progress (Knopf, $24.95, 922
pp.!) will be out in paperback in Febru-
ary, and we’ll review it at that time. (In
our September issue will be an account
of an NWSA session at which Hite
spoke.) A little more manageable, and
corroborating many of Hite’s results, is
Sally Cline and Dale Spender’s study of
women in Britain, Reflecting Men at
Twice Their Natural Size (title courte-
sy of Virginia Woolf; Seaver Books/
Holt, $17.95, 193 pp.). One interest-
ing exercise Dale (not a diffident person)
undertook was trying to take up 50 per-
cent of the conversation when talking
with men. Previous studies had indi-
cated that “in conversation with men it
is almost unknown for any woman to
talk for more than one third of the time

. women consistently report that
they had a fair share of the conversation,
even if their ‘share’ was less than 20%.”
The most Dale could achieve was an
average of 39 percent, even though she
thought she had surpassed the fifty mark
and had “believed [herself] to be aggres-
sive, rude, inconsiderate, domineering
and unpleasant” in striving for an equal
share. “Without exception each [male
conversationalist] volunteered the in-
formation that [she] was impossible, that
[she] didn’t listen to a word he said, and
that [she] was overbearingly rude.”

by Janet Palmer Mullaney

Two beautiful books from Godine
for lovers of Italian culture are The Mer-
chant of Prato by Iris Origo ($14.95,
illus., PB) and The Prettiest Love Let-
ters in the World: Letters between
Lucrezia Borgia and Pietro Bembo,
1503-1519 ($25). Barbara Tuchman
called Origo’s history of an actual
fourteenth-century merchant-banker
“one of the great works of historical
writing of the twentieth century.” From
her subject’s voluminous records, Origo
constructed a portrait of a marriage and
of Florentine society. The second book
is a splendid example of bookmaking art:
It is printed in two colors on laid paper
and set in hot metal type in the elegant
typeface called Bembo (first created for a
Cardinal who figures prominently in the
text). Lucrezia Borgia was not the
malefactor that later anti-Borgia writers
made her out to be. She was married
three times before she was twenty-three
to further schemes of her relatives, one
of them being her father, Pope
Alexander VI. The book chronicles the
enduring relationship between this
lovely, talented woman and her friend
and lover.

Anyone interested in women in
jazz will want to read All in Good Time
(Oxford University Press $14.95), a
collection of essays by Marian
McPartland, who besides being a jazz
great herself, is a great champion of jazz
women — among them Mary Lou
Williams and the International Sweet-
hearts of Rhythm, a racially mixed all-
female orchestra from the 1930s and
1940s.

Toth and Koppelman
Awards

The third annual Susan Koppel-
man Award for best 1987 an-
thology (or best multiply au-
thored or edited book) that is a feminist
study of American culture went this year
to The Women’s West, edited and in-
troduced by Susan Armitage and
Elizabeth Jameson (University of
Oklahoma Press). The award is spon-
sored by the women’s caucuses of the
Popular and American Culture Associa-
tions. The award for best popular culture
title went to Politics of the Heart: A
Lesbian Parenting Anthology, edited
by Sandra Pollock and Jeanne Vaughn
(Firebrand Books). Honorable mentions
went to On to Victory: Propaganda Plays
of the Suffrage Movement, edited by Bet-
tina Friedl (Northeastern University
Press) and A Private War: Letters and
Diaries of Madge Preston, 1862-1867,
edited and with an introduction by Vir-
ginia Walcott Beauchamp.

The Emily Toth Award for the best
single-authored work went to The Age
of Sex Crime by Jane Caputi (Bolling
Green State University Popular Press).
Three honorable mentions were The
Grounding of Modern Feminism by Nancy
F. Cott (Yale University Press), Color,
Sex, and Poetry by Gloria Hull (Indiana
University Press), and The Romance
Revolution by Carol Thurston (Illinois).

Publishers who wish 1988 works con-
sidered should send them to Susan at
6301 Washington Ave., St. Louis MO
63130 and to Emily c/o the English De-
partment, University of Louisiana at
Baton Rouge. Publishers of short story
collections featuring North American
women writers should also send their
books to Susan. This will accomplish
two purposes: consideration for review
in Belles Lettres (Susan is an active con-
sulting editor with a lot of clout!) and
representation of authors in one of her
many thematic anthologies (three pub-
lished, three in press, and many more to

come).
July/August 1988