Addams and Wald, Kate breaks with genteel expectations  
to find her greatest fulfillment: city welfare work. First as a  
child abuse investigator for Hull House, later as a successful  
crusader for the establishment of a Federal Bureau of Chil-  
dren, Kate “rejoiced ... that she was laboring in behalf of the  
city.... That deep and burning need for religion, or for love,  
or for some splendid and irresistible impetus, was satisfied in  
part by her present work."  

What is so intriguing about the Peattie book, and what sets  
it apart from the Deland type of New Woman novel familiar  
in its age, is that Kate does not lose independence or compro-  
mise principle for the sake of her beliefs. The novel chronicles  
her feisty battle with a manipulative mother and a rejecting  
father, who wish her to turn her Wellesley education to the  
pursuit of wealthy young men; her co-op lodging-house  
experiences in the Hyde Park/University of Chicago world;  
and her eye-opening lessons from visiting battered women and  
children in tenement households. Ever direct, she counters  
when a society matron criticizes her spinsterhood, "They think  
a woman heroic when she sacrifices herself for her children,  
but shouldn’t I be much more heroic if I worked all my life  
for other people’s children?"  

In many ways the novel is one of the more radical books of  
its day, for Kate does not atone for her "subversive" beliefs in  
arid spinsterhood, nor does she waver in her belief that a  
companionate marriage can free both sexes to work and love.  
Although the narrative sometimes founders in polemics about  
woman’s social responsibility as a necessary extension of her  
domestic role (a belief ardently held by many of the period's  
feminists), the novel does not hold back when it suggests that  
subordinate marriage, not commitment to professionalism, is  
a danger for many women.  

Addams, Wald, Peattie, and her fictional heroine were all  
daughters of privilege. Hilda Satt, a Polish Jew who emigrated  
to Chicago as a girl of ten in 1892, was certainly not. I Came  
a Stranger: The Story of a Hull-House Girl (University of  
Illinois Press, 1989, $24.95, 248 pp.) is edited by her  
daughter Dena J. Epstein and placed in historical perspective  
in a useful introduction by historian Lynn Weinter. To read it  
is to learn about the interaction of the settlement with the  
working class, particularly the young sweatshop and factory  
girl who had little opportunity for education, and thus ad-  
vancement, without a Hull House or a Henry Street. The  
book, which covers Hilda Polacheck’s life from the 1890s to  
the Depression years, is not actually a reprint, although it  
should be. When Hilda completed it in 1953, her daughter  
records in the "Afterword," publishers to whom she sent the  
manuscript asked her, “who would want to read about an  
obscure woman like you?" But the rise of the new social  
history, with its focus on "average" lives and mass political  
and labor movements, makes the publication of this work both  
timely and significant. As in a host of working-class memoirs  
and novels — Anzia Yezierska’s Bread-Givers, Agnes Smed-  
ley's Daughter of Earth, Rose Cohen’s Out of the Shadows,  
and Meridel Le Sueur’s Women on the Breadlines, to name a  
few — the privations of the urban poor are vividly and  
accurately depicted. Here Hilda speaks of her early years:  

I was fourteen years old.... I had no difficulty learning the  
[knitting] trade and I was soon able to earn four dollars a  
week.... So between my sister’s and my pay the family could  
exist. We worked from seven in the morning till six in the  
evening, six days a week.  

Soon, like the eponymous heroine of Stephen Crane’s 1893  
novella Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, Hilda finds work sewing  

cuffs for ten hours a day. Unlike the ill-fated Maggie, though,  
Hilda does not seek a spurious escape from the deadly  
monotony of the workplace in the arms of a neighborhood  
tough. She is, in her apt word, “lucky," for “the thought of  
going to Hull-House in the evening [makes] the day’s work  
bearable." Soon she is attending classes, dances, and rallies,  
and writing essays on the ghetto. When she begins work for  
a publishing company, her pay is “now called a ‘salary’  
instead of ‘wages.’"  

Though marriage and motherhood take her away from Hull  
House and Chicago, her chronicle of wifely affluence, then  
harder times as a Depression-era widow running a hotel, is  
infused with compassion for the downtrodden. We admire  
the woman who, now a manager rather than an employee, can  
write: "I was enraged to think how hard these [chambermaids]  
were working and what small wages they were getting.... I  
was paid a very good salary for those days and kept thinking  
of the maids."  

The overworked cleaning woman at the center of Fannie  
Hurst’s novel Lummox (Plume/NAL, 1989, $8.95, 329 pp.  
PB), first published in 1923, would have earned the sympa-  
thies of all the socially concerned women discussed here. The  
book is a potent reminder that many immigrant women lacked  
the awareness to enable the reformers in the community to  
come to their aid. In her introduction to the newly reissued  
text, the noted playwright Alice Childress informs us that  
Hurst sympathetically drew Bertha, the Scandinavian work-  
horse, as a woman "who needed someone who would at least  
passively and kindly accept her labor." Bertha represents a  
social tragedy, as, no doubt, did many domestic workers of  
the turn of the century (Hurst sets the story in that period).  
Her employers take all and return nothing. They give her dirty  
work, long hours, and inappropriate cast-off clothes. They  
lean on her strength when they are in pain and snub her the  
next day.  

By 1900 over one-fourth of American women, many of  
them Black, still toiled in domestic service, which was  
considered far less attractive than department store or even  
factory work. Hurst attempts to add a new dimension to their  
experience by endowing the inarticulate, slow-moving Bertha  
with the soul of a poet. Fully alive to beauty but shut off from  
it, Bertha thrills to a line of poetry overheard from the  
scullery, to a glimpse of finely dressed women at a dinner  
party for which she has slaved twelve hours — only to clean  
up for another two. If Laboring Woman as Silent Aesthete  
does not quite work, it is still a welcome antidote to late-  
Victorian versions of the “working girl," the popular fare in  
which she is rescued by—or from—her employer, or falls to  
seduction and death. And, like Hilda Polacheck on sweat-  
shops, Hurst is eloquent on the domestic’s “body tiredness at  
the end of a seventeen hour day from stoking the coal range  
at 6 a.m. to placing the two shining apples and silver pitcher  
of water beside the [master’s bed] at eleven p.m." We need  
such books.  

Bertha is a permanent member of the servant class; British  
novelist E.M. Delafield’s matronly protagonist in The Provin-  
cial Lady in Wartime (Academy Chicago, 1986, $8.95, 349  
pp., PB), which appeared in 1940, is a permanent member of  
the class that "manages" servants. Sometimes it seems that the  
narrator’s emotional and domestic life is centered on handling  
the moody cook, the flighty parlormaid, and the Daily,  
Weekly, and Sometime help who enable the complacent lives  
of the provincial upper-middle-class to run smoothly. Yet if