Murdoch’s Latest:

A Middling Muddle?

The Book and the Brotherhood, by Iris  
Murdoch. New York: Viking Penguin,  
1988, $19.95, 607 pp.

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Like many of Murdoch’s previous  
novels, The Book and the Brotherhood  
has a Shakespearean substructure; it is a wild, tragicomic brew of  
Macbeth and A Midsummer Night's  
Dream, with a dash of Marxism. The  
book begins with a summer ball at Oxford attended by almost all its charac-  
ters, long-time friends since undergrad-  
uate days, and their various significant  
others. During the enchantment of  
these revels, characters fall in love with  
the wrong people or become otherwise  
entangled in illusions that are gradually  
resolved in the complex, ensuing plot.  
The group forms “the brotherhood,” a  
band of well-to-do individuals who have  
long financed the writing activities of  
David Crimond, a brilliant political  
philosopher whom they knew in college.  
This Scottish mystery man appears at  
the ball “dancing like Shiva,” the Hindu  
god of death, and walks off — for the  
second time — with the wife of Duncan,  
devastating him anew. The middle-aged  
friends then begin reconsidering  
whether or not they should continue  
supporting “the book” that Crimond is  
writing, about which they know noth-  
ing. Their doubts about him and the  
content of his work lead to multitudes  
of confrontations, encounters, be-  
trayals, conversions, accidents, mira-  
cles, unions, and reunions that consti-  
tute Murdoch’s complex, ambitious  
twenty-third novel.  
If this sounds like familiar Murdoch  
territory, right you are. As the novelist,  
who is also a well-known philosopher,  

has often remarked in interviews, “Life  
is such a muddle.” Her characters in The  
Book and the Brotherhood make similar  
observations which, in the context of  
this somewhat tired novel, unfortunate-  
ly ring true. Devoted fans of Murdoch’s  
work will find many of the features that  
we have come to know and love — a  
noble homosexual (Gerard), his long-  
unrequited lover from afar (Rose), a  
saintly but somewhat foolish teacher  
whom Gerard may love (Jenkin Rider-  
hood), an inspired priest who doubts his  
faith (Father McAlister), a woman who  
believes she is — and may indeed be — a  
witch (Lily). But alas, the oxygen is  
lacking. One keeps hoping that their  
creator will finally stretch these types  
into psychological plausibility, that they  
will eventually assume the conviction of  
three-dimensional reality, but Murdoch  
falls short of succeeding with that trick  
of art this time.

Murdoch has been justly praised for  
her stunning, unequaled gift of charac-  
terization as well as her ever-intriguing  
philosophical concerns. We tend to feel  
passionately about Hilary in A Word  
Child, for example, or Dandy in Bruno’s  
Dream. More to the point, we believe  
them; they contain a large portion of our  
shared human experience. In this area,  
The Book and the Brotherhood falters  
badly. Its most interesting “characters”  
are a parrot (Gerard’s childhood pet),  
and a snail lost in King’s Cross station.

All the humans fail to convince, and  
none of them — not even that vague,  
doomed saint, Jenkin — is even like-  
able. They drink and think, think and  
drink. Meanwhile, they fumble in their  
relationships with each other until the  
end, when a wedding and a few “new  

beginnings” are hastily arranged. (Some  
reviewers have pointed to the missed  
opportunities for relationships as the  
whole meaning of this novel, which may  
well be true. But that the novel fails to  
establish a relationship with us is also  
true and perhaps more important; we too  
are not engaged.)

The most central failure in character-  
ization occurs with Crimond, a latter-  
day Macbeth with all of the nihilism but  
none of the poetry. His acquaintances  
perceive him as a quirky, sexy genius  
with a penchant for Russian roulette and  
apocalyptic social philosophy; we per-  
ceive him, rather, as a destructive  
child-man whose motives and actions  
are inexplicable (save by Murdoch’s  
puppetry). The presence of such autho-  
rial manipulations mars this muddle.

Compared with Murdoch’s estab-  
lished masterpieces, such as A Word  
Child and Bruno’s Dream, her latest work  
remains somewhat flat, contrived, and  
unoriginal. On the other hand, it far  
outranks in literary quality her few flops  

(such as The Italian Girl and The Uni-  
corn). The Book and the Brotherhood  
should be classed with Murdoch’s mid-  
range novels like The Sea, the Sea and  
The Black Prince. They have serious  
flaws in structure or characterization but  
nevertheless contain flashes of verbal  
felicity, the uncanny insight into the  
nature of love, the understanding of suf-  
fering in all its shapes, and philosophical  
depth that her readers have long cher-  
ished. Some magnificent touches are  
found in this novel — the midsummer  
madness of the ball, for example, is en-  
chanting in every detail, and Gerard’s  
meditations at his father’s deathbed are  
both surprisingly moving and philo-  
sophically arresting. Keep searching for  
these veins of gold, and let us hope for  
better things with the prolific Dame  
Tris’s next novel.

© Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger is  
Chair of the English Department at Man-  
hattanville College. She teaches courses in  
British women writers of the twentieth cen-  
tury and Commonwealth literature.

Back Issues

Available for $3.50 (three or more $2) from 11151  
Captain’s Walk Ct., Gaithersburg, MD 20878.

Preview: Lou Andreas Salome, Louise Erdrich,  
Doris Grumbach interview, Latinas, Meridel  
LeSueur, explorers, Viragos.

Volume I

Number 1: Ntozake Shange interview, Kay Boyle,  
Djuna Barnes interviews, Bobbie Ann Mason, Isabel  
Allende. Number 2: Italian writers, Faye Moskowitz  
interview, Anita Brookner, Black feminist criticism,  
Koppelman on Spender, Paula Modersohn-Becker,  
Marilyn Hacker, Luisa Valenzuela. Number 3:  
Women of the West, Alice Dunbar-Nelson, Linda  
Pastan interview, Dorothy Richardson rediscovery,  
short stories. Number 4: Marina Tsvetaeva, Sheila  
Fugard interview, Winnie Mandela biography, “Be-  
hind the Fig Leaf.” Number 5: Canadians, Josephine  
Jacobsen interview, 19th-century anthologies, Illinois  
short fiction. Number 6: Anzia Yezierska, mysteries,  
Viragos, first novels, Susan Allen Toth interview.  
Volume II

Number 1: Australian and New Zealand fiction  
writers and playwrights, Penelope Mortimer retrospec-  
tive, Vernon Lee. Number 2: Irish writers, Gwen  
John, Mothers of the Novel, Louise Erdrich interview,  

firsts in fiction, poetry. Number 3: Re-visions of  
Black women, Latina prose, dissident women, May  
Miller Sullivan interview, Mlle de Scudéry red-  
iscovery, Defiant Muse. Number 4: Lesbian writers,  
Judy Grahn interview, WW II novels, Evelyn Scott  
rediscovery, cartoonists. Number 5: Asian, Native  
American, Linda Ty-Casper interview, Lorine  
Neidecker rediscovery, Tribe of Dina. Number 6:  
Medieval writers, Rose Macaulay, Rebecca West,  
Alison Lurie interview, feminist criticism.

Volume III

Number 1: Jewish writers, Fay Weldon, firsts in fic-  
tion, report on Women’s Studies conference, Virago  
novels. Number 2: Centenaries of Marianne Moore,  
Emily Dickinson, HD. Interviews with Sonia Johnson  
and Charlotte Bunch, Willa Cather, avant-garde  
writers. Number 3: Mothers, working-class women,  
women and work, Triangle Shirtwaist factory fire,  
Harriette Arnow. Number 4: Stories from South  
Africa, short stories, women and war, Toni Morrison,  
Mary Daly, Bharati Mukherjee interview, Edith  
Wharton, Gwendolyn Brooks. Number 5: Asian  
Writers (II), Susan Fromberg Schaeffer interview,  
Mary Lee Settle retrospective. Number 6: Special  
expanded issue — writers from Australia & New Zeal-  
and, short stories, mysteries, Toni Morrison inter-  
view, Margaret Drabble, index to Volumes I-III.

Women on the  
Color Line

Evolving Stereotypes and  
the Writings of

George Washington Cable,  
Grace King, Kate Chopin  
Anna Shannon Elfenbein

“After an illuminating and incisive  
examination of the ways in which  
cultural concepts of gender, class,  
and race intersected in 19th-century  
representations of the ‘tragic oc-  
toroon,’ Anna Elfenbein shows how  
Cable, King, and Chopin defied  
such stereotyping. Her book offers  
fresh and exciting readings of all  
three writers as well as a  
fascinating history of ‘the fiction of  
racial difference’”—Sandra M.  
Gilbert, Princeton University

Women on the Color Line ex-  
amines the reemergence and the  
transformation of an abolition  
stereotype, that of the ‘tragic oc-  
toroon,’ in the fiction of Cable,  
King, and Chopin, three white  
Southern authors who subverted  
the plantation myth by revealing  
the symbiotic tie between sexism  
and racism in their fictions of the  
color line.

December 1988, 240 pp., $27.50

Elizabeth Bishop  
Her Artistic Development  
Thomas J. Travisano

“(This book) brings us, for the first  
time, a comprehensive study of  
Bishop’s work that meets the standards  
set by the best shorter essays on her  
writing, such as those by David  
Kalstone and John Unterecker. It makes  
a large contribution to the recent  
critical assessment of a formerly under-  
valued poet.”—Paul Breslin, author of  
The Psycho-Political Muse: American  
Poetry since the Fifties

In this first study of Elizabeth  
Bishop’s whole career, Travisano ex-  
plores her development as an artist.  
Through sensitive reading of the  
poems, supported by comparison with  
Bishop’s letters, interviews, stories,  
memoirs, and critical essays, he defines  
the traditions that shaped Bishop’s in-  
trospective early work and the evolu-  
tion of her later work toward a more  
public style.  
May 1988, 208 pp., $27.50

CALLALOO POETRY AND  
FICTION SERIES

Pyramid of Bone  
Thylias Moss

This is Thylias Moss’s second volume  
of poetry. She has been described by  
Alvin Aubert as “an impelling new  
voice on the Afro-American poetry  
scene;” hers is a style “uniquely her  
own, an assertive womanish voice  
tempered by her surrealistic rendi-  
tions.” The poems collected in this  
volume reflect Moss’s deep emotional  
capacity and a profound intellectual  
commitment in being able to balance  
thought and feeling.

February 1989, 80 pp., paper, $8.95

Fifth Sunday  
Rita Dove  
Winner of the 1987 Pulitzer Prize for  
poetry

“... Dove’s strength lies in the in-  
teresting range and diversity of her  
stories. They reveal the polymorphic  
nature of the black experience and,  
even more important, the impact on the  
individual of cultural erosion and  
assimilation.”—Kamili Anderson,  
Belles Lettres

1985, 71 pp., paper, $6.00

University Press of Virginia  
Box 3608 University Station © Charlottesville, VA 22903 © (804) 924-3468

20 © Belles Lettres

Fall 1988