Impressions

by Janet Palmer Mullaney et al.

Art & Photography

The diary of artist Kaethe Kollwitz  
(1867-1945) has been called one of this  
century's great autobiographies. Born in  
East Prussia, Kollwitz was a lifelong rev-  
olutionary who first came to prominence  
with a series of etchings called “Revolt of  
the Weavers.” Northwestern University  
Press’s edition of The Diary and Letters  
of Kaethe Kollwitz (edited by Hans  
Kollwitz and translated by Richard and  
Clara Winston, $39.95 [HB], $15.95  
[PB], 267 pp.) presents her writings fol-  
lowed by fifty-three black-and-white  
plates. The entries are a mélange of ar-  
tistic, humanitarian, spiritual, and fa-  
milial concerns, as is this 1920 diary  
excerpt concerning a poster Kollwitz was  
asked to make for a large-scale aid pro-  
gram for Vienna:

Self-portrait, from The Diary and Letters  
of Kaethe Kollwitz

While I drew, and wept along with the  
terrified children I was drawing, I really  
felt the burden I am bearing. I felt that I  
have no right to withdraw from the re-  
sponsibility of being an advocate. It is my  
duty to voice the sufferings of men, the  
never-ending sufferings heaped moun-  
tain-high. This is my task, but it is not  

an easy one to fulfill. Work is supposed to  
relieve you. But is it any relief when in  
spite of my poster people in Vienna die of  
hunger every day? And when I know that?  
Did I feel relieved when I made the prints  
on war and knew that the war would go  
on raging? Certainly not. Tranquillity and  
relief have come to me only when I was  
engaged on one thing: the big memorial  
for Peter [her son]. Then I had peace and  
was with him.

New Sage Press publisher Maureen  
Michelson is “dedicated to producing  
quality books not only in subject matter,  
but in production.” Her background as  
the editor of an arts magazine served her  
well in producing such impressive pho-  
tographic collections as A Portrait of  
American Mothers & Daughters (pho-  
tographs by Raisa Fastman) and The  
New Americans (photographs by Ulli  
Steltzer). The most luminous is Women  
& Work: Photographs and Personal  
Writings. One can spend hours brows-  

ing in this volume, reveling in the mul-  
tiplicity of who women are and what  
they do. The affecting marriage of auto-  
biographical text and images makes this  
book a treasure and an inspiration.

Gifts of Age is a “book of days”  
adapted from Chronicle Books’s volume  
of the same name. It is exquisitely pro-  
duced and replete with portraits of beau-  
tiful, vital women, the commonality  
being that they have mostly white or  
grey hair.

Karen F. Guisti. “In their cocoon stages, the sculptures can be homely. I must work many  

hours sanding, scraping, hammering. . .  

with just a vision in my mind of what the emerging  

piece will look like. My work is such an extension of myself — like a birthing experience —  
painful and euphoric.” Photo by Nancy Palmieri from Women & Work.

Eleanor Milder Lawrence, from Gifts of Age

Out & About

At the American Booksellers Conven-  
tion last June, we spoke to Barbara  
Smith from Kitchen Table: Women of  
Color Press, who was exulting over a  
major coup (a first for a lesbian/feminist  
publisher). After a long siege of the  
Quality Paperback Book Club, she has  
succeeded in placing Seventeen Sylla-  
bles by Hisaye Yamamoto as a club alter-  
nate. Barbara’s campaign included per-  
sistent phone calls and strategic mailings  
whenever reviews came out. The clin-  
cher may have been the Hiroshige post-  
card she sent that looked like the prize  
scroll one of the women in the collection  
received, with the pertinent text from  
Seventeen Syllables appended.

Margarita Donnelly of Calyx was  
even more ebullient than usual because  
she had just sold the Japanese rights to  
the Women and Aging anthology. And  
Firebrand Books publisher Nancy Be-  
reano had news that three of her recent  
titles have won awards: The prestigious  
Lamont Poetry Prize went to Minnie  
Bruce Pratt for Crime Against Nature; a  
Before Columbus Foundation American  
Book Award went to A Burst of Light by  
Audre Lorde; and Trash, stories by  
Dorothy Allison, won both the lesbian  
fiction and the lesbian small press awards  
at the first annual Lambda Literary  
Awards, held at the ABA.

Briefly Noted

Diane Peacock Jezic’s subject in  
Women Composers: The Lost Tradi-  
tion Found (The Feminist Press,  
$12.95, 250 pp., PB) is the life and  
works of twenty-five composers of West-  
ern art music from the eleventh century  
to the present. Each chapter consists of a  
biographical outline of one composer, a  
discussion of her life and music, an anal-  
ysis of one or more compositions drawn  
from two cassette tapes available from  
the Leonarda record label, and selected  
lists of compositions, bibliographical  
items, and discographies.

The major value of the book is in  
having all of the materials in one place.  
There is no original research. The biog-  
raphies are cursory and superficial, the  
summaries redundant. Almost no at-  
tempt is made to identify modern edi-  
tions, except when they are readily  
available in such already well-known  
sources as Briscoe’s Historical Anthology  
of Music by Women (1987) or the Da  
Capo Women Composer series. Text  
choices are not analyzed, except for the  
sentence “The personal life... must  
have affected her choice of texts” —  
even when it seems obvious that choices  

have been made relative to autobio-  

graphical facts, such as Barbara Strozzi’s  

choice of “Betrayal” or Louise Reich-  
ardt’s song from Das Knaben Wunder-  
horn about the women who came “with  
sickle and shovels, and wanted to drive  
away the dancing Swabians.”

A formulaic foreword and preface  
precede the most valuable part of the  
book — an introduction preparing the  
reader to consider questions of oppor-  
tunity, aesthetics, redefinitions, con-  
texts, and values. Appendices are of  
some value, although one wonders ab-  
out a ranking of texts according to their  
inclusion of women that excludes Don-  
ald Ivey’s Sound Pleasure (1985), surely  
one of the few that treats women fairly.

—Jane P. Ambrose

® The women’s caucus of the Popular  
and American Culture Association gave  
the following awards for 1988 books:  
The Emily Toth Award for the best  
single-author feminist studies went to  
Jill Dolan for The Feminist Spectator as  
Critic (UMI Research Press) and  
Kathleen Gregory Klein for The  
Woman Detective: Gender and Genre  
(University of Illinois Press); the Susan  
Koppelman Award for the best anthol-  
ogy, multiauthored, or edited work went  

to Feminist Art Criticism, edited by  
Arlene Raven, Cassandra L. Langer,  
and Joanna Frueh (UMI), Afro-  
American Women Writers, 1746 —  
1933, edited by Ann Allen Shockley  
(GK Hall), and Feminism and Meth-  
odology: Social Science Issues, edited  
and with an introduction by Susan Har-  
ding (Indiana University Press). Past  
recipients have told the women’s caucus  
how important the awards are, repre-  
senting a major shift for the academic  
authors in particular, whose depart-  
ments were justifying lower salaries for  
women because their male peers were  
getting all the awards.

Of Tea and  
Grendel’s Mother

I collect letters to the editors of book  
reviews regarding how women authors  
and their books are treated. (Beyond a  
sense of collective vindication, I hope  
they may prove helpful in grant-  
writing.) In perusing the Times Book  
Review letters column, I saw the follow-  
ing sample of the crackling wit of Aus-  
tralian author Thea Astley:

In her essay “Why Australian Writers  
Keep Their Heads Down,” Carolyn See  
failed to mention one of my most glaring  
faults, tea addiction. I confess to 20 cups  
per day. This omission is hardly surprising.  
The United States has managed to put  
men on the moon but has failed to invent  
the teapot. (Do the events of 1773 and  
the subsequent Intolerable Acts of the  
following year die hard? We also have  
bitter and more recent memories of colo-  
nial ill treatment.) Surely in the 70’s of  
this century when the French were seeking  
assistance in the setting up of nuclear  
pollution of the South Pacific, the United  
States could have insisted on being given  
templates of a teapot prototype by their  
Gallic partners as a more than fair ex-  
change!

While I realize Ms. See’s article was  
broad-brush metaphor, I feel she depended  
too richly (is that the word?) on hyperbole  
in her depiction of the Oz female writer,  
rendering her as a Down Under version of  
Grendel’s mother, a well-known pre-Saxon  
critic. I must insist that, although being a  
smoker and occasional cusser, I do know  
how to behave when I am “out,” as they  
say, and that during the whole two hours  
of readings in which I sat in a lecture  
theater at the University of Sydney behind  
whose sacred walls smoking is forbidden,  
neither smoke nor profanity escaped my  
lips. See obviously caught up with me in  
the coffee break as I recovered.

Still, I am relieved to read that I was  
merely swearing like a “trouper.” Heaven  
forbid it should be that more formidable  
charge of “trooper.”

Belles Lettres @ 39