Impressions

Middle-Aged Women

For those who wish to pursue things and
women medieval, the following books
should be of interest.

® Holy Feast and Holy Fast: The Re-
ligious Significance of Food to Medieval
Women, by Caroline Walker Bynum
(University of California Press). Dante
Scholar John Freccero in the Times Book
Review said that this book “explains the
apparently bizarre eating behavior of
many widely venerated medieval
women, not in terms of internalized
masochism or anorexia — explanations
[the author] considers anachronistic —
but in terms of the religious significance
of food in medieval culture.”

@ She was poetess, abbess, musi-
cian, artist, scientist, theologian,
prophet, and mystic — one could call
Hildegard of Bingen a “Renaissance

Briefly Noted

Who has not been irked by an

offensive billboard ad?

Women in particular seem
to suffer from the trashy, misguided
minds of advertising directors, who use
women’s bodies and ersatz glamour to
push products that are usually question-
able anyway (like cigarettes and al-
cohol). Some people dare to protest vis-
ually: By altering or adding comments
to tasteless, degrading, or exploitative
posters, they convey their disgust in a
witty and effective (although illegal and
risky) manner. British photojournalist
Jill Posener has been recording these
graffitified images since 1981, and Pan-
dora has published the results of her ef-
forts in two paperback volumes entitled
Louder Than Words and Spray It Loud.
The Fiat ad shown on this page was the
one that got her started.

Alice Kahn coined the words Yuppie
and CHUMP (Children of Upwardly
Mobile Professionals), which were lifted
from her and packaged by Madison Ave-
nue publishers, with no benefit to her.
She dealt with this by doing what she
does best: writing about it. Read My Life
as a Gal: Memoirs, Essays and Outright
Silliness (Delacorte) for Kahn on this
topic and others, such as her change of
careers: “So to balance the yin of my
nursing job, I started yanging in the al-
ternative press. Some of my patients read
it and are shocked. The voice in the
paper is not the angel of mercy they
think befits a sister of perpetual bedpan-
scrubbing. But I persist because I start
laboring under the delusion that the Lord
is speaking through me via the mysteri-
ous route of the dirty joke.” On the

12 ® Belles Lettres

Photo by Jill Posener from Louder Than Words.

woman,” except that she lived from
1098 to 1179. I highly recommend her
music: Two excellent albums are “A
Feather on the Breath of God” by Emma
Kirkby and the Gothic Voices (Hyper-
ion) and “Ordo Virtutum” by Sequentia
(Harmonia Mundi). Bear & Company
(P.O. Drawer 2860, Santa Fe, NM
87504-2860) has for the past few years
been issuing works of this formidable
genius. Meditations With Hildegard of
Bingen was the first translation of her
work into English and presents selec-
tions from all of her books. Scivias or
“Know the Ways” is a mystic vision in
the form of an alchemical journey
through the higher planes. The Illuminations
of Hildegard of Bingen reproduces 36
visionary images in full color and with
commentary, and Hildegard of Bingen’s
Book of Divine Works (with letters and
music) harmoniously blends science and
religion in its view of the universe. Bear
also publishes Meditations with Julian of
Norwich, who was a 14th-century mystic.

Podunk author tour: “I guess I most
nearly fit the title ‘female humorist,’
which meant I was invariably described
as a hip Erma Bombeck or a radical Erma
Bombeck or a premenopausal Erma
Bombeck. I consoled myself by thinking
that they probably call Alice Walker the
black Erma Bombeck and Anne Tyler
the serious Erma Bombeck.” On The
Brie Generation: “After frantically rush-
ing to achieve, in one decade, what had
been denied her for all of history, when
the noise and music stopped, what our
thoroughly modern woman heard was
her own biological clock going: cuckoo!
cuckoo!” And on natural childbirth:
“Once women started demanding fore-
play, an Alternative Birthing Center
was virtually a fait accompli. If the
woman was going to be involved in sex,
then gosh darn it, the man better well
be involved in birth.”

Alice Kahn. Photo by Jane Scherr.

Skirting the Left Bank

The women writers of the Left
Bank were a fascinating lot, as
Shari Benstock’s book about
them demonstrates. Yet more writers
than the principal ones Benstock discus-
ses still lurk around the periphery of that
world, writers who should be more
known and valued for their contribu-
tions to literature. Two among them are
the subjects of recent reprints by Pen-
guin/Virago. May Sinclair’s The Life and
Death of Harriet Frean (1922) was one
of 24 novels by this woman of letters,
who was a friend of all the eminent liter-
ary men of the period, of the Imagist
poets, and of Dorothy Richardson, about
whose prose Sinclair created the term
“stream of consciousness.” Through the
life of its heroine, this pristine, concise
work presents the self-sacrifice of the
ideal Victorian woman as a grotesque
travesty. Eliot Bliss (who now lives in
England) was also a friend of Dorothy
Richardson, and she knew Jean Rhys
well (they had in common a colonial,
Caribbean background). Her novel
Saraband was published in 1931. It cen-
ters around the perceptions of its
heroine, Louie, who stretches toward
adulthood as she passes from solitude to
a relationship with an artistic male
cousin to a period in a convent boarding
school and finally to the advent of World
War I and the challenge of finding work.
Unlike the writing of some of the
other Left Bank women, which is lost
or inaccessible, that of Jean Rhys has
often been reprinted of late (Norton pub-
lishes omnibus collections of both her
novels and her stories). Rhys “remained
an outsider even to that band of outsid-
ers,” says Teresa R. O’Connor in her
critical study Jean Rhys: The West Indian
Novels (Syracuse University Press). “In
her writing, place is most concretely rep-
resented by three countries: Dominica,
England and France — the first repre-
senting an Eden-like state of grace, at
least on first recollection, the second a
cold and neurasthenic hell, and the third
a limbo capable of at least providing dis-
traction from the self.” O’Connor makes
great use of a certain “Black Exercise
Book” to probe the connections and

“transmutations” between Rhys’s life
and her art.

One of the publishers profiled in
Women of the Left Bank, Nancy Cunard,
provides an interesting link to one of
America’s greatest indigenous writers,
Zora Neale Hurston. In a talk on
Hurston given at the Smithsonian In-
stitution in Washington, DC, for Black
History Month, Toni Cade Bambara
pointed out the characteristically avant-
garde nature of Hurston’s contribution
to a collection Cunard edited and pub-
lished in 1934 called Negro. In an essay
entitled “Characteristics of Negro Ex-
pression,” Hurston celebrated the
aesthetic demand for drama and ele-
gance and the profusion of similes and
metaphors in Black speech. (This piece
is reprinted in The Sanctified Church,
published by Turtle Island Press). “For
its day, it was outrageous,” said Bam-
bara. “Black speech was supposed to be
wrong.” Bambara spoke of other unpre-
cedented aspects of Hurston’s writing:
For example, her novel Jonah’s Gourd
Vine presents in poetic dialect a serious
portrayal of a rural Black family. Lest
that strike us as less than earth shaking,
Bambara characterized the pervasive
way in which Black people were por-
trayed in the period as full of “incendiary
icons — incredible stereotypes and
‘comic’ burlesques.”

In 1931 Hurston had already broken
new ground in another way: The Journal
of American Folklore published her article
on Hoodoo, the first scholarly piece on
the subject written by an Afro-Ameri-
can. Hurston’s anthropological writing
is of a piece with her fiction, and one
thing that makes them so good, said
Bambara, is how Hurston “sets herself
down in the middle of things, never dis-
tancing herself.” Hurston’s acknowl-
edgment of connection broke through
the traditional hierarchy of investigator
over subject, which Bambara called
“deeply psychotic” and implied was ra-
cist in terms of White academics writing
about Black people. Cunard’s book, by
the way, was nothing if not controver-
sial. Benstock reprints some of the vilify-
ing (read deeply psychotic) letters
Cunard received for daring to publish
on such a taboo subject.

As long as we are in the realm of wit,
I must mention a new biography of
Stevie Smith called Stevie (Oxford Uni-
versity Press), done by Jack Barbera and
William McBrien, the duo who previ-
ously edited both a Smith bibliography
and her uncollected writings (Me
Again). Glenda Jackson starred in a play
and film biography of Smith, so it is no
surprise that her life is uncommonly in-

teresting and unusual. This biography
benefits from anecdotes gleaned from
friends who were writers also (Olivia
Manning, Rosamond Lehmann,
Elisabeth Lutyens), as well as from mate-
rial from private sources and archives.
Like that of Barbara Pym, Jean Rhys,
and Elizabeth Taylor, Smith’s writing
ebbed in popularity and then hit a re-
surgence. She was a novelist, broadcas-
ter, literary reviewer, and poet. Her
playful line drawings, some of which are
reproduced in the book, parallel her
wordplay. Here is an example:

Lamb dead, dead lamb,

He was, I am,

Separation by a tense

Baulks my eyes’ indifference

Can I see the lately dead

And not bend a sympathetic head?
Can I see lamb dead as mutton
And not care a solitary button?

Jury/August 1987