Promising Poetry

Feminism and Poetry: Language, Experience, Identity, in Women’s Writing, by Jan Montefiore. London and New York: Pandora, 1987, $33.00 (HB), $11.95 (PB), 210 pp. Dwarf Bamboo, by Marilyn Chin. New York: Greenfield, 1987, $9.95, 77 pp.

Night Driving, by Suzanne Helfman. San Francisco: SFSU Chapbook, 1987, $3.00, 91 pp. The White Junk of Love, Again, by Sibyl James. Corvallis, OR: CALYX, 1986, $6.95, 73 pp.

by Anne Herzog

Written for the nonspecialist reader, Jan Montefiore’s Feminism and Poetry provides a solid, ambitious introduction to such debates among feminist critics as: Can we define such terms as “female identity” and “female meaning”? Is there a “female language”? How helpful is it to talk about a tradition of women’s writing apart from the writing of men? Montefiore probes each of these questions through readings of women’s poetry, the majority written by 20th-century American writers, primarily lesbian. Many of the poets she includes — Liz Lochhead, Olga Broumas, Judy Grahn, Irena Klepfisz, and Joan Larkin — have not received the critical attention they deserve, and it is refreshing to see them in this text. Yet Montefiore’s apology in her book’s preface that she has given “little coverage” to Black women poets (except for Audre Lorde) is disappointing and, I would argue, inexcusable at this point in the history of feminist criticism. Despite the omission, Montefiore’s book is an informative sounding of contemporary women’s poetry and an intelligent account of the difficulties of developing feminist poetics.

Marilyn Chin’s Dwarf Bamboo, Suzanne Helfman’s Night Driving, and Sibyl James’s The White Junk of Love, Again are first books of promising poetry. Chin’s poems powerfully depict Chinese-American assimilation into American culture. Chin was born in Hong Kong and raised in Oregon. Her poetry travels between America, the “cundra/Of the logical, a sea of cities, a wood of cars” and China, place of “Hirsute Taoists, failed scholars,” leaving one not familiar with her culture confused and yet allured by the strange beauty of her unfamiliar allusions and images. But cultural unfamiliarity will not stop you from marveling at the power of Chin’s poetry. Describing Chinese calligraphy, she writes: “These awry Chinese characters;/drip, drip, an era’s rain./I see where he placed the brush down/firmly, picked it up gently,/and carried the last stroke home.” Dwarf Bamboo carries “the last stroke home” with an impressively firm yet gentle poet’s touch.

SUBSCRIBE!

Suzanne Helfman experiments with multiple themes and voices in Night Driving, attesting to her versatility as a poet. This range is reflected in the difference between the opening poems, called “Notes on the Art of Fiction,” a series of narrative sketches so inviting that they call for further expansion, and the concluding section, “Day Shift,” whose poems describe the assembly work in an automobile factory. Helfman is strongest, however, in her painful, retrospective descriptions of a mother’s death. As she writes: “Who told you your mother/was gone, that you would find her/nowhere/on this earth?” And again, “Last night my mother appeared/only slightly greyer than the year/she died. I wanted to ask her where/she had been these past sixteen years and how/she spends her time—/but she was so happy/greeting the grandchildren/all hugs and apologies/for not bringing presents—/I couldn’t begin to shape words/into questions.” These are two examples of what Helfman calls, in another poem, “large sadnesses,” but Night Driving is also filled with humor and irony, uplifting because of the care with which she recounts ordinary human experiences.

Sibyl James’s The White Junk of Love, Again is a collection of “translitics,” poems inspired by the poetry of 16th-century French poet Louise Labe that are intended to cut across the meanings, images, and sounds modeled by Labe’s love sonnets. On alternative pages, James gives us first the French text of Labe followed by her translitic revisionary poem. Nonreaders of French will not be able to trace James’s strategies in spinning poetry from Labe, yet the vibrantly sensual, riveting poems of The White Junk of Love, Again will draw your interest with or without this double reading. In her poem to Venus, James writes: “Listen,/I’m an eye watching yours/keep watch. I’m two boned sockets/brimming up to hold you/like a well spills up to hold its moon./You wash me with this fever pain/that soaks my bed,/you lay your eyes against my cheek/like cooling hands./Be my witness, woman./I set my heart bits out like rocks/for you to smooth.” Love in James’s poems has a moving, obsessional quality that is sometimes violent and often shockingly beautiful. Poem #16 opens with “Summers we’d walk this coast for hours,/come back spilling shells,/the sand enameled w/mother of pearl,” and concludes with the following: “My bones breaking under your kiss,/a pattern of crystal and pearled ivory,/taking the shape of you, ringed w/frost.” For James, one definition of the poet is “a voice/translating heart.” The White Junk of Love, Again is poetry of much talent, all working toward translations of the heart.

— Anne Herzog is a doctoral student in English at Rutgers.

A Wreath for the Enemy by Pamela Frankau

McPherson & Co. (P.O. Box 638, New Paltz, NY 12561), 1987, $10.00, 310 pp. (PB)

We should be properly grateful to the publishers of A Wreath for the Enemy, which has been unavailable since 1954. This charming and delightful novel is entirely deserving of the reputation that it has held all these years in the memories of older readers. Frankau’s novel reminds us that adolescence is not just a time of freaky behavior, as we tend to think today, but also a time of intense philosophical concerns.

The story is told in the distinctive voices of several of the principals, chiefly the two English young people who are in the throes of a spiritual crisis when we first meet them in their early teens and are masters of it by the time they approach 20. As befits their age, Penelope and Don are preoccupied more often than they can comfortably admit with the big issues of philosophy — love, death, guilt, hate, penitence, how best to conduct one’s life. As the title suggests, they eventually achieve a spiritual integration and become able to forgive (and thank) the people who stimulated these hard, unsettling questions.

The milestones in their development are two deaths and one near-death of individuals about whom they have conflicting feelings at the time. The first death, perhaps the most important in their maturing process, dramatizes the differences in their upbringing.

Rediscovered novelist Pamela Frankau in her book-lined study.

Penelope is the child of a free-thinking poet who owns a hotel on the Riviera, and Don is the son of kindly but ultraconformist, very British parents who are vacationing next door. Typically, each envies the other’s family situation. Don longs for the world of imagination and intellect that the hotel represents; Penelope pines for the world of suburban routine that Don’s family (dubbed by her father “the Smugs”) seems to epitomize.

Penelope is particularly embarrassed by a current hotel guest who is a family friend, the worldly-wise, fun-loving, champagne-tipping old Duchessa. Don finds her fascinating, but his parents regard her as scandalous and cancel his visiting privileges. Don disobeys them, and one evening they find the Duchessa dead at the hotel. This first distressing encounter with death, dropping as it does right into the middle of more usual adolescent crises, launches both youngsters into a five-year period of soul-searching.

Their struggle toward equilibrium and self-definition is sometimes agonizing, sometimes hilarious, but always absorbing. The summer separates them. Apart, however, they progress along parallel lines toward spiritual resolutions, helped along the way by the two other confrontations with mortality and a whole procession of unforgettable eccentrics with metaphysical itches of their own. Essentially, they both learn the lesson of “The Ancient Mariner,” a poem with which Penelope ruefully identifies: “He prayeth best/ Who loveth best,/ All things great and small.”

As Penelope and Don fumble towards this wisdom, they also master one of the most difficult tasks of maturity — they forgive themselves their own adolescence. How many of us are able to lose that albatross? If you want to know how these two teenagers manage this trick, treat yourself to A Wreath for the Enemy. It may not be as complex or profound as other classic novels of gifted adolescents struggling with moral dilemmas (one thinks, for example, of Elizabeth Bowen’s The Death of the Heart), but Frankau’s novel provides plenty of pleasures of its own. They are well worth savoring.

— Nancy Engbretsen Schamburger

Pieces, scattering over the ground, shreds of scorched uniform and the contents of his lunch box spread out, burned black and uneaten, his identification tag glittering, its light piercing her eyeballs, blasting her head apart, ending with exhaustion and nausea.” Chiyo searches incessantly in the city rubble for Kenichi’s ID tag and bones: The eldest Hara son must have an honorable burial.

Slowly Hiroshima’s stunned survivors build shack homes and life-sustaining makeshift businesses. Although she had not worked before, Chiyo too must take a job to provide for the children because her husband has not yet returned from the army. She wonders how it will be working in City Hall, especially because she is not well and cannot depend on her energy. But “It wasn’t just lack of food and energy that worried her. It was dealing each day with the changing rumors about who would die and who wouldn’t... There was no order to the deaths. People who had not been in the city at all had died because of exposure to their stricken relatives, who had gotten well. People with burn scars and keloids had survived, and people who hadn’t seemed hurt at all were dying.”

Sickness and death continue to surround Chiyo. Husband Shintaro finally returns, a strangely changed man who soon dies of consumption. Daughter Yoko, graduated from high school, is ill with chronic leukemia. Her first husband, Yasu, dies several days after their wedding: He was among those who cared for the injured in the days after the bomb. Yoko’s younger second husband also lives with risk, for while carrying him his mother had been exposed to the radioactivity. When Chiyo remarries, it is to kindly Nakayama, also widowed by the bomb. Theirs is a good partnership, although Chiyo’s class-conscious brother condemns her work and the marriage as disgracing a samurai family.

Chiyo finds satisfaction in her work, at first painting faces on wooden dolls part-time and then as an official in Asahi Enterprises, which sells them. To herself, Chiyo muses about her emancipation:

Suppose Shintaro were alive, had begun teaching again, and had insisted she give up working at Asahi Enterprises. They could never have afforded a new house on his salary. And she would never have experienced the delight of creating and designing the dolls. Or felt the power of knowing that she and all the others were capable of making their own living and their own decisions.

Thus, as for countless women around the world, World War II had not only brought Chiyo immeasurable grief but also a newly independent role as family head during war and a new world of work and family in its aftermath.

After working in the American Embassy in Tokyo, Dorothy Stroup returned to Japan in the early 1960s to teach English at a women’s high school and college in Hiroshima. What she there learned from Japanese friends, plus the encouragement of the Committee of Atomic Survivors in the United States, drove her to spend some 10 years putting their story onto paper.

— Anita M. Mallinckrodt

Belles Lettres @ 11