Retrospective:  
Mary Wesley  

by Barbara Griffith Furst  

At the beginning of The Vacillations of Poppy  
Carew (Penguin, $6.95, 262 pp.) Poppy visits her dying  
father in a hospital, where he tells her he would like an old-  
fashioned funeral complete with black-plumed, horse-drawn  
hearse and hands her a racing magazine ad for Furnival’s  
Fun Rococo Funerals. Later, when she admits that she has  
been jilted by her boyfriend (whom her father cordially  
detests) the pater dies strangled by his own laughter.  

In Jumping the Queue (Penguin, $6.95, 217 pp.), a  
widow in her fifties is tidying up her cottage on the coast of  
southwest England as though for houseguests, and making  
arrangements for the care of Gus, her cantankerous pet  
goose. We soon realize, however, that she is preparing to  
commit suicide — very nicely, mind you, by rowing out to  
sea, where she will have a picnic lunch, swallow sleeping  
pills, drink a bottle of wine, and then throw herself over-  
board and swim until exhaustion, wine, and pills finish her  
off. At the last minute, Matilda gets sidetracked from sui-  
cide by saving a young man from leaping off a parapet into  
the sea. He is being closed in on by the police, and she  
recognizes him as the "Matricide." He had killed his mother  
with a silver tea tray and been much in the news.  

Matilda takes the Matricide home, and their respective  
stories unfold as they find solace in each other’s arms. Her  
handsome husband, who died alone in Paris, had run drugs  
off the coast after retirement and had had an incestuous  
relationship with their older daughter. Her son is now col-  
lecting tombstones from an ancient cemetery that is about to  

—Black Women’s Health, cont’d  

Lulu F. relates her growing dependency on drugs and  
alcohol after a childhood plagued by incest and abuse. Beth  
Richie in her essay, "AIDS: In Living Color" exposes the  
deadly marriage of drug use and culturally insensitive AIDS  
prevention education. And Vida Labrie Jones, in her discus-  
sion of lupus, a chronic inflammatory disease of unknown  
cause, impresses upon the reader the importance of both  
knowing one’s body and conducting regular health checks.  

A... being exposed to all of the "bad medicine" one  
wonders what practical offense Black women could launch  
to take back good health for themselves. Much constructive  
work is being done. Women like Marian Wright Edelman,  
founder and president of the Children’s Defense Fund, and  
Fay Wattleton, president of Planned Parenthood of America  
Inc., evaluate the ramifications of “not-so-benign neglect"  
and misguided political policies on the Afro-American  
community. Both propose practical and encouraging sugges-  
tions for confronting them.  

Wattleton says that "society must provide all of our young  

Mary Wesley. Photo by Kate Ganz Dorment  

become a parking lot. It seems that there is a market for the  
stones in, wouldn’t you know, the United States. Her other,  
very chic, daughter skips from place to place. None of her  
children is particularly interested in her. When Hugh, the  
Matricide, asks in light of her attempted suicide if she has a  
terminal illness she replies, “Haven’t we all?"  

Mary Wesley’s macabre stories are fraught with jaundiced  
relationships between the generations. The protagonists,  

people with a decent general education, tangible job oppor-  
tunities, successful role models, and real hope for the fu-  
ture." Edelman says Americans should "focus on what  
unites us" and implement social policies that will prevent  
“another generation of black babies from becoming the poor  
black mothers and fathers that we so begrudgingly try to  
help today."  

These women tap into the tradition of Mattie Hereford, a  
Huntsville, Alabama, midwife who ushered almost a thou-  
sand babies into the world. One year before her death,  
Hereford said, "I know I am important, because I feel it,  
you know, to myself." That theme streams through these  
works and energetically squares off against (in the words of  
Audre Lorde) “the despair born of fear and anger and  
powerlessness which is [the Black woman’s] greatest inter-  
nal enemy" as it confronts the economic and social obstacles  
that shorten the lives and limit Black women’s potential. In  
keeping with the words written in 1827 by the founders of  
America’s first Black newspaper, Freedom’s Journal, "We  
wish to plead our own cause. Too long have others spoken  
for us." These women do so eloquently and effectively.  
Their passion has a healing quality on a deadly situation.  

M. Stephanie Ricks is a writer and editor living in  
Brooklyn, New York.