Vernon Lee

by Harold Acton (translated by  
Shirley Hazzard)

Although she died in 1935, my

subject may be held to belong to

the 19th century. Violet Paget,  
who wrote under the name Vernon Lee,  
was, as Bernard Shaw remarked, one  
hundred percent English. She belonged,  
however, to the old guard of cosmopolitan  
intellectualism and passed the greater part  
of her life in Italy. She was above all an  
aesthete and believed that her major con-  
tribution lay in the realm of aesthetics.

In my youth, Florence was full of classic  
English spinsters of intellectual cast who  
struck a picturesque note in Florentine  
society. None of them could be called  
handsome: Their dress and gestures were  
not notably feminine; but they would  
have been horrified to be mistaken for  
men. One might consider them pioneers  
in the women’s movement. And they  
held the male sex in disdain.

Most eminent among these was Ver-  
non Lee. Certainly she possessed the most  
vigorous talents. These ranged over  
widely varied interests — which is perhaps  
the reason why few of the 46 works  
published by her are now familiar other  
than to scholars of literary essays. Yet  
those essays have particular merit because  
they give us the sense of place — genius  
loci. And all who, far from Italy, feel  
nostalgia for this country will find, in the  
volume Limbo, the air and colors of the  
Tuscan countryside. In The Spirit of Rome  
she offers us a portrait of the Rome, now  
vanished, of the young D’Annunzio and  
of the photographs of Count Primoli —  
depicted with the pen of an imaginative  
puritan maiden. It was there that she  
passed almost all her youth; but she con-  
sidered it a place without the purest Italian  
characteristics. The Apennines of Lucca  
and Pistoia, with the unexpected  
revelations of their fields and paths and  
garlanded walls, and the twilight sound of  
bells, with the peasants in the fields and  
the women seated at doorways spinning  
and sewing — all this was more truly the  
Italy of the Macchiaioli.

Of her numerous writings, I prefer the  
first — Studies of the Eighteenth Century in  
Italy — which she published in 1880, but  
which she had undertaken when she was  
less than 20 years of age. At the time of  
their appearance, these essays on Italian  
literature and music seemed more para-  
doxical than they do today, because she  
contended that, in that period, Italy  
alone enjoyed an individual artistic and  
musical flowering not found in other lands  
where there were, rather, philosophical  
movements in culture. Nineteenth-  
century critics held it, on the contrary, to  
have been a period, in Italy, of corruption  
and decadence. Even today, The  
Accademie dell’Arcadia may strike us as  
rather dusty stuff; but the first essay in her  
book — which treats this subject — is in  
fact a lively evocation of social and literary  
life in the era preceding the French  
Revolution: It is written con brio and with  
deep feeling. The second essay traces the  
journey of Dr. Charles Burney through  
Italy in 1770 — an expedition he under-  
took in order to hear that music which  
had, he believed, for Italians an im-  
portance analogous to that of sculpture for  
the Greeks. It is a kaleidoscope of dis-  
sertations on the famous feminine con-  
servatori of Venice, the Philharmonic  
Academy of Bologna, Father Martini, the  
celebrated soprani and Pacchierotti,  
musical education, the precursors of the  
contemporary lyric, and the influence of  
the three Neapolitan conservatori and of  
Alessandro Scarlatti on the musical de-  
velopment of Europe. This bravura piece  
flows and sparkles with a freshness of  
enthusiasm that enchants the reader. I

12 @ Belles Lettres

Rediscovery

was exposed to such music at the same age  
as Vernon Lee and have always heard the  
work of Pergolesi, Jommelli, Porpora, and  
Paisiello with greater pleasure than con-  
temporary music.

Even though, at Prato, a theater has  
been dedicated to him, Metastasio is  
almost forgotten. Reading the life of  
Metastasio left to us by Dr. Burney, Ver-  
non Lee asked herself whether such obliv-  
ion was just. The rejoinder was that  
Metastasio was the supreme collaborator  
of the great musicians of his time.

Above: Vernon Lee  
in spats in Italy.  
Photo courtesy of  
Special Collections,  
Colby College  
Library.

mental condition: He was afflicted by a  
deep depression and a form of paralysis.  
This was the origin of the malady that so  
long confined him to bed and forced the  
family to renounce their travels. They  
settled at Florence and, in 1889, at  
Maiano, where Vernon Lee remained,  
with occasional interruptions, for the  
remainder of her life. No specialist suc-  
ceeded in curing the poet until, in 1893,  
Dr. Erb of Heidelberg perceived that a  
form of auto-suggestion was involved and  
was able to restore the patient to normal  
life. In 1898, Eugene married the well-  
known Scots writer Annie Holdsworth  
and had an only daughter, who died  
young. He himself died in 1907; but Ver-  
non Lee had not visited him since the  
time of his marriage. She had been some-  
thing of a nurse to him, and — with her  
hypersensibility — had suffered a nervous  
breakdown. Her mother being engrossed  
in the treatments given Eugene, Vernon  
Lee took refuge in an intellectual life that  
was filled with feminine friendships on a  
high platonic level. She fell victim to ner-

Vernon Lee. Drawing by Michael Willhoite.

The rest of the book describes the birth  
of the Italian theater as it derived from the  
Commedia dell’Arte, whose last ex-  
ponent was Carlo Gozzi. For him, Vernon  
Lee had a nostalgic affinity. The success of  
his fables was due to the art of the clown  
Sacchi — yet Turandot and The Love of  
Three Oranges have inspired musicians of  
our own era. Vernon Lee had a special  
predilection for L’augellin Belvedere  
which, translated into Florentine dialect,  
she caused to be performed for the young  
peasantry of the region of Maiano. One  
senses in her stories the influence of Gozzi.  
Time unfortunately does not allow me to  
do justice to that little masterpiece, for I  
must speak of its author.

She was born at Boulogne [France]  

in 1856, but her childhood and  

most of her life were passed in Italy:  
a life serene on the surface, but of  
turbulent depth. She might — like so  
many other Victorian women — have  
been drained by the vampire of family  
obligations. Her mother, who had by her  
first husband a son of some repute as a  
poet, was as despotic as she was  
affectionate. This brother, Eugene, 11  
years older than Vernon Lee and the darl-  
ing of his mother, was an invalid for 20  
years. Her father, almost always absent,  
left the raising of the family to the mother.  
Of modest financial means, they moved  
from one city to another, between Nice  
and Rome.

Entering on a diplomatic career, Eu-  
gene was attaché at the embassy in Paris  
when the Franco-Prussian War broke out.  
The experience possibly affected his

vous exhaustion when one of her closest  
friends married, and she once said, “I  
avert my eyes from the matrimonial  
adventures of my women friends,” ex-  
claiming, “There’s something primitive in  
it!”

Fortunately, another friend, Kit An-  
struther-Thomson, helped her to recover,  
attending her with great patience and  
even concerning herself in the treatments  
of mother and son. With this friend, who  
had studied painting in London and Paris,  
Vernon Lee was able to talk at length on  
aesthetic questions. They would be seen  
in their little carriage or on their bicycles  
crossing the countryside of Tuscany or the  
Romagna in search of museums, old  
villas, and works of art. They also inter-  
ested themselves in social questions, in  
the feminist movement, in vivisection, in  
antinationalism, and in pacifism.

I do not have space to address the ques-  
tion of her aesthetic philosophy, which  
was the cause of her quarrel with Bernard  
Berenson. This falling out was a storm in a  
teacup, but it lasted 20 years. Berenson  
had sarcastically implied that they had  
stolen his ideas, and the two spinsters  
were so offended that, although they lived  
nearby, they refused to see him again.  
Friends divided on the issue, some taking  
one side and some the other. Two groups  
were formed, of Black and White. Thus it  
goes in the world of art. Nevertheless,  
quite aside from any question of plagiar-  
ism, both parties held that all is beautiful  
that enhances life, that all is ugly which  
debases it, and that our well-being is fed  
by beauty.

Following the success of her first book,  
Vernon Lee entered the world of the arts  
in London. She met many celebrated per-  
sons of the time and relayed her im-

pressions of these to her mother, in letters  
filled with vivacity. The reference to her  
by Browning in the poem “Asolando”  
brought her fame at the age of 20. But  
when she saw Browning for the first time,  
she said that his charm was that of some  
little old grandfather rather than that of a  
poet. Walter Pater struck her as colorless  
and heavy: ugly, but pleasant enough. Of  
Vernon Lee it could never be said that she  
was colorless, although she was in fact  
rather homely. The luminosity of talent  
gave her individuality, and her brilliant  
conversation — though sometimes dis-  
pleasing through its aggressivity —  
brought the listener under her spell.

In my opinion she had less merit as a  
novelist than as a critic; but her fiction is  
original in its inventiveness. All, how-  
ever, was not imagined: In Vanitas,  
several people recognized themselves and  
took offense — above all, Henry James,  
who called her “La Tigre” and who warned  
his brother William, then in Italy, that  
she was as dangerous as she was in-  
telligent. That her fame was international  
is evident also from the fact that Anatole  
France used her as a model for Le lys rouge  
(1894).

In art and nature Vernon Lee found  
compensation for the lack in her life of  
satisfying human contacts. Her pacifism  
brought her many enemies during the first  
world war; but today we may admit she  
was right in saying that the downfall of  
one side or the other would merely lead to  
other wars. I cannot recommend reading  
these polemics of hers, since they tend to  
drag on in long discourses. Instead, I  
would recommend her essays, her travel  
writings, her biography of the Countess of  
Albany, and her Studies of the Eighteenth  
Century in Italy.

Although her fame began in youth, she  
was obliged at the age of 37 to recognize  
that she had not impressed the public at  
large. And this discovery is often bitter to  
those who write for such a satisfaction.  
Vernon Lee wrote only when she truly had  
something to say, when she was inwardly  
moved to do so. She could not bring  
herself to realize, especially when old and  
deaf, that she was living in an ivory tower  
and that her villa at Maiano could be  
called a refuge — from unbridled  
materialism, from sex, and from the  
passions of this world. In her puritanism,  
she remained forever innocent. Today her  
life seems sad to us because its adventures  
were intellectual ones, and because the  
realities of the past were far more im-  
portant to her than those of the present.  
She described herself as hard and cold: “I  
cannot love at the price of being flayed  
alive,” she said. “People do not matter to  
me. I prefer to do without them.”

We may ask: “Would marriage possibly  
have changed her?” It is very doubtful.  
The wretched experience of the 20 years  
passed at the side of a brother so difficult  
and demanding had given her a very poor  
opinion of men. Nevertheless, her ashes  
were placed beside his in the evocative  
Cemetery of the “Allori.”

@ Harold Acton’s books include Memoirs  
of an Aesthete, Nancy Mitford: A  
Memoir, and Villas of Tuscany.

® Shirley Hazzard, author of The Transit  
of Venus, is at work on a new novel.

Note: This essay is excerpted from the  
published proceedings of the congress in-  
ghilterra e italia nel 900 (“England and  
Italy in the Nineteenth Century”), held at  
Bagni di Lucca, Tuscany, in October  
1972 under the auspices of the British In-  
stitute at Florence. (Published in Florence  
by La Nuova Italia, 1973.)

We recommend scouring used book  
sources for out-of-print volumes of Ver-  
non Lee’s eerie, historical/psychological  
ghost stories, such as The Snake Lady and  
Other Stories. — The Editors

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1986