Lost or  
Found?  

Lovingkindness, by Anne Roiphe.  
New York: Summit Books/Simon &  
Schuster, 1987, $17.95, 279 pp.  

by Susan P. Willens  

“What do we know about  
mothers and daughters?”  
asks Annie Johnson, the  
mother in this powerful story. A  
mother’s love can drive a daughter “to  
secrecy, to abandonment, to a ferocious  
fight for her own skin, her own destiny.”  
Lovingkindness traces just such a fight for  
a daughter’s own destiny.  

Through adolescence, the daughter,  
Andrea, struggles painfully. Sullen and  
distant, she drops out, disappears and  
reappears, clings to anonymous boys,  
has abortions, takes drugs. She rarely  
brushes her hair or teeth. Through it all  
she seems to be flailing for no reason.  
She has a good mother, doesn’t she? A  
scholar and teacher of feminist history,  
Annie, Andrea’s mother, is the very  
model of a modern woman. Alone after  
her husband’s suicide and her parents’  
retreat into uselessness, she refuses to  
yield to any tradition or any God. She  
rejects the solace her Jewishness might  
offer her. Head high, Annie writes,  
teaches, and speaks of the self-  
sufficiency women have finally  
achieved. Meanwhile, she yearns to  
embrace the errant girl who every day  
disproves all of Annie’s theories.  

When Andrea surfaces, it is by phone  
from an orthodox community in Israel.  
“I am staying at the Yeshiva Rachel. I  
am different from when you last saw  
me.” Hers is an original rebellion. A free  
child with the whole world before her  
seeks restriction, order, and tradition in  

an alien place. The mother reacts with  
revulsion. Her daughter in a cult? Her  
daughter surrendering her freedom?  

“I doubt the sincerity of your relig-  
ious impulse,” [Annie writes to An-  
drea]. “Are you sure you just don’t  
want someone to tell you what to  
do? Don’t you really think that  
those laws that determine what you  
can eat with what, when you can  
eat and what you say before and  
after... are infringements on your  
natural choices? Don’t you feel  
weighted down, free spirit that thou  
wert, refusing to learn algebra, re-  
fusing to be home at midnight, re-  
fusing to eat anything but Hostess  
cupcakes? Did you take so many  
drugs that you can no longer stand  
alone without your strings being  
pulled? Who are you anyway? Love,  
Mother.”  

The novel shows Annie learning who  
her daughter — newly named Sarai — is  
anyway. When mother follows daughter  
to Jerusalem, she finds her surrounded  
by orthodox women, head and limbs  
modestly covered, baking bread and set-  
ting the table, learning Hebrew and  
prayers, welcoming health and commu-  
nity.  

A true liberal, Annie makes room in  
her mind for this new Andrea. She  
shakes out and moves around all of her  
earlier ideas. Under the blazing light of  
her love for her daughter, she examines  
modern life, the New York intellectual  
variety, and finds it may be too empty,  
too scary for some Andrea/Sarais:  

“Why do they [psychiatrists] insist  
that each of us must stand free of  
the background, never cleaving or  
clinging or God forbid merging with  
one another? This is a cruel vision  
that goes against the grain of human  
effort. Is it some ill wind of Freud’s  
that has broken across our time and  
causes this absence of love we call  
maturity?”  

As her mind works, Annie’s imagi-  
nation is also stirred. Her daughter's  
“return” to Judaism churns up memories  
of Annie’s immigrant grandparents. Her  
nights are restless with dreams of Rabbi  
Nachman, a grotesque apparition from  
the Middle Ages. He pursues her to tell  
her folktales, obscure and violent, that  
end when the rabbi shrinks to the size of  
a baby, crying “Mama” and holding out  
his arms to be cuddled.  

Intellect, memory, and dream help  
Annie acquiesce to her daughter’s  
choice of a traditional — and estranging  
— life. To acquiesce is not to over-  
simplify, however. Annie sees that the  
yeshiva is smug and limiting, that Israel  
is a fragile haven. Still, for the happiness  
of Andrea/Sarai, is it not best to relin-  
quish her with dignity?  

Lovingkindness shows intellectual  
toughness and honesty as Annie tries to  
learn what is best for Sarai. It is also ex-  
citing to read, even for a reader who  
never wrestled self-doubt or puzzled over  
a child. The first meeting between  

Liberation — With a Memory  

A Restricted Country, by Joan Nestle. Firebrand Books (141 The Commons, Ithaca,  
New York 14850), 1987, $8.95, 189 pp. (PB)  

by Lynne M. Constantine  

One of the loveliest works in this  

collection of twenty-seven es-  

says, poems, and stories by the  
controversial cofounder of the Lesbian  
Herstory Archives in New York City is a  
short story called “Esther’s Story.” In a  
few pages, Joan Nestle manages to com-  
municate the essence of the “complex  
erotic statement” that was the butch  
—femme relationship in the 1950s. In  
the story, Joan has a one-night stand  
with Esther, a “passing” woman (one  
whom the heterosexual world takes for a  
man). Through the incidents of the  
story, Nestle movingly brings to life her  
thesis (discussed more directly later in  
her essay “Butch-Femme Relationships:  
Sexual Courage in the 1950s”) that the  
butch was not adopting a masculine per-  
sona, but rather was making a daring  
public acknowledgement of herself as a  
woman who made love with women.  
With this acknowledgement came re-  
sponsibility in the erotic arena, the re-  
sponsibility for sexual prowess. In the  
1950s, Nestle says, this “courage to feel  
comfortable arousing another woman  
became a political act.”  

Later, near the end of the volume in  
an essay entitled “My History With  
Censorship,” we learn that this story  
nearly went unpublished because a  
woman typesetter considered it porno-  
graphic. And in this paradox we come  
face to face with an often-repeated but  
uncomfortable truism: Things are never  
as simple as they seem. Nestle has been a  
central figure in what she calls the “sex  

July/August 1988  

wars” — the lesbian community at odds  
with itself on the issues of pornography,  
sadomasochistic sexual practices be-  
tween women, and the rediscovery of  
butch-femme role playing. She has been  
barred from speaking, put on “enemies  
lists,” and excoriated as one who partic-  
ipates in “patriarchal sex practices.”  
And yet it is in one of the most erotic of  
her pieces (far more erotic than some of  
her more contemporary fantasies or  
reminiscences, which intend to share  
little more than the sexual charge of the  
encounter, not the heft and scent of an  
entire era) through the minute obser-  
vation of the graphic details of this  
butch-femme lovemaking that Nestle  
truly shares her vision. We see it feel-  
ingly — and those of us who grew up in a  
different era or a different cultural mi-  
lieu can share a part of herstory that, but  
for Joan Nestle and a few other coura-  
geous women like her, would be closed  
to us. This sharing is important, even  
though it may lay open this private, in-  
tensely felt understanding to the prying  
eyes of those who can never understand  
it and who see in it something sick or  
titillatingly dirty.  

Nestle is one who opposes borders,  
who repeatedly tests the boundaries. In  
essay after essay, she reminds us of the  
many “restricted countries” we inhabit,  
and takes us with her on her life-long  
journey to personal freedom. In the title  
story, Nestle remembers the trip she  
took with her mother and brother to a  
dude ranch which, as it turned out, did  

not permit Jews. In “When the Lions  
Write History,” Nestle the archivist  
chronicles the history of heterosexual  
opinions about lesbians and gay men. In  
essays about her activities during the  
civil rights struggle and the McCarthy  
era, Nestle describes what happens  
when people refuse to accept the restric-  
tions put on their lives — refusing to  
turn in their friends during a witch hunt  
or to move to the back of the bus or to  
bow to brutal violence. In several essays,  
Nestle explores a particularly off-limits  
area: that of her own mother’s exuber-  
ant, frank, and vigorous sexuality.  

Nestle interweaves her personal his-  
tory and her mother’s history, the his-  
tory of the twentieth century and the  
history of lesbians in the twentieth cen-  
tury, into a tapestry of insights on the  
subjects of sex, cultural restrictions, and  
the creative spirit of women who daring-  
ly choose to love each other in the face  
of terrifying opposition. While the book  
could have been better edited — most of  
the pieces in it had been previously pub-  
lished and a number of them overlap to  
the point of redundancy — it is a joyous  
book, full of a life lived with passion and  
a spirit too broad to be defined by an ad-  
jective or two. Even those who do not  
agree with Nestle’s opinion that the  
feminist antipornography movement  
dangerously embraces censorship or with  
her acceptance of butch—femme or S/M  
explorations in contemporary lesbian  
living will want to read this book to learn  
how Nestle arrived where she is. Ulti-  
mately, this book is about love of all  
kinds, not the least of which is the love  
of those with whom we disagree, out of a  
respect for their life experience as re-  
flected in their beliefs.  

@ Lynne M. Constantine is a writer  
and critic in Washington, D.C.  

mother and daughter at the Yeshiva  
pulses with suspense. Once Annie meets  
the parents of the boy Sarai is to marry,  
she is involved in a vicious tug of war  
between assimilated American Jewish  
parents and the orthodox Israeli foster  
families. Blow-dried hair battles side  
curls and beards to a surprising resolu-  
tion. Although the action of the novel  
ends with resignation, there may be vic-  
tories ahead for the mother who can  
wait. When Annie returns to New York  
alone, she has a wry daydream:  

“If Israel does not burn down in the  
next eighteen years — and after all,  
an eighteen-year pause between  
catastrophes is not much to ask for —  
then I might have a grand-  
daughter who might come to New  
York to visit me. I will slowly in-  
troduce her to science and math and  
deductive reasoning and Chekov  
and Dostoevsky, Locke and Susan  
B. Anthony, and when she is ready  
I will suggest to her that she be-  
come a doctor...”  

Maybe only a mother can smile at  
that distant chance to get even. But as  
Lovingkindness brilliantly shows, the  
connection between mothers and  
daughters is a mix of a little revenge with  
a lot of letting go, a small savage grin  
with the beatific smile of unselfish love.  

© Susan P. Willens, who teaches litera-  
ture in Washington, D.C., has three  
daughters.  

Spence and Lila  
by Bobbie Ann Mason  

New York: Harper & Row, 1988,  
$10.95, 176 pp.  

On the face of it, Spence and Lila is a  
rather ordinary family saga. Sixty-six-  
year-old Spence, a rural Kentucky  
farmer, and Lila, his wife of more than  
forty years, are joined by their children  
in a less than celebratory reunion. The  
group, no longer bound by shared geog-  
raphy, comes together when Lila is diag-  
nosed as having breast cancer and  
blocked arteries to her heart.  

This short novel revolves around a  
chain-smoking, fun-loving woman for  
whom convention has always mattered  
less than pragmatism. Through flash-  
backs and conversations with her  
daughters, Lila harkens back to World  
War II, when, husband in the Navy, she  
and first-born Nancy lived with  
Spence’s parents. She recalls the trauma  
of “making do,” of ignoring her instincts  
and letting mother-in-law Rosie call the  
shots. We relive the terror of mothering  
an infant with pneumonia, an illness  
born of icy winds in a house they could  
not afford to heat adequately. And we  
witness a bond between heterosexual  
adults that can only be envied, an erotic  
and emotional connection that has  
grown and changed while remaining  
steadfast.  

But this is no sappy love story, no  
melodramatic tearjerker. Mason has  
instead crafted a terse and sometimes  
painful tale about a working-class couple  
that is neither sentimental nor con-  
trived. She forces us to take a wide-eyed  
look at both family dynamics and the  
high-tech medical world, a world in  
which things rarely go as planned and  
where human interaction seems ex-  
traneous.  

She also touches on upward mobility,  
adult sibling rivalry, sexism, the farm  
crisis, the ways in which we do or don’t  
communicate, and the feelings that are  
closest to our hearts. Mason proved that  
she is capable of creating brilliant fiction  
in In Country. Likewise, Spence and Lila  
takes us into the psyche of one family,  
and in so doing, raises issues pertinent to  
all of us.  

—Eleanor J. Bader  

Belles Lettres @ 17