Whatever Happened to

Nella Larsen?  
by Charles R. Larson

Whenever writers of the Har-  
lem Renaissance are men-  
tioned, the men usually

command center stage. Although Zora  
Neale Hurston was active then, she did  
not publish until the following decade.  
If Jessie Fauset and Nella Larsen (the two  
women novelists of the period) are  
cited, the remarks tend to be denigrating  
and brief. Fauset’s work is perceived as  
secondary to that of her male coun-  
terparts. Larsen, whom several critics  
have called the mystery woman of the  
Harlem Renaissance, has been uniquely  
shadowed by multiple inaccuracies re-  
garding her life and work. The introduc-  
tion to the 1986 Rutgers University  
Press edition of her two novels,  
Quicksand and Passing, for example,  
simply replicates all of the earlier distor-  
tions, and the edition even lops off the  
ending of one of the novels.

The amount of erroneous informa-  
tion about Nella Larsen is nothing less  
than legion. Her brief literary career is  
said to have come to an abrupt halt be-  
cause of the charges of plagiarism con-  
cerning her only published short story.  
After that awkward incident in 1930,  
she is said to have ceased her creative  
efforts and disappeared not only from the  
Harlem artistic scene but from the con-  
sciousness of her many friends as well.  
Larsen’s readers have speculated that she  
passed for white — in the manner of the  
heroine of her 1929 novel, Passing. At  
the time of her death, there were no  
published obituaries. Her childhood,  
her parentage, and the date of her birth  
have all been incorrectly recorded, as  
have virtually all of the other details of  
her life. Larsen herself contributed to  
the confusions by distorting the facts (in  
order to conceal the painful events of her  
private life). Still, one fact is indisputa-  
ble. If one classifies Jean Toomer’s Cane  
as a collection of his works, rather than  
as a novel, then Nella Larsen is in-  
disputably the major novelist of the  
Harlem Renaissance.

In the early part of the 1920s, Larsen  
and her husband, Elmer Imes, were part  
of the Harlem elite. When Nella mar-  
ried Elmer in 1919, she must have been  
the envy of many of her friends. Elmer  
had a doctorate in physics when most  
Afro Americans had not graduated from  
high school. Nella, herself a graduate of  
Lincoln Hospital of Nursing, would  
shortly embark on a second career. As a  
librarian at the Harlem branch of the  
New York City Public Library, she was  
clearly in the eye of the storm — the  
explosion of Black artistic creativity that  
Alain Locke, in 1925, would call the  
New Negro.

Nella’s first publications, in 1920,  
were in The Brownies’ Book, a magazine  
for Black children edited by Jessie Fau-  
set. Her byline was Nella Larsen Imes.  
Thereafter, she worked on adult fiction,  
in time publishing two short stories in  
Young's Magazine: “The Wrong Man”  
and “Freedom” (1926). She later re-  
ferred to these stories as “hack writing,”  
as she must have felt about them when  
she wrote them, since they were publi-  
shed under the anagram Allen Semi.

Both of these stories were probably  
thrown up as warning signs for Elmer,  
who was a notorious womanizer and by  
then well on his way to contributing to  
the demise of their relationship. Under  
the surface, these stories tell us that  
marriage is often a precarious balancing  
act, especially when spouses have been  
dishonest and have concealed aspects of  
their former selves. Both are free of ra-  
cial commentary — no doubt because of  
the magazine in which they appeared —

| 1 ® Belles Lettres

though Nella herself at this early stage in  
her career was known to waffle a bit  
about her racial origins.

By the time Nella’s first novel,  
Quicksand, was published (1928), she  
had stopped working as a librarian. She  
had also decided to use her maiden name  
for her work, a decision probably inter-  
preted by her friends as a clear indication  
that her marriage was in trouble. Al-  
though the Harlem Renaissance was in  
full swing, Nella must have been disap-  
pointed that it was not Quicksand that  
became a bestseller that year but Claude  
McKay’s sensational Home to Harlem.  
Still, she could take comfort in the fact  
that her novel received the stronger  
praise, as well as an award from the Har-  
mon Foundation.

Quicksand is the story of an educated  
Black woman’s inability to find her  
niche in the contemporary world. Helga  
Crane’s international search is made  
complicated by the fact that she is not  
only middle-class but mulatto. What  
separates Larsen’s novel from earlier  
works concerned with the plight of the  
“tragic mulatto” (Frances Harper’s Iola  
Leroy or Charles Chesnutt’s The House  
Behind the Cedars, for example) is the

Passport photo of Nella Larsen, circa 1930

depth of her characterization, as well as  
her superior narrative technique. Helga  
Crane is the most fully realized and con-  
vincing Black woman depicted in Amer-  
ican fiction to that date. Above all, hers  
is a portrait of loneliness and pain, de-  
spair and sorrow — qualities that bind  
her to the heroines of any number of  
later works by Black women writers:  
Zora Neale Hurston, Ann Petry, Toni  
Morrison, Gayl Jones, Alice Walker,  
Gloria Naylor.

The novel clearly draws upon auto-  
biographical details from Larsen’s trou-  
bled past. As a child, Helga is taught to  
regard her color with hatred and self-  
loathing. Like Larsen herself, Helga is  
white, her father Black. The story de-  
scribes a number of painful incidents in  
her adolescence when Helga is separated  
from the rest of her family. The reality of  
her mixed heritage and subsequent  
loneliness follows her all of her life and  
destroys most of her relationships. The  
novel’s grim ending implies that edu-  
cated, sophisticated, and cultured Black  
women are trapped in a life with few, if  
any, satisfactory alternatives.

Passing, published the following year,  
was equally despairing in its depiction of  
the lives of middle-class Black women.  
The story has frequently been miscon-  
strued as Clare Kendry’s tragedy, be-  
cause she is the character who has  
crossed over the color line, who has  
concealed her racial origins, and whose  
past is eventually discovered by her big-  
oted, white husband. Larsen’s superior  
craft added new meaning to the subject  
implied by the title. No “passing” novel  
can be regarded as anything other than a  
strong indictment of American life;  
people are driven to such drastic meas-  
ures because of racism and the need for  
economic survival. Yet the central story  
— for all of the rarities of Clare’s un-  
happy life — concerns what happens to

her friend, Irene, with whom she has

been friends since childhood.

After several encounters between the  
two women, Irene Redfield’s almost  
morbid fascination with Clare Kendry’s  
fate becomes the novel’s main focus.  
Thus, the primary theme is not race (as  
has usually been interpreted) but marital  
stability. Passing describes Irene’s at-  
tempts to keep her marriage intact in the  
face of her husband’s possible adultery  
with Clare. In many ways, Larsen has  
written an old-fashioned tale of jeal-  
ousy, infidelity, and marital disintegra-  
tion. Although at the end Irene may  
believe that her “sudden moment of ac-  
tion” has released her from the threat of  
losing her husband, one cannot help  
pondering his curious absence. In a  
strange transference, Irene’s marriage  
has become similar to Clare’s — one of  
duplicity and isolation.

By the publication of Passing, the  
fault lines in Larsen’s own marriage were  
so unstable that it was only a matter of  
time before the relationship would end.  
Clearly aware of this, she began making  
preparations for her future, since her  
writing had not brought her economic  
security. She applied for and was  
awarded a Guggenheim in 1930, be-  
coming the first Black woman so hon-  
ored. Yet some of the glory was already  
diminished by charges that her story  
“Sanctuary,” published in Forum in Jan-  
uary of that year, had been plagiarized.  
(The accusations, published in a letter  
to the editor, stated that the story bore a  
striking resemblance to Sheila Kaye-  
Smith’s short story “Mrs. Adis.”)

The Guggenheim year — which was  
spent mostly in southern Europe — per-  
mitted Larsen to gain new perspectives  
on her writing and her marriage, though  
not exactly the ones she may have ex-  
pected. By the time she returned to the  
United States, early in 1932, both were  
essentially at a dead end. Still, she made  
a final attempt to patch up the relation-  
ship with Elmer, even to the extent of  
spending some months with him at Fisk  
University in Nashville, where he had  
been installed as a kind of one-man  
Physics Department. But the rift was  
apparently too wide for them to repair.  
Their divorce, which became official in  
August of the following year, was descri-  
bed in scandalous terms in the Baltimore  
Afro-American. (Elmer’s mistress was  
referred to as “a white member of Fisk  
University’s administrative staff,” and  
Nella herself was said to have jumped  
out of a window and broken her leg.)

Larsen’s withdrawal (her so-called  
disappearance) can be attributed to sev-  
eral congruent events in her life. Cer-  
tainly, the negative publicity about her  
divorce (front-page headlines in the  
Afro-American) must have been hard to  
swallow. As she said of Imes years later  
to one of her co-workers, “He broke my  
heart.” So strong was her sense of rejec-  
tion that she lived for several years in a  
state of depression. Yet it is revealing  
that in her later life she identified herself  
as Mrs. Imes and not as Nella Larsen.  
(This is also the reason why critics  
failed for so long to locate her death  
certificate.)

Nella’s breakup with Elmer came  
almost simultaneously with the difficul-  
ties she was encountering with her writ-  
ing. The charges of plagiarism after the  
publication of “Sanctuary” were sec-  
onded by intense backbiting by a num-  
ber of her so-called writer friends, who  
were jealous of her recent successes. The

similarities between the two stories are  
embarrassing. Yet she was too much of  
an artist to have attempted such a de-  
liberate borrowing. Furthermore, as a  
librarian she would have clearly under-  
stood the consequences of such an act. It  
seems much more likely that she pos-  
sessed something akin to a photographic  
memory.

She could probably have lived with  
the public humiliation if her subsequent  
work had not met with such rejection.  
Mirage, the novel that she wrote on her  
Guggenheim, was turned down by  
Knopf, the publisher of her first two  
books. Two subsequent novels met with  
similar disapproval. Thus, she was  
thwarted both as artist and as wife in the  
early 1930s — at the same time that the  
Depression had slammed a door on the  
Harlem Renaissance and the New Negro  
was no longer in fashion.

The alimony that Elmer paid her un-  
til his death in 1941 was sufficient for  
Nella’s well-being and possibly her only  
source of livelihood during the 1930s.  
Around the time of his death, however,  
she returned to nursing. By February  
1944, she had become chief nurse at  
Gouverneur Hospital in New York City.  
She lived nearby on Second Avenue,  
more at a geographical distance from  
Harlem than an emotional one. Begin-  
ning with the Manhattan telephone di-  
rectory for 1955-1956, she is listed as  
“Imes, Nella L. Mrs.” In September of  
1954, her position was changed to night  
supervisor. Then in 1962, after having  
been mugged, she transferred to Metro-  
politan Hospital as a supervisor of  
nurses, a position she held until her re-  
tirement. She died March 30, 1964.

The mysteries of Larsen’s life after  
the Harlem Renaissance are il-  
luminated by a number of events  
in her childhood, which are nonetheless  
difficult to access because she rewrote  
her early life as if it were one of her nov-  

els. The dust jacket for Passing, for ex-  
ample, informed readers that

Nella Larsen’s mother was Danish, her  
father a Negro from the Virgin Islands,  
formerly the Danish West Indies. When  
she was two years old her father died and  
shortly afterwards her mother married a  
man of her own race and nationality. At  
eight she and her half-sister attended a  
small private school whose pupils were  
mostly the children of German or Scan-  
dinavian parents. When she was sixteen  
she went to Denmark to visit relatives of  
her mother and remained there for three  
years.

Much of this is fabrication. Although  
she claimed that April 13, 1893, was the  
date of her birth, the year was 1891. No  
birth certificate for her exists, but the  
earlier year is easy to establish because of  
documents pertaining to Anna, Nella’s  
half-sister, whose father was white. The  
place of Nella’s birth — which she  
claimed as Chicago — is more proble-  
matic. A close friend of the Larsen fami-  
ly for nearly fifty years claimed that  
Nella’s mother, Mary Hanson, told her  
that Nella had been born in New York  
and that her father was a Black  
American chauffeur for the family for  
whom Nella’s mother worked as a do-  
mestic. Thus, the question of Nella’s  
biological father remains conjectural.

When Mary Hanson married Peter  
Larsen, February 7, 1894, their child,  
Anna, was already a year and a half old.  

Census documents and the death certifi-  
cates of these three people help establish  
some of the details concerning the Lar-  
sen household. The most revealing fact  
(from the 1910 census) helps us specu-  
late about what had already happened.  
In the category listing family informa-  
tion (“mother of how many children,  
*number here“), a one has been written.  
”Number now living“ also indicates only  
one child. Thus, not only was Nella no  
longer living with them (she would have  
been nineteen) but she was also written  
out of their lives.

Spring 1989