Hilda Doolittle (1886 — 1961)

Herself Defined, by Barbara Guest. New York: Doubleday, 1984, $18.95, 360 pp.  
Nights, by John Helforth [H.D.]. New York: New Directions, 1986, $19.95, 106 pp. (PB)  
Ton: A Play After Euripides, by H.D. Black Swan Books (P.O. Box 327, Redding Ridge, CT 06876), 1986, $20, 148 pp.  

H.D.: The Career of That Struggle, by Rachel Blau De Plessis. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986, 168 pp.  

H.D.: Woman and Poet, edited by Michael King. Orono, ME: National Poetry Foundation, 1986, $15.95, 522 pp.  

Women of the Left Bank, by Shari Benstock. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986, $26.95, 518 pp.  

by Rochelle Ratner  

Hilda Doolittle was nicknamed H.D. by Ezra Pound, to whom she was briefly engaged. Readers of poetry are often more familiar with her initials than with her work: She was the poet for whom Pound established his theories of imagism. Critics and teachers of modernist theory found it impossible to discuss Pound’s work without discussing imagism, and imagism always included a discussion of H.D.’s early poems. But when her long poetic masterpiece, Helen in Egypt, was published by Grove Press in 1961, some readers were confused by the fact that it broke with imagist doctrines. Of course, these readers were aware that H.D. was a novelist. Was not her autobiographical novel Bid Me to Live, also an exposé of her love affairs with Ezra Pound, D. H. Lawrence, and Richard Aldington? If Ezra Pound was the major influence on H.D.’s early career, Bryher was the central figure of the middle and later period. Born Annie Winifred Ellerman, Bryher was the daughter of the wealthy English businessman, Sir John Ellerman. In an extremely insightful biography, Herself Defined, Barbara Guest describes Bryher as a woman who “grew up intelligent, rebellious, and furious that she was not a boy.” She had written a novel before she graduated from school and continued to write what Guest describes as “splendid adventure stories.” Bryher was fiercely devoted to H.D. Her memoir of their life together, The Heart To Artemis, was published by Harcourt Brace in 1962.  

In 1962, almost all of H.D.’s work was out of print. Yet by 1986, the centennial of her birth, most of her poetry and several of her novels and memoirs were back in print, and biographical and critical studies were suddenly appearing. More often than not, women were purchasing these newly reissued books and writing the critical studies. During the 1970s, emerging feminist critics had discovered H.D. Modernist and feminist schools of critical theory were able to explore these texts for their own purposes, and these purposes often seemed at odds with one another. H.D.’s writing is complex and cannot easily be categorized. For the most part, it falls into two distinct categories: the mythic (or, in the later work, the spiritual) and the autobiographical. Modernist and postmodernist critics — interested in the textual process, the way the writer used language as an exploration in and of itself — concentrated on the mythic and spiritual texts. Feminist critics, seeking to pierce through the text to explore the nature of the woman hiding behind them, began with an interest in the autobiographical writings.  

The autobiographical prose works — fiction or memoirs — always exist in the same tone and language, using the self as explorative and self-reflecting narrator. H.D.’s usual pattern was to draw upon the people around her for her novels, creating individual characters on a one-to-one ratio. Because her friends included several well-known writers, H.D.’s fiction lends itself easily to biographical interpretations and misinterpretations. Perhaps the most striking example is when Janice S. Robinson in H.D.: The Life and Work of an American Poet, reads Bid Me to Live as H.D.’s version of Lady Chatterley’s Lover. H.D.’s genius, in these roman à clef novels, was for creating psychological dramas, portraits of men and women trapped in relationships to which readers found and still find parallels. To attempt merely a biographical interpretation discourages readers from identifying with the characters on an emotional level.  

H.D. herself seemed aware of the dangers in drawing directly from the people surrounding her and was continually seeking alternative measures, most of which were not fully successful. In Nights (written under the pseudonym John Helforth), she reverses her process and creates characters who are emotional composites of herself and her friends. Unfortunately, these characters do not emerge as complete in themselves, and the novel simply falls flat.  

H.D. seemed to take it for granted that the mythologically based novels (Palimpsest, Hedylus) could also become direct portraits of her own life and struggles. I find these mythological connections forced, notes for a story rather than the story itself. Instead of using the fiction to explore her own relationship to her Greek narrator, H.D. absorbs the writing process to the extent that the character seems to bear no direct relation to herself. Guest pinpoints the problem precisely:  

Hedylus is one of her least successful experiments. It has a clumsiness, possibly because she is attempting to deal with a Greek environment on a social, daily level, never present in her poetry. . . . H.D. later admitted that Hedylus is a retelling of her own story in a classical setting.  

In the poetry, particularly Helen in Egypt, Trilogy, and Hermetic Definition, the slip into myth and the reemergence as human is handled so well that the words take on transformative powers. Perhaps H.D. turned to poetry when she was most desperate to recover her own fading image of herself. Helen in Egypt shows this technique at its best. It was written after World War II, which had deeply affected her. Readers immediately grasp the undertones and relevance when H.D. tells us that “Helen must be re-born, that is, her soul must return wholly to her body. Her emotional experience has been ‘too great a suspense to endure.’”  

Perhaps the most interesting link between the poetry and the Greek-based fiction can be found in her recently reissued translation of Euripides’s Ion. We know from Guest’s biography that H.D. was working on this translation shortly after the birth of her daughter, when she was close to a breakdown. The choice of this particular drama seems extremely important. H.D. had the courage not only to make these translations very much her own, but to argue with the accepted interpretations of these characters’ lives. In particular, H.D.’s comments between the lines of the drama reveal quite a bit about her process of transforming Greek characters into her own psyche. She says, for example:  

In the last section, there was a tense feeling of ecstasy and an undercurrent of hysteria, as if the pent emotions of a childless woman and a motherless boy might, at any moment, break through the surface of hard-won reticence. Here is a counter to all that. The queen’s unconscious hatred may stab out at her husband, in vituperative innuendo, nevertheless he stands there, solid, conservative, loyal. He does not even faintly realize her predicament.  

Despite all the books reissued recently, it is astounding how much of H.D.’s writing still remains either unpublished, or was published years ago in very small editions that have long been out of print. On the one hand, we lament that so many of H.D.’s books have not yet been made available to today’s readers; on the other hand, one questions how much of an audience exists. It seems to me as if H.D.’s most interesting works were published a few years ago: End to Torment, The Gift, Tribute to Freud, and Her. If the recently published Nights is any indication, perhaps the remaining works are best left unpublished. Guest’s comments about other manuscripts make us question their value. The Sword Went Out to Sea, for example, was begun in 1946, on the eve of H.D.’s breakdown. “Nearly impossible to decipher, it is an upsetting book,” Guest says, “as everywhere there is evidence of a disturbed consciousness.”  

That H.D. used various pseudonyms indicates that she understood the extremely private nature of much of her later writing. We gather from Guest’s notes that H.D. planned to sign all the “War II and post War II” novels with the name Delia Alton. Rachel Blau DuPlessis enumerates other pseudonyms (A.D. Hill, Rhoda Peter, John Helforth). Even Shari Benstock, who in my opinion is the most insightful critic to have written about H.D., goes along with the generally accepted view that “H.D. also feared censure, and kept back the most experimental of her writings (her prose work) to prevent disclosure of a more private, and divided, self.” I cannot help wondering if this is really the case, or if H.D. believed that her art was better represented in the poetry and the few prose books she published during her lifetime.  

Every book by H.D. reissued lately includes introductions and afterwords. But no amount of textual exploration can make the incomprehensible tolerable. Critics may have resurrected H.D.’s work, but their attention has had negative side effects. At its best, and in the proper place, criticism is useful. At its worst — as when it overexplains texts that would be understandable to many readers — it does more harm than good.  

I find the long-awaited H.D.: The Career of That Struggle to be disappointing. Rather than breaking new ground, DuPlessis seems to sum up what other women have written about H.D.:  

Gilbert and Gubar suggest that the “anxieties of authorship” besetting women because of their ideological and psychological heritage may issue in a shared project.  

Adrienne Rich, Tillie Olsen, Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar, Elaine Showalter, Dale Spender have all elaborated on what it might mean to women writers to have a history of not being encouraged to, empowered to — but in fact being enjoined from — speech, analysis and song.  

In a striking reading of this material, Deborah Kelly Kloepfer traces the narrative movement from resistance and hostility to the maternal.  

In a 130-page study, DuPlessis refers to another writer’s opinion at least every third page. While this is an accepted aspect of most criticism, the few new insights that DuPlessis offers weaken the context in which the opinions of others can be viewed. Perhaps the most remarkable aspect of this book is the vastness of DuPlessis’s own reading.  

Many feminist critics tend to oversimplify issues by taking the position that H.D. continually sought to hide her lesbian nature by writing novels about heterosexual relationships. Writing in Women of the Left Bank, Shari Benstock disagrees. In her view, H.D. was constantly pulled toward contradictory worlds, never able to choose between the heterosexual and the homosexual. These worlds collided in the writing itself, setting H.D.’s work apart from that of any other woman modernist. H.D. was never able to settle upon one of the choices Benstock outlines so clearly when she says:  

— continued on page 15  

Belles Lettres @ 3