Stories That Needed to be Written

Written With Flying Swifts

Proud Shoes: The Story of an American
Family, by Pauli Murray. New York: Harper
& Row, 1984, $7.95, 281 pp. Originally
published 1956.

Song in a Weary Throat: An American Pil-
grimage, by Pauli Murray. New York: Harper
& Row, 1987, $25.95, 437 pp.

by Joyce Pettis

The original publication of Proud

Shoes antedates Margaret

Walker’s Jubilee by 10 years and
Alex Haley’s Roots by nearly 20 years. In
significant ways, they are the same kinds
of books — documented, historical fact
blended with degrees of fiction — what
Haley coined “faction.” All three books
share as their point of origin the oral his-
tory of the author’s family. And in re-
creating the past, each author partici-
pates in the same creative act as a writer
of fiction, Walker and Haley more than
Murray. When Murray says that her
book is not fiction, she means that she
neither conceived nor created a wholly
fictitious story. But she advantageously
employs many of the devices of fiction,
such as artistic narrative design, narra-
tive perspective, characters, and
dialogue. With its familial anecdotes,
extensive narrative, mini-biographies, a
full-length letter, and excerpts from
diary entries, her book retains more of
the flavor of nonfiction than does
Haley’s or Walker's.

The immediate focus of the book is on
Robert and Cornelia Fitzgerald, Murray’s
grandparents in whose household in
Durham, North Carolina, she lived as
the ward of Pauline Fitzgerald, her aunt.
Murray includes earlier ancestors as
well, particularly her great-grandfather
Thomas Fitzgerald, born in Delaware in
1808. Twelve of the twenty chapters of
the book, in fact, recreate the history of
the Fitzgerald ancestors. In their
triumphs and defeats, the significance of
Murray’s title is illustrated. One source
of their survival was the pride that had
been passed down from generation to
generation because of the family’s tradi-
tions of land ownership, education,
fierce independence, patriotism, and
freedom. Grandfather Robert Fitzgerald
served in the Union army and in the
navy and then came South in 1869 as a
teacher of newly freed slaves. The other
Fitzgeralds eventually followed him.
Such accomplishments may seem undis-
tinguished, but Murray shows their dis-
tinctiveness in the context of social,
economic, and political realities for
Black people in the pre-Civil War years
and during Reconstruction.

The devices of fiction incorporated
into Proud Shoes make it entertaining as
well as informative. Murray introduces
the motif of storytelling in the first
chapter, casting herself as a 6-year-old
child eagerly listening to the history of
her grandparents. After the child’s
perspective is abandoned in chapter 2
for that of an adult, the reader’s interest
in the family story is maintained. Mur-
ray’s adult voice is personal, inquisitive,
and proud, especially in response to dis-
coveries and revelations. She docu-
ments family oral history with census re-
cords or other government papers and
locates the family’s problems and geo-
graphical movements in American his-
tory. Histories of ordinary citizens like
her ancestors are invisible in textbook
accounts, a point she subtly emphasizes.

Readers will value Murray’s commit-
ment to the vision that inspired her to
recreate the Fitzgerald history and will
applaud the book for its artistry and its
compelling story of an American fam-
ily’s survival and accomplishments in
spite of oppressive circumstances. Al-
though Song in a Weary Throat, Murray’s
autobiography, differs in its objectives
from Proud Shoes, it is still a testament
to the Fitzgerald family, whose presence
and memory remain integral to Murray,

12 % Belles Lettres

and whose proud traditions of excel-
lence continue through her.

Like the story of her ancestors, Mur-
ray’s life also needed to be written, for it
is an impressive documentation of the
realization of infinite human potential.
She seems, in fact, to have crammed
three lifetimes of activities and achieve-
ments into one. Her numerous achieve-
ments defy hierarchical rendering: a law
degree cum laude from Howard Univer-
sity School of Law and the only woman
in her class; a doctor of juridical science
degree from Yale University; authorship
of Proud Shoes, States’ Laws on Race and
Color, and Dark Testament and Other
Poems; and ordination as an Episcopa-
lian priest. Her numerous political ac-
tivities include being an early civil
rights activist, organizing and par-
ticipating in student sit-ins to desegre-
gate cafeterias in Washington, DC, in
1944 and being arrested in protest of de-
segregation policies governing seating
on interstate buses.

For all of her accolades, her existence
was not without its downward spirals,
many of which were occasioned by the
politics of sexism, racism, and poverty.
Economic hardship often resulted in
personal deprivation and subsequent
health problems. With the instincts of a
historian, Murray chronicles her life in
relief against the background of Ameri-
can history, emphasizing an individual
struggle against the politics of Jim Crow.
The book abounds with dates, names of
the famous and nonfamous, and court
decisions affecting the civil rights of
Black Americans. The book is tightly or-
ganized, moving chronologically from
Murray’s earliest memories of her
mother, who died during Murray’s early
childhood, and coming full circle to the
celebration of Murray’s first Holy
Eucharist at the church in North
Carolina, where her grandmother Corn-
elia in 1854 had been baptized as one of
“Five Servant Children Belonging to
Miss Mary Ruffin Smith.”

The autobiography convinces the
reader that Pauli Murray’s life was lived
completely. The focus, however, is re-
stricted to the public person. Although
one is permitted several glimpses of her
personal life — the deaths of the last
Fitzgerald aunts, bouts with poverty, a
failed, brief early marriage — Murray’s
posture in the book never approximates
Maya Angelou’s, for example, in I Know
Why the Caged Bird Sings. Song in a
Weary Throat will leave the reader agape
at the spirit, energy, and passion that
fueled Murray’s life but slightly disap-
pointed that she felt compelled to
exclude so much of the personal dimen-
sion. Perhaps Murray’s books tell us, ul-
timately, that in a life so public, the per-
sonal is lost.

© Joyce Pettis is an assistant professor of
English at North Carolina State University
and teaches Afro-American literature and
women in literature.

The Threshing Floor, by Barbara Burford.
Firebrand Books (141 The Commons,
Ithaca, NY 14850), 1987, $7.95, 210 pp.
(PB)

by Alaiyo E. Moseley

What is most striking about

this collection of stories by

Black British author Barbara
Burford is a poetic narrative style and a
talent for creating distinctive plots and
characters. Most of the stories are set in
London; several of the stories deal with
Black British women’s attitudes toward
and reactions to racism and oppression.
All of the stories portray women who are
survivors.

“Dreaming Down the Sky” mirrors an
adolescent’s insecurities, resentments,
and resulting dreams of balloon-like
flight. The dreams intensify and become
so important to Donna, the protagonist,
that she rushes home every day from
school, hastily eats her dinner, com-
pletes her homework, and dashes off to
bed without being told. Within her
room, the unfailingly obedient and re-
sponsible Donna can, when dreaming,
scoff at laws of gravity and write her own
on the ceiling as she floats. Burford lyri-
cally describes Donna’s visual explora-
tion of her body as she bobs slowly above
the bedroom furniture: “Soon she was
doing lazy naked pinwheels in front of
the mirror, trying to see if she could
keep the reflected shadow of her navel
always in the middle of the glass, while
the rest of her moved around her
center.”

In “Pinstripe Summer” love comes
gradually to Dorothy, a shy, middle-
aged woman suffering from the “repres-
sive litanies of her upbringing.” Burford
portrays the woman’s longing for the ex-
pansive, dew-spangled valley that she
claimed in her heart years ago. When
Dorothy summons the gumption to skip
work for a day and visit the land she
calls “Risse,” she is immediately
seduced: “She admired a dew-studded
cobweb held out for her inspection, and
sighed, ‘Risse!’ She spoke the name
aloud, and, as if on the wind of her
breath, the mist on the far side of the
road parted, inviting her to explore the
tumble of bracken that tipped over the
bank.”

The characters in “Miss Jessie” and
“Coming of Age” know racism’s queer
dimensions. Both are Black cleaning
women who must cope with being mis-
treated and ignored by the government
and society. And their coping methods
are, to say the least, very different.
Home is a “concrete Tower of Babel” to
Pearl in “Coming of Age.” After a
“lifetime of hard physical toil,” Pearl
just wanted to live her remaining years
peacefully. Her aches and pains and
neighbors fighting in the halls discourage
her from getting out of her apartment
much. On a day when she does
venture out, she visits a museum and is
saddened by what she sees: “They have
no shame, these people, she thought.
They build cathedrals to display the
things they have stolen .... Stolen
out of Arabia. Stolen out of Africa
.... As if marble floors and curving
staircases could disguise their dreadful
acts.”

In the chilling “Miss Jessie,” the pro-
tagonist, a subway sweeper “invisible to
the great mass of people who surged
through the station in tidal flows,” nur-
tures her memories of life in Jamaica to
avoid drowning “in the hopeless degrad-
ing tide of second-class life in Britain.”
Miss Jessie’s response to her life in “this
Babylon of exile” is to lure White men
to her apartment from the subway sta-
tion and eliminate them “sweetly,
neatly.” Although it is admirable for
Burford to portray the injustices these
women suffer, at times the characters
seem to talk out of the author’s mouth.
Burford apparently felt compelled to
give them a politically or socially moti-
vated cause and then speak for them;
these characters do not seem entirely
believable.

Such is not the case, however, in
“The Threshing Floor,” the most com-
passionate and finely crafted story of the
collection. Jenny’s death from cancer
causes Hannah to flounder in depression
and self-pity for months. The house that
she and Jenny shared is filled with her
lover’s scent, the poetry she wrote, and
the artifacts they collected together. In
the midst of her grief, Hannah remem-
bers that Jenny, a respected poet,
named her writing space “the threshing
floor.” It was where Jenny had sifted
through thousands of words to obtain a
few lines of beauty and brevity. Hannah
eventually realizes that only by return-
ing to her own threshing floor can she
become herself again.

“The Threshing Floor” offers not only
the splendor of Burford’s poetic prose,

but also the embracing story of a
woman's shoreless loyalty to her lover’s
memory and the struggle to recommit to
her craft and reshape her capacity to
love.

Burford’s depiction of working
craftswomen and artists, supported and
enriched by their art, makes this an in-
spiring story. On the day that she starts
a new project, Hannah meets lovely,
tall, and tactful Marah, who comes to
observe the glass-blowing techniques at
Cantii Glass. Marah reinforces Han-
nah’s rebounding sense of personal
strength and commitment to her craft.
She is warm and brilliant, like the colors
she uses to create her hand-woven
tapestries. She has survived several mis-
carriages and an abusive, philandering
husband, largely by relying on the heal-
ing power of her creative efforts. When
Hannah completes her first project since
Jenny’s death, she tells Marah:

“I'll tell you something I've realized
Marah. . . . This thing we have, this
sort of inside singing that comes out
through our fingertips; sometimes it
goes underground. Like. . . a river
disappearing in the desert. But it’s
always there, changing, building,
growing. And when it breaks through
again, it’s stronger, more powerful.
And even when it’s underground, it
feeds you, nourishes you. You may not
realize it’s happening, but it does.”

Burford’s development of this story
can be likened to Hannah’s creation of
the sky-colored glass bowl, animated
with flying swifts, when her grip on grief
is loosened. Just as Marah observes and
admires Hannah’s caring technique in
creating her glass pieces, one cannot
help but to realize that to Burford, writ-
ing is not only her craft, it is her love af-
fair.

© Alaiyo E. Moseley is a trade reporter
who is working on a book of poetry.

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987