Mother, Daughter, Sister, Self

Mother Love, by Candace Flynt. New York: Farrar, Strauss, & Giroux, 1987, $17.95, 342 pp.  
To Have and To Hold, by Deborah Moggach. New York: Dutton, 1987, $17.95, 320 pp.

by Lynne M. Constantine  
Mother Love and To Have and  
To Hold are novels that differ

in style, subject, and tone

but that nonetheless share a common  
wonder at the complexities of love  
among women in families. Motherhood  
and sisterhood are the heart of each  
story, the pivots for plot, character, and  
emotion.

To Have and To Hold is a biting com-  
edy of manners set in contemporary  
London and dealing with surrogate  
motherhood. This emotion-laden trans-  
action is made even more volatile be-  
cause the surrogate and the adoptive  
mothers are sisters. Vivian and Ann are  
opposites: Vivian is the freespirited,  
feminist, earthmother who roots around  
in her garden and marches to oppose de-  
ployment of Cruise missiles. Ann is a  
plodder, a good girl, promoted from  
bookkeeper to office manager through  
hard work and the convenient fact that  
she has no children. Ann’s childless-  
ness, however, is not by choice; she is  
incapable of bearing children. Vivian,  
to whom childbearing, as everything  
else, comes easy, offers to have a child  
and give it to her.

A gesture of generosity, born of sim-  
ple love of her sister? So Vivian and  
Ann both think, initially. But soon the  
complications come tumbling over each  
other. Instead of going with Ann’s hus-  
band Ken to the clinic for artificial in-  
semination, Vivian decides to consum-  
mate a long-smoldering desire to sleep  
with him. The sisters are estranged, not  
just by jealousy, but by Ann’s primal  
sense that Vivian somehow always had  
the best of everything, including her  
husband. Vivian and her husband, too,  
become estranged. The sisters even fight  
with their divorced parents, who inad-  
vertently reveal a key factor in their  
family’s manic dynamics: Ann is Viv-  
ian’s half-sister, fathered by another  
man whom Irene chose not to marry.  
And when the baby is finally born after  
Vivian undergoes a painful Cesarean,  
neither she nor Ann is sure that she will  
be able to give up her baby.

In sharp contrast to the event-filled  
melodrama of To Have and To Hold is  
Candace Flynt’s Mother Love, a daring  
and evocative structure in which three  
adult sisters must adjust their lives after  
their charming, flamboyant, and dif-  
ficult mother dies. As if to underscore  
the interwoven fabric of the four  
women’s lives, the novel’s point of view  
passes from that of the mother on her  
deathbed, to that of each of her three  
adult daughters, Katherine, Jude, and  
Louise. Through reminiscence, storytel-  
ling, and the incidents of their own  
lives, the daughters struggle to under-  
stand their mother’s behavior and a  
central mystery of their childhood: why  
their mother left their kind, loving  
father for another man.

Both novels, in their different ways,  
probe the extraordinary power that a  
mother’s choices have over the lives of  
her daughters. Both novels look to the  
sisters’ lives to put right something  
greatly awry in their mother’s. In To  
Have and To Hold, Ann and Vivian  
reenact the drama of Ann’s adoption.  
Ann’s opportunity to accept a child not  
of her body is in some sense her chance  
to put her own childhood right, to give  
Vivian’s child the simple mother love  
that Ann herself had been denied. In  
Mother Love, Katherine, Jude, and  
Louise have a more encompassing task:  
They must learn to know what is self

and what is Mother. In Louise’s case,  
the recognition means taking a job of  
which her sisters disapprove, as manager  
of the local ice cream shop. For Jude,  
the recognition means moving away  
from her small-town North Carolina  
home, ten minutes from her sisters, to

the variety and stimulation of Chapel  
Hill.

Katherine, who as the eldest suffered  
most from her mother’s fiery nature and  
at the same time understood her mother  
best, has a two-fold task. She must es-  
tablish her identity, but she must learn  
to do so without rejecting her mother.  
Paradoxically, Katherine clings to her  
power to reject her mother in order to  
keep her mother alive. Here Candace  
Flynt shows an extraordinary sensitivity  
to grief and mourning and a refusal to  
succumb to simple formulas. Katherine  
initially refuses to have children; she  
will only, she thinks, repeat the mis-  
takes she saw. When she relents and al-  
lows herself to become pregnant, she be-  
comes tempted to relive the climactic  
event of her mother’s life and leave her  
dependable husband and their soon-to-  
be child for the uncertain adventure of  
grand passion.

By the end of the novel, however,  
Katherine has decided to remain in her  
life, and has replaced her fierce anger at  
her mother with an understanding of  
who her mother was and who Katherine  
herself is. She no longer insists that they  
tell endless stories of what their mother  
did to embarrass or harm them during  
their childhood; instead, she tells her  
sisters a story of what she understands to  
be the “secrets of their mother’s heart.”

Mother Love is a rich, complex novel.  
Flynt’s characterizations are subtle,

complex, and utterly believable. She  
deals with the rivalries and loyalties that  
bind the sisters together with compas-  
sion and understanding. Her use of the  
shifting point of view is more than just a  
show of skill; it illuminates her charac-  
ters, giving them depth and dimension.  
Despite being a melodramatic narrative  
laden with surprises, To Have and To  
Hold also contains believable characters  
drawn with depth and compassion. De-  
borah Moggach intends more than just a  
comic romp or a meditation on the outer  
limits of surrogate motherhood. The  
exaggerated plot, instead of seeming  
contrived, highlights the jungle of real  
emotions that bearing children — or  
yearning for children — can cause.

At the end of each of these novels,  
one of the sisters gives birth — to a son.  
“There were no complications,” is the  
final line of Mother Love. How remarka-  
ble that, after these novels lead us to the  
heart of the passion and terror that bind  
mother and daughter or sister and sister,  
a long-awaited birth in each leads us out  
again. The tightly knit circle of women  
is broken by the birth of a boy-child.  
Katherine’s life and those of her sisters  
will not be like their mother’s. Ann’s  
child will not be like Ann. Are we re-  
lieved? Or disappointed?

@ Lynne M. Constantine is a writer and  
critic in Washington, DC.

Don’t Myth  
This One

The Goddess Letters, by Carol Orlock. New  
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1987, $15.95,  
220 pp.

The best known romance plots

by Madelyn M. Arnold  
are myths — Greek, Norse,

or perhaps Hebrew — stolen re-

peatedly and unashamedly by fresh  
writers-in whose genius it is to see old  
scenes anew. How often has a Juliet  
mooned over Romeo in a novel? But  
The Goddess Letters comes from a diffe-  
rent sort of myth. It is the mother—  
daughter story of Demeter (Ceres) and  
Persephone (Proserpine) made fresh and  
accessible to modern readers, along with  
a clever dissection of sex and imposed  
morality and of women’s powers and  
their loss. The brisk style and the epis-  
tolary organization of Letters is unusual,  
and it is a funny book. It is also not at  
all funny, and it is frequently, thought-  
fully political. It could fit well onto a  
variety of reading lists.

Orlock retells the story of the goddess  
of growing things, whose daughter —  
goddess of flowers and the spring — is  
abducted and forced against her will to  
be queen to the god of the underworld.  
The anguished pair unfold their mutual  
devotion in letters, writing complaints  
and explanations through the following  
1,900 years. They write because as  
mother and daughter, they each seem  
to have expected to remain the other’s  
best beloved.

Demeter and Persephone reveal  
themselves as bold, naive, and suprawo-  
manly — more believable than goddess-  
es tend to be. The types and rewards of  
emerging human societies somehow  
march into their commentary, and the  
types and rewards of male violence (or-  
ganized or otherwise) wind through what  
seem casual complaints. Orlock’s narra-  
tive technique works, as in the tossed-  
over-the-shoulder story of the Greek  
Wars. Most enjoyable, though, was her  
humor. Sometimes deadpan and some-  
times with a hoo-haw belly laugh, she

lampoons such things as rhetoric, the  
arbitrary nature of moral philosophy,  
and sex. Regarding sex, her writing falls  
somewhere between lusty and randy.

Rather than follow the trend of nam-  
ing parts (which makes even good sex  
seem like the unholy union of a medical  
book and a thesaurus), Orlock presents  
sex as frequent, differing, and as interest-  
ing to the reader as it is to the partici-  
pants. She has a taste for the understated  
and the symbolic: “(of the hymen) those  
misled men. . . . Do they think a reed’s  
no longer a reed when it enters the bas-  
ket?” “Pan’s small pipe chucked under  
Eros’ cheeks now” is not about a tickle  
under the chin. Metaphors can trill even  
through our jaded pipes.

The writer states that this book came  
from “undercurrents” about women’s  
preculture and magic, and she “docu-  
ments” the rise and fall of women as  
powerful receivers and shapers of the  
goddesses’ gifts. I confess, however, hav-  
ing difficulty understanding the basic  
motives of any of the deities: Why, for  
example, did they fool with humankind  
at all? But I am a fairly rockheaded un-  
believer, and magic under any of its  
names invokes in me a blank stare. It is  
worth the effort to accept this world,  
however, for accepting this pantheon  
exposes one to a fine Götterdammerung

with a real fire. A directly connecting  
twilight of women’s powers occurs as an  
ideal state of female domination is over-  
run and replaced with a series of guilt-  
ridden, male-dominant, single-godded  
cults. Quite a political statement, really,  
in a novel that works as a story about  
mother and daughter.

One mild criticism concerns what  
may be poetic license. Orlock paints a  
sacred, explicitly Christian atmosphere  
into pagan spring rituals enacted to call  
back Persephone (spring) to earth. It is  
hard to reconcile the dour masochism  
of Orlock’s Eleusans with her concurrent  
portrayal of them as a sensuous, lively  
people.

It is interesting, stylistically and  
philosophically, to see the “maturing”  
of the goddesses over the years: Imperi-  
ous Demeter becomes wool-gathering  
and philosophical, as if each were  
equally an aspect of her weakening. A  
frightened and petulant Persephone  
never completely matures, and over time  
responds to the ebbing of her power with  
a confusion that may be the wisest op-  
tion. Persephone has eagerly sought to  
plead her husband’s (Hades’s) ever-  
changing view of justice. The old pow-  
ers, values, and especially, beauties, are  
gone from Olympus and from the world.  
Eventually there are no powers left; even  
the queen of Hades needs no crown.  
What has Persephone gained ultimately  
by collaborating with those deities  
whose interest is power against what  
Mother Knowledge knew? I think there  
is a message to certain feminists here.

There is no need to know Greek  
mythology to appreciate this book: Or-  
lock tells what she needs to tell and glee-  
fully bends the odd phrase or character  
with just the right amount of cheek. Like  
all great tales, hers is easy to see oneself  
in. The Goddess Letters articulates the  
complex interaction of mother and  
daughter in the process of becoming  
peers and friends — of becoming  
mothers, and women, together. And  
that, I think, is universally understood.

® Madelyn M. Arnold, who lives in  
Seattle, is a sci-tech and “realistic” fiction  
writer who makes a pretense of reading  
Latin and Greek. Her first novel is due out  
this spring from The Seal Press.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988 Belles Lettres @7