The Conversations of Cow  
by Suniti Namjoshi  

London: The Women’s Press, 1985,  
$6.95, 125 pp. (PB)  

At the core of this book is the theme of  
the quest. In this intricate and per-  
ceptive autobiographical narrative, a  
cow manifests itself in response to  
Namjoshi’s unverbalized prayer in a  
public park. Her conversations with  
Bhadravati, a lesbian Brahmin cow, are  
explorations of her own identity. The  
problem is not who is the cow, as might  
first appear, but who is Namjoshi?  
Through the cow, Namjoshi’s diverse  
conflicts are united into one all-  
encompassing image. Apart from being  
a female symbol, it is a strong Hindu, if  
not Indian, image, evoking both tradi-  
tion and female identity. How does  
Namjoshi, an Indian woman teaching  
English literature in Canada, see  
herself? This is not merely a question of  
social and cultural fitting in or even of  

Two Women in One  
by Nawal el-Saadawi  

The Seal Press (500 E. Pike St., Seattle,  
WA 98122), 1986, $14.95 (HB), $8.95  
(PB), 124 pp.  

“Anima/Animus.” Charcoal on paper by Mary Connelly.  

coming out as a lesbian; rather, it is a  
question of establishing one’s own axis  
of strength within a social context and,  
more importantly, in one’s psyche.  

Initially the cow is a springboard for  
Namjoshi’s ruminations about her iden-  
tity. The struggle is between what she is  
and what she is becoming. Should she  
respond to the name “Suniti” or “Sue”?  
She sees herself successively as goldfish,  
poodle, lover, and robot in response to  
Bhadravati’s transformations of char-  
acter and gender. But the cow of a  
thousand faces and manifestations has  
the capacity to be itself no matter by  
what name it is called and no matter  
where it finds itself. Ultimately,  
though, cow and woman are one.  

Namjoshi’s humor is wry and quaint.  
On first reading, it is the funny aspect  
that is most attractive, but her images  
come back to haunt the reader at dif-  
ferent levels. This work has the quality  
of an onion: One peels layer after layer  
looking for the truth, only to realize that  
truth and all have been discarded with  
the layers of skin.  

— Geetanjali Singh  

|  

Two WOMEN  
IN ONE # # 4  

el-Saadawi  

by Nawal  

This novel parallels the sexual and  
political awakening of a young Egyptian  
medical student. Bahia Shahin, at 18  
years, is a woman whose life is split  
between two equally repressive spheres.  
The first, her tradition-bound home, is  
dominated by an authoritarian father  
and a submissive mother who forbid any  
manifestation of her personality to de-  
velop, except that of medical student.  
The other, the Faculty of Medicine, is  
dominated by callous professionals.  
Through her experiences at school,  
where her sensitivity is in conflict with  
the thick-skinned attitudes of the fac-  
ulty, and on the tram during her daily  
commutes, where she witnesses the  
social injustice and misery of the people,  
she begins to realize that she has no iden-  
tity of her own. Her mind is “unknown  
but definite, specific yet undefined.”  

The developing tension in Bahia is  
recognized by a magnetic fellow student,  
Selim, who becomes the instrument to  
unleash Bahia’s sexual powers. The de-  
cision to be sexually involved with Selim  
is an enormous struggle for Bahia, a  
struggle that lasts for half of the book.  
Understood within the context of  
Egyptian morals — that a woman’s los-  
ing her virginity is almost a capital crime  

— such conflict and hesitation are not  
unrealistic. Because of the gravity of the  
decision, when she finally concludes  
that love and its sexual expression will  
break the mold of conformity in which  
she is imprisoned, her identity — her  
selfhood — is liberated all the more.  
Afterward she realizes that she no longer  
belongs to the family, that “the blood in  
her veins is no longer theirs,” and later  
she asserts that “Only human choice  
gives this bond any meaning.” “Choice”  
is an important idea; it is her deliberate  
movement toward Selim that begins to  
give her life its meaning.  

Short Reviews  

The Graywolf Annual  
Two: Short Stories  

by Women  

edited by Scott Walker  
Graywolf Press (P.O. Box 75006,  

St. Paul, MN 55175), 1986, $7.50,  
176 pp. (PB)  

These stories are most strongly linked by  
a common mood, one that is bitter-  
sweet, plaintive. Most of the authors  
make us care deeply about the char-  
acters, although glimpses at their lives  
are brief. As the reader progresses from  
one story to the next, echoes begin to  
sound, then bump against each other,  
then accrete. What begins to echo is the  
knowledge that people are painfully  
alone, despite their attempts at fellow-  
ship. One is either literally and  
physically left alone by one’s fellows or is  
cut off through one’s own agency, con-  
scious or not.  

For example, in Susan Minot’s “The  
Navigator,” the seemingly close-knit  
Vincent clan (whose number and  
identities are annoyingly difficult to de-  
termine) is in reality struggling to keep  
the fabric of the family intact as the  
father’s alcoholism rips at the seams of  
its solidarity. The “sweet and ordinary”  
Mary of Louise Erdrich’s haunting “The  
Beet Queen” is forsaken in painful, grad-  
ual stages by all those she loves — her  
father dies and leaves the once-  
comfortable family in poverty; her  
mother flies off with a stunt pilot; her  
baby brother is scooped from her arms by  
a stranger; her older brother runs away.  
The children in Alice Munro’s “Walker  
Brothers Cowboy” learn that there is a  
private world behind the facade of  
parenthood — parents have longings,  
feelings, and past lives that exist in a  
realm apart from their daily lives as the  
children know them. Elizabeth Tallent’s  
“Black Holes” describes a similar realm.  
After a wife deserts a man and their small  
daughter, Fanny, he remarries, has an-  
other child, and buys a second house,  
which he jocularly calls “Fanny’s  
house.” He is perplexed by Fanny’s  
melancholy until he discovers that she  
has taken him literally; she thinks she is  
to live in the house alone, while he and  
his wife and son stay at the old house. It  
is as if Fanny’s past desertion by her  
mother has marked her life indelibly.  

Losing her virginity has given Bahia  
an identity that sets her apart from other  
young women, and also from society.  
Her newfound sexual identity  
empowers her into political conscious-  
ness. She joins Selim in a workers’ strike  
against the government; many are killed  
and many are jailed, including Selim.  
Her experience of the strike makes her  
realize that she has “blended in the larger  
world, of becoming part of the infinite  
extended part of humanity.” The sexual  
and political lines have converged.  

What follows is a series of struggles to  
retain her identity, both sexual and  
political, including her own arrest and  
an arranged marriage from which she  
runs away. Her strength is eventually  
grounded — and her identity solidified  
— when, motivated by her feelings  
about Selim, she joins a group of dis-  
sident students who print and distribute  
illegal pamphlets criticizing the gov-  
ernment. At this point, the sexual and  
political are fused. However, the clash  
between Bahia’s expanding sense of self  
and her repressive society propels the  
novel to a jarring conclusion: She is  
arrested and sent to jail. The life of com-  
mitment begins, and the heroine  
assumes an identity of her own.  

— Laila Said  

All of the stories show how people’s  
interactions often alienate them from  
one another — a very contemporary  
theme. But rather than showing a “wide  
and varied range” of experience (as  
stated on the back cover), I think these  
stories reveal that contemporary ex-  
perience has much in common: Society  
is not becoming more tightly bonded  
through people’s relationships; instead,  
fellowship tends to disintegrate.  

If you want to sample the best works  
of these writers (other authors included  
are Joy Williams, Alice Adams, Jane  
Bowles [whose “Señorita Cordoba” is  
wonderful but conspicuously out of sync  
with the other stories], Laurie Colwin,  
Ann Beattie, Sara Vogan, Bobbie Ann  
Mason, Tess Gallagher, and Mavis  
Gallant), you may have to read beyond  
this collection. For example, any of  
Mason’s Shiloh and Other Stories reveals  
this superb short story writer’s range and  
skill better than the selection in this  
volume. The stories from Adams and  
Williams are too slight. Minot’s  
“Navigator” does not work as a short  
story, but the novel of which it is a part  
has garnered high praise. It also troubles  
me that the collection’s reason for being  
is not made more explicit; an editor’s  
preface would have been welcome and  
edifying. Still, there is much to be dis-  
covered from this collection, and I find  
that individual stories (“Beet Queen,”  
“Black Holes,” and “Irina” to name but  
three) — and the poignant mood of the  
book — linger in my mind.  

— Deanna Cook  

Playing the Changes  
by Thulani Davis  
Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University  

Press, 1985, $16.95 (HB), $8.95 (PB),  
64 pp.  

Caution: These are not “instant  
gratification” poems.  

There is a poem in this second collec-  
tion of Davis’s poetry entitled “playing  
solitaire,” in which she writes:  

the thing about playing solitaire  
is that right from the start  

you begin to draw the same cards  
in spite of all the possibilities  
with their backs to you.  

At times, Playing the Changes seems to  
do the same. In spite of all the possibili-  
ties, some things fall short. At other  
times, the cards are dealt just right.  

A former senior editor for The Village  
Voice, Davis writes like a woman “living  
in the fire lane/ where it all moves fast/  
and the emergency is ongoing.” She  
creates vivid images that penetrate with  
the intensity of a blaring siren, and she  
interweaves lines that dazzle you with  
their perfect cadence and exacting  
beauty. But, for all her strengths, a few  
of her pivotal pieces stumble and lose  
direction when she plunges headlong  
into too many diverse themes at once.  

This book is not an easy read, but  
neither are the times and the changes  
Davis writes about. The poems reveal  
Davis's creative growth while she de-  
picts the 80s as a cauldron of fermenting  
malaise. Yet, in the cacophony of  
Playing the Changes, one’s very survival is  
an act of resistance.  

— Kamili Anderson  

14 ® Belles Lettres Jury/August 1986