Retrospective

Goodnight Mrs. Caliban,  
Wherever You Are

The End of Tragedy. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989, $6.95, 191 pp. (PB)  
Binstead’s Safari. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988, $6.95, 224 pp. (PB)  
The Pearl Killers. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988, $6.95, 215 pp. (PB)

I See a Long Journey. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987, $6.95, 141 pp. (PB)  
Mrs. Caliban. New York: Dell, 1988, $6.95, 125 pp. (PB)

Something to Write Home About. Boston: Harvard Common Press, 1988,  
$15.95, 296 pp.

by Lorraine E. McCormack

Have you ever wondered what  
would happen if your dreams  
came true? Well, Rachel Ingalls has a few notions, and she is crafting them into a series of elegant, touching, humorous tales to flesh out your dreams and confirm the best advice you ever gave yourself: Don’t go down into the basement. It is too bad your instincts won't let you follow this advice, because there is something much scarier than monsters waiting down there — you. Ingalls shines her naked bulb before your very eyes into all of your nasty, musty corners, so be brave and look carefully. Just when you are sure you'll see carnivorous toads, she will illuminate some exquisitely delicate night bloomers that spring from the muck.

In two novels and four collections of novellas and short stories, Ingalls is pursuing a deep fascination with the fullness of our nature and our human capacity to stretch our spirits to meet life’s demands. To examine the darker side of human experience, Ingalls uses the kind of horror that assaults your nostrils in dark catacombs, draws you up a mountainside you would just as soon not climb, and flashes a cold mirror on your secret self.

The British Book Marketing Council calls Mrs. Caliban one of the twenty greatest American post-World War II novels, and the book is certainly unforgettable for its lulling style and imaginative treatment of pain, despair, and rage. Thanks to her stateside publishers, all of Ingalls’s work, originally published in England, is now available in the United States.

Ingalls grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts, was educated in Europe and America, and settled in England in 1964. The wealth of her multicultural experience is evident in her work. Her characters, mostly Americans, seek their destinies from Hollywood to Africa, from Finland to the South Seas. Some stories are set in today’s world, and some happen long ago. Her settings are often purposely vague, contrasting a clarity of language that draws us into her characters’ time and place.

Several of her titles seem appropriate to more than one of her stories, which has the satisfying effect of basting the works together like large stitches, gathering the fabric of human experience from remote points on the compass, from century to century.

“The End of Tragedy,” the title story from Ingalls’s newest collection, is the kind of story Hitchcock loved bringing to the screen: intelligent, playful, and suspenseful. Ingalls is so intent on showing us the darker side of our natures in this tale of family duplicity and greed that nearly every character has a nickname or an alias to slip into when evil is afoot. Ingalls relishes ending a story with a jolt, and she is full of delightful surprises.

Ingalls can match Poe’s classic horror settings with her “medievalized Victorian castle” — you could get chilblains just reading some of her stories — and without apology she will throw in a vampire bat wherever it is needed (to stretch the stew, for instance). Visiting

Spring 1989

“Friends in the Country,” in The End of Tragedy, Jim and Lisa stumble into a house party of ghoulish sophisticates whose eerie hospitality strains the couple’s relationship, not to mention their good manners.

It wasn’t just the cold, either, or the general darkness of the room; there was a distinctly disagreeable, dank smell emanating from the corners, from the floor under the lovely old rug. ... She’d suspected at first that it might be coming from the wine, which she’d nearly choked on; it was like taking a mouthful of plasma.

Enchanted by the ambiance, Lisa and Jim challenge one another’s grip on reality, and while a ghostly fog presses against the house’s darkened panes, a chilly, campy scare is had by all.

Humor, wry and ironic, is a gift Ingalls uses as deftly as did Barbara Pym. Her characters are so sharply drawn that the humor pings out of them like the music from a stringed instrument. “Broderick simply loves it here,” the gaga hostess of a haunted house tells her guests, “his family’s been in the district just forever.” When considering husbands and wives, Ingalls’s wit runs from sarcastic to sardonic. “In the Act” from The End of Tragedy is a tongue-in-cheek rendition of the mad scientist/neglectful husband getting his comeuppance when the wife finds out he has built himself a computerized robot-mistress in the attic workshop. Helen blackmails Edgar into building her own robot lover, and Monty Python meets the Stepford Wives. “Oh, honestly, Edgar,” Helen complains about the robot he has built for her, “he looks like a floor-walker.” Edgar replies, “I thought of building him so he’d strangle you in bed.”

Like Barbara Pym’s, Ingalls’s characterizations are so full that each story seems to be just a window on the characters’ lives. Pym lets you lean through those windows for a second look when she uses characters from one novel as supporting players in another. Ingalls seems to use the same repertory company technique, less patently, but just as effectively. Surely a few of those après ski types blowing the steam off their chocolate are the same people who were arching their eyebrows over champagne in the Greek nightclubs in Something to Write Home About? These familiar faces in the crowd enhance the sinister atmosphere and heighten the suspense while the main characters ponder their next moves.

A girl coming toward them smiled knowingly at Carter and said, “Hi, there!” “Who’s that?” Mamie asked. What would he tell her anyway? Just the usual. . . . “I don’t know. A snow bunny.” She looked born rich: she’d have come to the ski resort as a victim, not a predator. With so many women like that around, Carter wouldn’t have to kill for money; he could marry it ... she could sense him preparing to frighten her with the possibility.

Men, and Michael learns a whole new meaning for the term “sucker punch.” Ingalls’s sardonic attitude toward men and her gift for fantasy are never more skillfully blended than in “Blessed Thou Art” from I See a Long Journey, in which a present-day monk is impregnated by the visiting Angel Gabriel. Following an afternoon delight with his celestial visitor, Brother Anselm ends up with swollen breasts, backaches, and crying jags. Ingalls visits on Anselm all the uncertainties and discomforts of pregnancy. She changes his body to a woman’s, inviting the lechery of his former fellows, and she changes his personality into the simpering layabout some men see in pregnant women.

He dropped all his duties and lived a life of ease... . “So when are you going to let us have some fun with you, babe? It better be soon, before you get too big.” “Don’t be naughty,” Anselm said. He made a motion of hitting at Elmo with a small peacock-feather fan... . “Come on Anselm. We’re your friends, aren’t we? Who else are you going to lay around with if it isn’t your friends? At least let us see your tits.”

When Ingalls’s characters stretch their spirits beyond their human capacity, their dreams come true in chaos. Weaving back and forth across the lines that separate good from evil, fact from fantasy, and peace from madness, many of Ingalls’s characters defy the laws of society, and some of them even challenge the laws of nature, like Mrs. Caliban, the meek California housewife whose lover is tall, dark green, and amphibious. In Mrs. Caliban, Dorothy and her husband, Fred, have created a chasm of grief and resentment between them after the deaths of their children. His request for twin beds is Fred’s nonverbal response to Dorothy’s attempts at nurturing their marriage. When Larry the sea monster steps into her kitchen one evening, Dorothy feeds him most of what she is preparing for her husband’s business dinner, a choice that changes not only the menu but the rest of her life.

Metaphorically, Larry is reminiscent of Shakespeare’s Caliban in The Tempest, a sea creature whose very existence is sustained by jealousy and misery. “A freckled whelp hag-born” is Shakespeare’s unkind description, “a savage and deformed slave.” Physically, gentle Larry is more of a cross between the Creature from the Black Lagoon and Boy on a Dolphin. He is a finely formed, seaweed-colored Lothario who brings a muted, undersea rhythm to Dorothy's incipient madness. She soon begins to delight in the spousal comforts Larry offers her that Fred cannot. For weeks, she hides him, feeds him, makes love to him, and disguises him for their nightly meanderings across shadowy summer lawns. One night they blunder upon Dorothy’s husband practicing his adultery al fresco, and her cool dream explodes into a fiery nightmare.

There is a temptation to be cynical about Ingalls’s style after she snatches your breath away with a few surprise endings. Sometimes she covers an awful lot of geography to questionable effect, as in “Inheritance,” the theme story from The Pearl Killers, and in the novel Binstead’s Safari, but these are minor disappointments. At its best, her work is beautifully balanced and emotionally riveting.

Her use of violence and the eschatological to highlight an untoward perspective is very like Flannery O’Connor’s. In “St. George and the Nightclub” from Something to Write Home About, a divorcing couple who have battered one another emotionally have a close encounter with the physical alternative to their emotional abuse:

Butterworth had held on to his wife, too, but too tightly. And he had also managed to make love to her; whether before or after her death was something I didn’t want to know. . . . Butterworth had held his wife by the neck and held her too tightly, for too long. But I held my wife close and carefully, by the waist and shoulders, and shut my eyes.

In the full range of her work, Ingalls is like a Yankee Flannery O’Connor, dishing out the horror and the humor as side orders to a main course of sanctifying grace.

@ Lorraine E. McCormack is a writer who lives and works in Washington, D.C.

Belles Lettres ® 17