B

Pinball, by Alison Lyssa, in Plays by Women, Vol. 3, edited by Michelene Wandor.

London: Methuen, 1985 (PB)

The Boiling Frog, by Alison Lyssa. Currency Press (P.O. Box 452, Paddington, SW

2021, Australia), 1984, 37 pp. (PB)

Framework and Blind Salome, by Sandra Shotlander. Yackandandah Playscripts (25
Buena Vista Drive, Montmorency VIC 3094 Australia), 45 and 50 pp. (PB)

by Rosemary Curb

Although rarely exported, Australian theater
has been flourishing for most of the 20th
century. Among popular contemporary
dramatists ranks Dorothy Hewett with her
bawdy iconoclastic plays, such as Joan of the
Stockyards, portraying the plight of work-
ing-class Australian women. Although
Hewett does not present herself as a feminist,
she and a good dozen other women have
seasoned the Australian stage for two
powerfully feminist playwrights, both of
whom won their first big successes in the
1980s with overtly lesbian plays: Alison
Lyssa with Pinball and Sandra Shotlander

with Framework.

Alison Lyssa was born in Sydney
in 1947. In the early 1970s she
explored questions raised by the

women’s movement and searched for her
own voice in drama with the aid of a
Young Writers Fellowship from the
Literature Board of the Australia Council.
Her first play, The Year of the Migrant, was
given a staged reading at Sydney’s ex-
perimental Nimrod Theatre in 1980.
That year at a demonstration in front of
Sydney Town Hall, the unemployed
playwright was asked for a donation for a
lesbian custody battle. Since she had no
money, she offered to write a play instead.
Her critically acclaimed play, Pinball, was
the result.

— Alison Lyssa Speaks

The first women’s play I remember

being affected by (and there

weren’t very many then) was in
1975 (International Women’s Year) in
Sydney. It was No Man’s Land by Jennifer
Compton, later published under the title
Crossfire. One of the characters was a
modern feminist. I kept thinking, “This is
only the beginning.” The actor playing
the feminist was without the body
movements or style of living or strength
that I knew in the women I was meeting
and doing political work with in the 1970s
in the anti-uranium movement or child
care. The women we were and were
becoming were not represented on stage.
In its first 10 years of existence, the
Nimrod, the most radical of mainstream
theaters in Sydney, put on 60 plays; but
only 11 were by women and only 5 of
those were full-length adult plays.

In 1980, a group of women at Nimrod
formed a Women in Theatre project and
asked the Australia Council for $107,000
to put on women’s plays, and they got it!
The boys at Nimrod were forced to look at
women’s work, including Pinball, which
was directed by Chris Johnson, only the
second woman to direct a play at Nimrod.
I also wanted to give women actors roles
that would look at the world in a new way.

In writing Pinball I was fascinated with
the ancient Solomon story. In it the
whole framework for viewing women is
devastatingly destructive. We see women
as harlots, as lying, as silly. Dis-
connections, rather than connections,
are made between people by insisting that
a child’s biological parentage is the most
important thing. The name of Theenie’s
son, Alabaster, comes from the “Song of
Solomon”: “His legs were alabaster col-
umns.” Alabaster is white, intelligent,
middle class, the hope of the patriarchy.
That’s why everybody is fighting over
him. I wanted to turn that story right
over.

The grandfather is called Archibald.
His name suggests both “the wide arch of
the Empire” and that he’s growing old and
rotting. The older and more crumbling his
empire gets, the more frantically he tries
to hang on to preserve it and to shut out
from his vision of the world anything that
would threaten it. I called the
grandmother Violet because it’s close to
the suffragette’s color purple. There are a
lot of references to the color violet.
Theenie, at one stage when she’s trying
not to go mad, says, “I’ll paint a picture
here violet, purple, lavender.” She
pictures a world of infinite richness.

The lesbian mother Theenie is
Athena, the goddess of wisdom. I'd
recently seen the Oresteia. The Greek

commander Agamemnon sacrifices his
daughter Iphigenia so that the gods will
give him a wind to sail to Troy. Years later
when Agamemnon gets home from the
Trojan War with a slave-mistress
Cassandra, Clytemnestra, his wife, kills
him in his bath. Fair enough. He killed
her daughter. Then Orestes, their son,
takes revenge and kills his mother. Then
there’s the big debate in Athens about
which is worse — killing your mother or
killing your husband. We're told that a
mother’s blood is nothing compared to the
bond a woman has with her husband. For
Clytemnestra to break that sacred bond is
so vile that she deserved her death. The
citizens vote whether Orestes is to be con-
demned for killing his mother, and it’s a
draw. Zeus calls on Athena to cast the
deciding vote, and she casts it for Orestes.
Her wisdom is co-opted by that patriarchal
system to support the death of the mother
because the mother’s connection to
husband and father must not be broken or
the patriarchy will crumble.

Why is Athena co-opted? She argues
for peace, stability, restoring order, but
she’s only allowed to do that within the
framework set up for her. But in my play
instead of abiding by a patriarchal judg-
ment, Theenie responds, “What if we
could begin to discuss how we might share
in the bringing up of children?” And she
realizes she’s never talked to her ex-
husband’s new wife. It’s a beginning of a
dialogue we’ve got to have: to transcend
all these walls that have been set up to
keep us apart, so we don’t have to con-
demn Clytemnestra to death or to cut
some woman’s baby in half.

Theenie’s lover Axis is the pivot, the
resting spot, someone to lean on, to get
strength from. I’ve never had an Axis in
my life. Wouldn’t it be wonderful to have
such a woman? Vandelope, the radical
feminist, rhymes with antelope. She’s
vandal plus hope. She runs around with a
spray can defacing billboards, prepared to
deface everything to change the way
things are — not to destroy. Like Portia in
The Merchant of Venice, she comes into
the court disguised as a male lawyer, but
instead of saving one of the boys, she plays
a legal trick to support women.

All my life I've been trying to rewrite
King Lear. In Pinball the three women are
sisters in the women’s movement sense:
Theenie, Axis, Vandelope. What if the
three women, instead of being at one
another’s throats, as they are in Shake-
speare’s play, were friendly and
supportive? King Lear’s youngest daugh-
ter, Cordelia, is sacrificed just like
Iphigenia. Not that Lear kills her directly,
but everything he does sets up circum-

stances that lead to her death. Cordelia

4 % Belles Lettres

In this play, lesbian mother Theenie,
her ex-husband, and her parents all
clamor for possession of 10-year-old
Alabaster, spoiled by gifts and attention
but blithely unaware that he is the sym-
bolic pivotal family treasure and heir; the
boy would rather play video games and
pinball. Theenie loves her son, her
parents, her lover Axis, her feminist
friends. She tolerates her pompous mis-
ogynist brother and ex-husband in order
to keep peace in the family. Although
torn asunder like Cordelia trying to
placate Lear, Theenie refuses to col-
laborate in her father’s folly and joins
forces instead with her feminist sisters.
Thanks to an absurd deus ex machina in
which her friend Vandelope impersonates
one of the old boys, Theenie wins
custody.

Alison’s third play, The Boiling Frog,

not only operates on several narrative

says, “Oh, dear father, it is thy business
that I go about.” And I thought, “What if
the three women on stage were not going
about their dear father’s business?”
Theenie says to Archibald, “I will not do
what you want.” He tells her that if she
gives up being a lesbian and comes home
to live he’ll pay for his grandson to go to a
nice expensive school, and she can have
her brother’s old room to do her painting
in.
But Theenie knows that if she was liv-
ing in their house with their restrictions,
she couldn’t be in touch with her feelings
and ideas. Her art would die. Her father
and brother say, “You’re mad.” They call
her right to be herself “madness.”
Fortunately Theenie can draw on the
support of her sisters to pull herself away
from the sacrifice her father demands.

version of Joan of Arc. My Joan is not

trying to lead an army into battle to
save a kingdom but to be a part of a new
way of looking at things. That means
redefining hero. When Joan first comes on
stage, it’s at the time of the Great Plague
of London in the 17th century. The only
way she can stay alive is carting dead
bodies. It’s the only work she can find.
But she can see very clearly that if housing
were different, if poor people weren’t liv-
ing in dark, crowded, dripping places,
they wouldn’t be getting sick. She
searches for a time when reason will have
worked these things out.

She goes to the 18th century and dis-
covers a coal mine she’s supposed to work
in. Her piece of common ground where
she used to grow turnips and the woods
where she used to gather firewood and
chestnuts have all been taken as part of
the English enclosure movement by the
local landowning duke. And so now as a
landless laborer, she has to go down into
the coal mines (and that’s certain death
— either suddenly by explosion or slowly
by dreadful conditions). And the coal
mine, as predicted, explodes. Joan’s
friends rush to try to bring up the victims,
but Joan refuses to help. She says, “But
they have been down there every day,
dying slowly for the coal, and I did noth-
ing about it. Now that they are dying
quickly, is it time to rush over and weep?
Take my naked candle down the shaft and
add my body to the pile?”

Downtrodden, oppressed people, in-
cluding women and people of dark colors,
are asked to draw upon our reserves of
compassion, to go and patch up and add
our bodies to the pile so that the entire

The Boiling Frog, Joan is my own

Belles Lettres Interviews

levels but also moves through time with a
Joan of Arc warrior struggling to survive
the Great Plague in London in 1665, coal
mine cave-ins in 1776, and finally the
threat of nuclear annihilation in the 20th
century. The title comes from a science
experiment: If you toss a frog in a pot of
boiling water it will jump right out; but if
you toss the frog in room temperature
water and slowly heat it, you can boil the
unwary frog. The play suggests that we (all
life on the planet) are the frog haplessly
and without resistance getting cooked.
With epic pageantry and song, the play
urges us to rise to immediate political act-
ion before we watch our planet dis-
integrate in a mushroom cloud. Holding a
Brechtian mirror up to the necrophilia of
the patriarchal system did not, however,
win the critical praise that a mother’s
struggle for her child did.

system can go on. At some point we have
to say, “We refuse to be the next lot of
victims.” What the patriarchy does is
canonize victims after their death — like
Sylvia Plath and Virginia Woolf, whose
work was magnificent and who in the end
weren't able to keep going because it is
difficult in a world where your vision is so
different from the accepted one. The
system loves to have martyrs it can use. I
wanted to create a hero who would refuse
to be that kind of martyr. Joan says, “I do
not want to be a hero.”

When Joan gets to the 20th century
she pieces together the final parts of the
jigsaw that she couldn’t understand
before. In its building of massive weapons,
the system is actually worshiping death.
Susan Griffin writes about the worship of
death and denial of feelings in this society.
But feelings come back like the sunrise no
matter how often you try to deny them.
Then, sadly, our culture turns to weapons
to push our feelings out.

In The Boiling Frog I use three women
again, not sisters, but three parts of the
self. Joan, like Athena, is pure seeing.
She sees from the outside what's happen-
ing. Sally is the sensual erotic part, which
has been denied in our culture or co-opted
so that a woman must use her sex to get a
roof over her head or some coal to keep
her warm. I wanted to reclaim Sally and
Joan together. The third part, Patience, is
the mother, who has been mouthing to
her daughter for centuries what the
patriarchy told them they had to believe.
By the end of the play the three parts of
woman are no longer divided against
themselves. Motherhood, wisdom,
sexuality have come together. The fourth
character is a man called Carpenter, who
represents a part of women men have
taken to be exclusively theirs: the skill of
our hands to reshape things, to use tools,
to give matter form and substance and
purpose. Carpenter, who’s been a soldier,
has taken off his uniform, thrown away his
gun. He’s on stage protecting the baby.
He’s getting into child care at last. And
he’s going to find himself a hammer and
become a carpenter again instead of a
dealer in death.

Hester Eisenstein was telling me why
she thinks the critics could praise Pinball
about a lesbian custody fight but not The
Boiling Frog, which they ripped to pieces.
“As long as you’re writing about what they
see as women’s issues, they can be
patronizing and pat you on the head and
say, ‘That’s a nice curiosity.’ But you dare
step into the political arena and write
about the whole world! You dare
challenge the entire political structure!
No wonder they got angry with you.”

September/October 1986