SS eee

—Recent Fiction, continued

Good Enough to Eat bewildered me.  
The book is billed as a humorous novel  
about bulimia (an incredible proposi-  
tion), but I did not find it to be funny.  
I also did not understand how the main  
character, 25-year-old Liza, was bulimic  
(I work with bulimics in my therapy  
practice), because never in the book  
does she engage in bingeing and purging.  
She is, however, a compulsive overeater  
who obsesses constantly about food,  
weight, and body image, which many  
women can identify with.

The most serious problem with the  
book, however, is that it seems to say  
that bulimia is caused by bad sex with  
men as well as society’s demands for all  
women to appear slim, and that the sol-  
ution to all of this is to come out and  
go to bed with a woman. I find such an  
assumption to be dangerous; I have  
worked with women who had happy  
partnerships with women and were still  
bulimic. The condition is actually  
rooted in serious boundary violations,  
experienced in early childhood, often  
including sexual abuse. Bulimia is cer-  
tainly a disease of a patriarchal society,  
but the correspondence is not as simplis-  
tic as Newman portrays it.

Literature Today.

ALREADY LAUNCHED by  
readers like you: Linda Ty-  
Casper’s Awaiting Trespass  
(Philippines), “This deeply  
moving book is full of good  
of the inner life” —Kirkus. My  

BOOKS TO CLEAR THE HEAD

Readers International brings you  
today’s world literature. Each  
hardcover volume, by  
subscription, is just $8.45.  
(regularly to $16.95)

You are an honest journalist—you discover a potential  
Chernobyl and—you write east of the Berlin Wall.  
Reporter Josepha Nadler is likeable, disorganized,  
amusingly scathing about herself and her newspaper  
colleagues. Then a visit to “the filthiest town in Europe”  
plunges her into the personal and professional battle of  
her life. In Flight of Ashes author Monika Maron breaks  
with the prescribed silences about the press,  

the Party, the position of women and the real truth: says André Brink, has a way of recording a  

truth deeper than fact. Through READERS  
INTERNATIONAL (RI) you can explore new worlds  
of fiction, worlds seen more clearly, stories told more  
freshly than in any press or TV news report.

“A splendid and important enterprise and worth  
supporting,” says London’s Financial Times.

RI works like a magazine subscription—every other  
month you receive a new and timely book: handsome  
hardcover editions at the special price of $8.45 +  
$1.50 postage. You help fund the translation and  
printing of some of the world’s finest literature.

Subscribe now for a good read and help bring some  
of today’s most gifted writers into English. “Readers  
International is exciting: good books—and a good  
cause,” says A. Whitney Ellsworth, publisher of the  
New York Review of Books. Return the coupon now to  
receive your first volume.

Lives of workers in a Workers’ State.

From Haiti comes Pierre Clitandre’s  
Cathedral of the August Heat. His novel brings  
alive the epic of the New World’s poorest who, once  
again, have made history. Clitandre’s sweat-soaked  
humor “blends earthy realism with voodoo and  
Creole folklore...a marvelous apotheosis” says World  

Next to Africa and the satirical Laugh-to-Cry, as  
the great Congolese novelist Henri Lopes lampoons  
the supreme African dictator—Amin, Bokassa,  
Mobutu, all in one—who moves overnight from the  
barracks to the Presidential Palace. Funny but  
searing: Lopes’ satire bites with anger and sadness  
at Africa’s burden of butcher-clowns.

Furthermore, the novel moves slowly  
and ponderously through an accretia of  
too much detail. The explicitly chroni-  
cled bad sex with a man, although not  
violent, may turn off some readers. New-  
man posits a lesbian community, which  
Liza finds easily and immediately; the  
women, all with names such as “Quartz”  
and “Anemone,” just happen to belong  
to “Overeaters Anonymous.” One  
woman immediately becomes Liza’s  
lover and all of her problems are solved.  
Sorry, it was just not good enough to  
swallow.

Another new novel, published by  
Spinsters/Aunt Lute, two small pub-  
lishers that have recently merged, also  
focuses on addiction and recovery, and  
with excellent success: Leave a Light on  
for Me. The author, Jean Swallow, who  
is also editor of the anthology Out From  
Under: Sober Dykes and Their Friends,  
proves with her first novel that she is a  
gifted writer of fiction. Reminiscent of  
a Marge Piercy novel, though without  
quite the lushness and scope, Leave a  
Light on for Me begins as a kind of oral  
herstory (a device I like) in which one  
of the novel’s characters, Bernice,  

gathers a group of dykes together to tell  
them the tale of her friends Georgia and  
Morgan and ends up, of course, saying  

much about herself as well. This is a  
novel of salvation, of how the refusal to  
let go of the ones you love, even when  
they are drowning, can make all the dif-  
ference. Each character faces a crisis of  
the spirit that almost finishes her. This  
novel deals with incest, AIDS, losing a  
job to a lesbian purge, sexual infidelity,  
traveling home again to enter an al-  
coholic family, and the serious illness of  
a parent. Swallow pulls it all off without  
being preachy or didactic, because her  
characters have real depth. Her scenes  
are full of specific detail and believable  
dialogue, and her impeccable sense of  
timing and pace keeps the narrative  
flowing even though the point of view  
changes.

Girls, Visions, and Everything, by Sara  
Schulman, in some ways offers a similar  
view of lesbians in community, the heal-  
ing power of friendship, sexual love, and  
alternative family networks. This story,  
unlike Swallow’s, is more a collage than  
a series of portraits. Lila Futuransky,  
Schulman’s young, urban, dyke heroine,  
serves as a kind of picaresque wanderer  
through the steamy blight of a New York  
City summer, finding girls and visions  
wherever she goes. Her friends at The  
Kitsch Inn are putting on a dyke version  
of “A Streetcar Named Desire”; she  

From East Germany  

FLIGHT OF ASHES  
by Monika Maron  

Merry Mornings by Ivan Klima,  
“charming and comic stories  
about Prague, irrepressibly  
cheerful & successfully writ-  
ten”—Financial Times. Osvaldo  

War (Argentina)—“feisty and  
brawling, rooted in the reality of  
Soriano’s A Funny Dirty Little  
City  

= READERS INTERNATIONAL I How RI Selects Books:  

P.O. Box 959, Columbia, LA 71418  
Literary merit is the first  

consideration of RI’s  
latest editors and advisors. Many  
of these works were  
initially banned at home or  

NAME  
written in exile: RI is  

committed to publishing  

literature in danger. Each  

current, from the past 10  

years. Each is new to  

readers here—although  

Poland Under Black Light by  

Janusz Anderman—“an honest  
and powerful voice...he under-  

Statesman. Fools by Ndebele (S.  
Africa), “Intricate & subtle...  
unusual depth” —LA Times.  

6 % Belles Lettres  

I enclose my check for $48.00 (Can. $58).  
I enclose my credit card for $48 (US currency only).  

| SIGNATURE  

mythology of the other”—New  
York Times Bk Rev.  

cuts the lies of one side and the  
other.  

Bill  

in European editions. Sub-  
scribe now and give these  
powerful writers a voice in  
English, all at a very  
modest price.

Herself sees potential in every woman  
she meets, from Helen Hayes, a punk  
star at The Kitsch, to Tina, who works  
in the gelato shop, to Emily, the shy  
one Lila ends up giving her heart away  
to. This is a gentle tale, full of the sweet  
wildness of youth as well as youth’s oc-  
casional flights of wisdom. Lila and her  
friends ramble down aimless roads like  
their hero Jack Kerouac—yet even so  
they end up somewhere, within the cir-  
cle of care and connection they have  
created.

Barbara Wilson, one of the founders  
and editors of The Seal Press, has written  
quality lesbian and feminist fiction for  
some time: a novel; several volumes of  
stories; and a detective novel, Murder in  
the Collective, which was more successful  
as a realistic depiction of Seattle’s alter-  
native community, from straight  
politicos to separatists, than as a mys-  
tery. Sisters of the Road, Wilson’s latest  
novel, carries on the story of Pam  
Nilsen, who, along with her much-dif-  
ferent twin, Penny, and a collective of  
workers, runs Best Printing, a small  
business.

In this volume, Penny is off to  
Nicaragua, and Pam takes no time at all  
to stumble into trouble again, this time  
in search of a teenage runaway who was  
working as a prostitute. Her search takes  
her from red-light districts to an isolated  
mountain cabin—and also deep into her  
own heart, where issues of sexuality,  
commitment, and self-confrontation lie.  
I enjoy Wilson’s ability to add a bit of  
fine-edged humor to a basically realistic  
novel that offers, with the mystery, just  
an extra fillip. Sisters of the Road repre-  
sents growth for Wilson within the de-  
tective genre; she is also successful in  
continuing to develop Nilsen as a  
character whose journey seems familiar  
to readers.

Audre Lorde has suggested that  
“poetry is not a luxury.” Neither, I be-  
lieve, is fiction, especially for lesbians  
and feminists. Mainstream publishing  
has not and probably will not ever serve  
lesbians well. Lesbians must continue to  
look to and support their own presses.  
These presses in turn need to commit  
themselves to publishing for a readership  
that includes more than the reader who  
tiffles the pages in the bookstore looking  
for the sex scenes. Lesbian and feminist  
fiction writers need to continue to tell  
their stories, which for me means to not  
opt for half-truths, paper-doll charac-  
ters, or formula plots. Craft, not just a  
girl-gets-girl happy ending, needs to be  
a criterion for publication.

® Patricia Roth Schwartz is a  
psychotherapist and writer. She publishes  
fiction, poetry, reviews, and nonfiction in  
feminist and small press journals.

Announcement

Writing Conference

The International Women’s Writing  
Guild will conduct its annual week-long  
summer conference, July 31 to August  
7, 1987, at Skidmore College in  
Saratoga Springs, NY. The event will  
include 30 workshops plus a very special  
guest lecturer: Dorothy Redford. Red-  
ford made national news last summer for  
staging a reunion of all the ancestors of  
the slaves who had served on the Some-  
rset Plantation in North Carolina, in-  
cluding her own. She is now writing a  
book about this historic project, which  
will be published by Doubleday.

For further information, contact:  
Hannelore Hahn, The International  
Women’s Writing Guild, P.O. Box 810,  
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028,  
212-737-7536.

March/April 1987  
et |