Charlotte Bunch is a walking history of the 1960s; she has been a younger and older generation of out of the movement. The movement

observer and participant in the civil rights movement, the New
Left, the women’s movement, feminist publishing, women’s
studies, and the emerging global feminist movement. As she
speaks to interviewer Debra Schultz in her Brooklyn apartment,
Bunch reveals, in a calm, reflective voice that carries a hint of her
southern roots, that she has grown older and wiser — but no less
ardent — with the women’s movement.

You came to the women’s movement
through Christian student activism and de-
scribe yourself then as “a shy presence at
pray-ins.” How did you go from that “shy
presence” to a vocal, visible, and radical
activist?

Very, very slowly. Step by step. I
moved gradually as I tested out whether
I could do those things. At first it was
just a moral protest but each thing I did
brought with it an education that made
me see more politically. For example,
the first time I saw people beaten up for
demonstrating.

How has your Methodist background influ-
enced you? Where does spirituality fit into
your life today?

Small questions! Well I think my
Methodist background coincided very
well with the moral outrage and sense of
moral purpose of the civil rights move-
ment. My parents wanted to be mis-
sionaries, and they came out of a very
earnest part of the Methodist tradition
that saw the struggle for fairness and jus-
tice as a very real part of spiritual belief.
There was a sense that what you do with
your life matters; how you lived your life
was a reflection of what you believed.
Although I don’t believe in a god or
goddess, my spirituality today is in feel-
ing some sense of meaning, some sense
of satisfaction, some connection be-
tween how I live my life and something I
see as broader and more than just my
own life. I have a strong sense of spiritu-
ality as part of my political work.

In the 1960s you lived and worked “in the
movement.” Is that terminology appropriate
today? Is it still possible to live an alterna-
tive lifestyle?

I think today people certainly still
live alternative lifestyles — I feel I do
and most of my friends do but in the 60s
there was such a new, highly political
atmosphere that living a movement life-
style meant living in a fairly well-de-
fined community. The advantage of
being more spread out today is that we
deal more with the rest of the culture. In
the ’60s the disadvantage was you were
either in it or you were out. It’s harder
today because the economic surplus that
absorbed a lot of our needs doesn’t exist
anymore. We used to pay $95 rent and
even with inflation, that’s a big differ-
ence. So today one may need to have a
little more job definition in relation to
what we called “the real world” to live a
movement life, but you can still do so if
by that you mean your primary reference
point is a sense of activism.

Do you have any sense of what happened to
those terms we no longer hear — radical
feminism and women’s liberation? I feel like
they just disappeared.

They did disappear. I’m sorry that the
term radical has lost a lot of its meaning.
Unfortunately, “radical feminism” came
to be identified with one sect and one
fairly narrowly defined ideology, so I’m
a bit reluctant to use the term. But I do
feel myself to be definitely a feminist
and definitely radical. I’m very sorry the
term “women’s liberation” got lost, but
what also got lost was the belief in
liberation and the larger view that
people could change.

In your book, Passionate Politics:
Feminist Theory in Action 1968-1986

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987

Charlotte Bunch. Photo by Tou E. Biren.

[St. Martin’s Press, 1987], you have a
statement from one of your speeches that
“we should never confuse the elite in
Washington with the will of the American
people.” How can this be true in light of the
re-election of Ronald Reagan, the Iran—
contra fiasco, and so forth? Can you ad-
dress how you manage not to be cynical
about the American people?

I think in a way, it’s as much a state-
ment of faith and an organizing princi-
ple as it is a truth. As a statement of
faith it’s really counter to the conven-
tional wisdom that the majority of
people are selfish or will do the mean
thing — this kind of attitude that’s been
so prevalent in the ’80s. The more you
assume that people could be otherwise,
the more possible it is to appeal to them
to see other options.

Is feminism reaching masses of women?

Yes. Newsweek did a poll two years
ago. Over 50% of the women in the
U.S. supported the goals of feminism.

But they wouldn't call themselves feminists.

They might not, but that’s still phe-
nomenal if you consider that it’s only a
15- or 20-year process. I do think we
need to translate our vision more into
terms that people can understand in
their own lives and offer better alterna-
tives. I would also add that the changes
you have to make in your life to embrace
feminism are very scary to a lot of
women.

How do you propose to reach the post-
feminist generation who are portrayed as
consciously rejecting feminism? Will history
have to repeat itself with Bork on the Su-
preme Court while we watch and say we
told you so?

First of all there are a lot of young
feminists, and I think they’re the vic-
tims of a media campaign which denies
their existence and makes it even harder
for them to continue to grow and de-
velop. I speak on campuses. How could I
speak on campuses if there are no young
feminists? Who’s taking the thousands
of women’s studies courses that now
exist? It’s really very aggravating to me
that the media has perpetrated this.
There are differences between the
feminists. Young feminists are not in-
venting the movement; 15 or 20 years
ago it was much easier to feel excited
and have a sense of identity than to
come into something that has all these
old feminists in it that you have to deal
with before you can articulate your own
vision. It’s very important in the next
few years that young feminists get some
visibility with the perspectives they care
about, which may be different from
those the movement has articulated so
far. In terms of backsliding, I don’t see
the whole movement disappearing and
having to be reinvented again. It’s gone
too far and too deep. Besides, the world
circumstances are different today.
Feminism exists at a time when the
world is in very deep crisis.

I'm impressed with your optimism and per-
severance. How have you managed to sur-
vive the bitter splits and trashing you de-
scribe in the movement? How did you get
over your professed fear of anger and con-
frontation?

It was very hard at first because con-
frontation is not my nature. But as I saw
anger and conflict often produce impor-
tant breakthroughs, I taught myself not
to panic, to wait it out to see what could
be learned from it. I truly believe in a
dialectical process — it often takes very
different points of view in real dialecti-
cal conflict to come to new insights.
However, if I could communicate one
spiritual, psychological word it would be
to try to have more respect for each
other in these debates — to be less hos-
tile and suspicious. This attitude has
helped me survive because even when
people are angry with me it’s very hard
for them to push me into that kind of a
corner because I don’t believe in that
corner.

I’ve been through a lot of these bitter
splits, for example the gay-straight split,
and I decided it wasn’t going to drive me

Cloth, $15.00

TE YOU

life.
GRAYWOLF

PRESS

Paper, $6.50
POST OFFICE

BOX 75006

family

SAINT PAUL

MN 55175

“

trait of family life.

Paper, $9.50

I Amplitude
New and Selected Poems
By Tess Gallagher

An eagerly anticipated collection by this award-winning poet.

“She is unfailingly good with the clear potential for greatness.
Her every poem shimmers with quality.”

If You Want to Write
A Book About Art,
Independence & Spirit

By Brenda Ueland

A wise and witty commentary on writing and the imaginative

“Ueland should be on every writer's shelf.”

Family: Stories from
the Interior

Edited by
Geri Geibel Chavis

Superb fiction from a wide range of writers including Colette,
Willa Cather and Hortense Calisher which paint a vivid por-

doesn’t belong to anybody. Even if
you're trashed — and it's very painful to
be trashed — only you can decide to
leave. Having a long-term view also
helps. I don’t expect it to be easy or for
things to get resolved immediately. We
need to help each other get through it.
In the late ‘70s we talked about starting
a home for trashed feminists.

That’s great. There would probably be no
vacancy. So, then, has the passion of the
movement been diminished by all these
vicissitudes?

No, I think there’s still plenty of pas-
sion. The passion tends to go with a
group in its first sense of self-discovery.
In the ’70s that was first about feminism
in general; then it was about lesbian
feminism; now the passion is with the
women of color movement in this coun-
try and with global feminism. The ex-
citement necessarily goes with the pro-
cess of discovery. After that you settle in
for the long-term relationship. And that
may not be as erotic, but it has its own
rewards.

And certainly Charlotte Bunch has
earned the right to enjoy those rewards
as she reflects on almost two decades of
principled introspection and action. In
her new position as the third occupant
of the Laurie New Jersey Chair in
Women’s Studies at Douglass College,
Rutgers University, she will have the
time and institutional resources to build
on a life of work for women. Nurtured in
a collegial environment of thinking,
teaching, and writing, there will be
many challenging ideas emerging from
this conscientious objector to compla-
cency.

Debra Schultz is a free-lance writer
who works for the National Council for Re-
search on Women.

—Publishers Weekly

—The Book Reader

Belles Lettres @ 7