and So Genteel

Circumscribed, Timeless,

by Susanna Sloat

Anita Brookner is fascinated by

families, especially those that

provide refuge from an in-
hospitable world. Her characters, lack-
ing family, often attach themselves to
one, as does Rachel Kennedy in A Friend
from England, Brookner’s seventh
novel. In Brookner’s eighth and latest,
Latecomers, two men who have been ref-
ugees in England since boyhood create
their own family.

The difference between the appropri-
ation of and creation of family suggests
some of the variations in tone between
the two books. A Friend from England is
powerful but sour. Latecomers is some-
times worried, but it begins sensuously
and ends with a radiance that would, if
Brookner were not such a subtle stylist,
almost be sentimental.

A Friend from England starts in a lei-
surely way as Rachel, a single book-
seller, sinks into the family life of Dorrie
and Oscar Livingstone and their daugh-
ter, Heather. The story picks up speed
and strength as Rachel confronts
Heather’s ability to detach herself from
her family and enter a new one, while
Rachel is revealed as essentially lonely,
bitter, and bereft. At first refreshingly
independent, Rachel in the end reminds
us of earlier Brookner protagonists, sin-
gle women who have failed at love and
are not immune to self-pity. In
Latecomers, Brookner avoids the prob-
lem of centering a novel on such a gloo-
my figure by simply not including such a
character. In this latest book, Hart-
mann and Fibich (both named Thomas)
join forces early and remain together as
business partners, neighbors, and best
friends. Each is married and has a child.
The whole aggregation is a single family

Latecomers, by Anita Brookner. New York: Pantheon, 1988, $16.95, 248 pp.
A Friend from England, by Anita Brookner. New York: Pantheon, 1987, $15.95, 205 pp.

unrelated by blood but insolubly bound
by shared experience and warm feeling.

Brookner’s world is circumscribed,
timeless, and so genteel that the word
“Nazi” seems too vile to inject into a
text. She counts on the reader, then, to
understand that Hartmann and Fibich
fled from the Nazi reign of terror. In
another century, this flight may require
a footnote. In 1989, we understand
without being told that this is why they
are refugees and why, after the war, they
find out they are orphans. We under-
stand also that they must be Jewish,
which Brookner alludes to vaguely as the
lost “old religion,” and also subtly sug-
gests when she has Hartmann’s Aunt
Marie (who also takes in Fibich) invest
their Friday evening meal “with consid-
erable ceremony, lighting candles,
spreading a damask cloth.”

Latecomers never develops the struc-
tural power of the last part of A Friend
from England. The force of A Friend
comes from the confrontation between
Rachel and Heather that brings into the
open — for Heather, for Rachel, and for
us — the horror and bleakness of life for
Rachel, the narrator. Rachel, we have
discovered, has been a slippery
storyteller. Her initial confidence has
been exposed as a sham, and her firm
judgments about people have to be dis-
placed by those more accurate. When
bland Heather makes an unpromising
marriage, for instance, Rachel is confi-
dent that, whatever happens, “she
would fail to surprise me.” By the end,
Heather has surprised Rachel to the
point of shock. The way perceived
truths are dissolved and fortunes re-
versed is reminiscent of Ford Madox
Ford’s A Good Soldier, itself heavily in
debt to Henry James, the obvious
Brookner predecessor.

In A Friend from England, we admire

She Got No Respect

Albany Park, by Patrice Chaplin. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1988,

$8.95, 192 pp. (PB)

Another City, by Patrice Chaplin. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1988,

$9.95, 361 pp. (PB)
by Laura Hapke

While growing up in the 1950s
in Albany Park, a working-
class town near London,

teenage Patrice had two obsessions: to
be glamorous and to live on the Conti-
nent. To these she added a third, when
she met José Tarres, a man ten years her
senior, encountered in his native
Gerona while she was hitchhiking
through Spain. Her memoir Albany Park
and its sequel Another City attest to her
ability to turn her experience into art —
and to the emotional bondage of which
this experience largely consisted. To
read her accounts of three decades of a
life that included everything from beg-
ging for food on Paris streets to bitter-
sweet success as a writer, from escaping
the French police through back doors of
sleazy Pigalle hotels to masochistic af-
fairs with José and his American sur-
rogates is wrenching. But it is an experi-
ence that few interested in the contra-
dictions of the female psyche will want
to miss.

From the outset, Albany Park reveals
Patrice as the kind of divided self fami-
liar to readers of Maryse Holder and
other chroniclers of feminine self-
punishment. It is not difficult to see
why. She was the child of an emotional-
ly absent man and a suicidal woman.

Summer 1989

The father ignored that his underage
daughter was living by her wits in
Europe, as long as she supported herself;
the mother welcomed the release from a
parental role she could not fill. Para-
doxically, when Patrice did return
home, her parents moralized and tried to
restrict her rebelliousness in true 1950s
fashion. The pattern was set: All her life
she would flee sham domesticity only to
return to it, at ease neither in desperate
passion-seeking abroad nor in un-
enthusiastic wifehood and motherhood
at home. But that is getting ahead of this
fascinating and troubling tale.

As Albany Park opens, fifteen-
year-old Patrice paints her face like a
movie star, wears Beat-generation
black, and seeks lower-depths experi-
ence in all-night Soho jazz clubs fre-

quented by a host of marginal types. Her -

appetite for adventure whetted, she and
her girlfriend Beryl run off to Spain.
They have no money, and they do not
scruple to beg, lie, and steal. Cos-
meticizing her behavior, Chaplin
writes, “I began to see many ways of
making life cheap.” She and Beryl live
off generous men and are all but raped by
vicious ones. Beryl cannot, to para-
phrase T. S. Eliot, bear this much real-
ity and returns home. Patrice calls it all
survival and plunges deeper into the
dangerous life.

Enter José Tarres: poet, Catalan na-

tionalist, improvident son of the rich,
womanizer, pathological liar. “He was
absolutely original in sound and expres-
sion and thought,” she recalls, as if still
filtering him through her teenage fanta-
sies. Not so original as that. Torres, who
has many artistic connections, finds her
roles in films but steals her wages. He
swears he will marry her, then lets his
jealous mother starve her out while he
dines with mistresses across town. He
refrains from sleeping with her at first —
to try to sell her sexual services to a rich
acquaintance. And he repeatedly ships
her off, penniless, to other towns, other
countries, telling her he will meet her.
He rarely shows up. No matter. She
always runs back to ask why.

For the next thirty years, exhibiting
that familiar feminine combination of
self-reliance and belief in her helpless-
ness, Patrice survives on her own while
telling herself that José is her savior. She
becomes a fairly successful novelist,
playwright, and producer. She marries
Michael, Charlie Chaplin’s son, and
has two children. Every time she pros-
pers, she undoes her success by running
back to her Spanish Artful Dodger to pay
his expenses, hasten his rejection, and
hover outside his bedroom window
while he is with another woman.

She weaves him into her novels, her
short stories, her documentary on the
Catalans. And, whether describing him
or not, she is certainly a fine stylist. Of
the ambitious sister of her onetime
friend Beryl: “She was always huddled in
the shadows, entwined with Mr. So-
phistication. They stayed motionless
against the door, like mollusks.” Of a
young man encountered on the road:
“He looked as though he had all the

charm he needed. He looked as though
he had a lot of things. What he actually
had was the ability to look as though he
had a lot of things.” And of a Paris jazz
musician: “Excellence like that took
away fear — at least for a while.”

But art, which channels her energies,
never lessens the intensity of her obses-
sions, as Another City, which takes up in
the 1970s where Albany Park leaves off,
amply demonstrates. Now the rejections
are crueler, and she supplements the
pain by taking sadistic lovers in the
States. Like José, they give her some
crumbs — one a glimpse of wealth,
another some Hollywood contacts —
and then insult her talent and poke more
holes in her self-esteem. Only in a sur-
prise (fantasy?) ending does one give her
something of himself.

Be prepared, reader. This beautiful,
talented, sensitive woman, a fine verbal
artist, a good thinker (when she is not
obsessing), this many-splendored thing,
writes not to free herself of her illness but
to celebrate it. Pages and pages are de-
voted to José’s loving manner, his sen-
sitivity as a sexual partner, his deep feel-
ing for her. She gives her husband a
half-sentence and her sons a paragraph
or two. “I could see my life hadn’t been
successful because of José,” she remarks
ingenuously. But she never questions
why she enthroned him or what twisted
Oedipal needs he met. Her most power-
ful work of the imagination, alas, is the
childhood script she condemned herself
to act out again and again. Praise the
artist, but be instructed by the woman.

Laura Hapke teaches English at Pace
University and writes often about woman
authors.