True Weirdos Go Incognito

Confessions of a Bad Girl, by Betty Pesetsky. New York: Macmillan, 1989, 

$16.95, 211 pp.

Midnight Sweets, by Betty Pesetsky. New York: Macmillan, 1988, $17.95, 206 pp.

by Lorraine E. McCormack

After reading Betty Pesetsky’s

novel Midnight Sweets or her

latest short story collection,
Confessions of a Bad Girl, you might have
the uncomfortable feeling that you can
relate as easily to her crazies as to the
characters who have both oars in the
water. Of course, this is just what
Pesetsky planned. Some of her charac-
ters have bad luck, like the Disco Prin-
cess; some have uncannily good luck,
like the Spacedons, and some are so bru-
talized by life, like Theodora, the
Cookie Lady, that they use insanity as
an umbrella, raising it when they are
saturated with pain to protect their souls
from completely washing away. We can
relate to these people because they func-
tion remarkably well, even when life is
chaotic.

If confession is good for the soul, the
characters in Pesetsky’s short stories
should feel a lot better than they do.
These reminiscences, told mostly in the
first person, have a compulsive moodi-
ness to them, from the brattiness of
preadolescence to the panic of parent-
hood to the resignation of middle age.
The characters who survive into old age
bloom with the craziness they have been
tending all their lives. Occasionally,
hopelessness and hysteria threaten, just
like in real life. In fact, some of
Pesetsky’s scenes fit so neatly into the
human jigsaw puzzle, you will find your-
self wondering what piece you are.

Cissie is the “bad girl” whose “confes-
sions” we hear often throughout the col-

Preparing for Sabbath
by Nessa Rapoport

Sunnyside, New York: Biblio Press,
1988, $9.50, 300 pp. (PB)

Novelists keep returning to the story of
growing up Jewish in America, in differ-
ent times, places, and circumstances. In
Preparing for Sabbath, first published in
1981, Nessa Rapoport explores her piece
of this territory with clear observation
and high seriousness. She polishes the
old silver of an observant Toronto fami-
ly, religious instruction, Jewish camp,
and the life-changing visits to Israel. In
the shine is reflected Judith Rafael, an
unusual heroine who is truly, deeply,
intelligently religious.

Because Judith is searching for an
authentic faith to live by, Rapoport
expands the customary story of a Jewish
girlhood beyond family life (keeping
Kosher when your best Jewish friend
doesn’t), beyond first love and the
choice between two boys, and even be-
yond the spell cast by the Land of Israel.

What is fresh in Preparing for Sabbath
is that its central drama is not social but
personal. It concerns the spiritual life of
the heroine. Judith learns to approach
God through traditional practices and a
loving community as her path ascends
divine mountains and brings her finally
to religious ecstasy. In a Sabbath prayer,
she affirms her faith in the unity of God’s
holy world: “At the end of all days the
mountain of your house will be above all
mountains, and everyone will flood to it
. . . then the mountain, the house, the
peoples, the journeys, the light and the
word, the land and the city will not be
divided again.” In this traditional
prayer, Judith testifies to her belief in
the God of her people. The search for
that faith shapes a powerful novel.

—Susan P. Willens

32 Belles Lettres

lection of that name. Her memories of
youth and parenting are countered and
enlarged by her brother, Sylvester, and
by their families and friends. Pesetsky
surrounds the reader with her rough-
and-tumble style, a style that draws you
close so that characters like Sylvester
can whisper in your ear:

I tried to tell her how good gossip was in
the past. But Gina didn’t have a sense of
history. I had developed a philosophy of
gossip. Gossip, I said, is like fairy tales.
Think about fairy tales. We could do local
fairy tales. When we saw Mr. Zimmerman
drunk — pull that thought out further —
make him come home every night nearly
passed out, pissing on the stairs in front of
everyone and Mrs. Zimmerman moaning
that she shouldn’t have married him and
wished that he were dead. A fairy tale —
the start of a fairy tale. Get it? Even real
gossip had to be changed sometimes.
What’s true isn’t necessarily believed.

On the other hand, what is believable
is not necessarily true. Sylvester
points this out in two stories about his
unusual neighbors, who give him a new
perspective on his own family.

I admired the Spacedons. They were truly
out of it. I’ll call people what I know about
true weirdos. [They] look like everyone
else. People thought my family was the
peculiar one in town when all the time it
was the Spacedons. My family had normal
values. Hidden maybe, but normal.

In manhood, Sylvester settles down
to an unsatisfactory marriage in which
he and his wife, Joyce, take better care

Nessa Rapoport. Photo by Tobi Kahn

of the dog than of one another. In
Cissie’s adult life, the plucky tone of her
early accounts becomes bruised and
ironic. As she matures, her jumbly style
takes a poetic turn. In “Family Planning
in Summer,” she remembers carrying

her first child.

I am two people.

Whom shall we name the baby after?

We shall name the baby after the dead.
Are they pleased to hear the song of
their name again?

My partner, the obstetrician, says any day
now.

A pat on the shoulder.

Raoul moved to the couch.

I understood — I am the restless body; I
am the kicking spirit, I am the
stretching soul.

Still, there is so much cynicism and
shallowness in life for Cissie and
Sylvester, we want to send up a flare. So
the prescient Pesetsky lights up the sky
for us with “Three Girls on Holiday,” a
string of lavish sketches for a smarmy
play starring Donna and Ralph, who call
each other Donnatella and Ramon. This
is a brisk, heady pastiche with a touch
of macabre in the ending, full of the
same kind of vaguely menacing zaniness
that rockets through Elizabeth Jolley.

Betty Pesetsky. Photo by Jerry Bauer

For those of us who begrudge Mrs.

Fields her talk-show glamour and

her fairy-tale success with the
chocolate chip, Pesetsky settles the
score in the novel Midnight Sweets. As a
millionaire baker in search of the perfect
confection, the Cookie Lady has it
made. As a woman in search of her soul,
Theodora Waite is continually losing
ground. In a dreamy narrative spliced
with darting reminiscences, Pesetsky
rolls out the Cookie Lady’s life and cuts
it into shapes that seem less human as
the years go by.

Theodora is so young she can barely
wield a rolling pin when she sends up her
first cloud of flour in search of the perfect
cookie. With scientific precision, she
experiments, observes, and records her
results in her baker’s diary. “Should I
stop chocolate? I have a great basic
fondness for vanilla. Vanilla as spice, as
scent, as conduit for flavor.” Her cookie
business succeeds through dedication
and inspiration. She decorates her
packages with a photograph of herself at
fifteen, the deceptively placid face of a
girl with a terrible secret.

When Theodora is still too young for
kindergarten, her floozy mother parks
her in public libraries all day while she
pursues her own fun. At the age of seven
when her mother dies, Theodora has
already figured out how to take care of
herself:

The funeral was the first time I ever
learned my father’s complete name. Abner
Palmer Waite. . . . “Are you listening,
baby,” Abner said. “I have to establish
myself. Then one-two-three Daddy will
come for you. Meantime, be a sweetie.”

Aunt Arlette was not a true aunt. She
was my mother’s cousin. . . . Neverthe-
less, she was the one who won me. . . .
“We shall get along,” Aunt Arlette said,
“by observing the Rules.” This turned out
to be astonishingly easy. The Rules were
not incompatible with what I had learned
in libraries. Keep quiet, sit still, and make
any messes in private.

Theodora’s blossoming cooking skills
prove useful when her drifter father and
his young wife reclaim her and carry her
off to a succession of new starts. Finally,
Abner seems to settle down, and Theo-
dora lucks into an honors program in
home economics at the local junior
high. Almost immediately Abner disap-
pears, leaving Theodora and her step-
mother penniless. With her responsibil-
ities now expanded from full-time stu-
dent to breadwinner, Theodora makes
ends meet as a cat burglar.

A thief is a person who fits in with the
others, more than blends, isn’t there. . .
I was not looking for profit. I just wanted
to break even. I never kept any account
of the houses I robbed. . . . Did crime
pay? Not for me. I was afloat in lies, and
my behavior ignoble.

Learning to be a person who isn’t
there is the survival skill that defines
Theodora’s life. After years of practice
to perfect the skill, she realizes she is los-
ing herself.

What was wrong with me?. . . “What
you have,” one doctor said, “is a dis-

orientation of your body orientation. You
cannot recognize the left side of your
body.” . . . I practiced looking. Those
were my hands . . . When I baked I used
two hands — didn’t I?. . . Still I had to
practice. Looking at me. That was hard.

Theodora always learned from her
practice sessions with cookies; she never
repeated her confectionary mistakes.
But looking at herself and learning was a
skill she couldn’t master. She un-
wittingly passed on to her children the
abandonment she suffered as a child.

“I am going to raise my children to get
along without me,” I said. “If they have
to.” . . . When they turn eight — soon
after that birthday — I send them away to
school. . . . For birthdays, I baked elabo-
rate cookie houses, cookie castles, cookie
footballs. . . . No one had birthdays like
the children of The Cookie Lady.

Theodora’s children come home for
the holidays, her ex-husband moves
back in, and soon there is a new cookie
to celebrate. Not a perfect one, Theo-
dora admits, but worth making a fuss
over. Life is not perfect, but it is worth
celebrating, Pesetsky affirms in Midnight
Sweets and Confessions of a Bad Girl —
whenever it is not knocking you around,
which it almost always is. When
Pesetsky celebrates life, a few of the
guests turn out to be true weirdos whose
invitations read, “Come as you are.”

@ Lorraine E. McCormack is a Wash-
ington, D.C., writer and a hopeful in Pulp
Press International’s 1989 Three Day
Novel Contest.

Homeland
by Barbara Kingsolver

New York: Harper & Row, 1989,
$16.95, 244 pp.

Barbara Kingsolver’s first collection of
short stories shows us how much terri-
tory a homeland can cover. These tales
range over a wide and varied expanse of
geographical and emotional terrain,
from a woman’s battles with a labor un-
ion to a rejecting daughter who through
a twist of fate must accept a forced inti-
macy with her mother. Each narrative
displays Kingsolver’s imaginative
breadth and depth; the collection as a
whole offers the reader a panoramic view
of human nature.

In the title story, a young girl and her
family journey from their home in a
Kentucky coal town to the birthplace of
the girl’s Cherokee great-grandmother.
Though not the most appealing, this
tale is enhanced by the use of a double
perspective: a view of the events
through youthful eyes, augmented by
the wisdom of age.

The author seems equally at home
with conversations between parents and
children, between couples, and between
characters whose relationships are con-
siderably more ambiguous. The ex-
changes between mother and daughter
in “Quality Time” are endearing and
true, while the narrator’s ability to ren-
der the confusion of childhood is evident
in the affecting “Rose-Johnny.” In an-
other intriguing story, “Covered
Bridges,” a couple find themselves con-
fronting death while immersed in a di-
lemma about birth. The couple’s uncer-
tainty about whether to have a child
never becomes trite; while they embody
a 1980s couple in their effort to antici-
pate time management, their inability
to sort out their emotions about the
prospect is convincing and engaging.
This story, told from a male point of
view, exemplifies the author's impres-
sive array of narrative voices.

Although a few of the endings of
these stories left me indifferent, this is a
satisfying journey through some mem-
orable landscapes.

—Leslie Hunt

Fall 1989