Belles Lettres Interview

“I write out my autobiographical impulses in the poetry; what
interests me in the fiction are the lives I haven’t led, the
choices I haven’t made,” Marge Piercy tells interviewer
Katherine Usher Henderson. An activist as well as a writer,
Piercy believes that to pretend you aren't part of society

“makes you stupid.”

Marge Piercy lives in Wellfleet,
Massachusetts, a town of
winding streets, summer

flowers, and tangled woods, bordered on
the east by the National Seashore and
the ocean and on the west by Cape Cod
Bay. She lives with her husband, writer
Ira Wood in a traditional-style house
separated from the town by a marsh. We
talked on the enclosed porch of her
lived-in house. Piercy sat at the head of
the table, radiating the energy and in-
telligence that are projected in photo-
graphs of her, while her assistant worked
nearby at the computer and her four cats
jumped in and out of her lap.

Many readers of this prolific and ver-
satile author (ten novels, eleven books
of poetry, a collection of essays, and a
play with Ira Wood), who grew up in
inner-city Detroit and is closely identi-
fied with radical movements of the six-
ties, are surprised to find that she lives in
a small New England town, to which she
moved in 1971 from New York because
of an “inability to live or work.” She had
been a smoker since the age of twelve
and “stopping wasn’t sufficient because
New York gives you several packs a day
just breathing. I was fleeing from the city
and discovered I liked living here.”

She now has her health back and
appreciates Wellfleet as a community
where “you meet people in very different
jobs and economic situations than you
might meet if you lived in the city.
There’s also more age-mixing.” Politically,
“the Outer Cape is quite liberal;
Wellfleet always votes Democratic.”
Piercy and her husband are deeply in-
volved in community and state affairs.
She is appointed both to the State
Council of the Arts and Humanities and
to the Arts Lottery Council. She also
recently did a benefit for Mass Choice,
the pro-choice group in the state, and
was active in starting the NOW chapter
on the Cape. She also participates in a
Jewish group, Am Ha-yam, that puts on
services, holiday observances, speakers,
and discussions on the Outer Cape. “We
recently organized a service on the
themes of nuclear and ecological de-
struction.” Possibly because her father
was not Jewish or because Judaism was
not “rammed down my throat — my
brother went to Hebrew School, I
didn’t,” Judaism was always something
special for Piercy, something she wanted
more of. It has strengthened her femi-
nism and criticisms of the establish-
ment. “Feminism, a strong ecological
consciousness, it all ties together, feel-
ing political and religious. It’s not one
simple grid you impose on reality. Even
the contradictions between the values
are rich.”

Piercy has also been involved “in a
siddur project (a prayerbook for Recon-
structionism). Reconstructionism tries
to deal with sexism. Not too many seri-
ous writers have put in time on some-
thing intended for weekly use by people.
I have rewritten forms of a number of
prayers, which is the opposite end from
writing more personal poetry.” When
asked to what degree this work parallels
rewriting Christian prayers (“Our par-
ent, who art in heaven”), she said that
“some of us aren’t comfortable with the
parent-child relationship as a paradigm
for holiness. We're trying to produce
something truly relevant. Part of Juda-
ism is that you’re supposed to use your
mind as well as your heart and faith; it

doesn’t make sense to pretend that you
don’t know what you know. I probably
have more in common with liberal
Catholics (at least, pro-choice ones)
than with extremely orthodox Jews. I'm
sure there are feminist Buddhists some-
where, too.”

Piercy feels that she is too much in-
volved in public life right now. “There's
always a dialectic process between times
like this and times when you feel you’re
being too selfish and not giving enough
work back. But I believe artistic creation
is real productivity, although under
classic Marxism it isn’t, and people
don’t think about it that way in society.
But we’re all part of the same economic
and social web and have the same obli-
gation to vote and recycle as anyone
else. To pretend otherwise makes you
stupid.”

A complex web of values informs
Piercy’s huge literary achievement. Her
two most recent novels are Gone to
Soldiers, an epic interweaving of the
experience of ten characters during
World War II, and Summer People,
which Piercy defined as “a moral tale
about people, artists, and their pa-
trons.” Gone to Soldiers was a runaway
bestseller, with smashing reviews.
Piercy acknowledged that her publisher
pressured her to write a sequel, but in-
stead she wrote a completely different
kind of novel. Summer People “has a
small compass and place” and focuses on
the inner lives and relationships of sev-
eral artists in a small town. Piercy sees as
central to the book the question of “what
people want. Does it issue from their
work or does it issue from the media? Are
the images they pursue programmed by
society?” It is a moral book in that all the
characters must bear the consequences
of their choices; those who choose false
images suffer heavy penalties, whereas
those who follow an inner vision and
care about others earn at least tentative

happiness.

Piercy has a systematic approach to
writing a novel. “No matter what genre
I’m working in I start with theme and
work out the architecture and then
spend a lot of time making a dossier for
the characters. People identify strongly
with different ones. I write out my auto-
biographical impulses in the poetry;
what interests me in the fiction are the
lives I haven’t led, the choices I haven’t
made. A useful gift for a novelist is being
able to enter other people’s experiences,
although characters based on one person
seldom work.”

Piercy becomes excited when dis-
cussing the fundamental nature of fic-
tion. “I see it as being about time and
choice. The stuff of narrative is time; it’s
the basic question in fiction. The move-
ment may be circular, it may be in epi-
cycles, it may go back and forth, but it’s
about time — past, present, and future
— parallel time.” She sees her own fic-
tion as also emphasizing choice, “the
ability to say yes and to say no, to shape
things, to make choices and accept their
consequences.”

Although Piercy’s work sells well (her
collection of poetry The Moon Is Always
Female sold 50,000 copies), selling
books in the millions is not her highest
priority. Because of her refusal to write a
sequel to Gone to Soldiers, she is “back to

midlist again. The publishers and the big
chains make that decision before a book
is published. It’s hard for fiction to sur-
vive given the marketplace. The sensi-
bility of the New York publishing houses
is a tremendous obstacle to fiction.
What editors like and what people in the
rest of the country — the heart of fiction
— want to read are very different. It
makes it hard for younger writers and
anyone who does not write blockbusters
to get published.”

Piercy is surprised that many West
Coast writers view their distance from

Marge Piercy: “It was impossible to publish
serious fiction about being a woman in the
late fifties and early sixties. I broke into print
by writing about childhood or male charac-
ters.” Photo by Tom Victor.

New York City and its book reviewers as
a keen disadvantage. “Why? Do they
imagine that you go out to dinner with
them? When I’ve met them we insult
each other. There is no old boys’ net-
work that includes me. In the seven
years I lived in New York, I managed to
insult most powerful people I met. Here
I don’t have to deal with them.” To the
observation that some of her recent
books — even the novel Fly Away
Home, which earned the highest praise
from most reviewers — were negatively
or ambivalently reviewed in The New
York Times Book Review, Piercy replied,
“since 1973, the only one of my novels
well received by the Times was Vida. I
think that they are threatened by my
politics in general, especially my femi-
nism. They almost invariably assign a
minor reviewer to cover my books.”

Piercy knew that she was a writer at
age fifteen. “My parents moved into a
house where I had a room of my own and
a door that shut. From the time I started
I had no other ambitions. It took forever
to begin. It was impossible to publish
serious fiction about being a woman in
the late fifties and early sixties. I broke
into print by writing about childhood or
male characters.” During that period of
the “feminine mystique,” “Muriel
Rukeyser and Adrienne Rich went on
writing despite the obstacles; they didn’t
just try to please men. Rukeyser is tre-
mendously underrated; I dedicated Early
Ripening to her.”

Piercy reads widely in contemporary
women’s fiction. “Toni Morrison is a
giant. I like Joanna Russ and Maxine
Hong Kingston, and short story writers
Jonis Agee and Colleen McElroy.”
Piercy appreciates Margaret Atwood’s
poetry even more than her fiction and
thinks Gloria Naylor and Carolyn See
are “very fine novelists.” She has re-
cently explored cyberpunk, a genre that
“extrapolates the present into the near
future” rather than inventing a com-

pletely different universe, as science fic-
tion does.

Most of her favorite male writers are
Latin American or Eastern European,
like Stanislaw Lem, or science fiction
writers such as Samuel Delany and
William Gibson. She believes that
“North American fiction hasn’t assimi-
lated the advances made in Latin
American fiction,” citing Manuel Puig’s
use of pop culture and writers such as
Garcia Marquez and Luisa Valenzuela,
who write “more politically, less realisti-
cally, with a conscious assumption of
mythology, a sense of place, and a rich-
ness of economic and linguistic aware-
ness. Some Black North American
writers, like Toni Morrison and Sherley
Anne Williams, seem to have assimi-
lated what the Latin Americans are
doing.”

Piercy has pondered the question of
women writing differently from men.
“In a book by a woman, rape won’t be
fun and women won't be simple-
minded. There are women who do the
chic violence number; Jayne Anne
Phillips writes like a man when she
writes about miners. When she writes
about people she knows, she writes like a
woman. Women writers in general, like
Joanna Russ, treat violence in a more
real, ethical, troubled way.”

To the question of whether women
rely more on memory than do men, she
at first demurred, “You can’t claim that
for women; Proust has a patent on me-
mory and so does Joyce.” Daria in Fly
Away Home seems to exemplify a
woman-authored character defined by
her memories, believing that her hus-
band is still a good man who loves her
even when confronted by massive evi-
dence to the contrary. According to
Piercy, “Daria is too captured by me-
mory when the novel begins. She hasn’t
noticed that her memory is no longer the
present, which happens to women.
They often endure bad relationships by
living for the past that will never come
again. Men will look up and say, ‘who is
that fat creature across the table?’ and
simply leave, whereas a woman will say,
‘I remember when he told me how much
he loved me and I remember our beauti-
ful vacation,’ etcetera, and keep ex-
pecting the good times to return.”

One of Piercy’s characters for whom
memory is empowering is Jacqueline,
the young Jewish Parisian in Gone to
Soldiers whose determination as a fierce
Resistance fighter was built upon her
memories of the rounding up of her fam-
ily by Nazis. “None of our capacities are
empowering or weakening in them-
selves; it depends on how we use them,”
says Piercy.

When Piercy received the Shaeffer
Eaton PEN award in May 1989, she read
from her poem “The fecund complain
they are not honored.” Although the
poem concerns all writers with high pro-
ductivity, it is also a self-description:
“The driven work. They get up like
Sylvia / Long before dawn. They write in
buses. / They write in the laundromat
while clothes / flash by, and somebody
steals their socks. / They write on com-
puters if one is there; / If not, they write
in pencil or crayon.” The poem ends,
“When the driven die / their real inner
stone reads: you did / a little piece of it, a
little piece.” Readers of Marge Piercy
might disagree, believing that she has
already done more than a “little piece” of
that work dictated by her conscience,
her integrity, and her artistic genius.

Katherine Usher Henderson is
vice-president for academic affairs at the
Dominican College of San Rafael. This in-
terview is adapted from Inter/View: Talks
with America’s Writing Women, coming
from the University Press of Kentucky.

Belles Lettres @ 31