On the Road

She Drove Without Stopping, by Jaimy Gordon. Chapel Hill, North  
Carolina: Algonquin Books, 1990, $18.95, 390 pp.

The One True Story of the World, by Lynne McFall. New York:  
Atlantic Monthly Press, 1990, $18.95, 252 pp.

by Diana Postlethwaite

In one of the classics about growing up we all read in  
high school, Huck Finn leaves his drunken Pap floating  
face-down and lights out for the Territory. But female  
rebels like Jane Eyre, try as they might to run away, find  
that all roads lead home, back to the Beast who will die  
without his Beauty.

Jaimy Gordon’s Jane Turner and Lynne McFall’s Jesse  
Walker seem free, like Huck, to head West, travel light,  
write their own stories. In 1964, twenty-two-year-old Jane  
“drives without stopping” from a “beatnik college” in Ohio  
to a seedy California rooming house. Like Huck, she meets  
a colorful assortment of rogues and fools along the road:  
tarnished angel Jimmy Fluharty, self-satisfied Dean of  
Student Life Betty Jean Lucorne, Neanderthal rapist Homer  
(complete with Sunoco shirt), her mother’s bored  
psychiatrist Dr. Zwillig, and the editors of G.R.O.P.E.  
(Global Rag of Psychedelic Emergency).

With and without the assistance of sex, drugs, and  
alcohol, Jane is perpetually in “an exalted state of  
exhaustion, full of a restless static charge” “trying to get  
somewhere she had never been.” Is it true you “have to let  
your boyfriend drive your car,” Jane wonders? Not in this  
feminist picaresque: Jane owns the 1951 Buick and Jane  
reinvents her destiny, as “the order of the past sank beneath  
the prolix liberties of navigation.”

McFall’s Jesse Walker learned to drive from her stock-  
car-racing father: “The secret to winning is in not lifting.  
You have to be able to keep your foot to the floor when  
your car is in flames and when the wall is coming at you.”  
A thirty-four-year-old bicoastal drifter (who drifts from  
writing obituaries for the New England Tribune to working  
at a bar called the Animal Shelter in San Francisco), Jesse  
plays “chicken” with herself (both literally and figuratively)  
driving at high speed down a dark road without headlights,  
“gripping the stripped threads of the headless gearshift until  
my hand grieves.”

Yet, stopping in the dark is as dangerous as driving on:  
whether being hit head-on by a Mack truck, or being picked  
up at roadside by a sexy commodities-broker-turned-pig-  
farmer named “Lucky,” Jesse sees the wall coming at her.  
In contrast to Gordon’s populous and leisurely comic  
ramble, McFall offers a stripped-down postmodern race of  
Self against Night: “how the view changes, the voice alters  
— on that imagined road, travelling through the dark.”

Both of these novels provide wonderful scenery along the  
way for readers who admire finely-tuned prose. Gordon  
revels in rococo metaphor: “zigzags of wild sweet-pea piled  
themselves against a barbed-wire fence, rich and chaotic,  
like ripped-out embroidery”; “The dean summons up a look  
of determination; Jane watches it swell under the sheen of  
mildness like a doughnut in a fryer.” McFall excels at the  
spare epigram: “We must choose again and again — what to  
take, what to leave”; “The real test of a talent for leaving is  

Jaimy Gordon, author of She Drove Without Stopping.  
Photo by Frieder Blickle/Bilderburg

leaving a man. Love is litmus; in the metaphysics of  
farewell, the final exam.”

Sooner or later, all ramblers arrive at the edge of the  
continent, the end of the line. But both novels follow T.S.  
Eliot’s road map from Four Quartets: “The end of all our  
exploring / Will be to arrive where we started / And know  
the place for the first time.” Jesse learned from her father  
that The One True Story may have multiple endings, but  
that the beginning cannot be altered. Or as Jane puts it:  
“when you are lost, really lost, you think all at once what a  
father could be. . . . For even an adventuress cannot choose  
her father, her first lover, the one least liable to be forgot.”

Jane and Jesse aren’t really alone behind the wheel.  
Their fathers have come along for the ride. “She was her  
father’s daughter, she was as bad as her father, she was her  
father,” Jane thinks. Is one — or are all — of these options a  
daughter’s only legacies? Jane can’t stop phoning home,  
even though she knows the message she’ll hear: “what if a  
girl’s father never liked her? Where is the bottom of that  
mystery? Who’s to blame?” And Jesse goes home, searching  
for some overlooked beatitude to fill the empty space her  
father left when he abandoned her: “I am surprised ... at the  
desire rising inside me ... to go home ... to find all those  
loved and lost waiting, saying, You have come so far, now  
it is over.”

The One True Story has very different endings for  
McFall than it does for Gordon. They leave their heroines  
parked, but with engines idling, somewhere in the space  
between Huck Finn’s unlimited Territorial expanse and Jane  
Eyre’s secluded manor house at Ferndean.

Diana Postlethwaite teaches English at St. Olaf College  
in Northfield, Minnesota. She writes about nineteenth-  
century British literature and is a contributing editor for the  
Hungry Mind Review.