Asian Women 

are alive. They give her the mission of
returning to China to tell them about

advertent neologisms are uncannily apt,
as are the mothers’ twisted observations

Your Mother Is in Your Bones

The Joy Luck Club, by Amy Tan. New York: Putnam, 1989, $18.95, 288 pp.

by Scarlet Cheng

With clarity of voice and lu-
cidity of vision, Amy Tan’s
delightful first novel, The Joy

Luck Club, reveals to us that for all life’s
contradictions and tragedies, the true
path of existence is convergence.

This is a hard faith to hold when
modern life seems so cacophonous, so
divisive. But it is key for immigrants to
this country who must try to adjust to the
new world without being swallowed up
by it, who must raise children whose first
impulse is to reject their cultural heri-
tage. The frustration is especially deep
for those immigrants cut off from their
homeland, as were the Chinese who fled
from the extremist politics and social
upheaval of postwar China.

Tan’s book revolves around four such
immigrant women and their daughters,
each chapter unfolding in the first-
person voice of one of them. Some begin
their tale far back in China, a world of
traditions both suffocating and embrac-
ing; some start here in the United
States, where the plethora of choices
sometimes leads to making the wrong
one. All are beautifully interwoven with
legend and memory, archetype and
longing. Like Maxine Hong Kingston's
brilliant The Woman Warrior, published
more than a decade ago, these tales
blend the mythical and the mundane,
and the endings are often astonishing
connections of the two.

The mothers meet in California
shortly after World War II and form a
mah jong quartet, the Joy Luck Club.
Even under hard-pressed financial and
social conditions, they sit down regular-
ly to play at the noisy game of tiles, to eat

Cheng Naishan: China’s
Voice for the Business Class

Cheng Naishan, one of Shanghai's most
popular female writers, began publishing in
1979. Her second visit to the United States
in March 1989 coincided with the publica-
tion of The Piano Tuner, a collection of one
novella and four short stories, published by
China Books. She is the first Christian to
achieve literary prominence in China.
Cheng Naishan spoke throughout the inter-
view with Shirley Geok-lin Lim in fluent
English.

In your short stories, you portray women
who suffer because they are plain. What
kinds of problems face women in China,
those who are plain and even those who are
beautiful?

In Shanghai, educated women face
special problems. Some companies, for
example, prefer to employ men rather
than women with graduate degrees; they
complain that women get married and
have families. Laws about this problem
are not implemented. These companies
also say that because there is so much
unemployment, they prefer to employ
men. They say women can stay home
and work in the kitchen, but men who
stay home become a problem for society.

The second issue facing women in
Shanghai is that the higher their educa-
tion is, the harder it becomes for them to
find husbands. If their families and their
education are so-so, it is easier for them
to marry. Sometimes a professor prefers a
wife with just a middle-school educa-
tion; he thinks she should be only a little
wife at home. However, if the wife stays
home, then the husband complains that

12 @ Belles Lettres

Amy Tan. Photo by Robert Foothorap

delicacies, and to “say stories.” The
daughters are born in the Chinese ghet-
tos of California, growing up ashamed of
their un-mainstream backgrounds and
eccentric mothers.

With the mothers and daughters split
by historical, geographic, and cultural
experience, misunderstandings and
cross purposes abound. As the novel
begins, Jing-mei “June” Woo, the cen-
tral “I” of the novel, sits down with
mixed emotions to the Joy Luck Club
table. She is taking the place of her
mother, who has recently died, and
must overcome her lifelong view of the
club as a “shameful Chinese custom, like
the secret gatherings of the Ku Klux
Klan or the tom-tom dances of TV In-
dians preparing for war.”

Unexpectedly, the three “aunties”
reveal that her mother’s first two child-
ren — daughters left behind in China —

they do not have common interests and
feelings, which gives him a reason to
find other women. He could say about
another woman, “She can talk about
poetry with me. She can take care of
society; she can understand me.” But if
the wife has a good job, then the hus-
band says, “But all I need is a little wife. I
don’t need a superwoman.”

So women have difficulties. We do
not know what husbands want. Perhaps
it is women’s education that causes the
trouble. If a woman has only a little edu-
cation, she will not think so much!

What responses have you received in China
to the stories in which you portray the busi-
ness classes sympathetically?

I am from just such a family. For a
long time, I have understood the sorrow
and sufferings of these families and their
younger generations. What happened to
them during the Cultural Revolution is
sad. I think our Chinese businessmen
are quite different from the way they
have been critically portrayed; they were
quite loyal to our New China. In 1949,
when New China was established, most
of our businessmen stayed in China.
Some moved to Taiwan, Hong Kong, or
the United States. But those who stayed
had trust in China and in the Commu-
nist Party. They have done much to help
our government.

In the novella “No. 2 & No. 4 of
Shanghai,” I wanted to express how val-
ues in China often change. I do not like
the variations; real values are forever.
For these changing values, many
Chinese people have paid a great deal.

their mother. June protests that she did
not really know her. “Not know your
own mother?” one auntie cries out.
“How can you say? Your mother is in
your bones!”

Conversations with the “aunties”
remind June of painful distances: “My
mother and I never really understood
one another. We translated each other’s
meanings and I seemed to hear less than
what was said, while my mother heard
more.”

Language itself has been a major gap.
When June’s mother once tried to ex-
plain the difference between Jewish mah
jong and Chinese mah jong, June’s puz-
zlement led her to think, “These kinds of
explanations made me feel my mother
and I spoke two different languages,
which we did. I talked to her in English,
she answered back in Chinese.” The two
languages are literal, as well as figura-
tive, because even in English the moth-
ers speak with the cadence and the
mindset of the Chinese. While they fre-
quently mangle idioms — “college
drop-off” for college drop-out and “so-so
security” for social security — these in-

of American life.

Tan also demonstrates that a funda-
mental faith in invisible forces pervades
traditional Chinese culture and that
this, too, divides the first and second
generations. For example, Waverly Jong
is taught the “art of invisible strength” at
the age of six by her mother. When
Waverly launches on an unexpected
career as a junior chess champion, her
mother proudly shepherds her around,
dispensing folksy advice like, “It is just
tricks. You blow from the North, South,
East, and West. The other person be-
comes confused. They don’t know
which way to run.”

But being modern and increasingly
cocky with her success, Waverly resents
what she feels to be her mother’s mis-
placed credit taking. One day she tells
her mother off on a Chinatown street,
and this, incredibly, is the beginning of
the end of her prodigious career. Too
late, “I realized my mother knew more
tricks than I had thought.”

Amy Tan has managed to express the
sense and sensibility of being Chinese in
a remarkably accessible way, while re-
maining uncompromisingly true to her
own experience, her own vision. Each
chapter has a self-contained quality —
several were published individually in
magazines — and is a marvel unto itself.
However, they are tied together so
adroitly in the end that your mind burns
long afterward, and the book’s dedica-
tion to Tan’s mother and “the memory
of her mother” returns to haunt you:
“You asked me once what I would re-
member. This, and much more.”

@ Scarlet Cheng, born in Taiwan and
raised in the United States by a Chinese
mother with lots of her own ideas (“If you
don’t get A’s like Billy and Betty Fong, I
will lose face!”), writes on film, art, and
culture.

Cheng Naishan

In the novella, the fate of the son is ex-
tremely sad. We have a large number in
such a lost generation, which struggles
to catch up with the new values of the
time. New values told them that the
bourgeoisie was bad. Even if the bour-
geois are your parents, you have to sepa-
rate yourself from them. For many years,
they had to be apart from their parents.
But that is difficult, so for a long time
there was hurt in their hearts. They
could not even be received by their par-
ents. But today values have changed
again. People do not think the business-
man is bad after all, and members of the
younger generation of the working class
try their best to be the businessmen of
today.

Have you been criticized for these stories on
business families?

I think every writer has a little circle.
The readers who are most interested in
my stories are those of the younger and
the older generations of the business
families, for they have the same life ex-
periences as people in my stories and can
understand them.

Some reviewers say that the scope of
my writing is too narrow. But I do not
mind the criticism. I myself understand
me best. It is like shoes. If I feel com-
fortable in my shoes, I myself know that
best. Criticism can be good; it can give
me another opinion. But I will decide for
myself.

Some of your stories show love between
men and women. Some Westerners believe
that romantic love is not valued in China.
Where do you stand on this?

Oh, no, perhaps some Westerners do
not understand China. Love does de-
pend on economic conditions. In some
areas in China where conditions are
hard, the most important concern for
people is to feed themselves; then they
can think about love. But in some de-
veloped sections where education is
advanced, they think more about love.

In leftist times, the policy encouraged
the people to think of revolution before
love. They did not encourage writers to
touch upon the subject of love. But
that was in the past. Now we are open; since
1976 we have more freedom in our art.
People look upon human nature as im-
portant. Writers write about sex as well
as about love. Ms. Wang Anyi, for ex-
ample, has written stories that touch
upon that subject.

You seem ambivalent about the Cultural
Revolution in your stories. What do you
think went wrong then?

I hate the Cultural Revolution. It
wasted ten years of every Chinese per-
son’s life. It also changed our future. But
like a coin, it had two sides. When I was
a young girl, I was taught that our society
is happy; I had a child’s view of life. But
during the Cultural Revolution, I saw
many sad faces. During the leftist re-
gime, we thought everything was fine.
But during the Cultural Revolution, we
were forced to think things over. The
Chinese people now want to consider
everything; they will not accept mes-

—continued on page 21

Summer 1989