Belles Lettres

P. O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

¥  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna Cook D’Errico  
EDITORS  

o  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR  

°  

Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Sucheta Mazumdar  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
°  
Caryl Marsh  

ART ADVISOR  
°  

Carmen Johnson  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
2  

Kathy Velis  
PRODUCTION ASSISTANCE  

¥  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly sub-  
scriptions $2.00 an issue for classes  
of 10 or more. Send a request (one  
month before desired issue) on  
letterhead signed by the course in-  
structor. Sample Issue: $1.00.  
Make all checks payable to Belles  
Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose is  
to promote and celebrate writing by  
women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, send SASE for a  
copy of the Guidelines for Reviewers.  
All views expressed in Belles Lettres  
represent the views of the individual  
authors.  

Submissions  
Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney.  
Enclose SASE for return of  
materials.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is  
accepted. Classified ads are  
accepted only as display ads. Copy  
should be camera-ready (stats or  
veloxes). Other forms will be  
accepted (i.e., manuscript,  
negatives, or photocopies); pro-  
duction charges will be assessed for  
typesetting or camera work. Dead-  
line for space reservations is the first  
of the month, two months preced-  
ing the month of issue. Address  
questions about reservations, di-  
mensions, and rates to Deanna  
Cook or call 703-524-7743. Belles  
Lettres reserves the right to reject  
advertising that is inappropriate to  
its stated editorial goals.  

September/October 1986  

Letters  

The following are excerpts from letters written  
to consulting editor Susan Koppelman, shared  
with us by permission of the author.  

Dear Susan Koppelman,  

The University of Illinois Press  
forwarded me your review of Honeymoon  
[May/June, 1986]. I must tell you how  
deeply moved I am by your assessment of  
my work (and also of my life). I feel,  
because of your compassionate analysis,  
made real in the eyes of the world. I don’t  
believe this has happened to me before.  
No reviewer of a book of mine has ever  
mentioned any of my other books or has  
tried to see my work as part of a tradition.  
(I've always known I was never in the  
mode of Roth or Malamud!) When my  
husband read your review, he said, “How  
strange, here is someone who doesn’t  
know you, but knows your deepest  
feelings.”  

Well, yes. Since now you say it, I give  
myself permission to accept my history as a  
writer as fact, and not just as my own  
skewed vision of what's gone on (or gone  
wrong). When I express what I feel about  
what's happened (or hasn’t happened) in  
these 25 years of my writing life, it comes  
closer to sounding like a whine; the sad  
song of someone passed over.  

Not entirely, as you note. There’s  
always Redbook — and recently I’ve  
written some young adult novels. But  
then there are three “real” novels, un-  
published, and no publisher (or editor)  
who has been willing to get behind me in  
all these years. My agent likes to remind  
me that I “fall between the stools.” Of the  
three unpublished novels, one is called  
The Hysterectomy Waltz and is “about” the  
havoc wrought on women by the male  
medical establishment. It’s also full of  
Jewish black humor; too strange to find a  
publisher. (“What we would like is a real  
‘operation’ novel,” said the letters of  
rejection.) The second unpublished  
novel, The Victory Gardens of Brooklyn, is  
set in New York between 1906 and 1945;  
it’s a Jewish family “saga” I suppose (700  
pages), but not what the genre requires;  
none of the three sisters whose stories are  
told becomes the head of Revlon, or ends  
in triumph and wealth. And the last  
book, King of the World, about the  
marriage of a battered wife and a mentally  
ill man, is still making its unlucky way  
about town — having found earnest  
supporters at two publishing houses, but  
not making it past the team assessment of  
its commercial potential.  

I’m not writing to cry on your shoulder,  
but only to say to you, yes, you are right!  
Nothing has worked out. There is no au-  
dience. Or “they” think there isn’t one,  
and much of the work remains un-  
published. The grant committees pass me  
by. And much that I would like to do  
remains unwritten. Most recently I have  
wanted to do a novel (or series of stories)  
on the “Anna” character who appears in  
some of the stories in Honeymoon. But  
when I discussed this plan with my agent,  
she wrote: “A geriatric novel, Merrill? I  
dunno.” She knows what I’m up against if  
I go ahead with this. And some days I  
don’t think I can go ahead with anything.  

So you see how shocked I was to realize  
that you know this. While reading your  
review I could hardly breathe. So: thank  
you again, for your perception, insight,  
and for having been with me all these  
years on this long climb. (Well, maybe  
not a climb, if the direction of a climb is  
clearly “up.”)  
Merrill Joan Gerber  

Dear Susan,  

Thank you for that long, open-hearted  
letter. And the invitation to the National  
Women’s Studies Association meeting.  
On June 15, my middle daughter  
graduates from Stanford, so I’m not free to  
go away at that time. (This daughter,  
Joanna, had a story published in the May  
Mademoiselle, her first sale at 21! She’s  
embarking on this crazy life too.) My old-  
est girl graduates from UCLA June 21 —  

CONTENTS  

VOLUME 2/NUMBER 1  

DOWN UNDER: A special section on women writers of Australia and New Zealand  

2  Foxybaby and Milk and Honey......  
by Elizabeth Jolley  

Women’s Work: Contemporary Short Stories by  
New Zealand Women.......... chosen by Marion McLeod and Lydia Wevers  

3 Room to Move: An Anthology of Australian Women’s  
Short Stories .............. edited by Suzanne Falkiner  
by Beverly Farmer  
by Keri Hulme  

Belles Lettres Interviews: Alison Lyssa and Sandra Shotlander  

6 Lilian’s Story.............  
The Only Daughter. ..............  
by Kate Grenville  
by Jessica Anderson  

A Boatload of Home Folk and An Item From the Late News... by Thea Astley  
7 Faces in the Water, To the Island, An Angel at My Table, and The Envoy From  
by Janet Frame  
The Delinquents and Down by the Dockside ............... by Criena Rohan  

REVIEWS  

8 Female Adolescence: Psychoanalytic Reflections on Works  
of Literature by Katherine Dalsimer  

A Wider World: Portraits in an Adolescence ............. by Kate Simon  

Female Friendships and Communities  
by Janice G. Raymond  
by Pauline Nestor  

Stepping Out: Short Stories on Friendships Between Women.......... Excerpt  

9 The Little School: Tales of Disappearance and Survival  
in Argentina .......... by Alicia Partnoy  

10 Conjuring: Black Women, Fiction, and the Literary  
Tradition edited by Marjorie Pryse and Hortense J. Spillers  
Women, Ethnics and Exotics: Images of Power in Mid-Nineteenth Century  
American Fiction by Kristin Herzog  

Pocahontas’s Daughters: Gender and Ethnicity in  
American Culture................  

13. Ghost Dance ...........  

COLUMNS  

by Mary V. Dearborn  

by Carole Maso  
by Christa Wolf  

15 Impressions: Birth of the Novel, Marginal No More, Worth a Look, Postscript  

FEATURES  

11 Retrospective: Penelope Mortimer  
12 Rediscovery: Vernon Lee  

On the Cover: “Dreamers.” Chalk on black paper drawing by Lorraine Inzalaco (542 Broadway, 4R, New York, NY 10012).  

thus I am two thirds liberated. My young-  
est will be a junior at Berkeley in the fall.  

You asked how I got the writing done.  
Being a wife and mother was the perfect  
cover for me: It appeared to the world as if  
I were staying at home cooking and clean-  
ing. In truth, the instant the babies were  
down for naps, I was typing beside their  
cribs. On those long days without adult  
company, incarcerated between washing  
machine and stove, writing was the escape  
hatch, the saver of my sanity. (I had had a  
job for one year after I was married, and  
knew I could never survive the kind of job  
I would probably always have if I worked:  
secretary, or elementary school teacher.  
So I pretended to be a housewife and saved  
the freedom of my mind.) The children  
ate up time, exhausted me, but they were  
necessary, they nourished my soul. (Still  
do.) As for holding on to this passion from  
childhood, it had something to do with  
the stupidity of all ‘round me — no one  
seemed to understand the depth of every-  
thing; thus, by writing it down, I had the  
illusion that someone, somewhere, would  
eventually “understand.” Withdrawing to  
write also got me out of the crazy world —  
the do this, do that world I lived in.  

I have a story in the August Redbook  
about a mother sending her last child (a  
daughter) off to college. And a new one,  
“Tabu,” is about the cattiness and nasti-  
ness of girls in the ’50s. (This one is going  
round the magazines.) How I resent that  
we were kept from friendships with  
women! My mother and aunt warned me  
repeatedly that women were not to be  
trusted, were my enemies, would hurt me.  
And they did! They were instructed to, by  
their aunts and mothers.  

Thank you for your warmth and support.  
Love,  

Merrill  

I was very pleased to see the rediscovery  
of Dorothy Richardson by Donna Perry  
(Jan/Feb, 1986). In addition to the studies  
Perry mentions, Dorothy Richardson has  
also been treated in a critical biography by  
John Rosenberg (1973). This long-  
neglected genius was once referred to as  
the missing link in English literature.  
Because of the difficulty of her writing,  
when so many wish to skim the surface of  
easy books, her obliteration seems almost  
assured, except for the respect and  
admiration of people such as Perry.  

I did want to mention, in terms of the  
stream-of-consciousness label for  
Richardson’s writing, that she herself  
responded most unfavorably to its use:  
“Among the company of useful labels  
devised to meet the exigencies of literary  
criticism it stands alone, isolated by its  
perfect imbecility.”  

Mary Kelley Black  
Seneca Falls, NY  

Announcements  

For their support and assistance in  
bringing about our feature on the women  
writers of Australia and New Zealand, we  
thank the embassies of both countries and  
the Literature Board of the Australia  
Council.  

Correction  

In the review of Molly Keane’s novels by  
Barbara Rich in the July/August issue, a  
line was lost in paste-up. The sentence,  
which occurs in the penultimate para-  
graph, should read, “A fire of sufficient  
strength and endurance to smoulder into  
page upon page of complex eccentrics?”  

Belles Lettres © 1