Mainland  
by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer  

New York: Linden Press/Simon &  
Schuster, 1985, $14.95, 285 pp.  

Eleanor can barely see. She feels that  
the whole world, starting with her  
family, is receding into the murk  
around her. She spends much of her  
time listening to the ghosts of her  
mother and grandmother making  
funny but unpleasant comments about  
her while they clean the cloud on  
which they sit. It is hard to believe  
that such a successful woman, who  
has published novels, poetry, and  
scholarly and semi-scholarly articles, is  
in such a mess; but she is. Perhaps  
the key to Eleanor’s situation is the  
title of her most recent article, “The  
Myth of Adulthood.” Eleanor has  
been living through this myth while  
retreating from her own life.  
Cataracts, brought on by an  
incompetent doctor, obliterate her  
vision of herself. Sometimes she  
stands in front of the mirror, trying to  
see her own face. Other times it is  

her children and husband Tom who  
are described as blurs.  

Tom, an unfailingly nice but  
enigmatic man, decides that she has  
to keep her job and her publishing  
contacts; so he finds her a driver, a  
Chinese student. Toh and Eleanor  
create a small world inside the car.  
For a while, he is the only thing she  
can see. They spend hours alone and  
simply grow together. Eleanor teaches  
Toh English. He becomes a member  
of her family as well as her lover.  
Strengthened by Toh, Eleanor fulfills  
a number of female midlife dreams.  
She gets her best friend Jane back  
after a 10-year hiatus, and the  
friendship still holds. She gets rid of  
the ghosts of her mother and  
grandmother once and for all,  
something that most of us never do.  
She gets to sit back and be taken care  
of for a while, with a perfectly good  
excuse, and she has a love affair that  
neither wrecks her life nor upsets her  
balance. When Toh finally decides to  
marry a girl from China, Eleanor feels  
that part of her life is at an end, but  
she is not permanently affected. The  

regeneration brought about by the  
affair with Toh enables her to survive.  

Mainland is full of attractive  
touches, clever observations, and  
enjoyable set pieces, such as Toh’s  
first few encounters with snow, the  
descriptions of Brooklyn past and  
present, the day the family sets up the  
ping-pong table, and every appearance  
of Eleanor’s awful friend Gloria.  
Schaeffer is expert at smoothly  
presenting the reader with small  
treats. I laughed out loud every time  
Eleanor’s mother and grandmother  
spoke from their cloud.  

The combination of the serious  
themes of blindness and reconciliation  
with Schaeffer’s intellectual wit is a  
curious one. When the book threatens  
to sink under its own metaphorical  
weight, Schaeffer buoys it up with her  
light tone and cleverness. It is largely  
a matter of taste whether these two  
elements work in conjunction for the  
reader, for the price of Schaeffer’s wit  
seems to be that the book is cool at  
the core. It is a strangely detached  
tale of passion, but it works.  

— Jessica Weissman  

Mohawk Trail  
by Beth Brant  

Firebrand Books (141 The Commons,  
Ithaca, NY 14850), 1985, $13.95 (HB),  
$6.95 (PB), 96 pp.  

In Mohawk Trail, Beth Brant creates  
out of an immense subject a  
homeopathic mixture of family  
biography, gay and straight portraits,  
and distilled images of Native  
American life before the advent of  
Whites. With symbols and myths  
inherited by her Indian grandparents,  
Brant sets about the difficult task of  
untangling the mysteries of her Indian  
past. Her grandfather taught her  
Mohawk, much of which she has  
forgotten, and her grandmother, an  
ancestral guide, taught her the  
strength of spirit. The family tree  
indicates that the Turtle clan lineage  
has been passed on through the  
generations by women, developing for  

the author a strong matriarchal  
foundation. She shares with her  
family the importance of sticking  
together, of education and hard work  
for the survival of their own minds  
and families.  

Brant grew up in the industrial city  
of Detroit. Her portraits are of tough,  
streetwise individuals. At times, as in  
Arnow’s The Dollmaker or Piercy’s  
Woman on the Edge of Time, these  
stories evoke the gruesome horror of  
the consequences of ignorance. To  
understand how the Native Americans  
have been silenced, one must  
understand that their cultural and  
moral values continue to be  
unaccepted, that their bodies and  
minds are being broken by alcohol,  
and that they are condemned and  
punished for their sexuality. The  
author accurately reveals how White  
society disempowers the Indian family  
by separating kin from one another.  
Society charges lesbians and Indians  
with incompetence in order to take  
their children away to assimilate them  

into the White straight society. It  
happened in 1890, and it is  
happening still.  

On a more optimistic note,  
Mohawk Trail locks into the humorous  
twists of fate and myth. A particularly  
unique interpretation is of that old  
troublemaker, Coyote, who in this  
case is a female disguised as a dapper  
male putting the make on a pretty  
little fox. The fox is onto the trick,  
however, and both animals lay down  
the roles of butch and femme and  
have some fun in the hay.  

In the end the author confesses  
somewhat emotionally, “I write  
because to not write is a breach of  
faith.” Minority figures, separated by  
race and sex from their intrinsic  
cultures, know that the roots of these  
stories come from a dark insecurity  
over lost pasts, hence the anger in the  
captive present. Glean the gist of  
these words and realize the courage it  
took to write out of the present chaos  
and the mystery of her past.  

— Katherine Hitt  

Sacred Groves and  
Ravaged Gardens: The  
Fiction of Eudora Welty,  
Carson McCullers, and  
Flannery O’Connor  

by Louise Westling  

Athens: University of Georgia Press,  
1985, $22.50, 183 pp.  

At last a critic has assessed the works  
of Welty, McCullers, and O’Connor  
— not as pale offshoots of Faulkner  
the Great, nor as the output of  
talented-but-abnormal beings with a  
taste for the offbeat and bizarre — but  
from the standpoint of the writers’  
common Southern White Woman  
background, with its inherent curses  
and blessings. Happily, Louise  
Westling conducts her study with  
exceptional skill, a deep feminist  
sensibility, and a genuine respect for  
these authors, who have given us  
what Faulkner could not: the southern  
woman’s story. Although Westling  
notes that this story has been told in  
some degree by other White  
southerners and that it has been and  
will be further delineated by the  
southern Black woman as well, she  
has chosen to narrow her sights to  
these three, comparing them in terms  
of life circumstances, literary  
influences, focus, and individual  
aesthetic.  

The handsome pen-and-ink  
drawings sprinkled through the book  
reflect Westling’s attention to the  
land (so historically equated with the  
southern female) and its treatment  
from the southern White male, in his  
professed adoration and steady  
degradation of it. She emphasizes  
Welty’s affirmation of the land as a  
restorative maternal force, in contrast  
to O’Connor’s harsh fictional  
surroundings and McCullers’s virtual  
absence of landscape. While outlining  
the ambivalence of rebellious women  
in the works of all three authors, she  
demonstrates how Welty’s women  
generally fare better than the Joy/  
Hulgas, Frankies, and Miss Amelias,  
who veer far from the Southern Lady  
idol.  

— Blanche Farley  

Between Women:  
Biographers, Novelists,  
Critics, Teachers and  
Artists Write About Their  
Work on Women.  

edited by Carol Ascher, Louise  
DeSalvo, and Sara Ruddick  

Boston: Beacon Press, 1984, $11.95, 469  
pp., (PB), photos  

This original and handsomely  
illustrated book is a collection of  
writings by authors from various  
ethnic, religious, and professional  
backgrounds. Despite their diverse  
marital, maternal, and sexual  
preferences, they are united by a  
commitment to feminism. The authors  
of these 25 essays investigate lives of  
women who have contributed to social  
history and change and, in the  
process, they make their own lives  
meaningful to themselves, to the  
surrounding community of family and  
friends, and to women at large.  

The essays bring information about  
at least two levels of experience, the  
experience of the authors themselves  
and the experience of the “distant  
strangers” they have researched.  
Hence, Alix Kates Shulman opens the  
series by speaking about her  
relationship with Emma Goldman,  
affectionately called the “general  
troublemaker.” Shulman demystifies at  
once the distance and strangeness  
between Goldman and herself: “I, her  
biographer, have shaped her life, and  

September/October 1985  

she, my subject, has shaped mine. For  
better or worse we’re a couple.”  

After Shulman, 24 other couples,  
trios, and quartets stir the reader’s  
imagination. DeSalvo and Ruddick  
include articles about their work with  
Virginia Woolf, and Ascher offers a  
chapter from her book on Simone de  
Beauvoir that contains an imaginary  
letter to the French feminist. Yi-Tsi  
Mei Feuerwerker takes us to China in  
her article about the revolutionary  
figure Ding Ling. In “Exiles,” Myrta  
Chabran refers to the lives of Julia de  
Burgos (Puerto Rican writer and  
poet), Doris Lessing, and Medea to  
give us access to the many intricate  
facets of the daughter-mother  
relationship. “Being a woman,  
becoming a mother, being a foreigner,  
becoming an exile,” she says, “are all  
inextricably tied up for me.”  

The closing essay, the classic  
“Looking for Zora,” is a report of  
Alice Walker’s voyage to the Florida  
town of Fort Pierce to look for and to  
mark the anthropologist Zora Neale  
Hurston’s grave. Walker's storytelling  
is witty and exciting. The reader visits  
with the old folks who had known  
Zora and shivers when Zora herself is  
called upon to locate her grave in the  
grassy abandoned cemetery. What  
Walker does not openly tell but  
brilliantly suggests to the reader is the  
enormity of her commitment to Black  
womanhood (and to womanhood of  
all colors). We are in debt to her for  
preserving the memory of this splendid  
woman being, Zora Neale Hurston.  

— Tania Ramalho  

Prizes, Prizes, Prizes  

We congratulate Julie Bondanza of Takoma Park, MD, who won the prize in  
our drawing for charter subscribers: a signed, boxed, limited edition of A  
Daughter's Geography by Ntozake Shange. That event was so exciting that we are  
having more. We will record the names of all subscribers received before  
November 30, 1985, and will have a drawing for signed copies of Susan  
Koppelman’s anthologies of short stories by North American women writers: The  
Other Woman, Between Mothers and Daughters, and Old Maids.  

Belles Lettres @ 15