Academics in Outer Space

Feminism and Science Fiction, by Sarah Lefanu. Bloomington and  
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1989, $9.95, 231 pp.

Memories and Visions: Women’s Fantasy and Science Fiction, edited by  
Susanna J. Sturgis. Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 1989, $9.95, 207 pp.

by Melissa Scott

Raven criticism and the fiction to which it refers is  
always an interesting process; in this case, it is a particularly  
revealing one. Sarah Lefanu’s discussion in Feminism and  
Science Fiction of the ways in which feminist writers have  
used science fiction and science fiction writers have used  
feminism both illuminates Susanna Sturgis’s superb collection  
of short stories and raises some questions about contemporary  
criticism of fantasy and science fiction. Lefanu is committed  
to a narrow definition both of feminism and of science fiction,  
whereas Sturgis in Memories and Visions presents a marvelous  
range of styles and voices and offers a very different view of  
women writing within the genre. This is not to say that Lefanu  
would consider sf/fantasy an inferior genre. If anything, her  
claims are higher than those of most critics:

[Science fiction] makes possible and encourages (despite its  
colonization by male writers), the inscription of women as  
subjects free from the constraints of mundane fiction, and it  
also offers the possibility of interrogating that very inscription,  
questioning the basis of gendered subjectivity.

Feminism and Science Fiction is a difficult book, not least  
because of the relentlessly academic style. The first half— the  
best part — discusses women and sf/fantasy in general. Here  
Lefanu has some provocative points to make, and makes them  
well. The second half focuses on four writers, James Tiptree  
Jr., Ursula K. Le Guin, Suzy McKee Charnas, and Joanna  
Russ. Her choice is frankly a personal one, based on the  
intersection of feminist politics and science fiction, and her  
assessment of these writers is entirely informed by that model.  
It is precisely here that I have problems with this book: her  
concern with the political validity of each writer’s work leads  
her to discount individual talents and choices.

Lefanu believes that it is unfeminist to claim to speak with  
authority. This is what is wrong with Le Guin, in Lefanu’s  
view: "[Le Guin’s] conception of her beloved outer space and  
her inner lands is too closely related to parameters set by  
mainstream narrative modes.... Le Guin speaks with the voice  
of authority... rather than against it." It is what is right with  
Joanna Russ, and especially with The Female Man: "While  
flagrantly flouting what can be seen as patriarchal conventions  
[of authorship]..., it resists, too, any attempt to substitute a  
feminine convention for a masculine one.... The Female Man  
challenges the simple notion of an author speaking and her  
readers hearing." This is a popular critical position that seems  
disingenuous in a critic, and is a symptom of an assumption  
that pervades the entire work: that it is somehow incorrect for  
a woman to exercise authority, except perhaps with the  
consensus or through a collective of her peers.

Memories and Visions, in contrast, has no such narrow  
editorial vision. In her introduction, Susanna Sturgis notes that  
she asked for:

the works I was missing, specifically female protagonists over  
the age of 35; women with female friends, lovers, colleagues,  

—45—

and kinfolk; fantasy that does not simplistically equate dark  
with evil and light with salvation, and future and never-were  
worlds where the social structure is not neo-, pseudo-, or  
crypto-feudal.

She has found those stories, and a good deal more.

Most of the authors were new to me, and a number had not  
published science fiction before, so I had the special pleasure  
of discovering new voices. The stories range from conventional  
fantasy to experimental sf, and even the least successful are  
well worth reading. The best stories are very good indeed:  
Barbara Krasnoff’s "Signs of Life," probably the most  
straightforward sf story in the anthology, is an excellent mix  
of hard and soft sciences. Mary Ellen Matthews also places  
"Children of Divers Kinds" stylistically within the mainstream  
of sf; her account of two members of the KaySearle clone is  
both haunting and hopeful. Lorraine Schein’s “The Chaos  
Diaries" is hardly conventional sf, but it is tremendously  
evocative and beautifully grounded in chaos theory.

Memories and Visions is a highly successful anthology. The  
writers speak with many voices and from many points of  
view, but all share a woman-centered vision, a perspective that  
does not apologize for or take as remarkable the fact of being  
female. It is that overall confidence — confidence as women,  
as writers, confidence in the stories themselves, and in the  
legitimate diversity of their experiences — that is most  
memorable about the anthology. It is rather depressing to  
contrast the image of women in sf/fantasy presented in this  
collection with Lefanu’s political analysis. There is an  
unfortunate gap between academic criticism of sf and the best  
sf being published today. My suggestion would be to put aside  
the critics, and read the writers first.

© Melissa Scott, a writer of science fiction, won the John W.  
Campbell Award for Best New Writer in 1986. Her most  
recent novel, Mighty Good Road, was published by Baen  
Books last spring.