Medieval Women Writers

eS re

ZS NCL  
ZONA AK 5  

A Small Sound of the Trumpet, by Margaret Wade Labarge. Boston: Beacon Press, 1986,  
$21.95, 271 pp.  

Medieval Women’s Visionary Literature, edited by Elizabeth Alvilda Petroff. New York:  
Oxford University Press, 1986, 402 pp.  

Medieval Women Writers, edited by Katharina M. Wilson. Athens: University of Georgia  
Press, 1984, 363 pp.  

Wayward Nuns in Medieval Literature, by Graciela S. Daichman. New York: Syracuse Uni-  
versity Press, 1986, 223 pp.  

STV.AY, we’ 7 = hy r  
Ne See  
Mi)  

by Ann Dobyns  

Chaucer’s Wife of Bath, Madam  
Eglentyne, and Patient Griselda  
represent for most readers their  
only images of women in the medieval  
world. The Beowulf poet’s Wealhtheow  
and Hygd, Gawain’s temptress in Sir Ga-  
wain and the Green Knight, Malory’s  
Guinevere, or Gill of the Second  
Shepherd’s Pageant are at best distant  
memories. A good reason, of course, for  
this narrow picture of medieval women  
is that up until the last 20 years, few  
books or articles examined the history  
or writings of women in the Middle  
Ages. Considered interesting only as re-  
ferences in occasional footnotes,  
medieval women remained a largely un-  
explored piece in the wonderfully com-  
plex and distant puzzle of the historical  
period that immediately preceded the  
advent of the printed word.  

Since 1970, however, several schol-  
arly studies have begun to rectify years  
of critical neglect. Compared to the first  
six decades of the 20th century, the past  
two seem filled with fascinating and de-  
tailed examinations of images of women  
in the literature of the Middle Ages, of  
the works and lives of women writers,  
and of the lives of medieval women in  
their various roles in society. Four re-  
cently published books make the dis-  
coveries of these studies available. Mar-  
garet Wade Labarge’s A Small Sound of  
the Trumpet details lives of women from  
all levels of society in northern Europe  
from 1100 to 1500. Katharina M. Wil-  
son’s Medieval Women Writers and  
Elizabeth Alvilda Petroff’s Medieval  
Women’s Visionary Literature are both  
anthologies of modern translations of  
writings by medieval women, each selec-  
tion accompanied by a biographical and  
critical introduction. Graciela S.  
Daichman’s Wayward Nuns in Medieval  
Literature traces the literary and social  
conventions that inform the portraits of  
Chaucer’s Madam Eglentyne and of  
Dona Garosa of the 14th-century  
Spanish Libro de Buen Amor.  

Most medieval historians have agreed  
that the position of women in society as  
well as her image in literature generally  
declined from the 12th through the 14th  
centuries. This change may be traced to  
the system of primogeniture, which de-  
nied inheritance rights to daughters and  
younger sons. Also, ecclesiastical re-  
forms of the 11th and 12th centuries  
insisted on clerical celibacy, thereby en-  
couraging representations of women as  
temptresses, a portrayal that showed  
women to be not only inferior but an  
active and dangerous force of evil in the  
world. Despite these views and the low  
position of women in society, however,  
many women exerted a significant influ-  
ence on the affairs of the medieval  
world.  

An adjunct professor of history at  
Carleton University, Labarge is the au-  
thor of six books on the Middle Ages.  
In A Small Sound of the Trumpet, she  

2 @ Belles Lettres  

paints a panorama of medieval women  
from all levels of society. Her canvas  
includes portraits of queens and noble  
ladies, religious women, townswomen  
and peasants, medical practitioners,  
prostitutes, and criminals. She first sets  
them in a historical frame by contrasting  
the lives of women in the 12th through  
the 14th centuries with those of women  
in the early Middle Ages. Compared to  
women in the later Middle Ages, those  
who lived in the early centuries enjoyed  
a privileged position in society. Early  
queens, for example, executed adminis-  
trative duties in the royal households,  
controlled much of the royal treasury,  
and influenced ecclesiastical affairs  
through their patronage of ecclesiastics  
and monasteries as well as by founding  
and endowing nunneries. There also  
existed powerful abbesses who, in addi-  
tion to ruling prominent nunneries,  
often led double monasteries (religious  

communities with separate sections for  

nuns and monks). Many noble women  
and nuns received a rigorous course of  
study. When Labarge turns to her profile  
of women in the later Middle Ages, she  
makes clear the differences. With less  

economic and legal power, most women  
had authority within narrowly defined  
personal boundaries. Yet, with a un-  
yielding persistence, these women con-  
tinued to exercise considerable influence  
over their domains.  

The effectiveness of queens often de-  
pended on the weaknesses of their hus-  
bands or even on their deaths, which  
sometimes left the widow as regent for  
a young heir. Widowhood was in many  
ways a more important avenue to power  
for noble ladies when, as Labarge ob-  
serves, “she took full control of her  
dower lands and frequently, if the heir  
was a minor, the management and super-  
vision of all the lands and revenues until  
he came of age.” A haven for daughters  
and widows of the nobility, the religious  
houses of the Middle Ages offered a un-  
ique opportunity for women to gain pos-  
itions of power and influence or to ex-  
perience certain controlled indepen-  
dence. Administered by women for  
women and often endowed by women,  
the earliest religious houses often were  
centers of learning for women. The  
growth of anti-feminism, however, se-  
verely restricted the activities and au-  
tonomy of these nuns, and with the trad-  
ition of “providing a respectable manner  
of living for the aristocratic or wealthy  
whose families had not been able to pro-  
vide them with husbands,” these religi-  
ous houses became less places of learning  
typical of earlier convents. In contrast,  
the Beguines represented a different class  
of religious women. Unlike nuns, who  
came from nobility, the Beguines were  
from various classes of society. Living in  
communities dedicated to religious char-  
ity but without the rigid restrictions of  
the late medieval convents, Beguines  
were generally respected and considered  
useful. Perhaps the most influential  
group of women in the Middle Ages were  
the mystics who because of their visio-  
nary gifts enjoyed special attention de-  
spite their sex. Like noblewomen, lower  
class women were most independent  
when widowed, but even the wives of  

Wayward Nuns in  

GRACIELA S. DAICHMAN  

Medieval  

Literature  

tradesmen and peasants were more ac-  
tive than noblewomen. Often tradeswo-  
men worked with their husbands in the  
family business or were widows in  
charge, engaged in trades of their own,  
or provided medical care. Thus they in-  
teracted on a more equal basis with men.  
Peasant women likewise were workers  
whether widowed or married, though of  
course they enjoyed greater autonomy  
as widows. The final avenue for liveli-  
hood was that of prostitution, usually a  
last resort when other employment was  
unavailable. Some women were driven  
to crime.  

Labarge ends her study with an assess-  
ment of women’s contributions to  
medieval culture. Though more often  
exerting their influence by their patron-  
age of writers, artists, and musicians, a  
few were practitioners, most notably  
writers. These women are the focus of  
the anthologies edited by Wilson and  
Petroff. Wilson’s volume is an excellent  
introduction to a broad range of women  
writers from seven different centuries,  
who wrote in eight languages and came  
from ten regions or nationalities. The  
collection contains both secular and re-  
ligious writings. Because religious life of-  
fered the greatest opportunity for writ-  
ing, however, the selections are pre-  
dominantly religious. Like Wilson’s vol-  
ume, Petroff’s includes translations from  
many languages and, in addition, spans  
the centuries of the medieval period,  
with earliest selections from the third  
rather than the ninth century, where  
Wilson’s collection begins. Although  
the two anthologies contain some of the  
same selections, they nonetheless com-  
plement each other with their different  
centers of concern. Wilson introduces  
the reader to medieval women who  
wrote successfully and well, whereas Pet-  
roff details a tradition particularly suited  
to women in the Middle Ages.  

Wilson’s book is in many ways an ar-  
gument for the inclusion of the writings  
of medieval women in the literary  
canon. In her introduction to the vol-  
ume, she attributes critical neglect of  
these writings to the omission of such  
works from anthologies, the lack of  
translations of works by women, their  
exclusion from secondary and college  
curriculums, and the minor attention  
they have received in literary histories.  
Wilson’s collection of translations of 15  
representative writers attempts to rescue  
these works from obscurity. Writings  
vary from selections from manuals of in-  
struction to dramas, letters, devotional  
and visionary tracts, autobiographies,  
and courtly and folk lyrics; the writers  
range from noble ladies to Beguines, re-  
cluses, nuns, prioresses, and abbesses.  
In the introduction to the anthology  
Wilson briefly places the writers in their  
historical context. Selections that fol-  
low are in 15 chapters written by diffe-  
rent scholars. Each chapter includes a  
historical and critical introduction,  
scholarly notes, and a bibliography. Wil-  
son explains that the contributors to the  
volume tried to present complete texts,  
substantial excerpts, or self-contained  
selections.  

With her focus on the visionary trad-  
ition, Petroff limits her choice of texts  
to devotional literature, which she de-  
fines as “literature written for the faithful  
and intended to develop or heighten  
feelings of devotion toward God or the  
saints.” To include as many untranslated  
writings as possible, she presents selec-  
tions of 28 medieval women whose lives  
were devoted to God. They include vis-  
ionary autobiography, spiritual guidance  
in letters, sermons, or short treatises,  
plays, poems, prose narratives of visions,  
and an epic account of a pilgrimage.  

— continued on page 3  

Jury/August 1987