Belles Lettres

P. O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

a  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna Cook  
EDITORS  
a2  

Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Susan Koppelman  
Claudia Tate  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
ry  

Caryl Marsh  
ART ADVISOR  
ry  

Kathy Velis  
PRODUCTION ASSISTANCE  

5  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly sub-  
scriptions $2.00 an issue for classes  
of 10 or more. Send a request (one  
month before desired issue) on  
letterhead signed by the course in-  
structor. Sample Issue: $1.00.  
Make all checks payable to Belles  
Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose is  
to promote and celebrate writing by  
women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, request a copy  
of the Guidelines for Reviewers. All  
views expressed in Belles Lettres  
represent the views of the individual  
authors.  

Submissions  

Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney.  
Enclose SASE for return of  
materials.  

Advertising  

Only display advertising is  
accepted. Classified ads are  
accepted only as display ads. Copy  
should be camera-ready (stats or  
veloxes). Other forms will be  
accepted (i.e., manuscript,  
negatives, or photocopies); pro-  
duction charges will be assessed for  
typesetting or camera work. Dead-  
line for space reservations is the first  
of the month, two months preced-  
ing the month of issue. Address  
questions about reservations, di-  
mensions, and rates to Deanna  
Cook or call 703-524-7743. Belles  
Lettres reserves the right to reject  
advertising that is inappropriate to  
its stated editorial goals.  

ae  

May/June 1986  

From the Editors CONTENTS ¢&  

The other day I was watching Carol  
Burnett belt out a showstopper from  
Follies on a telecast of the definitive  
recording session of that musical. The  
song was “I’m Still Here,” and it hit a  
resonating chord with me. I’d like to  
voice a similar sentiment vis-à-vis the  
magazine you're reading.  

When Deanna Cook and I began  
Belles Lettres about a year ago, we knew  
we'd have to attract impassioned readers  
and buyers of books as subscribers and to  
appeal to advertisers in order to stay  
afloat in a competitive publishing world.  
We needed advice and knowledge from  
heads more learned than ours. We  
needed to attract first-class writers,  
publications people, and consulting  
editors willing to donate their skills and  
time. We needed to refine our content  
and format to achieve our goal of bring-  
ing the often neglected writing of  
women forth to the public. We knew  
we'd have to work like crazy yet not step  
over the line separating committed and  
effective editors from burnt-out zombies.  

These are demands that we still come  
up against after our first year of publish-  
ing. Moreover, we've learned that in  
order to create a successful literary  
magazine, one must lavish devotion  
equal to that of Colette’s mother, Sido,  
who once regretfully declined her  
beloved daughter's invitation to visit  
because she was awaiting the flowering  
of a rare plant that bloomed but once a  
year. Despite the demands, despite the  
risks, Belles Lettres has bloomed. And  
thanks to you, we’re still here. Happy  
summer, and, in the words of Josephine  
Jacobsen, “I say let the flowers bloom,  
let all the flowers bloom.”  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  

Letters  

This is a long-overdue letter to correct a  
mistake in your first issue. Kate Chopin’s  
grave does exist today, in Calvary Cemetery  
in St. Louis, Section 17, Lot 47. A picture of  
her gravestone appears in A Kate Chopin Mis-  
cellany, which Per Seyersted and I edited in  
1979 (Northwestern State University Press  
of Louisiana).  

Factual errors are human — but I’m much  
more disturbed (that’s putting it mildly) by  
Leahy and Hamilton’s review of Gilbert and  
Gubar’s Norton Anthology of Literature by  
Women, [Jan/Feb]. Reasonable people may  
disagree about which selections belong in any  
anthology. But to assume, as these reviewers  
do, that there is no coherent tradition of  
women’s literature is a striking demonstra-  
tion of their own ineptitude. They simply  
don’t know what’s been discovered — while  
at the same time, they’ve imbibed, and  
believed, all the clichés of male critics (e.g.,  
“literary history” must not be “sacrificed to  
feminist polemics”). Leahy and Hamilton  
don’t seem to have the foggiest notion that  
feminist critics have spent the last 20 years  
proving how silly, destructive, and false such  
presuppositions are. In fact, their review is  
an example of “phallic criticism,” which  
Mary Ellmann dissected brilliantly in  
Thinking About Women in 1968.  

I could go on, but I don’t enjoy attacking  
women in print, and am doing so only  
because their review is a betrayal of two de-  
cades of scholarship they seem to know noth-  
ing about. It’s also a betrayal of what Belles  
Lettres should be: a collection of thoughtful  
and informative reviews and essays.  

Emily Toth  
University Park, PA  

If Luree Miller or any of your readers  
would like to learn more about Abigail Scott  
Duniway, whom Miller describes as “willing  
to dedicate herself to riding the dusty  
Western roads and the mighty Western rivers  
preaching Equal Rights to women in cross-  
road schoolhouses, steamboat parlors, and  
churches” [“Women of the West,” Jan/Feb]  
she might look at Ruth Barns Maynihan’s  
Rebel for Rights: Abigail Scott Duniway (Yale,  
1983).  
Joan Joffe Hall  
Storrs, CT  

REVIEWS  

3: Family Linen. ...;4.6s:a%esasc0%e%  

VOLUME 1/NUMBER 5  

ee eT ara rer era eT by Lee Smith  

4 Women of Ideas and What Men Have Done To Them: From Aphra Behn to  

Adrienne Rich... ..........5.05065  
Feminine Soul: The Fate of an Ideal  

ayo CRNGL DS SCenUaa. by Dale Spender  
[aie eters by Marilyn Chapin Massey  

5 Hidden Hands: An Anthology of American Women Writers,  
1790-1870 ...........-. edited by Lucy M. Freibert and Barbara A. White  
Provisions: A Reader from 19th-Century American  

6 The Stories of Muriel Spark .......  

Russian and Polish Women’s Fiction  

7 Honeymoon: Stories..............  
Getting to Know the Weather......  
Tentacles of Unreason............  
The Christmas Wife..............  

8 Trying to be an Honest Woman ....  
The Catastrophe of Rainbows......  
Dower Land. ........... 0.00000  
Sacred Hearts ...............005.  
Night Student io: 46.sse2ens050%  

PQ DOGOeG RET edited by Judith Fetterley  

cdc e eee e eee eees by Muriel Spark  
cect e eee edited by Helena Goscilo  

a eee ts by Merrill Joan Gerber  
BERG Paea dd baDRIAS by Pamela Painter  

Ciesea ieee yemnerwade by Joan Givner  
bebe e ene tenes by Helen Norris  

£4 RAR NSE ARETE by Judith Barrington  
GOD ARETNON HOnOOE by Martha Collins  
ee rere by J. B. Goodenough  

by Phoebe Hanson  
by Nancy Simpson  

10 Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance  

Italy sissies caveranswiws cmeanares  

es ue sma emameree nue by Judith C. Brown  

12 Short Reviews: The Women’s Computer Literacy Handbook, by Deborah L.  
Brecher; The Accidental Tourist, by Anne Tyler; Call Me Woman, by Ellen  
Kuzwayo; Joe Jones, by Anne Lamott; Saint, by Christine Bell  

COLUMNS  

9 Belles Lettres Interview: Josephine Jacobsen  

11 Impressions: Literary Awards, Briefly Noted  

FEATURES  

2 North of the Border: A Review of Surfacing, by Margaret Atwood; Green  
Water, Green Sky, by Mavis Gallant; The Stone Angel, by Margaret Laurence;  
The Beggar Maid, by Alice Munro; The Tiger in the Tiger Pit, by Janette  
Turner Hospital; The Handmaid’s Tale, by Margaret Atwood  

On the Cover: Drypoint etching of Colette by Priscilla Treacy  

I was deeply disappointed by the review of  
With the Power of Each Breath [Jan/Feb]. Sus-  
an LoTempio writes: “I do not understand  
why the editors opened the book with a dis-  
cussion of an obscure disability such as  
environmental illness and a too-specific dis-  
cussion on the insulin pump.” The editors  
were at great pains to explain exactly why  
they opened the book in the way they did.  

Those two essays serve as metaphors for  
the experience of all with disabilities or  
chronic illnesses. “Infusing Blues” by editor  
Susan E. Browne explicates the relationship  
between a patient vis-à-vis the  
pharmacological and medical es-  
tablishments. She writes of the pain and  
frustration of being told that something is  
“wrong” other than what is diagnosed when  
what will make Them money doesn’t work,  
and the patient says so. The struggle with the  
good patient/bad patient syndrome is brutal.  
You are a good patient when you follow  
“doctor’s” orders and when his (sic) orders  
“work.” You are a bad patient when you don’t  
respond to treatment the way you are  
“supposed to.” Browne’s essay on the insulin  
pump is right on target and crucial to under-  
standing the life of a person with a chronic  
illness. She uses the insulin pump as an ex-  
ample, but she could have used any of  
hundreds of other experiences.  

People will read this book for many  
reasons: to find validation of their own ex-  
periences; to make contact with the commu-  
nity of people with disabilities; for support as  
they try to deal with newly acquired dis-  
abilities or chronic illnesses in their own lives  
or in the lives of those close to them; and for  
its political and human insights. Browne’s  
piece provides readers with important keys to  
survival by sharing something of her own  
emotional/attitudinal struggle as well as her  
struggle with an establishment designed to  
maximize profits and not human well-being.  

Emily Levy’s essay on environmental ill-  
ness, “How The Rhino Got Its Flaky Skin,”  
is not about an “obscure” illness. Levy writes,  
“It strikes me as ironic that I’m considered  
sick because I react to the poisons in the en-  

vironment as if they were poison.” The  
epigraph for this piece clarifies its “meaning:”  
“I am a prototype of the next generation/ I am  
a warning to society to change its ways/ I am  
a tree standing beside a super-highway/ I am  
the water downstream/ I have been poisoned  
by industrialism.”  

These two essays are keys to the politics of  
not only this book, but of the entire disability  
rights movement. The physical world creates  
physical problems for more and more of us.  
And the social world complicates those  
problems with disabling attitudes. The great  
strength of the book is the blending of all  
aspects of the experiences of those with dis-  
abilities and chronic illnesses — the  
emotions, the clinical details, the nitty-  
gritty of managing our daily lives, and our  
encounters with the institutions and es-  
tablishments we are simultaneously de-  
pendent on and victimized by more often  
than we are helped or empowered.  
LoTempio’s review performs a disservice to  
the potential readers of this wonderful and  
important book.  

Susan Koppelman  
St. Louis, MO  

I disclaim the review of the three an-  
thologies edited by Susan Koppelman  
[Jan/Feb] that appeared in my name because  
it was so altered by the editors both  
structurally and substantively that it bears  
little resemblance to what I wrote.  

Kossia Orloff  
New York, NY  

It is the policy of Belles Lettres to consult  
writers when substantive editing of their work is  
required. In our opinion, the copyediting of Ms.  
Orloff's review effected concision, clarity, and  
proper usage and style. We did not judge the  
editing to have affected the writing substantively;  
thus we did not consult the author. We regret that  
Ms. Orloff is dissatisfied with the result. Copies  
of our Guidelines for Reviewers are available on  
request.  

The Editors  

Belles Lettres @ 1