Madcaps, Artful Deceivers,

Reprints

and Sisters of Mercy

by Laura Hapke

The mid-Victorian British novelist

Elizabeth Gaskell might have

been describing the aims of her
American counterparts when she sug-
gested that writing could illuminate “the
darkness where obedience [is] the only
seen duty of women.” Not only obe-
dience, of course, but the nineteenth-
century ideology of female subordination
to male power in all its forms: economic,
sexual, emotional. The newly reissued
works of Harriet Beecher Stowe, Alice
Cary, Constance Fenimore Woolson,
Louisa May Alcott, and E.D.E.N. South-
worth shed light on the subservience ex-
pected of American women a century
ago. Examining and often undermining
that cultural ideal, these writers—some
of them unjustly neglected for years—
challenge the prescription that, as
Woolson satirically put it, a woman
“should not dare in any way.”

Harriet Beecher Stowe published Pink
and White Tyranny (1871) almost twenty
years after her antislavery blockbuster
Uncle Tom’s Cabin. This time the target
is the idle society woman, most notably
in the fictive person of Lillie Seymour.
In her manipulation of the feminine role
assigned her, Lillie completely deceives
the dully conventional lawyer husband
who believes in her. Stowe is highly
critical of Lillie, who pretended love to
snare the prosperous John. Despite
satiric comments about this anti-
heroine, Stowe gives us a memorably
artful deceiver cloaking mercenary mo-
tives in “airy gauzes ... pearly whiteness
... sea-shell pink [and] infantine smiles.”
Determined to seize the day, the flirta-
tion, the party invitation, Lillie rules the
deluded John by the pastel tyranny of
her falsely angelic appearance. Beneath
the golden ringlets and dainty ways is a
sexual politician of the highest order.
Modern readers follow her social climb-
ing, theatrical trysts, and studied
manipulation of the stodgy New Eng-
land family she has married into with
more amusement than did her creator.
Still, Lillie emerges far more vivid than
the quiet altruists who people Stowe’s
domestic landscape.

Lillie’s forte, of course, is deception,
for she cannot admit that she would
rather smoke cigarettes and read George
Sand (favorite clandestine activities)
than pour tea and attend church as she
is expected to do. Stowe, a minister's
wife, is hostile indeed to so rebellious a
creature, yet astute enough to observe
that Lillie is a cultural product rather
than a villain. Her doll-like coquetries
mask an obsession with the financial
security conferred by wedlock. She thus
exemplifies the crass marriage market
philosophy on which she was reared.
The novel metes out a harsh punish-
ment to this superficial woman, yet the
book as a whole implies that those unfit
to be true wives have few wholesome al-
ternatives.

The farm women of Ohio in regional-
ist Alice Cary’s Clovernook Sketches,
written in the 1850s and 1860s, lead
marriage-centered lives as well. But as
we enter their psyches we find a spiritual
isolation that is Cary’s true subject. We
meet the overworked Molly Root, hid-
ing her poetic impressions of existence
first from the uncouth rural family with
whom she boards and then from the
gawky fool she marries to avoid spinster-
hood. We pity bitter Eleanor Holmes,
unable to vent her anger about life and
marriage, who seeks refuge in a manic

6 ® Belles Lettres

interior monologue. And we com-
miserate with Eliza Anderson, the crea-
tor of a nunlike existence, who longs for
a union of minds but feels compelled to
sacrifice herself to an arid life.

Whether wed young, in middle age, or
not at all, these characters are destined
to emotional solitude. At times Cary
states this as a truth of the human con-
dition; at other times she links it to
women’s sense of inferiority. The
beaten-down Eliza, for example, is told
that her shiftless, insensitive young
brother is “her natural and proper guard-
ian... superior to her in wisdom.”
Eleanor’s husband hits her in the eye on
her wedding day and tells her it is her
fault; she is in his way. Blurred worlds
for women, indeed.

Constance Fenimore Woolson’s hero-
ines, less content to suffer in silence,
represent a kind of feminine possibility
denied Stowe’s Lillie Seymour or Cary’s
Eliza Anderson. In “The Lady of Little
Fishing” (1874), a self-styled sister of
mercy rejects woman’s missionary role
and experiences a passionate, if ulti-
mately tragic, emotional life. In “The
Street of the Hyacinth” (1882), an
American expatriate in Italy is deter-
mined to cultivate her art. And the
wealthy protagonist of “At the Chateau
of Corinne” (1886) writes books and
pays homage to Madame de Staël in an
unusual way. Woolson’s grand theme,
however, is not so much feminine voca-
tion as the restrictions placed on it. Her
cool, ironic prose explores the con-
sequences of man’s refusal to treat
woman as an adult, whether a mature
woman or an artist of power. “A man
could no more tell the bare truth to a
woman than he could strike her,” confi-
dently observes one upholder of male
privilege. “We do not expect great
poems from women any more than we

. Weiss :
Pink and White Tyranny: “Beneath the
golden ringlets and dainty ways is a sexual
politician of the highest order.”

ties.”

Alcott dramatizes so potentially sub-
versive an idea, though, in richly diverse
ways. In the aptly entitled Work (1872),
a novel excerpted in the Rutgers
volume, she envisions a community of
laboring women who support one
another in the harsh industrial city.
Even a former prostitute becomes one of
their number for a time. Alcott follows
the fortunes of a beleaguered servant in
the autobiographical 1860s sketch,
“How I Went to Service.” There work
soon becomes exploitation: the ingenu-
ous narrator is houseslave to a neurotic
and exacting clergyman. He insists on
reading dull tomes aloud to her when-
ever she is not cleaning, cooking, 
sewing, or cheering him up about his im-
aginary troubles. While it makes a tel-
ling point about domestic service as fem-
inine oppression, the sketch is deli-
ciously comic. The scoundrelly clergy-
man is pinioned in a sentence.

He presented me with an overblown rose,
which fell to pieces before I got out of the
room, patted my hand, and dismissed me
with a fervent “God bless you, child. Don’t
forget the dropped eggs for breakfast.”

In the 1866 thriller Behind a Mask,

another of the relatively unknown works

Pink and White Tyranny, by Harriet Beecher Stowe. New York: Plume/New American
Library, 1988, $7.95, 331 pp. (PB)
Clovernook Sketches and Other Stories, by Alice Cary. Edited by Judith Fetterly.

American Women Writers Series. New Brunswick and London: Rutgers University Press,
1987, $42 (HB), $15 (PB), 265 pp.
Women Artists, Women Exiles: “Miss Grief” and Other Stories, by Constance

Fenimore Woolson. Edited by Joan Myers Weimer. American Women Writers Series. New

Brunswick and London: Rutgers University Press, 1988, $42 (HB), $15 (PB), 292 pp.
Alternative Alcott, by Louisa May Alcott. Edited by Elaine Showalter. American Women
Writers Series. New Brunswick and London: Rutgers University Press, 1988, $45 (HB),

$15 (PB), 462 pp.

The Hidden Hand, by E.D.E.N. Southworth. Edited by Joanne Dobson. American
Women Writers Series. New Brunswick and London: Rutgers University Press, 1987, $45

(HB), $15 (PB), 498 pp.

expect great pictures,” another man in-
forms the heroine of a Woolson tale.
The force of her fiction issues from the
tension between her rejection of such
sentiments and her ironic awareness of
their continuing force.

Another author whose work has been
reprinted in Rutgers University’s valua-
ble American Women Writers Series,
Louisa May Alcott was, like Woolson, a
true believer in woman’s right to define
herself outside of wedlock. Her seam-
stresses, sculptors, Civil War nurses, and
writers see laborious effort as salvation.
In the sermonic “Happy Women”
(1868), Alcott is quite direct about this.
“The world is full of work,” she tells her
readership. “[Do] not be daunted by the
fear of ridicule and loneliness, nor sad-
dened by the loss of a woman’s tenderest

collected in the Rutgers volume, Alcott
rewards her mysterious, black-clad
heroine for courage, daring, and the
“work” of cleverly executed scheming
against her self-involved, aristocratic
employers. A surprising piece to those
reared on Little Women (not excerpted
by Rutgers), the less conventional
novella refuses to condemn the kind of
woman who vows: “I’ll not fail ... if
there is power in a woman’s wit and
will!”

Such a sentiment is echoed by Capi-
tola le Noir, the central figure of Mrs.
E.D.E.N. Southworth’s vastly popular
The Hidden Hand. Not only was it serial-
ized for a soon-avid readership in the
New York Ledger in 1859 and reprinted
there twice more, but it was dramatized
in over forty versions and was still in

print well into the twentieth century.
Southworth lacked the depth of writers
like Stowe and Alcott, Cary and Wool-
son, but she could certainly spin a tale.
Her labyrinthine story of kidnap, missing
heirs, villains called Black Donald, and
amazon heroinism still entertains. A
blend of swashbuckler, Horatio Alger
story, domestic sentimentalism, and
thriller, her book offers fantasies of femi-
nine invincibility. Subtitled Capitola the
Madcap, it must have titillated many a
homebound matron.

Briefly, the story concerns the indomi-
table Capitola, kidnapped at birth by a
wicked uncle scheming for her fortune.
In true villainous fashion, he attempts to
sell her into slavery, but a series of sur-
prising events places her in New York
City with a family servant as her guard-
ian. Her perils have just begun, however,
for Cap must grow up in the Dickensian
poverty of Rag Alley. There she leads a
tomboy life, disguising herself as a boy to
sell newspapers—and, Southworth adds
pointedly, to avoid sexual attack from
the male members of the underclass.

“I didn’t grow in Rag Alley, New York,
for nothing,” Cap solemnly informs all
who will listen. When, in the melodra-
matic coincidences so favored by
nineteenth-century writers, she is res-
cued by a visiting aristocrat who lives in
her home county and is an enemy of her
evil uncle, the teenaged Cap proceeds to
right old wrongs with the flair of a
nineteenth-century Wonder Woman. In
one scene, she lulls the six-foot-eight
outlaw Black Donald into thinking he
has cornered her after he sneaked into
her bedroom to rape her, only to open a
trap door and drop him into a dark pit. It
serves as her feisty reply to this re-
viewer's favorite line, Black Donald’s
taunt, “Now Cap, my little man, be a
woman!”

In her introduction to The Hidden
Hand, Joanne Dobson reminds us that to
envision a woman “free enough of the
bonds of feminine decorum to be totally
herself, Southworth [had to] resort to the
fantasy world made available by the con-
ventions of popular fiction. In this
world, although not in reality, Capitola
[could] be at once ‘outlaw’ and heiress.”
And, as the novel’s finale suggests, even
the conventions dictated that, in a
happy ending, the heiress must suppress
the outlaw in herself.

Elaine Showalter’s astute introduction
to Alternative Alcott characterized Alcott
as a critic of “feminine scripts of child-
ishness and victimization.” The descrip-
tion could serve equally well for the
other writers discussed here. Whether
captured in Stowe’s measured, Cary’s
mournful, Woolson’s elegant, South-
worth’s blood-and-thunder, or Alcott’s
witty way, these heroines are far from
antiquated. Their conflicts are recogniz-
able; their troubles are real. True, ulti-
mately neither they nor the artists who
imagined them overcome the prejudices
of the day; even the fiery Capitola is
tamed. Still, writers and characters alike
bear witness to the truth one Alcott
heroine proclaimed: “I felt power of
some sort stirring in me!”

@ Laura Hapke teaches English at Pace
University and writes frequently about
women and literature.

COMING IN BELLES LETTRES
Rediscovery of Norah Hoult, Gilbert
& Gubar, George Sand, short story
anthologies, more of Maxine Hong

Kingston, literary biographies, cook-
books, second novels by Gibbons and
Sayers, reprints of mystery “greats,”
and Lynne Sharon Schwartz’s latest.

Don’t miss our summer issue!

Spring 1989