Rediscovery

Anzia Yezierska  
by Sharon Weinstein  

Anzia Yezierska, Jewish immi-  
grant writer (1880-1970), is  
making a comeback. Her pop-  

ularity, which was phenomenal while it  
lasted, began with the publication of her  
short story collection Hungry Hearts in  
1920 and faded with the onset of the De-  
pression in the 1930s. Feminist scholars  
rediscovered or, as literary critic Irving  
Howe said, “resurrected” her work  
around the mid-1970s. They found some-  
thing admirable in the spirit that kept  
Yezierska writing all her life. They found  
something worthy in the struggles of the  
heroines of her short stories and novels. In  
short, they found a writer who had some-  
thing to tell us.  

Yezierska was born in Russian Poland  
and came to America at age 16. Like  
thousands of other immigrants, she lived  
in poverty with her family on the Lower  
East Side. But she had a dream: to write.  
Alice Kessler Harris, who wrote the in-  
troduction to the 1975 reprint of  
Yezierska’s finest novel, Bread Givers  
(1925), noted that in it Yezierska “lays  
open the woman’s experience of immigra-  
tion, revealing the ways in which Jewish  
women encountered the new world and  
tried to reconcile it with the old.” Harris  
further explained that other writers of  
Yezierska's time, women writers included,  
tended to create women characters who  
were “creatures of male sexual imagina-  
tion, manipulative and overly protective  
mothers, or dependent wives made fearful  
by their helplessness . . . . Yezierska, in  
contrast, offers independent and self-  
willed women, and she does not hide the  
psychic pain of their sacrifice.”  

Yezierska had to make her own sacri-  
fices. She married in 1910, but the  
marriage was annulled after a few months.  
A short time later she married again, and  
a daughter was born in 1912. But marriage  
proved to be difficult for her. She  
could not tolerate the domestic constraints. She  
left her husband once, with her daughter,  
and tried to write. Then in 1916, after her  
first story was published, she left both  
husband and daughter.  

In 1920 Samuel Goldwyn Studios  
called and expressed an interest in her  
work. Would she accept $10,000 for the  
movie rights to Hungry Hearts? Yezierska  
left New York for the dazzle of Hollywood.  

Her second book, Salome of the Tene-  
ments, was also purchased by the studio for  
$15,000. But her departure from her roots  
caused an emotional distance from which  
she never fully recovered.  

In a 1925 article in Cosmopolitan,  
Yezierska poignantly described the effect  
of the money on her soul:  

I look back and see how happy I  
ought to have been when I was  
starving poor but one of my own  
people. Now I am cut off by my own  
for acquiring the few things I have.  
And those new people with whom I  
dine and to whom I talk, I do not  
belong to them. I am alone because I  
left my own world.  

Her daughter, Louise Levitas Hen-  
rikssen, says in the preface to the 1985  
reprint of Hungry Hearts that from 1920  
to 1930, Anzia was a celebrity. “News-  
papers frequently retold the fairy tale of  
how my mother rose from New York’s  
Lower East Side ghetto to literary star-  
dom. But with the depression of the  
1930s, she lost her audience and her  
money as well.” Henrikssen writes  
elsewhere that her mother felt that she  

As one critic said long ago,  
Yezierska writes with a pen  

dipped in the heart.  

Immigrant Minnie Cohen in her “new  
American clothes,” shortly after her arrival.  
Photo courtesy of Jeanne Talpers.  

Like all people who have nothing, I lived on dreams. With  
nothing but my longing for love, I burned my way through stone  
walls until I got to America. And what happened to me when I  

became American is more than I can picture before my eyes,  

even in a dream.  

— from “The Miracle,” by Anzia Yezierska  

had “betrayed the poor immigrants she  
wrote about. She even admitted that her  
father was right, that God and Mammon  
cannot co-exist and that ‘poverty  
becomes a wise man like a red ribbon on  
a white horse.’ Therefore, she called her  
success a failure, and her failure, the  
period of her old age, a truer mark of her  
integrity.”  

In 1950 Yezierska produced a fas-  
cinating semiautobiographical work,  
Red Ribbon on a White Horse. In it she  
detailed the disappointments of the  
Hollywood years, as well as later years  

when she met John Dewey. American  
studies scholar Jules Chametzky de-  
scribed the book as a “well-made and  
subtle” book: Its various themes, in-  
cluding “palmy Algonquin days, hard  
times, and the Works Progress Admin-  
istration Writer’s Project — one of her  
co-workers was Richard Wright — and  
finally an interlude in Vermont in search  
of a simple and emotionally fulfilling  
life, convince that who touches this  
book touches a person.”  

In 1963, when she was over 80 years  
old, Yezierska published a story called  
“One Thousand Pages of Research.”  
The six women in the story are crushed  
when they realize that the anguish of  
their lives that they have shared with a  
sociologist has been reduced to 1,000  
pages of research. In 1969, one year  
before her death, Yezierska’s last story,  
“Take Up Your Bed and Walk,” ap-  
peared in the Chicago Jewish Forum. Her  
daughter refers to her as a “fierce  

warrior-woman ... [who] never gave  
up fighting until the last weeks of her  
long life.”  

Now over 65 years after the original  
call from Hollywood, Hungry Hearts has  
come full circle: Another movie is being  
made. What is it about these stories  
that so tempts producers to bring them  
to life? Perhaps it is the strong in-  
dividuality of the female characters. Or  
perhaps it is simply that Yezierska knows  
how to touch the heart.  

In “The Free Vacation House” a poor  
woman with many children and harass-  
ing circumstances is offered the chance  
to take a free vacation. Many have  
learned that rarely is anything in life  
really free. Charity, for example, has  
strings — as this woman discovers. She  
is humiliated by questions before the  
vacation ever begins. She feels her status  

as a freeloader is being made public. And  
finally, the rules and regulations of this  
overly organized vacation house (which  
Yezierska makes seem very funny) drive  
her to distraction. After returning from  
the restrictive vacation, the woman  
responds to her poor but beloved sur-  
roundings:  

How good it was feeling for me to  
be able to move around my own  
house, like I pleased. . . I looked  
out from my window on the fire-  
escapes, full with bedding and  
garbage cans, and on the washlines  
full with clothes. Even the high  
brick walls all around me made me  
feel like a bird what just jumped out  
from a cage. And I cried out, “Gott  
sei dank! Gott sei dank!”  

Another story, “The Lost ‘Beautiful-  
ness’ ” is touching and unusual. Hanneh  
Hayyeh paints her kitchen beautiful  
white (at no small sacrifice to save the  
money for the paint) in honor of her  
son’s homecoming from the army. She  
proudly shows the beautiful kitchen to  
her husband, her neighbors, and even to  
the landlord, who subsequently charges  
her higher rent to pay for the improved  
living conditions! She cannot pay the  
added rent, and, in savage fury at the  
injustice dealt her, she tears the room  
and the whole apartment to shreds the  
night before she is evicted. Instead of  
the way her son envisioned her (“he  
pictured his mother’s joy when he would  
surprise her in her spotless kitchen”),  
“there on the curbstone [was] a woman  
huddled, cowering, broken ... their  
worldly belongings dumped there in the  
rain.”  

In “Fat of the Land” another  
Hanneh, Hanneh Breineh, has no real  
outlet for her energies. Her children,  
now wealthy, have placed her in a fancy  
Riverside apartment where she is not  
even allowed to cook (one of her greatest  
pleasures), where she has no friends,  
where it is miserably quiet, and where she  
is desperately unhappy. She dreams of the  
old days of poverty in Delancey Street, days  
that now seem to her to be vital and alive.  

One day she puts on her fur coat and  
goes to the pushcart vendors in the old  
neighborhood. In a marvelously comic  
scene she haggles with a fish peddler,  
“thrilling again with the rare sport of  
bargaining, which had been her chief  
joy in the good old days of poverty,” but  
then lets him keep the change from her  
dollar when she sees the “driven look of  
worry in his haggard eyes.” In the best  
scene in Hungry Hearts, Hanneh enters  
the lobby of her ritzy apartment house,  
happy: “The basket under her arm gave  
forth the old, homelike odors of herring  
and garlic, while the scaly tail of a  
four-pound carp protruded from its news-  
paper wrapping.” However, the uni-  
formed hall man stops her; her daughter  
happens to be there with the elegant  
Mrs. Van Suyden. A nasty scene en-  
sues, and Hanneh learns that the “the  
fat of the land” is full of irony and misery.  

Yezierska’s insights into the hearts of  
the old are but one of her special talents.  
Although she is sometimes sentimental  
and melodramatic, her stories linger in  
one’s mind. As one critic said long ago,  
Yezierska writes with a pen dipped in the  
heart.  

Note: Most of the books mentioned in this  
article are available in paperback from Persea  
Books, whose bestselling author is Yezierska.  

@ Sharon Weinstein is a professor of  
English at Hampton University and is book  
review editor for the National Jewish Post  
and Opinion.  

Jury/August 1986