Bringing Exhaustion to the Page

This Child’s Gonna Live, by Sarah Wright. The Feminist Press (311 E. 94th St., New York,

NY 10128), 1986, $9.95, 272 pp. (PB)

Eva’s Man, by Gayl Jones. Boston: Beacon Press, 1986, $7.95, 177 pp. (PB) [originally pub-

lished in 1969]

by Suzanne Berne

Poor, Black, and pregnant with

her fifth child at 23, Mariah

Upshur, the protagonist in Sarah
Wright’s This Child's Gonna Live, spends
her days in a dialogue with death. Her
sole reason for struggling on is to fight
for her children’s survival. One has died
already; the others are chronically ill,
malnourished, and so needy that the
sight of them maddens her. Toiling in
potato fields day after day, Mariah is
determined to save enough pennies to
escape “up North” with her children,
defying her husband and her community
in the attempt.

Set in the 1920s on Maryland’s East-
ern Shore, this book brings the mutter-
ings and phantoms of exhaustion to the
page. “She didn’t have time to be getting
tired or upset with herself anymore be-
cause time was flying by. Look like it
had the devil’s wings the way it kept
rushing hot and heavy in her face.”
Mariah’s constant companion is “The
Messenger,” death’s mouthpiece, who
whispers baleful messages in her ear
while she struggles to get through one
trial after another. “Get your children
some shoes before you join my king-
dom,” he hisses at one point. Although
she calls continually on Jesus, it always
seems to be the Messenger who answers.

Burdened also by her husband, Jacob,
an oysterman, whose pride is an afflic-
tion, Mariah strains through winter to
feed and clothe her family. Still a pretty
young woman, her appearance causes
trouble in the community. She has been
branded a whore for becoming pregnant
before she and Jacob were married. Her
neighbors, even her mother, treat her
as a local disgrace. Jacob’s family is par-
ticularly cruel. Once considered Black

aristocracy for owning a parcel of land,
most of their land has now been lost to
Whites. Jacob’s obsession to regain this
land and his family’s pride rivals
Mariah’s obsession with her children.
His refusal to allow her to accept welfare
money and their bitter disagreements
about the cost of survival drive them
apart, isolating Mariah even further.

Wright has constructed her novel in
concentric rings of oppression, with
Mariah at the center — the lowest com-
mon denominator. A poor Black woman
in the 1920s had little enough power;
one who was a social outcast had even
less. Mariah is oppressed by the suffering
of her children, by her attachment to
her husband — who prevents her from
receiving the little assistance she could
get, yet whom she loves even as she
hates him — and by illness, ignorance,
and the hostile winters that weaken her
every year. The line between sanity and
madness blurs as she stumbles on, driven
only by her need to protect her children.

Mariah emerges as a ruin of human
endurance. Forced by brutality into be-
coming brutal herself, her determination
to save her children gets stripped down
to its most basic: All she can afford,
emotionally, physically, financially, is
to keep them alive. Even as she cries
over them, she beats them, hating their
weakness, their sickness. Her struggle
for her children’s survival is linked to
her struggle for her own self-respect: As
she loses control of their lives, she loses
control of the one thing that made her
feel valuable, her motherhood.

Despite all, Mariah’s is a strong, clear
voice in the wilderness. She sees through
the hypocrisy of her church-going, un-
forgiving community. She sees through

Jacob’s pride enough to pity him. She
recognizes that the world she was born
into is not the only world, that it is an
unjust, inhospitable world, and that her
children deserve better. Her perceptions
are as sharp as the pain she continues
to experience, long after most people
are numb. Moving because of its subject,
the idiom of the book makes it truly
haunting. Lyrical and harsh, the lan-
guage embodies Mariah herself — a sen-
sual, bright woman forced into a narrow,
bitter life. “My children ain’t no fowl or
brute,” she says. “I wants my children
to live.” Living, for Mariah, is not the
life she knows; it is an ideal, a gift, just
out of reach.

Eva’s Man, by Gayl Jones, focuses on
oppression as well, but in a different
form. Unlike Mariah, who knows pain
so well she speaks to it, Eva fears pain
so deeply that she has nearly stopped
speaking altogether. She does not en-
counter pain as a hazard of being poor
and Black; it stalks her, appearing to
single her out for special treatment.

Here again, the language of the book
illuminates the narrative. Everything
that happens occurred in Eva’s past, a
web of nightmares gradually revealed
through memory and fantasy. Reality is
constantly shifting, prismatic; at times
it is impossible to separate the abuse that
happened from the abuse that is feared.
From her early childhood, sex was forced
upon Eva by the men around her. From
her mother’s boyfriend, to the old man
who sits in the hall, to her lovers, men
treat her as senseless: She is there only
to receive their anger, lust, and frustra-
tion. As a result, Eva becomes emotion-
ally dumb to safeguard what little of her-
self has remained untainted. Sex be-
comes an automatic function; abase-
ment by others becomes confused with
self-abasement.

When she does lash out, it is with the
fury of years of stifled pain. Eva stabs a
man who propositions her in a bar, and
years later, she kills her lover, Davis, in
a spectacularly bizarre and brutal mur-
der. This is the culmination of all the

abuse and degradation she has experi-
enced. The irony is that Davis is the
first to want to know, or care, what she
is thinking. “I was lonely,” she tells a
psychiatrist in prison when he asks her
why she killed him. She says, “It was
his whole way,” that made her do it.

Her relationship with Davis is compli-
cated. He keeps her shut up in a room,
not even permitting her to comb her
hair, making her into the ultimate sexual
object. He becomes other men in her
past — men who hurt her or who only
wished to. Yet, unlike other men, Davis
also wants to hear her talk. He wants to
know what she was thinking, why she
looks at him with a certain expression,
where she has been in her life. It is the
threat of disturbing what little equi-
librium she maintained by emotional
silence that finally drives Eva mad. His
murder is both symbolic and literal. She
destroys what has subjected her.

Eva’s Man is a difficult book. Eva’s
memories, dreams, and hallucinations
are woven together to create a compli-
cated narrative in which events do not
so much happen as emerge. Those
emerging events are repeated, rewoven,
re-visioned. Visceral, upsetting images of
sexual degradation are explored over and
over, linked to other images, separated
again. Ultimately, the repetition is stifling. Jones’s portrait of a consciousness
warped by sexual abuse is powerful, but
she fails to go much further. We are left
with a portrait, not a story. Perhaps that
was Jones’s intention, but the result is
slightly static and too easily confined.

Yet this book is hard to forget, if only
because of the sexual oppressiveness of
the imagery. It is a book that will make
men uncomfortable and women wary.
Some will call it brutally honest, others
will say it is perverse. Whatever is said
about it, Eva’s Man is vivid and pain-
ful — a book written entirely in the lan-
guage of abuse.

@ Suzanne Berne is a writer living in
California.

Sisterhood Earned

The Things That Divide Us: Stories by
Women, edited by Faith Conlon, Rachel da
Silva, and Barbara Wilson. The Seal Press
(3131 Western Ave., Suite 410, Seattle,
WA 98121), 1985, $7.95 (PB)

by Susan Koppelman

The publication of these 15 short

stories written during the last

decade must be greeted as a
major publishing event, as a cause for
joyful celebration. The stories sing a var-
iety of songs, each finding its tonic by
the end, all using controlled dissonances
to make their music. They are every-
thing that great editorial care, clarity,
and integrity would lead readers to ex-
pect. And the introduction to the book
is as important as the stories themselves.
The editors unite ideological and literary
concerns with sense, sensitivity, and
straightforwardness. Their description of
editorial process and the evolution of
this book are alone worth the price of
the book.

The things that divide women, one
from another, are heartbreaking. When
the natural flow of time takes women
from each other, the grief of loss is eased
by a sense that one is a part of the inevit-
able flow that gives as well as takes; but
there is much that divides women while
they are still alive: racism, classism, na-
tional and ethnic chauvinism, homo-
phobia, and the impact of compulsory
heterosexuality, making straight women
fear and compete with each other as well
as deny their lesbian sisters. There are
the laws and the taboos inspired by both

secular and religious patriarchal systems
that tell women they are not all the
same, that some are good and some are
bad and that the bad women and the
good women must be divided from each
other.

Women cannot heal their separation
wounds until they name them, until they
howl with rage and grief over the many
times they have lost one another, until
they understand how it happens that
they endlessly betray each other.
Women must assume appropriate guilt
for the times they have been too cow-
ardly, too stupid, too narrow in their
understanding of self-interest to love
each other. Women must also learn to
refuse to assume inappropriate guilt for
the things that divide them. In the late
sixties, women learned that sisterhood
is powerful and assumed in their exhil-
aration that it was easy to attain, too.
When it turned out to be difficult, cyni-
cism and disillusionment grew. This
book takes women back to the beginning
of sisterhood, offering second chances.

Women have made early conscious-
ness-raising into a literary model. The
various collections of coming-out
stories; the multigeneric collections of
ethnic or racial women’s writing; the
numerous anthologies of political,
theoretical, and academic essays all use
the concepts of consciousness-raising.
And among this list of books are the
new short story anthologies; among the
very best of these is The Things That
Divide Us.

According to the editors

[We] wanted stories . . . about
anything as long as [they] included
conflict or the recognition of dif-
ference between women. We sug-
gested the issues of racism, anti-
Semitism, classism, but hoped for and
welcomed others. We were also look-
ing for fresh approaches, convincing
dialogue, true-to-life plots and,
especially, moving characterization
.... We tried to choose stories that
surprised us, that caught us off-guard,
that frightened us at times, that made
us angry at other times. The best
fiction evokes feelings of all sorts,
offers new perspectives, transcends
everything we think we know about
a subject, and points in directions
we've never thought of looking be-
fore. Interestingly enough we didn’t
automatically select the overtly
political stories, even though we

all consider ourselves political. We
read and sympathized, understood
many times what the author was try-
ing to express and how hard it was,
and then put the story back in the pile
in favor of the strong, but often elu-
sive piece that tugged at us emotion-
ally, that made us feel we were in
the presence of something living and
breathing.

The stories include Robin Becker’s
tale of a mother’s finally successful effort
to accept her daughter’s lesbian love(r),
Becky Birtha’s story of a Black woman’s
pain and eventual acceptance of her
Black lesbian lover’s continued caring
friendship with her White ex-lover,
Elaine Starkman’s memoir of a junior
high school friendship during the years
of the Julius and Ethel Rosenberg trial
between a “regular” (i.e., assimilated,
depoliticized, secularized) girl and the
new girl in her class — an intense, eth-
nically identified, outspoken, politically
aware “Commie Jew.”

Cheryl Alexander writes of the strug-

gle of a young Caribbean Black girl for
acceptance, for friendship and a place
in the social world of Harlem. Barbara
Neely’s story is about the missed connec-
tions between a Black woman manage-
ment consultant and a Black woman
maintenance worker, both lonely, both
working in the same building, who pass
each other regretfully because “after all,
it wasn’t as though they had anything
in common.” Linda Hogan writes of two
young White women whose high school
friendship cannot survive the economic
and status separations of their young
adult lives as a waitress and a medical
student. These three stories do not have
the happy endings of Becker’s, Birtha’s,
or Starkman’s. Alexander, Neely, and
Hogan’s stories pain us with their insis-
tence on how similarities inside a group
only appear as such to outsiders.

Sarah Schulman’s story of two Uni-
versity of Chicago undergraduates —
one a Lithuanian Lutheran Chicago
southsider, the other a lesbian Jewish
radical feminist New Yorker — brought
together because they realize that
“We're both really peasants and need a
lot of potatoes” was the most fun for me,
and Vickie L. Sear’s story of the pain of
a child torn between her Anglo Catholic
mother and her Native American father
is the one that left me feeling the most
sadness. One of the most unusual aspects
of the book is the number of stories that
focus on adolescents, both early and
late.

Susan Koppelman, editor of three short
story anthologies, is preparing for publica-
tion a collection of stories written between
1840 and 1980 about friendships between
and among women in the United States.

Jury/August 1987