Radical by Design  
by Bettina Berch  

New York: Dutton, 1988, $19.95,  
214 pp.  

In 1933, a thirty-year-old designer had a  
show on the West Side. Her salon,  
Hawes, Inc., was a page from the future:  
Headless white mannequins, a white  
leather couch, and chairs of bent pipes.  
Instead of numbers, the dresses had  
names: Farm Relief, Remote Control,  
and Total Eclipse.  

The fashionable world has immortalized  
the names of Coco Chanel and  
Elsa Schiaparelli, but few people now  
recognize the name of their American  
contemporary, Elizabeth Hawes. Bettina  
Berch tries to remedy that situation  
in Radical By Design.  

It is likely that Hawes would have  
fought any comparison to a French de-  
signer, but she had much in common  
with Chanel. Both women were small  
and dark, fiercely independent, and  
radical for the times. Each had several  
failed relationships and, from all ac-  
counts, was increasingly eccentric and  
difficult with age. Professionally, both  
created simple, well-tailored designs to  
free women from earlier fashion con-  
straints. Yet Chanel was worshipped as a  
couturier while Hawes faded into ob-  
scurity.  

Part of the problem was the French  
domination of couture. A larger dif-  
ficulty was Hawes’s disillusionment with  
rich socialites who shied away from her  
innovative designs, the public’s preoc-  
cupation with decrees of the fashion  
press, and clothing manufacturers’ in-  
sistence on cheap copies of high-fashion  
styles. A growing dissatisfaction finally  
led Hawes to a seemingly unrelated un-  
ion job organizing women’s wartime  
labor.  

Her labor efforts, however, were not  
so different from her attempts to loosen  
the dictates of French fashion. Unfortu-  
nately, these efforts were even less well  

The Prosperine Papers  
by Jan Clausen  

Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press, 1988,  
$8.95, 260 pp. (PB)  

In The Prosperine Papers, Jan Clausen’s  
novel about retrieving and reinventing  
our foremother’s lives, a pursuit of the  
facts about a turn-of-the-century femi-  
nist is a clever device for exploring a  
process most of us eventually face: mak-  
ing peace with our families and our-  
selves.  

Bounced from academia during one of  
those familiar tenure debacles in which  
her radical research stands accused of  
parochialism, Dale is trying to shore up a  
crumbling long-term relationship with  
her lover. Ironically, just after Dale’s  
own scholarship has been spurned as  

Each generation improves the world  
for the next.  

My grandparents willed me strength.  
My parents willed me pride.  

I will to you rage.  

I give you a world incomplete  

a world  

where  

women still  

are property and chattel  

where  

color still  

shuts doors  

where  

sexual choice still  

threatens  

but I give you  

a legacy  

16 ® Belles Lettres  

received than her designs. Berch writes  
that “even as one war was ending,  
another was beginning. McCarthy’s  
Cold War was targeted at liberals such as  
Hawes. . . . With a thick FBI file and a  
strong sense of disillusionment, Hawes  
made her decision — to leave.”  

She dropped out, leading a bohemian  
island life for several years on St. Croix  
and returning only sporadically to New  
York. Abandoning her previous inter-  
ests, she worked at a bar, had an ulti-  
mately unhappy love affair with a na-  
tive, and finally returned home. In-  
creasingly alienated and “awfully  
alone,” Hawes again found herself  
swimming against the tide. After living  
awhile in California, she moved back to  
New York, where she turned once more  
to designing clothing. At sixty-eight,  

she died in a hotel room from cirrhosis of  
the liver.  

Berch’s outline of Hawes’s accom-  
plishments and the chronology of her  
life are accurate, but the designer is  

trivial, Dale agrees to assist her aged  
grandmother, Rose, in publishing her  
writings. Dale barely hints at what the  
reader suspects: that Rose’s stories are  
chiefly valuable as a testament to the  
difficulties a woman of her era en-  
countered when she tried to write. Put-  
ting aside personal and academic losses,  
Dale compiles, edits, publishes, and  
promotes Rose’s work.  

Our heroine is after more than mar-  
tyrdom, however. In the course of the  
project, Dale discovers that Rose pos-  
sesses the unpublished writings of her  
long-dead friend, Prosperine Munkers, a  
lesbian political activist involved with  
the labor movement before World War  
I. Dale not only seeks to resurrect the  
truth about Rose and Prosperine’s re-  
lationship, she is enthralled with the  
opportunity to get Prosperine into print.  

Interwoven with Dale’s quest, which  

Pat Parker, Black lesbian poet © mother © 1944-1989  

of doers  

of people who take risks  

to chisel the crack wider.  

Take the strength that you may  
wage a long battle.  

Take the pride that you can  
never stand small.  

Take the rage that you can  
never settle for less.  

These be the things I pass  

to you my daughter  

if this is the result of perversion  
let the world stand screaming.  
You will mute their voices  

with your life.  

—“Legacy,” from Jonestown  
and Other Madness, 1985  

ers a  

Photo of Elizabeth Hawes from Radical by Design. Courtesy Mary Morris Lawrence  

missing from this book. In fact, Hawes’s  
own and best-known book, Fashion Is  
Spinach, provides a better glimpse of her  
wit and personality with a rich autobio-  
graphical account of her foray into Pari-  
sian fashion during the 1920s.  

Berch’s “favorite part of working on  
this book was getting in touch with old  
friends and family members of Elizabeth  
Hawes,” but these contacts do not say  
much about what the designer was ac-  
tually like as a mother, sister, daughter,  
or companion. Her son Gavrik’s per-  
spective, for example, is summarized in  
less than two lines. And, although al-  
cohol killed Hawes, Berch mentions the  
designer’s drinking problem only in a  
brief passage in the final chapter. Judg-  
ing from Berch’s careful charting of the  
events in Hawes’s life, there is no doubt  

that Hawes was a talented, complex  
person, deserving more recognition.  
Calling attention to this fact is the pri-  
mary accomplishment of this biography.  

—Holly Hall  

has all the trappings of detective fiction,  
is Clausen’s sensitivity to aging and fac-  
ing death in retirement homes. She cel-  
ebrates the friendships among women  
that enrich otherwise arid days in insti-  
tutions where women reconcile them-  
selves to scrunching treasured homes  
into tiny cells, their lives filled with  
Tater Tot casseroles and carrot coins,  
with mysterious thefts and unsolicited  
suitors. At the same time, she hu-  
morously reveals the frustration and  
impatience of young, vigorous women  
who take on the responsibility of nurtur-  
ing their enfeebled kin: “ ‘Blood is  
thicker than water’ wasn’t a proposition  
I'd ever taken seriously, but for the first  
time since turning twenty-one, I began  
to wish for an anticoagulant.”  

Clausen packs a number of weighty  
issues into her relatively short novel.  
The Prosperine Papers fictionalizes the  
ethical choices biographers face about  
which aspects of writers’ personal histo-  
ries are appropriate to disclose, power-  
fully dramatizing the question: Who  
owns history? The novel also explores  
the anguish of thrashing around during  
periods when one seems to have lost  
everything — when passion and com-  
mitment have turned to ashes, career  
has been plundered, beloved people  
die. Never preachy or sentimental, the  
novel grapples with problems of identity  
that come crashing into our lives during  
such transitional times and carves out  
pathways that depart from addiction and  
self-destruction. Tightly constructed  
and skillfully written, The Prosperine  
Papers deserves a prominent place in the  
canon of lesbian fiction and an equally  
prominent place in the broader category  
of women’s literature.  

—Jane Campbell  

A Place at the Table  
by Edith Konecky  

New York: Random House, 1989,  
$16.95, 256 pp.  

At the end of Edith Konecky’s engaging  
second novel, Rachel Levin, a fiftyish  
writer who has just undergone a  
mastectomy, shares a bottle of Saint-  
Emilion on the Canarsie line with  
Deirdre, a writer trapped in the twin  
nightmares of psychosis and homeless-  
ness. To a native New Yorker, the word  
“Canarsie” conjures up the outer reaches  
of the civilized world. Until recently,  
the Canarsie line was the final home for  
ancient subway cars, with clattering  
ceiling fans and uncomfortable wicker  
seats that made the long trip to the end  
of the line seem interminable.  

Konecky’s skill is such that she makes  
Rachel’s encounter with Deirdre on the  
Canarsie line funny, meaningful, and  
poignant, not hokey, trite, or over-  
wrought with symbolism. In context,  
that is no small trick. But it is character-  
istic of Konecky’s gifts as a comic writer  
in the classical sense — she sees the  
world exactly as it is, and laughs.  

Rachel’s world is the perplexing  
limbo of a passionate woman awaiting  
her next all-encompassing purpose.  
Rachel herself is an acutely self-aware  
mass of sometimes cheerful, sometimes  
glum contradictions. She has just fin-  
ished a serious novel and alternately  
hopes to begin a “larger, more selfless  
work” and a “project” on which she can  
make some money. She faithfully reads  
her horoscope, at once scoffing and  
convinced of its hidden truth. She is the  
mother of two sons, about whom she is  
in turn sentimental and unconcerned.  
“What's the good of being a Jewish son,”  
says one of them, “if you have an un-  
Jewish Jewish mother.” She is the lover  
of a woman half her age, whom she is not  
entirely sorry to see slipping out of her  
life—but not entirely glad, either.  

Rachel and her friends explicate sub-  
way advertising, mulling over the moral  
implications of an ad in which a yuppie  
announces, “A cockroach ran over the  
roast chicken RIGHT IN FRONT OF MY  
guests!” The friends turn to each other  
for company, for moral support, and for  
a hedge against terrifying mortality—  
when one friend’s husband leaves  
her, or when Rachel herself faces can-  
cer. Though Konecky suggests that love  
and friendship are ultimately no match  
for the dissolutive forces of madness and  
death, she clearly believes that they are  
among the indispensable blessings of a  
rich life.  

Konecky has a keen ear for the way  
people actually talk to each other and for  
the insecurities that lurk beneath even  
the most successful and secure facades.  
In A Place at the Table, she affirms the  
basic lovability of every human being  
while reflecting on the tragic fact that  
love is rarely enough to heal life’s deep-  
est wounds.  

—Lynne M. Constantine  

How to Start a Book Group  
and Keep It Interesting  
by Susan P. Willens  

Indispensable advice from a consummate  
bookwoman! Available from Arbor Seminars,  
3409 Newark St., NW, Washington, D.C. 20016.  
Single copies: $3; group orders (5 copies  
or more to one address): $2.50 each.  

Summer 1989