— Spirituality, continued from page 10

Carol P. Christ’s Diving Deep and Surfacing is technically a work of literary criticism, not theological at all, yet it has become a classic in the study of women’s spirituality. Christ crosses disciplines to model for us how to search for female spiritual roots. Christ’s work, now in its second edition, dives deep into the hearts of women writers, from the 19th-century Kate Chopin to modern novelists Doris Lessing and Margaret Atwood, poet Adrienne Rich, and playwright Ntozake Shange, all of whom write of the spiritual quest as it takes shape in the lives of women. Rather than dissecting her text as a corpse in standard academic fashion, Christ instead brings to vivid life the rites of female passage each author has chronicled for us. The similar visions of these authors, each of whom wrote in different times and places, illustrate how Adrienne Rich’s “dream of a common language” is not a dream in vain.

Those books on spirituality that spring more directly from an ancient female source, bothering not at all with the patriarchal trappings of academia or the established church, are so different from the ones already mentioned as to constitute a distinct genre, one that focuses much less on “why” than “how to.” These works pay no attention to the bending of Christian texts to suit women, nor to the tailoring of familiar Protestant, Catholic, or Jewish customs to meet feminist needs. Instead, readers are asked to shed those trappings altogether, to look in a mirror to discover the divine.

Carol Pearson, co-author with Katherine Pope of The Female Hero in British and American Literature, has immersed herself for years in the study of women’s journeys, of how myth and archetype undergo profound change when a woman rather than a man becomes the hero. The Hero Within was written as a personal rite of passage as the author turned 40. In its pages, she explores “the stories that help us make meaning of our lives.” Moving through a paradigm of six archetypes that she places along a circular or spiral path of personal development, Pearson reveals how each of us plays out in turn the personas of innocent, orphan, martyr, wanderer, warrior, and magician. The path wends its way through the experience of the fall from innocence, hope, grief and loss, through to identity, autonomy, strength, and, finally, wholeness, which encompasses faith and joy.

Pearson’s creation is a refreshing change from the rigid grid of Eriksonian development, and from the gender-polarizing concepts of standard Jungian thought. Although she credits the New Age spiritual movement for part of her inspiration, she draws upon sources as varied as May Sarton, Alice Walker, and Elisabeth Kübler-Ross. She has kept her language pleasantly free of contemporary jargon.

Diane Stein, author of The Women’s Spirituality Book, has long been a prime mover in grassroots women’s spirituality circles. Her richly packed volume joins The Spiral Dance, The Holy Book of Women’s Mysteries, and Womanspirit as basic resource guides for women seeking ways to infuse their daily lives with a woman-identified spiritual sense. It is this very dailiness, and its accompanying practicality, that sets such work apart from academic tomes. Another important difference can be gleaned from juxtaposing Nancy Ore’s poem, “Unless a Woman-Christ Comes” (quoted in Womanguides), in which she states that our only salvation is the resurrection of female Jesus, against a Wiccan vision in which each one of us gives birth to ourselves. In this worldview, salvation as an external referent has no meaning, nor any one transcendent being, male or female, the authority to redeem us.

Stein’s book and others of this genre feed the soul as well as the head. Spirituality can indeed be analyzed, yet to come alive and serve us it must resonate through the world in which we make our home. Stein, who is also a poet, explains what women’s spirituality is and can be. She tells us how women can reclaim a lunar calendar in harmony with female cycles and celebrate through ritual the ancient matriarchal holidays that make up the Wheel of the Year. Sections on “Self-Blessing” and “Creative Visualization” are particularly helpful. A personal connection with the divine, within ourselves, in other women, and in the natural world around us, Stein posits, is imminent, available to us now without mediation by priest or minister, accessible by means of simple tools. She also crosses the patriarchal boundary that separates religion and medicine to return women to the deep knowledge of their foremothers: Body and spirit are not separate, the healing of one is the healing of the other. Her chapters on healing and on crystals allow the reader to claim natural and holistic methods for improving and maintaining a state of psychic and physical harmony rather than the state of disease prevalent in a culture cut off from a spiritual source.

The Women’s Spirituality Book also provides exquisite black and white plates of drawings by illustrators such as Sudie Rakushin and Zana, whose contemporary imagery of female empowerment speaks volumes of their own. Woman-identified tarot images by Vicki Noble, Ffiona Morgan, and Jean Van Slyke are illustrated as well, along with a sample page of the lunar calendar.

Stein’s The Kwan Yin joins Barbara G. Walker’s The I Ching of the Goddess, to bring this highly sexist discipline back to its roots in female archetypal imagery. Both works are meant to be used for personal readings, for “throwing the Ching.” Stein’s book contains line drawings, which, although beautiful, are a bit troublesome in that all of the women are young, Caucasian, and slim. Her interpretations of the hexagrams posit a lesbian society, which will not apply to all women; the goddess emphasis of her work, however, recommends it nevertheless to those wishing an alternative to the traditional Ching. Walker’s book contains striking color plates of her paintings, which illustrate the meaning of each hexagram as she envisions it.

Since religious tradition has primarily passed on orally (the epic poem, the myth, the folk tale) before the advent of the quill pen, the printing press, or the word processor, it seems fitting that among the most powerful works on women and spirituality to be published in recent years are two collections of short fiction, The Stories We Hold Secret and Hear the Silence. These tales of women come to us as if we sat with their tellers around a hearth-fire, a quilt-frame, a kitchen table. Each woman’s experience speaks for itself, no need for scholarly documentation. Women of different races, ethnic groups, social class, and lifestyles fill these pages. What is spoken of is not esoteric, but, rather, concerns everyday experiences of healing, renewal, and the kind of “magic” women have always worked, whether considered spiritual or not. The heroines of these pages journey through rites of passage such as coming out to a brother, daring to experience a protest march, feeling new life begin to grow within, a mother’s death. Some of the stories take place in present time in a realistic setting; others are more mythic in form.

There is no appreciable difference between these two collections except that Hear the Silence is about half the length of The Stories We Hold Secret. Both collections contain stories that were gleaned from works already published by feminist presses, although some selections appear here for the first time. Although it is certainly a joy to read new work by Judy Grahn, Ursula LeGuin, Meridel Le Sueur, Judith McDaniel, or Grace Paley, it would be wonderful, next time, to see a volume of work solicited at large from the vast body of unpublished and under-published women writers out there whose names are not a feminist household word. Women’s and alternative presses need to be careful to avoid the establishment pitfall of relying too frequently on big names to fill their pages.

At a time in women’s collective history when the women’s rights movement hovers at a low ebb and establishment religious groups are cited for power-mongering and corruption, we may take heart from the fact that the publication of books on women-identified spirituality burgeons. Although Rosemary Ruether, in Womanguides, writes that in theology, “the norm for women is absence and silence,” these works fill that absence and break that silence.

® Patricia Roth Schwarz is a psychotherapist in private practice in Somerville, MA, who offers workshops on women’s spirituality. Her fiction, poetry, nonfiction, and reviews appear in small press and women’s journals.

— Woolf, continued from page 11

the minor essays, as well as A Room of One’s Own and Three Guineas.

In many respects, these works constitute for Marcus an alternative Woolf canon, somewhat separable from the familiar “experimental” or “lyrical” novels Mrs. Dalloway and To the Lighthouse, and even more distinct from the most difficult of all the fictions, the work that Woolf called her “abstract, mystical, eyeless book,” The Waves. Her thesis indeed implies that critical attention properly focuses on the more straightforward and perhaps more polemical writings: “The extraordinary revival of interest in the life and work of Virginia Woolf has, I believe, a single source — the political themes of her novels and the ethical and moral power of her writing, both essays and fiction.” But Marcus is uneasy with the notion that there are instances of Woolf's writing that are not significantly political or ethical, and this unease manifests itself especially in her periodic references to The Waves, Woolf’s most radically experimental novel.

In fact, The Waves may well be the most important challenge to the new, consciously politicized readings of Woolf's work, if only because it is conspicuous by its absence from all of these critical studies. Neither Zwerdling nor Marcus addresses it directly, although both bring it up in the context of other discussions, and the collection of essays that Marcus edited on the occasion of Woolf's centennial celebration, Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury, similarly omits it from consideration. When Lily Briscoe reflected that 50 pairs of eyes were not enough to get round one woman, she added, “Among them, must be one that was stone blind to her beauty.” If none of these studies is “stone blind” to The Waves, none of them can assimilate this novel easily to its own angle of vision. The incompleteness is finally provocative and may instigate future criticism.

In virtually all other respects, Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury is a highly satisfactory exercise in getting round Woolf, thereby getting at the particular nature and conditions of her achievement. It documents the conditions surrounding her literary production, with excellent essays on the Bloomsbury and Fabian contexts, on the influence of Anny Thackeray and Jane Harrison, and on Woolf’s persona in her own adolescent diaries. Furthermore, it documents the conditions surrounding the reception of Woolf's work, with Marcus’s introduction pointing out some of the reasons why the Woolf centenary was celebrated at the University of Texas at Austin but not at Cambridge or in London, and Noel Annan’s essay remarking on how the pervasive English bias against Woolf (a bias that also exists, if to a lesser degree, in American universities) is a legacy of the nearly forgotten attacks mounted during the early days of modernist canon formation by F.R. and Q.D. Leavis. Of the essays on individual works, Elizabeth Abel’s on To the Lighthouse and Judith L. Johnston’s on Between the Acts are especially exciting, although every piece in the collection is worth reading.

Turning from these critical studies to the first volume of Woolf’s complete collected essays is a little like arriving at the epiphanic point on which Mrs. Dalloway concludes — it is an abrupt transition from reference to presence: “There she was.” There she is, miraculously intact, at the age of 22, with the voice somewhat muted but instantly recognizable, reviewing a William Dean Howells novel and visiting Haworth Parsonage, the home of the Brontës. This first volume of the Essays covers, in chronological order, the first nine years of Woolf’s professional writing career, and it is an astounding document, first of all because it is so big. This delicate young woman, who was also keeping diaries, maintaining a large correspondence, and writing the novel that would become The Voyage Out, published more than 100 nonfiction pieces during this period, ranging from notices, or capsule reviews, for the London Times Literary Supplement to travel articles to memoirs — most poignantly of her father and of her cherished aunt Caroline Stephen.

And the political Woolf is very much in evidence to those who have eyes to see and who know how to interpret the little curtsies in the direction of the male audience that paid for these writings. “Women and children . . . are the chief ministers of the comic spirit, because their eyes are not clouded with learning nor are their brains choked with the theories of books, so that men and things still preserve their original sharp outlines,” she proposes in a 1905 essay on “The Value of Laughter.” “It is because their laughter possesses this [shriveling] quality that children are feared by people who are conscious of affectations and unrealities; and it is probably for this reason that women are looked upon with such disfavor in the learned professions.” The stance is already that of an outsider, of one of the “daughters of educated men” turning on the fathers. Such observations can lead only to Three Guineas.

@ Molly Hite is a professor of English at Cornell and the author of the novel Class Porn.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988