by Cheryl Clarke

Retrospective

Ann Petry and the Isolation
of Being Other

Like all writers, Black or white, I work
against odds, real or imaginary, against
hostility, against indifference. I keep seeking
uninterrupted time in which to write and so I
wage war against interruptions. I am usually
defeated by my archenemy the telephone or by
people who do not regard writing as work and
drop in to visit.

—Ann Petry

More and more I realize how
much faith I place in fiction to
paint visions of freedom, to

simplify complexity, to be politically
correct, to give me the word, to show me
the way. For me, Black novels and short
stories have been morality plays, calling
out the lessons the race must learn to be
Black and to live to tell about it. This is
an awesome burden to place on a rela-
tively recent form. Fiction writers, un-
like most other kinds of writers, are
often cast into the prophet role (e.g.,
Alice Walker on animal rights, Toni
Morrison on the pain of being Black, or
Ishmael Reed on the long-suffering
Black male ego). But truth is still so
much stranger than fiction and more
devastating; fiction, no matter how
timeless, only interprets the lessons.
Black fiction writer Ann Petry says this
of her classic novel,

The sad and terrible truth about The
Street is that now forty-one years later I
could write that same book about Harlem
or any other ghetto. Because life hasn’t
changed that much for Black people.
(CAAS)

A child of the 1960s, looking for an-
swers, trying to find “truth,” I was un-
alterably marked by the urban rebellions
of that era. In 1968, a literature teacher
referred me to a story by Petry, “In Dark-
ness and Confusion,” which was an-
thologized in American Negro Short Sto-
ries, one of the few texts available then.
Beyond its skillful telling, I was most
astonished by what I considered the pro-
phetic nature of the story, written in the
1940s, and its depiction of the personal
and group frustration that is the stuff of
rebellion. I read The Street several years
later. My earliest impression of Petry was
that of a seer of sorts, a writer who had
predicted in the 1940s what would befall
Black people in the 1960s. After taking
several Black history courses, I realized
that Petry was not prophesying. She was
telling it like it was and is. The story was
based on a riot in Harlem in 1942, and
the riots in Watts, Newark, Detroit,
Washington, D.C., and many other
cities before and after the killing of Mar-
tin Luther King were neither the first nor
the last. Now, twenty-one years later,
having read the Beacon Press reissue of
Petry’s Miss Muriel and Other Stories, I
am newly impressed by her craft, manip-
ulation of moods, and ability to sculpt
characters. In this time of surrealistic,
image-laden, experimental, spiritualis-
tic, long fiction, reading a realistic short
story is a rare pleasure.

Petry’s depth comes from her ability
to depict the psychological terrain of her
characters and the tenor of their envi-

Author’s Note: Ann Petry granted me an
interview by mail in June of 1989 and di-
rected me to an autobiographical essay in the
Contemporary Authors Autobiography
Series (Vol. 6, A. Sarbissian, Ed., De-
troit: Gale Research Co., 1988), in which
much of the information I requested was
contained. In this article, I have inter-
spersed relevant facts and quotes from both
Ms. Petry’s interview and her essay.

36 % Belles Lettres

ronments. From the expressive child
narrator of the opening story, “Miss
Muriel,” to the inarticulate and intro-
spective William Jones of “In Darkness
and Confusion,” Petry’s technique dis-
pels the stereotype, supremely crys-
tallized in Wright’s Native Son, that
Black people have done little analysis of
the effects of racism upon themselves.
Her characters have interior lives. The
isolation of being other is a major theme

Ann Petry

throughout the collection, which is par-
ticularly emphasized in the nonautobio-
graphical stories. The Miss Muriel stories
reveal an intellectual and emotional
engagement of the most intense order,
even though Petry occasionally sacri-
fices plot for character development and
describes events rather than dramatizing
them. Yet, reading the stories is akin to
walking into a gallery of paintings that
have been hidden away for years.

Black feminist critic Barbara Smith
was the first to suggest The Street's
greatest lesson for Black people:

Neither Robert Bone nor Alain Locke,
the Black male critic he cites, can recog-
nize that The Street is one of the best de-
lineations in literature of how sex, race,
and class interact to oppress Black women.

Asked how she responds to this long-
overdue accolade, Ms. Petry writes:
“With applause.” Lutie Johnson’s strug-
gle in the street is a struggle against
white and Black male domination and
against her own sexual bondage. Yet in
all but two of the stories in Miss Muriel,
Petry projects her consciousness of race,
sex, class, survival, and triumph
through Black male protagonists.
Petry’s male characters are startling,
heroic, and tragic. Like her literary
daughters (Paule Marshall, Toni Morri-
son, Alice Walker), Petry gives us sen-
tient, complex, vulnerable Black men.
Petry has spoken of the amazing men in
her family in an autobiographical essay.
Her maternal grandfather was a slave
from Virginia who escaped to Connecti-
cut. Her father was the first Black man
to open a drugstore in the pre-
Revolutionary town of Old Saybrook,
Connecticut, where Petry, at eighty-
one, still resides (although she spent
many years living in Harlem). Of her
“extraordinary” uncles, she says:

They were footloose and fancy-free. . . .
One of them had helped smuggle Chinese
over the border between the United States
and Canada.

One of them was a veteran of the
Spanish American War. . . . Another
uncle, by marriage, was a juggler [and] an
expert card player.

Indeed, much of the action and most
of the characters of the three opening
stories, the most autobiographical
pieces, are influenced by the enriching
and adventurous relationships Petry had
with the adults in her family. All three
are set in Wheeling, New York, a town

similar to Petry’s Old Saybrook. The
precocious girl narrator (as a child and as
an adult recounting a childhood me-
mory) reveals a mock gothic world of
suspense, tragedy, and comedy from her
various perches in her father’s drugstore.
This expressive, introspective, obser-
vant child processes all of the adult ac-
tion of these three stories. The men of
these stories are dynamic: telling tales,
reciting poetry, playing jokes, express-
ing race consciousness, teaching self-
sufficiency, being eccentric, and for the
most part, treating women as equals.
The narrator describes her Uncle Johno
and his friend in “Miss Muriel”:

Dottle Smith and Uncle Johno went to
school together. They look sort of alike.
They are big men and they are so light in
color they look like white men. But
something in them (Dottle says that it is a
“cultivated and developed and carefully
nourished hatred of white men”) will not
permit them to pass for white.

In these stories, Petry makes room for
ambivalent men, such as Dottle Smith,
who is characterized as “ladylike” by the
male-identified, piano-playing Chink
Johnson. The character Forbes of “Miss
Dora Dean” is a mysterious suicide who
is described by the narrator as “effemi-
nate.” Petry provocatively captures the
emotional reaction to men who might be
homosexual: “When I write for adults I
write about the walking wounded.”

Other male protagonists experience
the unrelenting isolation, disappoint-
ment, ostracism, and vagaries of racism
more acutely than do the ebullient men
of the autobiographical stories. Man
Turner, the Harlem junkman who finds
himself in an absurd predicament with a
metal statue of a woman, Pedro, the
Mexican gas station owner who observes
the degradation of Black migrant work-
ers, Charles Woodruff, the professional
who is kidnapped and forced to watch a
gang rape, Kid Jones, the cuckolded
musician, and William Jones, trying to
reconcile the geometric dimensions of
racism in the middle of a ghetto riot, all
reflect the isolation of being the Black
male other.

My mother and her sisters. . . were ex-
traordinary women. They abandoned the role
of housewife in the early part of the twentieth
century. All three of them became successful
business women, financially independent.
(CAAS)

The characters of the Mother, Aunt
Sophronia, and Aunt Ellen of the first
three stories are modeled after Petry’s
mother, Bertha James Lane, chiropodist
and entrepreneur, and her two sisters,
never-married Anna Louise James, a
pharmacist and drugstore owner, and
Helen James Chisholm, schoolteacher
and creator of “a highly successful cor-
respondence course.” The revelations of
the Black women’s world in the auto-
biographical stories is absent from most
of the others. Aside from Black Chris-
tian Alice Knight in “The Necessary
Knocking on the Door” and the auto-
biographical Sue in “Doby’s Gone,” the
women are remarkably secondary,
though very present. Although the ac-
tion controls her and we see her through
her husband’s eyes, Pink Jones of “In
Darkness and Confusion” is perhaps the
most ironic Black woman character. It is
Pink, described as passive and meek,
whose act of throwing a bottle through a
store window incites ensuing rioting and
looting. The women of these stories are
irresistible, however; they are “straight
men,” disciplinarians, secret keepers,
town gossips, churchgoers, working
class, middle class, and town drunks.
Ann Petry is an extraordinary woman
who counts herself a “survivor and a

gambler.” I recommend reading her
autobiographical essay in Contemporary
Authors (in which she makes this state-
ment). The narrative voice of the essay
is full of both the zaniness and the seri-
ousness of the narrative voice of her
autobiographical fiction. Starting
school at age four, Petry became an
“omnivorous reader” before she was ten
and an accomplished cook, seamstress,
laundress, and entrepreneur by the time
she was fifteen. She joyfully worked after
school in her father’s drugstore and was
encouraged to be a writer. While still in
high school, she received five dollars for
creating a slogan for a perfume company
and realized one could make money at
writing. She graduated from the Con-
necticut School of Pharmacy and con-
tinued to work in her father’s store until
she met and married George Petry in
1938. En route to their new lives in New
York City, Petry asked his wife why
there had been so much crying at their
wedding, and she replied, “They were
crying for the loss of all those hot muf-
fins, blackberry turnovers, pound cakes,
frayed shirt collars turned, buttonholes
reinforced, trousers shortened, shirts
beautifully laundered.”

Of course, life did not stop after Pet
married nor after she published The
Street (1946; which won the
Houghton-Mifflin Literary Fellowship
Contest in 1944 and sold over one and a
half million copies). She went on to
write seven other major works, includ-
ing two novels, A Country Place (1948)
and The Narrows (1953), Miss Muriel
and Other Stories (1971), and four books
for children.

When I relayed to Ms. Petry my dis-
appointment that the reissues of Miss
Muriel and The Street contain no intro-
ductions, she wrote,

No introduction [to Miss Muriel] because
the person hired by Beacon Press to write
it failed to meet the deadline. I do not
believe that introductions to fairly recent
novels and collections of short stories
serve any useful purpose. They are an
unnecessary and for the most part ob-
jectionable and unjustifiable intrusion be-
tween reader and book.

Ms. Petry reads little contemporary
criticism and does not know how her
work has been treated by critics over the
years (which is cursorily, for the most
part). A thorough examination of her
oeuvre is in order, and literary introduc-
tions would have furthered that process.
I am happy, though, that her work is
being reprinted, for she has contributed
mightily to the Afro-American literary
tradition.

Please read Miss Muriel and Other Sto-
ries, pass the book on to others, and, if
you teach, use it in your classrooms.
Many of its stories would make excellent
reading and teaching for those involved
in antiviolence and antiracism activism.
I hope we will see more contemporary
work by Ann Petry, who says she is
“working on a novel, short stories, an
essay, poetry.” Her most recently publi-
shed short story was “The Moses Project”
(Harbor Review, Nos. 5/6, 1986).

Selfishly I asked her, “What words of
encouragement would you give Black
lesbian and gay writers to express their
concerns, tell their stories, and claim
their space within the Afro-American
literary tradition?” She wrote, “These
words of encouragement come from
Mabel Louise Robinson, who taught a
famous fiction workshop at Columbia
University: ‘keep writing’; ‘follow your
star’; ‘plough to the last furrow.’ ”

@ Cheryl Clarke, a Black lesbian poet, is
the author of Humid Pitch, Living as a
Lesbian, and Narratives: Poems in the
Tradition of Black Women. She is an editor
of Conditions magazine.

Fall 1989