A self-described “labor poet,” Chris Llewellyn tells interviewer  
Michelle Tokarczyk how she came to write Fragments from the  
Fire, her first published collection of poetry and winner of the  
Walt Whitman Award for 1986. “I didn’t choose the subject; the  

subject chose me.”  

Can you tell me how you came to write  
Fragments from the Fire?  

Well, I like to say I didn’t choose the  
subject; the subject chose me. I was in-  
volved in a project around International  
Women’s Day, and I was trying to find  
out the day’s origins. As I read, I often  
came across references to and pictures of  
the fire. It seemed so important that I  
wanted to learn more about it; I had no  
intention of writing about it. But the  
more I read, the more I felt compelled to  
write about the fire, or really to retell it,  
not as a historian or a scholar but as a  
poet. At first I read some and wrote a  
poem, read some more and wrote  
another poem. I had no intention of  
making a book, but when I noticed I had  
about ten poems I made a deliberate de-  
cision to try to complete an entire man-  
uscript.  

How did you go about the research?  

One book that I used was called The  
Triangle Fire by Leon Stein. It’s actually  
a compendium of newspaper stories of  
the day as well as interviews with the  
survivors in 1961. I also went to the  
AFL-CIO and went through their news-  
paper file. Of course, there were refer-  
ences to the fire in some history books  
which I used. I actually had done most  
of the reading before I started writing.  
And then I got a grant from the DC  
Commission on the Arts and Humanities  
so I could buy the pictures from the Li-  
brary of Congress. I think only two of  
them are actually of the fire, but pictures  
just extend the metaphor and also give a  
dimension of the time.  

You've been referred to as a labor poet.  
How did you get interested in labor issues?  

It’s in my background to have an in-  
terest in labor issues and history. I came  
from a small industrial town that was  
very divided about unionization, and I  
followed the debates that were going on.  
When I was a secretary I wrote a lot  
about working conditions in offices. I  
started with what was most familiar to  
me, but all my poems have always in-  
cluded some discussion of work. One of  

Shirtwaist Strikers. Photo courtesy of the Library of Congress.  

the things that struck me about The  
Triangle Fire was that the book was  
about women workers. Of course, there  
were a smaller number of men, machinists  
and cutters, who were in the fire, but  
the majority were teen-aged immigrant  
women, garment girls who operated  
sewing machines, who were stitchers.  

Do you see this as a tragedy that feminists  
should take a particular look at?  

Yes, because since about 1980 we’ve  
gone through another big wave in im-  
migration. And again you have a lot of  
women who don’t know English, have  
come from places where women’s lives  
and women’s work are regarded as some-  
what cheap, and they don’t understand  
things like overtime or minimum wage.  
In another way what was going on in the  
early 1900s is similar to what’s going on  
today. Earlier in the century the first  
wave of immigration from Western  
Europe had built up industries in the  
garment district and the new wave of  
immigrants from Eastern Europe worked  
in them: There was a whole class system  
based on this, just as there is now be-  

tween people whose ancestors immi-  
grated from Latin America or East Asia.  
So feminists need to pay attention to  
history because it’s repeating itself.  

I think that feminists need to pay par-  
ticular attention to women in history in  

general. There was some really good  
strategizing at the beginning of the cen-  
tury. There was just tremendous social  
change going on and also tremendous  
suffering.  

Many historical novelists and poets express  
concern that people aren’t aware enough of  
history, that history needs to be  
mythologized in a way.  

Well, I hope that not just my book  
but my poetry in general does not just  
appeal to only a literary or academic au-  
dience, but to a more general audience.  
When I read to the postal workers,  
many of them had never heard of the  
fire. Afterwards they came up and  
wanted to know what kinds of laws came  
out of it, what’s going on today. That  
was very exciting.  

I guess you feel that poetry has a special  
power of conveying something about the  
subject?  

In the Triangle poems, certainly, the  
voices of the people and the emotions  
they express are better expressed  
through dramatic narrative.  

Political poetry is often still criticized as not  
being true or good poetry. Do people ever  
ask you how you can write about politics,  
and do you have an answer for them?  

Well, Denise Levertov, a poet who’s  
been very active in the disarmament  
movement said that she preferred not to  
use the word political. Its meaning is very  
much misunderstood. I think everyone,  
including people who write political  
poetry, will tell you it means something  
different. Didactic poetry, of course, is  
considered preachy, rhetorical, and  
perhaps requiring less knowledge of  
poetry and technical skill from the poet.  
But you know all political poetry isn’t  
didactic or inferior. There’s bad political  
poetry, just as there’s bad lyrical poetry.  
And there’s also political poetry like  
Muriel Rukeyser’s, which is very, very  
good.  

One thing that I’m concerned about  
is that I don’t think imagination and  
creativity are being developed enough;  
people just can’t imagine new solutions  
to tough problems. So political conflicts  
are too often resolved through violence  
instead of through diplomacy. It’s the  
same thing as far as domestic violence  
goes. Everything’s so confusing that I  
think poets and other kinds of artists  
need to bring some kind of order and  
meaning to things, I guess reclaim his-  
tory and language through the creative  
process.  

What kinds of things are you working on  
now?  

Well, I finished a second manuscript  
of collected poems which aren’t on any  
particular topic. Some of them are what  
I call my Ohio memory poems, because I  
grew up in a town in northwest Ohio.  
Some of them are lyrical, some are very  
political — I have some on Lebanon and  
Central America. I write from the news-  
paper and TV news a lot.  

The Triangle poems were a different  
writing experience because I was taking  
something removed from my experience  
and time — I'm not an immigrant, I’m  
not Jewish, Italian, or a garment worker  
— and recreating it. So that it was as if a  
process external to me became inter-  
nalized. Then it was put on paper and  
retold; it became my poems.  

© Michelle M. Tokarczyk, a consulting  
editor to Belles Lettres, is an assistant pro-  
fessor of English at Rutgers University and  
a poet whose work has appeared in many  
small magazines.  

The Dear and Only Friend  

Emily: The Diary of a Hard-Worked Woman, edited by Jane Lecompte. Lincoln: University  

of Nebraska Press, 1987, 166 pp.  

by Amy Clyde  

The year 1890 was one of Emily  
French’s worst. Penniless and  
recently divorced, she sup-  
ported two children and an invalid sister  
by “working out” as a laundress, cook,  
nurse, and general dogsbody. She  
traveled from Elbert, Colorado, to Den-  
ver to the mountains and back, pursuing  
steady employment and the fulfillment  
of her dream of a stable home for her  
family. That she has time to keep a diary  
at all is surprising. That the diary is not  
simply a catalog of her trials, but also a  
full-bodied expression of resignation,  
generosity, pride, and hope is a wonder.  
In language as unadorned by  
metaphor and flourish as her life is bare  
of repose and play, Emily confides daily  
in her diary. A sounding board for com-  
plaints and a remedy for loneliness, the  

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988  

diary provides sustenance as this entry  
attests: “I came here in this lonely bare  
cabin to sit and write in this dear and  
only friend I seem to have, it will never  
go back on me.” Here, Emily can be her-  
self: She can call a neighbor an “Irish  
bitch,” dream of a protective husband,  
and express private thoughts without  
risking the displeasure of those upon  
whom she depends. In a life so subject to  
the whims of others, the diary is a quiet  
declaration of independence. Although  
bereft of home, consistent family life,  
and a secure income, Emily can be sure  
that the diary at least is entirely hers.  
The diary reflects the main tension in  
Emily’s life: the contrast between her  
current position and rightful place. The  
divorce has catapulted her from shabby  
gentility to the working class, and job  
scarcity forces her to work for unpredict-  
able strangers rather than for caring  
neighbors. Accustomed to kindness in  
Elbert, Emily is treated as a workhorse  

by new employers who take little re-  
sponsibility for their servants. And,  
separated often from her children and  
sister, Emily has little sense of commu-  
nity.  

Her most felt displacement, however,  
is not from gentility or community but  
from home. While married, as mistress  
of a well-regulated home, she enjoyed  
the respect due the moral guardian of a  
family’s health, spirit, and education.  
Now she is unable to fulfill her destiny,  
and the same housework that gave her  
pride and place has now become a  
humiliation. The dream of a home is the  
central transcendent image that  
nourishes Emily. For her a home is not  
just a place, but a loving and beloved  
existence to be shared with a strong, sol-  
vent husband. “What a nice time I  
would have,” she muses, “if only I have  
a home and someone that was as they  
ought to be to furnish it,” stating with-  
out a blush that the ideal of romantic  
love is as firmly fixed in her mind as the  
knowledge that marriage is an economic  
necessity.  

Gentle but never rarified, the diary is  
a raw cross-section of a life in concrete,  

immediate terms. Often Emily will sim-  
ply list a day’s activities: “I combed my  
hair, starched the white shirts, went to  
ironing them... I done the dishes...  
then I went at mending, 9 shirts, 4 to-  
wels, 2 collars, he got them at evening,  
gave me $1.25 for them, good.” Con-  
centration on every detail drives home  
the exhaustion and tedium of that life.  
When Emily lists prices, we feel her  
poverty. When she relishes each meal as  
if it were her last, we feel her hunger.  

Although Emily’s writing intends no  
audience, occasionally drama bursts  
from her solid words. “Morrice he began  
to scream, his father took him, she  
bounded quick as lightning across the  
kitchen, hit the child a slap on the  
head, the father put it down, went over  
to her, hit her, then she run out of the  
room, the baby left screaming.” As in  
this case, Emily’s bondage allows an in-  
timate peek inside ordinary lives. Her  
diary, replete with both the mundane  
and moving, provides the same service  
to us.  

© Amy Clyde is a writer and editor living  
in New York City.  

Belles Lettres $5