— Wordless Ones, continued

and White characters. In the first, these
are two men — a dishwasher who is
headed home early after taking the usual
racist crap from his boss, and a terrified
but nervy college professor in the big city
for the first time. Sylvia is the inner-city
helper of a suburban mother who is val-
iantly battling her own and her commu-
nity’s racist distrust; although we are
mostly inside of the mother, we also
develop understanding for Sylvia
through her diary. Painter achieves a
stark tension by this shift in conscious-
ness, which she indicates by spacing or
italics. Through the objectivity created
by the alternation, Painter builds to
some wonderful surprise endings, for we
are never quite sure whose side we are
supposed to be on. This is as it should be
in our world of inclement weather, in
which the powerless of many classes,
sexes, ages, races, and bodily capa-
bilities are pitted against each other.

I would love to see some of these
stories in collections where they would
be available for diverse students to iden-
tify with and argue about, and note with
pleasure that “Sylvia” is being printed in
Things That Divide Us (Seal Press).
Painter’s “The Visitor,” in which a
needy ex-husband is teased by his kids,
would also spark discussion.

These books demonstrate the obser-
vation that women tend to be con-
cerned about relationships and commu-
nity. This is what it means to “get to
know the weather” and to tangle with
the “tentacles of unreason.” This is why
Painter moves in and out of the con-
sciousness of so many mute or seemingly
powerless people — a drummer, a senile

man, a kidnapped child. It leads Givner
to rethink her way into characters from
antiquity (Lot’s wife, Laocoön’s daugh-
ter, Chaucer’s Prioress) with a modern
consciousness that is not afraid to men-
tion such matters as homosexuality or
the similarities between sexual and
religious feelings. In Givner’s “The
Decline and Fall of a Reasonable
Woman,” the outrageous tentacles of
unreason, as exemplified by the British
parents of Sibyl, an unmarried college
professor in western Canada, could
make me laugh out loud. Yet it seems
perfectly reasonable that Sibyl should
end up going to live nearer her parents,
in spite of her brother's warning when
she suggested to him that he visit them
more often:

“To tell you the truth, Sibby,”
he’d replied, “I often think it isn’t a
good thing for you to spend as much
time as you do with them. Months
on end. You could get to be like
them.”

“You mean,” she said, “a bit
cuckoo?”

“I mean stark, raving bonkers,”
he said.

These women believe that you do not
abandon parents just because they are
old and driving you crazy. These are
women who have inhabited communi-
ties in which people are in conflict, and
where very funny things happen. These
women understand that the world is a
complex place and many are mute with-
in it, yet words can be found and stories
told that will make sense of it.

One Painter story in which a preg-
nant woman silently weathers the
harassment from her father to give the
baby a name ends with her holding the
baby in single-parent closeness. She has

A Geography of Shared Lives

Trying to be an Honest Woman, by Judith Barrington. The Eighth Mountain Press (624
S.E. 29th Ave., Portland, OR 97214), 1985, $6.95, 74 pp. (PB)
The Catastrophe of Rainbows, by Martha Collins. Cleveland State University Poetry

Center, 1985, $6.00, 67 pp. (PB)

Dower Land, by J. B. Goodenough. Cleveland State University Poetry Center, 1984,

$5.00, 83 pp. (PB)

Sacred Hearts, by Phoebe Hanson. Milkweed Editions (P.O. Box 24303, Minneapolis,
MN 55424), 1985, $5.00, 45 pp., stipple drawings (PB)
Night Student, by Nancy Simpson. State Street Press (P.O. Box 252, Pittsford, NY

14534), 1985, $7.50, 69 pp. (PB)

by Ruth Moose

I feel. I read to know who I am and
where I have been, to relearn some-
thing about myself I had forgotten I
knew. I found some of myself in Phoebe
Hanson’s poems. Her Minnesota child-
hood in Sacred Hearts is my Albemarle,
North Carolina; her Lutherans and
Catholics, my Baptists and Methodists.
Nancy Simpson’s Blue Ridge Mountains
became my Uwharries; Judith Good-
enough’s country mice in Massachusetts
scuttled in my store room. Her vines
climb a trellis outside my window. How
linked we all are. As a friend and fellow
poet said of other women poets, “We're
all writing the same poem. We just use
different words.”
Here is Goodenough’s “Among
Vines”:

It to know what I think and how

Wisteria ties the roof

of the porch down; morning-
Glory anchors the mailbox;
Green peas keep the garden
Fence from taking off.

Trumpet-vine has locked up
The front door that

We never used anyway;
Clematis tries now

To seal the back door.

Benign root and tendril,
They mean no harm.

I too know a hundred ways
Of holding on. And

No way of letting go.

8 Belles Lettres

Judith Barrington

Goodenough begins with delight and
wraps up with wisdom. Her poetry pulls
me in, reins me up short, and I drink
these simple stanzas like a thirsty
sponge. Look what she does in a small
poem called “Changes” that makes a
reader read again:

No, they said,
You cannot be a tree.
You are a human child.

But one night
He did it
When they weren’t looking.

Helen Norris

resisted pressure from one man who
might have married her for the
(minimal) economic advantages that
moving in with her might have given
him. In another, the devastating story
in which the child has watched a castra-
tion, the image at the end makes us
understand, or at least accept as the
child accepts, that there are reasons, in
an oppressive overall situation, why
men, including his father, act with in-
humanity toward one another: “For his
father it had all been said, as if words had
been stripped away like coal from the
hollows and hills that had once been
farms. And he too had nothing to say as
he kept his father’s silence. For now it
was enough that they were at home.”
Wise is not too strong a word for these
stories, for there are clues in them about
how comfort can be found and given,
how home can be created. I was particu-
larly moved by Norris’s achievement,
for all of her stories are wonderful, mov-
ing through much strangeness to im-
portant conclusions, although, like
Emilu, I am hard pressed to say quite
what it is I have learned. I have found
myself remembering a line from Gladys
Hasty Carroll’s As the Earth Turns: “not
to be questioned, only to be sung.”
What happens in Norris’s stories is
rather like what happens in a wet
snowstorm in early spring, when a land

beginning to dare to bloom is suddenly
blanketed. The new shapes and rela-
tionships just emerging from their
familiar winter bone structure suddenly
become transformed once again. It is the
physiognomy of love that she is detailing
in these stories — a delicate task.

Let us simply open the book to page
one, “The Love Child,” and begin:
“The wind was brawling out of the north
when they told her she had to move.”
From the first line we are confronted
with bitter weather. She is 76, has lived
in her house for 50 years, and refuses to
move. “ ‘Mama ... would you want
the cars running straight through your
living room?’ ‘Yes,’ Emma said. She was
always difficult when they talked to her
like a child.” A lot of these oldsters are
crotchety — but they do have stamina.
It turns out that they have another house
for her, and a totally unloved love child
for her to take care of, a 4-year-old who
is wordless with her. Her house is de-
molished, there is loss after loss after
loss, and the child refuses to respond,
even to look at her. This is deep, this is
desolate, but love wins through. Their
eyes meet deep in the water of the pond,
much as the grandfather and Emilu have
made contact through their interaction
at the dry well.

It is a magical world that Norris
creates in these stories, as magical as the
world of the late Shakespearean plays, in
which an honest and perceptive ap-
praisal must acknowledge a bleak and
devastated landscape, but in which the
reality of magical renewal is also undeni-
able. It takes an unwavering yet idio-
syncratic eye to go out into the spring
blizzard and transmit the information to
us, and Norris has that eye. Further-
more, she does not expect only the
powerless to discover how to love, in-
sisting that men can learn to feel and
nurture, too, as in “The Healing” and
“The Christmas Wife.” In the end it is
feeling that saves, the willingness to
take risks and feel pain that leads to
healing, true power, and love.

® Nancy Hall Rice, daughter of two,
sister of three, mother of three, and
grandmother of going-on-four, got her PhD
in 1975 and has taught English and
Women’s Studies in Albany, Alabama,
and Illinois. She writes letters, short stories,
and poetry.

And in the morning
Stood rooted
And leafing out, laughing.

Sapling-slim,
Bending in the thin wind
of spring.

His mother went
For a bucket of water.
His father fetched the ax.

Here we have Oedipus in a line, in a
seemingly innocent poem that mows us
down. Superstition, folklore, myth, and
magic are abundantly stirred in her
work, and if any collection of poems has
ever been capable of casting a spell on
the reader, this one is.

Most of the poems have previously
appeared in such well-thought-of
publications as Ascent, Denver Quar-
terly, Modern Poetry Studies, Poet and
Critic, and Yankee, with a whole selec-
tion originally included in New Di-
rections in Prose and Poetry. After reading
Goodenough and the other four, I won-
der why none of their credits include The
Atlantic, The New Yorker, The New
Republic, or The Paris Review? What does
it take to break into these places? Would
the credentials of any five first col-
lections by any five equally competent
male poets include these “biggies?”

On a whim, I pulled from my shelves
five collections by men from comparable
presses, and three of them confirmed my
assumption that the credentials of male

poets include such publications. The
fourth also listed Esquire. It is something
to think about. How far have women
really come since the days of which
Maxine Kumin spoke early in her career
when an editor of one of these pres-
tigious publications returned her work
with the comment that he had already
published one poem by a woman that
year and could not use another?

Nancy Simpson’s poems are more
personal than Goodenough’s. She
writes of her father’s death, of her life in
Florida. Mountain peaks emerge from an
ocean of fog in a seven-sectioned poem
called “Skin Underwater,” which,
through dream sequences, deals with her
mother’s almost abortion and the au-
thor’s own ultimate birth. She ends with
a walk on the sand and these two lines:
“In hearing distance of a wave’s yes,/
earth is a woman with plans.” Simpson
surprises you, not with bold poems, but
with a smoothing surf that is both warm
and encompassing.

Phoebe Hanson’s world is small-town
Minnesota over a 50-year span. This
could have been my own Southern
town. We could have lived across the
street from each other: Our shared lives,
in words and experience, are that close.
Religion rings hourly as church bells;
guilt, large as bedsheets, flaps daily on a
clothesline. Hanson incorporates the

— continued on page 15

May/June 1986