Australian Women Writers:  
The Literary Heritage  

Press, 1987, $11.95, 137 pp. (PB)  
Press, 1988, $15.95, 307 pp. (PB)  
Pandora Press, 1988, $15.95, 434 pp. (PB)  

[01890, (800) 547-8889.]  

by Michele Slung  

A New Guide to Modern World  

Literature (1985), a 1,400-page  

desk reference of moderate  
utility, begins its chapter on Australian  
literature with this information:  
“Twenty-five years ago it was widely  
held, even by academic critics of repute,  
that there was no Australian literature  
worth mentioning outside Australia it-  
self.” Because the London-born  
Australian novelist Patrick White was  
still nine years from his Nobel prize a  
quarter of a century ago, this is not, a pri-  
ori, a harsh statement; it simply reflects  
the reflexively parochial nature of lit  
crit. And even today, of course, more  
people have heard of Crocodile Dundee  
than of the author of The Tree of Man  
(1955) or Riders in the Chariot (1961).  

However, the next sentence of this  
reference goes on to reconsider, “Today  
that is an untenable view.” Furthermore,  
we are quickly told that “Australian  
women prose writers have been espe-  
cially notable.” Yet that tantalizing  
opinion is a bit of a red herring, for it  
turns out that, by the New Guide’s reck-  
oning, only four of these so-called nota-  
bles are actually worth noting: Henry  
Handel Richardson, Katherine Susan-  
nah Prichard, Kylie Tennant, and Chris-  
tina Stead. No mention is made of any  
of the excellent writers now being made  
available in the Pandora Press series  
edited by Australian feminist Dale  
Spender.  

Now, I realize that such reference  
books as the New Guide are overviews  
and by their nature will probably com-  
mit more sins of omission than any other  
sort. But consulting it in this case and  
coming up empty-handed serves to re-  
mind me once again that those works  
often abandoned as being sentimental,  
romantic, or commercial in the short  
term have more to offer in the long run.  

For example, to learn as we do in Eli-  
zabeth Webby’s introduction to  
Catherine Martin’s An Australian Girl  
that this rich and, yes, highly romantic  
story has been out of print since 1894 is  
to be astounded. Astounded, not just be-  
cause it is still so compelling but because  
Webby also informs us that Martin,  
whose first work this was, is still re-  
garded by some regional scholars as  
South Australia’s best novelist, even  
with her works available only in librar-  
ies. Nonetheless —  

Like many other women writers of her  
period, she has been dismissed as  
second-hand and second-rate, a derivative  
colonial rather than a truly Australian  
writer. In her case this seems particularly  
unfair and can be explained only by the long  
identification of the “truly Australian” with  
the masculine.  

In this assessment, I agree with the  
“particularly unfair.” As readable now as  
it must have been when it first came out  
in an anonymous London edition (the  
Australian one did not appear until four  
years later), An Australian Girl is more  
than its splendid heroine, the beautiful  
and spirited Stella Courtland, more even  
than its corkingly melodramatic plot or  
its wry portrait of contemporary social  

Spring 1989  

Lady Bridget in the Never-Never Land: A Story of Australian Life, by Rosa Praed.  
Introduction by Pam Gilbert. New York: Pandora Press, 1987, $15.95, 293 pp. (PB)  
The Bond of Wedlock, by Rosa Praed. Introduction by Lynn Spender. New York: Pandora  

Outlaw and Lawmaker, by Rosa Praed. Introduction by Dale Spender. New York: Pandora  
An Australian Girl, by Catherine Martin. Introduction by Elizabeth Webby. New York:  

Uncle Piper of Piper’s Hill, by Tasma (Jessie Couvreur). Introduction by Margaret Harris.  
New York: Pandora Press, 1987, $14.95, 277 pp. (PB)  

A Marked Man: Some Episodes in His Life, by Ada Cambridge. Introduction by Debra  
Adelaide. New York: Pandora Press, 1987, $15.95, 347 pp. (PB)  

[All of the above titles are distributed by Unwin Hyman, Inc., 8 Winchester Place, Winchester, MA  

and matrimonial mores.  

For what this novel did for me, as did  
each of the others (save The Bond of  
Wedlock, which is set in England), is  
what the writing of everyone from  
Patrick White to Arthur Upfield (not to  
mention the Qantas ad copy geniuses)  
had so far failed to do. And that is to  
make me feel a longing for this distant  
continent—its grand and wild spaces, its  
exotic foliage, its colonial blend of the  
strange and the familiar—that I have  
never seen and thought I never wanted  
to see.  

Thus, these books achieve a high  
measure of success whether as reclama-  
tion of women’s fiction for women’s rea-  
sons so that we may look at ourselves  
through the mirror of the past; as  
Australian fiction for nationalist rea-  

Dale Spender, editor of the  
Pandora Australian Women Writers series  

sons; or simply as novels to hold our at-  
tention and entertain us.  

And it may be that, dashing aside my  
preconceptions and expectations as they  
do, what works best about them is the  
central theme of “civilization” versus  
“wildness” at the heart of the Australian  
character. Explorations of this push/pull  
have always intrigued me, but heretofore  
(just as Webby says) I associated them,  
in the Australian context, entirely with  
a male sensibility. To find this conflict  
interpreted and shaded by female aware-  
ness instead makes a great difference.  
Moreover, one sees in at least three of  
these novels how this national theme  
finds a near-perfect parallel in the more  
personal one of a woman’s choice be-  
tween marriage and independence.  

All but one were published while  
Queen Victoria was on the throne. The  
exception, Rosa Praed’s Lady Bridget in  
the Never-Never Land (1915), has about  
it an air of precarious “modernity” that  
reminds us it was not a monarch, neither  
Edward VII nor George V, but World  
War I that ushered in the twentieth cen-  
tury. Each novel, however, presents  
strong, even unforgettable, personages,  
with emotions that are fresh even if the  
situations are dated.  

In her three novels reissued here, each  
a different sort of melodrama, Rosa Praed  
gives us distinct and yet romantically in-  
clined heroines. Each is forced to face re-  
ality, but only in the last book, Lady  
Bridget — separated from the first, The  
Bond of Wedlock, by twenty-eight  

years—is that reality neither bleak nor  
bitter.  

A Queensland native born in 1851,  
Praed spent her later life expatriated to  
England where, Dale Spender tells us,  
“her husband was a cause for concern,  
and yet still there was some compensa-  
tion: it was he who caused her to ques-  
tion men, marriage and conventional  
morality.”  

Necessary telescoping of data can lead  
an introducer to make such peculiar  
statements, but it is also quite easy to  
recognize the point Spender wishes to  
make. Eleven years into her English life,  
Praed published The Bond of Wedlock  
(1887) with its double-edged title, and it  
is clear that by then, when it came to  
matrimony, cynicism had already over-  
taken her. Total disillusionment is the  
fate of Ariana Lomax D’Acosta, a young  
London society woman who unknow-  
ingly trades one rotten marriage for  
another.  

No marriage at all, however, is what  
lies in store for Elsie Valliant, heroine of  
Outlaw and Lawmaker (1893), who must,  
as Dale Spender points out, “come to a  
decision about the relative attractions of  
security and passion.” Elsie, a “spoiled  
beauty” who is also a “typical Australian  
girl,” begins as a heartless flirt and ends  
as a tragic figure, robbed of her future by  
the intensity of her past.  

The title may be taken literally, for  
Morres Blake, the Robin Hood figure to  
whom Elsie loses her heart, is a man  
with a double identity, both a risk-defy-  
ing highwayman and an elected legisla-  
tor (not to mention an Irish peer). Tor-  
mented by her love for him (and his  
mysterious avowal that the only  
honorable thing he can do is never  
marry her), she is also courted by a stolid  
political rival of his, then kidnapped by a  
fellow-brigand, who can no longer con-  

trol his lust for her. And, finally, she  
must watch her Morres plunge to his  
death in order to escape capture.  

The story, thrilling in the best sense  
with its untamed Queensland setting of  
“quicksands, slimy and treacherous...  
impassable rocks and impenetrable  
thickets,” is a far cry from the drawing-  
room claustrophobia of The Bond of  
Wedlock.  

Lady Bridget in the Never-Never Land is  
separate in mood and tone from the two  
earlier works. Spender tells us that Praed  
(whose long career produced more than  
forty novels) had by the time of this  
book taken Nancy Harward as her com-  
panion and sometime collaborator, a cir-  
cumstance that seemingly brought her  
great peace of mind after her troubled  
marriage.  

A charming, if mild, wit pervades Lady  
Bridget, as well as a sense of a more  
benevolent providence, even if its  
heroine, Lady Bridget O’Hara from Ire-  
land, suffers a few setbacks. But espe-  
cially appealing is the depiction of the  
friendship between the thoughtful and  
ironic observer-journalist Joan Gildea  
and the impulsive Biddy, who becomes a  
bush-station helpmeet and then a runa-  
way wife.  

The story is told from several different  
points of view, primarily those of Lady  
Bridget, Mrs. Gildea, and Colin Mc-  
Keith. Biddy marries this well-meaning  
diamond in the rough, who worships her.  
As the story moves along quickly, Biddy  
is allowed to grow in ways denied to  
Elsie Valliant. These three Praed  
heroines—Ariana, Elsie, and Lady  
Bridget—share potentially dangerous qu-  
alities of temperament: each is coquet-  
tish but ultimately virginal, ready for  
powerful love but, at the same time,  
overfastidious and too idealistic.  

The potential for harm inherent in the  
partnership relation between men and  
women is a major theme in all six of  
these novels; expectations lure us on and  
fantasies of bliss turn out to be just  
that. Ada Cambridge’s A Marked Man  
(1890) is another book out of print for  
almost a century. The protagonist, Ri-  
chard Delavel, is the wild, youngest son  
of a proud county family whose infatua-  
tion with a rosy village maiden leads him  
to make a mésalliance that alters the  
course of his life.  

Determined to make his fortune in  
Australia, he does so and eventually  
sends for his bride, Annie, whom he has  
left behind; in the new world of Sydney,  
she reinvents herself as gentry. Yet her  
excessive gentility further alienates her  
husband, who has nothing in common  
with her except the daughter they both  
adore. Sue Delavel, dutiful to the one  
parent while spiritually allied to the  
other, is one more representation of the  
“push/pull” theme I have mentioned.  

Debra Adelaide’s introduction to A  
Marked Man reports that Ada Cambridge  
actually was esteemed enough to merit  
an individual chapter in an 1896 study,  
Australian Writers. So did Rosa Praed and  
Tasma, the pen name of Jessie Catherine  
Huybers Fraser Couvreur. Shortly there-  
after, of course, began the period of ob-  
livion or of museum status, as Adelaide  
terms it, lasting until now.  

In the case of Tasma (who took her  
nom de plume from her European fami-  
ly’s sojourn in Tasmania when she was a  
child), Adelaide also sees her eclipse as  
the triumph of the “hey, mate” school of  
outdoor Australian fiction over “effete”  
Anglo-Australian novels of social cir-  
cumstances. Interestingly, in Lady Bridget  
the hero and heroine lovingly refer to  
one another as “mate,” turning the bush  
word for “pal” into a term of endearment  
and renewed commitment. And, in Out-  
law and Lawmaker, “coo-ee,” another  
typically Australian expression, becomes  
a cry of passion, as Elsie uses it to seek  
Morres in a mountain hideaway.  
Tasma is represented in the series by  
Uncle Piper of Piper’s Hill (1889), a rather  
Trollopian comedy of social pretensions  
and marital pursuit played out against  
the boomtown atmosphere of late-  
nineteenth-century Melbourne. Preoc-  
cupied with “town” as it is, though, the  
book does not neglect the exterior world,  
and the satire unfolds beside “luxuriant  
Murray pines, golden-fruited orange and  
lemon shrubs, the spreading palms and  
glossy Moreton Bay fig-trees” where the  
Australian sun makes its “upward jour-  
ney across a field of unclouded blue.”  

Much more in these books and in the  
lives of their authors should stimulate  
curiosity and provoke further investiga-  
tion and discussion. There is also a great  
deal that is remarkably contemporary, as  
well as timeless. “Ah, dear God!” writes  
Catherine Martin, “how strange and  
pitiful it all is—this incredible saga of  
human life, whose beginning we have  
lost, whose end we cannot tell; in which  
we lose one by one those who are our  
companions, and in the end lose our-  
selves; in which we are first robbed of all  
we love and then of all we know.”  

@ Michele Slung, a lifelong “heroine ad-  
dict,” is the series editor for Plume Ameri-  
can Women Writers (New American Li-  

brary).  

Belles Lettres @ 7