A Feminist  
Classic  

Women of Ideas and What Men Have  
Done To Them: From Aphra Behn to  
Adrienne Rich, by Dale Spender. London  
and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul,  
1982, $23.95, 586 pp. [Also available in  
Ark paperback, 1983, $9.95]  

by Susan E. Osborn  

To keep a patriarchy in good run-  
ning order, you must do two  
things: First, you must make sure  
that men maintain absolute authority  
over all resources, including knowledge,  
and second, you must ensure that  
women, those who have been defined as  
other, are prohibited from encoding  
their own different experiences of real-  
ity. It, therefore, behooves patriarchal  
engineers to keep women isolated from  
each other and without a sense of past or  
future, to keep them, in any manner  
possible, from asserting their own con-  
tinuous and, as Mary Daly has written,  
“self-identified sense of reality.” For it is  
a woman’s subjective, gynocentric self  
that threatens to disrupt the mono-  
dimensional, linear, predictable, sys-  
tematic, and eminently controllable  
reality that we know as patriarchy.  
Dale Spender, an Australian fem-  
inist, writer, and editor of Women’s  
Studies International Forum, writes about  
women who have done just that: exerted  
their subjective selves. She ascribes  
their refusal to comply with a paradigm  
of reality that denies their existence —  
correctly, I believe — as a political  
threat: a threat of subversion that must  

Moral Defective/Angel in the House  

be censored if the state is to maintain its  
power. Thus women such as Aphra  
Behn, Frances Wright, Margaret  
Sanger, and thousands of others have  
been trivialized, misrepresented, dis-  
paraged, dismissed from the record,  
made invisible, erased.  

Because, as Spender documents, men  
have “doctored” the records, we have  
been led to believe that women’s ab-  
sence from our encoded knowledge is  
women’s own fault, that they have  
nothing worthwhile to contribute. I  
grew up in Tenafly, New Jersey, not a  
mile and a half from where Anthony,  
Stanton, Gage, and Harper worked on  
History of Woman Suffrage. I may have  
known that before reading Spender’s  

to read of the disappearance, dismissal,  
or total erasure of hundreds of women  
who have made enormous contributions  
to women’s knowledge, understanding,  
and heritage, so infuriating and painful  
that I found myself, at times, trying to  
refute the weight of Spender’s evidence.  
The weight being, however, too for-  
midable to budge, I tried attacking her  
evidence directly, thereby hoping to  
convince myself that she had made it all  
up (I became adamantly concerned with  
“footnotes”). But her evidence is, of  
course, sound. What was troubling me  
was that I had realized, whether I liked it  
or not, that the harassment, the censor-  
ship, the literal annihilation she  
documents is not some abstract  

Women such as Aphra Behn, Frances Wright, Margaret  
Sanger, and thousands of others have been trivialized,  
misrepresented, disparaged, dismissed from the record, made  

invisible, erased.  

book (my mother is determined that  
someone must have told me), but while  
living there, I never found the fact in-  
teresting enough to exert the energy  
required to walk the distance to the  
house. I dismissed them, as did my  
teachers and parents, as being mal-  
adjusted, and if there was one thing I  
knew as a girl of 16, it was that I did not  
want to be like one of them, a sexual  
“aberration.”  

Women of Ideas is not an easy book to  
read; in fact, the reader should be  
forewarned that the weight of Spender’s  
evidence is so great that most will, I  
believe, experience some resistance  
while studying the text. It is infuriating  
(maddening? numbing? excruciating?)  

theoretical principle, but the daily real-  
ity of women’s lives, of my life.  
Spender’s methodology is unusual  
and worth noting. In order to avoid  
studying these women in relation to men  
(or their wars, accomplishments, or  
“feats of strength”), she has studied  
them in a manner that will seem to some  
“out of context.” The differences be-  
tween women created by class, color,  
time, culture, sexual preference, and  
age are acknowledged, but not made  
into an issue, for Spender feels it is more  
subversive and empowering to empha-  
size women’s unity rather than their dif-  
ferences. Her accounts are not de-  
finitive, nor have they always been  
double checked for accuracy. Of neces-  

Feminine Soul: The Fate of an Ideal, by  
Marilyn Chapin Massey. Boston: Beacon  
Press, 1985, $22.95, 219 pp.  

by Joyce Bright  

Contemporary feminists such as  

Rich and Daly seem to argue for  

women’s superior spiritual qual-  
ities. In Contemporary Feminist Thought,  
Hester Eisenstein terms such thinking  
reactionary rather than radical: Such  
thinking harks back to the 19th-century  
ideology of the feminine soul. Massey  
enters the dialogue by asking “Can an  
appeal to women’s unique spiritual  
qualities lead to more than a trap?”  
Massey, who is dean of the School of  
Arts and Sciences at the College of New  
Rochelle and who has translated several  
works of the writings of the Young  
Hegelians, takes us back to the 18th and  
19th centuries in which the concept of  
the feminine soul first appears. By look-  
ing at those early works — what men had  
to say about religion, gender, and  
ideology — women might better de-  
termine what they want to say about  
themselves.  

Infanticide — surely what we call  
abortion — was widespread in 18th-  
century Germany and punishable by  
decapitation. Frederick the Great  
wanted to alter this state of affairs. He  
allowed soldiers to marry, reasoning that  
thusly young girls could not be seduced  
out of wedlock. In fact, he elevated the  
status of marriage to a social institution  
essential to the security of the state.  
Despite this, in 1777 most of the  
criminals executed in Prussia were young  
girls who had aborted their children.  

In order to force mothers to conduct  
themselves better, reformers turned to  
ideological power. Pestalozzi was one  
such reformer. In the traditional think-  
ing, woman’s morally defective soul  
necessitates her subordination to her  

4 @ Belles Lettres  

husband. In the new thinking, it is  
woman’s superior soul, the angel in the  
house, that causes her to want to be sub-  
ordinate to her husband.  

Pestalozzi’s late-18th-century book,  
Leonard and Gertrude, was most in-  
strumental in the transformation of  
traditional thinking about gender.  
Pestalozzi, concerned with infanticide,  
writes an edifying tale instructing  
women how to be good mothers through  
Gertrude-modeling. Gertrude “alone  
seemed to possess a soul untainted by the  
moral filth around her.” He also comes  
very close to creating God the mother.  
He thinks the bases for morality are  
love, trust, and gratitude, and that  
“mother, and being satisfied, are one  
and the same thought.” The German  
philosopher Fichte takes great issue with  
Pestalozzi, specifically with his thoughts  
on education.  

There the matter might have rested  
except for the emergence of German  
romanticism. It is to Novalis’s work,  
Henry of Ofterdingen, that Massey turns.  
This is the story, unfinished and confus-  
ing, of a young man’s discovery of self. It  
takes place, like any good German  
Bildungsroman, on a journey. Novalis  
presents a sensuous matriarchy with a  
ritual of drinking the mother’s body. He  
presents women as pleasure, and as the  
source of life, of a fundamental psy-  
chobiological energy.  

This is all too much for the theo-  
logian Schleiermacher. He domesticates  
Novalis, and in so doing, gives us the  
fullest ideal of the angel in the home.  
Woman is allowed her own autonomous  
soul as long as she keeps it home, pro-  
ducing other little angels, tending the  
flame of man’s unruly religious nature,  
and turning out sons fit to join the army.  

Massey’s point through all of this is  
that the theories of Novalis and  
Pestalozzi come close to theories de-  
veloped by contemporary feminists.  

“They came close to describing an ul-  
timate reality marked by the continual  
fluidity of finite forms, the experience of  
a unity that generates, rather than  
represses, difference, and the primordial  
truth of nurture.” They come close  
because they are men doing the imagin-  
ing. How different would it be if women  
imagined?  

Furthermore, liberal theory that  
seeks to debunk God the father — one  
thinks of Freud or Marx — simply  
remakes man in the image of God the  
father. Massey makes the same point  
that Marilyn French does in Beyond  
Power: Man, in his ideologies, divorces  
himself from animal, from physical,  
from woman — women become the  
repository of all that man does not like in  
himself or that he holds less important.  
More important, man does not seem to  
know that his ideology is merely an  
ideology — something he has created. It  
is Massey’s contention that con-  
temporary feminists know they are  
creating an ideological construct; and in  
the knowing, a feminine soul can be  
created that more nearly reflects an im-  
age of all people, incorporating into the  
image a toleration for differentness that  
allows for peace and harmony in the  
world.  

This oversimplifies a finely reasoned  
metaphysical argument. By presenting a  
succinct and interesting intellectual  
history, Massey is able to offer clarity to  
the reader in her closing chapter. She  
has wisely limited the field of her in-  
quiry, the better to keep her argument  
focused and simple. I think it interesting  
that two women as diverse as French and  
Massey can come essentially to the same  
conclusion: If human life as we know it is  
to continue, society must experience an  
ethical transformation, and women  
have the tools for making a new moral-  
ity. Put another way, women have been  
denied access to a kingdom the keys to  
which they had possession all along.  

® Joyce Bright has a BA in philosophy.  
She is a novelist and reviewer currently  
working on a master’s degree in counseling.  

Spender is aware of the implicit  
catch-22 in this kind of book: In order to  
propose a case about how women have  
been silenced, she has been confined to  
those who have made their presence  
known. She has, in other words, been  
limited to those few who have managed  
to publish; her study is, therefore, lim-  
ited — with few exceptions — to the  
elite, literate, English-speaking world.  
But there is an advantage to this: By  
clearly outlining the limits of her study,  
Spender begs a critical reading of the  
text and frustrates the reader’s learned  
desire to canonize and seek universality.  
By refusing to play the role of the un-  
questionable oracle imparting knowl-  
edge to the unenlightened and ignorant  
reader, Spender subverts the authorial  
“I” and demands that the reader’s critical  
intelligence play an active part in the  
experience of reading the text. The  
book becomes, then, a true dialogue in  
which the reader and the writer both  
participate.  

Spender begins with an analysis of the  
techniques used to silence and mis-  
represent Aphra Behn, for she feels that  
Behn’s experience illuminates almost  
paradigmatically three common  
methods employed to discredit women.  
First, Behn was judged by criteria de-  
fined by men to judge their experiences;  
her mind was ridiculed, then, for not  
being “masculine,” and her “failings”  
became the basis for future discussions of  
her work. Second, Behn was defined in  
terms of her sex and her sexual  
attractiveness to men (she might have  
been too fat, too slim, “ungainly,” etc.,  
etc., etc.). By dismissing her on sexual  
grounds, her critics freed themselves of  
the perhaps distasteful task of addressing  
her ideas. Finally, Behn was repudiated  
as an aberration, a solitary figure,  
isolated, singular, anomalous, and,  
therefore, irrelevant.  

The blatant misrepresentation and  
sexual harassment that Spender docu-  
ments is horrifying. Harriet Martineau,  
for example, was repeatedly castigated  
for leaving “her place”: One reviewer  
claimed that because she was neither a  
wife nor a mother, she failed to fulfill a  
woman’s “natural” role and, therefore,  
had no natural right to demand any-  
thing. Margaret Fuller, considered to be  
an intellectual of great magnetism and  
charm during her lifetime, became, after  
Emerson, William Henry Channing,  
and James Freeman Clarke had their way  
with her memoirs, an “arrogant old  
maid,” the archetypal feminist whose  
unsatisfied need for attention was  
channeled into the movement. The  
techniques used on Behn were similar to  
those used to demoralize and discredit  
Rachel Carson, who, after publication  
of Silent Spring, became, according to  
the chemical industry, emotional,  
reclusive, and unstable — a woman  
whose ideas were, in other words,  
obviously not worth addressing.  

The harassment continues today ad  
nauseam: Upon publication of the  
Handbook of Nonsexist Writing, one male  
reviewer wrote: “From the photographs  
supplied by Ms. Casey Miller and Kate  
Swift I should judge that neither was  
sexually attractive,” and he adds, “I  
refuse to accept that speculation along  
these lines is irrelevant to a study of the  
book.” As Spender points out, they are  
“plain” women, women not attractive to  
him, and, therefore, not to be taken  
seriously, for their words come from a  
sense of grievance and frustration.  

Throughout the body of the text,  
Spender calls attention to the sim-  
ilarities between feminists of the past  
and their contemporary sisters. Mary  
Wortley Montagu’s analysis of women’s  
complicity with male paradigms sounds  

May/June 1986