The Art of  
Telling All  

Faces in the Water, 1982, $5.95,  
254 pp. (PB)  

To the Is-Land, 1982, $10.95, 253 pp.  
An Angel at My Table, 1984, $12.95,  
195 pp.  

The Envoy From Mirror City, 1985,  
$14.95, 176 pp.  

All by Janet Frame. New York: Braziller.  

by Lisa Forestier  

Artists, actors, and writers draw  
on personal experience to paint a  
picture, shape a character, or  

write a book. Baring the soul, it would  
seem, ensures verisimilitude. And yet  
there is an art to telling all, as a reader of  
Janet Frame soon learns. Although the  
four books discussed here are all essentially  
autobiographical, the one posing as a  
novel, Faces in the Water, is oddly enough  
the one that strikes the reader as the most  
true to life. Why is it that, although Faces  
is a triumph, with the autobiographies  
Frame is always standing up too close or  
back too far?  

Frame’s autobiographies — To the Is-  
Land, An Angel at My Table, and The  
Envoy From Mirror City — chronicle the  
author’s childhood in New Zealand in the  
1920s, the aspiration to be a writer that set  
her apart from her peers, her trip abroad to  
England and Europe, eventual recogni-  
tion, and her return to New Zealand. The  
books read like diaries: intimate, detailed,  
imbued with the gentle drama of a life  
filled with small but significant moments.  
Consider this passage from To the Is-Land:  

The book that everyone was talking  
about in our house was Uncle Tom’s  
Cabin, by Harriet Beecher Stowe,  
and I was being called Topsy because  
my hair was frizzy. “Who are you?”  
they'd ask me, and I learned to reply  
“I'm the girl that never was born 'prass  
[sic] I grew up among the corn.  
Golly. Ain't I wicked!” Mother  
talked, too, of Eliza crossing the ice  
as if it had really happened, like the  
pioneers and the visit of the prince  
and the flood. She talked of wicked  
Simon Legree. There was much talk  
of ice, of sheet ice and pack ice and  
icebergs, for the Titanic disaster was  
often mentioned, still uppermost in  
people’s minds.  

It is the preciousness of life, the artless-  
ness of delivery, that one responds to here  
as one does in, say, a child’s diary.  

I found To the Is-Land to be the most  
engaging (though least accomplished) of  
the three autobiographies because Frame  
convinces the reader that her verbal im-  
pressionism forms sufficient structure for a  
collection of reminiscences. Later, es-  
pecially in Mirror City, she is more  
ambitious, and her running dialogue with  
her muse is strained and self-conscious:  

“That's Dunedin. I was born  
there. Let me write of my life there,  
how I made friends and wrote books,  
how I went north to live by the sea,  
how I moved to other cities with  
other clouds and skies.”  

“You say it’s Dunedin? It’s Mirror  
City. You know it’s time to pack this  
collection of years for your journey to  
Mirror City.”  

I stare more closely at the city of  
my mind. And why it is Mirror City,  
it’s not Dunedin or London or Ibiza  
or Auckland or any other cities I  
have known. It is Mirror City before  
my own eyes. And the Envoy waits.  

Significantly, as Frame becomes more  
accomplished as a writer, she becomes  
increasingly dissociated from the world.  
Whereas To the Is-Land brims with a sense  
of family and community, the two books  

that follow are the ruminations of a truly  
insular woman. People, incidents, places  
become only raw material for her  
creations. In a poignant moment of self-  
recognition, Frame recalls how, after  
years in England, she had only the local  
librarian to see her off when she left for  
New Zealand.  

Almost as soon as Frame’s auto-  
biographies are read, they vaporize in the  
mind. The lighting in these books is so  
diffuse that images do not coalesce. Few  
emotional demands are made on the read-  
er, who will be neither wiser nor worse off  
for having turned the pages.  

Janet Frame  

The same could never be said of  

Faces in the Water. As a thinly  

veiled account of Frame’s exper-  
iences as a patient in a New Zealand  
mental hospital, the novel is poetic but  
never fragile. Patients, nurses, and  
doctors are scrutinized by Estina Mavet’s  
shattered mind with an underlying,  
cohesive toughness:  

“I don’t think I could sell hats,” I  
said doubtfully.  

“You've no idea what you'll be  
able to do. You'll be out of hospital  
in no time instead of spending your  
life here as otherwise you'll have to  
do, my lady, and you'll get a good  
job in a shop or perhaps an office,  
and you'll never regret having had a  
lobotomy.”  

Now that my personality had been  
condemned, like a slum dwelling, the  
planners were at work. The nurses  
were given permission to talk to me,  
and they and Sister Bridge, even  
Matron Glass, moved into my  
“changed” personality like immigrants  
to a new land staking their claim.  

Janet Frame escaped lobotomy by con-  
vincing her keepers of her literary talent.  
Estina Mavet, on the other hand, remains  
vague about what happens after Dr. Port-  
man decides to “bore two holes in the side  
of my head for my unsuitable personality  
to fly out like a migrating bird.”  

What Frame has achieved in Faces is a  
seemingly artless artistry. Here language is  
heightened just enough to imprint the  
images on the reader's memory, whereas  
in the autobiographies, one finds either  
artlessness or studied artistry. That a work  
of fiction can be more real than a life story  
is a tribute to how the blush and rouge of  
perfectly balanced art can highlight the  
contours of the essential.  

@ Lisa Forestier’s poetry appears in  
Bitterroot, her essays in Book Forum, and  
her book reviews in The Los Angeles Times.  

Subscribers: Don’t forget — a free issue of Belles  
Lettres is added to your subscription when you  

renew.  

September/October 1986  

Love and Death Down Under  

The Delinquents and Down by the  
Dockside, by Criena Rohan. New York:  
Penguin, 1986, $5.95, 192/256 pp. (PB)  

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger  

The Penguin Books Australian  

Selection, in its admirable series  

of reprints by modern Australian  
writers, has again done us all a tremendous  
favor by bringing Criena Rohan’s only two  
surviving novels back into bookstores.  
Rohan is the pseudonym of Deirdre Cash,  
a cabaret singer and dancing teacher who  
died of cancer in 1963 at the age of 36. Her  
fiction, though well-received during her  
tragically brief lifetime, has long been out  
of print. Librarians report, however, an  
unusual “off the street” demand for her  
books by young working-class readers,  
who devotedly pass them from hand to  
hand. This kind of audience, so much like  
some of Rohan’s most memorable char-  
acters, would have delighted her. They  
are largely responsible for the republica-  
tion of her novels, to which we in the  
outside world now also have access.  

The Delinquents, first issued in 1962,  
focuses on the touching and heroic love of  
a teenage couple, Lola and Brownie, who  
today would be called “punks” (then, in  
Australian slang, “bodgies” and  
“widgies”). Despite their leather-jacketed  
bravado and the unpromising circum-  
stances of their slum-bound lives, the two  
are readers and thinkers. Between  
beatings by his mother’s lover, Brownie  
(age 15) devours Arabian Nights, while  
Lola, left alone by her partying mother,  
consumes poetry. Inevitably, the two  
meet. The surprise, to us and to the  
hostile adult universe they inhabit, is that  
the two do not have a mere street-corner  
romance but a dignified, intense, endur-  
ing relationship. An early reviewer  
captured the high romanticism of The  
Delinquents when he called it a “back-  
street Tristan and Isolde.”  

It is that, certainly, but in view of the  
tender age of the lovers, it is also a Dick-  

ensian fairy tale of babes in the wood. As  
minors, Brownie and Lola are prevented  
from achieving their life goal of marriage  
throughout much of the novel by a suc-  
cession of wicked guardians, brutal police  
officials, meddling social workers, and  
other incarnations of the spirit-crushing  
Establishment. Brownie supports himself  
by going to sea as a deck boy as soon as he  
is legally able and tries recurrently to set up  
a home with Lola. During their many  
enforced separations — Brownie at sea,  
Lola in reform school — they resolutely  
maintain contact and scheme to be  
together again.  

Lola’s finest moment occurs when she  
learns that a letter to her from Brownie  
was returned “address unknown” by  
“Auntie” Westbury, the furiously re-  
pressed parole officer with whom she must  
live. Lola treats this dragon to a colorful  
torrent of “such abuse as can be achieved  
only by a girl who has been reformed at the  
tax-payer’s expense.” This comment by  
the narrator — a charming, affectionate,  
worldly-wise, somewhat older voice — is  
typical of the tone of The Delinquents.  

Despite many sorrows, including an  
unwanted and horrifying abortion, Lola  
and Brownie jauntily refuse and transcend  
the labels (delinquents, vagrants) with  
which society tries to trivialize their  
unique experience. They maintain their  
sharp awareness, knocking about and de-  
fining life on their own terms, until  
Brownie finally turns 21 and the child  
couple become “respectable married.”  

The novel’s relative weakness in charac-  
terization is more than offset by the riot it  
provides of unforgettable sights and in-  
spired eccentrics, all suggestive of a  
marvelous film. The sailors’ touching and  
hilarious tattoo-unbaring party lingers in  
the mind’s eye, for example, as does  
Lisha’s landlady, who likes to toast the  
photograph of her long-dead husband,  
“the biggest cad on the astral plane.” As  
Lisha observes, painfully visualizing her  
grandmother’s anxious face as she  
rummaged in her purse for the pennies  
that would mean the family’s survival for  
another week, these are the scenes that it  
would be “criminal to forget.”  

In the most recent Pelican Guide to  
English Literature: The Present, there is an  
essay on only one Australian writer, male  
(Patrick White), and the two pages  
allotted to the fiction of work and the  
working class mention only British  
writers, all male. This shocking im-  
balance will be corrected, one hopes,  
when such remarkable Australian women  
writers of the working class as Criena  
Rohan become more widely known  
through Penguin’s Australian Selection.  
This effort in responsible publishing de-  
serves our appreciation and support.  

® Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger, a  
member of the English Department at Man-  
hattanville College, teaches courses in Com-  
monwealth Literature and Women Working.  
She has written for a number of scholarly and  
feminist publications.  

Belles Lettres © 7