The Mysticism and Magic of  
African Thought  

Beloved, by Toni Morrison. New York:  
Knopf, 1987, $18.95, 276 pp.  

by Jewelle Gomez  

Beloved is a ghost story. Its ha’ants  

include the spirits of slavery,  

race hatred, misogyny, and  
grief as well as the heroine’s daughter,  
who has died 19 years earlier. Under a  
cloying blossom of gothic mysticism,  
Morrison hints at then lays bare the lega-  
cy of the runaway slaves of the Sweet  
Home plantation of Kentucky. As any  
good ghost story should be, it is compel-  
ling and chilling.  

Young, pregnant Sethe sends her  
three children ahead with other escaping  
slaves to live with their freed grand-  
mother, Baby Suggs, in Ohio. Sethe is  
caught, raped, and beaten but still es-  
capes, delivering her baby with the help  
of an itinerant white girl making her own  
way to freedom. In her escape Sethe  
leaves behind her husband, Halle, who  
fails to appear at their appointed meeting  
place, and two others who are caught  
and murdered by the callous new owner  
of Sweet Home. This is enough life for  
any one lifetime, yet Sethe’s new free-  
dom is then threatened by the arrival of  
her owner, coming to claim his property.  
Her terror of having her children re-  
turned to slavery is borne so deeply  
within the marrow of who she is that  
Sethe franticly tries to kill them all, suc-  
ceeding in the death of only one of her  
daughters.  

In the years that follow, Sethe fills her  
life with Baby Suggs, her three living  
children, and the restless ghost of her  
dead child, who plays pranks like leaving  
her handprint in cakes and scaring  
neighbors. Baby Suggs dies, and the two  
sons, perpetually afraid of their mother  
and the psychic unrest, abandon the  
family. Sethe and her daughter, Denver,  

Toni Morrison. Photo by Maria Mulas.  

are left locked in competition and dis-  
trust. Paul D., who has also escaped from  
Sweet Home, finally makes his way to  
Sethe, and he too is like a ghost, opening  
up her memory to things she and many  
around her would rather leave forgotten,  
including the knowledge that Halle did  
not escape but remained at Sweet Home  
and went mad. Paul D. takes his place  
beside Sethe, reuniting with a happier  
side of his past. Too full of his own ghosts  
he rails against the dead child that domi-  
nates the household and drives it out.  
All is quiet for a time until a young girl  
appears who calls herself Beloved, the  
one word on Sethe’s daughter’s  
headstone, a word for which Sethe had  
to barter her own body. She joins the  
house as a mysterious, alluring woman/  
child but she soon evolves into a suc-  
cubus, seeking unqualified devotion and  
certain destruction:  

Rainwater held on to pine needles  
for dear life and Beloved could not  
take her eyes off Sethe. Stooping to  
shake the damper, or snapping  
sticks for kindlin, Sethe was licked,  
tasted, eaten by Beloved’s eyes. Like  
a familiar, she hovered, never  
leaving the room Sethe was in un-  
less required and told to... . In  
lamplight, and over the flames of  
the cooking stove, their two  
shadows clashed and crossed on the  
ceiling like black swords.  

Morrison is undoubtedly one of  
American literature’s premier thinkers  
and “feelers.” Her complex, poetic lan-  
guage makes the feelings of her charac-  
ters and her own ideas sing. To read her  
words is to know at once the urgency of  
Sethe’s need to save her children from  
the death of slavery by killing them. It is  
also to accept the burden that act must  
be for Sethe, her shocked neighbors, and  
her surviving children who withdraw  
into their own worlds to disconnect from  
Sethe’s guilt. The ominous presence of  
Beloved grows like a poisonous flower,  
alienating Paul D. and almost starving  
Sethe and Denver, both figuratively and  
literally.  

Morrison dips into the many rivulets  
of pain that are the overflow of slavery,  
provoking questions that social histo-  
rians have yet to tackle strenuously  
enough to shed much light on the sur-  
vivors of slavery in America today. And  
Morrison’s success is that she draws not  
from some remote academic pool of facts  
but from the simple experience of  
mother and child, man and woman,  
friend and neighbor. What does it mean,  
not to the concept of family but to a  
mother, to never have had the security  
of nursing her own child? Or to that  
child? Sethe remembers her own  
mother, separated from her most of the  
day, only by the hat she wore working in  
the fields. Although her mother tried to  
teach Sethe how to recognize her, she  
cannot. And there is desperation in  
Sethe’s need to recall her mother who is  
now long dead.  

What does it do, not to the psyche of a  
people but to one woman, to never have  

had the sanctity of her own name? Once  
freed Baby Suggs asked her master why  
he always called her Jenny. He responds  
simply that it was the name on her tag  
when he bought her. She has lived sepa-  
rate from that name, somewhere deep  
inside herself, until freed to take on the  
surname of the man she called her hus-  
band and the name he called her: Baby.  
This is a simple act, renaming, but one  
whose importance has been reiterated  
throughout Black American history,  
from the southern tradition of giving  
children initials instead of first names so  
they can choose later what they wish to be  
called, through the Black Power Move-  
ment of the 60s when many Afro-  
Americans disavowed their slave roots  
by choosing names from African cul-  
tures. Morrison repeatedly points out the  
cruel and gentle wearing away of life by  
the denial of names: Paul D.’s name is to  
differentiate him from the other slaves  
on Sweet Home, Paul A. and Paul F.  
The man who helps escaping Blacks  
cross the river to freedom adopts the  
name Stamp Paid. And, of course,  
Sethe’s dead daughter remains nameless  
except for her fragmentary epitaph, “Be-  
loved.”  

Morrison tackles another question,  
more subtle but equally devastating.  
When did Africans become Negroes?  
How African cultures were suppressed  
and how they survived and blended with  
European cultures in the United States  
has been examined somewhat, but the  
ways of thinking and feeling had to  
change as well. Morrison skillfully  
evokes this change by examining the re-  
lationship between Sethe and her chil-  
dren and her neighbors.  

When we first encounter Stamp Paid  
he is an ordinary man but also a heroic  
figure, the angel of deliverance who has  
ferried Sethe and Denver to freedom  
along with hundreds of others. The com-  
munity remains so grateful to him for the  
lives among them that no door is ever  
closed to him. That is until he forgets the  
horror that lay back on the other side of  

— continued on page 12  

An Antidote for Academentia  

Webster’s First New Intergalactic Wickedary of the English Language, conjured by Mary  
Daly in cahoots with Jane Caputi. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987, $35.00 (HB), $14.95 (PB),  

310 pp., illus. by Sudie Rakusin  

Much Madness is divinest  

by Debra Schultz  
Sense —/To a discerning  

“M  
Eye,” said Emily Dickinson, “Much Sense the starkest Mad-  
ness.” These lines convey the essence of  
The Wickedary, Mary Daly’s latest at-  
tempt to jolt her readers out of androcen-  
tric thinking into woman-centered con-  
sciousness. The medium of language is  
the chosen vehicle for continuing “the  
metapatriarchal journey of exorcism and  
ecstasy” first charted by Daly in Gyn/  
Ecology: The Meta-Ethics of Radical  
Feminism.  

Webster’s First New Intergalactic Wick-  
edary of the English Language, “conjured  
in cahoots with Jane Caputi,” is a radical  
feminist dictionary designed to inspire,  
delight, amuse, enrage, and bewitch  
women into reclaiming their reality, his-  
tory, value systems, and language. Its  
tone is delightfully antiauthoritarian, if  
not downright confrontational. “The  
Wickedary is a declaration that words  
and women have served the father’s sen-  
tences long enough,” proclaims Daly in  
Preliminary Word Web One.  

The subversion of traditional struc-  
ture is a major theme, reflected in the  
book’s fundamental unit of the web. A  
Webster (defined in traditional dic-  
tionaries as a female weaver) is defined  
here as a woman whose occupation “is to  
Weave, especially a Weaver of Words  
and Word-Webs.” The Wickedary is di-  
vided into three phases, each consisting  

of several webs. The phases and webs  
grow increasingly more provocative and  
far-out as the journey progresses.  

The first phase of “Preliminary Webs”  
corresponds roughly to the front matter  
of a dictionary and includes articles on  
the history of the project, spelling, gram-  
mar, pronunciation, and general naviga-  
tional guidelines. These are extremely  
helpful despite Daly’s contention that  
“Weird Searchers of this work will find  
its Wicked System Sylph-explanatory.”  
I’m pretty Weird but I didn’t begin to  
enjoy The Wickedary until I surrendered  
somewhat to the internal logic of the  
text. As the reaction of several friends  
attests, this book can be daunting to the  
uninitiated, which raises questions of  
just who this new women’s language can  
speak to. Despite references to Black  
women in the text, I was disappointed  
that Alice Walker's term “womanist”  
was not defined.  

The core of The Wickedary is com-  
posed of three webs or tribes of words:  
elemental words, inhabitants of the  
Background, and inhabitants of the  
foreground. The first gives clues to the  
book’s basic philosophical premises. The  
latter two can be deduced/reduced to  
“the good guys and the bad guys.”  
Heroines include Revolting Hags,  
Crackpot Crones, Amazons, Banshees,  
Spinsters, Familiars, Lusty Leapers,  
Novice Nags, Old Maids of Honor, and  
the like. The villains are Big Brothers of  

Boredom, the papal bully, fembots, the  
fraternity of phallic fellers, Lecherous  
Lacklusters, snivelards, snools, snook-  
ers, and my personal favorite, The  
Abominable Snowmen of Androcratic  
Academia. Trying to banish the thought  
that this was simply an inversion of mis-  
ogyny, I relaxed and frolicked through  
the language.  

The last phase of Appendicular Webs  
contains four essays exhorting Websters  
to speak out against patriarchal distor-  
tions, to be irreverent wild women who  
jump off “the Doomsday Clock” into un-  
charted territories of Self-defined female  
reality. We are invited to join the race of  
“Weird women who cast our lot with the  
Fates, the Spinners of Stamina, the  
Forces who can save the world.”  

I was immediately tempted to throw in  
my lot with the Lusty Women saviors,  
seduced by the conspiratorial pleasures  
of self-righteous sisterhood. Here Daly’s  
rhetorical strategy can be seen as akin to  
Virginia Woolf’s use of the lecture to  
women college students in A Room of  
One’s Own, which literary critic Jane  
Marcus has deconstructed (forgive me  
for using that word) in “Sapphistry: Les-  
bian Seduction as Narrative Form,” an  
essay in her book Virginia Woolf and the  
Languages of Patriarchy.  

Although women’s history reveals a  
long feminist tradition of belief that  
women’s inherent morality and spiritual-  
ity can save humanity, we as feminists in  
today’s troubled world, cannot accept  
that position uncritically. It is too  
simplistic and too easily portrays women  
historically as victims of patriarchy, an  
image Daly certainly does not wish to  
perpetuate. By implication (or should I  
say glaring omission?), real men are seen  
as unredeemably evil, which lets them  
off the hook too easily from demonstrat-  

ing a commitment to fighting sexism and  
ending patriarchy. Although Daly might  
label discomfort with the separatist posi-  
tion as “dis-ease” — “a sickening com-  
plex of plastic passions, e.g., guilt, anxi-  
ety, depression, and frustration, which  
are embedded into women in the state of  
Possession,” the objection still stands.  
Also, as Bell Hooks, Barbara Smith, and  
Beverly Smith have written, separatism  
is a strategy that Black women cannot  
and choose not to afford. Although The  
Wickedary is obviously a visionary, crea-  
tive work and not a political manifesto,  
its political implications still need to be  
addressed precisely because Mary Daly is  
such an important articulator of feminist  
visions.  

That being said, let us move on to the  
business of celebrating a scholarly, pro-  
vocative, humorous, and serious piece of  
work that practices what it preaches at a  
most profound level. Daly is clearly un-  
daunted by the potential ridicule a work  
like this will draw from “the boys.” The  
word “chutzpah” keeps coming to mind.  
She seems to relish directly challenging  
the elitism of academia with her wild  
words. Proudly, defiantly she points out  
that the word “fanatic” comes from the  
Latin “fanaticus,” which means “in-  
spired by a deity.” The Wickedary is also a  
nice counterpoint to all those brilliant  
and obtuse Signs essays that call for the  
end of “rationalist dichotomies” in chill-  
ing prose. As I chuckled with glee over  
some of the terms I encountered in The  
Wickedary, I was reminded that femi-  
nism indeed can be fun.  

The Wickedary makes many important  
contributions to feminist discourse. It is  
a collaborative work of creative re-  
search, restoring words to their original  

— continued on page 15  

March/April 1988