by Julia Alvarez

Love Medicine, by Louise Erdrich. Holt,  
Rinehart and Winston, 1984, $13.95,  
275 pp.

Louise Erdrich’s Love Medicine  
is full of superlatives. It is one of the  

best novels I have read in a while,  
and I cannot qualify my enthusiasm by  
limiting the book to the usual cate-  
gories: “best first novel” or “best novel  
by a Native American woman.” I have  
explored the latter field using Rayna  
Green’s comprehensive Native Ameri-  
can Women: A Contextual Bibliography  
as a guide. Mostly, the novels fall into  
two categories. One is the close-to-  
anthropological autobiography or  
memoir, which relates a typical life or  
an atypical life of struggling with set-  
backs and divided loyalties—the strug-  
gle to survive. (In this first group, I  
include books such as Me and Mine:  
The Life Story of Helen Sekaquaptewa as  
told to Louise Udall, Polingaysi Qoyawayna’s No Turning Back, and Beverly  
Hungry Wolf's The Ways of My Grand-  
mothers.) The second kind of book is  
more of a novel and strives beyond  
personal reportage for the poetic under-  

pinnings of the experiences of a main  
character whose Indian-ness is usually  
the conflict, the mythos, the driving  
force of the plot. (There are some very  
good novels in this category, among  
them Leslie Marmon Silko’s Ceremony,  
and less accessible, but impressive,  
Paula Gunn Allen’s The Woman Who  
Owned the Shadows.)

I set up these two categories to show  
the tradition from which Louise Erd-  
rich springs. But, as with the best  
writers, she far outdistances her pre-  
decessors and goes beyond reporting or  
shedding light on a certain character or  
ethnic group. The plight of her charac-  
ters reminds one of the fiction of  
George Eliot or Alice Walker, from  
whom we learn, not only about being  
British in a growingly materialistic  
society, or black in the racist South, or  
Indian on a reservation, but about  
being alive.

Louise Erdrich’s Love Medicine  
plumbs that universal. But do not  
mistake this as Erdrich’s whitewashing  
and high horsing her characters into  
Representative Human Beings in A  
Human Race Plot. Her characters are  
very much Native American men and  
women whose home is a “rez,” much of  
which has been sold to Whites and lost  
forever. Their broken lives and history  
and hearts are in need of healing. But  
who these days knows how to get that  
old Chippewa medicine, love, right? In  
each of these 14 chapters, one or an-  

other member of the Kashpaw or  
Lamartine family tells us his or her  
(love) story in language that rings so  
true to the eloquence and to the es-  
sence of the character that you want to  
say to each one, “Would you say that  
again?”

But there is no stopping the relentless  
progress of these brilliant storytellers.  
The stories recount all kinds of loves:  
love of a man and a woman, love of a  
mother, love of a would-be saint for her  
adversary/savior, love of a broken  
Vietnam veteran for the one thing he  
can make right again—his red con-  
vertible. It is not that these loves are  
not “right,” but the cure, love, makes  
these lovers sick to death. As Lipsha  
Morrissey discovers, “I thought love  
got easier over the years so it didn’t  
hurt so bad...or feel so good...I thought  
it smoothed out and old people hardly  
noticed it.... Now I saw it rear up like  
a whip and lash.”

But like Scheherazade healing the  
Sultan with her stories, Louise Erd-  
rich’s characters enchant us and en-  
large our sensibilities with their tales.  
Their stories have that fantastic truth  
of the mythic about them. An Indian  
girl, determined to be honored as a  
saint, witnesses her own apotheosis  
when the convent of nuns she has  
joined bows to her stigmata, a gash she  
received when grappling with a crazed  
nun over a bread knife. Two lovers re-  
unite after intervening years, marriages,  
and children when the man asks the  

Coming of  
Age in the  
1930s

by Anne Roston

I Hear Men Talking, by Meridel Le-  
Sueur. West End Press, 1985, $5.95, 243 pp.

Now age 85, Meridel LeSueur was  
born in the Midwest to socialist  

parents, who later sent her to  
live in New York with anarchists  
Emma Goldman and Alexander Berk-  
man. Hence began a writing career  
aimed at fighting oppression. Her latest  
work, I Hear Men Talking, is more like  
a collection of anguished dream poems  
than three short novels. Each one re-  
embarks on the same lyrical journey  
through blossoming sexuality and  
adulthood, which are presented with  
an uncanny sense of horror. All three  
remind one of a Sherwood Anderson  
portrait in isolation.

In the first and best piece, I Hear Men  
Talking, Penelope floats about like a  
wisp o’ wheat, watching the dusty town  
about her through distant, yearning  
eyes and hopelessly trying to evade  
both a cruel-lipped admirer (whose  
caresses feel like a “trap, a snare,” and  
indeed they are, for he has bet his bud-  
dies that he can “make her”) and her  
own sexuality. While Penelope struggles  
with mixed inclinations toward  
maturity and community, the towns-  
people investigate the power of coali-  
tion in an attempt to save themselves  
from farm foreclosures.

The second piece, The Bird, returns  
to the theme of burgeoning sexual  
reality, this time as viewed by a young  
man. Aboard a Pandora’s box of a  

woman for help delivering 17 tons of  
surplus butter on the hottest day of the  
year in her air-conditioned Nash Am-  
bassador Custom. An Indian baby,  
born to a jailbreaking father for whom  
the scales of justice have been tipped in  
favor of his White accuser, is weighed  
by his mother on a highway truck  
scale, but his weight does not register  
at all. On and on, these wonderfully  
surprising plots become metaphors of  
each character’s tragic quest to give and  
get love. As one reads further into the  
novel, story builds on story, and  
characters reappear in each other’s  
lives or in sequel chapters to their  
earlier adventures. This weaving of  
story with story makes finally for a  
spiderweb of connections: we see how  
each life connects with all the others by  
fiber-fine lines of heartbreak.

Although Lipsha Morrissey cannot  
get the traditional Chippewa love  
medicine right—he substitutes frozen  
turkey hearts and Grandpa Kashpaw  
chokes on it—Louise Erdrich, a mem-  
ber of the same Chippewa tribe, has  
written a novel that takes no shortcuts  
and does the heart good to read.

Poet Julia Alvarez, author of Home-  
coming (Grove Press, 1984), is the Jenny  
McKean Moore Visiting Writer at George  
Washington University for 1984-85. This  
fall, she joins the creative writing faculty  
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-  
Champaign.

ship, Floyd grapples with his combined  
thirst and revulsion for human contact.  
Each passenger embodies some form of  
human debility, which in the tumult of  
a storm Floyd learns to pity and, hence,  
accept.

The last story, The Horse, zeroes back  
in on the plight of a young girl terri-  
fied by harsh reality. The scornful Mer-  
cedes is absolutely determined to reject  
humanity and the role expected of her  
by an imperfect society. She learns,  
however, that trying to deny her place  
in the real world by creating a private  
Utopia bodes self-destruction.

LeSueur apparently views sexual re-  
lations as being something impure that  
one submits to. Reality is decisively  
violent, and she seems to view initia-  
tion into both sex and reality as being  
savage. The world of her book is one of  
bourgeois complicity, wherein the  
young are victims of the capitalist de-  
mand to possess and wherein female  
sexuality is a tool for bartering. It must  
be kept in mind, of course, that all  
three novels were written in the 1930s,  
a time when women were unimaginably  
low on the totem pole.

There is no escaping the message be-  
hind the work, but, if heavy-handed in  
delivery, LeSueur’s belief that the  
“artist’s duty is...to return to the people  
their need and vision...of a new birth  
of abundance and equality” is certainly  
worthy. Meanwhile, the impressionistic  
lyricism of her stories is curiously con-  
suming and seductive, and the book  
stands out as being brave and refresh-  
ing during the current blitz of coming-  
of-age nostalgia.

Anne Roston is a freelance writer  
currently living in Washington, D.C.

Belles Lettres ° 5