The Kaleidoscope of Gender

No Man’s Land: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century. Volume
II: Sexchanges, by Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar. New Haven, CT: Yale

University Press, 1989, $29.95, 455 pp.

by Deborah Price

“We may not know exactly
what sex is,” the influ-
ential sexologist Have-

lock Ellis wrote in 1933, “but we do
know that it is mutable, with the possi-
bility of one sex being changed into the
other sex, that its frontiers are often
uncertain and that there are many stages
between a complete male and a com-
plete female.” Ellis’s tone of scientific
amazement captures a historical mo-
ment when everyone — from his male
medical colleagues and politicians to
female writers and social activists —
seemed fascinated with learning exactly
what sex was.

That interest in gender in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth cen-
turies raised possibilities for women and
anxieties in men. The possibilities and
the anxieties as reflected in social
change and in literature are the subject
of Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar’s
second volume of No Man’s Land: The
Place of the Woman Writer in the Twen-
tieth Century. Like its predecessor,
Sexchanges is impressive in breadth and
analysis. Although some of its early
chapters seem endless, the book is worth
its frustrating moments.

Think of the slow parts as a long fuse
leading to dynamite. The final section of
the book — “Reinventing Gender” — is
outstanding. The authors there study
the emergence of lesbian writing, the
liberating effects of World War I on
women, and the experimental cross-
dressing that they argue was an exten-
sion of the radical way gender was being
explored in literature.

Women inspired by other women,
including lesbian expatriate writers liv-
ing in Paris, were among the women
writers who tested the outer limits of
cultural and biological roles. Gilbert and
Gubar divide these writers into two
groups: those who turned to Sappho as
their inspiration and guide and those
who believed they had to forge their own
tradition. The groups shared, however,
the desire to create a “self-consciously
lesbian literary tradition for the first
time,” the authors note. Radclyffe Hall,
H.D., Renée Vivien, Natalie Barney,
and Gertrude Stein are discussed with
humor, insight, and sensitivity.

No Man’s Land

The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century

SEX CHANGES

The moving and inspiring chapter on
World War I helps fill in the female gap
left by Paul Fussell’s groundbreaking The
Great War and Modern Memory. The war
that shattered the lives of many men of-
fered change, opportunity, and excite-
ment to as many women. In a Punch
cartoon, cited by Gilbert and Gubar,
two women “did not think the war would
last long — it was too good to last.” This
early enthusiasm was echoed in writing
by women, including Edith Wharton’s
Fighting France (1915) and A Backward
Glance (1934) and Alice B. Emerson’s
Ruth Fielding at the War Front and The
Hunt for the Lost Soldier (1918). The

critics note that

women writers of popular literature. . .
exploited the excitement rather than the
immobilization, the thrill rather than the
filth of the front. . . . “For a woman — a
marvelous experience!” “This was adven-
ture, indeed!” If such phrases sound in-
humane or actually inhuman, it is worth
remembering that most of their authors are
in some sense recounting their feeling that
the Great War was the first historical
event to allow (indeed, to require) them
to use their abilities and to be of use. . .
to enter the public realm of roads, re-
cords, maps, machines.

The first volume of No Man’s Land
covered so much material so quickly that
the reader at times felt like a tourist vis-

iting a dozen European cities in ten days.
The close textual reading of Edith
Wharton and Willa Cather in Sex-
changes comes as welcome relief. And
the choice of photographs and other art
in Sexchanges is more effective than in its
predecessor. Leering into the camera,
Edith Wharton wears a stylish dress with
ballooning arms, with two small dogs
poised on her shoulders. Seven World
War I veterans, linked arms-to-
shoulders in a pose reminiscent of foot-
ball teams, share four wheelchairs, with
only the stump of one leg among them.
Mary Walker, who fought for women to
be allowed to dress more freely, poses in
full tuxedo — with top hat and umbrella
— wearing her Congressional Medal of
Honor. And a series of photographs
shows the “war girls” driving ambulances
and motorcycles, digging graves, and
directing laboratory experiments.

As Gilbert and Gubar explain, the
unifying theme of the series is to investi-
gate “the relationship between feminism
and modernism, politics and poetics,
gender and genre, old rules and new
roles, during a period of notable cultural
conflict.” The first volume, The War of
the Words, set forth the authors’ argu-
ment that a battle between the sexes
helped trigger modernism and has fig-

ured in the language of modernist works
(see Belles Lettres, Winter 1989.) The
third volume, Letters from the Front,
scheduled for release in 1990, will close-
ly examine Virginia Woolf’s literary
experiments and writings of Black
women.

Sexchanges is highly successful and
manages to steer away from the lay
reader’s nightmare: obtuse academic
jargon. (Remember, these women foot-
note Adam and Eve in The Norton An-
thology of Literature by Women.) Gilbert
and Gubar persuasively interweave so-
cial history and literature and incorpo-
rate recent ideas of other feminist critics
as well as rafts of citations from nearly
every imaginable source.

The final pages take the reader
through the labyrinth of modern
techno-medicine — from sex-change
surgery to artificial breasts that enable
men to nurse babies — that makes the
experimental dressing of the early part of
this century seem quaint. Yet these last
pages also remind us that our age and its
writers are just as engrossed as Havelock
Ellis’s were in exploring the kaleido-
scopic quality of gender.

Deborah Price is a Washington jour-
nalist.

The Two-Headed Genius of Gilbert & Gubar

No Man’s Land, had an even greater pro-
pensity for growth and will result in
three volumes.

Because neither had tenure when
their partnership began, both were sen-
sitive to potential problems in tying
their publishing careers together. “A
committee could tell me that Sandra had
really written a book,” Gubar said, “and
then tell her I’d really written it. So we
were careful at the beginning to docu-
ment our independent scholarship.”

Many chapters in their books grew
out of scholarly articles they published
individually, and in their prefaces, they
state who was primarily responsible for
what material. Their typical work style
involves each of them drafting a chap-
ter, then exchanging and revising one
another’s writing.

From Indiana University, Gilbert
went to the University of California at
Davis and then to Princeton, which she
recently left to return to California. This
created logistical nightmares since Gu-
bar remained in Indiana. The team re-
lies on the telephone, the mail, air-
planes, and joint lectures where they
can consult in person to keep their work
moving forward.

So how do you write amicably with
someone for more than fifteen years?
“You have to be very good friends and
think quickly along similar lines,” said
Gilbert. “We have survived through the
sheer good luck that we have so much in
common and work so well together.”
Gubar put it similarly. “We have an ex-
traordinary affinity and intellectual
friendship.”

Next in their plans is to finish the fi-
nal volume of No Man’s Land and revise
The Norton Anthology of Literature by
Women.

And what then? Do they have
another joint project waiting? No, both
said. They probably will take a break and
pursue independent projects, at least for
awhile. Gilbert, now in her early fifties,
recently released a new collection of
poems, Blood Pressure (reviewed in this
issue), and more poetry writing is likely
awaiting her, she said. Gubar, forty-
five, said she wants to devote more time
to writing fiction.

As for any advice they could offer to
would-be collaborators, “If there is a
secret, it isn’t ideological — it is an in-
tellectual excitement that grows,” ac-
cording to Gubar. “Collaboration defi-
nitely isn’t for everyone.”

—Deborah Price

Summer 1989