Valiant Women,

Courageous Lives

Daughter of the Hills, by Myra Page. The Feminist Press (311 E. 94th St., New York, NY

10128), 1986, $8.95, 268 pp. (PB)

River of Light, by Brenda Peterson. Graywolf Press (P.O. Box 75006, St. Paul, MN 55175),

1986, $8.00, 303 pp. (PB)
by Mary Lynn Skutley

In the book, Blue Willow, a young migrant

girl escapes the drudgery of her life
by reading tales of romance and chivalry.
When she laments to her hard-worked
father that “in those days everything was
an adventure and you just had to be
brave or it was the end of you,” he so-
berly explains, “Every day that comes
along is an adventure to us, and may be
dangerous because we don’t know for
sure what it’s going to bring. . . it takes
just about as much courage to live like
that without losing your grip on things
as ever it took to buckle on armor and
go out to fight some fellow who had a
grudge against you.”

Unsung, unglamorous courage has
long been an attribute of those who must
work to survive. Daughter of the Hills, by
Myra Page, and River of Light, by Brenda
Peterson, are two adventures that docu-
ment the struggles of working women.
They describe strong women who fight
as equals beside their men to keep their
grip, and they debunk the delusion that
women’s work is, or ever has been, in-
consequential or superfluous.

Both novels are set in the 1930s.
Daughter of the Hills tells the true story
of Dolly Hawkins, a spirited woman who
used her talent for “tongue lashing” to
rally the coal miners of the Cumberland
Mountains of Tennessee to fight for safer
working conditions. Myra Page, who
was Dolly Hawkins’s friend, describes
her as a firebrand whose spunk was in-
herited from her father, Jim Hawkins,
“a fiery oversized Irishman with red
beard and hair” who was “revered and
cursed alike.”

When the governor of Tennessee, in
cahoots with the mine owners, brought
in penitents to work the mines, it was
Jim Hawkins who outwitted them: He
organized a midnight roundup of the
penitents, marched them to the gover-
nor’s mansion, and roused him from his
bed to demand that the miners be al-
lowed to do their rightful work. Years
later, Dolly is asked to speak out against
mine owners who now refuse to replace
the rotten wooden props that have
caused cave-ins, crushed limbs, and
death: “Let me think it over,” I said,
knowing by the fury rising in me that I
would go. Shades of our dead fathers
routing penitents from our hills would
rise and speak to us... buried under
coal.”

The novel is centered on Dolly’s strug-
gle to come to terms with her legacy,
and her growth in love mirrors her evolu-
tion as a determined fighter for miners’
rights. Dolly’s love is sparked at the be-
ginning of the novel when John Cooper,
“with his thick mane of chestnut . . .
black eyes dancing” and “cheek bones
... high and sharp pointed like Ma’s,
bespeaking Indian blood,” strides into
her hollow looking for work. He is smit-
ten with her at once, but she resists him,
mindful of her parents’ unhappy mar-
riage and her father’s tragic death as the
result of an adulterous affair.

But Cooper soon proves himself a hard
worker, an unsurpassed fiddler and
storyteller, and a patient, respectful
suitor. Dolly climbs High Top, a moun-
tain peak sanctified by the memory of
her granny and parents, to wrestle with
her fear of him: “Seize hold of life, Dol.
It was Dad himself talking with me.

E Doris Gate’s classic children’s

L 2 © Belles Lettres

.

Myra Page

Don’t be doubting. Stake all you have. That
was his way. Not to fear hurt nor danger.
Nor, when it came, love.”

Dolly and John marry, and Dolly
shoulders the burdens of a miner’s wife.
With an ear for mountain dialect and
an eye for detail, Page deftly weaves the
textures of daily life. The women cook,
sew, fetch wood, and haul water, tend-
ing to work above ground as their men
mine the coal below. But, overall, Page
describes a life of shared struggles and
triumphs in which work is an essential
tonic for the soul. The injured men join
the women above ground to build furni-
ture, tend crops, tend children. They
share the women’s dread and sorrow as
the news of each cave-in or gas leak
spreads and the villagers gather to iden-
tify first the dead, then the injured, then
the loved ones who have been spared.

Dolly’s outrage grows as she joins in
this agony of waiting. Twice, her fears
are confirmed: First her brother Clyde
suffers a minor injury, then John loses
his leg when it is crushed in a cave-in.
Dolly vows that her children will never
risk the dangers of mining even as she
searches for another job that will lift
John’s sagging spirits. In the meantime,
John helps her with the cooking and the
wash. Dolly reflects that “I hadn’t the
heart to cross him in it, for I knew him
right. Man or woman, a body has got to
feel of use. Take this from him, and he
is better off dead.” Eventually, she per-
suades a lumber boss to hire them as a
team by silencing his objections to hiring
a woman: “ ‘I am uncommon strong.’ I
proved it by lifting one of their logs,
single-handed. Loggers gathered around
to whistle and clap their boots.”

When John dies and their son is forced
to work the mines to support the family,
Dolly’s resolve to fight for miners’ rights
is strengthened: “Numb and burdened
as I was with sorrow, I could not help
seeing young miners’ scarred bodies as
they returned from the night shift.
Women folk with their secret haunted
look. Scrawny young ones. Grief shar-
pened my sight. I felt an angry will rising
in me.”

In the preface, Page notes the im-
provements that unions have brought
for the miners and the dangers, such as
Black Lung disease exacerbated by slip-
shod removal of coal dust, that remain.
She writes that women are allowed to
work the mines now and that “Dolly
would have liked this.” Daughter of the

Hills is both a straightforward tale and
a fitting epitaph for a woman who de-
voted her life to improving the lot of
her people.

River of Light also documents the work
of a strong woman, but her tale is not
so straightforward and her triumphs are
not so easily lauded. Perhaps this is be-
cause the opposition is more formidable.
The book describes the desperate efforts
of Lloyd Sloan, a farmer from North
Georgia, to make his land fruitful. De-
spite the inevitable foreclosure that
takes place early in the novel, Lloyd’s
real foe is not the banker who denies
him a third mortgage but the cruelty and
fickleness of nature, which forsakes his
devotion.

Brenda Peterson’s novel is a lyrical
and rich account of Lloyd’s struggle to
find spiritual redemption through his re-
demption of the land. The novel is di-
vided into five parts. In the first two,
Lloyd marries Nettie Mason against his
father’s warning that “they’s beggarly,
son, and ifn ye gang up with a Mason,
she’s gonna eat a hole right through you
like them weevils.” His father’s premo-
nitions are confirmed by Nettie’s barren-
ness. Only after several miscarriages does
she bear him a son, but Lloyd’s joy is
cut short by the midwife: “You got your
chile, Lloyd Sloan, but you ain’t got
much left of your wife.”

Nettie’s sickness is not properly diag-
nosed until scores of cattle die of bovine
abortion and her undulant fever is
beyond the reach of medication. Nettie
is left with few capabilities. Her routine
is reduced to milking her cow, baking
morning biscuits, and easing into her
chair to commence smoking a day’s
worth of cigarettes: “A delicate skein of
thin white air spread over her contem-
plative face, like the veil of a Sunday
church hat. Swirling, the gray smoke
settled like fog in her deep-set eyes. She
listened with these eyes as if against the
dark; she saw signs and revelations in
the silences.”

Nettie’s son, Ira, is raised by church-
women. Lloyd at first mourns the loss
of Nettie’s vitality, then is hardened
against the stranger, ensconced in smoke
and make-believe, who has taken her
place. When the bank forecloses on his
farm, he moves the family to town and
takes the job that his uncle has arranged
for him as deputy of Jordan County,
never fully accepting his exile, for “a
man who lost his land lost his memory.”

In the last three sections of the novel,
Lloyd’s fortunes change for the better.
The turnabout comes on a moonlit night
when he is ordered to evict a group of
migrants from a farmer’s land. There he
meets Jessie Walsh, the migrant midwife
who is coaxing new life from one of her
companions in the back of a pick-up:
“Here, honey don’t be kickin now. Ease
up... ease.” The midwife caught the
woman’s legs in mid-air, each knee
cupped in one hand like stirrups so that
the midwife rocked back and forth with
every shove, the truck beneath the
woman singing on its wheel springs. To
Lloyd it looked like a primitive dance.”
It is a primitive dance of hope. Lloyd
watches, rapt, and later propositions
Jessie and her three sons to stay and help
him regain his land.

Jessie is everything that Nettie is not.
Her years of migrant farming have made
her strong and resilient, and Peterson
skillfully creates in her character a foil
both for Nettie’s diseased resignation
and for Lloyd’s rigid fervor: Jessie’s years
of stooping and picking in the fields have
given her an ability to listen to and com-
mune with the land that contrasts with
Lloyd’s desperate efforts to impose his
will on it.

Even Jessie’s love for her sons reflects
her knowledge of the earth:

In each of her children, Jessie smelled
the fruit season in which she bore him:
Nate, the youngest, like that sticky
fragrance of ripe peaches. . . her second
son, Leon, smelled sour and green like a
vine’s first hard tomatoes, and her oldest
child, Virgil, had the sorrowful smell of
late adolescence that struck Jessie like the
hidden acidity of berries.

Yet, Jessie’s knowledge has come
through a baptism of pain. Stricken
with grief at her first husband’s abandon-
ment, she gave herself up to a fevered de-
lirium that lasted many days. Only
under the healing guidance and incanta-
tions of the Mambo woman did her spirit
return from the “resplendent river that
had not granted her crossing.”

Through her passage, Jessie is
strengthened and sensitized to the suf-
ferings of others. She works steadily be-
side Lloyd, cooking and cleaning for
both families, nourishing the towns-
people with hot coffee, homemade
donuts, and tales from afar at the diner
where Lloyd has found her work; and re-
storing the rotting cabin that was once
intended for Lloyd’s new bride. But
Jessie’s true vocation rests on her knowl-
edge of the spirit, and she uses the tools
of the earth to soothe and nurture her
kinfolk as they struggle to transcend the
harsh dissolution of their lives.

River of Light is essentially a religious
drama of mercy and damnation played
out by those who work the earth. In
Jessie’s character, Peterson expresses the
spiritual courage of a woman wielding
her faith to conquer despair rather than
the tidy courage of knights battling dra-
gons. Although Jessie’s gains are less
tangible than those of Dolly Hawkins,
her struggle is more universal. Both
Daughter of the Hills and River of Light de-
pict women who are working valiantly
to keep their grip in an inhospitable
world. Their bravery is mundane and
magnificent.

@ Mary Lynn Skutley is an editorial as-
sistant for Belles Lettres who lives in
Washington, DC.

Errata

@ In the review entitled “Sisterhood
Earned” on page 10 of the July/August
issue, Linda Hogan was erroneously cre-
dited for writing a story that was written
by Celia Smith in The Things That Divide
Us: Stories by Women.

® Calyx wrote to clear up a misleading
statement in the review of The
Riverhouse Stories (September/October,
page 12): “As the review was written, it
sounded as if it was an editor at Calyx
who gave Carlisle a hard time about
publishing a book that ‘could be read
and enjoyed by everybody’ because
‘there’s no publishing category called
everybody.’ Actually, as the foreword
makes clear, it was an unnamed editor
in New York. Calyx editors don’t lose a
lot of sleep over whether or not good
books fit into the right category.”

@ In the November/December 1987
issue, the last line of “Report From
Paris” was inadvertently cut off. The last
sentence should read “The current trend
for everyone is to seek solutions on an
individualistic basis, thereby placing the
emphasis on resilience and personal
courage and initiative.”

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988