At last,

Laughing Our Hearts Out

The Hearts and Lives of Men, by Fay Weldon. Viking/Penguin, New York, 1988,

$18.95, 357 pp.

The Heart of the Country, by Fay Weldon. Viking/Penguin, New York, 1988, $17.95,

208 pp.

by Regina Barreca

When Fay Weldon was asked

what she thought about the

magnificent public response
to The Hearts and Lives of Men, the first
of her novels truly to capture the atten-
tion of the American reading (and criti-
cal) audience, she said, “It’s all very
nice, but it’s for the wrong book.” I
think Weldon was referring to the fact
that Hearts and Lives originally appeared
in the British weekly magazine Woman
—and that it was written piece by piece for
serial publication. Perhaps she believed
it less “literary” than some of her other
works. Perhaps she was concerned that
new readers would find her too frivolous,
too glib. When asked why she decided to
write a serial novel, she answered that
Woman had approached her agent to see
whether she would write a short story for
them. “Being an agent,” Weldon con-
tinued, “he said ‘why not one a week?’
and that’s how it started.”

Fortunately, Hearts and Lives does not
suffer from the problems of disjointed-
ness or frivolity that worried Weldon: It
is a quintessentially and wonderfully
Weldonesque novel. One of the best
things about Weldon is that she has cre-
ated a new category for simile. We can
safely say, in response to the question
“How are things going?” that life is like a
Fay Weldon novel. This answer is all
encompassing. Our lives become Wel-
donesque when the following elements
can no longer be denied: that there is no
such thing as coincidence; that justice
— haphazard as it appears — is swift,
satisfying, and ultimately inescapable;
that we are none of us safe, however se-
cure we feel; and that “to the happy all
things come: happiness can even bring
the dead back to life, it is our resent-
ments, our dreariness, our hate and

Screaming in Love

envy, unrecognized by us, which keep us
miserable. Yet these things are in our
heads, not out of our hands; we own
them; we can throw them out if we
choose.”

The Hearts and Lives of Men can safely
be called a comedy. The novel begins by
telling us in the second paragraph,
“There! You already know this story is to
have a happy ending. . . . Why not?”
Has Weldon turned traditional? Hardly.
She creates a comedy that depends on
the inversion and subversion of tradi-
tional, masculinist comedy. She over-
turns convention in much the same way
as the artist in her novel, John Lally,
paints “the Rape not of the Sabine
Women, but by the Sabine Women. It
was they who were falling upon helpless
Roman soldiers.”

It is a story of love at first sight and of
divorce, of black and white magic, of
airplane crashes and near misses, of
children abandoned and reclaimed.
Helen and Clifford, the lovers whose
catalytic romance prompts much of the
tale’s adventure, fall into one another's
arms in the early sixties when people
“wanted everything and thought they
could have it... . Dinner, in other

Molly Hite. Photo by Harvey Ferdschneider.

Class Porn, by Molly Hite. Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press, 1987, $8.95 (PB),

$23.95 (HB), 268 pp.

Felicity, by Coral Lansbury. Ballantine/Ivy 1988, $3.95, 247 pp.

by Jane Campbell

Presumably aimed at female uni-
versity professors like myself,
Class Porn and Felicity may also
hook former professors, academics’
spouses, or curiosity seekers. Totally
seductive, each book interweaves

potboiler plotting with satire, urging the

reader to solve a mystery while revealing
how little has really changed for aca-
demic women since the sixties.

Class Porn takes the reader on a
blackly hilarious romp through those
days that some of us recall as vibrant
with student protest, sexual excess, and
intellectual ferment, telling it like it
really was. Student compositions might
have posed sophisticated arguments
against the Vietnam War or racism;
more often, however, they discoursed
on such subjects as the advantages of
sorority life: “These girls are special.
They are my sisters! (I don’t mean they
are my real sisters but, in some ways
even more than my real sisters, no of-
fense Jill and Kath!)” The anti-draft
movement welcomes our heroine, Elea-
nor Nyland, primarily for her cookie
baking, typing, and willingness to liber-
ate mimeo materials from the English
Department. The sexual revolution, as

2 @ Belles Lettres

Eleanor experiences it, consists of mash
notes, obscene phone calls, drunken
harassment from married colleagues,
and public humiliation about her ex-
husband, who has abandoned her for a
“non-intellective” graduate student in
pottery. Buried in an avalanche of fresh-
man themes, surrounded by medievalists
who “herd together and make chilly
remarks about scholarship,” Eleanor
delays completing her dissertation on
unfashionable Wordsworth and
launches into The Revenge of the
Leonorans, a pornographic manuscript
that she attempts to write from a female
perspective.

Her hero, Bik Chaggard, suffers
through a series of humiliating episodes
with a bevy of amazons, who arouse him
by ordering him around. Awed by his
captor’s attractively freckled breasts,
Bik hazards his desire:

“I would—” he began, and then
stopped, terrified by his own pre-
sumption.

“Go on,” she murmured.

“I would taste them,” he murmured
back.

Her lip curled, almost imper-
ceptibly. “Taste only? Would you go
further? Would you... bite?”

His lips were trembling. Beads of

sweat stood out on his noble brow.

words, and no washing up.” Their re-
lationship continues through marriages
to various people, including one another
on occasion, over twenty years or so.
They have “as good a chance as any” of
“setting away with” a happy ending, but
of course they might not deserve it. Who
of us does deserve happiness? After
reading this novel, such questions no
longer seem rhetorical.

After reading The Heart of the
Country, we realize that there is no such
thing as a rhetorical question in a Wel-
don novel. Ask a question and (by God
or the Devil) you will get an answer. The
Heart of the Country is marginally a bet-
ter book than The Hearts and Lives of
Men. Weldon is in more familiar, more
mythical territory where judgments are
not weighed with caution and where we
are not asked to have sympathy for the
despicable characters, as we are in
Hearts and Lives. Instead of opening with
love at first sight, this novel (written
before Hearts and Lives and already suc-
cessfully adapted as a British miniseries)
opens with the exclamation “Oh! The
wages of sin! Natalie Harris sinned, and
her husband Harry left for work one fine
morning and didn’t come back.”

Natalie commits the usual sins of lust,
pride, and envy, but she is cursed finally
for the “special sin of splashing the
poor.” This is a modern sin, Weldon’s
first-person/third-person narrator, So-
nia, explains. Sonia, instructed by her
psychiatrist, is attempting to step out-
side of herself and look at herself as oth-
ers see her (“that is to say in the third
person”) when she enters into Natalie’s
story. She describes the way that Na-
talie, driving her two elegant children to
their private school in her Volvo station
wagon, splashes unemployed, unhappy
Sonia as she is walking her three chil-
dren to the state school they hate. “God
rot her,” said Sonia aloud. . . she could
deliver a curse or two effectively. God
heard. God sent his punishment on
Natalie. Or was it the Devil? He forgave
her other sins, but got her for this one.
Natalie committed the sin of carelessly
splashing Sonia. Sonia cursed her. Mis-
fortune fell on Natalie. Cause and ef-

fect? Words have power in Weldon’s
reality. "One must be careful with
words,“ she wrote back in The Fat
Woman's Joke, her first novel. "Words
turn probabilities into facts and by sheer
force of definition translate tendencies
into habits.“ Nothing is more powerful
than language. Language is the stuff of
love and, equally, the stuff of politics.

The Heart of the Country is an explic-
itly political novel, as is any novel deal-
ing with getting benefits from the state
(Natalie must get “tutorials on the Wel-
fare State” from Sonia, among others.)
Women shifted to the margin by society
become political because they do not
follow “the advice given to economically
dependent female spouses since the be-
ginning of time — wait for her husband
to cease his wanderings, and be as loving
as lovable in the meantime.” Not unlike
Ruth in Life and Loves of a She-Devil, the
women get their own back. It happens
during carnival. Carnival is comedy,
right? But this is a women’s comedy, and
so there must be a sacrifice and not a ri-
tual one either. “That was the purpose of
the event. Burn a virgin, fire a barn,
drown a witch. Clear old scores and start
afresh! What do you think the carnival
is about? Fun and games? Oh, no.”

As for comedy, well, this book has
one of the happiest endings of any I have
read, acknowledging as it does that
challenge, not stasis, is what makes for
happiness; that comedy for women de-
pends often on what was always misread
as her pain, “that it is up to women to
fight back, because the men have lost
their nerve”; that, in fact, through the
guise of dependence and sentiment “she
had been laughing at him all the time.”
Weldon maps the territory where come-
dy and terror meet, consume one
another, and create an altogether new
landscape.

@ Regina Barreca is Assistant Professor
of English at the University of Connecticut.
For Wayne State University Press, she is
completing a book on the history of women
and comedy entitled Punch Lines. She
edited the collections Last Laughs, and Sex
and Death in Victorian Literature.

“Majesty,” he whispered, “I would
indeed bite.”

“Take him away,” she commanded
scornfully. “No biters.”

Given the absence of a feminist
movement in Class Porn, Molly Hite’s
protagonist must assume the role of pic-
aresque heroine; her naiveté works in
concert with her resourcefulness, allow-
ing her to survive departmental efforts to
“wrest Basic [English] from the grip of
the schoolmarms” and turn it over to
“some really good guys.”

Coral Lansbury’s Felicity takes place
in the eighties, but her portrait of
Pequod, a mythical liberal arts college on
Long Island, lampoons the Neanderthal
attitudes that still prevail in academe.
Pequod’s president resolves to locate the
homicidal rapist terrorizing the campus
because “rape is not good for enrol-
ment.” Like Eleanor Nyland, Felicity is
naive, declaring she would rather be a
sexual object than a sexual reject. Her
ironically conceived obliviousness to
feminism exists despite conversion ef-
forts from her ex-lover Bernie. “A truly
liberated male who did not feel his mas-
culinity was threatened when he used a
vacuum or tossed together some zucchini
bread for a party,” Bernie sees no con-
tradiction in his rejection of Felicity
because she fails to keep their apartment
clean. A hirsute sex object in his own
right, Bernie prides himself on filling
“the first five rows of any classroom with
palpitating sophomores” and envisions
his academic future at Berkeley or Cor-

nell, where a gorgeous graduate student
will disrobe, intoning, “I’ve always wor-
shipped your mind, Professor Lefkowitz;
please let me worship your body.”
Notwithstanding the pain of Bernie’s
rejection, Felicity fervently pursues her
own academic dream of locating Whis-
tler’s erotic drawings. She is assisted by
her friend Stefan, who has suffered as-
sault from the KGB while smuggling
Russian art. Felicity’s artistic devotion
parallels Bernie’s sexual obsession, lead-
ing to Lansbury’s shameless trickery and
manipulation of the delighted reader.
Like Hite, Lansbury seeks to re-
envision sexuality from a woman’s per-
spective. Complementing Eleanor’s re-
formulation of male pornography, Fe-
licity supplants the male, violence-
tinged language for sexuality. Subvert-
ing Bernie’s request for “dirty” words
during lovemaking, Felicity invents her
own verbal exciters. “When men used
four letter words . . . it was offensive,
but when women used them it was un-
natural. Instead, she preferred to
scroom.” Perhaps because of its first-
person narration, Class Porn struck me
as easier to identify with, more sincere,
and less slick than Felicity. However,
both authors astonished me with their
mastery of language and wit, giving new
meaning to the term “feminist humor.”

® Jane Campbell is a feminist whose
nineteen years in literary academe allow her
to testify to the reality sketched out in these
novels. She is the author of Mythic Black
Fiction: The Transformation of History.

Fall 1988