The Texts of Self

The Female Autograph: Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the Tenth to the Twentieth Century, edited by Domna Stanton. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987, $12.95, 244 pp. (PB)

A Poetics of Women’s Autobiography: Marginality and the Fictions of Self-Representation, by Sidonie Smith. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987, $27.50 (HB), $12.95 (PB), 211 pp.

“American Women’s Narratives.” Special Issue of Women’s Studies, edited by Susan Armitage. Vol. 14, No. 1 (1987), 80 pp.

Writing a Woman’s Life, by Carolyn Heilbrun. New York: Ballantine, 1989, $6.95, 144 pp. (PB)

The Private Self: Theory and Practice of Women’s Autobiographical Writings, edited by Shari Benstock. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988, $34.95 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 319 pp.

Life/Lines: Theorizing Women’s Autobiography, edited by Bella Brodzki and Celeste Schenck. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988, $12.95, 363 pp. (PB)

Interpreting Women’s Lives: Feminist Theory and Personal Narratives, edited by The Personal Narratives Group. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989, $39.95 (HB), $14.95 (PB), 277 pp.

Black Women Writing Autobiography: A Tradition Within a Tradition, by Joanne Braxton. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1990, $24.95, 242 pp. Autobiographical Voices: Race, Gender, Self-Portraiture, by Francoise Lionnet. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989, $29.95, 258 pp.

by Elizabeth R. Baer

No woman has ever told the whole truth of her life.  
—Isadora Duncan (1927)

Women have not broken the million-year silence about themselves. Or, they are only beginning to.  
—Lillian Smith (1962)

The first extant autobiography in English was dictated in the early 1400s by Margery Kempe, who was illiterate. The Book of Margery Kempe opens with an account of childbirth and descent into madness. Kempe’s manuscript was lost, like many women’s life stories, and was recovered only recently, in 1934. This project of recovery continues as we enter the final decade of the twentieth century; we are discovering not only the autobiographical texts, but also their meaning through theory.

Ten years ago, Estelle Jelinek pioneered this effort with her introduction to Women's Autobiography: Essays in Criticism. She pointed out the exclusion (by then a familiar notion in feminist criticism) of women’s autobiography from literary criticism of the genre; analysis of autobiography did not begin until the early 1900s and was not widely accepted until after World War II.

Jelinek offered a simple but purportedly comprehensive notion of the uniqueness of women’s autobiography in terms of gender differences. First, she asserted that female autobiographers focus on the personal, whereas male writers look at broad historical or public issues. Whether the autobiography is by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Mountain Wolf Woman, or Margaret Mead, the emphasis is on family, friends, and domestic matters. Second, women use irony, humor, understatement, and a straightforward style, whereas men often use an idealized, self-confident, exaggerated, and sometimes nostalgic style. Finally, Jelinek noted that women rarely tell their stories chronologically. Women’s autobiographies are fragmentary, disconnected, or organized into chapters that could stand alone.

Jelinek’s was the only theory from 1980 onward for scholars and teachers of women’s autobiography. In 1984, Domna Stanton edited a special issue of the New York Literary Forum, republished as The Female Autograph. There she acknowledged both Jelinek’s earlier work and the limitations of her own volume, declining to offer a new comprehensive theory. She called for “more probing analysis of the (possible) differences of female autographic writing” and for a better understanding of its tradition. There is, Stanton pleaded, an “overarching need for a systematic examination of the ways in which female autographs at different times, in different places, may be intertextually linked.” Sidonie Smith, in her opening chapter of A Poetics of Women’s Autobiography (1987), gave this disclaimer: “I offer here no comprehensive theory of women’s autobiographical writing.” By the following year, Mitzi Myers suggested (The Private Self): “Although the field of autobiography studies is still young, it already seems too late to dare a definition that encompasses the whole of a protean genre.”

In this review of eight books and one journal, I will trace the emerging theory of women’s autobiography, discussing how it confirms and moves beyond Jelinek’s early postulation.

Stanton’s anthology, The Female Autograph, fails to provide an articulated, unified, or coherent view of women’s autobiography. Her introductory essay ends, by her own admission, inconclusively, as does the volume. The anthology provides a sense of the diversity of women’s experience and forms of expression (many excerpts focus on job discrimination) but not in advancing a theoretical understanding. The volume is attentive to letters, which are often excluded from the genre. Six of the letters of Artemisia Gentileschi, the Italian Renaissance painter, are included, along with a provocative essay tracing connections between her correspondence and her paintings. Two of Fanny Mendelssohn Hensel’s letters to her famous brother are found here, too, as well as an essay on Madame de Sevigné’s letters to her daughter, leaving the reader hungry to read this correspondence. Finally, Catharine Stimpson writes about the recently published letters of Virginia Woolf — all 4,000 of them! Stimpson’s prose is, as ever, lucid and surprising; she discusses Woolf’s letters as a uniquely female text, occurring in a “middle space,” written neither for herself nor for the public. This is a useful concept when applied to epistolary autobiographies, such as Elinore Pruitt Stewart’s Letters of a Woman Homesteader (1914).

Stanton’s anthology would be useful for teachers. It includes autobiography from a wide range of countries, formats, and periods. In addition, the volume contains the manuscripts of several hard-to-obtain autobiographies, ranging from a Russian cavalry maid to a free Black nineteenth-century minister in the African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, and several illustrations. Sidonie Smith opens A Poetics of Women’s Autobiography with a concise, straightforward presentation of the history of autobiography criticism and of the failure of these theories, which implicitly are founded on a male-as-norm ideology, to help us understand women’s autobiography. Smith concludes that the majority of autobiography critics still persist in either erasing women’s story, relegating it to the margins... or, when they treat women’s autobiography seriously, uncritically conflating the dynamics of male and female selfhood and textuality... At worst, they condemn autobiographies by women as anomalies: sometimes interesting, sometimes even skillfully written, but more often than not flawed, insignificant, idiosyncratic, irrelevant, or just plain tedious.

Smith finds that Jelinek’s “recourse to a binarism that reifies the public-private opposition eventuates in a simplistic and unsatisfactory description of textual difference” between male and female autobiography and asserts that many exceptions to Jelinek’s generalizations can be named. Cautioning the reader that she herself “offers no comprehensive theory,” Smith defines the limits of her study as formal autobiography (no letters, diaries, journals, oral histories) and as the Anglo-American tradition.

Smith begins to present her “poetics of women’s autobiography” by offering a critique of the “way in which literary historians have described the cultural origins of autobiography as the generic expression of a certain idea of selfhood in the West.” According to Smith, the insistence of Christianity on the inferiority of women and their subsequent silencing has rendered their autobiographies marginal. “Transgression,” “anomaly,” “heresy,” “contamination,” “illegitimacies,” “threat,” “disruption,” and “disorder” are the nouns used to describe the women’s texts of self by the patriarchal order.

Since the ideology of gender makes of woman’s life script a nonstory, a silent space, a gap in patriarchal culture, the ideal woman is self-effacing rather than self-promoting, and her ‘natural’ story shapes itself not around the public, heroic life but around the fluid, circumstantial, contingent responsiveness to others that, according to patriarchal ideology, characterizes the life of woman but not autobiography. From that point of view, woman has no ‘autobiographical self in the same sense that man does. From that point of view, she has no ‘public’ story to tell. That situating of the autobiographer in the two universes of discourse accounts for the poetics of women’s autobiography and grounds its difference.

Smith applies this poetics to five autobiographies: The Book of Margery Kempe, Margaret Cavendish’s A True Relation of My Birth, Breeding and Life, A Narrative of the Life of Mrs. Charlotte Charke, Harriet Martineau’s Autobiography, and Maxine Hong Kingston’s The Woman Warrior. Readers familiar with earlier criticism of Kempe’s autobiography will find Smith’s approach insightful. The chapter on Kingston is notable as well: Smith sees it as a postmodern autobiography.

In her introduction to the Special Issue of “Women’s Studies: American Women Narratives,” guest editor Susan Armitage notes that each essay begins “with a close study of a (usually neglected) female text.” Each then goes on to analyze what is uniquely female about it and how “the feminist form is then employed to critique... the existing male modes of scholarship or theory.” Gayle R. Davis’s essay “Women’s Frontier Diaries: Writing for a Good Reason” outlines five functions the diary performed for the lonely, displaced pioneer woman. Davis draws upon five unpublished diaries of white women to demonstrate how the diaries served as mediation between the familiar and the new: between past and present, between “self-perception as Victorian lady and feared loss of identity in the wild,” between isolation and communication, between fear and estrangement, and order and control, and between being forgotten and remembered. Especially notable is her explanation of the sparseness that characterizes pioneer diaries, which can be a source of frustration for curious contemporary readers.

Judy Nolte Lensink’s essay “Expanding the Boundaries of Criticism: The Diary as Female Autobiography” focuses not on the function of a diary, but rather on its design: “a supersubtle design, similar to a quilt’s, made up of incremental stitches that define a pattern.” Using the diary kept by Emily Hawley Gillespie, from age twenty to her death at age fifty (1858-1888), Lensink argues that diaries are unfairly excluded from the autobiography canon. She also proposes that although “intensity of experience is usually signaled by quantity of language rather than by metaphor,” excessive use of metaphor often obscures emotion. She comments on silences in women’s diaries (frequently on such topics as sexuality and birth control); on what she calls “diary time”; and on the recurring image of home in nineteenth-century women’s diaries, as well as the use of family relationships as the chronological structure. Lensink has subsequently published a book-length study, “A Secret to be Buried”: The Diary of Emily Hawley Gillespie.

The final two essays focus on the writing of immigrant women. Gail M. Nomura presents three dozen tanka, five-line poems in a traditional Japanese form, written by Teiko Tomita, a first-generation (issei) immigrant whose arranged marriage brought her to Washington State in 1921. Characterized by compression and concentration, the tanka reveal depths of emotion. Writing of the arrival of a package from her family, Tomita confides:

When I think  
It is from Japan  
Even wrapping paper  
Seems so close to me  
It’s hard to throw it away.

The tanka trace Tomita’s life as a farm worker, mother, prisoner in an internment camp during World War II, garment worker, homeowner, and grandmother. Nomura reads each poem as “a diary entry relating a significant event or thought in her life.” In these tanka, the cherry tree, a traditional Japanese image, is common; Tomita writes of “grafting” it, a vivid metaphor for her own transition to the American West.

Winter 1990