WWII Novels

A Stricken Field, by Martha Gellhorn. 302 pp.

A Fine of Two Hundred Francs, by Elsa Triolet. 184 pp.  
On the Side of the Angels, by Betty Miller. 238 pp.

One Fine Day, by Mollie Panter-Downes.

The Gentlewomen, by Laura Talbot. 280 pp.  
—New York: Penguin/Virago, 1986, $6.95 (PB)

Berlin Wild, by Elly Welt. New York: Viking, 1986, $17.95, 368 pp.

by Laura Hapke

In 1947, New York Times book critic

Orville Prescott asserted that the

best World War II novels, to his  
mind characterized by a focus on com-  
bat, were “tributes to the men who wrote  
them.” Five novels written during or  
shortly after the war and now reissued  
and one newly published novel chal-  
lenge Prescott’s assumptions. With their  
common subject, the rearrangement in  
personal relationships caused by war,  
these six works provide an alternative  
to traditionally masculine perspectives  
of war and its impact.

Martha Gellhorn is unjustly as-  
sociated with her brief marriage to  
Hemingway rather than with her long,  
continuing career as a reporter, war cor-  
respondent, and author of fiction. One  
of her early novels, A Stricken Field, writ-  
ten shortly after the Munich Pact and  
published in 1940, describes the plight  
of people displaced by Hitler’s 1939 an-  
nexation of Sudetenland. They were  
given very brief refuge, then were re-  
turned to a Nazi-occupied territory  
where their politics suddenly con-  
demned them. American journalist  
Mary Douglas has joined a group of male  
reporters sent to Prague to cover new  
developments. The novel is, in some  
ways, extended reportage. With a fine  
eye for detail, Gellhorn provides ironic  
vignettes of refugee life: the over-  
crowded farmhouse where families no  
sooner arrive than they are required to  
plan their return, a kindergarten where  
many of the children have been or-  
phaned by their parents’ deportation and  
where dinner is a piece of bread and  
some grapes. In another powerful en-  
counter, an old man is so afraid of being  
arrested and sent back that he apologizes  
when Mary accidentally hits him with  
her car.

A Stricken Field is of historical interest  
as a testament to the appeasement men-  
tality of nations that were unwilling to  
take in German refugees. Mary Douglas  
tells Rita, who has spent 3 years in a  
German prison and is now helping ref-  
ugees elude the Gestapo, “You better  
not count too much on the moral indig-  
nation of the world.” But the novel is  
equally important as a study of the  
woman-as-journalist who confronts a  
human tragedy and is divided between  
feminine compassion and masculine de-  
tachment. Mary’s male colleagues argue  
that it is unprofessional to become in-  
volved. The scenes in which Mary, ac-  
cepted as one of the boys, questions the  
value of her adaptation are some of the  
most thought-provoking in the book.  
Gellhorn’s work bears witness to the un-  
flinching quality of a gaze that, by care-  
fully recording the terrors of the dis-  
placed, also registers the moral implica-  
tions for the observer.

Moral behavior in an immoral time is  
also the concern of Resistance member

Martha Gellhorn

Marcu/April 1987

Elsa Triolet, author of A Fine of Two  
Hundred Francs. These stories were is-  
sued illegally during the war by under-  
ground presses and first published in  
book form in 1945. The collection com-  
bines a painter’s sense of place with a  
poet’s understanding of the contingency  
of existence in occupied France: the cut-  
backs on essential items, the suspicion  
of one’s neighbors, the fear of denunci-  
ation for listening to foreign broadcasts.  
In the sorrows of her protagonists,  
Triolet, herself in hiding during the war,  
conveys a longing for the beauty and  
freedom of pre-war Paris. The grayness  
of Lyons, where most of the characters  
in these interlocking stories seek refuge,  
is a metaphor for Nazi rule: “To walk in  
the streets of Lyons was to wade in cold  
slush, grey barracks with a swastika flag  
over each gate, two field-grey sentinels  
helmeted and armed to the teeth.”

In the story “The Lovers of Avignon,”  
the alienation of Resistance courier  
Juliette Noel is all the more real because  
she is ceaselessly in contact with  
people—possible informers on railway  
trains, in cafes, in waiting rooms. When  
on a mission to Avignon, Juliette has a  
romantic interlude with another Resis-  
tance member; Triolet conveys the sur-  
realism of their need to color and fan-  
tasize an alternative reality.

The longest piece, “The Private Life  
of Alexis Slavsky,” also demonstrates  
Triolet’s interest in the relation between  
wartime intimacy and feminine political  
commitment. The apolitical artist  
Alexis, who resents the war, is drawn  
into brief contact with his friend Louise;  
he desires her and is unaware that she  
has joined the Resistance. It is an in-  
triguing role reversal: He thrives on love  
affairs, she seeks temporary respite from  
the pressures of her work with the  
maquis. After Louise is arrested and  
taken by the Gestapo, Alexis finds her  
description of their meeting. He recog-  
nizes “an intimate voice which he had  
never known.” Triolet’s art is a subtle  
one, detailing love’s ambiguous oppor-  
tunities and delicious dissatisfactions in  
a way that anticipates the films of Eric  
Rohmer.

Betty Miller, Mollie Panter-Downes,  
and Laura Talbot set their novels in the  
relative safety of rural England, yet like  
Triolet, they are preoccupied with  
women’s courage in the face of wartime  
anxiety and responsibility. On the Side  
of the Angels, Miller’s 1945 story, is about  
Honor Heriot, a young mother whose  
boyish physician husband works at a  
military hospital and chafes at living out  
the war away from what he imagines are  
the exhilarations of combat. Honor is  
trying to prevent him from taking an  
assignment whose distance from his  
family appeals as much as its potential  
for heroism.

Laura Talbot

From its initial scene depicting  
Honor, alone with her children, waiting  
for the footsteps of a husband who prefers  
drinking with his military colleagues,  
the novel employs the war to make a  
much larger statement about relation-  
ships between men and women.  
Through a series of ironically paired en-  
counters, Miller offers mordant reflec-  
tions on the pursuit of manliness. Men  
turn their women into transient sexual  
comforters or go-betweens in struggles  
with other men, only to leave at times  
of crisis or tension. Honor resents being  
made to feel that she has “obtruded her-  
self as a human being” when she tries  
to remind her husband of his respon-  
sibilities; her sister Claudia is tormented  
by her fiancé, a shell-shock victim, be-  
cause he cannot return to combat;  
Claudia is then manipulated by a dazzl-  
ing commando who taunts her about the  
inferior courage of women. The battle  
lines in Miller's war are those of gender:  
The actual war is an occasion for mas-  
culine flight. Among its victims are the  
women who shoulder the family respon-  
sibilities—and wait.

In Mollie Panter-Downes’ One Fine  
Day, written in 1946, Laura Marshall  
reflects with a serenity denied Miller’s  
characters that “Men must fight and  
women must sew—of course in this war  
women had fought too. They had flown  
aeroplanes, they had been bombed on  
gun sights....But still the other women  
had sat stitching and folding, making  
ready...in quiet old houses.” One year  
after the war, Laura is one of the  
traditionalists, shaping her life to the  
needs of her husband Stephen, who is  
home safe but spiritually fatigued. There  
are no more servants for people like the  
well-bred Marshalls, and Laura must  
shoulder the chores of a decaying house  
and a dispirited husband. One fine sum-  
mer day she encounters a cast of rural  
types: the dowdy vicar’s wife, the man-  
nish lady of the manor bereft of sons by  
war, the shiftless but lively local work-  
ing-class family, and the town gypsy who  
shelters Laura’s dog. Showing compas-  
sionate if bemused interest in them all,  
Laura emerges as an immensely sym-  
pathetic character. Reminiscent of Vir-  
ginia Woolf’s highly strung women, she  
can still reconcile her rich inner life with  
the prosaic demands of domestic tasks.  
In her cheerful acceptance of ration  
cards, queues, and long, tiring days,  
Laura becomes a symbol of British endur-  
ance itself. As Nicola Beauman points  
out in her astute introduction, the novel  
is a tribute to the “ordinary Englishwo-  
man who did not fight in the war but  
lived through it as acutely as any  
soldier.”

The not-so-valiant Englishwoman is  
the subject of the 1952 novel, The  
Gentlewomen, by Laura Talbot, the  
pseudonym of Lady Ursula Cheltwynd-  
Talbot. The protagonist, Miss Bolby,  
has fallen from being the proud daughter  
of an Indian Army officer to an embit-  

Betty Miller. Photo by Mark Gerson.

tered woman cherishing memories, In-  
dian shawls, and a knowledge of the  
peerage gleaned from sitting below the  
salt at many houses as the governess.  
She takes a post at the Rushford, which  
once, she brags in a letter to a social  
inferior, had 28 gardeners; she regrets  
that now only two Italian prisoners of  
war work on the grounds.

Willing to endure the noise of bomb-  
ers returning to a nearby Royal Air Force  
base and the poor accommodations—  
many of the rooms are shut up for lack  
of servants to care for them—Miss Bolby  
struggles to hold onto a time of Ed-  
wardian shooting parties and family teas  
and a world in which class relations are  
rigidly dictated. As the conflict deepens  
between herself and Lady Rushford’s sec-  
retary, Miss Pickford, a gentlewoman  
but a democrat as well, Miss Bolby obses-  
sively imposes ways of maintaining dif-  
ferences of rank. The rest of the house-  
hold are aware that, as the returning  
Lord Rushford, himself tainted by pride  
of place, ruefully acknowledges, “those  
days are over....We might be able to  
scrape along for a few more years, that’s  
all.”

The Gentlewomen is an excellent and  
troubling study of a questionable aristo-  
cratic code. Amidst the petrol rationing  
and blackout curtains, Lady Rushford  
and her neighbor Lady Archie are too  
condescending to recognize each other’s  
claim to be “top drawer.” Miss Bolby,  
clinging to her gentility, reflects on her  
more painful exclusion:

War was a lonely battle for the lonely,  
for those not urgently connected with  
it, and in her case a lonely battle for  
what? That she might continue to be  
a governess—she had not ceased to  
shudder inwardly at the word—in  
houses such as Rushford, continually  
reminded she was the governess, and  
there were few houses such as Rush-  
ford left.

—continued on page 15

E: aK  
Elly Welt. Photo by Nancy Crampton

Mollie Panter-Downes. Photo by Anthony  
Ziegler.

Belles Lettres $9