Impressions

“Birth” of the Novel

Would you believe that English
and American women created
the literary form we all know

— and love — as the novel? Scholars
Cathy Davidson (U.S.) and Dale
Spender (U.K.) shared this discovery and
many more at a panel at the National
Women’s Studies Association con-
ference. They gave us a tantalizing
foretaste of the books they will be publish-
ing and the reprint series they will be in-
augurating this fall, Spender with Pandora
Press and Davidson with Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

Davidson dealt with 120 works in her
investigation into the beginnings of the
novel in America. She read secondary
sources, such as diary collections, to get
an idea of the context and importance of
the literature in society. She found that
early novels — the provenance of women
writers — were passed down as heirlooms,
were purchased at general stores (they
were very expensive), and were borrowed
by less affluent readers from lending li-
braries (many of which distributed only
novels) for 2 to 3 cents each. Susanna
Temple, by Susanna Rowson, one of the
two reissues to be published this Novem-
ber, had a profound effect on later
novelists: 23 of them alluded to it in their
plots. The Coquette, by Hannah W. Fos-
ter, will appear simultaneously, as will
Davidson’s study, Revolution and the
Word: The Rise of the Novel in America.

One of the most telling — and com-
pelling — features of these early novels as
presented by Davidson and Spender is
their subject matter. Early American
novels often focused on sexuality,
specifically, how to avoid seducers and
have more control of husbands within
marriages that often seemed like slavery,
for the wives had no autonomy and were
debilitated by frequently giving birth. In
England the female voice changed forever
the conventions that governed storytell-
ing. No longer were aristocratic heroes
seduced by shepherdesses in sylvan groves;
it was middle-class heroines who were
seduced by villains. Spender told us that
her Mothers of the Novel: 100 Good Women

Writers Before Jane Austen were the “real,
original, great psychologists.” The issues
they raised concerning human ethics,
morality, and behavior bespeak a chain of
women writers unbroken (although “hard
beset,” to quote Elinor Wylie) to the
present.

So why haven’t we heard of these “100
good women novelists”? The answers are
appalling, and you'll have to wait for the
review of Spender’s book in our next issue
to find them all out. Suffice it to say that it
has something to do with an attitude such
as that of Jan Watt's in his influential Rise
of the Novel (and much sport was made of
the choice of verb, notwithstanding
Davidson’s title). Watt allotted one
sentence to the progenitors of the novel,
saying that most 18th-century novels were
written by women (ergo, they're not
worthy of our consideration). These were
women who had to write to survive —

Marginal No More

One highlight for me of the
American Booksellers Associa-
tion convention in May (besides

meeting Louise Erdrich and Ellen
Gilchrist) was a panel on alternative
publishing organized by Barbara Smith of
Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press.
Smith spoke of book publishing as being a
strategy for oppressed people to gain access
to power, and she pointed to the “more
than tokenistic” commitment to equality
for people of color that is demonstrated by
independent publishers. She invited the
audience to consider the work of the in-
dependent publishers on the panel in light
of two myths perpetuated by trade
publishers: that people of color do not
read and that they are impossible to target
as an audience.

Ruthanne Lum McCunn and Nicolas
Kanellos, who publish works by women of
Chinese and Hispanic backgrounds,
respectively, agreed that the large com-
mercial presses have failed abysmally in
recognizing and meeting the needs of the
reading communities in various ethnic
groups. Kanellos, publisher of Arte

Publico Press, pointed to the long history
of Hispanic publishing in the United
States; in fact, Hispanic women have
been writing in English here since the
19th century. Hispanic literature has the
capacity to be integrated into inter-
disciplinary curricula in high schools and
colleges. In addition, the first priority of
the Hispanic population is education;
still, Kanellos said, the works needed are
not being generated by large trade houses,
whose attempt to homogenize the market
perpetuates stereotypes and silences a host
of American voices, voices that are by no
means marginal. I was stunned to learn
that Publishers Weekly has never reviewed
an Arte Publico title.

This neglect corroborates, however,
some troubling observations that Phyllis
Tickle (author of a biography of Julia Ann
Hooks, a 19th-century Black activist)
made in a recent PW article. “A black
publication [read ethnic] can’t be just
publishing. It has to be a phenomenon.”
One colleague to whom she confided her
dismay over the absolute lack of reviews
for her book responded, “The difference
between a biography of Julia Hooks and
something like, say, The Color Purple is
that you’re trying to sell the biography of a
great black woman as if she were just a

great woman.”

Like Kanellos at Arte Publico,
Ruthanne Lum McCunn of Design
Enterprises of San Francisco has made a
success of publishing “ethnic” titles by
promoting them on the grassroots level.
Her illustrated history of the Chinese in
America was turned down by all the major
publishers to which she submitted it; she
self-published and in six months had sold
out her first 5,000 copies. Her second
book, A Thousand Pieces of Gold — which
recounts a Chinese pioneer’s experiences
as a slave and then a free woman in the
American West — was translated chapter
by chapter (a la Dickens) in Chinese
newspapers, creating an avid market for
the book. Lum McCunn gave scores of
talks to societies, ethnic and feminist
studies courses, and so forth. Her efforts
paid off: The book sold an amazing 30,000
copies before being sold to a mass market
publisher.

Note: Mark your calendars for Septem-
ber 25-27, 1987, which will be the date of
the first Third World and Alternative
Presses National Book Fair in Madison
Square Garden, New York City. For in-
formation call James Gwynne, (212)
777-0972, or write him at 134 West 4th
St., New York 10012.

Worth a Look

Boyer Bell Limited has
published a valuable resource
for those of you working on

grant proposals or thinking about seeking
funding: the Grant Seekers Guide, a
revised and expanded funding sourcebook
from the National Network of
Grantmakers, edited by Jill R. Shellow
($16.95, 550 pp.). The heart of the book
is a guide to national and regional
grantmakers, which details how to go
about contacting organizations, what they
are interested in funding, how much they
awarded in the past, and so forth. There
are also useful essays, such as “Tax-
Exempt Status for Your Organization.”
The Research in Women’s Literature
Project at the University of Tulsa has
published a book that will interest general
readers as well as researchers, Women
Writers in McFarlin Special Collections, First
Series. Many authors are represented:
some, such as Jean Rhys and Stevie
Smith, with large holdings in literary
manuscripts and correspondence. Other
holdings of interest include the Harriet
Shaw Weaver Joyce collection, the
Factory House Library (of 19th-century
fiction), and the la Cour collection of
popular fiction. The essays on each author
or collection vary in emphasis from the
biographical to the bibliographical and are
written in an accessible style. The book is
available for $3.00 from Academic
Publications, University of Tulsa, 600
South College Ave., Tulsa OK 74104.

Serremser/Ocroser 1986

“Down Under” Postscript

When compiling our list of
current books to review for
our special section on women

writers of Australia and New Zealand, we
tried to be fairly comprehensive, but
because of deadlines and space limitations
we had to leave out a few. Viking
published Beachmasters by Thea Astley
last summer ($14.95, 185 pp). Watch for
the paperback editions of The Bone People
and Foxybaby from Penguin in October as
well as Elizabeth Jolley’s short story col-
lection, Woman in a Lampshade. In

@ $12.50/year

Check the subscription rate that applies:
1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year

1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)

2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year
subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00

Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription

November, Virago will reissue The Per-
simmon Tree, by Marjorie Barnard. Look
for Turtle Beach and Winter in Jerusalem by
Blanche D’Alpuget, and don’t forget to
watch for books by expatriate authors
Christina Stead, Janette Turner Hospital,
and Shirley Hazzard, as well as by Sylvia
Ashton-Warner, who has recently been
republished.

People interested in pursuing Aus-
tralian literature further can join the
American Association of Australian
Literary Studies (dues $20/year, write to
Marian Arkin, 190 6th Ave., Brooklyn,
NY 11217), which puts out a newsletter

Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216

Please send

Name

subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check
or money order in the amount of
Belles Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a
photocopy, or handwritten copy.

and is founding a literary journal. The lat-
est issue of the newsletter has an interview
with Elizabeth Jolley, in which she tells
Catherine A. Corman, “I’ve always
written, right from when I was a small
child. My sister too; we both wrote
stories. At boarding school I wrote stories
and sent them home to her. We played
with doll houses, which was like an
eternal writing only it was speech — di-
alogue between the houses. I played with
my dolls’ house till I was about 17.” The
October newsletter will publish a basic list

of Australian books that libraries should
order. — Janet Palmer Mullaney

1-year subscription[s] or 2-year

payable to Belles Lettres

Street

City

State Zip

* Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:

1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year

Send gift card to: A combination of subscriptions.
Name
Street
City State Zip
9/86

I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue.

Belles Lettres @ 15