Splintered Lives

A State of Fear, by Menan du Plessis.  
New York: Pandora Press/Methuen, 1987,  
$25.00 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 190 pp.

by Martha L. Wharton

Il that most of us know of  
South Africa, of apartheid, is  
what comes to us by way of  

television, news magazines, or fiction.  
We see, hear, and read until we can  
smell the distant stench of a smoldering  
“rubber necklace,” or feel the impact of  
an attacking policeman’s rigid rubber  
baton. When we read the personal ex-  
periences of one who lives beneath the  
pall of apartheid we cannot help but be  
overwhelmed. This is true of Menan du  
Plessis’s first novel, A State of Fear. With  
this novel, Ms. du Plessis won two of  
South Africa’s highest literary awards.  
When she pledged the prize monies to  
the African National Congress, the gov-  
ernment banned her subsequent writ-  
ings, and Ms. du Plessis was forced un-  
derground.

The novel opens on the cold, joint-  
stiffening winter of South Africa. It is  
1980 and Cape Town is torn by bus  
boycotts, meat boycotts, and protests in  
its schools. A hopelessness has seeped  
into the lives of each of the characters.

Anna Russouw is a white school-  
teacher who works in one of Cape  
Town’s “colored” schools. She lives in a  
small flat “sealed away from the rain and  
the funnelling wind,” where she cooks  
meager meals and prepares for the next  
school term. As she recalls earlier con-  
versations in the teachers’ lounge, she is  
plagued by a guilt that stalks her through  
the remainder of the novel: “I’m not cer-  
tain that I can go back now. Don’t see  
how I can ask the kids to open the same  
old books and expect them to carry on  
from where we left off — as though no-  
thing had happened.” The schoolchil-  
dren are ignored by their teachers and  
have seen their schoolmates beaten and  
shot by police squads. Although they are  
young, bright-eyed, and eager, apartheid  
has forced them to lead splintered, adult  
lives.

Before Anna returns to school, two  
students take refuge in her flat. Felicia  
and Wilson are active members of the  
colored students’ protest movement and  
attend regular nightly meetings. Their  
presence disorients Anna. She feeds  
them but argues sheepishly with Wilson  
about the value of Marxism versus  
socialism, and the coming of Azania, a  
state of political freedom. Her thoughts  
begin to turn in on themselves as she  
questions her youth and her fleeting days  
of political activism. At the same time,  
Felicia and Wilson cannot fully trust  
Anna because she is white and will not  
understand their struggle. They never  
tell Anna where their meetings are held,  
or whether they are safe. Ultimately,  
they are all separated, no one trusting or  
understanding the others.

The novel is short, but it is not quick  
reading. A State of Fear is written from an  
insider’s perspective. Frequently, Ms. du  
Plessis calls upon the Afrikaans language  
to express Anna’s frustrations or to re-  
count an intimate conversation between  
Anna and a close relative. I often won-  
dered whether I was missing some clever  
turn of Anna’s mind or a probing insight  
into her life under apartheid.

The vehicle through which Ms. du  
Plessis has chosen to have Anna speak is  
a long open letter. Anna chronicles the  
events of a few short days and the turbu-  
lence of a city at war with itself. Her text  
is peppered with memories of deteriorat-  
ing family relationships, vivid snapshots  
of the South African flatlands, and  
brushes with the authorities in her days  
of student protest. More than once I  
wondered whether Anna would send the  
letter and whether I would have an op-  
portunity to read the response. It became  
clear by the end of the novel, however,  

| Marcu/April 1988

that Anna’s writings were more an at-  
tempt to understand her circumstances.  
I was the interloper reading her intimate  
journal, deciphering her shorthand.  
Anna wrote because her father, a cele-  
brated poet, had never taken responsi-  
bility for South Africa’s prevailing state  
of fear in his poetry. Considering his  
many books, she decides, “It’s difficult to  
be entranced by the febrile, decadent  
brilliance of an elite when the near-  
starving uneducated masses live in the  
same city. Rather than some obscure  
Third World country on a vaguely re-  
membered map of another continent.”

In A State of Fear, Menan du Plessis  
has effectively and skillfully documented  
the type of personal violations — politi-  
cal compromise, lifelong guilt, and even  
death — that one must endure if one is to  
rebel against apartheid in a country be-  
sieged by it.

® Martha L. Wharton is a lawyer  
employed at the University of Mas-  
sachusetts - Amherst as Associate Director  
of Affirmative Action and Equal Opportu-  
nity. She writes short fiction and hopes to  
publish soon.

= AY}  
. 1  
s} BN, 2  
f (  
OM TE  
BZ  
= je  

by South African Women.

Poppie Nongena  
by Elsa Joubert

New York: Holt, 1987, $18.95, 359 pp.

This semifictionalized biography is the  
tenth book by the accomplished white  
South African Elsa Joubert. Written  
originally in Afrikaans, and published  
first in Cape Town in 1978, it became a  
bestseller in South Africa and has been  
acclaimed internationally. Both its form  
and content make the work memorable.  
First, Joubert performs the linguistically  
difficult task of meshing two different  
narrative voices — that of the inform-  
ant, Poppie Nongena, and that of the  
formal narrator and framer of the work.  
By minimizing the latter’s role, however,  
and making the Xhosa speaker the prin-  
cipal voice and thus the inventor of her  
own history, Joubert radicalizes the na-  
ture of the work. Second, life in South  
Africa is guilelessly recounted by Poppie  
Nongena, and its relentlessly destructive  
power is thus more dramatically under-  
scored. The work presents a lived experi-  
ence that seems, easily, to match the ex-  

PD  

ae  

ra  

= Swi = == SS + at |  
“Women at Work, Ukhula,” linocut by Bongiwe Dhlomo from Sometimes When It Rains: Writings  

Sometimes When It Rains:  
Writings by South African  
Women  

edited by Ann Oosthuizen  

New York: Pandora Press/Methuen, 1987,  
$9.95, 184 pp. (PB)  

“Answer this question, Father. How is it  
that when the white man came here, he  
had only the Bible and we the land.  
Today, he has the land and we the  
Bible.” This query, from Bessie Head’s  
“The Coming of the Christ-Child,” re-  
verberates throughout the stories in this  
collection, as does her characterization  
of the white minority: “They fell upon  
the people like a leaden weight and they  
lay there, an agonizing burden to en-  
dure.” Traditional lands are robbed;  
communities are summarily displaced to  
make way for “development,” a nasty  
euphemism boding ill for the nonwhite  
majority. (“We're not talking about slum  
clearance, my dear,” a white liberal ex-  
plains to a visitor in Nadine Gordimer’s  
contribution, “white people want to  

: i guerre SUL iN '  

4  

cae pele \\  
‘ig “yc  

periences that have been described of  
New World slaves.

Poppie Nongena tells a bleak and  
tragic story, but she gains heroic stature  
in her refusal to be overcome by adver-  
sity and in her brave struggle to provide  
her children with a more hopeful future.  
The oppressive system under which she  
lives systematically attacks the family.  
Forced away from her home in Up-  
ington, for example, her family is relo-  
cated to Lamberts Bay, where she is soon  
told that although the male workers  
could remain, the “wife and children  
must go.” Finding her house burned to  
force her away, Poppie goes, by herself,  
to live in Cape Town. There she works  
as a “live in,” to be joined eventually by  
her husband and children. But the gov-  
ernment’s system of permits and of tem-  
porary, short-term extensions (passes  
were later substituted) is used constantly  
against the family. She is impelled to  
move to New London, without her dis-  
abled husband, to prevent the greater  
hardship of being sent to Kaffirland, the  
“Homeland,” designated by the au-  
thorities, that she has never known. The  

build houses or factories for whites where  

blacks live... . We're talking about  
loading up trucks and carting black  
people out of sight of whites.”) Fathers  
and husbands are lost to their im-  
poverished families as they are forced by  
legislation such as the poll tax and the  
passcard system to work at distant sites,  
becoming part of a vast pool of cheap  
labor.

In the South Africa depicted in these  
stories there is virtually no safe space for  
a Black person. Homes are violated and  
people are terrorized — or worse, shot —  
by police sniffing out “sedition.” In “The  
Toilet” by Gcina Mhlope, a young girl  
secretly staying with her sister, a maid,  
hides out in a public toilet for two hours  
each morning and night, on her way to  
and from her factory job, to avoid being  
caught by her sister’s employer. An of-  
fice cleaning woman in Miriam Tlali’s  
story “No Shelter for Cleaners” describes  
the gauntlet she must run to avoid harm  
as she leaves her job at 2:30 a.m. Not al-  
lowed to sleep there until a safe hour to  
travel, she is accosted by “ducktails”  
(white men looking for Black prosti-  
tutes), by thieves and bullies, and by the  
indignities of apartheid: “We are not to  
go to Park Station; we may not sleep on  
the benches, we may not sit in the wait-  
ing-rooms. We must stand outside. Even  
when there’s a train on the platform, we  
may not board it.”

Despite having had their world, in the  
editor’s words, “mutilated by apartheid,”  
the voices of these storytellers are ex-  
traordinarily powerful and whole.

— Janet Palmer Mullaney

book relates a dizzying number of forced  
relocations (at the dictates of authority  
or of poverty), and the uncertainties of  
the Black South African’s daily life are  
amply evidenced. A fitting title for the  
work would be: Poppie Nongena: On the  
Road.

Poppie, the classic victim of oppres-  
sion, survives by compliance and by  
making herself cope. Not until late in  
the work — after the revolt of the chil-  
dren in Soweto, the Black township of  
Johannesburg, and in Cape Town —  
does she express deserved feelings  
against apartheid, and even then only to  
intimate that she has “grievances.”

Concerned and ambivalent as Poppie  
has been over the Xhosa custom of initi-  
ation, the “abakwetha” or man-making  
ritual, it is ironically a more dangerous  
rite of passage that her children will un-  
dergo. The true initiation of youth by  
the 1970s, the decade with which the  
work ends, had become less the tribal  
circumcision than the proving ground of  
political fight and resistance. It is this  
new delineation of manhood that Poppie  
confronts, one that puts the tightly  
maintained family unity in jeopardy. But  
if the work ends with her pained recogni-  
tion that she no longer definitively influ-  
ences and protects her children, it also  
concludes with her perception that  
perhaps she should not. She acquiesces  
in her closing words, “if my children had  
to be drawn into this thing, then that is  
what they were born to.”

— Evelyn Hawthorne

— Home Ground, continued from page 2  
sexism, a phenomenon in the apartheid  
system that is less frequently  
documented. Maids and Madams was first  
aired on British television and has since  
been shown at film festivals internation-  
ally. A recent interview with Hamer-  
mesh in the Spring 1987 issue of Lilith:  
The Jewish Women’s Magazine describes  
how and why she made the film.

Her parents did not survive World  
War II. She reflects, although “I was  
spared the experience of the deporta-  
tions which led to the death camps, my  

rage against racism has stayed with me  
for life, taking on the rigor of obsession.”  
The interview reveals how some Jews in  
South Africa are participating in the  
apartheid system and how others are  
working vigorously to end it, in some  
cases doing both at the same time.  
“Apartheid,” she says, “is tearing Jewish  
family life apart. The dispersion of young  
South African Jews is a fact of life. They  
are scattered over all the English-speak-  
ing world and Israel.” But the recogni-  
tion that European Jews are “white” in a  
human landscape dominated by color  

distinctions came as a particular shock to  
Hamermesh, who, as a Holocaust sur-  
vivor, was not used to thinking of herself  
as part of the oppressor class. The com-  
plexity that I missed in Freed’s novel is  
more fully developed in this interview,  
and powerfully revealed in Maids and  
Madams. The film can be purchased or  
rented from Filmmakers Library, 133 E.  
58th St., NYC, 10022.

® Evelyn Torton Beck is director of the  
Women’s Studies Program at the University  
of Maryland.

Belles Lettres @ 3  
ee ee |