Expanding to Embrace

the Universe

Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences, by Ursula K. LeGuin. New York: Plume/NAL,

1987, $6.95, 200 pp. (PB)

Dancing at the Edge of the World, by Ursula K. LeGuin. New York: Grove Press, 1989,

$17.95, 320 pp.

by Athena Andreadis

Like Virginia Woolf, Ursula Kroeber

LeGuin is a foremother. Starting as a writer of adolescent fantasy and a cautious feminist, she has consistently extended both her subject matter and ideology. At this point, she is one of our most articulate voices, not only in science fiction but also in literature and women’s issues (that include global, political, and environmental concerns). In short, she is a fully fledged Wise Crone.

To really understand her contribution to science fiction, one must realize that even ten years ago, the field was dominated by what is known in the jargon as hardware—namely, stories that hinged exclusively on gadgetry, with conventional plots and characters who were mere mouthpieces. It was heaven and haven for teenage boys. However, women’s increasing dominance in the field has changed its character radically.

Feminists tend to be hostile to science/technology, because they believe (and often rightly so) that it perpetuates linear, rigid ways of thinking, supports the patriarchal status quo, and is very much a double-edged weapon in its applications. Nevertheless, because technology is ubiquitous in our lives, if we do not comprehend it, it will become our overseer. Thus, the newer generation of women science fiction writers knows science. Now, however, the stories have strong social relevance and the characters and their interactions are complex and credible. Some men, most notably Harlan Ellison, also write such science fiction. But, as in the mainstream, they tend to stress alienation and malaise, whereas the women explore alternative solutions.

Practically none of this would have happened if pioneers had not broken the stony soil; foremost among them were Alice Sheldon (pen name James Tiptree) and Ursula K. LeGuin. LeGuin’s first novels—The Earthsea Trilogy, City of Illusions, Rocannon’s World—were beautifully written and already unusual but were relatively conventional in terms of the universes (social and personal) portrayed therein. Then came a spate of amazing novels (The Dispossessed, The Left Hand of Darkness, The Word for World Is Forest); two wondrous story collections (The Wind's Twelve Quarters, The Compass Rose); and some outstanding criticism (The Language of the Night).

LeGuin’s writing is a continuum that bridges fantasy, science fiction, mainstream prose, poetry, and essays. Her stories are enriched by an unostentatious but impressive knowledge of science, literature, and history that transcends the prescribed canons. Her people are real, her ideas of alternative worlds are refreshingly original, and her mythmaking contains essential ingredients often omitted due to lack of courage—defeat, loss, and pain. Two of her strongest characteristics are unusual humaneness and acceptance of diversity. Her evolution as a writer and a citizen of the world has been continuous, which brings us to the newest collections.

Buffalo Gals and Other Animal Presences is precisely what the title says—eleven loose groups of stories and poems about the essential oneness of nature and the error of considering one’s self separate from and superior to the other, whether that is woman, animal, or environment. Many of the stories have appeared in other collections. This book is

Spring 1989

decidedly uneven, especially the poems (Hard Words was more consistent in tone and quality), but it contains three gems: Buffalo Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight, a marvelous intertwining of real world and Indian myth (the beguiling Coyote, the Trickster, plays a central role), Vaster than Empires and More Slow, an innet/outer space exploration (illuminating the connection between fear and hate), and She Unnames Them, a neat twist and coda to the Garden of Eden story.

Dancing at the Edge of the World is even more heterogeneous and, perhaps because of that, more interesting. It is a grab bag of essays, stories, poems, revisions, speeches, and criticisms; we can hear the author thinking. And what a wide variety of things one thinks about: integration (reclaiming the dark in its

Ursula K. LeGuin: “Love doesn’t just sit there, like a stone, it has to be made, like bread; re-made all the time, made new.”

widest implications—in one’s self, actions, and creations); power and the mother tongue; the writer’s creative process; responsibility for society and the environment. But these issues are not neatly pigeonholed. They are, both in LeGuin’s heart/mind and in the real world, inextricably intertwined. The kinship with Woolf is unmistakable, especially since LeGuin uses a modified version of Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown in the first story of this collection, The Space Crone.

This book is definitely for people who know and like LeGuin. It is untidy, sprawling, generous—but also urgent. It is to be savored and dipped into, a visit to a dear friend who is always unpredictable and fascinating. Although LeGuin has been progressively moving away from science fiction and into the mainstream, I wish for more tales from the Hainish universe. May she put many more starships into eccentric orbit.

@ Athena Andreadis, with a PhD in molecular biology, is conducting basic research at Harvard Medical School. Her heroic fantasy collection, In the Realms of Fire, is scheduled for 1989, and she has just launched a science fiction novel.

GREETINGS
ABA and NWSA Participants

We hope you enjoy Belles Lettres and pass the word along about us — and subscribe!

Queens of the Night

The Queen of the Damned, by Anne Rice. New York: Knopf, 1988, $18.95, 448 pp.

Those Who Hunt the Night, by Barbara Hambly. New York: Del Rey/Ballantine, 1988, $16.95, 296 pp.

by Jewelle Gomez

I stood beside Van Helsing, and said: “Ah well poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!” He turned to me, and said with grave solemnity: “Not so; alas, not so. It is only the beginning!”

—Dracula by Bram Stoker

Unfortunately, it is Mina who is proven correct in this exchange at the bedside of the dying Lucy between the legendary, fictional vampire hunter Dr. Van Helsing and the distraught heroine, Mina Harker. Almost without exception, women characters and female vampires (which is Lucy’s fate) have not gone on to achieve the infamy of Dracula but have remained shadowy background figures. Two new vampire novels make an attempt to shift this balance, one less successfully than the other.

The Queen of the Damned, the third in the popular series by Anne Rice, has a compelling, baroque style that befits the gothic origins of her genre. It is perhaps Rice’s long residence in the Castro, the heart of San Francisco’s gay male community, that gives her work such lush homoeroticism and sensuous characters.

Although the number of women characters has increased in this latest novel, Rice loses some of the fine quality in her character portraits and seems to have lost her editor altogether. The first half of the book is a rehash of the catastrophic ending of its predecessor told from several points of view. Unlike the taut excitement of Interview with the Vampire (the first novel), the panorama of characters and incidents in The Queen is cluttered and rambling. The narration jumps around erratically, introducing crucial characters such as Jesse, the daughter of an ancient archeologist who is on the trail of mythological twins depicted on diverse artifacts. It skips to the sharply drawn but largely inconsequential Baby Jenks, one of the new breed of vampires whose greatest failure seems to be (in the eyes of their creator) a lack of style, culture, or breeding. Where Louis was sensitive and Armand elegant, Baby Jenks is adolescent and tattered; he is a beer-drinking lover of rock and roll easily slaughtered by the crazed Egyptian Queen Akasha, who is seeking the unexplained death of all her progeny.

Among the sea of seductive male faces shine a few female characters. Most notable is Maharet, one of the twins who loom ominously in everyone’s dreams like the mountain shape that dominated Richard Dreyfuss in Steven Spielberg’s film, Close Encounters of the Third Kind. She alone knows the source of the death that stalks them all. But her revelations are almost an addendum rather than a strong thread in the story. Languishing on the periphery in this novel is Gabrielle, the magnificent mother of the impish Lestat who upon becoming a vampire immediately shed her confining gowns, donned men’s clothing, and tried to bob her hair. Gabrielle is now relegated to wringing her hands as she waits by a window anxious for the return of her son, who has taken up with the evil Queen.

If this seems a bit convoluted, it is simply a reflection of the 400-page novel itself. Powerfully written sections are full of the tasty language and sweaty passion Rice is so adept at providing, but overall it seems as if she had skeins and skeins of rich ideas and rather than knitting them together, she simply balled them up and tossed them out.

Barbara Hambly, more often identified as a science fiction writer, triumphs in her foray into vampire fiction. Those Who Hunt the Night is as spare as Rice’s work is opulent, but she succeeds in creating a female hero and female vampires to be reckoned with. Her book is set in the foggy streets of a Holmesian London. This is a wonderfully gothic atmosphere, but rather than striving for a convoluted narrative or adorned language, Hambly adopts the clean style of a detective novel with a twist. The oldest vampire in London, Simon Ysidro, hires an archeologist and former British spy to find out who has been destroying vampires in their sleep. Asher’s wife, Lydia, a researcher with a degree in medicine, is key in his investigation.

Hambly has taken a time-worn genre, the deductive detective novel, and introduced new elements—a scientific wife as well as vampires whose life after death is not so different from their previous living life. This makes the novel feel both familiar and surprising. The women consistently provide an exciting perspective that is integral to the plot and grows out of the femaleness of their character without being patronizing. Lydia is concerned and frightened when her husband accepts the assignment, but she goes into hiding with as much of her scientific equipment as she can pack and there parallels his investigation with a successful one of her own.

The female vampires are the promise that Lucy never was able to fulfill in Dracula. Hambly’s vampires are many things: seductive, elegant, wary, and tawdry. One is even Black—an uncommon occurrence for the genre. These are women you might want to meet again—as long as they were on your side. With Hambly’s leap into the genre and the news that Chelsea Quinn Yarbro may be building a novel around one of the women vampires in her wonderful Count St. Germain series, perhaps this is only the beginning.

@ Jewelle Gomez is the author of the Gilda vampire stories and is a consulting editor to Belles Lettres.

Belles Lettres @ 3