easily an internal exile created out of fear  
and repression. This collection narrates  
implacably the tale of such societies,  
hypnotized by power and fueled by  
paranoia. In these societies little that is  
humane operates because the trust neces-  
sary for human bonds has been lost or  
denied by the government at almost all  
levels. These are societies where machis-  
mo and the idea of the state as an entity  
has run amok.  

When a society cuts away its own  
humanity, the varieties of exile it invents  
to preserve its dehumanized plan are  
relentless. Silence severs thought from  
communication with others initially, and  
then with the self. First visible as censor-  
ship of media, fear enforces individual  
and collective silence. A singer is “con-  
demned to internal exile, silence”; “Fear  
took its toll” on the audience who stayed  
away. Such isolation slowly bleeds away  
community, then misinformation and  
rumor overcome information, and un-  
reality sifts into the cracks where reality  
once was. These effects of exile are so  
common that these tales of women iso-  
lated from each other and cut off from  
their culture as well as the rest of the  
world are stunningly, vividly universal.  
In our highly technological society, we  
tend to take full and privileged com-  
munication for granted. The women in  
this anthology have wrested communica-  
tion from silence in the face of odds we  
can only understand through their tes-  
timony. The fact is that what has hap-  
pened in their lives can easily happen to  
anyone anywhere.  

The exiles of these women are our own  
small isolations and cultural exiles taken  
to extremes. The message sent is the  
strength of sisterhood, of their com-  
munity with us, and of how appallingly  
easy it is to become an exile. How simply  
roots and traditions, family and home  
can be removed from a life and the  
meaning of community emptied away.  
The longer any exile lasts the more  
tenuous the connection to a lost home  
and the more disrupted the culture. So  
the women dream of a time when they  
will be exiles no longer, when there will  
be no exile of any kind for women  
everywhere. Speaking the dream is the  
challenge to the whirlwind, and its ul-  
timate defeat.  

The English-speaking world has  
not been in exile from South  
American women, as they have  
been from us. We have not only been  
denied their life story but have lacked  
the richness of their literature. Nothing  
makes our literary exile from them  
clearer or may end it quicker than the  
collection of stories and excerpts in  
Women’s Fiction from Latin America.  
Most of them have been prolific for  
years, although the bulk of their work  
has been available in English only  
recently. Like the women writing on  
exile, these authors display complexity of  
style and technique; what further links  
these two collections is their breadth,  
depth, and intensity. One does not mere-  
ly read them; one plunges in and is con-  
sumed. Coming to the surface after  
plunging into their compelling senten-  
ces, magical realities, and vivid con-  
sciousnesses is bewildering.  

Representing seven of the southern-  
cone countries, these twelve authors pro-  
vide a mini-history of contemporary in-  
ternational literature. Evelyn Picon Gar-  
field, faced with such a large area,  
decided “to limit the number of authors  
and represent them more fully by includ-  
ing more than one text.” I speculated  
about who might have been omitted, yet  
I soon applauded this decision. Although  
the purpose of such a volume is admit-  
tedly to “introduce,” it is frustrating to  

In Our Spring Issue:  
Denise Giardina and Lee Smith, Nora  
Hoult rediscovery, reissued classics from  
Australia and the United States, science  
fiction, short stories, mysteries, and more  

| 4 @ Belles Lettres  

meet such writers merely in an outline  
more like an appetizer than a main  
course. Wherever possible, a complete  
piece or a substantial section of a longer  
work was chosen. Included are nineteen  
short stories, a one-act play, and four ex-  
cerpts from novels.  

Arranged chronologically by date of  
author’s birth, Women’s Fiction from  
Latin America offers a stunning range of  
narrative and philosophical perspectives.  
The approaches are both experimental  
and traditional; yet certain threads inter-  
lace the many shifting realities and  
worlds, for example, the effect of cultural  
heritage on contemporary issues. In Latin  
America, many cultures have come  
together (albeit differently in each  
country). Perceptions of reality are fil-  
tered through Indian and African cul-  
tures. The stories, legends, magic, and  
language illuminated in the writing cast  
bard-like spells.  

Language, while especially important  
to an oral culture, is a magical power  
that writing has only strengthened for  
these Latin American women. “Tatabi-  
sako,” by Lydia Cabrera of Cuba, is a re-  
telling of an encounter between a wom-  
an and “The Water Master of the La-  
goon” that shows the power of language  

to alienate as well as to establish com-  
munication. This double-edged sense of  
language echoes throughout the collec-  
tion. In “The Tree” by Elena Garro of  
Mexico, an Indian woman first com-  
mands the attention of and then entraps  
her victim with the labyrinthine story of  
her life. This intricate quality of lan-  
guage imbues Cuban Julieta Campos’s  
fascinating excerpt from “A Redhead  
Named Sabina,” which is part detective  
story and part psychodrama. Language  
shifts into image when Marta Traba of  
Argentina describes the mothers’ march  
in the Plaza de Mayo or when the  
landscape and color tell the story in  
Traba’s “Conformity.” Language can  
even become muted or speak in silences;  
yet although the voice may be stilled, the  
message prevails. Language mute or  
sounded records the trivialities that help  
Isabel Allende “reclaim the past and  
overcome terrors of my own” in “Rosa  
the Beautiful,” an excerpt from The  
House of the Spirits. As in “Why Kill the  
Countess” by Carmen Naranjo of Costa  
Rica, language is a multidimensional  
medium combining real and the magical,  
natural and supernatural.  

More compelling than language and  
images in this collection is the dynamic  
between public and private vision.  
Whether or not the author concerns her-  
self with the political nature of her par-  
ticular country, as does Marta Traba in  
her novel Mothers and Shadows or Elvira  
Orphee in “Angel’s Last Conquest,”  
many of these pieces explore the nature  
of the reality that is Latin America by in-  
vesting even purely private spheres with  
power. Brazilian Clarice Lispector be-  
stows heightened awareness on her char-  
acter Anna in “Love” when the tram  
jerks her suddenly off balance. In “Family  
Ties,” Lispector reinvents a farewell be-  
tween a mother and daughter that is an  
emblem of the quirky exasperation  
familiarity creates. Reflections of the  
public arena in private spheres are em-  
bodied vividly in fragmented narratives  
and images without anchors in reality.  

In weaving together representative  
selections, anthologies often arrive at a  
seamlessness detrimental to the in-  
dividual authors and to the literary cul-  
ture they are representing. Here that  
type of weave has been avoided. Garfield  
has achieved a tapestry in which in-  
dividuals remain autonomous, while cre-  
ating a connected sense of Latin Amer-  
ican literary culture. Both Women’s Fic-  
tion from Latin America and You Can't  
Drown the Fire are long overdue and es-  
sential works on Latin America.  

@ Denise M. Marshall is a professor of  
English at Heidelberg College in Tiffin,  
Ohio. Her current interest is women’s con-  
cepts of space.  

IMAGES OF WOMEN  

WOMEN  

caso  
EnV Pervert  

Secs o  

478 pp.; 302 illus.  
paper $14.95  

REVOLUTION  
AND THE WORD  

336 pp.; illus.,  
paper $9.95  

388 pp.; photos  
paper $10.95  

DESTINED  

TO BE WIVES  
The Sisters  

of Beatrice Webb  

302 pp.; photos  
paper $8.95  

248 pp.  
paper $13.95  

“Clear... brisk...  

OF IMAGINATION  
IDOLS OF PERVERSITY  

Fantasies of Feminine Evil in  

Fin-de-Siècle Culture  

BRAM DIJKSTRA  

“A ground-breaking, important book.... Will  
clearly be important to art historians and feminist  
critics of the late nineteenth century.”  

—Susan Gubar, The Washington Times Magazine  
“[A] witty and rewarding study of the ‘iconography  
of misogyny’ in late nineteenth-century culture.”  

— Elaine Showalter, The New Republic  
“[Dijkstra is] more than equal to the task of analyz-  
ing the cultural war waged on women at the turn of  
the century.” — Alessandra Comini,  

The New York Times Book Review  

Winner of the 1987 American Culture Association’s  
Toth Award for Feminist Criticism  
REVOLUTION AND THE WORD  
The Rise of the Novel in America  
CATHY N. DAVIDSON  

“Davidson has done the seemingly impossible —  
written a book that is both a landmark of literary-  
historical scholarship and a delight to read.... If  
there is a better way to treat the rise of the  
American novel, it hasn’t been invented yet.”  

—Jane Tompkins, Legacy  
“Drawing on recent work in social history, post-  
structuralist literary theory and feminist studies,  
[Davidson] argues persuasively that the genesis of  
American fiction was an integral part of a  
widespread crisis of authority in early modern  
America.... A wonderful book.” — The Nation  
“Far and away the best book ever written on the  
early American novel.” — American Literature  

STEVIE  
A Biography of Stevie Smith  
JACK BARBERA and WILLIAM McBRIEN  

“The tireless Messrs. Barbera and McBrien—they  
even sound like a pair of sleuths—have cracked the  
case.... [They] were right to go in search of her....  
Stevie Smith is a rare bird, a Maltese falcon.”  

— The New Yorker  
“Excellent, understanding, well researched, with  
many lively quotations from Stevie’s clever friends.”  
— The New York Review of Books  
“sympathetic...and along the way it  
paints an entertaining picture of the English literary  
scene of the 1930s, ’40s and 50s.” — The Nation  

DESTINED TO BE WIVES  
The Sisters of Beatrice Webb  
BARBARA CAINE  

“Consistently fascinating and informative.... A  
superb example of critical biography well wedded  
to the new social history.” — Albion  
“[A model] of the best and most unbiased kind of  
women’s history... [a] stylishly written and  
imaginative study.” — José Harris,  

Times Literary Supplement  
“The discrepancies between the actual conduct of  
life in England and its articulation of morality, and  
the narrowness of the framework within which  
women, however intelligent, had to live, emerge  
clearly from this excellent, unpolemical book.”  

— The Times (London)  

YELLOW PENCILS  

Contemporary Poetry by New Zealand Women  
Chosen by LYDIA WEVERS  

Helping to establish a literary history of New  
Zealand women, this anthology offers a body of  
work that represents not only the well-known  
poets—such as Lauris Edmond, Janet Frame, Keri  
Hulme, and Riemke Ensing—but also a large  
selection of previously-unknown younger poets  
including Michelle Leggott, Jenny Bornholdt, and  
Susan Allpress. Focusing on the exploration of  
identity, the business of being a poet, and the  
constructions and deconstructions of language,  
these poets raise many essential social, cultural,  
and political questions concerning the importance  
of gender in writing and publishing not only in  
New Zealand but throughout the world.  

At better bookstores or directly from  

OXFORD PAPERBACKS  

Oxford University Press • 200 Madison Avenue • New York, NY 10016  

Winter 1989