Overlapping Lives

Tight Spaces, by Kesho Scott, Cherry Muhanji, and Egyirba High. San Francisco:

Spinsters/Aunt Lute, 1987, $8.95, 182 pp. (PB)

by Linsey Abrams

Literary forms evolve as the times

(and not the New York Times)

demand. In both the narrative-dominated nineteenth-century novel and its consciousness-dominated twentieth-century successor, the individual life or mind has been of primary focus. But much of recent literature by North American women has explored new paradigms for speaking about society and community, where one life overlaps others, and how, taken together, similar lives tell a story beyond the particular. I’m thinking of the story collections of Grace Paley, Gloria Naylor’s Women of Brewster Place and the novels of Louise Erdrich, to name only a few. Virginia Woolf, who staked out so much

Power Outage

The Powers of Charlotte, by Jane Lazarre. Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press, 1988, $8.95, 350 pp. (PB)

by Rickey Gard Diamond

This is a novel that might have

been more effective if it had

been reined in from the promise of multiples in its title and instead ridden hard and straight toward a more single-minded goal. That may have been the intent of author Jane Lazarre. At least, she clearly names one fundamental source of power for her narrator, Charlotte, in the book’s next-to-the-last paragraph: “This was the power that enabled her to ascertain direction, to love more wisely, to move from one place to the next — her hand on the pencil or brush, her tool on the page. Her work.”

And yet this topic of work and its force in the lives of women is almost lost in a labyrinthine plot peopled by parents, adopted parents, adopted siblings, friends, friends’ spouses, Charlotte’s spouse, her lover, a vagabond sister and the sister’s daughter and the sister’s dead spouse and other sibling’s offspring, and their lovers and spouses.

Nothing in this book is simple and direct. When painter Charlotte takes up her artist’s hand again, it is to write fiction in order to empower herself to paint: When she prepares to have a baby, she must make up contrasting theoretical stories about her patrimony, always a question in her mind, in order

to empower herself as a mother. As a result, in one section we have Charlotte’s two versions of a story within her own story.

Now true enough, that is what life is: complicated and looped and tied up in knots. But a book is not life, it is art. And as Lazarre herself is trying to tell us, art is also work: honing, paring, shaping, tearing down, and starting over. It is precisely in such matters of craft that The Powers of Charlotte misses the mark.

As a result, the energy-giving power of work and art remains an idea perceived rather than felt. Some sections read as roughly as first drafts. Detail, to mark the reader’s way, is inconsistent. And the broad, sentimental roads of generalization, which Lazarre chooses too often, lead to dead ends, not to crossroads.

One must give the author credit for having headed out in a promising direction. Ironically, however, it is just those portions of the book that seek to explore the significance of work, both artistic and political (especially within the context of family with all of its tugs and pulls) that seem the most contrived, the least artful.

Farr 1988

territory that has remained central to women writers, introduced us to the chorus of many voices in her extraordinary modernist novel The Waves.

Tight Spaces, whose title refers to the way most Black women in our society must live, joins this discourse and further defines it. Not only do various stories and voices interweave to create a community of Black women, their friends, and family, but also the book was written in community.

Tight Spaces is the work of three Black women, who happen to be friends and/or relatives, their original hometown the city of Detroit. All appear as characters in some of their own and the others’ contributions to the thirty-six pieces;

An example is when Charlotte’s troubled brother, Andre, gets a job after having been a recluse. Charlotte believes he has rounded a corner back to recovery, and, inspired, she suddenly says, “Let’s go to that demonstration against war on Saturday.”

One could forgive her this magician’s turn of direction if she used it to dramatic advantage. But illusion is shattered; it becomes a paper rabbit pulled out of a paper hat.

Lazarre turns that demonstration against the war into an opportunity to intellectualize feelings, writing here and elsewhere, in pretty prose so abstract it is impossible to see or feel her subject. Describing the brother and husband who accompany Charlotte to the march that day, she writes, “Raised by upper-class Protestant New Englanders to be proud of his country, Alex’s disappointment was genuine, his indignation clean. Andre was marching on the swift, light steps of private hope.” Try to picture that.

Meanwhile, Charlotte herself supposedly is thinking these thoughts: “Charlotte castigated herself for allowing personal emotion to pollute what ought to be a purer commitment to historical justice.” Thus does feeling become the mere notion of feeling.

Where the author does seem in her element is in passages describing intimate relationships. (Lazarre’s previous book was The Mother Knot.) The sex scenes are sexy. The descriptions of Charlotte’s comfortableness with her husband feel comfy. The scenes just before and after the birth come closest of all to a power that is felt by the reader. From such places Lazarre writes with a sureness that is less self-conscious and more convincing than the portions quoted. But unfortunately, it does not happen consistently enough to make the novel a clear-cut success.

@ Rickey Gard Diamond is the founding editor of Vermont Woman and remains a contributing editor.

not only that, but they use their first names as well as invented ones. The reader is asked to accept the book as both fiction and autobiography. As in Maxine Hong Kingston’s The Woman Warrior, fantasy and myth making are included as part of every day.

The book (I hesitate to call it a novel or even a collection of stories) is divided into three sections, entitled “Talkin’ Real Honest,” “Listen to Me Good, Now,” and “You Must Be Lyin.’” The first addresses the authors’ complementary and sometimes contradictory viewpoints of themselves and one another and of their lives, together and apart. The second contains a meditation or an incantation of selfhood by each author. And the third focuses on a wider community of characters in what seem most like invented stories, more conventionally told than those in the earlier sections though employing a somewhat fantastical vocabulary. These

Egyirba High, Kesho Scott, and Cherry Muhanji. Photo by Maria Elena Mujica.

The Very Rich Hours by Jean McGarry

Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987, $15.95, 141 pp.

In her prologue to this finely observed first novel, Jean McGarry tells the reader that the medieval books of hours (devotions) to which the title refers drew “no final line . . . between the holy and the daily.” Although her “story of a soul, or beginner, entering the world,” as she calls it in the prologue, does follow the structure of such books by its interspersing of story with contrasting prose poems (as the books of hours interspersed the devotions for the seven canonical hours with illuminations), the structure does little to embellish a moving depiction of a young woman’s entry into the world and may, in fact, detract from it.

The Very Rich Hours tells the tale of Anne Marie Kane (whose name, with its echoes of St. Anne, the Virgin, and Cain, indicates McGarry’s desire to connect this tale with the supernal) as she moves from her working-class home in Providence, Rhode Island, to first a Catholic college for women and then to Harvard, to her work at a mental health center, and finally to her marriage. McGarry is able to observe the external details of daily life, the significant bits of reality that show so much about the bright, gentle, fragile Anne Marie. Whether it is a description of the books in her essentially bookless home (some volumes of a grocery store encyclopedia for children, hand-me-down book club selections, tattered copies of Look and Life), or her recounting of the diet menus of Anne Marie’s housemates (“1 1/2 slices of English muffin thinly spread with creamed cheese and thinly spread with strawberry bruises, a solitary glass of tomato juice rimmed and streaked, some dried fruit”), or even her reflections on her Harvard honors thesis, we encounter again the clear, unsentimental

thirty-six pieces are self-contained, none more than a few pages long. Each is attributed to a single author though Papusa Molina’s introduction informs us that the writing process was a group one. Although they can be read individually, only some of them have full impact on the reader without cross-references to the others. The texts are alternately stories, prose poems, meditations, reminiscences, tirades, speculations.

The pieces that work best, such as the moving stories “A Gardenia for Miss Eva” and “Little Faith,” and the childhood reminiscences “Take a Look over My Shoulder and Be Happy” and “Bird Tracks” — do so because the situations they conjure are specific and the comments on them full of wisdom about the human condition. One example of the powerfully truthful lines throughout is “She didn’t take her husband seriously, because, unlike other women, she didn’t complain about him.” And another: “She was an artist trying to find a form when he got her pregnant.”

These fine pieces are full of narrative surprises as well. “Instead, I gave in to the only secure and natural event of the day — sleep. I slept twenty years.” Or, as a woman sums up her feelings about being forced by her African lover to abort their child, as she remembers he once toasted her in Swahili before trying recklessly to drive both of them to their deaths in a car: “I would have named her Kesi, which means: child born at a time when her father is in trouble.”

Occasionally, the authors lapse into an abstract, unfamiliar vocabulary: “He was the object of a cruel kids’ game that converted loving into clowning.” Or a kind of self-conscious phrase making, such as “Dear God,” that leaves no emotional space for the reader. But the highpoints in this collection (Egyirba included) far outnumber the low. Tight Spaces gives voice to the difficult odds against which Black women must struggle to become fully themselves. Many of its characters lose their chances to family, to men, to children, to poverty, to madness, to addiction, to not enough elbow room for their souls. Rightly, the book pays attention to casualties as well as to survivors. For the authors, survivors themselves, it is a celebration of life, of creativity. And of the healing power of friends, who are both inspiration for and mirror to the self.

@ Linsey Abrams is the author of two novels, Charting by the Stars and Double Vision. She teaches in the writing program at Sarah Lawrence College.

eye that made the short stories in Airs of Providence, McGarry’s first book, such a pleasure.

Placed between the chapters of this fine evocation of the life of a timid entrant into the world are eight prose poems that exhibit a wild energy of imagination. These include “Black-Letter Vulgate,” a sensitive depiction of St. Jerome, father of the Latin Bible; “The Workhouse,” a manic flight on household dirt, among other concerns; and “The Beating,” a Chagallesque evocation of adolescence. Delightful as these are, their real function in the novel seems tenuous, unless they are regarded only as the medieval ornaments McGarry mentions in her prologue.

McGarry suggests in the prologue that a book about the mundane can reflect and contain the holy, much as the medieval books of hours placed depictions of the lives of Christ, Mary, and the saints in contemporary, everyday settings. To say that The Very Rich Hours seems to do quite the opposite is not to fault it. It is in the very ordinariness of Anne Marie’s life, a life that all women have lived in some part, that the strength of this novel lies.

—Bonnie Jean Cox

Belles Lettres @ 11