Reconstructing History

During My Time: Florence Edenshaw Davidson, A Haida Woman, by Margaret B. Blackman.  
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1986, $8.95, 172 pp. (PB)

Hobomok and Other Writers on Indians, by Lydia Maria Child. Edited by Carolyn L. Archer.  
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1986, 245 pp.

Oglala Women: Myth, Ritual, and Reality, by Marla N. Powers. Chicago: University of Chi-  
cago Press, 1986, $19.95, 241 pp.

Ways of Indian Magic, Stories Retold by Theresa VanEtten. The Sunstone Press (Box 2321,  
Santa Fe, NM 87501), 1985, $8.95, 91 pp. (PB)

by Barbara Loren

The limits of history have been

defined, explored, and de-

plored, and they are currently  
being redefined by feminist historians,  
anthropologists, and writers. History  
that was once written predominately by  
White men to perpetuate the patriarchy  
is at least beginning to expand beyond  
these parameters. Retold by women,  
feminists, and other nonpatriarchal  
voices, history begins to weave a more  
complete, more complex pattern. The  
tone, emphasis, and attitudes of feminist  
writers illuminate the aspects of history  
that were once kept in darkness by their  
male predecessors or their current pa-  
triarchal cohorts.

Hobomok is a courageous work of fic-  
tion, written in 1825, and is one of the  
first books by a woman to consciously  
attack the patriarchy. Child’s writings  
opened the door for contemporary writ-  
ers and essayists. Oglala Women and Dur-  
ing My Time are two anthropologically  
based books that treat the history of  
American Indian women more  
humanely, compassionately, and hon-  
estly than have anthropologists who  
study “objectively” and base their find-  
ings largely on “observation.” These two  
books seek to let Native American  
women tell their own stories. They are  
more in the genre of oral histories than  
of anthropological studies. Ways of In-  
dian Magic retells history by means of  
the American Indian storyteller — the  
weaver of myth in Pueblo Indian  
legends.

Lydia Maria Child’s Hobomok is a  
landmark in writing about the patriarchy  
and Native American survival. Called  
“unnatural,” “in very bad taste,” and  
“revolting” by various 19th-century cri-  
tics, the book challenged and broke un-  
speakable taboos of the time. Although  
a contemporary reader may find the lan-  
guage stilted and may also find undeni-  
ably racist qualities in the book, the time  
period in which it was written must be  
kept in the back of one’s mind. Through  
this book Child attempted to debunk  
the patriarchal system that she found  
intolerable (It would not let her study,  
research, or write, among other things).

Hobomok has been condemned by  
contemporary readers mainly because  
Child offers cultural genocide of the  
American Indian as an alternative to  
assimilation into White culture:  
Hobomok, for example, becomes suc-  
cessful in the White world by relinquish-  
ing ties to his heritage. To contemporary  
minds this is an intolerable solution to  
an intolerable problem. Yet in 1825 the  
idea of the survival of American Indians  
within a White society (by any means)  
was a radical idea. To Child, who did  
not have antiracist theories at hand, sur-  
vival, even if it meant invisibility, was  
more hopeful than annihilation. Child  
did break through some of the patri-  
archal barriers of the time and began to  
chip away at racial falsehoods. After  
writing Hobomok she began to scrutinize  
the problems of racism in the book.  
After this she came out with several es-  
says — An Appeal in Favor of That Class  
of Americans Called Africans (1833) and  
History of the Condition of Women (1835)  
that began to deal with the problem  
more directly and successfully. Dated as  
it may be, Hobomok is a valuable source  
of information. The essays that follow  
the fiction demonstrate Child’s persis-  
tent, progressive thought, even within  
the confines of her time and place.

May/June 1987

Oglala Women, by Marla N. Powers,  
is an anthropological, ethnographic  
study that focuses on the role of women  
among the Oglala Sioux. As Powers  
points out, “little has been said about  
the effect [of the reservation process] on  
females,” because “men were stripped of  
their political and economic respon-  
sibilities, whereas women continued to  
function as wives and mothers.” But if  
Oglala society became patriarchal as  
most Native American tribes did, then  
women’s roles were probably changed  
even more drastically than men’s roles  
at a much earlier date. Powers implies  
that contemporary Oglala society is  
“viewed as male dominated, primarily  
as a consequence of missionaries and fed-  
eral education.” She reminds us that “in  
ritual and myth females are its [Oglala  
society’s] prime movers,” and ritual and  
myth, as we know, are the most accurate  
tools of study to determine the roots and  
original structure of oppressed, exter-  
nally redefined cultures.

Powers does a fine job of pointing out  
the colonizer’s interpretations of Oglala  
life. Competitive eyes could not see the  
“complementarity” between the roles of  
Oglala men and women. “Even today,”  
Powers explains, “it is still common to  
contrast the roles of women with the  
roles of men and then to make some  
generalization, usually with regard to the  
universality of the lower status of  
women. But these errors do not apply  
to women exclusively. Rather, they are  
a function of viewing any non-Western  
group, and even certain segments of  
Western society, ethnocentrically.”  
Powers’s research for Oglala Women was  
thorough, and her writing is clear and  
precise. In contrast to conventional  
textbook treatments, she does try to let  
the Oglala speak for themselves  
whenever possible.

During My Time, by Margaret B.  
Blackman, is a sensitive portrayal of a  
Haida woman, Florence Edenshaw  
Davidson. Chapters 4 through 12 com-  
prise Davidson’s first-person narrative of  
her own life. The history recounted is  
rich, heartwarming, and, at times dis-  
turbing. It succeeds in recreating the feel  
of Haida daily life. The detail recounted  
in this oral history is exquisite and gently  
spellbinding. Davidson lived through a  
time of great individual and cultural  
transition. She is one of the last Haida  
women alive who can accurately and expe-  
rientially relate early traditional rituals  
as well as the later changes effected by  
the intrusion of government agents and  
Christian missionaries.

The discussion and afterword by  
Blackman are insightful. At no time  
does Blackman dissect or objectify  
Davidson’s life. Her addendums are en-  
lightening and informative without  
seeming belabored or intrusive. During  
My Time is a fine portrayal of one Haida  
woman’s lifetime and experiences of  
forced transition.

— continued on page 15

Visions of a  
Woman Warrior

The Sun Is Not Merciful, by Anna Lee  
Walters. Firebrand Books (141 The Com-  
mons, Ithaca, NY), 1985, $6.95, 133 pp.  
(PB)

by Kamili Anderson

Sonny’s tears fell noisily. He had no  
control. He emptied himself of them,  
to High Water, then and there. High  
Water cried with Sonny, too, as did  
High Water’s old woman, hidden  
behind the door.

When High Water had spent his  
tears, he asked Sonny in a husky voice,  
“Sonny Boy, what are you crying for?”

Sonny laughed and cried at once, “I  
don’t really know except that it’s been  
too long since I’ve cried and been a boy.  
What are you crying for?”

“It’s one of our laws, boy,” High  
Water told him. “We can’t let none of  
our people cry alone. . .”

Anna Lee Walters states that

the substance of her fiction is

“both what we’ve [Native  
Americans] lived collectively as a people  
and individually as human beings who  
are ultimately alone.” A Pawnee/Otoe  
Indian, originally from Oklahoma, who  
now lives and works on the Navajo reser-  
vation in Arizona, Walters dedicates her  
book to “all the storytellers and to the  
children.” The book itself, which won  
an American Book Award for fiction in  
1986, is evidence of a precious gift.  
Through it, outsiders are granted a view  
of Native Americans that has long been  
withheld.

Most important, the image of the si-  
lent, stoic Indian is struck down here.  
The collective anguish suffered by Na-  
tive Americans is not viewed as the sum  
total of their existence. Instead, the  
people who inhabit Walters’s landscapes  
are complex and vital. Juxtaposed be-  
tween cultures in a land whose beauty  
has been virtually turned against them,  
they must make difficult choices be-  
tween old ways and new. Some lose their  
way, or their lives, in the struggle to  
come to terms with time, life, and place.  
Others are rock-like in their resistance  
to the erosion of their culture and to  
Western (White) concepts of reality or  
spirituality. They are determined to up-  
hold and project their native beliefs and  
to maintain a sense of community in  
spite of centuries of physical and  
psychological warfare.

In each of these stories, a critical les-  
son is either learned or lost. The opening  
quote comes from “The Laws,” in which  
Indian and White modes of justice meet  
and clash. Sonny Boy, a reckless young  
Indian, has committed a robbery for  
which he is certain to get into serious  
trouble with “the laws,” as the two cal-  
lous White reservation policemen are  
called. In desperation, his mother seeks  
assistance from the tribe. The elders  
erase the evidence of Sonny Boy’s crime,  
but he cannot escape tribal law. He is  
beaten and whipped in a public ritual  
and abandoned to suffer his wounds or  
die. Ironically, Sonny Boy’s life is saved  
when the two “laws,” previously intent  
on his capture, take him to the hospital.  
He refuses to reveal his assailants. When  
he returns to confront his mother and  
the elders, their stolidness reduces his  
anger to remorse. Humbled, he releases  
the bitter tears that he has harbored  
since boyhood and is reminded of the  
most important law of all: No one can  
exist alone and unaccountable to others.  
“The Warriors” is told from the  
perspective of two sisters, who learn of  
their Indian heritage and the “ways of  
the old people” from an itinerant uncle.  
The Pawnees, their uncle teaches, were  
fierce, proud warriors who lived and died  
to preserve the beauty of the ancient  
ways. Living beautifully, though, is a  
goal unattainable to him. He is unable  
to reconcile himself to the life devoid  
of dignity that is the lot of most non-  
White men in America. Decimated by  
alcohol and frustration, he dies a hobo,  
not the decorated warrior he envisioned  
himself to be. Yet, he has a profound  
effect upon the girls as they grow and  
boldly explore the circumscribed world  
of the reservation. It is they who carry  
on the legacy of the past and become  
warriors, as women fully cognizant of  
their role in the “battle for beauty.”  
“The Resurrection of John Stink” is  
a touching story of the love between an  
outcast old Indian and a young Indian  
girl. John Stink is viewed with suspicion  
by the village people because of his  
frightening, epileptic-like seizures. The  
girl, Effie, goes to live with him and his  
many dogs on his isolated farm. They  
live a quiet life of sharing and mutual  
respect. “Effie fell in love with John  
Stink, the way she fell in love with the  
start of every autumn. Both things  
touched her soul deeply. She didn’t  
know why she loved him as she did.  
They hardly spoke. They simply were  
there together.”

John Stink does try, unsuccessfully,  
to explain the Indian beliefs in spiritual  
reincarnation to the young Effie, in  
order to prepare her for his imminent  
death. After many years, an extremely  
violent seizure appears to have killed  
John Stink, and Effie buries him in the  
traditional wooden tomb. After the  
burial, John Stink’s dogs refuse to leave  
his grave. Effie spends an all-night vigil  
by the tomb and is awakened by their  
frenetic whining and digging. She dis-  
covers, to her amazement, that John  
Stink is alive, awakened, no doubt, from  
a deep comatose state. Effie and the old  
man are content to resume their life to-  
gether until his final death, whereupon  
Effie “borrows” a child to live with her  
as she herself lived with and cared for  
John Stink. When the child returns from  
the reservation Sunday school confused  
and distraught over a lesson on death  
and the resurrection of Christ, Effie’s  
spiritual growth is evident as she is fi-  
nally able to put John Stink’s talk of a  
“changing of the worlds” into perspec-  
tive for herself and the child.

Walters writes with an intensity that  
is as unmerciful and inescapable as the  
solar force described in the title story,  
which I strongly encourage readers to  
discover for themselves. These eight  
brave, poignant, and bittersweet stories  
reveal the woman warrior’s perspective,  
which is, at once, intimate and objec-  
tive, panoramic and intensely personal.  
In addition, the book is beautifully illus-  
trated throughout, with drawings based  
on traditional Pawnee motifs, and sports  
a very striking cover.

Still, it is the author whose art is most  
dramatic. Using words as her paint-  
brush, Walters offers The Sun Is Not Mer-  
ciful as a telling landscape of the combin-  
ant spiritual and human forces that have  
made it possible for the survivors of the  
European invasion of this continent to  
continue to exist today. Given the li-  
mited access Native American writers  
have to the publishing media, Firebrand  
Books should be commended for bring-  
ing her talent to a wider audience.

@ Kamili Anderson works in the market-  
ing department of Howard University  
Press.

Belles Lettres @ 9