A Not-So-Scarlet Woman

Madeleine: An Autobiography. New York:  
Persea Books, 1986, $9.95, 320 pp. (PB)  

by Laura Hapke  

Those who were bold or curious  
enough to have purchased  
Madeleine, the compelling 1919  
autobiography of a veteran prostitute,  
before it was withdrawn from circulation  
by its overly cautious publisher, must  
have had quite an awakening. Here was  
no tearful penitent, no suicidal sinner  
all but destroyed by the brothel, no vic-  
tim recounting the terrors of entrapment  
by a White slave ring. Defying these  
lingering Victorian stereotypes — and  
the odds as well — Madeleine was a sur-  
vivor. She endured an abusive alcoholic  
father, dangerous pregnancies, abor-  
tions, venereal disease, addiction to  
gambling and drink, and the inevitable  
brutalities of 15 years of life in brothels  
from the Midwest to the Canadian fron-  
tier. And she lived to tell her tale and  
to chide those who believed the Virtue  
Betrayed myths of the day.  
Madeleine’s rejection of the era’s most  
sentimental idée fixe, White slavery, is  
less troubling but just as thought provok-  
ing for modern readers encountering her  
in this newly reissued book. Here she  
writes with characteristic force:  

I met the public prostitute, the  
clandestine prostitute, and the oc-  
casional prostitute . . . . I met the girl  
from the sheltered home and the girl  
who had been allowed to run wild; the  
girl who had sold her honor for bread,  
and the girl who had sold it for luxury  
and fine clothes. . . . I met the girl  
who should have been a nun, and those  
others who were “predestined by an-  
cient conditions” for the life of a harlot.  

But the one girl I never met in all  
these years and in all the cities and  
countries that I visited was the pure girl  
who had been trapped and violated and  
sold into slavery.  

The passage also illustrates the paradox  
at the heart of Madeleine and the whole  
subgenre of the prostitute’s confession:  
The more she provides a kind of  
taxonomy of prostitution — of the  
women who enter the trade; the varieties  
of madams, brothels, brothel towns, and  
corrupt officials — the more we wonder  
about Madeleine herself.  

Although her narrative tells all in a  
strikingly modern style, the real  
Madeleine still eludes us. Of course, we  
register the facts of brothel life, like the  
8 p.m. to 4 a.m. parlor hours or the  
tricks practiced on the unwary or dull-  
witted client. We learn of the constant  
pressure on the girls from the madam to  
buy costly clothes and thus fall into  
house debt or to drink so that the cus-  
tomers would buy more liquor. The pre-  
scriptions and superstitions are memora-  
ble too: Never speak to the piano player;  
do not take another girl’s client unless  
the madam orders it; only loosen your  
corset in the parlor after 2 a.m.; spit on  
the back of a customer who leaves with-  
out choosing a girl. Yet in trying to dis-  
cover the woman herself, we are caught  
up in the contradictions, delusions, and  
fantasies of the narrative self.  

Madeleine says she entered the trade  
to support the child she would soon  
have, although she could have stayed  
indefinitely with generous friends. She  
claims that she remained a prostitute to  
send money to her family but also ad-  
mits: “It was not possible for me to send  
them much money, for I had no way of  
accounting for the possession of it.” She  
affects to despise the men for whom she  
counterfeits passion, but she glories in  
being “the most sought-after girl in  
town, [who] rejoiced in my . . . popu-  
larity.” There is obvious romanticizing  
as well: Every brothel she works in is  
beautiful, and no madam ever cheats  
her. Later, as a madam herself,  
Madeleine claims to inspire fanatical de-  
votion in her subordinates and scrupu-  
lous honesty in the girls. A former client  
supposedly pursues only her for a decade,  
wanting her to leave the trade and re-  
main with him, but she prefers her “‘in-  
dependence.”  

In her informative and scholarly in-  
troduction, Marcia Carlisle terms  
Madeleine a “feminist narrative,” and,  
despite its evasions and rationalizations,  
it is. Madeleine’s discussion of male bru-  
tality in the brothel as a mirror of mas-  
culine social power is lucid and memor-  
able. Although she is uneasy with the  
idea of the prostitute being dependent,  
she acknowledges the assault on the  
feminine self and the need for psychic  
strength that “the life” required. In so  
doing, she provides us with a record of  
a kind of womanly courage often ignored  
in the search for feminist role models.  

@ Laura Hapke is at work on a study of  
the prostitute in late 19th-century American  
fiction.  

Hard To Be Jewish  

The Tribe of Dina: A Jewish Women’s  
Anthology, edited by Melanie Kaye/  
Kantrowitz and Irena Klepfisz. Sinister  
Wisdom Books, (P.O. Box 1308, Mont-  
pelier, VT 05602), $9.95, 335 pp.  

by Susan S. Lanser  

There is an old Yiddish saying,  

s’is schver tsu zein a yid, or, it is  

hard to be a Jew, to which a  
friend of mine sometimes answers, “and  
harder still to be a Jewish woman.” As  
I read The Tribe of Dina, with its prism  
of visions, I am reminded that hard  
means more than “full of obstacles:” It  
means “resisting pressure or force” and  
“not easy to understand or explain.” The  
Tribe of Dina is both an explanation and  
a resistance to pressure. It is also a cele-  
bration of the lives it documents:  
Ashkenazi and Sephardic lives, hetero-  
sexual and lesbian lives, lives lived in  
many countries, lives present and past.  

These authors understand the simul-  
taneous diversity and commonality of  
Jewish women’s experience. On the one  
hand, shared struggles cut across differ-  
ences. There are the constraints of trad-  
itional roles, whether for Ellen Hawley’s  
Ashkenazi aunt who knew that college  
was only for her brother, or Gloria  
Kirchheimer’s Sephardic mother, mak-  
ing strudel behind her husband’s back  
for the synagogue. There are the pres-  
sures to assimilate that tarnish adoles-  
cence, whether in Marilyn Zuckerman’s  
New York or Isabelle Maynard’s  
Tientsin. There are the troubling signs  
of self-division, both for Elinor Spiel-  
berg, whose love for horses is shadowed  
by her Austrian great-grandmother’s  
scars from “Franz-Josefs mount,” and  
more drastically for Nava Mizrahhi,  
bearing the torn identity of an “Arab  
Jew.”  

On the other hand, unexpected differ-  
ences may be “sources of strength,” as  
they are for the book’s editors, but they  
can also be sources of disappointment,  
as when Sandra Butler and Barbara  
Rosenblum thought they could be a  
home for each other where “we didn’t  

10 ® Belles Lettres  

have to explain everything,” and who  
learned instead that “our homes were  
furnished differently.” The message,  
crucial to feminist theory and practice,  
is that one can presume neither differ-  
ence nor sameness but must listen care-  
fully for the nuances of both, for the  
subtle shifts and slips of meaning when  
people use the same words, for the deep  
resonances when they use different ones.  
As Irena Klepfisz writes about Yiddish  
and English in “Fradel Schtok”:  

Think of it: heym and home the  
meaning  

the same of course exactly  

but the shift in vowel was the ocean  

in which I drowned.  

The Tribe of Dina makes clear that what  
is true of language is true of Jewish  
women as well: like words in translation,  
Jewish women are and are not the same.  
It is precisely this dialectic of differ-  
ence and similarity that makes antholo-  
gies built around issues of identity  
so crucial to feminism. Personal narra-  
tives necessarily form the heart of such  
anthologies. But The Tribe of Dina is  
unusual in offering an extraordinary di-  
versity of genres as well: poetry, fiction,  
biographical and historical accounts (my  
favorite of these is Sarah Schulman’s  
walking tour through Lower-East-Side  
Jewish women’s history), interviews,  
bilingual printings of Yiddish poems and  
Ladino ballads, art, an abundance of  
photographs (including the works of Is-  

trom SINISTER WISDOM: a special double issue (#29/30)  

THE TRIBE OF DINA:  

A JEWISH WOMEN’S ANTHOLOGY  

EDITED BY: MELANIE KAYE/KANTROWITZ & IRENA KLEPFISZ  

raeli artist Lea Majaro-Mintz), a glossary  
of terms, resources for further study, and  
a handbook on anti-Semitism and  
Jewish identity. The result is a text that  
educates in myriad ways, beginning with  
the explanation of its own name, which  
refers to the near-forgotten daughter of  
Leah and Jacob whose brothers founded  
the twelve tribes of Israel.  

Every anthology has its particular  
emphases. This one stresses secular  
Jewishness and gives careful attention to  
Sephardic women, to women living in  
Israel, and to Yiddishkeit, the culture of  
Eastern European Jews. I am sorry that  
the book does not include any pieces by  
self-identified Black Jews, or by women  
who are Jewish by choice — “converts”  
to Judaism for whom it is also, and dif-  
ferently, hard to be Jewish and whose  
presence asks us to question, as this book  
does in so many other ways, what it  
means to be a “real Jew.”  

But there is in Dina an abundance to  
appreciate, not least the prose and  
poetry of the editors themselves. Irena  
Klepfisz’s and Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz’s  
own writings give powerful voice  
to the convictions that the personal is  
political and that words matter deeply.  
They and their contributors have much  
to tell both Jewish and non-Jewish read-  
ers who want to understand what it  
means, in struggle and in joy, tzu sein a  

yidene.  

® Susan S. Lanser teaches literature and  
women’s studies at Georgetown University.  
She is presently completing a book on  
women and narrative voice and beginning  
a study of women critics 1770-1900.  

FICTION • ESSAYS • ART + POETRY • PHOTOGRAPHS • TRANSLATIONS  
e INTERVIEWS WITH ISRAELI PEACE, CIVIL RIGHTS, FEMINIST  

ACTIVISTS • BOBE MAYSES • SECULAR JEWISH IDENTITY + BECOM-  

ING A RABBI • GROWING UP IN ARGENTINA, CHINA • SEPHARDIC  
IDENTITY • SURVIVING THE HOLOCAUST • ANTI-SEMITISM & RACISM  
+ JEWISH LESBIANS + RADICAL JEWISH WOMEN'S HISTORY >  

YIDDISHKAYT • JUDAISM & FEMINISM • JEWISH FOOD  

ISBN 0-931103-02-9 .  

@  

1985  
SINISTER WISDOM Subscription: 4 issues yearly $14.00  

SINISTER WISDOM BOOKS - P.O. Box 1308 Montpelier, VT 05602  

288 pp. $8.95 • Add $1/postage  

Illinois  
Boundaries of the Self  

Gender, Culture, Fiction  
Roberta Rubenstein  

Examines the fiction of women from  
different ethnic (Kingston, Morrison,  
and Silko) and national (Robinson,  
Atwood, and Mortimer) backgrounds.  
“Shows how gender intersects with  
self, ethnicity, and culture to define  
boundaries significant in women’s  
writing.” — Blanche H. Gelfant.  
$24.95.  

Marianne Moore  
The Poetry of Engagement  
Grace Schulman  

“Schulman has provided the careful  
reading that the poetry demands and  
deserves.” — Warren Woessner, New  
York Times Book Review. “Both ex-  
citing and important to the study of  
Moore.” — Christanne Miller, Li-  
brary Journal. $17.95.  

Marguerite Duras  
Writing on the Body  
Sharon Willis  

The first study to treat Duras’ literary  
and cinematic production together.  
“Clearly and exhaustively presented,  
this study goes to the center of the  
“Duras problem.”” — Constance Pen-  
ley, editor, Camera Obscura. $19.95.  

Oedipus Anne  
The Poetry of Anne Sexton  
Diana Hume George  

Merging feminist and Freudian ap-  
proaches, George argues that Sexton  
is a female hero in the tradition of  
Oedipus and his tragic quest for  
truth. “[Illuminates so much more  
than Sexton — we may read other  
modern and postmodern poets, espe-  
cially women, by the light George has  
lit here.” — Alicia Ostriker, author of  
Writing Like a Woman. $24.95.  

Eleanor Roosevelt and  
the Media  

A Public Quest for  
Self-fulfillment  

Maurine H. Beasley  

Illuminates the symbiotic relationship  
between the First Lady and the me-  
dia, showing how Eleanor Roosevelt  
enhanced the careers of some women  
journalists and later put to her own  
use the techniques of mass communi-  
cations, both in the White House and  
at the UN. $24.95.  

New paperback  

Women and the English  
Renaissance  

Literature and the Nature of  
Womankind, 1540-1620  

“The first study of its kind to sepa-  
rate literary exercises from works re-  
flecting actual social conditions and  
attitudes.” — Alison Tartt, Library  
Journal. “For Renaissance women’s  
studies, the significant book of the  
year.” — Gordon Braden, Studies in  
English Literature. $10.95 paper.  

Order toll free 800/638-3030.  
Maryland residents 301/824-7300.  

University of Illinois Press  
54 E. Gregory, Champaign, IL 61820  

May/June 1987