Impressions

Out of Africa

The underpinnings of apartheid as de-
picted in the fiction reviewed in this
issue are laid bare in South Africa: A
Different Kind of War by Julie Fred-
erikse (Beacon Press, $12.95, 192 pp.,
PB). Using clippings from state-
controlled and opposition newspapers,
interviews, pamphlets, posters, lyrics,
and advertisements, she creates a
documentary montage of resistance to
apartheid from 1976 through 1986.

A South Africa further back in time
can be found in An Olive Schreiner
Reader: Writings on Women and South
Africa, edited by Carol Barash (Pan-
dora/Methuen, $33 HB, $11.95 PB, 200
pp.). Author of the classic novel Story of
an African Farm, Schreiner wrestled with
burning social issues in essays as well.
Barash introduces each piece, as well as
providing a general introduction, in
which she observes: “The paradoxes em-
bodied in a woman who can understand
and articulate sources of shared oppres-
sion, but who cannot or will not oppose
them, can seem as troublesome in
Schreiner’s own life as in the lives of her
fictional heroines.”

Come to Africa and Save Your Mar-
riage ($14.95, 235 pp.) is a powerful
book of short stories by Maria Thomas,
who spent 12 years in Africa and speaks
several African languages. She writes
about the interconnections of the vari-
ous races and nationalities of people liv-
ing there — some ugly, some saintly, and
the rest struggling in between. Soho
Press, a new small press distributed by
Farrar Straus & Giroux, is the publisher
of this and of Thomas’s novel, Antonia
Saw the Oryx First.

Two new paperbacks explore the re-
sponses of women travelers in Africa.
Helen Winternitz, author of East Along
the Equator (Atlantic Traveler series,

More Women and War

Canadian television researcher and
producer Shelley Saywell garnered first-
hand accounts from women who had
been in combat for Women in War:
From World War I to El Salvador
(Penguin, 1986, $9.95, 324 pp., PB).
Individual chapters focus on Britain,
France, Italy, Poland, and the Soviet
Union during World War II and then
progress chronologically through Pales-
tine, Indochina, Vietnam, the Falk-
lands, and El Salvador. The narrative
poems by Wendy Larsen in Shallow
Graves: Two Women and Vietnam
(Harper & Row, $7.95, 289 pp., PB)
evoke the war in Vietnam through their
retelling of the experiences of Larsen’s
Vietnamese friend and collaborator,
Tran Thi Nga. Behind the Lines: Gen-
der and the Two World Wars, edited by
Margaret Randolph Higonnet, Jane Jen-
son, Sonya Michel, and Margaret Col-
lins Weitz (Yale, $22.50, 310 pp.), is a
book of essays that looks at if and how
gender relationships were altered as a re-
sult of the two world wars. The book is
cross-disciplinary, covering literature,
history, and sociology. An exceptional
document comes to light in A Private
War: Letters and Diaries of Madge
Preston, 1862-1867, (Rutgers, $29.95,
374 pp.), edited and with an introduc-
tion by Virginia Walcott Beauchamp.
The public war is the War Between the
States; the private one between Preston
and her husband, who was unfaithful
and who abused her physically and ver-
bally. The editor juxtaposes letters writ-
ten by Mrs. Preston with journal entries
made at the same time to point up the re-
ality behind the facade of a typical gen-
teel family.

14 @ Belles Lettres

Drawing from South Africa: A Different Kind
of War

$9.95), makes the following observa-
tions:

More than one person has asked me
how I endure the loneliness of traveling
in Africa, how I get along, a white
American woman. . . I get a lot lone-
lier traveling in the United States than
I ever have in Africa. . . . To travel in
Africa, above all, is to be with people
. . . to learn to depend on strangers,
who on that continent fortunately have
not forgotten the meaning of hospital-
ity.
Dawn Kolokithas, author of The
Tropologue ($9, 64 pp., Poltroon Press,
PO Box 5476, Berkeley, CA 94705)

wrote this journal of her six-month trip
through Zaire, Uganda, Kenya, Sudan,

and Egypt as a prose poem. Here she is in
the last location:

At Kom Ombo we visit the crocodilo-
pholis where Sobek ruled. . . . The
guidebook says in ancient days the
crocodiles roamed freely through the
temples, perfumed and ornamented
with jewels. There’s a room full of
crocodile mummies, snoots pointing
skyward. In the Holy of Holies I listen
to an Egyptian guide lecturing in Eng-
lish to a group of Japanese tourists. Is
that a toilet, one of them asks, pointing
to a hole in the floor. No, the guide
says, that’s an oracle.

“I would like to call it advocacy an-
thropology in the female style, that is,
speaking on behalf of a culture as a lover
or mother,” says Edith Turner of her
book The Spirit and the Drum: A
Memoir of Africa (University of
Arizona Press, $18.95, 164 pp.). The
author lived among the Ndembu of
southern Africa three different times,
from the 1950s to the 1980s.

Nancy Schaumburger warns us to stay
away from Cradle Song by Jane Rawlin-
son (St. Martin’s) and Breaking the
Rules by Caroline LaSalle (Viking), two
novels by Britishers with parts set in Af-
rica. “Both are about rather over-
privileged, unpleasantly neurotic
women,” she says, “and they’re not par-
ticularly well written.”

Kamili Anderson shares the following
observations with us adapted from a re-

view she wrote for Small Press magazine
on Women in African Literature Today
(Africa World Press, P.O. Box 1892,
Trenton, NJ 08608; $35 HB, $11.95
PB): “Gender is rarely a theme for
analysis in critical examinations of con-
temporary African literature. Scholars
in the field even more rarely discuss
feminist concerns. But if African litera-
ture, like that of most societies undergo-
ing turbulent change, can be viewed as
protest literature, then we have the basis
for viewing the writings of African
women as efforts to use art for the pur-
pose of historical retrieval and the cor-
rection of the images of women. That is
what makes these critical essays so valu-
able.

The contributors make a strong case
that the decidedly male heritage of Afri-
can literature has dealt insufficiently
with the portrayal of womanhood and
that the imagination and breadth of
perspective that only African women
writers themselves can bring are of vital
importance. The essays specifically on
this subject analyze unflinchingly the
dialectical nature of the visions of Afri-
can women: artistic/cultural, social, and
political. Nigerian feminist critic Molara
Ogundipe-Leslie’s overview, “The Fe-
male Writer and Her Commitment,”
and Mybe Cham’s study of the novels of
Mariama Ba are worth the price of the
book alone.

Briefly Noted

@ One of my favorite novels has come
out in paperback from Penguin: Ana-
grams by Lorrie Moore, whose previous
collection of short stories, Self-Help, was
a wholly original combination of pathos
and humor. The cloth edition from
Knopf was distinctive in that the jacket
copy was actually relevant to the text
within; in fact, it did it justice! Bravo to
the unsung copywriter, who told us that

At the center is a mystery, and a set of
variations which first seem to conceal
the mystery but ultimately disclose it

. . . We see Benna as if through a
lens, leading a number of possible
lives. We see her as a catty, tough, vul-
nerable nightclub singer. We see her as
a cigarette-puffing aerobics instructor;
as a slightly daffy but passionate college
teacher; as a bemused and then aban-
doned wife; as an enchanted mother;
and — always — as an eclectic, pierc-
ing “I,” dislocated and anxious in all
the familiar ways but with her feelings
intact, vibrant.

We see, through Benna’s intense
gaze, her closest friend, Eleanor, her
tough-gal confidante — thirty-one,
overweight, a woman who is incredibly
smart, hilarious, and sad. And Benna’s
magical child, Georgianne Michelle,
now six and soon to be in first grade.

All the while we are shown — but
don’t quite see until the startling
climax — the truth of Benna’s

life.

® Fiction writer Ellen Gilchrist’s
book of excerpts from her journals, Fall-
ing Through Space (Little, Brown,
$15.95), contains some wry reflections
on being a writer in modern-day USA,
including a hilarious exchange with a
Hollywood lamebrain who wanted her to
rewrite a foreign film, and the following
passage on donating papers to institu-
tions:

Universities are always after me to give
them my papers (by which they mean
my letters and notes and worksheets).
Whenever that happens I go out to the
shed and get a sack of them and burn
them up in the wood stove. I have the
idea of some poor graduate student
down in a marble basement somewhere
going through my notes and letters and
wild imaginings. . . .

A poet told me a good one the other
day. She said academics have a new
name for a writer’s worksheets. They
call them repressed papers.

Ellen Gilchrist. Photo by Thomas Victor

Short story readers who have followed
Gilchrist through her three collections
will be interested in what she discloses
about her family background, as well as
in how the recurring characters in her
stories enact the questions raised by her
favorite reading: science and
philosophy.

% Note to J. California Cooper: I
liked your short stories when they were
published by Alice Walker’s Wild Trees
Press and still do now that you’ve gone
over to St. Martin’s for your latest, Some
Soul to Keep ($14.95, 211 pp.). I like
your stories with morals, peopled by
characters bursting with life. But J.
California, have mercy! Hold back on
those exclamation points! They like to
jump off the page! Don’t nobody talk
that way! It’s distracting! OK? OK! OK!

@ Scribner’s, Edith Wharton’s
lifelong publisher, has been reissuing her
books recently in paperback. This spring
they are publishing The Collected Let-
ters of Edith Wharton ($29.95), edited
by her biographer, R.W.B. Lewis, and
his wife, Nancy. Many of the letters are
unpublished, among them a great many
passionate epistles to Morton Fullerton,
the love of Wharton’s life. The book will
also feature an assortment of photo-
graphs.

® Jeanne Casey reports on The
Selected Letters of Louisa May Alcott
(Little, Brown, $24.95, 416 pp.) as fol-
lows: “Louisa May Alcott’s letters, 271 of
which are annotated and printed
chronologically in this volume, are sharp

-

a
J. California Cooper. Photo by R. Allen.

cameos of verve and affection. They
span 45 years, years that were etched by
financial difficulty, bereavement, and
illness for the Alcotts all the while
Louisa’s literary star was rising. The
editors acknowledge that correspon-
dents who saved her letters are dispro-
portionately represented, for Louisa al-
legedly destroyed some family letters to
preserve her privacy. Yet Madeleine
Stern and her co-editors have done a
wonderful job of amassing and annotat-
ing letters that have never been pub-
lished.”

One Less Belle

to Answer

As of this issue, editor Deanna
D’Errico has demobilized; henceforth
she will do all of her belles-lettrizing as a
private citizen. In the three years that
she co-edited the magazine (covering its
inception to the present, with a marriage
in the middle), Deanna accomplished
enough to last a lifetime. It was all unre-
munerated, except for the pride she took
in a job well done and in the success of
Belles Lettres. No longer will she work
around the clock or through holidays;
lose touch with loved ones (could it be
that a paste-up dummy is no substitute
for a warm body?); or be haunted by
overflowing stacks of paperwork — but I
trust she will be able to cope with the
loss. Whatever she does with her new-
found freedom will surely be wonderful;
what she did for Belles Lettres truly was.

Marcu/April 1988