The crowd laughed and cheered and applauded. But the  
singing had stopped. The fireman trained a huge light on the  
building and it ran up the side like a roach. The light hov-  
ered at the rooftop, then began to creep along the edge. The  
roof was indeed empty. "You see? There’s nothing there,"  
shouted the man with the megaphone. “There is nothing  
there!"  

My Aunt Clara’s voice came shrill through the crowd. I  
could not see her, but her voice was clear as she explained  
what had happened away. "It is a miracle," she shouted,  
"She would not let the Protestants see her. She would not  
let them shine their lights upon her. It is a miracle."  

Her opinion of the Virgin’s departure was immediately  
accepted. The Virgin was Catholic. The Virgin of Guadal-  
upe, of Lourdes, of Fatima, was Polish, too. Of course the  
Protestants would not be able to see her. Nor would the  
Italians, nor the Irish. The Virgin was ours.  

My grandmother translated all of this to two of her  
friends who spoke no English. They nodded, grave with  
knowledge. They, and then everyone, took up the cry again:  
"Miracle, miracle," in English so that the firemen would  
know. “Okay, folks," the man, whose voice had taken on  
the huskiness that my own had when I’d try to sing too  
loudly, tried again. "Take your miracle home with you. Go  
on home." The light still shone on the empty roof.  

Then my mother’s voice grew loud at my side. “I won a  
cookie jar!" she shouted, as if to say, "Explain that away if  
you can." "That’s right," my father hollered, shaking his  
fist. “That’s right, she did."  

"Okay, people," the fireman had not heard. "Okay. You  
can see she’s gone now, so go on back. Go back home."  
The huge truck began to move, turtle-slow, down the street,  
and everyone began to back from it, from the man with the  
megaphone, from the building.  

We backed too, like all the rest, not turning our eyes  
from the hospital, but shuffling backward, staring at the  
spot where She had been, trying not to trip or lose our  
balance, not to shove or be shoved, but trying, most espe-  
cially, not to relinquish that which was especially ours, the  
Virgin of Polish Hill, my own Aunt Clara’s Virgin.  

"Hey! Hey, Cat!" It was Raymond Bielski calling to me,  
a boy whom I secretly thought of as my boyfriend.  

I sneaked a peek in his direction, and when I did, he  
raised a finger to his temple and began to twirl it round, the  
symbol for crazy.  

I wavered between laughter and solemnity, and finally  
gained the latter, turning away from him and all of my  
devilish instincts. I ignored Raymond, offering it up, this  
huge sacrifice that I knew would mean the end of his affec-  
tion for me, to my family, my roots, my past, and above  
all, to the Virgin: the Virgin of Polish Hill.  

© Carolyn Banks is working on her fifth novel and on a  
collection of short stories.  

illustrations by Scott Cook and from the loving way in  
which Nettie Jo solves a problem. As in Flossie and the  
Fox, the parameters of the predicament are described to  
Nettie Jo by a loving adult who isn’t afraid to allow her  
child the risk of disappointment and failure. Nettie Jo is to  
participate in a wedding but can’t take her doll because she  
is too “scraggly-looking." She can choose not to attend, to  
leave the doll at home, or to find a way to improve the  
doll’s appearance. Nettie Jo chooses to make her doll a new  
dress. In this way she satisfies her own needs while respect-  
ing the feelings of her doll because "Annie Mae is my  
friend. If she can’t go, then I don’t want to go either."  
Nettie Jo’s mother encourages this solution by giving her a  
piece of material with which to make the dress but can’t  
supply a needle because they are all in use. Nettie Jo en-  
counters difficulties and disappointments as she tries to find  
a needle but perseveres.  

In Mirandy and Brother Wind (Knopf, 1988, $12.95),  
a slightly older child defines her own problem. Mirandy  
decides to capture "Brother Wind" to ensure winning the  
community cakewalk. After several inventive and compli-  
cated efforts to ensnare the wind, she successfully traps him  
in the henhouse. But her original plan of having the wind as  
her partner changes when a friend needs support. Mirandy,  
instead, asks the wind to grant her a wish and to give her  
and her friend "style and grace" and the ability to move like  
“shadows in the flickering candlelight." Mirandy’s mother  
and neighbor support her efforts but allow her the physical  
space and the independence to develop a private and cre-  
ative solution. McKissacks’s young Black girls are respon-  
sible in a time in which this trait in children is desperately  
needed, as is her ability to tell a story without moralizing or  
underestimating the reader’s perceptiveness.  

@ Anne Bischoff is an elementary school teacher in St.  
Louis, Missouri.