= ee ae  
Is Margaret  
Randall  
a threat  
to the  
U.S.A.?  

In 1984, poet, political writer  
and feminist Margaret Randall  
returned to the U.S., the country  
of her birth, after living for nearly  
a quarter century in Latin  
America. Her application for  
permanent residency has been  
denied by the Immigration and  
Naturalization Service because  
of her political beliefs. Claiming  
that her writings advocate  
“world communism,” the INS  
considers Margaret Randall's  
continuing presence in the U.S.  
a threat to the state.  

Alice Walker,  
Kurt Vonnegut  
& Studs Terkel  
don’t think so  

The INS decision is based on  
the McCarran-Walter Act,  
legislation passed in 1952 at  
the height of the McCarthy era.  
Alice Walker, Kurt Vonnegut  
and Studs Terkel join a growing  
number of writers, artists and  
activists who are protesting this  
unjust ruling.  

Albuquerque  

Coming Back to the U.S.A.  

Margaret  
Randall  

a coming  
Back story  
USA.  

350 pages $12.95  

Albuquerque is really  
about the U.S.A., 1984,  
as filtered through the eyes  
and soul of a North American-  
born woman returning home  
after twenty-three years in  
Latin America. Margaret  
Randall’s journals and photo-  
graphs provide a remarkably  
rich and probing document of  
this time and place, a witness  
to the plurality of its cultural  
and political currents, to the  
lives of many individuals both  
searching and committed. At  
once a book of homecoming  
and travel, this is truly  
a unique testimony.  

— Adrienne Rich  

Margaret Randall, the author  
of more than forty books,  
including the bestselling  
Sandino’s Daughters, is  
currently appealing the INS  
decision against her.  

NEW/ A better bookstores  

or order from  

New Star Books,  
BOOKS  

2504 York Avenue,  
Vancouver,  
British Columbia, Canada V6K 1E3  

March/April 1987  

—Rediscovery, continued  

little cowards, sadists and debauchees.”  
They met her criterion of “honesty” but  
he called it “complete lack of reticence.”  

In 1922 the Scotts went to Bermuda  
where Cyril was to restore an old estate.  
Evelyn fell in love with Owen Merton,  
a painter, and he and his son Thomas  
moved in with them. Evelyn, Owen,  
Cyril, and Creighton traveled to Italy,  
France, and Algiers. While they were  
living in Bou Saada, Evelyn worked with  
Owen on a book that was never pub-  
lished. She and Cyril did a children’s  
book, In the Endless Sands. Cyril was also  
painting, and after he had an exhibit in  
Paris, he decided to remain there.  

After 3 years and 3 continents, Owen  
chose to go back to his children rather  
than to marry Evelyn. Evelyn returned  
to London and, within several months,  
told her friend Lola Ridge that she had  
married John Metcalfe. “I went out to  
look for an interest....So I found John.  
Not hard to find, in the obvious sense,  
but he is showing himself someone upon  
whom affection can spend itself not just  
blindly for lack of object, but consciously  
through a spontaneous approval.”  

In spite of this calculated beginning,  
the marriage lasted until her death in  
1963. Metcalfe was a writer of horror  
stories, a mild man who was devoted to  
Evelyn, but he had several mental break-  
downs and developed a drinking prob-  
lem. Callard discovered little about Met-  

calfe: “Apart from his work, the man  
cast no shadow.” John and Evelyn were  
often separated because neither could  
settle comfortably in the other’s country.  
To follow their peregrinations from 1926  
until the war would take a sophisticated  
map and myriad position pins.  

Returning to the U.S. in 1953, Eve-  
lyn and John lived meagerly. When Eve-  
lyn could not get published, she blamed  
a Communist conspiracy. A latent  
paranoia had developed and her letters  
became strident and strange. John pub-  
lished two books, but lost teaching jobs  
because of his drinking. They depended  
greatly on loyal friends as they went sadly  
downhill together. John died in 1965.  

Evelyn’s friendships flourished by  
mail. Her long correspondence with the  
poet Lola Ridge started with Lola’s re-  
view of Evelyn’s first book. Lola offered  
a sympathetic, unjudging ear for Eve-  
lyn’s thoughts and troubles. But even  
she could be offended and there were  
several rifts.  

One of Scott’s correspondents, Kay  
Boyle, wrote, “The reality of our  
friendship resided in our letters and this  
may have been because each of us was  
writing not to a stranger but to another  
facet of herself.” But when she met Scott  
she was uncomfortable. “One was aware  
at every instant of the nervous com-  
plexities of Evelyn’s marital, sexual, and  
professional lives...I trembled for Eve-  
lyn’s shattered depths.” Scott’s most  
bizarre pen pal was the anarchist Emma  
Goldman to whom she wrote admir-  

ingly, “Anarchy requires of all men the  
spirit which makes leaders.” Evelyn be-  
lieved in unfettered individualism.  
Emma’s excoriation of Communism  
fueled Evelyn’s suspicions of conspiracy.  

Oddly neither Waldo Frank, Thomas  
Merton, nor William Carlos Williams  
mention Scott in their autobiographies.  
Only her son remembered her in his  
memoirs—harshly. He criticized the un-  
settled life she gave him, from Freudian  
experiments in the Village to dangerous  
schools in Africa. Although he admired  
his father, he resented Evelyn and  
stopped seeing her after 1949.  

Callard’s well-researched biography is  
packed with facts about this talented,  
contrary, fascinating, and ultimately  
tragic woman. But it is as densely written  
as an encyclopedia entry. He has traced  
her frenetic path, dealt calmly with the  
sensational aspects, read her writing, in-  
terviewed those who knew her, and  
listed her books with notes on her un-  
published manuscripts. There are  
lacunae, however. He reveals little  
about her last two years in Brazil when  
she contributed to Poetry and other  
magazines.  

With his detective work, Callard has  
brought out of oblivion the work of a  
writer who made breakthroughs in style,  
substance, and technique. But the flaws  
in her writing, and in her life, leave her  
an enigma still.  

@ Emily Vincent used to edit books and  
now reviews them in Princeton, NJ.  

—WWAII Novels, continued  

The Lady Rushfords will endure; it is  
the Miss Bolbys, as unsympathetic as  
they are, who will be among the emo-  
tional casualties of the war.  

In Elly Welt’s darkly satiric new work,  
Berlin Wild, half-Jewish Josef Bernhardt  
searches for alternative family and emo-  
tional survival in Hitler’s Germany. The  
novel moves between the Iowa City of  
1967 and student unrest and the wartime  
Berlin of yellow stars and concentration  
camp deportations billed as work assign-  
ments for the Reich. Each period is an  
occasion for Josef’s bitterly ironic reflec-  
tions: Student protestors, ignorant of  
history, are oblivious to the implications  
of mob violence, yet the very adoration  
of authority in Josef's disciplined early  
schooling had sent Berlin children home  
with swastikas on their book covers.  

As Josef, a successful anesthesiologist  
who still fearfully conceals his Jewish-  
ness, flashes back to his Berlin years,  
the sounds of students’ voices recede. It  
is Berlin, 1944, and his Jewish mother,  
a physician ordered to a “new career” of  
peeling potatoes in a downtown factory  
“for the glory of the Third Reich,” is  
about to be sent to a camp. His ineffec-  
tual Christian father has refused to dis-  
obey the law and flee with the family.  

@ $12.50/year  

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216  

Check the subscription rate that applies:  
1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year  

1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)  

2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year  
subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00  

Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription  

Through family connections, Josef finds  
work at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute  
where, with irony characteristic of the  
novel, he is put to work separating “ra-  
cially pure” fruit flies from the “Berlin  
Wild” breed—a mixed breed like him-  
self. Titularly under Nazi control, the  
Institute is a hotbed of resistance.  
Jewish-looking employees are hidden  
when there are Nazi inspections, illegal  
broadcasts describing German defeats  
are cheered, and German discipline is  
undermined at every turn. Josef discov-  
ers maternal love from the Russian  
women scientists, sexual awakening in  
his visits to the copyroom with the young  
female lab assistants—and the insight  
that only in this “lunatic asylum run by  
the inmates” can a sane life be lived in  
the Third Reich.  

Although there are echoes of Günter  
Grass in Welt’s emphasis on the brilliant  
and pubescent young man who witnesses  
the disintegration of social relations in  
Nazi Germany, the voice here is a new  
one. Rather like a scientist herself, Welt  
bombards her highly sensitive characters  
with the tyrannies of Nazism and records  
responses with meticulous irony. Fi-  
nally, the poignance of Josef’s realization  
that to retain his past he must release  
his guilt is dramatized with a power that  
recalls the tragedy of the Holocaust and  
pays tribute to those who died and to  
those who lived.  

Please send  

Name  

1-year subscription[s] or  
subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check  
or money order in the amount of  
Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a  
photocopy, or handwritten copy.  

The liberated women of Gellhorn and  
Triolet, the less-rebellious women of  
Miller, Panter-Downes, and Talbot, and  
Welt’s young man in search of identity  
in the merciless Third Reich all testify  
to the primacy of the need for relation-  
ships, whatever the historical moment.  
These works also eloquently de-  
monstrate that combat is not the only  
context for the study of those profoundly  
affected by the fortunes or misfortunes  
of war.  

® Laura Hapke teaches at Pace Univer-  
sity and writes frequently about the fiction  
of 19th- and 20th-century women.  

Free Books  

The following people receive free  
books for subscribing to Belles Lettres  
by February 3: Margaret Lyell, Mor-  
gantown, WV—I’ve Been a Woman  
by Sonia Sanchez; Jean Russell,  
Miami, FL—Homegirls and Hand  

Grenades by Sonia Sanchez; Nancy  

Corbin, Seattle, WA—Black  
Women Writers at Work by Claudia  
Tate.  

Four signed copies of Janet  
Campbell Hale’s The Jailing of  
Cecelia Capture will be given to four  
people who subscribe by April 15.  

2-year  

payable to Belles  

Street  

City  

* Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:  

State Zip  

1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year  

Send gift card to: contribution of $ is enclosed.  

Name  

Street  

City State Zip  

I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue.  

Belles Lettres @ 15