Some Like  
It Haute  

by Lise Metzger  

Hollywood Androgyny, by Rebecca Bell-  
Metereau. Columbia University Press, 1985,  
$24.95, 237 pp.  

Androgyny, but as Rebecca Bell-  
Metereau makes clear in Holly-  

wood Androgyny, the theme is not new  
to film. According to Bell-Metereau,  
more than 200 films address the subject  
of cross-dressing and role reversal.  

Bell-Metereau, who is an assistant  
professor of English at Southwest  
Texas State University, has done her  
homework. If ever a man has put on a  
skirt in front of a camera, she has seen  
the film and read all the criticism on it,  
from the years of silent pictures to 1982.  

Hollywood Androgyny traces the  
changing attitudes of our society to-  
ward sexuality and women through its  
examination of cross-dressing in films.  
The author includes both sexes in her  
discussion, of course, but both the man  
dressing as a woman and the woman  
dressing as a man reflect the status of  
women in society at the time a film was  
made. And the way the subject has  
been handled has changed dramati-  
cally, reflecting the changes in the  
status of women. Status is at the heart  
of cross-dressing. For the man, imper-  
sonating a woman means giving up his  
power, since women are of lower status  
in society. Bell-Metereau thinks that it  
is possible that all films that involve  
female impersonation express a nega-  
tive view of women, because in order to  
achieve his disguise, the cross-dresser  

Si call ours the Age of An-  

Two Hits  
With Misses  

by Barbara A. Mullaney  

Miss Mole, $8.95, 256 pp. and The  
Misses Mallet, $7.95, 228 pp., by E.H.  
Young. Dial Press, Virago Modern Classics,  
1985.  

spinster with lots of spunk and wit  

and the requisite threadbare coat  
takes employment as a housekeeper in  
the home of a Nonconformist minister.  
She wins the respect, and in time the  
love, of his two motherless daughters.  
She charms his 20-year-old son and  
helps him find the courage to leave the  
ministry studies that he abhors but has  
entered for the sake of his father.  

But that exasperates her ultracon-  
servative employer (“nonconformist”  
having an entirely different meaning  
when it is used to describe an English  
clergyman) in his efforts to maintain an  
orderly, serene (and stultifying) house-  
hold. He is never quite sure whether his  
housekeeper is being insubordinate or  
terribly conscientious—as in her offer  
to throw out all of the holiday pud-  
dings and fruit cakes when he discovers  
that they have been made with brandy.  

If this were a more conventional  
novel for its time, the Reverend Robert  
Corder would, by the last few pages,  
have seen the true worth of his em-  
ployee and have asked Miss Mole to be  

4 © Belles Lettres  

L: starts out auspiciously: A fortyish  

must focus on those aspects of being  
female that are the most superficial.  

Films before the 1934 Hays code—  
Hollywood’s self-imposed censorship—  
treated cross-dressing with freedom and  
variety. There were many different  
situations, many different disguises.  
Then for about 20 years female im-  
personation was limited primarily to  
farcical portrayals of a sexless matron  
type. Male impersonation, however,  
enjoyed a wider range of expression.  
“Masculine” women were portrayed in  
many different roles—career women,  
cowgirls, tomboys, or pals. (The author  
notes that when directors could not  
make a woman sexy by highlighting her  
female qualities, they made her more  
masculine.) Bell-Metereau links the rise  
of the masculine heroine to the social  
upheaval caused when women joined  
the labor force during World War II.  
She thinks the abundance of masculine  
women can be seen either as an out-  
growth of men’s hostility toward  
women or as their desire to break out  
of rigid roles. No doubt both are  
correct.  

Most films featuring cross-dressing  
are what Bell-Metereau (and Leo  
Braudy before her) calls closed vehicles  
that discourage experimentation and  
support the status quo. Cross-dressing  
is often an expression of hostility (I Was  
a Male War Bride is an excellent ex-  
ample). As an example of an open film  
she discusses Some Like It Hot, a  
ground-breaking work that sought to  
expand our conservative attitudes  
about sexuality by showing the two  
cross-dressers as attractive, sexually eli-  
gible women. After Some Like It Hot,  
the representation of cross-dressing,  
particularly female impersonation,  
expanded to include more dramatic,  

his wife and the true mistress of the  
house. Instead Hannah is disgraced  
when it is revealed that she has had a  
lover, a soldier injured in the war who  
had come to the country to recover.  
Years later, usually drunk and con-  
temptuous of her generosity, he still  
lives rent-free in her cottage, the one  
thing of value she owns. It is his inept  
and illegal attempt to sell the cottage to  
her banker friend, Mr. Blenkinsop,  
that precipitates Miss Mole’s disgrace.  

She leaves the Corder house, as she  
has left so many places of employment,  
sometimes for speaking too frankly,  
sometimes for failing to be sufficiently  
obsequious, but always with very little  
money in her pocket and very few  
things in her small suitcase. But this  
time the “miracle” that she has always  
believed was just around the corner  
does arrive in the form of shy, diffident  
Mr. Blenkinsop (a name to make any-  
one feel inhibited), who has not only  
turned the bounder tenant out of the  
cottage but has also recognized the  
sense of fun and irony, the indepen-  
dence and spirit of adventure, of the  
indomitable Miss Hannah Mole.  

A book about a “fallen woman,”  
written in 1930 with an unconven-  
tional conclusion in the last paragraph  
would have to have had an interesting  
author. And the life of Emily Hilda  
Young would raise eyebrows even  
today. Married at 22 to a solicitor from  
Bristol, the author lived quietly for 16  
years in that city, which as “Radstowe”  
was the scene of her many books, until  

psychological elements (Psycho).  

By the mid ’70s, with society more  
open to the subject, female imper-  
sonators had become sympathetic  
characters. Male impersonation had  
gradually become less prevalent. Bell-  
Metereau thinks that the decrease over  
the years in male impersonation and  
the increase in female impersonation  
seem to suggest the heightened status  
of women in our society. One wonders  
whether that is so when one hears of  
the new film Just One of the Guys, in  
which a young woman dresses like a  
boy in order to enter a contest.  

Bell-Metereau attributes the current  
obsession with androgynous figures—  
in film and music—to America’s grow-  
ing conservatism and a return to more  
rigid sexual roles. In our private lives,  
she says, we adhere to rigid codes of  
behavior, so in the films we see and the  
music we listen to we prefer the fantasy  
figure.  

Hollywood Androgyny is an interesting  
book in parts, but it could benefit from  
being handled by an editor not afraid  
to pare it back. All too often Bell-  
Metereau repeats her points, and large  
chunks of the book read like lists of  
who wore what clothes in which film.  
Her writing at times lacks focus, and  
more than once she apparently contra-  
dicts herself.  

But these are problems of execution.  
What may disturb more readers is her  
underlying approach. Androgyny, by  
its nature, is ambiguous and hard to  
define. What seems to define it for  
Bell-Metereau is a person who dresses  
in the clothes of or takes on the role of  
the opposite sex. Bell-Metereau’s argu-  
ment relies on the fundamental di-  
chotomy of gender that androgyny  
seeks to overcome—that a certain set of  

the death of her husband in 1917 in the  
Battle of Ypres. She then moved to  
London, into the home of Ralph  
Henderson, who had probably been  
her lover for some years, and his wife.  

This interesting and apparently ami-  
cable arrangement continued for the  
next 20 years, during which Young  
wrote seven novels (three of her books  
had already been published during her  
years in Bristol) and Henderson main-  
tained his position as Headmaster of  
the London public school, Alleyn’s.  
Young and Henderson even spent long  
school holidays together at a resort  
hotel in the company of two teachers  
from the school and their son.  

After Henderson’s retirement in  
1940, when they were both 60, the  
couple then settled (without his wife)  
in a cottage in Bradford-on-Avon in  
Wiltshire, choosing the area because it  
was close to Bentley School where their  
friend, Mr. Gotch, was now Head-  
master. There Young wrote one more  
novel and two children’s books before  
her death in 1949.  

That this couple was able to live such  
an unconventional life without attract-  
ing attention in an era in which de-  
corum was prized above all else, includ-  
ing personal happiness and self-fulfill-  
ment, is astonishing. Just as remarkable  
is the fact that Young did not need a  
movement, consciousness-raising  
seminars, or exhortations by Betty  
Friedan to live her life as she, not  
society, deemed appropriate and to use  
and develop her talents.  

mannerisms are male and a certain set  
female. Hence, all those career women  
in films of the 40s, with their tailored,  
big-shouldered suits, are masculine.  
Surely those women were expanding  
the role of women in society (or re-  
flecting the expansion already oc-  
curring), but why does that make them  
masculine, much less androgynous? My  
feminist sensibilities recoil.  

The most cohesive section of the  
book is Bell-Metereau’s reading of  
Alien. She sees the film as being based  
on role reversals: Sigourney Weaver’s  
character represents a creature alien to  
the science fiction film, the woman  
who takes on the role traditionally  
played by a man. Bell-Metereau’s in-  
terpretation is insightful, but its length  
is out of proportion to her discussions  
of other films. One wonders why it is  
even included in a book on androgyny.  
Weaver may fulfill what is usually a  
man’s role, but why must this be seen  
as her masculinization; why not the  
birth of a new woman? Weaver is far  
from manlike. She’s even wearing  
skimpy panties when she destroys the  
alien.  

Bell-Metereau looks forward, in her  
conclusion, to a new kind of open,  
sensitized person—thanks to the ex-  
perience of viewing cross-dressing in  
films. But if she is correct in the reasons  
why we have made androgynous figures  
our cult heroes, then one must con-  
clude that we will continue to respond  
to these films only to maintain our  
sexual stereotypes or to see acted out a  
sexual liberation that we do not ex-  
perience in our own lives.  

Lise Metzger, an editor and avid movie-  
goer, is also a fan of shoulder pads and  
skimpy panties.  

The Misses Mallett is also about spin-  
sters: Caroline and Sophie, aging  
belles, and their younger, beautiful  
stepsister Rose. The three live elegant,  
perfectly ordered and pointless lives in  
their Radstowe mansion. They fill their  
days with having new frocks made,  
dining in elegance, and retelling stories  
about the beaus and conquests of their  
youth. For a time it appears that the  
arrival of their niece Henrietta, the  
orphaned daughter of their black sheep  
brother, will bring some purpose to  
their lives, but conversely, it is Hen-  
rietta who succumbs to the luxury and  
ease and the rationalization, “If I were  
only a man I would....” The under-  
current of repressed sexuality and vi-  
carious living sets the reader up for a  
surprise at the end of the book (again  
in the last paragraph).  

Miss Mole, which won the James Tait  
Black Memorial Prize for fiction and is  
considered to be the finest of Young’s  
books, was made into a movie titled  
“Hannah.” The brandy-laced fruit  
cakes, the threadbare coat, and Han-  
nah’s iconoclastic wit are all there.  
And—another surprise—the endearing  
Mr. Blenkinsop is played by that arch-  
villain of the BBC production of Jewel  
in the Crown, Tom Piggott-Smith.  

Barbara A. Mullaney is assistant to the  
president of the Longview Foundation and  
is the mother of seven. Her eldest is Janet  
P. Mullaney, editor-in-chief of Belles  
Lettres, who is a firm believer in the  
maxim “nepotism begins at home.”