First Novels

Alamo House, by Sarah Bird. 317 pp.  
God’s Snake, by Irini Spanidou. 252 pp.  
—New York: Norton, $15.95  

by Maureen T. Reddy  

Apart from their superficial  

similarities—both are first  

novels by women and are nar-  
rated by their female protagonists—Irini  
Spanidou’s God’s Snake and Sarah Bird’s  
Alamo House have little in common. A  
slapstick revenge fantasy subtitled  
Women Without Men, Men Without  
Brains, Bird’s novel satirizes the stock  
figures of campus jokes: developmentally  
delayed frat boys, radical feminists,  
maladjusted graduate students, lecher-  
ous teaching assistants, and neurotic li-  
brarians. Set in post-civil war Greece,  
Spanidou’s book is a female Bildungsro-  
man focusing on Anna, a young girl  
growing up in an oppressive military  
family that, like the wider culture, val-  
ues maleness above all.  

The Texas of Alamo House is not  
much different from the Greece of  
Spanidou’s book in its prevalent cultural  
values: maleness over femaleness, war  
over love, action over thought, past over  
present. Clearly, this is a culture ripe  
for feminist satire, and at first Sarah Bird  
appears to be a Texas humorist whom  
feminists can welcome, but this is a fleet-  
ing hope, as Alamo House rapidly de-  
teriorates into the narrative approxima-  
tion of a sitcom script.  

The humor of Alamo House consists  
entirely of stock characters in stock situ-  
ations and would amuse only those so  
influenced by television that they enjoy  
safe, familiar comedy that panders to  
widely shared prejudices. The cast of  
characters includes a smart fat girl (the  
characters, although chronologically  
adults, bear little resemblance to  
women) who hates herself, a rich beau-  
tiful girl who hates herself, a psychology  
major who babbles about getting behind  
the emotional content of people’s ideas,  
a butch lesbian, a femme lesbian, and  
several other stereotypical characters  
familiar from popular culture but un-  
known in real life, all of whom share a  
house across the street from a horrible  
fraternity. Each night, the frat boys play  
loud music, drink themselves silly, and  
go on a misogynist rampage, vomiting  
on the women’s shrubbery and vandaliz-  
ing their house. The central plot, such  
as it is, revolves around the women’s  
growing rage and their ultimate revenge  
on the frat boys. If this all sounds like  
a southwestern version of Animal House,  
from the female neighbors’ point of  
view, that is because it is, as the verbal  
echo of its title suggests. Alamo House  
would make a great teen movie; it does  
not, however, make good adult reading.  

Unlike Bird, Spanidou interests her-  
self in subtlety and nuance; God’s Snake  
is the kind of book to which one re-  
peatedly returns, each time finding  
something new and valuable. The cul-  
ture about which Spanidou writes is both  
beautiful and horrific, capable of nurtur-  
ing and crushing the spirit. The land of  
her ancestors, of her childhood, often  
has a magical significance for the woman  
writer, who is torn between the imagina-  
tive pull and the undeniable harshness  
(especially for women) of the place; this  
is the central paradox of China in  
Maxine Hong Kingston’s The Woman  
Warrior and of Greece in God’s Snake.  
Spanidou’s choice of title underscores  
the novel’s exploration of paradox and  
ambiguity, referring simultaneously to a  
huge slug that a servant tells Anna is  
“god’s snake” and must never be killed  
and to the many snakes this same servant  
kills and brings to Anna, on her father’s  
orders. It is never clear to Anna just  
why her father wants her to examine  
dead snakes, or what the exercise is sup-  
posed to teach her, and this uncertainty  

10 @ Belles Lettres  

seems emblematic of Anna’s entire re-  
lationship with her father.  

Anna’s father dominates this book as  
he dominates her early life. The daugh-  
ter of a profoundly indifferent mother  
who often says she never wanted to have  
the child, Anna turns to her father for  
love but realizes very early that he can  
only love egotistically, treating her as  
an extension of himself, and that she  
can never be exactly like him, as he is  
male and she is female. Lonely and pas-  
sionately desiring love, Anna tries to be  
like her father, coming up with various  
magical equations like talismans to pro-  
tect her from a dangerous future; for  
example, she nearly drowns attempting  
to swim because she wants to show her  
father she is brave, thinking “I must al-  
ways be brave, so my father stays proud.”  
The damage her father does to her is  
painfully clear in Anna’s thoughts about  
a dog he has mistreated: “He had no  
right to torture her, I thought. No right!  
It doesn’t matter if you torture someone  
you love. It’s like you’re torturing your-  
self then—you suffer. But he did not  
love Kyroula. He tortured her without  
love. That is evil.” Anna’s family has  
taught her that tormenting those you  
love is natural and that, somehow, one  
has a right to torture others so.  

God’s Snake leaves Anna when she is  
still very young, and the reader is left to  
wonder what sort of adulthood awaits  
her. Anna has a fierceness and a passion  
for life that seem to ensure her survival.  
Despite the horrors she lives through—  
the suffering she witnesses and the suffer-  
ing she endures—she retains her loving  
nature and her essential fearlessness.  
Anna is a remarkable character, and this  
is a remarkable book, starkly beautiful  
and deeply affecting.  

@ Maureen T. Reddy is an assistant  
professor of English at Haverford College  
and a member of the Hurricane Alice  
editorial collective.  

Trini Spanidou. Photo by Thomas Victor.  

Opal Palmer Adisa  

Island Harvest  

Bake-Face and Other Guava Stories, by  
Opal Palmer Adisa. Kelsey Street Press  
(P.O. Box 9235, Berkeley, CA 94709),  
1986, $7.50, 116 pp. (PB)  

by Sandra D. Shattuck  

Rum molasses, cane juice, and  

blue-drawers. Duppies, pick-  

nies, Yemoja, and fried fish.  
Bake-Face and June-Plum. This is the  
sound of the words that make the music  
of Opal Palmer Adisa’s writing. It is the  
talk of Jamaica’s women, their speech  
syncopated by loss and jubilation, by the  
steady wear and tear of everyday labor  
and love. It is a writing ground in the  
mythology and religions brought over by  
the peoples of West Africa, forged by  
the transformations wrought by the Mid-  
dle Passage, slavery, and life on the  
islands.  

Bake-Face and Other Guava Stories is  
a collection of four short stories entitled  
“Bake-Face,” “Duppy Get Her,” “Me  
Man Angel,” and “Widow’s Walk.” The  
stories are about rural Jamaica seen  
through the souls’ eyes of the island’s  
women who are at the market, raising  
children, in and out of love and trouble,  
baking, birthing and burying, arguing,  
and giving counsel. The stories are about  
how these women treat their men and  
children, sisters, goddesses, and ances-  
tors. They are about sweat, talk, and  
love; about community, separation, and  
growth.  

One of the gifts of the collection is  
its cohesiveness and variety. Adisa’s  
characters are bound together by class,  
land, language, mythology, and relig-  
ion. But each woman featured in each  
story is distinctly her own, each situation  
distinctly a new one. “Bake-Face” is  
about one woman’s memories of her  
childhood and adolescence of abuse, her  
marriage and five-year affair. Through  
Bake-Face’s eyes we see the community  
of Bruk-Up House, where the seasonal  
workers on the sugar plantation set up  
housekeeping for five months out of the  
year and where Bake-Face makes a deci-  
sion to end the affair with Mr. Johnson.  
“Duppy Get Her” speaks to the need of  
those living to attend to the guiding  
voices of their ancestors and depicts the  
importance of obeah. “Me Man Angel”  
is about the excessive love and attention  
that a mother of nine concentrates on  
her tubercular young nephew, who is  
loved by the whole community.  
“Widow’s Walk” is about a woman who  
fears that her fisherman husband has  
been taken by Yemoja, Yoruban goddess  
of the sea.  

Adisa gives us no simple answers, no  
easy endings. Each story holds a struggle  
that takes the central character, a  
woman, through whatever lesson it is  
she needs to learn. But she does not go  
through that struggle alone, and it is  
primarily her relationship with other  
women in the community that heals her  
into growth. And although Adisa’s  
stories focus around one woman, they  
are just as much about solidarity between  
women.  

There is an exuberance in Adisa’s  
writing that emanates from the strength  
and variety of her characters, from the  
strength of her creative imagination  
sung in such skilled words. Adisa writes  
of Bake-Face’s memories: “some burnt  
molasses, bitter and scalding to the  
tongue, others thick cane juice, frothy  
and sweet.” She could be describing her  
own stories and the bittersweet of her  
writing style. When Bake-Face takes her  
daughter to the hospital, Adisa writes,  
“twenty-five miles to the nearest hospi-  
tal, which was always a pot with too  
much food in it.” There is a tinge of  
humor in the metaphor, but the tinge  
does not deny the overcrowding in rural  
hospitals, nor the long waits and lack of  
personnel and supplies. So many of  
Adisa’s similes and metaphors are taken  
from women’s work. In “Duppy Get  
Her” Adisa writes that “Lilly’s face is a  
dimpled cake pan.” Part of the vibrance  
of Adisa’s writing comes from the  
Jamaican English she uses in dialogues.  
Because the spoken language is given  
written form, the sound of the speech is  
very present in the stories. For one not  
familiar with Jamaican English, it is  
sometimes a little difficult to decipher  
the speech, but the momentary unfamil-  
iarity of the written form is worth the  
effort of translation.  

Adisa’s use of Jamaican English places  
her squarely next to the Jamaican poet,  
Louise Bennett. There is no question  
that Adisa’s writing comes out of a rich  
tradition of women writers in the Carib-  
bean. But after I read Adisa’s stories, I  
thought of Zora Neale Hurston and her  
use of the spoken word, the incorpora-  
tion in her creative fiction of the work  
she did as a trained folklorist and an-  
thropologist. Adisa’s attention to folk-  
lore, myth, religion, and language makes  
her voice in Caribbean as well as Afro-  
American writing a powerful new one,  
one that pays homage to the mixed cul-  
tural legacies of the Americas.  

Although the voices in Adisa’s stories  
belong to those who cut cane, to those  
who work, as domestics and in factories,  
there is nevertheless little in her stories  
to indicate the harsh side, deprivations  
and losses that inevitably occur in those  
occupations. It is in this area that Adisa  
leans on the sweet and leaves off the  
bitter. The work that does not get writ-  
ten about takes place primarily within  
the home. And although there is still a  
lot of sweetness, Adisa is very skilled in  
giving us women’s thoughts as they  
work. “Bake-Face” and “Widow’s Walk”  
are good examples; they both contain  
long reveries of Bake-Face and June-  
Plum remembering their relationships,  
their childhoods. They sit against  
coconut tree trunks, under mango trees,  
on the veranda, next to the ocean and  
smoke pipes, stroke their thighs. Adisa’s  
hand in the memories of these women  
is a skilled feather touch. Her eloquence  
is evident in this line describing Bake-  
Face at the end of her journey: “She will  
take what she wants, she will walk out-  
side of herself and taste the dawn.”  

The last sentence of the dedication  
of Bake-Face and Other Guava Stories  
reads, “May the sisters without voices  
be given microphones.” The creative  
imagination of Opal Palmer Adisa  
amplified through the music of her writ-  
ing remains true to that dedication.  

® Sandra D. Shattuck is a feminist  
literary critic and theoretician who is more  
and more fascinated by the crinkly stuff  
inside of crystals.  

March/April 1987