SSS SSS ee  
Not Grandiose Enough  

Encounters: A Memoir, by Dorothy  
Norman. New York: Harcourt Brace  
Jovanovich, 1987, $19.95, 319 pp.  

by Charlotte Mendez  

Dorothy Norman’s memoir be-  

gins like an autobiography that  

is written for the words, for the  
literature it will make, as well as in  
honor of the life that it tells. In many  
ways, it is a writer's, and certainly a  
seeker’s, book: “Born in Philadelphia,  
1905. First it moves slowly, then fast —  
like a miracle.” From that brilliant, stac-  
cato beginning, she swiftly moves on to  
establish the theme of social conscious-  
ness that will pervade the book, as it did  
her entire life. “Even in warm weather,  
Mother insists I wear a hat. Because  
Marta doesn’t wear one, I refuse to. Is  
she poorer? Why do some people have  
more than others?” She is intuitively  
aware of injustice when she sees it, and  
refuses to be comfortable with privilege,  
yet is steadfastly honest about the com-  
forts of privilege. And from childhood,  
she questions: “Everything is something  
that I don’t understand and you dare not  
talk about. I want to know everything.  
How do you find out?”  

Dorothy devoted her life to “finding  
out.” And in the process, she also de-  
voted her life to exploring beauty, to  
discovering her own creative and  
humanitarian powers, and to working  
effectively for human rights and social  
change. The book is filled with great  
names — people as diverse as Stieglitz,  
Coomaraswamy, New York’s Mayor  
O'Dwyer, novelist Richard Wright,  
India’s Nehru and Indira Gandhi —  
with all of whom she was closely as-  
sociated; and with organizations she  
worked with, such as Planned Parent-  
hood, the Urban League, and Citizens  
Committees for Aid to the Third  
World.  

Yet no story in Encounters is more in-  
teresting than Dorothy’s first girlhood  
battle against anti-Semitism, when she  
took up a personal campaign to get ad-  
mitted to a New England girls’ school  
that did not admit Jewish girls, got the  

Dorothy Norman. Photo by Alfred Stieglitz,  

headmistress to confess the truth —  
“And then, there it was! She told me,  
with simplicity, that even if her school  
did have a place for me, there was the  
matter of my being Jewish.” In the end,  
Dorothy gains admission — her first suc-  
cess in fighting against injustice.  
Encounters is filled with many such  
successes. One of the most moving is the  
story of her association with Richard  
Wright, who became a co-editor of her  
acclaimed literary journal, Twice a Year.  
When Wright wanted to go to Paris  
after World War II, to experience life  
there and act as a correspondent for  
Twice a Year, he encountered blatant  
governmental racism, which Dorothy  
wrote of brilliantly and indignantly in a  
column for the New York Post: “I was  
asked why Wright, a Negro, would want  
to go abroad anyway. Wasn’t it his place  
to stay here? What interest could he  
possibly have in Europe? Wasn’t his sub-  
ject matter the ‘Negro in America?”  
With Wright’s and Norman’s combined  
persistence he gets the passport, after  

The Testing of Hanna  
Senesh  

by Ruth Whitman  

with Livia Rothkirchen  

Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press,  
1986, 115 pp.  

I first learned of Hanna Senesh from a  
postage stamp 20 years ago when I was  
living in Israel. I had no idea who she  
was, and I went to the local bookstore to  
see if I could find some information  
about that young woman with the  
haunting face. Her diaries had first been  
translated and published in England,  
later in the United States. From them  
(they have since been incorporated in  
many collections of women’s diaries), I  
learned that Hanna, born into a com-  
fortable life of assimilated Hungarian  
Jewry in 1921, was one of hundreds of  
women, both named and unnamed,  
who became heroines of the Resistance  
during those terrible years of World War  
II.  

Hanna volunteered as a paratrooper  
to be dropped into occupied Europe  
from Palestine, contradicting every  
stereotype of the unresisting victim. She  
was one of 2 women and 30 men trained  
to parachute into Yugoslavia, from  
where they would enter her native Hun-  
gary to get her mother and help others  
come to Palestine. She was caught and  
executed as a British spy in 1944 at the  
age of 23.  

| 4 @ Belles Lettres  

In the preface to Whitman's work,  
Livia Rothkirchen, former editor of Yad  
Vashem Studies, gives us the historical  
background and cultural context of  
Hanna’s life so that we see her growing  
up as a comfortable assimilated girl, the  
daughter of a Hungarian-Jewish play-  
wright, whose sudden awareness of her  
Jewishness is thrust upon her in 1938  
with the introduction of the “First  
Jewish Law” restricting Jews in Hungar-  
ian economic life. Overnight the happy,  
affluent child becomes aware of her an-  
cient heritage, makes a conscious deci-  
sion to leave behind her literary aspira-  
tions, and decides to join an agricultural  
kibbutz in Israel.  

Using research and interviews with  
Hanna’s surviving family and friends,  
Whitman has created a kind of post-  
script to the diaries with this book, a  
statement of what we might read be-  
tween the lines. She gives us the essence  
of Hanna’s diaries in a series of 35  
poems, dividing them into three sec-  
tions. Whitman’s voice is as authentic  
as Hanna’s own. We witness Hanna  
transformed from “dainty schoolgirl who  
used to play Chopin” to the “airy  
pioneer shoveling manure in the kibbutz  
barn” to the impatient, stubborn  
parachutist, to the legend she has finally  
become. Whitman’s poems offer us a  
kind of emotional clarity and present-  
day hindsight that we sometimes cannot  
get from Hanna’s original diaries. She  
has recreated Hanna’s last days for her  
readers with empathy and insight.  

— Elaine Starkman  

endless government delays and eva-  
sions. From early in the memoir,  
Dorothy expresses the other theme that  
dominates her life: the love of art and  
the spiritual transformation that she  
finds glimmers of through her apprecia-  
tion of beauty. Speaking of the art of  
Renoir, she also expresses the nexus of  
art and social consciousness in all her  
life’s effort: “How can one make the  
world an equally fair and exultant  
place?”  

It is her love of art that leads the  
young, recently married Norman to  
Stieglitz’s little gallery and the relation-  
ship that became both enduring love  
and great source of creative learning for  
Dorothy. As one who has always greatly  
admired Georgia O’Keeffe, I had some  
struggle as I entered this section of the  
book. After all, Dorothy was becoming  
the “other woman” in O’Keeffe’s life.  
She scarcely mentions O’Keeffe, except  
to speak of the merciful fact that their  
paths do not cross as they visit the hos-  
pital when Stieglitz is dying. Curious, I  
looked up Norman in Laurie Lisle’s bio-  
graphy of O’Keeffe, Portrait of an Artist,  
where I found a sympathetic account of  
Norman’s part in the affair. But clearly  
it had been painful for the much older  
O’Keeffe, who barred Norman from  
Stieglitz’s gallery whenever she herself  
was to be there.  

Shifting to O’Keeffe’s pain, and then  
back to Norman’s restraint and moral  
concern during the years of her love for  
Stieglitz, remind me of how delicate and  
complex human relations are, as we  
shift from one consciousness to another.  
Though she does not speak quite so  
specifically of this issue, Dorothy’s ethi-  
cal struggle over her love for Stieglitz  
clearly includes a large awareness of the  
needs of others:  

Does our love really interfere with the  
rest of our lives? With the lives of those  
closest to us? Or does it contribute? We  
never think of breaking up our  
marriages. We are nourished by and  
nourish them. Each of us loves the core  
of the rest of our lives. I want to hurt or  
tear apart nothing. . . . To stop loving  

—what would it help? And how do  
you stop? The rules haunt me. I have a  
sacred feeling about them, as I do about  
Edward — about Stieglitz. About the  
children and the flowers I have  
photographed. Our little white fence.  
The lines I have written.  

As the book moves toward its close,  
and as we read so matter-of-factly of the  
rapid growth of her friendship with  
Nehru, her visit to India in 1950, and  
her subsequent influential role in gain-  
ing U.S. aid for India, we find once  
again all the themes of her life combined  
— the rich emotional and aesthetic re-  
sponsiveness, the social consciousness,  
the spiritual searching.  

To read this book is to become in-  
spired by how much one rather modest  
woman was able to achieve in the causes  
of art and of social justice, thanks partly  
to her comfortable financial position,  
but only because she also had the desire  
and energy to follow through whenever  
she was inspired. It is this about her that  
inspires me as I read her story: how  
much she allowed her own sincerity to  
take her into effective action, even  
when, at the beginning, she had little  
confidence in herself. She became a  
woman of great consequence, sought  
out by government leaders and well-  
known artists because of her ability to  
get things done, but also because of her  
sensitivity and creative understanding.  
Without ever boasting, Encounters man-  
ages to convey the richness of its au-  
thor’s accomplishments, as well as the  
depth of her seeking. This is an ex-  
tremely moving, life-affirming, fascinat-  
ing book about an extraordinary woman  
whose life was beautifully lived and is  
beautifully told.  

@ Charlotte Mendez’s novel, Condor  
and Hummingbird (Wild Trees Press,  
1986), has just been published in London by  
The Women's Press. She is the recent recip-  
ient of a National Endowment for the Arts  
Creative Writing Fellowship. A professor of  
English at SUNY Oneonta, she teaches a  
course in women’s autobiographies.  

Beware of  

False Messiahs  

The Messiah of Stockholm, by Cynthia  
Ozick. New York: Knopf, 1987, $15.95,  
144 pp.  

by Fran Snyder  

A Jew waits in Stockholm for  

the messiah, preparing him-  

self through study and hard  

work; he sets himself apart from others,  
he has divorced two women and let his  
only child go; he has created for himself  
a suitable pedigree; he is visited by an  
apparition that endorses his belief in  
himself as the one to whom the messiah  
belongs. And the messiah does come,  
carried by a woman, first in a white plas-  
tic bag, then in a “sort of amphora” that  
is “either a very large flower vase or a  
very modest umbrella stand” covered  
against the snow by a plastic shower cap.  
In Cynthia Ozick’s new novel the  
messiah is “The Messiah,” a story pur-  
portedly written by the Polish-Jewish  
writer Bruno Schulz, who was shot by  
the SS in his native Drohobycz,  
Galicia, in 1942. Her yearning Jew is a  
book reviewer, Lars Andemening, who  
is called by one of his co-workers at the  
Morgonti rn newspaper, “the messiah of  
Stockholm.” Lars redeems from obscu-  
rity writers like Danilo Kiš, Elias  
Canetti, Milan Kundera, and Witold  
Gombrowicz, “those indecipherables  
that steam up from the stomach hole of  
Central Europe.” The pedestrian re-  
viewers, content with Americans and  
popular novelists, and the others from  
the literary “stewpot” deride him, but  

Lars is steadfast: He studies Polish, he  
believes that he is Schulz’s son.  

Poor Lars could be anyone’s son. Born  
in Nazi-occupied Poland, he was smug-  
gled as a newborn to Stockholm. With  
the “orphan’s terrifying freedom to  
choose,” he invented himself. He has  
picked a public name from the diction-  
ary, but secretly he is Lazarus Baruch,  
blessed Lazarus. Ozick writes that he  
“had never learned his mother’s name,  
but his father had become his craze.”  
When the book opens, Lars lies sluglike  
in a quilt. Every afternoon at 3 p.m. he  
sleeps, and every evening at 7 p.m. he  
wakes to the vision of his dead father’s  
“murdered eye.” Still, despite his origin  
in the “chaos” of Europe, despite his or-  
phan existence, his failed marriages, his  
lost daughter, his outcast status, his  
macabre vision, 42-year-old Lars has the  
“face of a foetus.”  

How can this “arrested soul” come to  
be born? By finding his father? By secur-  
ing his imagined birthright? Apparently  
so. Ozick gives Lars one confidante,  
Heidi Eklund, a “gnome,” a “dwarf,” an  
old woman with “a girl’s name.” She,  
too, has a refugee past (although Lars  
doubts that she tells the truth about it),  
and now she owns a bookshop that  
stocks Kiš, Canetti, Kundera, et al., and  
even Schulz, in their original languages.  
Lars tells Heidi his secret identity, and it  
is she who delivers to him “The Messiah.”  

But is it the real messiah? Or have  
Heidi and her husband, the elusive Dr.  
Olle Eklund (formerly Alter Eckstein),  
and their accomplice Adela, the woman  
who actually carries the messiah to Lars,  
invented it? The novel is loaded with  
stories of forgeries, made-up identities,  
misrepresentation, plagiarism, rumors of  

— continued on page 6  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987