“Why Do We Have to Ruin It?”

The Women Who Walk, by Nancy Huddleston Packer. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State

University Press, 1989, $17.95, 159 pp.

by Ann L. McLaughlin

According to Chekhov, the

short story writer must present

the problem, not solve it. In
her new collection of stories, The
Women Who Walk, Nancy Packer dem-
onstrates the wisdom and skill to do just
that. Packer shows husbands and wives,
mothers and children, students, profes-
sors, and former lovers in a variety of
tense, often inchoate situations. Solu-
tions, if they are reached, come as mys-
terious gifts, not as the result of labored
explanation. In “The Day the Tree Fell
Down,” a couple argue over the disposi-
tion of said tree, veering close to a mari-
tal rift, but a moment of grace opens at
the end, when the wife admires her hus-
band’s labors. “You've done a lot,” she
says, and she “held out her hand and he
took it as together they looked at the
tree.” In “Saturday People,” a divorced
mother watches her daughter make
friends with the child of a divorced fa-
ther. As the foursome grows friendly,
the mother’s tentative hopes for ro-
mance rise. When they are squelched,
she indulges in a few angry words, then
hugs her child in forgiveness.

Packer presents several neurotic
characters with frightening vividness. In
“Breathing Space,” she describes a di-
vorced mother tormented by the suicidal
threats of her teenage daughter. Her
mood changes from pity to panic to an-
gry resentment toward her daughter’s
exploitative tactics, and once again
there is no solution.

In the title story, Marian, an aban-
doned wife, is drawn gradually into
madness as her isolation increases. Al-
though aware that she must protect her
children “from misery and pain, from
herself,” she cannot resist staring at var-
ious women in her neighborhood who
seem to pass on mysterious and urgent
errands. When she attempts to offer one
walker a ride, the woman turns. “Her
face was mottled and skull-like, and the
flesh seemed already to be rotting back
from the bones”; she smiles at Marian
with “a terrible grin of complicity.”
When Marian finally walks out into the
night street, wearing her bathrobe, she
feels “a rising flood of energy, the release
of her torment,” for she has attained a
kind of freedom through her alienation.
Although Marian’s victim stance seems
dated in a culture where most working
women cannot afford to indulge in such
isolation, this story casts a strange spell.

In “Jellyfish,” a brilliant and realistic
story, two children endure a beach va-

Charades

by Janette Turner Hospital

New York: Bantam, 1989, $18.95,
196 pp.

Charade (pronounced Sha-rahd), the
young heroine of this intriguing new
novel by Australian-born Janette Turner
Hospital, is the living riddle that her
name suggests. She is also engaged in a
number of acting-out games or charades
in pursuit of the elusive answer of her
origins. One of them involves sharing
nights of sex and episodes of her life,
Sheherazade-fashion, with an older
man, a famous scientist named Koenig
who specializes in the first second of the
universe’s existence. In following the
course of their intricate relationship, we
learn that Charade wants the kind of
self-knowledge that comes not from psy-
choanalysis but from the trickier detec-
tive work of actually tracking down the
principals in her past.

We also learn that Charade has a

14 @ Belles Lettres

cation with their unstable mother, who
stands at the door of the screen porch
and exclaims, “Goddammit.... All
this clean air, all these bright blue skies.
What an exile.” The children are acute-
ly aware that their mother’s mood alter-
nations could remove her from them
permanently, and they compare obser-
vations of her manic energy and of her
alcoholism as they canoe to a blackberry
patch. The contrast between the sad
accuracy of their calculations and their
innocent summer pastime has a terrible
poignancy. At the end, Sarah, the
younger child, rips the adhesive tape off
a deep cut on her knee, convinced that
the pain she induces will ward off her
father’s imminent return and magically
secure her mother’s love.

Two of the best of these stories are
concerned with academic life. In “The
Waiting Game,” Thomas Kincaid, an
ambitious young professor awaiting a
tenure decision, batters his loyal wife
with accusations that she does not be-
lieve in him. The tension is so convinc-
ing that it is a relief to know the out-
come, although the reader wonders if
Kincaid’s victory is as benign as he
thinks and whether the laughter of a
pompous colleague is really “music. . .
the song of larks . . . the voice of an-
gels,” as Kincaid perceives it to be in
that heady interval, or something more
ominous. “Lousy Moments” has an
autobiographical feeling, since it con-
cerns a creative writing professor and a
dissident student, Ives. “Writing is
everything to me,” Ives confesses to the
professor early in the term, but when the
class discusses a student story, he pro-
tests, “Why do we have to cut it into lit-

Janette Turner Hospital

first-class “grab-bag” mind, as one of her
professors has told her — an avid,
engaging curiosity about everything
odd, impossible, and true. One of the
novel’s chief delights is the splendid gold
vein of her thoughts — on Captain
Cook’s journals of fantastic discovery,
the metaphysical implications of phys-
ics, the Anglo-Saxon poem “The Way-
farer,” and the Heisenberg principle. If
you too share the teasing intellectual
pleasures of a voracious mind happily
feeding among the mind-boggling mys-
teries of our implausible planet, you will
relish Charades.

The mystery of Charade’s own life
centers on her long-vanished father,
Nicholas Truman, whom she knows
only from her mother’s stories as a kind
of playboy-tutor at the university, a
womanizing Prince Hal in exile. As
Charade mythologizes this absent figure
throughout childhood, she comes to
know the three equally myth-sized
women who competed over him in
youth: her loving, lovable mother, Bea;
“the slut of the Tamborine Rainforest,”

The Leader of the Band
by Fay Weldon

New York: Viking/Penguin, 1989,
$18.95, 196 pp.

“That’s the way to deal with the past!
Keep it in its place,” insists Sandra, her-
oine of Fay Weldon’s most recent novel,
“or it’ll get you, even if it has to trail you
across fields and cities, and make you
stumble beneath a bus: your own past or
someone else’s. And above all keep the
house in order: keep it placated.” The
Leader of the Band concerns the wish of
astronomer Sandra (“Starlady”) to avoid
her destiny. Weldon indicates that the
past, ironically enough, has been ahead
of us — not behind us — all along. It is
our destiny as well as our history. Keep-
ing the past placated, which by defini-
tion means thinking of it continuously,
is the only way to survive. “Of course I’m
in a flight from the past,” explains San-
dra, adding with a certain impatience,
“Who isn’t? ... [I am just an extreme
example of the human race.”

The plot turns on Sandra’s desire to
leave her decent (if boring) husband,
her glamorous (if confining) job, and
take up with Jack, embodiment of the
elusive, sexually charged and dangerous
Other Man. With Jack, Sandra will be
— finally, deliciously — simply
Woman. Or so she thinks. But as
Seneca has told us, and as Margaret
Drabble reminded us in The Waterfall,
often in seeking to avoid our destiny we
inadvertently rush to meet it. When we
try to avoid facing the past — the his-
torical past no less than our personal past
— we run up against it. Weldon herself
seemed disappointed that the reviews of
this book for the most part avoided the
historical context she so painstakingly
provided for the characters’ actions.
Leader of the Band is more about Europe
and history than it is about adultery; like
The Shrapnel Academy and The Presi-
dent’s Child, the other Weldon books

that The Leader of the Band most resem-
bles, it is a brilliant interweaving of the
political and the personal.

Weldon shows an efficient, intelli-
gent, sophisticated woman forced to
confront the truth behind her family —
behind the elements that shaped her
into her neat, independent self. Sandra,
like the rest of us, would like to re-vision
the past to make it less painful. She
would like to forget her bizarre origins,
to forget old scars and wounds. But this
is as impossible and as dangerous for a
woman as it is for a nation. Weldon
shows us in this novel that history has
been hard wrought and that ghosts, both
literal and figurative, need attention.

“The past” contains all the stories,
according to Weldon, that we want to
forget. Weldon’s tale insists on the cen-
trality of the past in creating one’s own
present; the past both influences and
informs us, whether or not we choose to
acknowledge it. The structure of the
novel illustrates this quite neatly. One
of the narrative’s most distinctive as-
pects is the three appendices that follow
the ending of Sandra’s story. Readers are
told that they can interrupt their reading
to skip to “Alison’s Story” at the end of
the book. There one finds stories com-
peting with the central text. Like the
past, alternative voices force their way
into definition and prominence.

In this novel, history seems to be a
loop tape, not something that can be
laid to rest and forgotten. Jack’s wife
appears, weeping and awkward, a remin-
der of Jack’s history in much the same
way as memorials to the war dead appear
throughout the French landscape, re-
calling a history it would be more con-
venient to forget. The Leader of the Band
should be read as a political allegory
(Weldon sees it in this way) as well as a
tale of adultery and astronomy. “I might
try politics. It’s what I’m trained for,”
muses one character. Weldon’s political
allegory is essential reading.

—Regina Barreca

tle pieces like this? Why do we have to
ruin it?” To the relief of the others, Ives
stops coming to class. When a faculty
colleague tells the professor that Ives has
dropped out of school, the professor
comments, “He has a point.” This quiet
professionalism implies a wisdom about
knowing when a teacher can help and
when, in the case of a disturbed and
seemingly unreachable student like Ives,
the teacher cannot and should not try.
In a few stories, the relationships
seem somewhat contrived. The peace
achieved between a mother’s lover and
her teenage son seems too easy in “Cous-
ins,” and in “Homecoming” the sym-
pathy felt by two sisters at their reunion
is facile in view of the death they are
confronting. But at her best, Packer
avoids simple answers and gives her
characters a toughness and believability
that assures us they will endure their
problems, even if neither they nor we
can solve them.

@ Ann L. McLaughlin teaches writing
and literature at American University and
the Writer’s Center, in Washington, D.C.
Her first novel, Lightning in July, has just
been published by John Daniel.

Bea’s foster sister, Kay (who obtained a
degree but not Nicholas); and the
woman he loved, Verity, a fellow tutor
and dream-haunted Holocaust survivor.
Kay emigrated to Canada. Her deep
friendship with Bea ended in a jealous
tiff. Nobody knows what happened to
Nicholas and Verity.

Kay never stopped wondering. Some
twenty years later, Charade sees a per-
sonal ad by her seeking information; it
leads her to the stifling legitimate
branch of her father’s family in England,
to Canada and Kay’s doorstep, and fi-
nally to Koenig at MIT. The link be-
tween Charade and Koenig is Kay, the
one-time lover he encountered at a
Holocaust-related trial where his psy-
chotic ex-wife (also a survivor) was a
witness. Kay and Koenig, like Charade,
need both knowledge and comforting
about the unthinkable, whether it’s the
Holocaust or the explosion of the
Crab-nebula. Sex and research, mean-
while, fill up some of their emotional
“black holes.”

While Charade runs down a number

of fascinating dead ends and becomes
more deeply involved with Koenig than
she had intended, it is Bea, back in the
bush, surrounded by Charade’s many
half-siblings, who knows the only an-
swers that matter: “Bea loved the messy
world of babies, the slow-turning sloppy
sweet days. She loved all viscous things:
dribble, semen, milk oozing from her
breasts, mucous ferns under logs, fungi,
slick spittle from the scrub turkeys fuss-
ing at their mounds.”

Charade finally discovers a few miss-
ing pieces in the puzzle of her making,
and her quest ends as it began, with Bea.
Charade leaves one tantalizing clue for
Koenig, a phone number in Queens-
land, a connection one feels he will
eventually need to make.

Charades is an enticing, enjoyable
intellectual romp, as well as a finely
crafted novel. Not quite as artistically
impressive as Hospital’s recent collec-
tion of stories, Dislocations, it neverthe-
less provides substantial pleasures.

—Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Winter 1990