Giving Our Souls Ears

Under a Soprano Sky, by Sonia Sanchez. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 1987, $6.95,

101 pp., (PB)

by Kamili Anderson

The name Sonia Sanchez may be

the most undeservedly under-

spoken of contemporary women
poets in America. Relative to her merits
as both prolific poet (she has authored
thirteen books) and social activist,
widespread critical acknowledgment of
Sanchez’s talents has been remiss. No
doubt this is a result of the boldly
rhetorical nature of her work and her in-
volvement with so-called “radical” Black
literary and cultural factions. But her
poetry, for its precision and insightful-
ness, warrants far broader recognition,
no matter how belated.

Sanchez was a leading spokessister for
the women’s side of things in the defiant
Black Arts literary upsweep of the 1960s
and 1970s. It was often she who, even as
a female follower of the Honorable
Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of
Islam, was the strongest feminist poetic
voice in a cultural movement with
strong sexist leanings. Noted for her
dramatic and moving articulations of
her own work, Sanchez now (she is in
her fifties) presents an intriguing study
in juxtapositioned extremes. Her poetry
has burned consistently with a fierce but
expertly controlled intensity. With each

collection, that fire has burned hotter
and cleaner.

Her latest and finest work, Under a
Soprano Sky, is hot enough to melt rock,
and it comes hard on the trail blazed by
her previous book, Homegirls & Hand

Sonia Sanchez. Photo by Janet P. Mullaney.

Grenades. Although the poems in this
collection are tempered and configured
to scorching extremes, they are, simul-
taneously, her most introspective and
intricate. They deal with age, AIDS,
alienation awareness, Africa, and all of
us, men and women.

Sanchez has a penchant for enlisting
words to imagery. She can mesmerize
with scenarios that require readers to
transfuse all of their senses, so much so
that the ability to discern whether one
is reading with the soul or with the eyes,
or listening with the heart or the ears, is
lost.

This is deep, deep stuff that conjures
and comingles the senses in a potpourri
of images. “I shall spread out my veins,”
she writes, “and beat the dust into
noise.” “I hear the wind of graves
moving the sky”; “hands breathing”;
“my eyes put on more flesh” and “I hear
the bricks pacing my window” are more
of the same. “Under a soprano sky / a
woman sings / lovely as chandeliers,”
sings the refrain from her title poem.
Lovely and fiercely, she should add.

Under a Soprano Sky offers a full dose
of a mature woman-poet rising to the
height of her powers, a woman very
much like the older Black women
Sanchez writes respectfully of in “Dear
Mama”: “women rooted in themselves,
raising themselves in dark America, dis-
charging their pain without ever stop-
ping.” This collection poses the “full
moon of Sonia/shining down on ya” to
anyone who might take her or her

sisters’ visions lightly. With it comes the
warning: “you gon know you been
touched by me / this time.”

Few poets write with more succinct-
ness or intensity: Sanchez’s expansive
poems can incorporate guttural sounds
insistent upon vocal rendition or be
terse, taut haikus. Haikus such as those
“for domestic workers in the African
diaspora,” “I works hard but treated / bad
man. I’se telling you de / truth I full of
it.” and “for a black prostitute,” “red lips
open wide / like a wound winding down
on / the city / clotting.” provide searing
examples.

From “fragment 3” echoes the call:

come all you late twenty
year olds you young thirties
and forties and fifties.
lacquered revolutionists!
all you followers of vowelled
ghosts painted on neon signs.
O noise of red bones cascading dreams.

come to conscripted black
mounted on a cell of revelation
come and salute death

while the rust of tombs
murmur old sonnets

and my grave sinks with

the pleasure of insects

who wear no diadem.

Sonia Sanchez is a poet not to be dis-
avowed further. Her work is high reality
transformed into high rhetoric, trans-
formed into high art. Under a Soprano
Sky and the corpus of her work deserves
a thorough reading that is worthy of her
substantial and finely honed literary
talents. ®

Ambition and Audacity

No Man’s Land: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century, Volume I:
The War of the Words, by Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar New Haven, Connecticut:

Yale University Press, 1988, 320 pp.

by Maggie McFadden

Like other feminists, I quit reading

the male modernists on whom my

formal education was based for
twenty years when I began to discover
the wealth of women writers never even
mentioned in school. After all, there is
so much catching up to do and so little
time. Thus to go back to that modernist
canon with new eyes, guided by Sandra
Gilbert and Susan Gubar, is both shock-
ing and sobering.

This feminist team, which has produc-
ed the fine The Madwoman in the Attic
and The Norton Guide to Literature by
Women, now takes up the twentieth
century. Their project eventually will re-
sult in three volumes. This first one is
“an overview of social, literary, and lin-
guistic interactions between men and
women” for the past century and a half;
it focuses on the literal and figurative
battle of the sexes begun by the first
wave of feminism in the nineteenth cen-
tury.

The ambitiousness of their effort is ex-
ceeded only by the audacity of their
thesis. Modernism, they argue, “is a
product of [this] sexual battle” and is at
least in part “a reaction-formation
against the rise of literary women.” The
sexual anxieties enunciated in male
modernist texts have usually been seen
“as metaphors of metaphysical angst” in-
stead of part of this struggle. While Gil-
bert and Gubar do not deny the angst,
they also do want to read for texts and
the lives more literally. By quoting and
remarking misogynistic passages in Eliot,
Hemingway, Faulkner, Nathaniel West,
and D.H. Lawrence, they provide a
strong antidote to received opinion and
force the reader to confront the biases
hidden in the standard interpretations.

Gilbert and Gubar assume that history
is knowable and that texts have authors
who lived within historical contexts.
Well-known texts are not privileged aes-
thetic objects to be studied in a vacuum
but productions of gendered human
beings. Individual narratives can be

14 % Belles Lettres

“conflate[d] and collate[d]” so that “they
constitute one possible metastory, a story
of stories about gender strife in this
period.” Likewise, the aesthetic prin-
ciples touted by critics and writers like
Eliot, Pound, and Joyce can be shown to
exclude women writers, consciously or
not. In support of this bold thesis, the
authors marshal a huge amount of
evidence, using essays, poetry, short
stories, drama, and novels as well as
biography, autobiography, and letters.

Gilbert and Gubar’s criticism works
best when they are reinterpreting the
female literary tradition. Their richly
suggestive model of the “female affilia-
tion complex” illuminates the ways that
women have both searched out and
adopted, as well as denigrated and
repudiated, their literary grandmothers.
The complex possibilities of “affiliative
choices” are traced from the traditional
father/daughter paradigm through the
renunciation of the desire to create (a
kind of aesthetic frigidity for women ar-
tists) to what Freud called “the mas-
culinity complex” of some lesbian artists,
to an empowering female autonomy.

This section is notable for its fascinat-
ing discussion of works that invoke
literary foremothers, from Woolf's and
Plath’s respective pilgrimages to the
Brontës’ Haworth Parsonage, to Bishop’s
“Invitation to Miss Marianne Moore.”
Included are parodies and imaginative
reconstructions, such as Jean Rhys’s
Wide Sargasso Sea (from the perspective
of the mad wife in Jane Eyre) and Joyce
Carol Oates’s Mysteries of Winterthurn
(which recreates Emily Dickinson). Syl-
via Plath’s “Burning the Letters,” written
on the back of the typed copy of hus-
band Ted Hughes’s “The Thought Fox,”
becomes emblematic of literary attacks
on male precursors and contemporaries
that are found in such writers as Virginia
Woolf, Gertrude Stein, Amy Lowell,
and Doris Lessing.

Although Gilbert and Gubar use
Freudian terminology, they critique his

interpretation and its logical conclusion
that “by definition there can be no such
thing as a woman artist.” If one accepts
the Freudian model of the creation of art
through sublimation, as well as his
developmental paradigms for boys and
girls, the girl’s pre-Oedipal desire for the
mother destines her to remain at a pre-
symbolic stage. Gilbert and Gubar want
to separate the stage of the symbolic
contract (language) from that of the so-
cial contract (which constructs gender
difference). They suggest that it may be
the absence of the mother that requires
the child “to acquire words”: “Because
mom is not mum, one might bridge the
grievous gulf of absence by expressing
desire in language and reconstituting a
lost presence through symbolization.”
Thus, language is not “owned” by the
father; it is the mother who is the
originator of language. They quote
favorably Erich Neumann, who asserts
in The Great Mother (1955) that the
womb is often symbolized positively as a
mouth; the mouth or “upper womb”
then becomes the birthplace of the
breath and the word, or Logos.

In the last chapter, “Sexual Linguis-
tics: Women’s Sentence, Men’s Sen-
tencing,” Gilbert and Gubar review the
history of views of “mother tongue,” or
ordinary language, as opposed to “father
speech,” the educated, classical rhetoric,
reserved in the Western tradition for
men. When women began to gain access
to formal education in the nineteenth
century, Latin and Greek still were not
taught to them. Male modernists, such
as Joyce, Eliot, Pound, and Beckett,
began to inveigh against women’s lan-
guage by “castigating what they defined
as the incoherence or destructiveness of
female language,” literally equating it
with excrement, sexual desire, or infan-
tile drivel. Modernists also found ways
to re-mystify their own language by
using classical allusions, neologisms,
multiple etymologies, and puns. Thus,
the male modernists “transform[ed] the
material vernacular into a new morning
of patriarchy.”

Despite this exciting new work’s
astonishing juxtapositions and bold
thesis, No Man's Land is often frustrat-
ing, both in methodology and style. Its

thesis is ultimately reductionistic; al-
though the authors are careful to say
that their “metastory” of the cause of
modernism is only one of several “tales,”
it is treated as the only one, thus invit-
ing the charge of inadequate causal ex-
planation. Their method of mixing
decontextualized biographical, imagina-
tive, and historical works in order to ex-
plain the meaning of a particular text is
misleading. Gilbert and Gubar tend to
overuse metaphor and comparison and
exhibit an exasperating tendency to
quote (without citation) from a different
writer to explain the one at hand. The
book also falls short stylistically. Senten-
ces go on for clause after clause, errati-
cally mixing in parenthetical material,
sets of dashes, a quotation or two. The
reader is forced to backtrack to find the
subject. One has to wonder: is this “the
woman’s sentence” invoked by Woolf?

Still, there is much to mull over. The
last two chapters are in the best tradi-
tion of feminist critical theory. Gilbert
and Gubar stunningly critique both the
Lacanian and traditional Freudian
analysis of women, ably discuss the
female affiliation complex, and draw on
fantasy and science fiction for suggestive
ideas on the “mother tongue.” One
wishes they had gone even farther afield
with their descriptions of women’s new
languages, to analyze the etymologies,
puns, and neologisms of Mary Daly, for
example. And Ursula LeGuin’s novel
Always Coming Home is surely as impor-
tant in the history of female linguistic
creations as is her short story, “She Un-
names Them,” with which the book
ends. But these are small matters. The
War of the Words gives us important
work to debate, discuss, savor, reread.
The second and third volumes promise
closer readings of longer works in the
development of the lesbian tradition
and feminist modernists. Read this one
now.

@ Maggie McFadden teaches women’s
history and feminist theory and coordinates
the Women’s Studies program at Ap-
palachian State University, Boone, North
Carolina. She is writing a book on interna-
tional connections between women in the
nineteenth century.

Winter 1989