A Turn  
Around the  

Family Plot  
by Maxine Combs  

The Dead and the Living, by Sharon  
Olds. Alfred A. Knopf, 1984, $13.95, 80 pp.  

Many of the poems in Sharon  
Olds’s The Dead and the  

Living—the volume that was  
the Lamont Poetry Selection of the  
Academy of American Poets—depend  
on shock. They are not easy poems to  
read. Many of them contain excruciating  
details, yet their power and energy  
are unmistakable. A procession of  
ghosts, both public and private, domi-  
nate the first half of the book—“Poems  
for the Dead”—and this intense, deeply  
focused writer faces them unflinchingly.  

The first poems describe a series of  
gory photographs: two crucified (but  
not yet dead) Chinese stare hopefully  
out from a 1905 snapshot (“Ideo-  
graphs”); a starving young Russian girl  
just at puberty is the subject of a 1921  
picture (“Photograph of the Girl”); in  
“Portrait of a Child” a dead, delicate  
Armenian child with an ear bitten off  
lies as if sleeping; and “The Issues”  
describes a bayoneted newborn and  
her mother.  

These poems make a statement about  
innocence—innocence maimed by in-  
difference, casual cruelty, political  
expediency. Olds heightens her point  
by introducing into her portraits of the  
most horrific deaths some aspect of the  
beautiful; she points toward what is  
hopeful, fruitful, possible, continuing  
(or might have been). She publicizes the  
unthinkable, gives it dimension and  

Nonvintage  
Pym  

by Ellen Dykes  

Crampton Hodnet, by Barbara Pym.  
Dutton, 1985, $14.95, 224 pp.  

The appearance of this early, pre-  

viously unpublished novel. Pym  
began it in 1939 just after the outbreak  
of World War II but then set it aside  
until after the war, when she revised it.  
Feeling then that the book, set in Ox-  
ford in the mid-1930s, was too dated,  
Pym never published it. It was found  
among her papers after her death.  

The problem with Crampton Hodnet  
is not that it is dated, but that it is  
clearly the work of a novice, albeit a  
talented one. It lacks the depth, the  
subtlety, and the polish of Pym’s later  
books. The humor is broader and more  
farcical, almost slapstick, with charac-  
ters predictably hiding in bushes and  
falling out of boats. The characters  
have fewer dimensions and less com-  
plex motives and often seem to exist  
only for the sake of the plot. The minor  
ones, such as Mr. Cherry, the red-faced  
“Bolshevik” and the inseparable duo  
Michael and Gabriel who appear (like  
archangels?) at opportune moments, re-  
main caricatures. And the style is more  
direct, the irony more heavy-handed:  
“And it was then that it occurred to  

him that he might do worse than marry  
Miss Morrow. The idea framed itself  
in precisely those words—that he might  
do worse than marry Miss Morrow.”  

Yet, if the book is not equal to such  
later books as A Glass of Blessings and  
An Unsuitable Attachment, it is pleas-  
ant, funny, and interesting in view of  
the development of Pym’s work. Many  
of the characters of the later books are  
here in prototype: the members of the  
academic community (although no an-  
thropologists), the vicars and curates,  
and the “excellent women” who cater  
to them. Miss Maude Doggett; her  
companion, Jessie Morrow; and the  
Cleveland family, who reappear in  
slightly altered form in Jane and Prud-  
ence, make their first appearance here.  
Here Jessie, as sharp-witted as in the  
later book, is less sharp-tongued and  
has a romantic, reckless streak. Out-  
wardly quiet and “used-up looking,”  
she secretly listens to continental music  
from Radio Luxembourg and has a  
definite personality that includes a  
wicked sense of humor. Miss Doggett  
lives up to her name as she sniffs out  
scandal, often wrongly, and hounds  
those around her.  

The plot focuses on two unsuitable  
attachments and the intriguing ways in  
which the characters get into them, get  
out of them, or cover them up. Stephen  
Latimer, a young curate who comes to  
live with Miss Doggett and Miss Mor-  
row in Leamington Lodge, “respects  
and esteems” Miss Morrow. To cover  
his guilt about missing evensong be-  
cause he was walking in the woods with  

her, he makes up a story about visiting  
a vicar in the nonexistent town Cramp-  
ton Hodnet (which gives the book its  
name and which Pym, unsuccessfully,  
tries to give symbolic dimension). Miss  
Morrow, however, wants more than  
the “cold, lifeless things” Stephen  
offers.  

In the second mismatch, Francis  
Cleveland, a married, middle-aged  
tutor in English literature, develops a  
passion for his young student Barbara  
Bird. While she worries about saying  
something intelligent, he takes her  
silences for deep understanding of his  
needs. Their dalliance, which they  
think is private although they meet in  
such places as the Botanical Garden,  
the Bodleian Library, and the British  
Museum, is watched over and discussed  
by their friends and relatives. These  
episodes provide some of the liveliest  
fun in the book.  

A third romance, developed as a foil  
to the other two, is between Francis’s  
nineteen-year-old daughter, Anthea,  
and a student, Simon Beddoes. The  
paths of love are, of course, not  
smooth: Stephen runs off to Paris,  
Simon to the Lido, but Francis gets  
only as far as Dover. In this book,  
however, the rocky stretches are brief  
and cause no lasting hardships, espe-  
cially with the venerable English insti-  
tution of tea to soothe the spirit at  
the end.  

Ellen Dykes is an editor in Washington  
by profession and a novel reader by  
addiction.  

Latina Rites  

of Passage  
by Maria Quintana  

Cuentos: Stories by Latinas, edited by  

Alma Gomez, Cherrie Moraga, and Mari-  
ana Romo-Carmona. Kitchen Table, 1983,  
$7.95, 241 pp.  

Cuentos: Stories by Latinas is a  
unique collection of short  

stories. Written in either Span-  
ish or English (occasionally combining  
the two), they are stories of the lives of  
Latinas—Latin American women living  
either in Latin America or the United  
States. They record both rites of pas-  
sage and the struggle for reconciliation  
between everything that Latinas are  
brought up to be and the realities they  
must face. The collection is clearly  
separated into three sections, each with  
a short bilingual preface explaining the  
essence of each short collection within  
the book.  

Political prisoner, a patient in an  
institution, or a captive of old beliefs  
and faiths confronted and endangered  
by a modern world, the women in the  
first set of stories are described as  
“possessed—possessed in opposition to  
the forces that deny their humanity.”  
The stories, mostly written in the first  
person, demand an intimacy with the  
reader, an intimacy that is often in-  
tensified by the use of both Spanish  
and English. In “Como el Cristal al  
romperse,” Carrera, a seventy-five-  
year-old woman in an institution, is  
surrounded by nurses, fellow patients,  
television—incarcerated in an English  
world she cannot understand. Her  
thoughts and perceptions are all in  
Spanish. Not once does she speak  
aloud; she seeks solace in the Spanish  
music on the radio and the Spanish  
voices in her head. This helps her to  
remove herself from a foreign world  
that can only bind and degrade her.  
When she becomes unable to keep  
these voices because of the constant  
intrusion of surroundings, she is moved  
to desperate action. This separation by  
language without translation, although  
limiting in its potential audience, is un-  
stilted and beautifully done.  

The second set of stories described as  
“el corazón de este libro,” (the heart of  
this book) deals with the battle for  
identity. In particular, they illustrate  
the battle for identity that the Latina  
in the United States must wage not  
only with her exterior world but also  
with the interior—the struggle to recon-  
cile what she has learned at her  
mother’s knee with a new set of rules in  
a new society.  

In “Growing,” Naomi, a fifteen-year-  
old girl whose “father could no longer  
trust her because she was a woman,”  
must consent to the humiliation of  
being escorted by her younger sister  
Lucia when she is in public. She wavers  
between outrage at such a rule, which is  
not demanded by the society that she  
now lives in, and a desire not to enter  
womanhood at all—to remain a child  
playing stickball, a childhood game,  
near the cemetery. “At the end of the  
block, she lifted Lucia and laid her  
head on her shoulder. As Lucia fell  
asleep, Naomi wondered why things  
were so complicated when you become  
older...‘Enjoy,’ she whispered to Lucia,  
‘enjoy being a young girl, because you  
will not enjoy being a woman.’”