Native American Writers

Survival and Transformation

The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions, by Paula Gunn
Allen. Boston: Beacon Press, 1986, $24.95, 311 pp.  
Furious Light, by Joy Harjo. Watershed Tapes (6925 Willow St. NW, Washington, DC  
20012), $9.95, 55:02 min.  

Seeing Through the Sun, by Linda Hogan. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1985,  
$6.95, 68 pp. (PB)  

The Halfbreed Chronicles and Other Poems, by Wendy Rose. Los Angeles: West End Press,  
1986, $4.95, 71 pp. (PB)  

by Barbara Loren  

Paiute medicine man Wovoka  
dreamed the Ghost Dance in  
1889. It was a ritual movement  
performed by the Native American  
tribes of the plains, and it was their last  
attempt to survive. By 1890 the wars  
were ostensibly over. Their ways of life  
were changed; they were allotted bound-  
aries on their own land by the European  
culture that began immigrating to this  
land in the 15th century. Since that time  
the colonizers — White, patriarchal  
immigrants — have controlled the  
progress of reservations and the record-  
ing of the history of Native Americans.  
Thus history has been written and inter-  
preted by a culture whose biases per-  
petuate patriarchal imperialism. Now,  
nearly a century later, the underside of  
this history is beginning to surface, as  
the four Native American women writ-  
ers reviewed here reveal.  

The Sacred Hoop is divided into three  
main sections. In the first, “The Ways  
of Our Grandmothers,” Paula Gunn  
Allen analyzes several Native American  
creation myths. Allen points out that  
“traditional tribal lifestyles are more  
often gynocratic than not, and they are  
never patriarchal.” Her retellings of  
these cosmologies is enlightening. In  
each case the creator is female, and  
never is the creation achieved through  
copulation, nor is it achieved by any  
association with male figures. The pat-  
riarchal interpretations of Native  
American female deities as mere “fertil-  
ity goddesses” is revealed as a not-so-un-  
common attempt to trivialize feminine  
power. Allen demonstrates that Ameri-  
can feminists in search of a model of a  
matrifocal, matrilineal society need not  
look as far away as Manoa.  

Allen continues in this section to de-  
fine power as it was conceived by the  
tribal gynocracies. Power was never  
power over anyone or anything. Rather,  
it reflected one’s relation to “non-  
human worlds.” This power had a  
spiritual basis, and it occurred in the  
relationships of humans, animals,  
plants, spirits, gods, and goddesses.  
Once again, it did not represent unequal  
relationships among people or any other  
sentient or ethereal life forms. This view  
affected the politics of the tribes greatly.  
The White immigrants saw this lack of  
power division in tribal societies as un-  
civilized anarchy, which resulted in the  
distortion of American history. Allen  
cites many familiar passages from history  
books that demonstrate the crippling ef-  
fect of the half-truths that were accepted  
as objective fact.  

Paula Gunn Allen  

“The Word Warriors” is a compila-  
tion of Allen’s essays on Native Ameri-  
can literary criticism. The introduction  
outlines the elements of Native Ameri-  
can oral tradition and its transference to  
written work. The short, repetitive sec-  
tions found in works that stem from oral  
traditions are pulses of meaning, like the  
drumbeat, that transcend ordinary real-  
ity and conventional plot expectations.  
“It [repetition] is hypnotic, and a hypno-  
tic state of consciousness is the aim of  
the ceremony. The participants’ atten-  
tion must become diffused. The distrac-  
tions of ordinary life must be put to rest  
and integrated into a ceremonial context  
so that the greater awareness can come  
into full consciousness.”  

If The Sacred Hoop has been criticized  
for being full of optimistic wishes and  
short on substantiated facts, the third  
section, “Pushing Up The Sky,” may  
have instigated that criticism. This  
chapter, as Allen says, is largely conjec-  
ture. This conjecture is necessary, how-  
ever, because here she explores the rela-  
tively untouched subjects of the history  
of homosexuality and feminist thought  
in America. Allen explores new territory  
in these essays, and if they lack substan-  
tiated fact in part, they do so no less  
than other “histories” told in the interest  
of furthering conventional ideals and  
biases. The tone of this section is one  
of undying belief, which can also be seen  
as naive idealism.  

Although Allen’s work may not be a  
product of elite scholarship, it never  
claims to be, nor does it laud this quality  
in writing. And although it may seem  
more intuitive than scholarly, it com-  
mits no sin of contradiction (a recurring  
trait of patriarchal history). Allen com-  
municates her knowledge with a high-  
spirited, enthusiastic voice that is often  
looked down on by “serious intellectu-  
als,” but Allen is a writer first, a histor-  
ian second. Her urge to write poetically  
and with emotion are two wonderful  
facets of her art form. “Pushing Up The  
Sky” does replace homophobia with  
homophilia; it does state clearly that  
70% of the tribes were pacifists and did  
not fight the new settlers; it does call  
for a reexamination and alteration of “all  
the interpretations and conclusions [of]  
scholars in the field of folklore, ethnol-  
ogy, and contemporary literary studies.”  
In short, Allen builds an argument that  
shifts the focus of interpretation “from  
a male to a female axis,” and this “recon-  
textualizes the entire field.” If she goes  
overboard in places, if her arguments are  
too emotionally charged, if what she says  
is not documented but based on intui-  
tion that tears down the walls of false  
documentation in history, then perhaps  
others will follow suit. Perhaps the poe-  
tics of history will eventually be recog-  
nized.  

“Furious Light,” a reading of  
Joy Harjo of both early and  
recent work, emphasizes the  
oral tradition in a demonstrative, literal  
sense. Eight poems on the tape are still  
in manuscript only. Though spanning  
half a decade, each poem continues  
Harjo’s concern with transformation,  
spirituality, and political injustice. The  
reading incorporates a finely woven fu-  
sion of jazz sax and Spanish guitar as a  
background for Harjo’s words.  

Joy Harjo  

Side one opens with “Eagle Poem,”  
which invokes the pure images that ex-  
pand the limited language we have been  
given. She asks to be “open to one whose  
voice that is you/ and know there is  
more/ that you can’t see, can’t hear,  
can’t know/ except in moments steadily  
growing/ and in languages that are not  
always sound/ but other circles of mo-  
tion.” This circular motion and em-  
phasis on sacred imagery are the rhythms  
of Harjo’s content. “Eagle Poem” exalts  
the cyclical, interconnected nature of  
all life (a facet of the oral tradition noted  
also by Allen) and prays that we recog-  
nize the beauty of this cycle.  

— continued on page 8  

Word as Creation  

Storyteller, by Leslie Marmon Silko. New  
York: Seaver Books, 1986, $11.95, 278 pp.,  
photographs.  

by Bonnie St. Andrews  

To read anything by Leslie Mar-  
mon Silko — Storyteller in-  
cluded — is to enter a world of  
myth and reality, of immediacy and  
timelessness, of the foreign and familiar.  
Given the “storyless” fiction of so much  
contemporary writing, her ability proves  
appealing. Add to this the axiomatic ele-  
ments of her fiction, poems, and inter-  
views, and Silko’s work is clearly allied  
with wisdom.  

Her writings and opinions are not,  
however, remote or preachy, as an inter-  
view in Dexter Fisher’s fine collection,  
The Third Woman: Minority Women  
Writers of the United States certifies. Here  
is Silko on childhood: “Nobody has the  
conventional mother, really.” Com-  
munity is “where a person’s identity has  
to come from, not from racial blood  
quantum levels.” On her identification  
as a Native American author, Silko says,  
“I don’t think one should oversimplify  
and say this is a Laguna point of view.  
It’s my point of view, coming from a  
certain kind of background and place.”  

May/June 1987  

She wisely confirms the powerful reality  
of imagination: “With a good story  
there’s no end to the possibilities.”  
Silko’s positive attitude comes from  
the Pueblo cosmological certainty that  
all creation begins with words. The Old  
Testament is also evoked in this cosmol-  
ogy, but for the Native American cul-  
ture, the idea of word-as-creation is  
primary; it centers every tale and poem  
in Storyteller. Collecting family photo-  
graphs, poems, tales, and stories (many  
previously published), Silko weaves a  
great blanket of a book. Through this  
means, she also creates a mini-saga, that  
is, the Marmon family and its intricate  
heritage represents the larger North  
American family with its admixture of  
tribal and ethnic riches. Silko’s own  
multicultural heritage includes Mexi-  
can, Caucasian, and Laguna Pueblo  
components. Storyteller ties together the  
personal and the tribal. Thus, the fact  
of Grandpa Stagner’s marriage to Helen  
Romero follows Aunt Alice’s story of  
the female hunter, Kochininako, and  
the legend around a landmark called  
Yash’ka, which means heart. Silko  
parallels her family’s emotional history  
with the timeless legends of the land.  

Silko uses this same great, multicul-  
tural inheritance in her fictional charac-  
ters who are, at once, insiders and out-  
siders. They are grounded in a reality  
begun in “time immemorial,” as the el-  
ders say. From this vantage point, Silko  
examines how the contemporary iden-  
tity connects with ancient tribalism and  
how the modern evils — nuclear  
poison, prejudice, the rape of the  
land — paradoxically lead her heroes  
back to ancient spiritual certainties.  
Thus Tayo, the main character in Silko’s  
finest work, Ceremony, returns to the  
purifying powers of tradition while re-  
cognizing that change is both proper and  
positive.  

For Silko, the common Cartesian  
dualities — present and past, good  
mother or bad, red medicine or white —  
simply cannot bear the weight and  
beauty of how interconnected every-  
thing is. Her writing reflects this round  
intelligence, a position increasingly cer-  
tified in such unexpected quartets as  
quantum physics and Western medical  
practice. Storyteller reveals the well-  
spring of Silko’s philosophies: from the  
ancient teachings of the scholarly Aunt  
Susie and wise Grandma A’mooh to the  
modern photographic essays of her  
grandfather Hank.  

Storyteller is a book about unities of  
generation, tribe, and consciousness.  
Although the writing is often uneven,  
certain fine, finished pieces raise the  
level of the work. “Tony’s Story” re-  
creates the horror of the Native Ameri-  
can veteran’s encounter with an evil  
enemy on home ground; “Yellow  
Woman” ties together the ancient no-  
tion of a Ka’tsina mountain spirit with  
modern sensuality. “Lullaby,” first pub-  
lished in the Chicago Review (1974), pre-  
sents a tragic, deeply disturbing story of  
children forced from their mother and  
their motherland.  

Poems also link mythic elements with  
modern events; the “Ck’o’yo magician”  
who tricks and despises humans is always  
among us. The ancestors, too, are always  
among us. And, as Silko’s works from  
Laguna Woman (1974) to Ceremony  
(1977) to this work clearly celebrate, so  
are the storytellers. Silko enacts the  
ceremonies, and her ability to record  
these complex spiritual and material  
realities has earned her not only a co-  
veted MacArthur Fellowship but also a  
preeminent place among contemporary  
writers.  

Bonnie St. Andrews’s book, Forbid-  
den Fruit: On the Relationship Between  
Women & Knowledge (Whitston, 1986),  
includes chapters on Atwood, Chopin,  
Lagerlof, and Lessing. She has published in  
The New Yorker, Saturday Review,  
Commonweal, and The Women’s Re-  
view of Books.  

Belles Lettres © 7