IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Reacting to Trouble

and Temptation

The Long White, by Sharon Dilworth. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1988, $17.95,

194 pp.

The Purchase of Order, by Gail Galloway Adams. Athens, Georgia: The University of

Georgia Press, 1988, $14.95, 148 pp.

Playing with Shadows, by Gloria Whelan. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press,

1988, $11.95, 147 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

A collection of short stories is a
bit like a private zoo. Corralled
inside the book jacket is a

menagerie of genres, images, issues, con-
cerns—some exotic, some domestic—
gathered together by one imagination.
Certain breeds are favored depending
upon the author: for instance, first-per-
son narrators, or stories set in the South.
There are subgenres, of course, in a
variety of plumages. What one writer
presents with understatement another
presents with exaggeration. The final
experience for the reader, on touring
this menagerie, should be a sense of
having pondered both the familiar and
the unknown and of having learned
something of the world’s complexities in
the process.

The Long White by Sharon Dilworth,
this year’s winner of the Iowa Short Fic-
tion Award, is set largely in the mid-
west; yet these stories range far beyond
their given territory. The title piece
concerns a girl whose father is in love
with Lake Superior. He periodically
wanders off to the lake, leaving his wife
and children to worry about him. Fi-
nally, he chooses the middle of a bitter
winter to disappear. “The wind was very
strong,” says the narrator, describing the
night her mother lies to her about her
father’s whereabouts, “and, sometimes
during the night, the plastic covering
around my window has blown away.”

Dilworth has an uncanny ability to
make simple descriptions resonate. Her

Fifty Years of Eternal
Vigilance and Other Stories

by Carolyn Thorman

Atlanta, GA: Peachtree, 1988, $14.95,
216 pp.

It is refreshing and exciting to read about
an ethnic group that has not been preva-
lent in American mainstream literature.
Carolyn Thorman’s first collection of
short stories is based on the lives of Li-
thuanian-Americans, and she allows us
to peer into a culture that resists assimi-
lation and proudly holds on to the
shadows and ties of the old country.
Thorman brings the unfamiliar reader
into her world in stories that exhibit a
universal appeal beneath the veneer of
the Lithuanian rituals, food, and lan-
guage. It is the uncertain world of con-
flicts between generations. The older
emigrés try to resolve them by old
country ethics, usually to the bewilder-
ment of their children. For instance, in
one of the best stories of the collection,
“No Job Too Small,” Randy, Maggi Ze-
donas’ addict husband, returns home
from prison to resume their marriage

against Maggi’s will. Later, she discovers

that her taciturn, emotionally removed,
handyman father was an accessory to
Randy’s death. All her life Maggi had
never realized how much her father
loved her until:

She and Pops faced each other, and she
imagined a rope-ladder swinging between
them. He gave me life twice, she thought.
And made sure the gift was not asked for.
Tears tightened her throat. “He wasn’t worth
your soul,” she whispered.

He held his hands out, palms up. “You my
soul.”

Spring 1989

characters’ emotional states are often re-
flected entirely through observations of
their physical surroundings. “Mom kept
walking forward and we tried to keep
up,” Carenne, the narrator, tells us later
on. “The ice was thick beneath our feet
and it didn’t seem like it could ever
melt. The sun felt miles away.”

We are not told to feel sorry for these
characters. Dilworth allows our sym-
pathy to develop from our participation
in their confusion and pain. Her charac-
ters are often frustrated people on the
edge of not accomplishing much, but
the last thing they want is pity. In “Mad
Dog Queen,” Dilworth describes a rest-
less Indian teenager whose shaky sense
of self-worth comes from winning chug-
ging contests. “Where most of the other
girls wore their hair long and knotted in
ponytails, Beth kept hers short. She said
it was New York style. Now, wet from
the snow, it hung on her forehead like
black string.” Nothing fancy, and yet the
description persists through the story.
Beth would do anything to escape her
chilly little town—even her haircut tells
you so—but she would never ask for
help.

Occasionally, the descriptions get sen-
timental. “Independence Day” is about a
woman whose husband recently
drowned. She has become pathologically
terrified—almost agoraphobic—as a re-
sult. But when her children want to
come home from summer camp, she
leaves in the middle of the night to get

Maggi accepts her father’s act with some
peace and readily includes him as a part
of her life instead of shunning her immi-
grant family as she had before.

Conflicts are resolved in another fine
but complex story, “Sweet Chikadee of
Grace.” Sister Veronica befriends her
student, Zacko, who is also the son of her
best friend. She tries to convince his
father to allow the boy to get therapy.
Accidentally, Sister Veronica stumbles
on Zacko sexually assaulting another stu-
dent and runs away from the scene. She
wrestles with herself as to whether she
should notify the police or blame Sally,
the victim who had teased Zacko before
the incident. It is easy to blame the vic-
tim, but Sister Veronica sees Zacko vic-
timized by his life as well. Thorman pre-
sents us with no easy solutions, and the
reader is drawn to the characters and
their fates, regardless of their immoral
choices.

Several stories present a lighter side to
the Lithuanian community. One in-
volves a Lithuanian ladies group, the
Society for the Benefit of the Daughters
of Vilnius, who want to Americanize
their organization and change their
name to the Southeastern Baltimore
Women’s Club. Another humorous story
is about two sisters who run a sausage
shop and are at odds when one of them
plans a getaway vacation to the Grand
Canyon rather than buy a neon sign for
the shop. Another focuses on a woman
who clandestinely buys her artist lover’s
paintings of Lithuanian themes, so that
he can get ahead in America. These pro-
tagonists are amusing without being lu-
dicrous. They are strong characters with
common sense and admirable old-
country sensibilities.

— Irene Zabytko

them. “The road is dark, but I keep look-
ing for the lights of another car or gas
station on the side of the highway. I
know there will be something coming up
soon. This is a large interstate and I
won't be alone for long.”

Most of the stories in this collection
are quite subtle. Dilworth’s menagerie is
peopled by characters who have been
betrayed, who have lost love and secu-
rity, whose personal resources are
limited; still, she never allows them to
throw up their hands and give up in
despair. What good would that do? they
seem to ask. There is the sense in all of
her stories that life can certainly be
bleak, but one’s response does not neces-
sarily have to concur.

Playing with Shadows, an Illinois Short
Fiction collection by Gloria Whelan, is
geographically far-ranging: there are sto-
ries about eastern cities, Greek islands,
Florida retirement communities. Whe-
lan’s characters also vary widely: from a
spinster schoolteacher to a disgraced
clergyman to an aging Freudian ana-
lyst—they are determinedly civilized,
most retired, all convinced they have
missed something vitally important.

“The Showing” is about the wife of a
noted biologist who sights a passenger
pigeon one afternoon while hunting
mushrooms in the north woods. Instead
of telling her husband, who would im-
mediately set off after the pigeon with

Sharon Doubiago

Patchwork, continued

Although this book accomplished much
by bringing together such a thematically
integrated, consistently excellent collec-
tion by writers as diverse as nineteenth-
century Sarah Orne Jewett and contem-
porary lesbian/feminist Cathy Cockerell,
I would also have appreciated a collec-
tion about women and animals solicited
from unpublished submissions.

Of all the books I perused for this re-
view, the most delightful and techni-
cally outstanding was Margaret of the Im-
perfections, by Lynda Sexson. The title
story illustrates the range of the author’s
audacity and imagination. Margaret, a
young woman of a roughly medieval
time and place much sought after by
male suitors she does not desire, begins
to grow pearls on her skin.

No one story can indicate the author’s
range. Far from the gargoyles of Mar-
garet’s village, “Ice Cream Birth” carries
its protagonist, a modern young woman,
on a Joycean odyssey through modern
Korea to take custody of her half-or-
phaned niece, while the definition of
home and family receives a complete
overhaul. “Deer Crossing” immerses us
in the murkiness of both a Southern
small town and the mind of a young girl
raised by her older sister. Schooled by
her sister with mystery fiction, the girl
finds herself well equipped to begin to
explore the many crimes of the heart
that have been perpetrated against their
fragile sense of family.

The characters in the universe of this

his bird-banding net, mobile tracking
unit and portable receiver, she keeps the
sighting a secret. She disagrees with his
opinion that nature is a science and no
place for romance. Sighting the pas-
senger pigeon has suddenly made her
singular, “She had found herself wishing
something exceptional would happen to
her. This desire had frightened her...
She knew there was safety in her incon-
sequence.”

The struggle between safe incon-
sequence and experiencing “something
exceptional” affects many of Whelan’s
characters. Retired rather precipitously
by his parish after a nervous breakdown,
Reverend Donald Wangeman in “A
Dwelling Place for Dragons” finds a way
to continue his spiritual leadership by
designating an alligator as evil incar-
nate. The alligator lives in a lagoon be-
hind the reverend’s Florida condo com-
plex. “Donald’s only worry was that
should something happen to the animal,
the devils would be released to reenter
the world. Feeling a terrible responsi-
bility, he began to feed the animal so
that he might see him each day and be
reassured.” Ineffectual in his own parish,
the Reverend has found a way to be su-
premely, exceptionally necessary.

“Beneath the Fig Trees” concerns a re-
tired schoolteacher who, on a visit to
New York, gets her purse snatched. To
her astonishment, instead of feeling
anger when the purse snatcher’s forged
checks from Bloomingdale’s, Bergdorf’s
and Bendel’s start arriving, the school-
teacher is envious. She imagines the
purse snatcher’s shopping sprees, “the
pleasure she would have, moving from
one heaped counter to another, ascend-
ing escalators, the bounty of the oncom-
ing floor gradually revealing itself.” She
feels as if she herself is the buyer. “I be-
came excited by the elegance of the
things I had come to own,” she says.
Used to self-denial, the schoolteacher
begins succumbing to the lure of luxury.
She buys silver candlesticks, a silk
blouse. Although her brief foray into
luxuriousness is cut short, her life of
small economies will never be the same.

Whelan seems particularly concerned
with investigating careful lives at the
moment when hazard is introduced. Her
characters are usually good citizens, per-
haps a trifle irritable, maybe even selfish,

—continued on next page

book live closely entwined with not only
the natural world (in “Foxglove,” the
forest teaches its lessons) but the super-
natural (in “Starlings, Mute Swans,” an
angel frequents the lives of a brother and
sister who must learn at last to live as
separate beings).

Sexson’s ability to replicate tone and
voice from deep inside the skull and skin
of each of her protagonists deserves high
praise. The concept of “unreliable narra-
tor” gets a workout in many of these sto-
ries. Sexson builds compact, complex
structures; the reader must work a little
to get at what is happening. The
charmed and charming results are worth
it. A professor of religious studies at
Montana State University, Sexson has
also authored a work of nonfiction en-
titled Ordinarily Sacred, an apt descrip-
tion of her fiction.

Writing this review has left me revital-
ized and inspired by the excellence of
the work of women short-story writers
today. The form itself seems stretched to
its limits, bursting with transformation
in the effort to convey newly emerging
realities. Perhaps the short story is after
all our truest form: patchwork, piece-
work, bedtime story, gossip. It is portable
enough for the wagon train, the subway
tide, the backyard fence, the world.

® Patricia Roth Schwartz is a psycho-
therapist in private practice and a writer
whose volume of short stories, The Names
of the Moons of Mars, will be published in
June by New Victoria Publishers.

Belles Lettres @ 19