Quilt of a Thousand Voices

This Way Daybreak Comes: Women’s Values and the Future, by Annie Cheatham
and Mary Clare Powell. New Society Publishers (4722 Baltimore Ave., Philadelphia, PA
19143), 1986, $34.95 (HB), $12.95 (PB), 288 pp.

by Susanna J. Sturgis

Annie Cheatham and Mary

Clare Powell spent two years

traveling 30,000 miles in the
U.S. and Canada, listening to women
who were working toward change. In
This Way Daybreak Comes, they fashion
a thousand of these voices into a quilt.
They “introduce us to each other so we
can grasp the magnitude of the changes
we are fashioning in the present and
comprehend the significance of those
changes for the future.”

Although a book can make only
one-sided introductions, this book is an
inspiring document. Not only did I meet
hundreds of women creating alternatives
I had never dreamed of, I was also
reminded that my own work as a feminist
writer and print activist is an essential
part of the tapestry.

What are “women’s values”? Some
feminists deny that such things exist;
others are struggling to escape them.
Powell and Cheatham believe that “the
traits relegated to women as unnecessary
or unworthy of men, e.g., flexibility,
receptivity, nurturing, reverence for
life, cooperativeness — are turning out
to be the very qualities necessary for sus-
tenance of life on this planet.”

Men have sought to keep women and
their life-saving values out of public life;

— Solving Crimes, continued

and materially unencumbered, she hangs
onto a case like a terrier with a rat. The
victims and the victimizers get to her.
Kinsey is another tough and tender type.
(Her idea of a date is an afternoon of pistol
practice with a male buddy.) It is to the
immense credit and talent of both Grafton
and Paretsky that their characters never
become caricatures.

The popularity of the series character
in detective fiction gives the series author
a particularly suitable vehicle for explicit
and implicit social commentary. As this
sampling suggests, the genre accommo-
dates women’s concerns and portrays
women’s friendships as significant. While
these mainstream novels do not offer sear-
ing political or philosophical analysis,
they do provide a pleasurable escape into a
world where a woman’s intelligence and
integrity are recognized and rewarded.
Nancy Drew was only the beginning.

® Patrice Clark Koelsch directs the Cen-
ter for Arts Criticism in St. Paul, MN, and
reviews books for the Minneapolis Star and
Tribune. Her essay on the effect of the clas-
sical public/private distinction appears in
Gender, Ideology, and Action: Historical
Perspectives on Women’s Public Lives
(Greenwood Press, 1986).

Jury/August 1986

these women insist on bringing them-
selves in on their own terms, and what is
more, they do not buy the cultural split
between private and public. “Women
take the ‘self as their major reference
point,” grounding action deeply in their
own realities. And “they affirm that the
‘self is inextricably bound to, and one
with, all of life.”

The result is that the activities de-
scribed in Daybreak merrily transcend
boundaries, particularly those that split
spiritual from cultural from political.
Jean Tait defied her doctors by recover-
ing from cancer; now, as an herbalist,

BREAK

COMES

WOMEN'S VALUES
AND THE FUTURE

TWO FUTURISTS JOURNEY 30,000 MILES TO DOCUMENT
THE LIVES & VISIONS OF 1000 NORTH AMERICAN WOMEN

Annie Cheatham • Mary Clare Powell
Afterword by Gloria Anzaldúa

she communicates to others what she
learned. Women architects and others
develop “environments that support
people’s autonomy, empowerment, and
comfort.”

This is not a how-to book or a manual
for organizers; it is a vital feminist
resource. Simply knowing what other
women are doing can inspire a woman to
imagine and create alternatives for
herself and her community. As Martha
Stuart, a video producer, said, “The
reason you think you can do something

Annie Cheatham

An Ambiguous Hope

Swastika Night, by Katharine Burdekin. Introduction by Daphne Patai. The Feminist
Press (311 E. 94th St., NY, NY 10128), 1985, $8.95, 196 pp. (PB)

by Susanna J. Sturgis

First published in 1937, 12 years

before Orwell’s 1984, Swastika

Night is a compelling novel set 700
years into a 1,000-year reich where
Hitler is worshiped as a literal god. Two
militaristic empires, the German and
the Japanese, have each subjugated half
the world; evenly balanced, they have
come to an uneasy stalemate. The world
is a monotonous and brutal place.

In its first century, the Holy German
Empire virtually destroyed all evidence
of previous civilizations. For the few
who can read (a neo-feudal ruling class
of Teutonic Knights and a handful of
technicians), the only books extant are
technical manuals and the Hitler Bible,
from which “all history, all psychology,
all philosophy, all art except music, all
medical knowledge except the purely
anatomical and physical” have been
erased.

The virtues of the empire are the
“manly” virtues of war, which have been
institutionalized by the ruthless
squelching of all things female. In the
Hitler Creed, men are to women as
women are to worms. Hitlerian women
are breeding animals, interned in
prison-like compounds and infinitely
accessible to Hitlerian men. At the age
of 18 months, male children are placed
in the care of their fathers.

As women are to worms, so worms are
to Christians, the pariahs of the empire.
Christians are not allowed to work; they
live by foraging, poaching, and illicit
trading. They believe that their miser-
able lot is divine punishment for per-
secuting the Jews despite Christ’s in-
junction to do otherwise. Christian
women are accorded the status of pet
dogs and are thus considerably better off
than their Hitlerian sisters.

If it explored only the origins and
horrors of post-Hitlerian society,
Swastika Night would be an unrelentingly
depressing novel. Instead, Burdekin’s
scenario does offer some possibility for
change. After 70 years of military im-
passe, the empires for whom war is life
are beginning to disintegrate. More
important, the terrible denial of all
things female is leading to a literal steril-
ity. Fewer girl children are being born;
suicides are increasing among men.

Some pre-Hitlerian knowledge has
survived, and with it a glimmer of hope.
In the first century of the empire, one
Knight recorded in a book everything he
remembered of world history and cul-
ture. The Knight von Hess, his aging
and heirless descendant, passes the pre-
cious volume to Alfred, a technician
who, like the Knight, has managed to
remain an individual. Both Alfred and
von Hess understand that the celebra-
tion of violence must lead inevitably to
death.

Well aware that women have not
always been such abject creatures, von
Hess believes that “women will always
be exactly what men want them to be.”
Alfred’s view offers a little more cause
for optimism; women acquiesced in their
subjugation because they believed
themselves inferior to men. But, one
wonders, can men teach them to believe

is because someone like you is doing
something.”

Nevertheless, I found this book
frustrating as well as inspiring. In the
introduction, the authors write,
“Throughout the project, we looked for
the good news.” Yet, to this activist’s
eyes, these accounts paint a deceptively
antiseptic picture of change-making
work. When struggles and setbacks are
screened out, it is too easy to assume that
these women were so unlike our own
imperfect selves that they had no prob-
lems.

I found Daybreak most moving when-
ever its authors discussed how their own
“women’s values” affected and were
affected by their work. They keep a low
profile most of the time, however, and
draw only the most general conclusions
from what they learned. I often wished
that they had speculated more freely. At
the same time, their nonjudgmental
approach should encourage readers to
formulate and discuss their own ques-
tions. How are these disparate activities
connected? Sonia Johnson recognizes
that “being out on the edge is my way of
making the world safe for moderates”; do
moderates acknowledge the debt? How
does a feminist affirm and maintain
women’s values in nonfeminist con-
texts?

Clearly, one book written by two
women out of one extraordinary journey
cannot be everything. Perhaps its most
important message is that, despite the
dedicated and generally unpaid work of
thousands of women, the communica-
tion networks are fragile. Unless women
can develop quicker and fuller ways to
exchange information about their prob-
lems, struggles, joys, and successes,
they will continue to battle the many
exhausting consequences of isolation.

@ Susanna J. Sturgis lives on a semi-
mythical island off the coast of Massachu-
setts, where she is working on a novel and a
book of poetry.

otherwise without confirming the
women’s belief in their own inferiority?

Swastika Night left me with real hope
that resistance would come, from men
who, like von Hess, Alfred, and perhaps
the Christians, are imperfectly assimi-
lated into the empire. Nevertheless, it is
hard to believe that any new order can
be less patriarchal than the old.
Burdekin has suggested that the fatal
flaw in this culture is the degradation of
all things female, but she leaves no way
to heal the schism. Perceptive as she is
about misogyny and its consequences,
Burdekin does not give voice to any of
her women characters. All of the prin-
cipal characters in Swastika Night are
men, none of whom are privy to the
inner thoughts and feelings of women.
Neither they nor the reader can know if
any spark of resistance survives among
the women; without this knowledge,
hope is limited indeed.

Contemporary feminist authors have
written a number of dystopian novels
and novels with dystopian elements,
tracing contemporary woman-hating to
some of its logical conclusions. The
Holdfast, for instance, envisioned by
Suzy McKee Charnas in Walk to the End
of the World (Berkley, 1974), is easily as
grim a place as Burdekin’s Holy German
Empire. The near-future U.S. of Suzette
Haden Elgin’s Native Tongue (DAW
Books, 1984) is more refined, but no less
horrifying. Unlike Burdekin, however,
Charnas and Elgin dare to identify with
their oppressed women characters. They
believe that an independent spirit can
survive within the most brutally en-
slaved female body. As a result, their
novels, far more than Swastika Night,
offer the possibility of women’s resis-
tance, and a clear, unambiguous hope
for a world that no longer embraces or
enforces the “manly” virtues.

Belles Lettres @ 3