Vina Delmar  
by Carolyn Banks  

Vina Delmar’s first novel, Bad  

Girl, zoomed onto the bestseller  

lists in 1928. It was inordinately  
controversial, dealing not only with  
promiscuity, as the title might lead one  
to imagine, but with childbirth as well.  
“A novel is not the place for obstetrics,”  
one critic grumbled, saying, too, that  
“Miss Delmar must learn to leave some-  
thing to the reader’s imagination.”  

Other reviewers (the book had nearly  
twenty printings and was made into a  
Fox Movietone film) gave the novel  
high praise. Most of the plaudits men-  
tioned the book’s accuracy and its au-  
thor’s eye for detail; a few also hinted at  
its great charm.  

Nation was one of these. “Bad Girl  
seems as fresh as a dill pickle on a hot  
summer day,” its reviewer wrote. And at  
Bookman, the novel was touted as “one  
of the miracles of American life.”  

Bad Girl was, in addition, seen as a  
sort of time capsule. The New York Times  
noted that the story “captures a mood in  
the life of a section of the metropolis that  
will be invaluable 100 years hence for  
those seeking bygone atmosphere.” In-  
deed, sixty years later, this is how one  
might best approach Delmar’s first book-  
length work.  

Bad Girl begins with the heroine,  
Dot, on an excursion boat on the Hud-  
son River. Here she meets Eddie, the  
man she will eventually marry. She is a  
wisecracking typist who uses “ain’t,” “he  
don’t,” and such. Eddie is a radio repair-  
man. The use of central characters from  
the working class almost guaranteed a  
wide reading audience.  

Although writing in this milieu was  
refreshing, it was by no means restrict-  
ing, in that Delmar was able to provide  
her more educated readers with a few  
tongue-in-cheek asides. We get, for in-  
stance, a girlfriend bragging to Dot  
about an imaginary beau who gives her  
expensive presents:  

“Yes, George Bernard Shaw,” said  
Maude, “Isn’t that distinguished?” For a  
second she hung in dizzy suspense. The  

—continued from p. 13  

in the anti-apartheid movement (both  
inside South Africa and in exile), trade  
union women, leaders of women’s or-  
ganizations, and women involved in  
community issues. Until recently, we  
have had few glimpses of the lives of  
Colored Indian women, except through  
the literature of Bessie Head. We had no  
way of knowing how deeply many of  
them were involved in the African Na-  
tional Congress (ANC). We have had  
quite narrow views of Black women,  
most of which placed them either in the  
home or, alternatively, in the move-  
ment. Russell introduces us to single  
women who, despite imprisonment and  
sexual terrorism, continued their resolve  
to work with political organizations and  
community affairs. There are mothers  
who, despite forced separation from  
their children or violence to their homes  
by Inkatha Loyalists, still struggle to  
maintain motherhood and contribute to  
the fight for liberation. We also are  
given in-depth personal views of some of  
the outstanding women we already  
know, such as Winnie Mandela, Ruth  
Mompati, Mavivi Manzini, Albertina  
Sisulu, Helen Joseph, Di Bishop, Flo-  
rence DeVilliers, and Sheena Duncan.  
The stereotype of English and  
Afrikaaner as privileged and the view of  
their oppression as minor compared to  
that of women of color is not removed by  
these interviews, but we do see that  
some of them are committed rebels de-  
spite the cost.  

14 @ Belles Lettres  

Vina Delmar. Photo by John Engstead  

name had a too-familiar ring. Suppose it  
was the name of a movie actor?  

Or, after Dot has succumbed in Eddie’s  
flat, this wonderful exchange:  

“Don’t you suppose,” Dot asked, “that  
somewhere there are nice people who  
would think it was all right?”  

“Maybe in France,” Eddie replied,  
doubtfully. “Even the high-toned people  
over there are kind of loose, I’ve heard.”  

Incidentally, Eddie proposes to Dot in  
these postcoital pages, thus belying the  
book’s title.  

We get a grim view of Dot’s life as a  
young bride. The first thing Eddie does is  
make her quit her job. For a short time,  
she thrives on decorating their apart-  
ment. All too soon, we learn that after a  
day of housecleaning, “Dot would stand  
on the little blue bath mat and study the  
gleaming white tiles surrounding it. And  
sometimes she would suddenly burst into  
song, and other times she felt as though  
she’d just like to cry.”  

Before half the book is over, Dot is  
pregnant. Her obstetrician, we learn,  
makes a monthly house call to examine  
her! He tells her, in answer to her ques-  
tions, “Less time would be wasted if  
women did at once what they were told  
to do.” Later, to thwart Dot’s vision of  
giving birth at home, the good doctor  
tells her that  

Rape and violence against activist  
women, particularly women of color,  
emerge as disturbing subthemes in many  
of these interviews. Thus it is not sur-  
prising that the question Russell allows  
to permeate the book is where to place  
sexism in the list of priorities. Russell  
alerts us that she uses the term “femi-  
nism” cautiously, omitting it from her  
conversation with Black women who,  
despite their experiences, interpret it to  
have negative western overtones. Sexu-  
al assault or violence in prison, while  
being arrested, or at work is such a com-  
mon threat to Black, Colored, and In-  
dian women that it is repeated over and  
over in the interviews. These women  
admit that their own experiences have  
taught them the primacy of working  
within women’s organizations to oppose  
sexist oppression because it is “patriar-  
chy that is divisive, not feminism.”  
Winnie Mandela and Ruth Mompati,  
while feeling that there was little or no  
discrimination based on sex within the  
African National Congress (ANC),  
still felt that they had “to have an organ-  
ization which would tackle problems  
that are specific to women.” Others be-  
lieve that the ANC, United Democratic  
Front, and Kosatu (Organization of  
Trade Unions) still have a long way to go  
toward combatting sexism and allowing  
women to play an equal role.  

Russell’s concluding comments are  
excellent, in that she integrates femi-  
nism into the political struggle by stress-  

practically everybody goes to a sanitarium  
nowadays. Women have learned that it’s  
best that way. You'd have to have a  
nurse, and while an ordinary maternity  
nurse is sufficient for your purpose, that  
would be fifty dollars for the two weeks  
you need her. You’d have to have a laun-  
dress in, and there’s a great deal of drugs  
and sick-room things you’d need, and that  
would run into money. You're foolish not  
to go to a sanitarium.  

Once there, however, Dot spends  
hours in the labor room amid “a strong  
odor of ether and disinfectant,” only to  
have to walk down a flight of stairs to the  
delivery room to give birth. Delmar does  
not report this with any hoopla. Evi-  
dently, it was simply the way of things.  

From the moment Dot discovers she  
is pregnant until the couple brings the  
baby home from the hospital, the plot  
turns on whether or not Eddie will ac-  
cept the baby. Dot is sure he won’t. We,  
however, know that he is ecstatic about  
the prospect of fatherhood. Readers of  
present-day romances, which build on  
this sort of misunderstanding, will be  
treading familiar turf indeed.  

Perhaps this explains Delmar’s enor-  
mous — almost mind-boggling — popu-  
larity, to which she responded with a  
continuous flow of work. In 1929, on  
the heels of Bad Girl, her Loose Ladies  
appeared. The short stories in this col-  
lection had appeared in magazines such  
as Liberty Weekly, Hearst International,  
Cosmopolitan, and Red Book [sic], indi-  
cating how widely published she already  
was. The heroines in many of these  
pieces were similar to Dot: tough-talking  
young women with hearts of gold.  

It is worth noting Delmar’s roots. She  
was born into a New York City theatrical  
family. Her mother had pretensions and  
never quite accepted her father’s ties to  
old neighborhood friends, many of  
whom were involved in shady activities.  
Vina, an only child, was witness to their  
many steely battles about this and doubt-  
less internalized the conflict.  

Much of her work displays her  
Whitmanesque sympathy for the under-  
dog, yet her enormous success as a writer  
meant that her own life did not at all re-  
semble the lives of the women about  
whom she wrote. She was never forced,  
for example, to take a menial clerical or  
shopgirl job. Instead, she dropped out of  
school and married Eugene Delmar at  
the age of sixteen. Her agent remembers  
that, throughout her long writing life,  

ing that often “apartheid and sexism are  
so intertwined, that fighting one  
entails fighting the other.” In that vein,  
she agrees that “giving priority to the  
struggle for national liberation in South  
Africa does not mean ignoring experi-  
ences like these.” However, the book  
achieves its greatest synthesis when  
Russell highlights the women’s pride in  
the dominant role that the ANC has  
played in the struggle, and the continu-  
ing importance of international pressure  
in helping move the country toward lib-  
eration. She urges us to help subdue this  
last “kick of a dying horse.”  
Throughout Russell’s book, as well as  
that of Marks, the reader is conscious of  
the “collective outsider” peering over  
the shoulder of the writer, establishing a  
dialogue with South African women as  
they fight against apartheid. Lily and  
Sibusisiwe Makhanya, as well as the  
contemporary South African activists,  
have seen their Western counterparts as  
potential partners along the anti-  
apartheid path. This implicit as well as  
explicit partnership accounts for much  
of the appeal and sensitivity in these two  
books.  

@ Gwendolyn Mikall is the author of the  
recently published Cocoa and Chaos in  
Ghana. Her forthcoming book, entitled  
Within Nations in Crisis, examines chang-  
ing relationships in rural areas, particularly  
among women. She is an associate professor  
of anthropology at Georgetown University.  

she insisted on having her mail ad-  
dressed to “Mrs. Eugene Delmar.”  

She was only twenty-three when Bad  
Girl made her famous. Loose Ladies,  
which appeared the next year, came  
from previously published work. That  
same year, however, saw the publication  
of yet a second novel, Kept Woman. This  
time the critics pounced, with one call-  
ing it a “lurid example of the mutations  
and mutilations to which the English  
language is subject.”  

For the most part, critics objected to  
the social class of the women in Delmar’s  
work. As one of them carped,  

Most of those in ‘Kept Woman’ are  
non-intellectual, petty minded, restless,  
indolent, improvident, poverty-stricken in  
interests and standards. If one does not  
care to understand such people, even at  
second or third hand in a novel, he is  
entitled to avoid them in fiction as he  
would in life.  

Despite such barbs, Delmar’s output  
continued furiously. For a time she con-  
centrated on short stories, appearing  
from the 1930s into the 1950s in The  
Saturday Evening Post, Good Housekeep-  
ing, and Ladies Home Journal, among  
others. She outlasted editors, steering  
clear of personal contact with them and  
shunning the celebrity that undoubtedly  
would have been hers had she been more  
public. Margaret Cousins, for many  
years the fiction editor at Good House-  
keeping, insists that she never met Del-  
mar, “nor had any sort of personal re-  
lationship with her.” Naome Lewis, Ms.  
Cousins’ successor at the magazine, was  
in touch with her in a limited way. “I  
met her, of course,” she says,  

and was charmed, and always admiring of  
the deftness of her work. But Good  
Housekeeping bought most of her stories  
(and a couple of novels) in the 1940s, and  
I didn’t come here until the 1950s. Her  
volume of work, especially the longer  
pieces had diminished by then, and so we  

sought only a relatively few short stories  
in the 1960s. All fresh and innovative,  
but few and far between.  

Running parallel to her career as a  
magazine writer, however, was her out-  
put in other areas of publishing. In  
1946, she wrote The Rich Full Life, in  
1954, Midsummer, and in 1959, Warm  
Wednesday — all stage plays. And scat-  
tered over the years were other novels:  
Women Live Too Long (1931), The Mar-  
riage Racket (1933), Mystery at Little  
Heaven (1933), The End of the World  
(1934), The Love Trap (1949), New  
Orleans Lady (1949), About Mrs. Leslie  
(1950), Marcaboth Women (1951),  
Strangers in Love (1951), Laughing  
Stranger (1953), Beloved (1956), The Big  
Family (1961), Grandmére (1967), The  
Freeways (1971), and A Time for Titans  
(1974).  

In 1968, Delmar’s only nonfiction  
book, The Becker Scandal, appeared.  
The book recounts a celebrated 1912  
crime that seriously strained the mar-  
riage of her parents. Delmar was then a  
child, but her memories and her percep-  
tions are acute. Here we see much of  
what shaped her — the class conflict  
between her parents and the ever-wid-  
ening rift resulting from it. In The Beck-  
er Scandal, the young Vina clearly sides  
with her father, applauding his support  
of people her mother found unworthy  
and uncouth. This surely accounts for  
the mature Vina’s almost defiant desire  
to vindicate, in her fiction, characters  
her mother would have hated.  

None of Delmar’s work is in print,  
although libraries still circulate her  
books. A reissuing of a selection of her  
writing would be valuable for historical,  
sociological, and aesthetic reasons. In-  
deed, many of us might well agree with  
this Bookman reviewer’s appraisal: “Miss  
Delmar’s prose is fresh — except when it  
is too fresh — and airy, and swift, ad-  
mirably suited to the sort of thing that  
interests her.”  

® Carolyn Banks, author of four sus-  

pense novels, is planning to compile a criti-  
cal edition of Delmar’s short fiction.  

Spring 1990