Gentle Readers

and Lemon Suckers

by Molly Hite

Reading is by convention a peace-

ful and blameless activity, and

we tend to feel at our most peace-
ful and blameless when as feminists we
peruse feminist writing — rather as if we
could attach political significance to
that grand old epithet of the 18th cen-
tury novel, “gentle reader.” In such a
self-congratulatory context, it can come
as a shock to encounter a passage of di-
rect address that ostentatiously with-
draws the label:

Gentle reader! What have I said! You
are no more gentle than I am.... We
all believe ourselves to be, more or less,
well intentioned, nice — goodies, in
fact, whether we’re the greengrocer or
the Shah of Shahs. But we can’t

possibly be, or how would the world
have got into the state it’s in? Who else
but ourselves are doing this to
ourselves? We simply don’t know our
natures.

Both the narrator’s arch intrusiveness
and the theme of complicity are charac-
teristic of Weldon, who, in The Shrapnel
Academy, her most recent and most bril-
liant novel so far, is bent on showing us
the extent to which military history is in
fact history — our history — no matter
how strenuously we disassociate our-
selves from the machinations of macho
generals, no matter how much we insist
on our outsider status as “gentle read-
ers.”

The Shrapnel Academy of the title is
a sort of stately home-cum-conference
center, the kind of setting familiar from
countless classic murder mysteries,
where a group of disparate, if generally
well-fed and military-minded, English
types gather for a weekend of banquets
and speechifying. These characters are
counterbalanced below stairs by a com-

plement of Third World servants, also
disparate, although on the whole less in-
tent on mass carnage. Mass carnage is,
of course, the form of murder under con-
sideration, if only on a microcosmic
level, using a new line of miniaturized
weaponry. “Once such fire power would
have needed a half-mile wagon train to
carry it,” enthuses the narrator. “Now, a
knife box! Oh, nifty! Oh, progress!
Stunning! Oh, the cleverness of men!”
But the cleverness of men, who com-
pare battles and armaments at the din-
ner table as ingenuously as boys swap-
ping baseball cards, is not the malign
force behind the calamitous course of
history that Weldon traces — or not the
only malign force. Equally unsettling is
the enthusiasm of Joan Lumb, who runs
the Shrapnel Academy (“It was a much
coveted post, now for the first time
given to a woman. The honor was self-
evident”; or the vampirish sexual appe-

—_—— Fay Weldon Speaks with Regina Barrecca

Can you give an example?

Little one-line throwaways. What I
say about Bobbo and Mary Fisher [Lives
and Loves of a She-Devil] being in love
with each other — “the less he loves,
the more she will” — is really an alarm-
ing thing to say, isn’t it? You have to
think about its implications. And I write
rather short paragraphs. I could “ex-
plain” it, but I don’t: You have to do all
that for yourself.

“How are we supposed to take this?” is a
question often asked about your work. Am
I supposed to believe absolutely — or dis-
agree with — statements you make, always
made in this very cool, detached narrator’s
voice. Do you see yourself as a part of your
books? There seems to be a narrator who
joins the reader and says, “Oh, look at what
these people are doing, pay attention to
this.” Is that as an extension of you, or are
we meant to abstract the narrators in the
books away from you as author?

I think much of it is me: I do like
talking, you see! If I can’t get enough
people to listen I have to put it down
in the books so that nobody can inter-
rupt me. Life is very dangerous and I
want them to know and understand and
come along with me.

A criticism of your work is that the male
characters seem difficult to sympathize with.
When writing the male characters, do you
pay much attention to them?

The title of Bella Morthampton, the Gen-
eral’s mistress; or the placid acquies-
cence of Shirley and Muffin, who define
themselves respectively as wife and
girlfriend; or even the ambivalence of
the lesbian feminist journalist named
Mew (short for Medusa), who finds the
atmosphere of wealth and power stirring
up unexpected heterosexual tendencies.
Here, as elsewhere in Weldon’s work —
and in the history of the world, in Wel-
don’s view — women are victims or ac-
complices, and usually, necessarily
both:

Faded tapestries lined the walls: they
had little merit except age. The archers
of Agincourt, the hosts of
Thermopylae, the vengeance of
Marathon, the fury of Saratoga, all
fading gently into the past, stitched
long ago by docile female hands, the
widows and orphans of the warrior
race. Who else but the unlucky sew for
a living? And how else but by glorifying
the abysmal, can we make the abysmal
glorious? The sewers stitched, no
doubt, with loving hands, and
worshipped their oppressors.

The reissue of Weldon’s first novel,
The Fat Woman’s Joke, comes as a wel-
come reminder that Weldon has been
trafficking in this sort of disaffection for
20 years now. Astonishingly, prophet-
ically, this book begins from the as-
sumption that fat is a feminist issue, al-
though it was first published in 1967,
when virtually nothing was a feminist
issue. One of the ongoing jokes of the
story is that of a marriage breaking up
because both partners went on a diet.
But the underside of this story — its un-
derground aspect, because Esther, the
Fat Woman of the title, is the female
counterpart of Dostoevsky’s celebrated
Underground Man — is that the
breakup, interpreted by all the other
characters as a temporary act of despera-
tion, derives from the clear-sightedness
that Esther gains when she is suddenly
reprieved from the continual busy-ness
of the feminine mystique. As she re-
marks, “To spend my life waging war
against Alan, which was what my
housewifeliness amounted to, endeavor-
ing to prove a female competence which
was the last thing he wanted or needed
to know about — what a waste of time
this was!” Yet Esther, like the mistress
who conveniently turns up to accommo-
date her husband, ends up acceding to
the humiliating myth of female depen-
dency: “I suppose I might as well be
there as here. It doesn’t seem to make
much difference where one is.”

The most disturbing aspect of Wel-
don’s fictional universes is this reiter-
ated claim of the female protagonists
that it doesn’t make much difference
where one is — or what one does, for
that matter. Women tend to be victims:
of masculine manipulation, social brain-
washing, their own mawkish romanti-
cism, even of their own biology. Yet de-
spite the bleakness of the prognosis,
Weldon’s fiction is not the counsel of
despair, even when it is clearest about
acts and consequences. “Reader, I know
you do not like the ending to the story,”
the narrator observes on the next-to-last
page of The Shrapnel Academy. “It seems
a cheat just to blow everything and
everyone up. I wish there was some
other possible ending, but there isn’t.
That’s the way the world ends, not with
a whimper but a bang, the way it
began.” And given the history we have
accumulated, the way we assign vic-
tories and defeats, and, indeed, the fact
that we do assign victories and defeats,
it is difficult to envision another possi-
ble end.

Yet in the best satirical tradition,
Weldon’s aggressive, vital narrator
keeps pushing us to see further, even as
she refuses to provide us with cozy alter-
natives. Fundamentally a satirist, Wel-
don does not purvey lovable characters
or strong role models; she is hardly a
nurturing feminist, unless you count as
nurture a reading experience rather like
being suckled on lemons. As a closet
lemon-sucker and long-time Weldon
fan, I can only report that in both cases
the effect can be bracing: sour as disen-
chantment, acid as truth.

@ Molly Hite teaches contemporary fic-
tion and feminist theory in the English De-
partment of Cornell University and is the
author of a novel, Class Porn (Crossing
Press, 1987).

Women are really central to my writ-
ing, but I think that what happens is
that male readers are so accustomed to
seeing men in novels taken very seri-
ously, being portrayed as heroes, and
being central to the action that when
they’re not, when it’s women who are
these things, men feel somehow slighted
and insulted. The complaint is that my
men characters are just plain horrible. I
don’t think they’re any worse than the
women! I was brought up in an all-
female household, went to a girl’s
school, was supported by my mother.
The world is female, as far as I’m con-
cerned. Most people believe it to be
male.

I am impressed by a sense of generation in
your work. One of your books begins
“There’s a certain kind of unhappiness ex-
perienced by a certain kind of woman mar-
ried to a certain kind of man which outruns
generations.” It is not a matriarchy in any
anthropological sense, but instead a kind of
emotional handing down from mother to
daughter, who appear frequently as a focal
relationship in your work. Is this deliberate?

You do see this line stretching, and a
kind of development through a family;
it rises and falls, and the traumas that
happen in one generation affect the
next. I think it just needs putting down:
I don’t set out to do it. I’m conscious of
myself in a family line. My mother died
recently at 99; I have my own children,
and I have a grandchild now.

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987

It’s nothing like the children bearing the sins
of the fathers, but the children are affected
in that they almost exist in the future as the
present happens. All the incidents of the
day will get passed down in one way or
another. Nothing is lost.

Yes, nothing is lost and nothing is
over. It simply continues on out. Our
view of time is too limited and limiting.
It certainly is a comforting thought as
you get older — continuing in your
younger self, perhaps.

Several of your characters do see a kind of
immortality through their children.

You hope you transmit your energy to
them or a positive view of your experi-
ence.

There seem to be definite patterns in your
novels: sister characters, repeated names,
similar events. Are these repetitions deliber-
ate or are they something that readers derive
from your work?

No, the patterns are there in my
mind. In a way, writers see one book
leading out of the other. They have dif-
ferent plots, different characters, but the
patterns are in your life. Through the
writer’s life there is a kind of stream run-
ning through fairly continuously.

— continued on page 15

Belles Lettres @ 7