Briefly Noted

Science fiction writer Octavia Butler forayed into the past twice, with Wild Seed (1980) and Kindred (1979), the latter now republished in Beacon Press’s Black Women Writers series ($8.95, PB). Eschewing both futuristic speculation and the trappings of technology, this powerful novel posits time travel back to the days of slavery in the American South. The heroine is pulled back unwillingly to be the protector of a despicable slave owner, whose life she must preserve. If she fails, her lineage is lost, for he is one of her ancestors. The story weds two of the impulses of Butler’s writing: an attempt to reclaim the dignity of her family (it pained her to see the way her mother, a maid, was treated by her employers and the insidious effects such treatment had) and an escape into the imagination prompted by that humiliation. “Like Kafka’s Metamorphosis or Anna Kavan’s Ice,” says the introduction, “Butler’s novel is an experiment that resists easy classification by... collapsing the genres of the fantastic travelogue and the slave narrative.” 

Another science fiction writer to watch is Pat Murphy, whose third novel, The City, Not Long After, is just out from Doubleday ($17.95, 246 pp.). Murphy’s fiction has won the prestigious Nebula and Sturgeon awards; she edits The Exploratorium Quarterly, a magazine of science, art, and human perception, and her favorite color is ultraviolet. 

“There was something frantic in their blooming, as if they knew that frost was near and then the bitter cold. They’d lived through all the heat and noise and stench of summertime, and now each widely opened flower was like a triumphant cry, ‘We will, we will make seed before we die.’” To read and learn more about mountain people (including Harriette Arnow, from whose novel The Dollmaker comes this excerpt), check out Appalachian Journal, a quarterly regional studies review that over the years has featured commentary on such figures as Arnow, Jayne Anne Phillips, Mary Lee Settle, and Meredith Sue Willis. Free catalogs of back issues and subscriptions ($10/yr) are available from University Hall, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC 28608. In a few years, publishers’ advances and health willing, Susan Koppelman and Dorothy Abbott will bring us a volume of short stories by Appalachian women. 

Would that we could print our illustrations in four colors so that we could have reproduced more quilts in their full, exhilarating artistry. Do take a look, however, at the two quilting books mentioned previously and at a third, The Quilters: Women and Domestic Art: An Oral History (Doubleday/Anchor, $15.95, 159 pp., PB), which was originally published in 1977 and was made into a Tony-award-winning musical. Besides the color photographs, you will find a wealth of conversational snippets from old women, as in the following exchanges from a quilting bee:

Move over there, you old hens. Who’s got my thread?

Lord, she done put Dacron inside this outing quilt.

Wear my fingers to the bone looking at it.

I thought I’d never get out here. First he wants me to put my quilting in the outhouse, then he tries to keep me from getting at it.

Had your Shurfine pickles today, Annie? I gotta leave at noon to take Aunt Lucy her lunch. She’s down again.

Go by my kitchen on the way. There’s beans on the back burner. Cut your time in half.

This here’s the mama of my son’s wife. Those two kids made one mess of a house. When these pieces was put together they kindly made a triple star. When you look at it thisaway you can see a triple star. When you look at it thataway you see boxes.

When I look at it anyway I get dizzy. Mary Lou, you pieced one seasick quilt.

Spring 1989

And this confidence shared with the authors:

Most people don’t like to quilt. They think it’s too little a business, I guess. Too much work involved. I love to quilt. My husband used to say, “I just have to choke you off a quilt.” He did want me to come and eat when the family did, of course. But oh, I’d rather quilt than eat when I’m hungry.

Another war novel reprint from the Feminist Press (We That Were Young by Irene Rathbone, $10.95) arrived just in time for Eleanor Bader to send us the following commentary:

For Joan Seddon, the onset of World War I coincided with the arrival of adulthood. Reared in upper-class splendor, she nonetheless honed her thinking in the British suffrage movement, learning the value of assertive and audacious behavior at an early age. But like other women of her class, she never dreamed that she would work alongside men, an equal, as it were, in battle. “How different from merely being allowed to do things was the fact of being definitely asked to come and do them,” writes Irene Rathbone. Her heroine, Joan, proves her worth in a number of ways. Working in a military canteen run by the British YMCA, she parcels out food and drink and entertains the men with songs and conversation. She experiences the joy of living collectively, sharing pleasure and pain with other women. Joan thrives outside the family home, learning independence and the happiness of throwing away some of the shackles of established expectations.

Later she works as a nurse, bathing the battle-torn, bandaging wounds, and assisting in rehabilitation. It is grisly work, and Rathbone spares no detail in describing amputations and the loss of eyes to enemy fire. Death is ever-present in this matter-of-fact novel.

Subscribers’ Book

Drawing Winners

Penny Armstrong, Gordonsville, PA; Clayelle Dalferes, NYC; Jeanne Audrey Powers, NYC; Susan Berndt, Kingsport, TN; Cathleen Douglass, Santa Clara, CA; Diane P. Griffin, Portsmouth, VA; Elizabeth Zographos, Sunnyville, CA; Julia Demmin, Northampton, MA; Karen Utterback, Gainesville, FL; Deborah Hepburn, Bridgeville, PA; Marilee Parfrey, Alexandria, VA; Jane Ambrose, Burlington, VT; Kathleen A. McGinn, Vienna, VA; Janice Otagura, Aiea, HI; Patricia Forsberg, Missoula, MT; Effie Ambler, Detroit, MI; Sinavaiana, Pago Pago, American Samoa; Karen Peper, Royal Oak, MI; Claire Skidmore, Magalia, CA; Sylvia Fish, Riverdale, NY; Joan Weston, Dallas, TX; Lucia Schutz, Los Angeles, CA; Michelle Cloutier, New London, CT; Linda Spink, Alexandria, VA; Alice E. Lowenstein, Brookline, MA. Congratulations, and thanks for your support!

E. Ethelbert Miller sent us the following reflections on playwright Adrienne Kennedy:

Kennedy’s work established her as an important voice in the 1960s avant-garde theater movement. Her plays have often been described as complex, surreal, “richly symbolic,” and experimental. She is best known for three one-act plays, Funnyhouse of a Negro, The Rat’s Mass, and The Owl Answers. Because the playwright relies so much on dreams and memory, her memoir serves as a general introduction to her work.

People Who Lead to My Plays, her autobiography, is structured around her education, a grouping that permits one to follow her artistic development. Kennedy reveals the life of a woman who went to college but who had been socialized to be mainly a wife and mother, a woman who came to maturity in the fifties. By the beginning of the sixties, one notices her personal awakening coinciding with world events.

Kennedy’s early years are the most intriguing and enjoyable parts of the book. Here one gains insight into the forces at work in the shaping of a young Black mind in America. The dominance of white cultural image and the influence of various media are also shown clearly. Yet we find her connecting to a racial identity through the model of her father, a community leader. The result is an honest picture of Black middle-class life.

A certain innocence emerges from the text, supported by photographs of Kennedy’s childhood and selected prints of popular movie stars and cultural figures, both Black and white. She has also included a list of childhood belongings, such as a green ballerina dress, jacks and ball, and a doll named Gloria Lou.

Although her section entitled “College” is the shortest, it explains how racism would influence her imagination:

My dorm mates at Ohio State: Often from southern Ohio towns, they were determined to subjugate the Negro girls... to make you feel that it was a great inequity that they had to live in the same dorm with you... an injustice. This dark reality was later to give great impetus and energy to my dreams.

This is the story of a woman who continued to believe that she could become a writer. Kennedy’s life is filled with metaphors as plentiful as the air. She never loses sight of the big picture of why she is writing the book: It is her attempt to answer the many people who ask why she writes and who influenced her, especially to write in such a nonlinear way. As a companion volume to her edition of plays, Adrienne Kennedy in One Act (University of Minnesota Press, $19.95 HB, $8.95 PB), this memoir will provide several clues to the forces that have shaped and continue to motivate Kennedy’s work.

England has its jumble sales, France its flea markets, and the Orient its bazaars. But well worth rhapsodizing about are the Yankee thrift stores — those Salvation Armies, Amvets, Junior Leagues, and Value Villages of yesteryear. Voluptuous Hawaiian shirts. Cashmere! Hose with seams. Zoot suit ties. A tux for a buck. Funky, funky, funky stuff! Then the zen of “junking” was at its height, unsullied by the emergence of pricey retro shops. But I’ll let Cynthia Heimel take it away, in the following paean to the efficacy of the American church rummage sale in assuaging the pain of a romance gone awry (from But Enough About You, Harper & Row, $7.95, PB):

Speeding along the countryside of the north shore of Long Island, I shrieked, “Wait! Wait!”

Rita screeched to a halt. “What? What?”

I pointed fervently to a sign in front of a Presbyterian church, which said “Rummage sale today.”

Rita parked, Lucy got out of the car while it was still moving and ran into the church. By the time we arrived, she was already clutching a black slip, a chintz-covered chair cushion, three embroidered hankies, and a silver charm bracelet.

I wrenched the chintz cushion out of her arms, while Cleo took peremptory possession of the charm bracelet. We let her keep the rest.

I looked around and inhaled deeply. The sight and smell of a church rummage sale is better for me than a thousand shrinks telling me it was all my mother’s fault, better than Robert Redford confessing his love, better than a swim in any ocean, better than any single sexual episode I can think of — except three good ones put together. A church rummage sale is full of infinite pleasures and possibilities, mystical, healing, calm, and joyous.

The church was old with gleaming wood and lofty ceilings, the air was cool and thick with an evocative musty smell. In a state of divine contemplation, I went through stacks of sheets, boxes of gloves, piles of lingerie, cartons of bow ties. Occasionally, I caught sight of one of the others similarly transformed.

Please send 1-year subscriptions or 2-year subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check or money order in the amount of payable to Belles Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a photocopy, or handwritten copy.

Name

Street

* Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:

A contribution of $ is enclosed

Name

Street

City State Zip

Belles Lettres @ 23