Science Fiction and Fantasy

Dawn Breaks:

A New Race Arises

Dawn, by Octavia E. Butler. New York: Warner Books, 1987, $15.95 (HB), 264 pp., $3.95, 248 pp. (PB)

Adulthood Rites, by Octavia E. Butler. New York: Warner Books, 1988, $16.95, 277 pp.

by Sandra Y. Govan

Novelist Octavia Butler, Nebula and Hugo award winner, continues in the first two books of her newest saga, the Xenogenesis series, to provide engaging, entertaining, yet provocative speculative fiction. As operative sciences from which to extrapolate, she uses psychology (response of people to the stress of radical, unexpected change), biology (the manipulation of human DNA and deliberate genetic engineering), and sociology (formation and government of adaptability of the species) to pose the most essential question of science fiction—what if?—and then proceeds to frame her novels in response to that speculative inquiry. She asks questions, some initially raised in Dawn and further explored in Adulthood Rites. If a global nuclear war occurred, what would become of possible survivors? If remnants of humanity were saved but by an alien species, how would we respond? If the aliens asked a price, would we agree to pay? If humanity was not willing to pay that price, what then?

Appropriately, Dawn heralds the beginning of a new reality for humanity. It introduces us to Lilith Iyapo, easily one of Butler’s best and most intriguing reluctant heroines, and shows us a vivid, terrifying, possible future where humanity must begin again because, indeed, we foolishly destroyed ourselves in a catastrophic nuclear holocaust. Two hundred and fifty years later, when humankind is once again allowed back in the garden, we are not alone.

An alien species, the Oankali, has salvaged, collected, preserved, and restored humanity’s remnants; in return for saving us they require that we “trade” with them. The price of salvation is genetic exchange, for the Oankali are gene traders and inveterate genetic engineers. Of necessity, as one of Lilith’s new mentors explains, they trade “the essence” of themselves. “We do it naturally. We must do it. It renews us, enables us to survive as an evolving species instead of specializing ourselves into extinction or stagnation.” To Lilith, of course, the announced intent to trade signals coercive interbreeding; children born of such an unfathomed coupling would be, in her eyes, repulsive, “grotesque, Medusa children,” part human, part alien. But trade is the price the Oankali require for they are as “committed to the trade” as human beings are to breathing.

The four segments of Dawn, “Womb,” “Family,” “Nursery,” and “The Training Floor,” are keys to the novel’s thematic development. “Womb” depicts Lilith’s final awakening in isolated captivity aboard the Oankali spaceship. Putting archetypal suggestion aside, she learns where she is, what has happened, why it has happened, who earth’s rescuers are, and what they ultimately expect. Unlike human societies, the Oankali are not hierarchical. They are, however, “powerfully acquisitive.” Lilith is told they “acquire new life—seek it, investigate it, manipulate it, sort it, use it.” They are driven to do this by their genetic makeup. By contrast, the Oankali believe the human need for hierarchy stems from competing genetic, even terrestrial, urges; we have a “mismatched pair of genetic characteristics” in that we are both intelligent and hierarchical. Put together, these characteristics are lethal.

“Family” shows us Oankali society while it illustrates Lilith’s efforts to adjust and adapt to a totally alien familial and social structure. She must learn new patterns of kinship and she must adapt to a different, largely chemical and biological technology. She must also learn to accommodate different modes of thinking, teaching, behaving; she must even learn to accept different sexual distinctions. The Oankali have three genders: male, female, and ooloi—a neuter gender that within the Oankali societal structure attends to reproduction and, in a consensus-type social structure, functions in an advisory/counsel/professional role. Sex, formerly a taboo topic in most science fiction, is also treated in Dawn. Among the Oankali, sex is as different as everything else; for them it is an intense three-way experience. In the course of her adjustment to her adoptive Oankali family, Lilith has been given to, and had entrusted to her care, Nikanj, an ooloi child. Theirs has been a mutual non-threatening exchange, and each has learned from the other about the culture and history of their respective species. The time spent with Nikanj has in fact been something of a final test for Lilith. Her real work, as she learns at the close of the segment, is to parent, in her eyes to mother, the first large group of humans to be awakened. She is expected to “teach, to give comfort, to feed and clothe, to guide” the new people and to interpret for them the startling new world they will awaken to find.

The first two segments of Dawn are largely about Lilith and her response both to the aliens and her new environment. Truly Lilith is an exceptional woman. Stripped of everything important in her life and persistently questioned by unseen examiners who never answer her own questions, Lilith maintains her sanity. Confronted by aliens whose appearance is so repulsive (elongated worm-like figures covered with tentacles) that they are the stuff of mythic horror tales, she never attempts suicide nor attempts to kill. Strong and thoughtful, caring and compassionate, frightened yet determined, independent, self-contained, and self-possessed but not to the exclusion of the welfare of others, Lilith is the quintessential androgynous heroine. Like Anyanwu of Butler’s Wild Seed (1980), she is another example of what Margaret O’Connor has called the “feminist ideal of the compassionate exercise of power” albeit, given the circumstances, she has little opportunity to exercise power.

These first two segments allow Butler to both explain and explore (largely through the interface of the speculative alien-meets-humanity premise and dialogue rather than exposition) differing concepts in psychology, biology, technology; social, cultural, and political norms; and a smattering of cultural anthropology. Lilith must represent the race—the human race, not just her own African-American heritage—she must teach the Oankali about us and learn enough about them to familiarize and teach other human beings who will soon confront the aliens in large numbers. That she was very carefully chosen for her multidimensional capabilities becomes more important in the final segments of the novel. Here Lilith, a Black woman whose principal ally is an Asian man, must once again be integrated into human society. In “Nursery” and “The Training Floor” she is to lead and instruct the humans awakened. But because the human capacity for racial, cultural, and gender bias remains; because pettiness, intolerance, violence, fear, and hatred of the unknown and/or the different are still largely intact, for Lilith, to contend with, parent, or attempt to guide those Awakened proves as traumatic as, and more dangerous than, coping with the aliens.

In fact, one might wonder just why the Oankali value human life enough to want a merger or trade. Our hierarchical social tendencies they find unsettling. Our capacity for senseless violence cannot be underestimated. Apart from a human talent to produce cells that stimulate latent regenerative abilities—Lilith’s talent for cancer is deemed intriguing and useful—it seems the Oankali are seduced by the “Human Contradiction.” Nikanj confesses that they need human beings, rather than mere clones of human beings, because a trade “partner must be biologically interesting, attractive,” ...and “fascinating.” We “are horror and beauty in rare combination.” As importantly, we “are [our] personalities,” and [our] cultures.”

Shelving for the moment personality, culture, ethnicity, and an understandable xenophobia, a large part of the problem the remaining humans have with Lilith stems from her subconscious connection to a shadowy Edenic figure. Her name signals ambiguity, and the roles the Oankali force her to play contribute to that ambiguity. Allegedly, Lilith was the first wife of Adam; but she refused to submit to his will and fled. Jay Jacoby, who has traced the Lilith figure in Jewish literature, reports that Lilith has been depicted variously as a “demonic figure” and an “independent spirit,” a victim, a victimizer, fighter for women’s rights, “the Muse,” a destroyer of children, the “surrogate wife of God,” a seductress, a “beautiful but deadly succubus” and an ancient fertility goddess. She has also been the eternal outsider doomed to “eternal alienation” as an “archetypal scapegoat.”

Clearly, Butler has subtly molded her latest complex heroine to reflect some of the multifaceted dimensions associated with the mythic figure. Lilith’s is not an enviable position. Because the Oankali chose her to lead, and not a man, Lilith is alienated from those she awakens. Because they think her guilty of complicity in the alien’s plans, she is victimized as a convenient scapegoat. Because she remains assertive and independent, those she must parent cannot see Lilith as a human being like themselves; instead, they view her as a traitor to humanity, a woman who has been seduced by the Oankali and in turn, assists the Oankali to seduce them. This despite the fact that Lilith has been unfailingly honest, direct, and straightforward with her charges, attempting to equip them with what little knowledge she had. “Learn and run” had been her guiding metaphor to empower those she awakened.

Lilith’s success is a Pyrrhic victory laden with irony. Her charges learn to survive in primitive conditions, at mere subsistence levels, and they escape the confines of immediate Oankali supervision once they are returned to a barely habitable earth. The tale of their return and the reestablishment on earth of human communities, and mixed communities of Oankali and humankind, is the substance of Adulthood Rites. If Dawn extrapolated from science fiction’s “first contact” (with alien life) premise, Adulthood Rites explores in greater detail coexistence theory and the “Human Contradiction” in operation.

In keeping with the projected flow of the series—it is, after all, called Xenogenesis, the birth of a completely different species, Adulthood Rites gradually moves away from an emphasis on Lilith as heroine (her image shifts from amazon to madonna) and shifts instead to Akin, her son, as central protagonist. This is appropriate because Akin, pronounced “Ah-keen” but resonant with symbolic ties to “kin” and “kinship,” is kin to both humankind and Oankali. He is a construct child, a successful product of the best genetic engineering between Oankali and human that Nikanj, the now mature ooloi, could manage. Akin, the new Adam, is also the first male construct child permitted to a human mother on earth. We meet Akin as an infant and follow him to the time of his metamorphosis. Because of his genetic inheritance we know early that he is destined to be a solitary prodigal son, a wanderer, and a man with a mission. Part of his mission is to see for himself human diversity.

Humans are, in the experience of most Oankali and the construct children, a dangerous “compelling, seductive, deadly contradiction.” Even as an infant Akin is “drawn to them, yet warned against them. To touch a Human deeply—to taste one” is to feel the conflict and contradiction. But Akin’s travels, both as an infant and a young male, allow Butler to comment on aspects of human society and to probe the larger question of, with all our faults and failings, what makes humanity unique and worth saving. Akin is taken to resister villagers and exposed to those who have rebelled and fought against any acceptance of Oankali values. The resister communities are testimonies to the best and worst of human society—the human contradiction illustrated. Some are primitive and barbaric. Their inhabitants—men who must dominate and submissive or captive women—establish a pseudocaveman hierarchy and subsequently resort to rape, pillage, and murder to demonstrate their hegemony. Guns have been reinvented and used, not against the aliens, but against other humans. Other resister villages, driven by a will to build and create, have established full-fledged communities and forged, for a time, a restored fully human social structure complete with traditional established values and acceptable human technology. Villagers in Phoenix have coined their own money and could have added a textile mill to their reinvention of the spinning wheel, sewing machines, and looms; but they decided that they had enough to satisfy their immediate needs. Gradually however, because of biological sterility, these model communities also begin to decay.

—continued on page 13

Spring 1989