IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

ee es eee ae

a a a ee

a es ee

a ae

Retrospective

Marguerite Duras

by Joanne Schmidt

several significant factors mark the

early life of Marguerite Duras.

Marguerite Donnadieu, who later
used Duras as her pseudonym, was born
on April 4, 1914, in Giadinh, In-
dochina, then a French colony and
today, South Vietnam. She was the last
of three children in her family, the only
girl. Both of her parents were educators
who chose to settle in Indochina to
teach the native inhabitants. Duras’s
father taught mathematics and her
mother, French and arithmetic. When
Marguerite was four years old, her father
died; she never knew what it meant to
have a father. Duras’s mother, Marie
Donnadieu, then forty-one, was left with
the burdensome task of supporting three
small children. Marie loved her children
deeply and struggled to save them from
poverty. She focused her energies on
young Marguerite. Her younger son died
as a child, and she failed to instill her
ideals in her older son. He dropped out
of school and never amounted to much.
For Madame Donnadieu, “her daughter’s
education was the only hope left to her.”

Young Marguerite gained a certain
freedom and love for nature in the
tropics that later shocked her relatives in
France. Even after Marguerite was dis-
ciplined by her teachers at the Lycée of
Saigon, her mother, a respected head-
mistress of a girls’ school, defended her.
“She’s a child who’s always been free;
otherwise she’d run away; even I, her
own mother, can’t do anything about it,
if I want to keep her I have to let her be
free.”

At the Lycée of Saigon, Marguerite’s
talent for writing was recognized. Even
before she was named “first” in French
composition, Marguerite knew that she
would be a writer. Her mother was proud
of her daughter’s accomplishment al-
though her initial reaction to the award
was hurtful to Marguerite. Marie had
wished it had been given to her older
son instead.

In 1932, when Marguerite was seven-
teen, the family moved to France and
settled in Paris after Marie Donnadieu’s
painful struggle to secure her family’s
economic future failed. Probably because
she was vulnerable as a woman, she was
ill-advised to buy land submerged under
water in Cambodia with the last money
she had from her deceased husband. Her
distress and bitterness at being cheated
and her struggles led Marie Donnadieu
to experience mental problems that
haunted her for the rest of her life.
These factors led her to return to France
with her two remaining children.

Once in Paris, Marguerite completed
her license (a B.A.) in law, studied
mathematics, and continued work in
political science at the prestigious Haute
Ecole de Sciences Politiques. She had
completed her baccalaureate in Saigon
where she took the examination in Viet-
namese. After completing her studies in
political science, she got her first job at
the Ministry of the Colonies and wrote
her first novel, Les Impudents in 1943. In
1939, she married Robert Antelme,
another writer.

Like some of the other French women
writers in Duras’s generation, recogni-
tion was a slow and very painful process.
Although the film Hiroshima Mon
Amour was a notable success in 1959,
triumph was accorded director Alain
Resnais, who had asked Duras to write
the screenplay. Duras learned that the
film world devalued writers. Even after
she wrote the screenplay for a film that

12 ® Belles Lettres

Marguerite Duras

became a landmark in world cinema, her
reputation remained marginal. That
Duras suffered from alcoholism is by no
means difficult to understand. She was
also considered “difficult” as a writer be-
cause of her brief affiliation with the
nouveau roman, a group that made a
radical break from the linear, bourgeois
French novel, and for the experimental
nature of her writing. Not until the pub-
lication of Woman to Woman in 1970
did interest from French feminists help
increase her popularity and, in part, her
readership.

The Sailor from Gibraltar (1952) is an
early novel that is still linear in its plot
development. The narrator/male protag-
onist remains nameless throughout the
novel, which connects him to the realms
of the imaginary and unconscious, both
important to Duras. In Part I, the nar-
rator is vacationing in Italy with Jacque-
line, his lover of two years. Between
bouts of intense heat and heavy alcohol
consumption, he realizes that he wants
to start a new life and not return to
France. He breaks up with Jacqueline af-
ter meeting the rich owner of a yacht
named Gibraltar. Jacqueline, a sympa-
thetic character, vents her anger because
she knows there is another woman; nev-
ertheless, he is determined to leave with
the new woman and taste the “wine of
freedom.”

In Part II, “he” is very receptive to
“her” (also nameless until later, where
she is called Anna). She invites him to
join her in her occupation: “I am look-
ing for someone.” That someone is a
sailor from Gibraltar with whom she had
a passionate affair three years earlier. He
decides to join Anna in her search for
the man of her obsession, while he
begins to become preoccupied with her.
Although Anna does have “a special
fidelity” to the sailor, she realizes that
this obsessive search is an end in itself.
“It’s strange, but I never ask myself what
I'd do if I found him.” The quest con-
tinues, the sailor eludes them, and the
narrator continues on with Anna and
her crew, making this a novel with no
real closure, a technique common to the
nouveau roman.

Already themes such as obsessive love,
desire, abandonment, and loss, accom-
panied by narration restricted to in-
dividual situations and lack of closure,
are evident in this early Duras novel.

The Ravishing of Lol Stein (1964) is, by
far, the most complex of the novels con-
sidered here. Duras believes it to be a
turning point in her career and one of
her most frightening novels because she
wrote it during a detoxification from al-
cohol abuse and because the theme of
madness is developed. This novel is am-
bitious in its attempt to articulate the
realm of the unconscious. Also, themes
such as love, abandonment, memory,
repetition of events, madness, desire,
and the erotic are further explored here.

Lol Stein is the abandoned woman par
excellence. The narrator is Jack Hold, or
the “narrator narrated,” as Sharon Willis
labels him. Therefore, the “I” is male
and he discredits all previous accounts of
Lol’s life. Jack Hold begins his story by
flashback to the actual abandonment
scene at Town Beach casino at a dance.
Lol is jilted by her fiancé, Michael
Richardson, for another woman, Anne-
Marie Stretter. Lol, who is known to suf-
fer from mental illness, freezes the pain
of her abandonment in her mind and
becomes victim to an obsessive playback
of this tragic event for the next ten
years. During that time, Lol Stein mar-
ries John Bedford, a man who has a
penchant for “broken-hearted women.”
He takes her to another city, and they
have three daughters. Lol experiences a
relatively calm existence until she and
her husband decide to move back to the
town, South Tahla, and live in her
parents' house.

After returning to South Tahla, Lol
reconstructs the pain of that awful
memory. During one of her frequent
walks, she begins spying on Tatiana
Karl, her childhood friend who was
present at the Town Beach casino
dance, and her lover, Jack Hold. Lol
“watches these lovers, she devours them
with her eyes, she invents them.” Lol
displays a new “initiative” that surprises
her husband. Seeing Tatiana again has
repercussions for Lol, and she gets back
in touch with her. Tatiana then invites
Lol and John and Jack Hold to dinner at
her house. The theme of the love tri-
angle begins to develop after the dinner,
when Lol again spies on Tatiana and
Jack Hold. A complicated reversal oc-
curs when Jack later becomes enamored
of Lol and makes love to her. Lol lies to
Tatiana about seeing Jack, Tatiana
threatens not to see Jack again, and she
calls Lol a lunatic. Now Jack is obsessed
with Lol. A breakthrough occurs for Lol
because her memory of the past has
grown. Jack Hold agrees to travel back
to Town Beach casino with Lol and wit-
nesses Lol exploring her past. She is
mentally ill because of attacks she has
there. Tatiana was right. Lol encourages
Jack to continue to see Tatiana and the
novel ends with Lol staring at the two
lovers from outside. As Sharon Willis
proposes, love circulates in Duras’s love
triangles.

The Vice-Consul (1966) is in the same
cycle of writing as The Ravishing of Lol
Stein, with hysteria depicted in a male
character. Two separate plots are artfully
interwoven in this “novel within a
novel” narrated by Peter Morgan, a
friend of the ambassador. One is the nar-
ration of the beggar woman’s exile from
her homeland and her mother’s house

because she is pregnant and consequent-
ly an outcast. The other is the narration
of the vice-consul, who is also a pariah,
at the Calcutta embassy where he has
been transferred.

While the story of the beggar woman
frames that of the vice-consul in an at-
mosphere of loss and separation, of
maternity, and of the force of the
natural world against which the beggar
woman struggles to survive, his account
is localized in Calcutta. He is haunted
by his “frightening” reputation at his last
embassy job in Lahore. He suffers from
nervous depression and fits of rage; he is
described as having an unpleasant voice,
common among hysterics; and “his face
is blank.” He becomes obsessed with
Anne-Marie Stretter, the ambassador’s
wife, who is a recurring character from
Lol Stein.

The climax of the novel occurs at a
reception at the ambassador’s house. As
the hostess, Anne-Marie Stretter must
dance with all of her new male guests.
The vice-consul has too much to drink.
When Stretter pulls away from him
while dancing, his fit of rage is heard by
all present. “Don’t leave me!” In Duras’s
novels, the cry is highly significant be-
cause in psychoanalysis it emerges from
deep within the unconscious. As a char-
acter, the vice-consul is considered
closer to the “feminine.” He inhabits the
world of the hysteric and the mad in
Duras’s work. His transfer is inevitable
at the end of the novel.

L'Amante Anglaise (1967) was pub-
lished one year after The Vice-Consul.
This detective novel is divided into
three neatly organized parts. In Part I, a
savage murder committed in a small
town named Viorne is close to being
solved. Separate parts of a mutilated
female body, found in cargo portions of
trains all over France, are reassembled
by police. Identification is not possible
as the head is missing. The detective in
charge is equipped with two tape re-
corders: one gives conversations in a
local café five days after the murder, and
the other records further investigation as
preparation for a book about the crime.
Duras’s sophisticated technique of a
“novel within a novel” helps unravel the
crime and strips away the layers of
speculative language that hide the truth.
By the end of this part, Claire Lannes,
known as a “harmless lunatic” who lived
with Pierre, her husband, confesses to
the murder of Marie-Thérèse Bousquet,
her “deaf and dumb” cousin.

In Part II, information about Claire’s
psychology is obtained from her hus-
band, Pierre. Her motive according to
him “was just that she was mad.” We
also learn that Claire left her native
town of Cahors after the end of a love

MARGUERITE DURAS

By Marguerite Duras
with Jacques Lacan, Maurice Blanchot,
Xaviere Gauthier, Dionys Mascolo, & Others.

In essays and interviews, Duras discusses the personal
and political concerns that inform her films, scripts, and novels.
Includes the shooting script and working notes to India Song.
$9.95

ie

a recent publication from

CITY LIGHTS BOOKS

Available at better bookstores & through City Lights Mail Order
26

1 Columbus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94

133

Winter 1989