Not That Story Again

Tending to Virginia, by Jill McCorkle. Algonquin Books (Chapel Hill, NC 27515), 1987,

$15.95, 312 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

Tending to Virginia is one of those

intricate Southern family sagas

that requires you to memorize
the genealogy provided on the opening
page. Otherwise you will never re-
member who is whose sister’s husband,
which children belong to whom, and
how they all managed to be related in
the first place.

The family here are the Pearson sis-
ters, Emily and Lena, their dead sister-
in-law Tessy, their dead husbands, their
children, and their children’s children.
Virginia is Emily’s granddaughter, who
has left home to live with her law stu-
dent husband, Mark, in North
Carolina. “Barefoot and pregnant,” she
mopes in their rented house, homesick
for her family, disgusted with her physi-
cal condition and alienated from Mark
because she has discovered that his first
wife left him. “You told me your divorce
was mutual, a joint mistake,” she ac-
cuses him. Whether she is more tor-
mented by being married to someone
else’s “mistake” or by the fact that Mark
might still love this other woman is
never made clear.

One afternoon, after painting a nur-
sery mural with vultures, snakes, and
parasites instead of the cheerful cartoon
characters she had planned, Virginia
gives up, gets in the car, and drives
home. “Home” is Saxapaw, one of those
somnolent small towns perched on a
river bank where entire families can still
be discovered living within a five-mile
radius. Desperate to return to the se-
curity she knew as a child in “Gram’s
house,” Virginia arrives at Gram’s dup-
lex (her house has been torn down to
make way for a Piggly Wiggly), col-
lapses, and thus provides the catalyst for
a convention of her female relatives.

The women tending to Virginia are
Gram and Lena, both suffering from Alz-
heimer’s disease and no longer able to
care for themselves; Tessy’s daughter
Madge, a widowed dental hygienist; her
daughter Cindy, a wise-cracking, brassy
medical secretary who lives for her
weekly romantic assignations in the
local Ramada Inn parking lot; and Vir-

Jill McCorkle

ginia’s mother Hannah, the family Rock
of Gibraltar, who has just retired from
her profitable sewing business. The
memories, distortions, and reveries of
these women provide the dramatic heart
of the novel. Virginia, in fact, slips out
of importance soon after her arrival. In-
stead the story is taken over by a rather
aggressively presented family mythol-
ogy, pieced together by her relatives like
something at a quilting bee.

As Gram and Lena weave in and out
of reality, portraits of the men in the
family begin to emerge. Both women are
still intensely preoccupied with their
lost husbands, whom they remember as
perfect mates: “ ‘Fireworks,’ Lena said. ‘I
met Roy Carter and it was fireworks.’ ”
These husbands end up rather more like
icons than men, however. Madge’s hus-
band Raymond, who committed
suicide, is the only male character to
come truly alive. Literally worshiped by
Cindy, mythologized by himself into a
reincarnation of King Tut (he even had
himself buried in a tomb along with a
new widescreen color TV), Raymond
comes forth as pathetically human when
Madge finally tells Cindy the truth
about him and their relationship. “He
was a very sick man,” she says anti-
climactically.

Ellen Terry:
Player in Her Time
by Nina Auerbach

New York: Norton, 1987, $22.50, 504 pp.,
illustrations

The most popular parlor game in-
dulged in by a reader of the biography
or autobiography of a major celebrity is
that of discerning between the public
and private lives — the mask versus the
human being. This impeccably re-
searched study of the Victorian actress
Ellen Terry is no exception. In what
appears to be the seminal study for this
volume, Nina Auerbach wrote in her fas-
cinating Woman and the Demon: The Life
of a Victorian Myth: “In a censorious age
Ellen Terry attracted a general reverence

the actress unleashes divine-de-
monic womanhood.”

Auerbach presents Terry’s life as a
series of intriguing dichotomies. But it
is in the descriptions of her love/hate
relationships with her illegitimate chil-
dren, Edward Gordon Craig and Edith
Craig, that this volume takes on its most
amazing colors. “Teddy” was promiscu-
ous to a remarkable degree, dumping his
ex-wives, ex-mistresses, and children on
Ellen Terry to be cared for. His austere
sister “Edy” with her group of feminist
radicals was the one who looked after
the actress when she was dying, blind

12 Belles Lettres

and mad. Teddy, a hedonistic Peter Pan,
essentially destroyed his mother both fi-
nancially and professionally; she, in an
excess of Victorian hero worship and ex-
coriation of his hysterical flights of fan-
tasy, ruined him as a human being. The
stolid, unimaginative Edy was her
mother’s mainstay, even though her
mother cruelly repudiated her attempts
at love and nurture.

This very long but rewarding book is
lavishly illustrated and appended with a
valuable chronology as well as bibli-
ography and index. Her publishers
rewarded Auerbach with a stunning re-
plication of Terry’s own letters, which
included double-, triple-, and even
quadruple-underscorings, as well as ec-
centric capitalizations and drawings.
This book’s strength lies, perhaps, in
Virginia Woolf’s exegesis as quoted by
Auerbach: “While other actors are re-
membered because they were Hamlet,
Phédre, or Cleopatra, Ellen Terry is re-
membered because she was Ellen Terry.”

— Ellen Terry

Editors’ Note: Reviewer Ellen Terry
wrote to say that she does have a birth cer-
tificate to prove that Ellen Terry is her legiti-
mate name. “I have listened all my life to
stale jokes and comments about George
Bernard Shaw, Henry Irving, and the il-
legitimate kids.”

Cindy is the one character who resists
revisiting the past. “Every time I come
over here, ya’ll start on those depressing
stories,” she tells the assemblage. “This
family is full of death.” She has a point.
There is something slightly ghoulish
about this family’s determination to in-
voke the past. In fact, the pivotal scene,
in which everyone seems to have a reve-
lation to make, occurs during a terrific
rainstorm when a power failure obliges
them all to talk séance-style over candle
light.

McCorkle tries hard to create a living
mythology as a way to show how the
past informs the present in our lives. Yet
this intention becomes so obvious that
it becomes unwieldy. The characters
seem to know each other’s stories al-
ready; the retelling feels staged. “I
know, I know, that dogwood tree story.
You have told it so many times I can say
it by heart,” Cindy tells Virginia. We
get the feeling that we have heard a lot
of these stories before, too.

Tending to Virginia winds up very
neatly, with everyone’s life aired out.
Indeed, the end effect is of having sorted
through a trunk of old clothes, salvaging
a few interesting items to be dry cleaned
and packing the rest tidily away again in
the attic. Virginia goes happily back to
Mark, dismissing all of her former con-
fusion and resentment as “something
psychological.” Cindy and Madge are
reconciled. Gram and Lena return to
their rocking chairs. Life in Saxapaw
goes on.

McCorkle is an interesting writer.
This novel has considerable lyrical
power at times; the scenes where Gram
remembers herself as a young bride and
then as a new widow are particularly
moving. Yet there are so many main
characters that we never have time to
get truly attached to any particular one.
And for all its memories and reflections,
the pace of the book as a whole is curi-
ously inert — not unlike Virginia lying
on Gram’s sofa in a semi-daze. What you
find yourself waiting for, by the end of
300 pages, is to be genuinely startled.

@ Suzanne Berne is a writer living in
California.

Lucha
by Constance Urdang

Coffee House Press (Box 10870, Min-
neapolis, MN 55450), 1986, 94 pp. (PB)

Serious fiction never merely evokes an
exotic culture, yet the sense of such a
culture often increases the work’s appeal.
Constance Urdang’s Lucha, a spare and
haunting novella about a family of Mexi-
can women, both appeals to the reader’s
desire for insight into another culture and
suggests that such insights may be deceptive.

The main character, Liz Filomena, is
nicknamed Lucha because she is “always
a great one for struggling with the world.”
The only girl in her family to attend Sec-
undaria, she fights to escape “the fruitless
drudgery that was her birthright,” to leave
the ranch for town, to marry her boss, to
enter the middle class. If such a life seems
banal to liberal readers who take for
granted the material and social advantages
Lucha seeks, it does not seem so to Lucha
and her family. Childless, Lucha brings
her niece Nieves to town. But Nieves’s
life is the reverse of Lucha’s; she retreats
from the school that makes her ill for
home, the courtyard, and babies. It is not
Nieves’s choice but a more profound
tragedy that alters Lucha’s vision, reveal-
ing a “bleak, rejecting earth” where “the
struggle to live” may be the only answer.

The women’s lives and their tragedy
appear against the poetically imagined
landscape of the central Mexican plateau:
the “monotonous grandeur” of the moun-
tains, the colonial town of restored
Spanish houses and the pastel houses of
the poor that are “pockmarked by bullets
or the weather,” the town with bougain-
villea in the courtyard and garbage in the
streets. Lucha’s long-time friend, the ex-
patriate gringa, Blanche, appears a small
figure in the foreground of that landscape.
She ascribes the tragedy to failure of
bureaucracy; her point of view from the
developed world is pale next to Lucha’s
profound despair.

Sympathetic and informed, Blanche
remains an outsider who does not under-
stand. Lucha reveals to readers a world
occasionally glimpsed through a door left
ajar. Yet the figure of Blanche suggests
the limits of understanding. Ironically,
this resonant book is itself the strongest
retort to the implications of Blanche’s
limited view.

— Helen W. Power

Latest Issue:

Further
Information:

FRONTIERS

A Journal of Women Studies

FRONTIERS, a feminist journal, publishes substantive
and accessible articles, essays, short fiction, interviews,
literary reviews, photography, and book and film
reviews that appeal to both academic and community
audiences. Although issues often have a cluster of ar-
ticles addressing a specific theme, FRONTIERS always
welcomes unsolicited contributions on any topic of in-
terest and encourages interdisciplinary and collabora-
tive articles as well as creative work.

“Women in the
American South”

Upcoming Issues: “Women and Words”
and “Women and
Worth”

FRONTIERS
Women Studies Program

Campus Box 325

University of Colorado at
Boulder

Boulder, CO 80309-0325

(303) 492-3205

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988