Belles Lettres

P. O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  
301/294-0278  

¥  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

°  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR/DESIGNER  
°  
Dorothy Abbott  
Kamili Anderson  
Jane Bakerman  
Regina Barreca  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Laura Hapke  
Helaine Harris  
Susan Koppelman  
Shirley Geok-lin Lim  
Faye Moskowitz  
Leslie A. Moushey  
Roberta R. Rubenstein  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
2  
Jeanne Casey  
Adele Gorelick  
Carmen Johnson  
Andrea Lapin  
Catherine McDermott  
Joyce Murdoch  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
¢  

Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) is  
published four times a year in January,  
April, July, and October. Available by  
subscription and distributed by Inland  
Book Company, East Haven, CT;  
Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and  
Ubiquity Distribution, Brooklyn, NY.  
Member of the Coordinating Council of  
Literary Magazines. Indexed by Book  
Review Index. Funded in part by the  
Virginia Commission for the Arts.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of books  
written by women, published by trade,  
university, and independent presses.  
Both scholarly and popular works are  
reviewed in the genres of fiction,  
nonfiction, poetry, biography, and  
criticism. Our purpose is to promote and  
celebrate literature by women and in  
doing so, to inform and entertain. All  
views expressed herein are those of the  
individual authors.  

Correspondence  

Editorial correspondence and books for  
review should be sent to Janet Mullaney  
at 11151 Captain’s Walk Ct.,  
Gaithersburg, MD 20878, except for  
poetry books and queries (send to  
Michelle Tokarczyk, 601 N. Utah St.,  
Baltimore, MD 21201) and mysteries  
(send to Jane Bakerman, RR 23, Box  
131, Terre Haute, IN 47802). Con-  
tributors should query first, send clips,  
and enclose SASE. Send subscription  
requests and inquiries to Karen T.  
Jenkins, 785 Verbenia Dr., Satellite  
Beach, FL 32937. Subscription Rates:  
$30 for institutions; $15 for individuals;  
$12.50 for students with photocopy of  
ID; foreign +$9. Sample Issue: $2.  

Advertising  

Camera-ready display advertising (stats  
or veloxes) preferred. If other forms are  
accepted, appropriate charges will be  
made. Deadline for space reservations is  
two months preceding the month of is-  
sue. Write for rate card or call (301)  
294-0278.  

©Belles Lettres Inc.  

Crime Report  
by Dorothy Sucher  

Women who kill and the readers who love  
them were networking and signing and buy-  
ing books in the Washington, D. C., suburbs  
last April at Malice Domestic, the first of an  
annual regional convention honoring the  
traditional “cozy” mystery. Not that you had  
to be a woman to attend — but it has long  
been an open secret that there is something  
of a split along gender lines in the tastes of the  
mystery community, with female readers and  
writers tending to prefer the manse to the  
mean streets, the vicarage to the Vice Squad,  
and the puzzle to the perversion of the  
month. Nor is it a secret that the reviews, the  
awards, and the big publicity campaigns tend  
to go to men, although an estimated sixty to  
eighty percent of mystery book purchasers are  
women. Malice Domestic is an attempt to  
address this inequity. Of the 300 partici-  
pants, some thirty were writers and the rest  
were fans, with a sprinkling of editors,  
agents, and booksellers.  

Hovering over the proceedings was the  
spirit of the Ghost of Honor, Agatha Chris-  
tie, to whom affectionate tribute was paid at  
a banquet where the first Agatha Awards  
honoring excellence in traditional mystery  
fiction were given to Carolyn Hart for  
Something Wicked (best novel), Elizabeth  
George for A Great Deliverance (best first  
novel), and Robert Barnard for “More Final  
than Divorce” (best short story). Among the  
criteria for nomination, in addition to high  
literary quality, were a downplaying of overt  
violence and a focus on character develop-  
ment and atmosphere. As a fan from Chicago  
commented, “We don’t care for the kick 'em  
in the groin school.”  

A breakfast was sponsored by Sisters in  
Crime, an organization dedicated to further-  
ing the careers of women in the mystery field.  
Although only three years old, it has 600  
members and is growing rapidly. President  
Nancy Pickard, whose most recent book is  
Dead Crazy, welcomed participants and in-  
troduced Sharyn McCrumb, author of  
Bimbos of the Death Sun (winner of last year’s  
Edgar for Best Paperback Mystery), who  
spoke on the publicity methods or lack  
thereof of publishing houses, remarking that  
“publishers publish books the way the Indians  
planted corn, they just throw them out  
there,” and explaining to the assembled  
“cozy” lovers and creators, “What we have to  
do is figure out how to be so ubiquitous that  
people have to buy us even if they don’t want  
to.” The tab for the breakfast was picked up  
by Pocket Books, publisher of Pickard’s pop-  
ular Jenny Cain series. Present was publicist  
Christian Waters who said that his firm is in  
the forefront of the movement to give more  
adequate recognition to women mystery  
writers. “You can see it’s a movement,” he  
commented, “from the amount of resistance.  
Take the current editorial in Armchair Detec-  
tive that says, in effect, ‘nice try, girls, but  
you’re barking up the wrong tree.’ There’s a  
lot of misogyny in the field. The big women  
mystery writers are all English and it  
shouldn’t be that way. There are many good  
American women writers.” At least at Malice  
Domestic, there were no arguments with that  
judgment.  

@ Dorothy Sucher’s Dead Men Don’t Give  
Seminars was an Agatha nominee for best first  
mystery. Her new novel is Dead Men Don't  
Marry.  

Notes from  
the Editor  

We thank you for being so patient in waiting  
for this issue, which (in newspaper parlance)  
we had a devil of a time putting to bed (typi-  
cal five-year-old). This special double issue  
format does not, however, augur a future  
reduction in frequency. We had some major  
setbacks this summer, including two national  
conferences, major grantwriting efforts, and  
one of our editors undergoing brain surgery.  
We hope you will agree that it was worth the  
wait. See you next year!  

THIS SPACE CAN BE YOURS!  

We welcome readers’ comments, responses,  
criticisms, and so on regarding the features  
that appear in the pages of Belles Lettres.  

CONTENTS @  

INDIA & PAKISTAN  

2 Mistaken Identity and Rich Like Us  

VOLUME 4/NUMBER 4  

50/97 RADE Sa ESSE e by Nayantara Sahgal  

Daughters of Independence: Gender, Caste, and Class in India  

3 Meatless Days..........00000s ees  

eee by Joanna Liddle and Rama Joshi  
BSG DyAGILENG (hart MOOS by Sara Suleri  

The Blindfold Horse: Memories of a Persian Childhood  

a RG EATAS TRIBE BT by Shusha Guppy  

Sultana’s Dream and Selections from The Secluded Ones  

4 Dislocations..............-.005-  
Baumgartner’s Bombay ..........  

REPRINTS  

6 Islanders................0 20000  
The Wide, Wide World ..........  
The Lamplighter..............5.  
The Stairway..........0...0005.  
My Mother Gets Married.........  

ASIAN WRITERS  

12 The Joy Luck Club..............  
Interview with Cheng Naishan.....  

13 Tripmaster Monkey: His Fake Book  
Interview with Wang Anyi........  

REVIEWS  

eee ees by Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain  
sa WB Bie nays exes ee by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala  

Boe eoSUSD One. by Janette Turner Hospital  
eee eee e eee een ee by Anita Desai  

nnn by Helen Hull  
cece eect e eee eee by Susan Warner  
POR ER EATS by Maria Susanna Cummins  
cece eee by Alice A. Chown  
BO e aN Sn C=Omeoe by Moa Martinson  

20.8) 0205050 BOGE SAE aEeG by Amy Tan  
Lees conducted by Shirley Geok-lin Lim  

rn by Maxine Hong Kingston  

See conducted by Shirley Geok-lin Lim  

5 A Friend from England and Latecomers............... by Anita Brookner  

Albany Park and Another City....  

7 How I Got Him Back............  
A Virtuous Woman .............  

RR Eine em tatas DRS by Patrice Chaplin  

rn by Valerie Sayers  
Lee eee cence by Kaye Gibbons  

8 No Man’s Land: The Place of the Woman Writer in the Twentieth Century.  

Volume II: Sexchanges ..........  

by Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar  

9 Is the Future Female? Troubled Thoughts on Contemporary Feminism  

Lecce cece eee by Lynne Segal  

Inessential Woman: Problems of Exclusion in Feminist Thought  

Fa SUE pet Ee RCESIe) nya BEC Ce Ser Ueriry One ee by Elizabeth Spellman  
The Demon Lover: On the Sexuality of Terrorism....... by Robin Morgan  
Ruth Benedict: Stranger in This Land............ by Margaret M. Caffrey  

Sexual Science: Victorian Constructions of Womanhood by Cynthia Russett  
The Sound of Our Own Voices: Women’s Study Clubs, 1860-1910  

ii dtime swnes by Theodora Penny Martin  

The Shape of Red: Insider/Outsider Reflections  

by Ruth Hubbard and Margaret Randall  

Uprooting Poverty: The South African Challenge  
PHiRe C08 es ew EE OH EWES EEE OD by Francis Wilson and Mamphela Ramphele  

eee e cece teen eens by Erida Friedl  

10 New Selected Poems of Stevie Smith  
Emerald Ice: Selected Poems......  
The Silence Now .........--...-  
Blood Pressure .......05-0+++555  

DC een au Hegre ney ade by Stevie Smith  

beeen eee eee by Diane Wakowski  
Lene eee eee eee by May Sarton  
eee by Sandra M. Gilbert  

14 Prisons We Choose to Live Inside; The Doris Lessing Reader; and  

The Fifth Child. .s:cncassaen cus  

SiG MEM SR PRAMEOE FEES! by Doris Lessing  

Rereading Doris Lessing: Narrative Patterns of Doubling and Repetition  

16 Radical by Design...........-54  
The Prosperine Papers...........  
A Place at the Table.............  

Lee eee eee by Claire Sprague  

FA REINA TOI ERAS by Bettina Berch  
EOE USED e 8 UOC Cenoe by Jan Clausen  
edt emniieme vmre edd ® by Edith Konecky  

17. Positions with White Roses and Thirteen Stories....... by Ursule Molinaro  

The Magician’s Girl .............  

18 Leaving Brooklyn ...............  
Woodpecker Point and Other Stories  

20 Women, Culture, and Politics .....  

eis} cainmama ememame by Doris Grumbach  
Sob e cece by Lynne Sharon Schwartz  

i) worameme veamema cil by Carmel Bird  

Lecce eens by Angela Y. Davis  

21 American Women Writing Fiction: Memory, Identity, Family, Space  

COLUMNS  

Lecce cece eens by Mickey Pearlman  
Leben eee ee ee by Jane Vandenburgh  

11 Belles Lettres Interview: Irini Spanidou  
15 The Criminal Element + by Jane Bakerman  

19 Rediscovery: Norah Hoult  
22 Impressions: Lesbian Presses  
22 Author Index to Volume IV  

On the Cover: Helen R. Hull (1888-1971), American author of seventeen novels and  

sixty-five short stories.  

Letters that enlighten and/or entertain will  
be printed on this page in the Readers’ Fo-  
rum, to the extent that space allows. Cor-  
respondence concerning women and writing  
in general will also be considered. And as  
always, we are happy to hear your suggestions  
for theme sections, special features, and  

writers you would like to see covered in in-  
terviews, retrospectives, and rediscoveries.  
Be sure to send change of address notices  
and renewal information and inquiries to  
Karen T. Jenkins, Subscription Manager,  
785 Verbenia Drive, Satellite Beach, FL  
32937, and not to our editorial offices.  

Belles Lettres @ 1