You May Plow Here: The  
Narrative of Sara Brooks  
edited by Thordis Simonsen  

New York: Norton, 1986, $12.95, 222 pp.  

Research in Afro-American studies is  
often undermined by the unavailability  
or inaccessibility of primary source mate-  
rials. Abolitionist editors, 20th-century  
Afro-American researchers, and the  
Federal Writers Project’s narrative pro-  
jects of the 1940s have diligently re-  
trieved much of the substance for a first-  
hand look at Black life in early America.  
Similarly, crucial aspects of Black his-  
tory from the Civil War through the  
civil rights period are locked away in the  
minds of those who lived it, in danger  
of being lost forever. Oral histories sup-  
ply important missing evidence that is  
needed to reconstruct the more recent  
past.  

You May Plow Here is important,  
therefore, because it exists. Second, the  
lifetime of memories, facts, and perspec-  
tives collected in this enjoyable text are  
of literary as well as historical value. Sara  
Brooks’s lively narrative tells of a life  
that is both unique and quite common  
to the Black experience. She recapitu-  
lates one Black woman’s involvement in  
the flow of history: her early life in the  
cultural world of the Jim Crow South, her  
participation in the Great Migration,  
and her adult trials and tribulations in  
the industrialized North.  

Born in Alabama in 1911 to a free-  
holder (a Black property owner),  
Brooks’s reflections on the tough but  
loving spirit that carried her father and  
her family through years of hardship are  
penetrating and instructive. Her telling  
of the independent life that she carved  
out for herself and her five children is a  
remarkable tale of the single-minded de-  
termination she inherited from her kin.  
More than merely recounting facts and  
places as she adapted to the radically  
different demands of city life, Brooks  

gives us deeper insight into how the  
thousands of Black immigrants made “a  
way outta no way.” Although many  
hedged “up South” with few material  
possessions, they survived — and some  
thrived — because they had trans-  
planted a rich cultural, spiritual, and  
ethical heritage to aid them in plowing  
out a niche for themselves in the North.  

Brooks served as a domestic in the  
Cleveland home of Thordis Simonsen’s  
family for almost 30 years. As an editor,  
Simonsen graciously refrains from im-  
posing her viewpoints upon the nar-  
rator’s tale, preferring instead to render  
Brooks’s narrative as faithfully as possi-  
ble. She does a commendable job of or-  
ganizing these 10 years of transcriptions  
and in retaining the flavor of colloquial  
Black speech.  

The book’s biggest failing is that, by  
omission of perspective, it propels the  
narrator’s fervently spoken words into a  
void. I disagree with the comments made  
in the foreword by Harvard child  
psychologist Robert Coles that “this  
book is the last one to require yet  
another smug or patronizing interpreta-  
tive summary from one of our all too  
abundant and authoritative social scien-  
tists.” His reflections are not scholarly;  
they are condescending. Coles sounds  
much like other White male historians,  
who for centuries off-handedly dis-  
counted the earlier narratives of ex-  
slaves as having only anecdotal value  
and no historical worth. By their refusal  
to take the factual and personal perspec-  
tives of the oppressed seriously, these  
men held history captive for years. You  
May Plow Here is vivid “herstory,” of  
value to historians and social scientists,  
and to literary scholars as well. I would  
not like to see the unfortunate trend of  
the past repeated as we unveil our second  
generation of narratives.  

— Kamili Anderson  

Heartbreak Hotel  
by Gabrielle Burton  

New York: Scribner's, 1986, $15.95,  
303 pp.  

Winner of the Maxwell Perkins prize for  
a first novel of exceptional merit,  
Heartbreak Hotel can best be described  
as a madcap feminist fantasy. Its time  
period is the near future, its setting Buf-  
falo. The novel’s cast features a colorful  
cross-section of every type of female  
adaptation, funny and sad, to the warp-  
ing influences of male-dominated soci-  
ety. Heartbreak Hotel, a rest-leave  
home for employees of a unique  
museum, boasts among its residents a  
right-wing cheerleader, a depressed  
comedian, a lush, a tough-talking  
policewoman, and a nymphomaniac  
who is always getting her long hair  
caught in her vibrator. This unlikely  
group of women find themselves united  
throughout the novel by two impending  
crises: the near-death of their hunch-  
back co-worker Quasi, the victim of a  
hit-and-run accident, and the threat-  
ened closing of the museum by the City  
Fathers.  

The real focus of the novel, though,  
is the Museum of the Revolution, for  
which they work as tour guides, adminis-  
trators, and living exhibits. This huge,  
highly popular institution showcases all  
the absurdities of women’s history and  
the growing-up experiences of girls.  
There is, for example, an exhibit named  
The Menstrual Show (performed in red-  
face), the Up Your Ess Room (for poetes-  
ses, Jewesses, temptresses, and so on),  
a whole block devoted to All the Lies  
Mothers Tell Their Daughters and  
Daughters Tell Their Mothers, and a  
cafeteria in which visitors can eat only  

14 @ Belles Lettres  

Gabrielle Burton. Photo by Bruce Jackson.  

the foods that women never order on  
dates because they are too fattening, ex-  
pensive, or messy.  

Clearly, Heartbreak Hotel is both  
comic and painful, a succession of  
chuckles and clicks of recognition. It is  
worth reading both for the jokes, which  
abound on every manic page, and for  
the insights, which are equally plentiful.  
It is an original, delightful, freewheeling  
tour de force; one hopes that Burton will  
write more in this vein.  

The novel has, however, a couple of  
minor flaws — it is plotted in a cumber-  
some, often confusing manner, and  
some of the characters could have been  
more sharply developed. These defects  
in structure and characterization have  
the unfortunate effect of making the  
novel seem more like a series of sketches  
in a review than a full-fleshed work of  
fiction. Heartbreak Hotel is, in a sense,  
a one-joke novel, intricately elaborated.  
However, the joke is well worth relish-  
ing and passing on because the experi-  
ences that generate it form the bases of  
women’s lives.  

— Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger  

A Literary Life  

By James Woodress  

Willa Cather: A Literary Life is the first detailed, completed portrait of  
this major American writer. The author of such classics as My Antonia  
and Death Comes for the Archbishop was in love with life. Willa Cather: A  
Literary Life gives us her passions, prejudices, and quirks of personality.  
Thoroughly grounded in Cather's writings, which were autobiographical  
to an uncommon degree, this volume will stand as the definitive biog-  
raphy of her for years to come. October. ca. 660 pages. Foreword, notes,  
photographs, index. $35.00  

Available at bookstores or from  

NEBRASKA  

The University of Nebraska Press-901 N 17-Lincoln 68588-0520  

Announcing a new series  

European Women Writers  

Marion Faber, Alice Jardine, Susan Kirkpatrick, and Olga Ragusa, editors  

Woman to Woman  
(Les Parleuses)  
By Marguerite Duras and Xaviére Gauthier  
Translated by Katherine A. Jensen  
“Marguerite Duras is, without doubt, one of the most important  
French writers of the 20th century. One of her most important and  
widely read books is not a novel or screenplay, but this interview  
with Xaviére Gauthier. It is an underground classic, absolutely  
essential for an understanding of Duras's work in general."—Alice  
Jardine, Harvard University. October. ca. 190 pages. Preface,  
afterword, notes. $16.95  

Nothing Grows by Moonlight  
By Torborg Nedreaas  
Translated by Bibbi Lee  
"I could not put this book down. It is a book that makes any sensitive  
reader anxious. That is its great power. Both men and women will  
find it gripping and revealing and will be grateful for the experi-  
ence."—Mary Kay Norseng, UCLA. "Compelling. An important  
narrative of one woman's attempt to overcome her psychological  
predisposition to masochistic dependence."—Marion Faber,  
Swarthmore College. December. ca. 210 pages. Afterword. $14.95  

Available at bookstores or from  

NEBRASKA  

The University of Nebraska Press-901 N 17-Lincoln 68588-0520  

May/June 1987