Belles Lettres

11151 Captain’s Walk Ct.  
North Potomac, MD 20878  
301/294-0278  

¥  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  
°  
Andrea Dale Lapin  
ASSISTANT EDITOR  

oJ  

Dorothy Abbott  
Kamili Anderson  
Eleanor J. Bader  
Jane Bakerman  
Regina Barreca  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary K. Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Laura Hapke  
Joanne Jimason  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Susan Koppelman  
Shirley Geok-lin Lim  
Faye Moskowitz  
Leslie A. Moushey  
Deborah Price  
Roberta R. Rubenstein  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS  
Helaine Harris  
CONSULTING EDITOR  
o  

Lisa Dreyfus  
Travis Koplow  
Joyce Murdoch  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
°  
Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) is  
published four times a year in January,  
April, July, and October. Available by  
subscription and distributed by Inland  
Book Company, East Haven, CT;  
Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and  
Ubiquity Distribution, Brooklyn, NY.  
Member of the Coordinating Council of  
Literary Magazines. Indexed by Book  
Review Index and Women’s Studies Index  
(G.K. Hall). Available in University  
Microfilms Underground Press collection.  
Funded in part by the Virginia  
Commission for the Arts and the Na-  
tional Endowment for the Arts.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres reviews books written by  
women, published by trade, university,  
and independent presses in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, biography,  
and criticism. Regular columns feature  
reprints, mysteries, interviews, and  
publishing news. Belles Lettres exists to  
promote and celebrate literature by  
women and, in doing so, to inform and  
entertain. All views expressed herein  
are those of the individual authors.  

Correspondence  

Editorial correspondence and books for  
review should be sent to Janet Mullaney  
at 11151 Captain’s Walk Court, North  
Potomac, MD 20878, except for poetry  
books and queries (send to Michelle  
Tokarczyk, 601 N. Eutaw St., #716,  
Baltimore, MD 21201) and mysteries  
(send to Jane Bakerman, RR 23, Box  
131, Terre Haute, IN 47802). Con-  
tributors should query first, send clips,  
and enclose SASE. Send subscription  
requests and inquiries to Karen T.  
Jenkins, 785 Verbenia Dr., Satellite  
Beach, FL 32937. Subscription Rates:  
$40 for institutions; $20 for individuals;  
$15 for students with photocopy of ID;  
foreign +$9. Sample Issue: $3.  

Advertising  

Camera-ready display advertising (stats  
or veloxes) preferred. If other forms are  
accepted, appropriate charges will be  
made. Deadline for space reservations is  
two months preceding the month of is-  
sue. ©1990 Belles Lettres Inc.  

Spring 1990  

Letters to the Editor  
Re. the review by Eleanor J. Bader of Lucy  
Ellmann’s Sweet Desserts. I was surprised  
to see the author referred to only as the  
“daughter of Richard Ellmann, respected  
biographer of James Joyce and Oscar  
Wilde.” When I registered the name, I  
thought to myself, instead, is this the daugh-  
ter of Mary Ellmann, who wrote the mar-  
velous book Thinking About Women  
(1986)? Mary was the wife of Richard, and  
since I don’t know much about either of  
them, I suppose it’s possible Lucy is his  
daughter by another marriage. But any-  
way, in Belles Lettres, I would have hoped  
to see Mary get some credit, if she is indeed  
Lucy’s mom. (Thinking About Women  
may be out of print. I have a yellowing  
paperback, which I cherish.)  

—Michelle Slung  
The information Ms. Bader had on Ms.  
Ellmann was confined to the book jack-  
et, so we are grateful to Ms. Slung for  
both maternal lineage and a book tip.  

The death of Ifphigene Sulzberger (called  
“If” by her family) was announced  
in the New York Times on February 27 in  
a long story. If controlled, through her fa-  
ther’s estate, the majority of the stock in our  
most influential newspaper, yet made cer-  
tain that her three daughters did not interfere  
with the right of their husbands and younger  
brother to run the company.  

If’s power was based on breaking the  
collective power of women in her family. In  
her background (according to the filtered  
information given in the Times) lies  
an identification with her father (her mother  
is barely mentioned) and an acceptance of  
his dictum that she could express opinions  
only when backed up by “the facts.” If  
probably never understood that “the facts”  
she was handed were opinions, attitudes,  
and points of view acceptable to the ruling  
white male elite. “Opinions” based on her  
experience as a girl and a woman — bearing  
children, for example — could not be ex-  
pressed or even believed because there were  
no “facts” to support them. So she was dis-  
empowered but given her father’s “love” as  
recompense, which translated into “stew-  
ardship” of his majority holdings.  

If’s daughters are directors of the New  
York Times Company, but they own only  
Class B stock, which has limited voting  
rights and must be offered to the relatives (at  
their price, presumably) if the owner wishes  
to sell. This “buy-back agreement” was sig-  
ned in 1986 to prevent “what happened at  
the Binghams’.” (The big dogs watch care-  
fully and learn from each others’ mistakes.)  

At the same time, Gallimard Publishers  
in Paris is “threatened” because the daugh-  
ter of the founder is questioning the way the  
company is run by her brother; she owns  
something like 13 percent of stock.  

What is striking here is the role of women  
as “owners and directors” of companies that  
they do not presume to own or direct. Un-  
like their male relatives, they must have, or  
at least express, no opinions about how the  
companies are run; they must not “gang up”  
to vote their meager holdings together; and  
they must not question their male relatives’  
judgment. In many cases, the women of the  
middle generation are kept in line by their  
mother, referred to as the “matriarch,” who  
protects traditional primogeniture. She is  
often very intelligent, with few connections  
to other women, and with a sense of humor  
that “defuses” her critical remarks and let-  
ters to the editor (If’s letters were run under  
the name of a dead relative or friend).  

How does this affect the majority of  
women who never approach the seats of  
power? As women make money in the ca-  
reers that have been forced to receive them,  
they invest in companies run by men and  
institute another phase of the cycle, perhaps  
uniting as shareholders to criticize and frus-  
trate women on the boards who threaten the  
company by speaking up.  

—Sallie Bingham  

CONTENTS  

IRISH WRITERS  

2 Territories of the Voice: Contemporary Stories by Irish Women  
Writers... edited by Louise DeSalvo, Kathleen D’Arcy, and Katherine Hogan  

VOLUME 5/NUMBER 3  

Women in Ireland. ........... 00. cece cence tenets by Jenny Beale  

1 I Am of Ireland: Women of the North Speak Out .... by Elizabeth Shannon  

3 Different Kinds of Love............ 020 s0s cence ee eee by Leland Bardwell  

My Head Is Opening 2 .asc5 seiwras ca eyaes cere sweaees by Evelyn Conlon  

rindi Ut Cpsigangqucnas evome bn oscsveosrsoccene SDE by Melissa Murray  

Blood and Water ........ 000s cee eee e ccc eee e tenes by Eilis Ni Dhuibhne  

4 The High Road.sssccsicsenswissanieswsenaninias evens by Edna O’Brien  

Garen Pear casnserensmsre ss nseys om ecsneewes emery by Molly Keane  

The Land of Spices and The Ante-Room.............0005 by Kate O’Brien  

5 Peggy Deery: An Irish Family at War .........0..0555 by Nell McCafferty  

The Other Side... 0.0.0.0 0c cece cee cnn ere een ene by Mary Gordon  

Dublin Belles. ........... 20. c ccc e eee ee en eee edited by Mairin Johnston  

Give Them Stones «02: cs0ciesciapaceeeandeneyae seewe by Mary Beckett  
SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE: AFRICA AND THE MIDDLE EAST  

12 Night Train to Mother............. BOO ae BaD SE EEE by Ronit Lentin  

Wald Thorns) s:s:ons02a5 coseres eerevesanewewees exes by Sahar Khalifeh  

Doing Daily Battle: Interviews with Moroccan Women. . by Fatima Mernissi  

13. Not Either an Experimental Doll ...........5.6.65 45400 by Shula Marks  

Lives of Courage: Women of a New South Africa ....by Diana E.H. Russell  
Elizabeth of Toro: The Odyssey of an African Princess  

aca Kwsama atmems emamund EREAISA heh EAEAR BO ESE RE by Elizabeth Nyabongo  
Another Year in Africa ... 0.060. cose cece eee eee eee eaes by Rose Zwi  
REVIEWS  
6 The Writing Life. .ccassucerasanseieserinsvsmaavinens by Annie Dillard  
Among Sisters: Short Stories by Women Writers . .. edited by Susan Cahill  
The One You Call Sister ...................04. edited by Paula Martinac  
Close Company: Stories of Mothers and Daughters  
;2RERTERERURATE CHEE CREM ES edited by Christine Park and Caroline Heaton  
7 Cosima .......-. 0. ccc eee ee cette e eee eees by Grazia Deledda  
Maria Zef inca cee gece ene esas baw I SS amie OE ARC ES m ERE by Paola Drigo  
A House in the Shadows .......0000. 00s cece eee eeeees by Maria Messina  
8 Genét: A Biography of Janet Flanner..............- by Brenda Wineapple  
White Girls. 25 useweog enquires eme@eneememyusa gen smn « by Lynn Lauber  
Falling Angels .........0 0.00. c cece eee eee eee eee by Barbara Gordy  
9 Cat’s Eye....... BS AEA cIRDAROC) OG ORRGO SIE Ord TIOGA AEDS by Margaret Atwood  
She Rises Like the Sun: Invocations of the Goddess by Contemporary  
American Women Poets............ 00+ 0000 eee edited by Janine Canan  
11 A Vindication of the Rights of Whores .......... edited by Gail Pheterson  
Working....5 2525i..0.cn bes stg RES Ades LEER NOSES ES by Dolores French  
20 Confessions of Love ........ 0.00. e cece eee ee eee ee by Uno Chiyo  
The End of Summers... ¢2csccceeaaabemawaad emawen by Harumi Setouchi  
Picture Bride 00.00.0000 cence nee e eee cee ee eene by Yoshiko Uchida  
The Floating World . 0.0.0.0... 00. c eee ee ee ees by Cynthia Kadohata  
Dixie Church Interstate Blues.............00-.0 002 ee eeee by Ingrid Hill  
22 Sister Git. ou ccs ec eee cos ween enw menememe euewamemns by June Armold  
23 Letters of a Woman Homesteader............... by Elinore Pruitt Stewart  
Great Plains Patchwork: A Memoir................05. by Marilyn Coffey  
Windfall and Other Stories ...............-.00-. by Winifred M. Sanford  
24 Unfinished Painting ..........6..0: 0002 cece eee eee eee by Mary Jo Salter  
Green the Witch-Hazel Wood........... 0.200000 e eee by Emily Hiestand  
‘The Sourlinds! 23:53... oa¢e¢se nate wise sete eal aRseees by Jana Harris  
Reractuamtiet eet etter e heat ener etre rrr mitre by Olga Broumas  
25 British Women Writers: An Anthology from the Fourteenth Century to the  
Presenticsi:2:e sews nese memswrasay edited by Dale Spender and Janet Todd  
Sing Soft, Sing Loud..... 0.20.0... 0.0.0 c cee eee eee by Patricia McConnel  
27 Girls Who Went Wrong: Prostitutes in American Fiction... by Laura Hapke  
28 Born for Liberty: A History of Women in America...... by Sara M. Evans  
COLUMNS  

10 Nonfiction Bookshelf: Rambling Gals/Science * by Leslie A. Moushey  

14 Rediscovery: Vifia Delmar ¢ by Carolyn Banks  

15 Children’s Corner: Alphabets, Dinosaurs & Adventure ° by Joanne Jimason  
16 Interview: Merrill Joan Gerber corresponds with Susan Koppelman  

18 Fiction: A View of Boston Common ° by Merrill Joan Gerber  

21 The Criminal Element: Realism and Order + by Jane Bakerman  

22 Reprints: “The New Woman”: A Double Life by Louisa May Alcott, Miss  
Marjoribanks and Phoebe by Mrs. Oliphant, Brother Jacob by George Eliot, The  
Daughters of Danaus by Mona Caird, The Way Things Are by E.M. Delafield, and  
Ex-Wife by Ursula Parrott ° by Laura Hapke  

26 Patchwork: Book Review Editors » by Deborah Price  

29 Impressions: Briefly Noted, The Inveterate Reader, Literary Lights, Black  
Literature ° by Janet Palmer Mullaney, et al.  

Cover: “Elizabeth Bowen/Ireland/1950s” from Eudora Welty Photographs (U. Mississippi).  

Belles Lettres @ 1