Belles Lettres Interview

“We have big stories to tell... Our lives are extraordinary, even grand and heroic,” says Bharati Mukherjee of herself and other immigrant writers. In an interview with Alison Carb, she spins tales from both her life and her fiction.

Born in Calcutta, schooled in Europe, and a former Canadian citizen, Bharati Mukherjee has decided to make her permanent home in the United States. She is the author of two novels, The Tiger's Daughter and Wife, and a short story collection, Darkness, both available from Penguin Books. She has co-authored with her husband two nonfiction books, Days and Nights in Calcutta and The Sorrow and the Terror: The Haunting Legacy of the Air India Tragedy. Mukherjee has a PhD in English from the University of Iowa. She lives in New York City and teaches writing at Columbia University.

Where did you get your ideas for the stories in your soon-to-be published collection, The Middleman?

The title story grew out of an unfinished novel about a Vietnam veteran, who, after the war, becomes a mercenary and does odd jobs in Central America and Afghanistan. While I was writing that novel, a minor character with a walk-on part, a Jew who had moved from Baghdad to Bombay to Brooklyn, took over and wrote his own story. He fascinated me because he was cynical and witty and because he was a wheeler-dealer, a new breed of immigrant survivor.

So Alfie Judah, the central character in “The Middleman,” bounces around the globe, supplying people with whatever they need — weapons, drugs, cars. The story is set in an unnamed country in Central America, where he gets caught up in a guerilla war.

By the way, the Vietnam vet, Jeb Marshall of Miami, gets his own story, “Loose Ends,” in this collection. Many of these stories are told by mainstream Americans, but even when I write about mainstream Americans I describe how their lives intersect those of immigrant or first-generation Americans.

For instance, a story called “Fighting for the Rebound” is told from the point of view of an Atlanta stockbroker who becomes involved with a Filipina, an ex-millionaire’s daughter and a Marcos supporter. As a writer, I enter many different lives and let those lives speak for themselves.

All the stories in The Middleman focus on the new, the changing America. I use immigration from the Third World to the New World as a metaphor for the process of uprooting and rerooting, or as my husband Clark Blaise in his book Resident Alien calls it, the process of “unhousement” and “rehousement.” The immigrants in my stories are radically changed by America, and they in turn change the complexion and psychological makeup of America.

Are there any special twists or surprises in the collection?

Yes. I look at familiar American institutions, such as the family, in unfamiliar ways. The families in my stories are not quite the American families we are accustomed to reading about in fiction. The American family has changed, not only because of social pressures and new sexual mores, but because of the interaction between mainstream Americans and new immigrants.

March/April 1988

For instance, there is a story in The Middleman called “Fathering,” in which the life of an upstate New York yuppie is disrupted by a sudden visit from the half-Vietnamese daughter he had fathered as a “grunt” in Saigon.

How would you characterize your literary style in these stories?

The style suggests itself to me by character and story. I don’t start out by saying, “I’ve got to write an experimental story.” I let the story idea itself dictate the right voice for it. Some stories are written very authoritatively using the third person point of view. Others are very intimate and textured and use the first person.

Are there similarities between your writing and the writing of other authors who have immigrated to America?

I see similarities between my writing and that of Bernard Malamud, even though he writes about Eastern European Jews and I write about Third World immigrants. He describes a minority community that is breaking away from the ghetto, acculturating, and entering the American mainstream. So do I. His work has a moral center. Mine does also. I admire his writing very much. After reading his stories in 1983, I recognized the validity of my own material.

How does your writing contrast with that of an American immigrant author like Malamud?

My fiction takes into account race and politics. Mainstream America reacts to you in unpredictable or special ways when you are from the Third World, when you have a dark, “nonassimilatable” complexion and a religion that is not part of the Judeo-Christian axis.

Bharati Mukherjee. Photo by Stephanie Karakas.

engineer husbands to the United States. But in their new country they suddenly discover depths and passions in themselves that they didn’t know existed.

When did you start writing?

In high school I wrote short stories for the school magazine. I went to a post-colonial British convent school where we read British writers like Jane Austen and E.M. Forster. My imagination was fired by reading about European history and Western civilization. For a while I thought I could be a chemist like my father, who owned a pharmaceutical company in Calcutta, and a writer at the same time. But by the age of 16 I realized that I wasn’t good at science and enjoyed writing more.

How was your desire to write viewed by your family?

I would not be the writer I am today if it hadn’t been for the encouragement I got from my parents. My father was a patron of the arts even though he was a scientist and businessman. He thought of writing novels as an accomplishment.

When I was in graduate school in Baroda, where my father had moved his business, he found out about the Writers’ Workshop at the University of Iowa from a group of Americans from UCLA who were visiting India. They came to our house for dinner one night, and my father said to the group leader, who was a drama professor, “I want this daughter to be a writer, where do I send her?”

The man told him whom to write to at the University of Iowa, only he gave the name of the wrong town in Iowa. My father sent off the letter and somehow it got to the right person at the University. So I went to Iowa City in the early 1960s.

What was the hardest time for you in your writing career?

My husband and I lived and taught in Canada during the late seventies. I was devastated by the racial discrimination I encountered as a Canadian citizen of Indian origin, especially in Toronto. Those were horrendous years to be Indian-looking in Canada. Indo-Canadian citizens like myself were called names, spat on, pushed or shoved in subways, and even thrown onto the tracks.

Whether I wanted to or not, I fought battles against racial discrimination. I wrote nonfiction essays about the problem; some of them were printed in Canadian publications. I didn’t have the strength to say, “I’m going to do what I want to do, just write my fiction,” and pick up and leave.

But in 1980 I did leave. After having lived in Canada for 15 years, I resigned my position as a professor at McGill University and came to the United States with my husband and sons. For me, this was an act of self-preservation. It was a way to remove myself from the constant hurt. I felt I had done my share of sensitizing the public to racial discrimination. It was time to do something for myself.

Being in the U.S. was a relief after Canada. I didn’t have to deal on a moment-by-moment basis with what I looked like. In America, a country that has a healthier attitude toward immigrants than Canada, I could wear Western clothes and be anonymous if I chose. This freed me to write the stories that were boiling in my head.

Do you feel you have a special role to play in ensuring that Indian and other South Asian immigrant writers’ voices are heard here?

I see my job as a writer to make my complicated and unfamiliar world understandable to the mainstream reader. That is what good fiction does. If my writing is strong enough, then even unexplained cultural details about the Indian community in Queens or the Korean community in New York will become accessible.

I want to give voice to the new pioneers in this country, not just through my writing but by editing the work of other immigrant writers from nontraditional countries, including India, Fiji, Sri Lanka, and Guyana. In this way I hope to sensitize editors to the enormous changes occurring on the American writing scene.

We have big stories to tell. We have lived 300 years of our own history very quickly because most of us come from either postcolonial countries or countries with a lot of civil and religious strife. Now we are rapidly learning 200 years of American history and acculturating into American society. Our lives are extraordinary, even grand and heroic.

I try to show this in my fiction. My characters want to succeed here. Sometimes in the process they are dented or damaged by the ups and downs in their lives and the ghettos in which fate has temporarily placed them. But they are not losers; they are conquerors. Like me, they feel that they are better off in the new world than they were in the old.

Alison B. Carb is a freelance writer who has reviewed books for newspapers across the country. She is also a poet, and her work has been published in Amelia, Embers, Present Tense, and other magazines.

Surprises in the Mailbox

If you have received a copy of Belles Lettres and you are not a subscriber, chances are that you have received a complimentary issue — we regularly mail complimentary issues to people who we think are interested in the writing of women. Enjoy your free issue. We hope you will subscribe.

Belles Lettres @ 9