Cool on

the Outside

The Stories of Muriel Spark, by Muriel  
Spark. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1985,  
$18.95, 314 pp.

by Susan P. Willens

Reading Muriel Spark’s stories is

like drinking martinis straight up.

Bitter, cold, and rather un-
pleasant, they ultimately throw you off
balance.

This collection includes stories written
from 1951 to 1985 and placed in settings
from South Africa to England. The
dramatic situations have a similar range;
they include banal love affairs and flaming
angels, foolishness, revenge, and murder.
The unity in this diversity comes from two
sources: the central observer and the
tone, as characteristic as the writer's
fingerprint.

Like Edna O’Brien’s, Spark’s stories
focus on a particular kind of young
woman as main character or observer,
sometimes both in the same story.
Thirtyish, single, quite unattached, this
woman is a tourist in life, not a native.
As a hotel guest, overnight visitor,
spinster daughter, or colonial African in
England, the typical Spark character
visits, waits, watches. The usual in-
vitations to belonging — sex, love,
marriage, loyalty, family, nationality —
lurk like traps waiting to catch her. She
rarely wants to be caught. “I am a freak,”
says Sybil, the central character of
“Bang-Bang You’re Dead,” “and should
not have married. In fact I am not the
marrying type.”

Often in Spark’s stories the con-
ventional family is frightening. Un-
happy couples use the single woman in a
game meant to solidify the illusion of
their love. Children trick and lie as
scarily as Miles and Flora in James’s The
Turn of the Screw. They are too
monstrous to lure anyone into com-
mitment. In Spark’s universe, love and

To Hear  
the Unsung

Russian and Polish Women’s Fiction,  
translated and edited by Helena Goscilo.  
University of Tennessee Press, 1985,  
$29.95, 343 pp.

by Eileen Lotozo

“We are new women, we have an
obligation to introduce a new
morality of loving slaves... . We
want a full life.”

These words of writer Zofia Nal-

kowska, from a speech given in

1907, express two of the com-
mon themes that bind together the di-
verse stories collected in this volume —
a desire for change and an expansive
spirit of hope. As “new women” each of
these 11 writers struggled for a full life.
The biographical material reveals inter-
estingly that all of them realized their
vocations as writers only through escape
from the loving slavery that was
marriage, the majority by divorce,
although a few were widowed early or
never married at all.

Helena Goscilo’s informative, if
somewhat stilted, introduction sets the
work of these writers in a historical con-
text of centuries-long subjugation of
women and shows how these old
patterns were affected in Russia and
Poland by late 19th- to early 20th-
century social ferment and the up-
heavals of revolution and war. In 1894,
only 1 percent of Russian females re-
ceived schooling, 10 years later 14 per-
cent were literate, and in 1905, univer-
sities accepted women. In 19th-century,

6 @ Belles Lettres

Muriel Spark. Photo by Jerry Bauer.  
family do not go together like a horse
and carriage — more like oil and water.
In “A Member of the Family,” for ex-
ample, the single young lady begs in vain
to meet her lover’s mother. When he
finally invites her to Mum’s, the party is
several of his old girlfriends, all “just like
members of the family.” He is out woo-
ing a new girl.

Indeed, the ordinary family can
become positively pathological. In “The
Pawnbroker’s Wife,” a boarder witnesses
the transfiguration of a sluttish teenager
into the family’s idol, a dream of
glamour slapped on her like the heavy
makeup she wears to pick up strangers.
So Spark’s vision of home emerges as a
funhouse of distorted mirrors, full of lies
and horror. You want to run as fast as
you can into safe solitude.

The best story in the collection is the
novella “The Go-Away Bird.” In this
tale of growing up in the English colony
of South Africa, the protagonist,
Daphne, experiences all of these
alienations — from family, landscape,
nation, and, finally, from herself. The
farm where she grows up is as solid as
anything in Spark’s writing, full of
firmly realized people and physical
settings. Africa lives in sensuality and

partitioned Poland, severe Russian re-
pressions after the Polish insurrection of
1863 and after World War I halted ad-
vances for women. Not until Poland was
restored as a free state in 1918 did a
constitution give women the vote, and
in 1920 they were admitted to higher
education. Despite these gains, in 1931
an estimated 41 percent of women in
Poland between the ages of 25 and 49
still could not read or write.

This, then, was the climate within
which women writers developed their
craft. With few literary zhenskii rod
(female forebears), they followed new
paths without guides. Most of the au-
thors anthologized in this collection
came of age during a period of literary/
intellectual renaissance for women,
when increased freedom and education
made the reading and writing of
literature by women a possibility for the
first time.

The editor has included writers such
as the Countess Rostopchina (once
compared to the notorious George
Sand), although her melodramatic soci-
ety tales, such as “Rank and Money,”
seem not to have stood the test of time
very well. Also, the work of the one-
time actress Gabriela Zapolska seems less
able to stand on its own literary merits,
with its strained moods of obsession and
duplicity. But both authors were famous
early women writers in Russia and
Poland, and their inclusion provides an
intriguing insight into literary fashions
and the position of women in the last
century.

Among the Russian writers, Inna
Varlamova’s “A Ladle for Pure Water,”
while sympathetically portraying an
unlikely ménage à trois in a bleak
northern village, pushes against the
limits of socialist realism by revealing

adventure. So it is doubly sad that the
well-raised colonial girl is dying to get
away to England, the alien homeland.
Once there, Daphne has nothing, is
nothing, and dies a stranger. The go-
away bird that has drawn her away from
life sings over her grave at the end.

I have never much liked Spark’s
novels, although they include such
memorable titles as The Prime of Miss
Jean Brodie and The Mandelbaum Gate. I
have felt them to be sketchy and tricky,
trading on wit and brevity at the expense
of understanding. In the shorter “The
Go-Away Bird,” however, I see the
writer take responsibility for her
characters and her settings. Her vision
remains ironic; you cannot look to her
for sentiment. But at least she rewards
the reader’s curiosity and desire for
pattern in fiction. This tale shows the
writer at her best.

Much of the critical discussion of
Spark’s fiction concerns her Catholic-
ism. With “great spiritual and physical
torment,” she converted from the An-
glican faith in 1954 when she was 35.
Although the public nature of this con-
version puts Spark’s religion on the crit-
ical agenda, the stories reveal little of
the spiritual quest she experienced in her
own life.

Of course there are angels, like the
flaming presence in her first story, “The
Seraph and the Zambesi.” Miraculous
apparitions occur in other stories: a fly-
ing saucer in “Miss Pinkerton’s
Apocalypse,” and ghosts in “The Leaf
Sweeper” and “The Executor.” A
housekeeper in “Another Pair of Hands”
even solves the servant problem with the
aid of a phantom maid! Spark, like Iris
Murdoch, erases the line between the
“real” world and that of the imagination.
Interventions from the beyond are not
divine, however; Miss Spark’s angels
represent no God.

With love-starved spinsters at the
center of her universe, and her clinical
attitude toward them, Spark fails to
convey any attitudes usually regarded as
Christian. Do you look to her art for the
virtues of love? charity? humility? She
neither shows nor expresses these

qualities. What she does offer is craft,
the writer’s religion. Spark writes about
art by indirection. It, rather than formal
faith, summons her deepest feelings.

In an early story, “The Playhouse
Called Remarkable,” she recounts a
beautiful and strange tale of a moon girl
who is an acrobat and singer, held
captive on a mountain of the moon. The
girl sings from the mountain in defiance
of the spirit that imprisons her there.
“She tells us in her nightly song all she
has seen on the landscape of the moon

. she sings a different song every
night. She saves up everything she sees
by day, and hurls it in her song against
the walls of the voice which imprisons
her.” This moon girl represents the
artist, whose work is a song that reports
on a strange world, in defiance of the
force that keeps her from returning to
her people. That daring girl shows the
courage of the artist — and the artist’s
isolation.

In the last story of this impressive col-
lection, “The Dragon,” Spark creates a
perfect parable for the writer’s life and
craft. The protagonist here is a seamstress
who defends her need to be alone and do
her work according to her own genius.
What a symbol for a creative writer! Per-
fection matters to this craftswoman: each
stitch; the selection of the fabric, its
drape, color, and texture; the design she
realizes with it. Finally, the artwork
means immortality. “So far as I knew to
date, forever was slip-stitch, split-stitch,
cross-stitch, back-stitch; and also
buttonhole and running stitches . . . all
along the dipping and rising hemline, as if
for always and always.”

This collection brings us 30 years of
Spark’s stories. In them we see her sewing
meticulous stitches, in striking fashions,
made for always and always. She may not
be to everyone’s taste, but like a martini,
she goes to your head.

® Susan P. Willens teaches English,
lectures, leads fiction discussion groups, and
heads a department of continuing education in
Washington, DC.

Women of the ‘Bergman family of Kiev, circa
1890. Courtesy of Jeanne Talpers.

the negative side of Soviet life. Olga
Forsh’s marvelous “Ham’s Wife” depicts
a desperate spinster without means who,
tempted by the escape of death, seizes
instead the promise of new life in the
offer of a whimsical stranger. The most
famous of the Russian writers is Vera
Panova, who helped to revive Soviet
literature with her novel Seasons of the
Year (1953). Panova’s long story
“Evdokia” is a saga of workers’ lives in
the provinces and of the travails of one
passionate and resilient woman.
Among the Polish writers is Maria
Konopnicka, whose brief stories,
written in a coolly modern style, recreate
peasant and working class speech. The
fiction of Eliza Orzeszkowa keenly ex-
amines the role of women in society: Her
powerful story “Miss Antonina” evokes
the struggle of an unmarried woman to
find meaning in her life. Pola
Gojawiczyńska, the only writer of work-
ing-class origins included here, lacked

formal education, but her talent
attracted the support and encour-
agement of established writers. Her
stories — short, vivid, glimpses of the
intersections of very different women’s
lives — suggest the commonality
beneath the differences.

Famous as a feminist, Zofia
Nalkowska was elected to the Polish
Academy of Literature in 1933, an un-
heard-of honor for a woman at the time.
Her later fiction, selected here, un-
flinchingly portrays Nazi atrocities dur-
ing World War II. Finally, Maria
Dabrowska, another classic figure of
modern Polish letters and author of the
acclaimed novel Nights and Days, is
represented by the wonderful story “Miss
Vincent,” in which a woman bureaucrat
discovers the uneasy line between cold,
logical efficiency and the intuitive
irrationality of human sympathy.

Although they enjoy solid repu-
tations in their own countries, these
writers are very little known outside of
them, and for the most part have been
overlooked by the compilers of the
canon of world literature. Goscilo’s task
of selection and translation was not an
easy one, and her energy and vision in
bringing out this excellent volume are
admirable. She reminds us that in the
resurrection of great literature by women
that has been devalued and forgotten,
there is still very much to be done. The
pleasure of these fictions will, I hope,
motivate further reading in the works of
these writers and perhaps will inspire
potential translators out there to get
busy.

@ Eileen Lotozo is co-editor of an an-
thology of writings by Slavic-American
women. She has been a tutor/instructor of
writing at Temple University since 1983.

May/June 1986