Mediums  
and Messages  

Conjuring: Black Women, Fiction, and  
the Literary Tradition, edited by Marjorie  
Pryse and Hortense J. Spillers.  
Bloomington: Indiana University Press,  

1985, $10.95, 260 pp. (PB)  

by Jewelle Gomez  

The title of this collection of essays  

(much like the title of Barbara  

Smith’s seminal essay “Toward a  
Black Feminist Criticism”) implies  
movement and action. The word  
conjuring captures both the nature of Black  
women’s creative process and their posi-  
tion as “mediums” making communica-  
tion possible between all worlds, and it  
implies the developmental status of the art  
of examining Black women’s writing. In  
Smith’s essay, she states that the work of  
Black women has been relegated to the  
fringes of mainstream literary criticism,  
and she suggests new approaches to ex-  
amining that work. One significant  
suggestion is that criticism not be limited  
to how things have been done in the  
(White, patriarchal) past but that it  
“embody the daring spirit of the works  
themselves.”  

A second idea seems elemental but is  
still anathema to the literary es-  
tablishment and to many Black writers as  
well: that a commitment to exploring  
both sexual and racial politics is crucial to  
the discussion of Black women’s  
literature. The editors of this book have  
assembled a selection of writers whose  
work is variable in its reflection of those  
principles. But the book as a whole  
represents an important new exploration  
of Afro-American writing.  

In one of the essays, Bernard W. Bell  
valiantly rescues Ann Petry from the lim-  
ited visions of critics like Robert Bone,  
who, in his book The Negro Novel in  
America, compared her to Richard Wright  
and Chester Higgins rather than looking  
at her body of work as a whole. Bell ex-  
amines Petry within the context of all her  

Jessie Fauset. Photo courtesy of  
Moorland-Spingarn, Research Center,  

Howard University.  

literary work and looks at her role not just  
as a Black writer but as a Black woman.  
He asserts that the mission of Black  
women writers is both to demythologize  
the culture in which they have been  
trapped and to revitalize their legends by  
embracing the variety of Black ex-  
perience. With the recent reprinting of  
Petry’s novel, The Street (Beacon Press),  
this is a timely piece that should  
encourage the examination of her other  
work.  

In 1984, Claudia Tate began to expand  
the idea of methodology with her book  
Black Women Writers at Work. In that col-  
lection of interviews, she cogently dis-  
cussed not simply the lives of Black  
women writers but also the writing process  
and the philosophy that underlie the  
work. The tone and style of her piece in  
Conjuring on Pauline Hopkins (another  
little-known writer) duplicate the  
accessibility of her book. Tate is able,  
with her enthusiastic language, to convey  
the plot and spirit of Hopkins’s work. She  
does not remove herself from her subject  
but instead acts as the “medium” that  
editor Marjorie Pryse describes in her in-  
troduction to Conjuring.  

The book’s other editor, Hortense J.  
Spillers, takes a more traditional academic  

The Power of the Other  

by Nancy Hall Rice  

These two works of social and  

literary criticism share an aware-  

ness, which has become increas-  
ingly acceptable in the last 15 years, that  
literary themes and images in fiction are  
connected to problems, situations, and  
even social documents (the constitution)  
of the culture that produces the literature.  
American literature, beginning in the  
mid-19th century, has reflected major  
societal inequities that erupted into the  
Civil War then and that continue to warp  
the lives of women and ethnic Americans  
in the present day. As defined at length by  
these writers, “ethnic Americans” means  
not just immigrants but Blacks and Native  
Americans, too — in other words, just  
about everybody who is nondominant,  
different, or Other. These books are ex-  
aminations of the strains and attributes of  
Otherness that have woven the web that  
is America.  

Herzog looks at works that delineate  
the Other in mid-19th-century American  
writing; Dearborn reveals works that were  
created by (female) Others from that time  
to this. Kristin Herzog examines six  
creators of American literature including  
mainstream representatives Melville and  
Hawthorne, Harriet Beecher Stowe,  
Black writers William Wells Brown  
(Clotel, or The President’s Daughter) and  
Martin K. Delany (Blake), and the  
American Indian oral narrative “epic”  

Dekanawida. With meticulous documen-  

| 10 Belles Lettres  

Women, Ethnics and Exotics: Images of Power in Mid-Nineteenth Century American  
Fiction, by Kristin Herzog. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1983, $22.95, 280 pp.  
Pocahontas’s Daughters: Gender and Ethnicity in American Culture, by Mary V.  
Dearborn. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986, $21.95, 266 pp.  

tation, Herzog develops the idea that  
Hawthorne’s and Melville’s works present  
women and Blacks, ethnics, or exotics  
with the spiritual and cultural “primitive”  
powers of the Other. She suggests that  
their writing fascinates us because it has  
psychosocial relevance to problems that  
arose because of the dominance of White  
men in Western culture. (“There is a psy-  
chological price to be paid for social  
wrong,” she says.)  

The second half of the book presents  
writing from those who were being  
dominated. Stowe, in Uncle Tom’s  
Cabin, took a forthright stand against the  
injustice of slavery and implicitly linked  
women’s sympathies with Black troubles.  
The success of her book, as well as of the  
slave narratives, seems to have motivated  
both Brown and Delany to use and present  
information from their own people’s ex-  
periences under slavery. Delany depicted  
a militant hero, Henry Blake, who organ-  
ized a rebellion because, as a friendly In-  
dian chief put it, “ ‘If you want white man  
to love you, you must fight im!’ ” Blake  
believed that White folks grievously mis-  
used their religion and their God for their  
own aggrandizement at Black folks’ ex-  
pense but that prayer could also be used to  
empower Blacks.  

As male representatives of the Black  
community, Brown and Delany both  
present very Black characters who are  
concerned about autonomous Black man-  
hood. Their women characters are less  
Blackly Black, however, for although  

approach to the work. If you are willing to  
wade through her overwritten, con-  
voluted abstractions, Spillers is good at  
pulling together the lines of inquiry that  
the book’s essays introduce. She also  
makes strong, long-range historical and  
literary connections that the pieces in-  
dividually do not. One such example is  
her discussion in the afterword of the  
relationship of Zora Neale Hurston to her  
characters as compared with the  
relationships of Jessie Fauset and Ann  
Petry to their characters. I disagree with  
Spillers’s interpretation of Hurston’s work  
as “discontinuous” and “contrastive” and  
think her discussion ultimately con-  
tradicts these awkward adjectives. That  
Fauset’s Chinaberry Tree and Hurston’s  
Their Eyes Were Watching God are sep-  
arated by only six years implies, to me, a  
heretofore unexplored relationship  
(whether evolutionary or reactionary)  
between the two works and the two au-  
thors rather than indicating that they are  
unrelated entities. But Spillers’s initiation  
of a comparison between these writers  
opens up new areas of thought.  

Barbara Christian’s essay “Creating a  
Universal Literature” is part of her im-  
portant book, Black Feminist Criticism.  
She has certainly avoided the comfortable  
and insidious trap of being devoted to the  
standard methodology and expression  
used by academia, which is exemplified in  
this book by Spillers. Christian allows  
Black women to identify themselves and  

Ann Petry. Photo courtesy of Saybrook  
Studio.  

remains the medium through which they  
speak. From there she explores identity  
and its use in society, past and present.  
Her brief discussion of Audre Lorde,  
Gloria Naylor, Ntozake Shange, and June  
Jordan in relationship to the concept of  
the “Other” in our society is provocative.  
She introduces a multileveled per-  
spective, which is closer to the point from  
which these women are writing than any  
dissertation can be.  

There is a disappointing shortage in  
Conjuring of examinations of sexuality  
(gay or straight) as a motif or motivation  
in Black women’s work. Although Gloria  
T. Hull does mention the curious lack of  
gay themes in the abundantly inclusive  
novel The Salt Eaters by Toni Cade  
Bambara, it is Barbara Christian who in-  
dicates the importance of sexuality in the  
literature and the value of the emergence  
of overtly lesbian relationships in current  
fiction. Sexuality seems to remain the  
“final frontier” for Black women writers  
and feminist critics.  

Historically, the literature of Afro-  
Americans has not only had to serve as  
literary expression but it has also had the  
“high, holy purpose” of uplifting the race.  
Black women writers frequently restricted  
themselves to picturing chaste, fair-  
skinned, devoutly Christian women to  
prove to society and themselves that they  
were worthy of respect. Even in 1986, over  
100 years after the first publication of a  
novel by a Black woman, the primitive cry  
continues that we Black women portray  
only our best aspects (witness recent  
backbiting of Alice Walker). Ultimately,  
it must be accepted that the literary art is  
something more personal, something out  
of which universal truths may be extracted  
only if one’s deeply held core is explored.  
Much of the critical work here takes that  
more expansive perspective, successfully  
exposing the core of Black women’s writ-  
ing and confidently placing it within the  
American literary tradition.  

@ Jewelle Gomez is a critic, poet, and fic-  
tion writer. She is also an associate in the  
literature program of the New York State  
Council on the Arts.  

Brown, Delany, Stowe, and abolitionists  
generally were concerned about Black  
womanhood; they saw that plots center-  
ing on the difficulty of protecting racially  
mixed heroines from sexual exploitation  
could be used to arouse the conscience of  
the nation. As Dearborn also points out,  
the very existence of the mulatto, the  
quadroon, and the octoroon immediately  
establishes the truth of the charge that  
there have been generations of White  
men guilty of sexual misconduct.  
Establishing any woman’s right to au-  
tonomous selfhood has of course been  
problematic, given the distractions of  
mating and childrearing and the im-  
mediate need that childrearing implies for  
a larger community. Dearborn’s whole  
book is about Pocahontas’s “daughters”  
(the “ethnic” women of late 19th- and  
20th-century America) and their  
paradigmatic quandary. Pocahontas’s re-  
sponse to White men (not yet perceived as  
dominant) was an autonomous and un-  
reserved pledge of allegiance. But  
although she may have had the power to  
save her chosen one, she did not get to  
marry him and she lost her heritage.  
Dearborn’s book is rich in mini-stories:  
We learn about the difficulties of au-  
thorship for specific American Indian or  
Black women, who are often multi-  
cultural. Heavily autobiographical, their  
writing is often about what one poet has  
termed “this bridge called my back.” We  
authors often bridge cultures, forming  
alliances between our parents’ cultures or  
between our own and our spouses’  
cultures. To do so we have often been, in  
the view of our readers, politically in-  
correct. To be published and read we have  
typically required something Dearborn  
calls “mediation” or “midwiving.” She  
explains how cultural Otherness affected  

writers such as Antin, Yezierska, and  
Stein; Fauset, Larsen, and Hurston of the  
Harlem Renaissance; and their various  
characters, particularly those with an  
apparent capability for success — that is,  
those smart enough to compete, light  
enough to pass, or beautiful enough to  
marry well. But these writers were operat-  
ing in a real world, and they saw that such  
things were never sufficient.  

Dearborn’s book is full of information  
about books that most of us have not read.  
Most important to me is her recasting of  
Stein’s The Making of Americans as the  
work of an “ethnic American woman  
about the meanings of ancestry in female  
identity.” How could I have accepted the  
denigrating judgment that this book was  
unreadable after only glancing through  
the short version? After all, it is women  
— mothers — who make Americans. My  
mother, and I myself, and now my  
daughters, have done this. We women  
need to be reminded of what we have  
accomplished with our living as well as  
with our writing. And we all need this  
information about the integrity of our  
ways and struggles within all the cultures  
melting in our pot. The viability of an  
ecosystem increases in direct proportion to  
its complexity. “American literature  
gained strength,” Herzog says in closing,  
“whenever it drew on the power of the  
powerless.” We will; American society  
will, too. Herzog and Dearborn have used  
their fine minds and impeccable scholarly  
abilities to read widely, to think well, and  
to set their insights down in concise and  
empowering ways.  

@ Nancy Hall Rice’s PhD dissertation,  
Beauty and the Beast and the Little Boy,  
deals with sexism, racism, and anti-Semitism  
in literature from three time periods.  

Serremser/Ocroser 1986