Undiscovered Islands

The Orchid House, by Phyllis Shand Allfrey. Washington, D.C.: Three Continents

Press, 1985, $20 (HB), $10 (PB), 235 pp. (PB)

Cantando Bajito/Singing Softly, by Carmen de Monteflores. San Francisco: Spinsters/

Aunt Lute, 1989, $9.95, 197 pp. (PB)

by Erika Smilowitz

Native-born whites are an an-

omaly in the Caribbean. Often, as Jean Rhys has shown, they are part of no established expatriate community and thus find themselves doubly isolated. The Orchid House provides a rare glimpse into the lives of such Caribbean whites.

First published in 1953, The Orchid House is tightly structured around the return of three sisters to their childhood home of Dominica and tells of their reactions to their depressed and drug-addicted father, their island, and a dying childhood friend. They are all strong, decisive women. Stella has left a bad marriage and is searching for a changed life; Joan is agitating for a new political party for island workers; and Natalie, now a rich widow, ridicules the mindless men who adore her.

The details of the family’s life hold interest, and the effects of colonialism on the island are portrayed well. The family is managed by “Madam,” the former governess, and various servants. The male characters, on the whole, are either dying or die during the course of the novel, and institutionalized patriarchal forces, such as church and state, do not stand up to the women of this family.

Nonetheless, the novel falls down

Cerebral, Real, and Classic Tales

Enclosed Garden, by Angelina Muñiz-Huberman. Translated by Lois Parkinson Zamora. Pittsburgh: Latin American Literary Review Press, 1988, $11.50, 103 pp. (PB) The Gold Mine, by Barbara de la Cuesta. Latin American Literary Review Press, 1988,

$14.95, 160 pp. (PB)

Breakthrough, by Mercedes Valdivieso. Translated by Graciela S. Daichman. Latin American Literary Review Press, 1987, $12, 96 pp. (PB)

by Barbara Benham

“Transmutations” is what Angelina Muñiz-Huberman calls Enclosed Garden, her collection of twenty-one short pieces. This is rhythmic, mythic prose that defies classification. These difficult, cerebral exercises run the gamut of subjects, from mythology to modern-day urban angst.

Many pieces breed confusion. “The Most Precious Offering” had me asking myself: Is this a Jew-hating Jesus? A mother hating her son? A first-born sister hating her brother? The story’s “dénouement,” in which the narrator releases herself through murdering the object of her hatred, lends itself to several interpretations.

“The Dream Curtain” embodies a child’s fear of criminals that murder little girls. There is a twist, though: the little girl in this piece “catches” the murderer through her playful, imaginative world.

A genuine love rings in “The Minstrel.” Simplicity reigns, in contrast to the overwrought tension (and pretension) of many of the other pieces. It has the charm of a folktale from an eerie, faraway land.

My sense is that Muñiz-Huberman is an acquired taste. Her powerful and evocative writing cannot be easily dismissed. (Indeed, this collection won the Xavier Villaurrutia Prize in 1985, the Mexican equivalent of the National Book Award.) Unfortunately, most of these pieces are inhabited by creatures of a private, inaccessible mythology who obscure the universal themes touched upon in this book.

The Gold Mine by Barbara de la Cuesta is an exquisite novel that brings together Dorie West and Ordóñez, who teach at the same American school in an unnamed South American country. Ordóñez, a widower with three young children, is a native of this fictive nation-state; Dorie West hails from Warsaw, New York.

Ordóñez has set out to reform the nation’s education system. He wants a law that would require that Spanish be taught for at least half the day. He also pontificates about his country’s history to his fifth-grade class. “Snot noses!” he screams at his students, who shriek in delight. Ordóñez ultimately loses his job over these theatrical lessons.

Dorie, who is in her mid-twenties, falls in love with this romantic, seemingly doomed man, and they embark on an affair. One day Ordóñez schemes his way out of poverty. In exchange for his journals, he promises Tiburcio, a wealthy cousin of his wife, not to expose Tiburcio’s misdeeds, documented throughout the notebooks. Tiburcio takes the bait and turns over to Ordóñez a sizable piece of land that contains a gold mine.

Dorie accompanies Ordóñez to the gold mine, where an act of violence incapacitates him. “Envy puts one off balance,” Ordóñez says at one point. “To possess is to be calm.” He learns in the end that this is not the case.

Ordóñez is a marvelously realized character of considerable depth and contradiction. He is an exhausting magnet of a human being. Dorie, however, is a bit of a problem. For all the coffee she drinks, she remains phlegmatic, floating in and out of scenes without leaving much of a mark. Even though Dorie (if not her being, her presence) has inspired Ordóñez to act on one of his many fantasies — in this case, to be materially comfortable — I kept wishing she were more of a match for him, that she could have jolted him out of his craving for the silent woman.

Ms. de la Cuesta has a wonderful ear for dialogue. Every character speaks in a distinct voice. “Fresh. Tastes like udder,” one of Ordóñez’s friends says of cheese he’s just bought. She laces her realism with magical detail, as in the scene where several women discuss a vision of the Virgin Mary, who has been spied in the mountains — through opera glasses. Another strength is the novel’s profound sense of place. This compelling story reminded me of how wonderful it can be to get lost in the other world of a good book. I wanted it to go on and on.

Originally published in Chile in 1961, Breakthrough by Mercedes Valdivieso is considered Latin America’s first feminist novel. It has stood the test of time like a strong tree. Almost thirty years later, this story of a young woman trying to escape an unhappy marriage and carve out a place for herself in the world resonates with immediacy.

If women were not still struggling with inequality, this book might seem quaint. The narrator, whose name is never revealed, marries a young man named Gaston, a promising young lawyer. Somehow she was expecting that marriage would bring some degree of freedom, after her mother’s rigor. But Gaston is jealous and possessive. And then there is Gaston’s mother, her home filled with religious icons.

The new bride quickly finds herself pregnant. She slips into lassitude. Finally, she returns to her mother’s until the birth of Sebastian. The son is just one more wedge between husband and wife. The months pass, with fits of rebellion, like the narrator refusing to socialize with Gaston’s relatives and taking up theatre classes. A second pregnancy ends in abortion, and she finally tells Gaston she is leaving.

The remainder of the novel deals with the narrator’s effort to construct a life for herself and her son. They move into an apartment. As a lark, she and her best friend, Marta, devise a scheme to smuggle clothes into the country. The narrator spends several weeks in New York City. Finally, it is time for the narrator to start her job as a bilingual secretary. She finds the workplace dehumanizing but accepts it as the price she must pay for her freedom.

The narrator has a smooth, captivating voice that never stoops to despair or self-pity. She can sum up a situation in one sentence, as in this comparison of her grandmothers’ houses: “Jesus saw me darn socks in one house and steal candy in the other.” In the first days of her liberation from her husband, she says: “My vision was expanding as if old bandages were being removed from my eyes.”

By the end of the novel, the narrator has proven herself to be an escape artist. She is free from her mother’s clutches. She is free from her husband. But she knows freedom is relative. As the closing metaphor indicates, she can never completely escape. She is still a prisoner of the human condition.

@ Barbara Benham is an editor and writer in Washington, D.C.

been known to her white family, which keeps her character flat. In so prominent a person as the narrator, we need to know more.

When white writers write about the Caribbean, there is always the danger they will use it as a backdrop, relating a story about whites with a few Blacks as servants strategically placed for verisimilitude. Allfrey, however, includes Blacks in her novels and describes their life to some extent; and her novel is worth reading because she is one of the few native-born Caribbean women being published, providing a valuable historical perspective.

Cantando Bajito is also about several generations of women, but it reveals a far darker side of island life — of classism, racism, and the culture that brought us machismo. Set in Puerto Rico, the novel is told through a series of narratives that move back and forth in time and perspective; they switch from a great-grandmother to mother, grandmother to granddaughter, and to the mysterious Sefia Alba, who sleeps in the sand. Only at the end is the picture complete, and only then is the emotional force of this impressive novel felt. De Monteflores focuses on Pilar, who escapes from her shack in a cane field to live in a fine house with servants and an indoor toilet. But the narrative also describes her mother’s harsh existence, Pilar’s daughter’s early life and disastrous marriage, and the haunted childhood and escape of the narrator, Meli.

All the dialogue is bilingual, a statement about the significance of language to the author. She distinguishes between the Puerto Rican Spanish that almost everyone speaks and the more exacting, more socially desirable Spanish as spoken by Juan, the rich merchant who fathers Pilar’s children. The English translation makes the same distinction. Pilar cannot speak the “better” Spanish and, as a result, keeps silent: “Mostly Pilar didn’t talk very much. . . because she felt foolish talking like the Spaniards and ashamed of talking like the country people, the jibaros.”

Juan chose Pilar, the author makes clear, because she was pretty and light-skinned. Her father is light, but her mother is black. Racism and classism meld as Juan tries to ignore Pilar’s family because of her mother’s dark skin, and as he keeps his daughter from sitting in the sun for fear she might grow darker.

Because of Juan, Pilar comes to reject her past. Although ashamed of herself, she accepts this as a necessity. When she goes home because her sister is sick, she realizes, “The old place smelled of pee and there were flies everywhere.”

As sad as Pilar’s life turns out to be, and as depressing as her mother’s is, Sefia Alba’s evokes the most sympathy. She is nearly a supernatural character, orphaned and childless, a midwife who is both feared and revered. She is a shadow who hides in the darkness, drinking, and, in one tragic scene, vomiting on her beloved Pilar.

All these women suffer, primarily because of the monstrous things men do to them. Images of lechers leering and ogling young girls are a constant motif, forming a backdrop to the women’s daily lives. And the men they live with are no better. Pedro, the great-grandfather, refuses any interest in the lives of his wife or daughter. He is considered a good man, however, simply because he comes home at night. Juan never marries Pilar, to her great shame, and his brother steals her money. Arturo, another despicable husband, is mostly shown yelling at no one in particular.

Despite these portraits, the novel is uplifting because of the strong connections these women feel and because Meli, the narrator, ultimately escapes from the ties that bind so tightly.

@ Erika Smilowitz teaches English at the University of the Virgin Islands and is the editor of The Caribbean Writer.

Winter 1990