Bohemia Was Never Like This

In the City, by Joan Silber. New York:  
Viking, 1987, $16.95, 246 pp.

by Susan P. Willens

In this slight novel, Joan Silber

sends her heroine, Pauline

Samuels, just graduated from high  
school in Newark, New Jersey, to work  
and live in New York City. The year is  
supposed to be 1924, and Pauline is an  
eager, virginal daughter of immigrant  
Jewish parents. She is seeking the  
glamor that only Manhattan offers —  
speakeasies, all-night parties, gay  
banter, freedom, and love. Zelda and  
Scott are always just out of sight.

Pauline soon becomes a clerk in a rib-  
bon company. She also finds a handful  
of good nightspots, two rather boring  
men to have affairs with, and two close  
women friends. In the process she learns  
some useful lessons: Sex with the wrong  
man degrades you; all-nighters cause  
hangovers and sleepy days at the office;  
you are implicated in your lover's frauds;  
people you love can get sick and even  
die. In the last pages of the book,  
Pauline lovingly tends to her friend  
Rose and feels calm for the first time in  
the nearly 3 years she has been in New  
York. The novel ends with a gentle,  
Sargent-like vision of three young  
women at ease in a dappled sickroom.

The line of her dresses hanging on the  
wall looked friezelike; the skirt of a  
limp crepe one near the window stirred  
slightly. In the dimming light the  
white of the walls was dappled and the  
varnished woodwork had a dark watery  
sheen. Nita had gone back to sitting on  
the edge of the bed; she was settled  
sideways, drinking her cloudy white  
punch out of a teacup. Rose was saying  
something about the breeze — she  
liked the breeze from that window —  
her voice was still thin and raspy and  
Nita had to lean forward to hear — and  
Pauline stood for a minute watching  
them.

In the City dramatizes a well-estab-  
lished, fictional pattern of self-discov-  
ery: A young innocent — Lily Bart or  
Sister Carrie — moves to womanhood  
in a setting fraught with temptation. In

many respects, this novel follows that  
pattern capably. Silber’s prose style  
often deserves the praise lavished on it,  
for it is tight and careful, apt for obser-  
vations of the self-absorbed heroine,  
whose thoughts about studying Latin go  
like this: “She liked the idea of being  
trained into a sublime and calm logic  
(she was sorry she was not good at  
math). It was a kind of whiteness of  
mind she wanted, a mental stillness like  
the sealed expressions on eyeless  
statues.” With that crisp prose and fac-  
tual precision, the story records some  
conditions of Pauline’s life — seedy  
boardinghouses, the same skirt worn all  
winter, bewildering parties attended by  
strangers. It capably records the speech  
and habits of the men who embrace her  
briefly.

But nifty sentences and attention to a  
few details ultimately do not satisfy. The  
novel is self-indulgent and annoying be-  
cause so much is omitted. Silber seems  
to feel she has done her work when she  
has labeled a character or time period.  
So, for example, she labels Pauline  
“Jewish” and she dates the action  
“Spring 1924.” Filling in the fictional  
outlines of characters and settings is be-  
neath her, however.

Is the reader to believe that Pauline is  
really Jewish? That she really speaks  
Yiddish? In reality such a young woman  
would live a powerful, interior drama of  
the sort recorded by Mary Antin or  
Alfred Kazin. But Pauline has almost no  
compunction about eating nonkosher  
food, no awareness of the religious  
calendar, no fear of prejudice, no refer-  
ence to language or learning. In a practi-  
cal way, Pauline also has no feeling for  
her family and no connections to an ex-  
tended family. No uncles or cousins  
bump into her on 18th Street when she  
is out late and drunk. Is such isolation  
probable in the Newark or New York  
Jewish community of the 1920s? Is this  
really the 1920s? Except for references  
to Prohibition, Sacco and Vanzetti, an  
open car, flapper costumes and marcelled  
hair, the novel is thin on atmosphere.  
Finally, is Pauline really sleeping with  
these men? The novel sketches sex and

The Memoirs of Gluckel  
of Hameln  
Translated by Marvin Lowenthal

New York: Schocken Books, 1977, $7.95,  
295 pp. (PB)

The dying man is asked, “Have you any  
last wishes to give us?” “None,” Reb  
Chaim replies. “My wife knows every-  
thing. She shall do as she has always  
done.” The woman of whom he spoke so  
confidently was not only the mother of  
his 13 children, but also his partner,  
connected to every aspect of his far-  
flung business affairs, a woman at ease in  
the world outside her home and whose  
own words give us the impression that  
she stood on an equal footing with the  
businessmen she encountered. What is  
so breathtaking about this story is that  
the wife, Gluckel of Hameln, is not a  
contemporary woman, deftly juggling  
career and children, but a Jewish  
woman born in Hamburg in 1646, two  
years before the Thirty Years War.  
Gluckel begins her writing as a dis-  
traction from her grief at the death of  
her husband, her “dear friend.” “If God  
wills that I live to finish them,” she tells  
her children, “I shall leave you my  
Memoirs in seven little books.” Gluckel  
chronicles her life with the personal in-  
sights and details no history book can  
give us; she tells us what it was like to be  
a Jew in the Europe of her time.  
Through her eyes we witness the impact  
on the community of the greatest Jewish  
upheaval of the 17th century: the ap-  
pearance of the Messianic pretender,

| SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987

Sabbatai Zevi. An incident concerning  
her little daughter brings to life the ter-  
rors of the plague. One particularly  
poignant scene describes Gluckel at 15,  
pregnant with her first child at the same  
time her mother is expecting. “My dear  
good mother had reckoned out her time  
for the same day,” Gluckel writes.  
“However, she had great joy in my being  
brought to bed first, so she could help  
me a little, young girl that I was.”

As modern as she appeared to be (she  
had a secular as well as a religious educa-  
tion and could read and write), Gluckel  
was a deeply religious woman who had  
no notion of challenging the laws that  
assigned to men and women their sepa-  
rate obligations to Jewish law and ritual.  
Even in her agony at the bedside of her  
dying husband, she is reminded of what  
it meant to be an observant Jewish  
woman. She chronicles her sorrow sim-  
ply in a marvel of understatement:  
“Whereat I said to my husband, ‘Dearest  
heart, shall I embrace you — I am un-  
clean?’ For I was then at a time I dared  
not touch him. And he said, ‘God for-  
bid, my child — it will not be long be-  
fore you take your cleansing.’ But, alas,  
it was then too late.”

This book would be important simply  
because it is the only existing pre-mod-  
ern Yiddish memoir by a woman. But  
more than that, it is the work of a gifted  
writer who foreshortens the lengthy tun-  
nels of time that separate women of dif-  
ferent eras and makes them aware of the  
many correspondences in their seem-  
ingly disparate worlds.

— Faye Moskowitz

neglects consequences; Silber spends  
more time describing itchy train seats  
than an itchy conscience. These omis-  
sions, missed opportunities, drain In the  
City of its potential power, the power of  
imagined reality.

Joan Silber. Photo © by Thomas Victor.

In 1924 — real time — my own  
mother went from Detroit to New York  
to attend Columbia’s teacher’s college  
for a year. Like Pauline, she was a Jewish  
girl just graduated from high school,  
away from home for the first time. Her  
memories of that time start with her rad-  
ical innocence, ignorance really, about  
how she was supposed to act, to dress, to  
talk. Hers was a new immigration; she  
was a greenhorn like her parents a gen-  
eration before. She needed to overcome  
inhibitions just to walk down Broadway,  

attend meetings, date boys, eat out,  
spend money. But this strange new  
world offered the heady attractions of  
theater and political debate in the com-  
pany of two kinds of aliens: non-Jews  
and men.

My mother’s time in New York was  
much more interesting than that of the  
heroine of In the City because it was hard  
for her. In contrast, Pauline hardly ever  
finds anything very hard, except staying  
awake at work or moving out on the guy  
who pushes her around. Most of the fizz  
of New York escapes her. In fact,  
Pauline has the consciousness of a mod-  
ern young woman. Like an innocent of  
the 1980s, she finds that leaving home,  
partying, and knowing men have little  
mystery, little threat for her.

In the City is well-crafted, and Silber  
is attentive to details, but it is too simple  
for a writer of her intelligence and skill.  
In her first novel, Household Words, she  
showed power in the portrayal of a fam-  
ily in the 1940s. The next time she  
writes historical fiction, she might do  
more than move a loosely imagined  
heroine of the 1980s back to a randomly  
chosen historical moment. She might  
write the novel that will test all she has  
to give.

% Susan P. Willens teaches and lectures  
on literature and heads the continuing ed-  
ucation program of the Edmund Burke  
School in Washington, DC.

An Unorthodox Jew

Tama Woman — and a Jew, by Leah Morton. New York: Marcus Wiener Publishing, 1986,  

$9.95, 362 pp. (PB)

by Evelyn Torton Beck  
This extraordinary book is a re-  
print of an autobiographical  

novel originally published in  

1926 by Elizabeth Stern under the  
pseudonym Leah Morton. It has been  
reissued with a new introduction by  
Ellen M. Umansky as part of a series ded-  
icated to acquainting the contemporary  
reader “with the best of an earlier genera-  
tion of Jewish writers, now undeservedly  
forgotten.” The book was surely unde-  
servedly neglected, but it probably  
would have remained out of print were it  
not for contemporary Jewish feminists  
whose work in the women’s movement  
and in Jewish communities helped to  
create a more receptive climate for its  
dual focus.

I cannot help but wonder what Leah  
Morton, who was born in 1890 and died  
in 1954, made of the post-World War II  
pressures to return women to the home —  
a condition she had protested in the  
1920s. Her account of the multiple ways  
in which women were constrained  
would have been particularly helpful to  
me (and countless others) in those  
years, when I found no support for my  
rebellion against social norms based on  
sex differences and no encouragement  
to assuage my deep insecurities. This  
book might have helped me to link  
these two factors and to understand that  
American anti-Semitism and class  
privilege contributed to my insecurity.  
Though Morton provides no easy solu-  
tions, her story would at least have pro-  
vided a context in which to place my  
own struggles, as a woman and a Jew, for  
in no other book that I have read are  
these two themes so centrally in-  
tertwined. They are also presented in  
political terms that are congruent with  
contemporary feminist analyses in  
which identity politics are inseparable  
from sexual politics and material cir-  
cumstances.

The narrator of this text (whose life  
story is not entirely congruent with that  
of the author) allows us to understand  
how her own inner conflicts as a woman  
and as a Jew evolve from myths and prej-  
udices that were frequently in-  

stitutionalized, seriously limiting the op-  
portunities for each group. Access to  
jobs, housing, schools, clubs, resorts,  
and other spaces were restricted for Jews  
of both sexes; women in Orthodox  
Jewish families were to have only a min-  
imal secular education; married women,  
Jew or gentile, were not to work outside  
the home. The narrator’s insistence in  
going to college and pursuing a career,  
followed by her marriage to a gentile,  
causes an irreparable rift with her family  
of origin, particularly her father whom  
she never sees again once she is married.

Though she never denies being a Jew,  
even when it costs her her job, or later,  
her daughter’s entry to an exclusive  
school, for some years Judaism ceases to  
be meaningful to her. Not until her mid-  
dle years, after her father’s death, is she  
able to distinguish between Judaism as a  
religion, which she rejects, and Jewish-  
ness, which goes much deeper and  
which, she now believes, can never be  
eradicated. “The way our eyes see life,  
our minds thought, we discover through  
our Jewishness.” No doubt she is speak-  
ing here as a born Jew, steeped in a  
childhood of tradition that marks her  
psyche in a significant way. Though in  
real life Morton eventually became a  
Quaker, it is likely that she never ceased  
to feel like a Jew. While the text cele-  
brates Jewish identity, it never  
adequately resolves the essential ques-  
tion of how this Jewishness can be lived  
meaningfully outside the structures of  
religion or Zionism (which Morton  
views as a substitute religion).

Similarly, the author explores, but  
never resolves, the conflicts she experi-  
ences as a woman, particularly the ques-  
tion of how to integrate the roles of  
wife, mother, and career woman. When  
they are very poor, she writes to bring in  
additional income. Later, the narrator  
juxtaposes her continuing search for  
meaningful work and for what we would  
now call “her own voice” (she is success-  
ful in a number of fields, particularly in  
the demanding job of social work  
administration) with her husband’s re-  
sistance to accepting her work as a seri-  
ous enterprise, not simply a “pleasant

— continued on page 6

Belles Lettres @ 3