Impressions

Lesbian Fiction

@ Heartscape, an absorbing first
novel by Sue Gambill (Naiad Press,
$8.95, 192 pp., PB), explores the per-
sonal and political subtleties of feminist
burnout in the mid-1980s. Leslie, a
long-time political activist, is in flight
from her soured hopes of political
change in America and from a failed re-
lationship in the lesbian paradise of
Provincetown. Returning to Portugal,
the “home of her heart” where she
worked and lived several years before,
she finds herself among artists, intel-
lectuals, and villagers who are beginning
to assert greater freedom under a nonfas-
cist government. Through her changing
relationship with an upper-class
Portuguese family, and through her
clandestine love affair with Helena, a
Portuguese artist, Leslie rethinks her
identity as an American woman and her
relationship to her culture, with which
she feels profoundly ill at ease. Gambill’s
musical prose proves once again that
politics is life and can thus make for fas-
cinating art.

Heavy Gilt (Naiad Press, $8.95, 173
pp., PB), a first novel by Dolores
Klaitch (best known for her 1974
Woman Plus Woman: Attitudes Towards
Lesbianism), is a broadly written comedy
of manners set in an upper-crust New
Jersey resort community. The year is
1975, when freewheeling sex was politi-
cally correct and monogamy suspect,
when radical feminist authors regularly
made the pages of Time magazine, and
when the word “lesbian” still caught on
the tongue, even the tongues of
lesbians. Klaitch, whose wit was shyly
evident in her earlier nonfiction, lets a
hearty sense of humor rip in this stylized,
stingingly funny romp.

Shirley Verel, author of the 1960
lesbian classic The Other Side of Venus,
returns after three decades to the novel-
ist’s profession with The Bee’s Kiss
(Naiad Press, $8.95, 198 pp., PB). A
strongly British novel, complete with
the required picnic scene (a must since
Jane Austen’s classic picnic in Emma),
the novel is reminiscent of Jane Rule’s
This Is Not for You in its valediction to a
complex love affair that changed the
narrator’s life. Verel lovingly re-creates
the expectant atmosphere of the British
countryside in the late 1950s, a simple,
traditional world on the verge of explod-
ing into complicated modernity.

Each generation of lesbian writers
retells the quintessential lesbian experi-
ence of coming out. First-time novelist
Denise Ohio locates this experience in a
Women’s Studies department in The
Finer Grain (Naiad Press, $8.95, 198
pp., PB). Ohio sets the coming-out
story within a skillfully crafted tale of
how a young woman from rural West
Virginia uncovers the hidden circum-
stances of her birth and thereby closes
the first chapter of her life.

Patricia Roth Schwartz’s at once
comic and grave collection of short sto-
ries, The Names of the Moons of Mars
(New Victoria, $8.95, PB), exemplifies
the delightful diversity of women’s lives.
Her razor-sharp humor helps us look at
ourselves, warts and all, without taking
ourselves too seriously. Even the sad
stories of lost love and disappointment
are cathartic and wise.

In “Winter Apples,” Schwartz pokes
good-natured fun at classic lesbian dis-
asters. Sandie says,

Since I saw myself as a woman possessed
of A Past — having had two classically
disastrous former lovers, The Teenage
Crush and The Married Woman — I soon
developed a set of unchallenging cronies
from amongst the pool-table spectator set.

The humor turns to poignancy, how-
ever, when, after doing her stint on the

22 @ Belles Lettres

lesbian volunteer circuit, Sandie meets a
woman who holds for her the promise of
“other nights when we would share even
more secret recesses of the spirit —
words, ideas, poetry” but discovers that
her inamorata stands on the other side of
the chasm from Sandie’s Mary Daly
brand of women’s spirituality.

The story of Rosalie, “fourteen and
still in the sixth grade and could barely
read and had hair like a rat’s nest and
smelled of B.O.,” reminds us painfully
of children’s cruelty and the isolation
and loneliness of the so-called “wonder
years.” But Schwartz’s story delivers a
forceful message with a powerful out-
burst by Rosalie that changes her, if not
her attackers.

Some might argue that Schwartz’s
stories border on the pessimistic. Al-

Zahava brings together twenty-nine
comic and poignant tales. Her inspired
choices include wonderful short works
by Becky Birtha, Jane Rule, Barbara
Wilson, and Gloria Anzaldúa. The col-
lection draws from a wide range of cul-
tures, emotions, and perspectives, with
stories as diverse as Merril Mushroom’s
“Silver,” an amusing tale of a midlife
lesbian in a happy sixteen-year relation-
ship who is tempted by a woman some
thirty years her junior, and Carol Or-
lock’s “Tell Me Where the Road Turns,”
a moving examination of a military
woman’s life in the closet. Every lesbian
will hear echoes of her experience in
every story, no matter how different her
life appears.

Patricia Miller has done us a tremen-
dous favor by resuscitating the beautiful—

though some are heart-rending, her per-
ceptiveness and deft touch make them
stimulating reading.

Uniquely British humor, imagina-
tion, marvelous storytelling, and clever
analysis fairly leap from the pages of The
Pied Piper: Lesbian Feminist Fiction
(edited by Anna Livia and Lilian Mo-
hin, Onlywomen Press, $9.95, 246
pp., PB). Despite the diversity of the
nineteen tales and their distinctively
British feel, the moving force behind
such an anthology is the same on both
sides of the Atlantic. At the end of the
second decade of the modern-day wo-
men’s movement, lesbian feminists can
claim, as Livia and Mohin do in their
introduction, a degree of recognition
and a kind of respectability. They add:

And yet it is absurd to believe, or behave
as though, we are now respected, recog-
nised and no longer oppressed. We are not
(yet) free to build our own culture, to
address ourselves to literature, without the
codes of the closet. But the possibility of
so doing glitters on the horizon as never
before.

The selections anthologized here cel-
ebrate women’s lives, bringing enor-
mous hope. The ingenious twists of the
fairy-tale-turned-lesbian-love-story by
Kym Martindale, “The Pied Piper: A
Fairy Story,” elicit a chuckle and a sigh
with every turn of the page. And “Me-
mory Lane” by Caroline Natzler illus-
trates the power of the bond between
lesbians. Amalie, who is married to
George and suffers from some form of
senile dementia that requires her spend-
ing her days in a day care center, mirac-
ulously recovers when the woman she
loved many years before reappears.

That three of the writers in this col-
lection used pseudonyms because they
feared reprisals from employers signifies
that our celebration is not without its
sorrow.

In Lesbian Love Stories (Crossing
Press, $9.95, 323 pp., PB), editor Irene

ly intense stories of Helen Hull (Last
September, Naiad, $8.95, 199 pp.),
published early in this century by such
mainstays of tradition as Harper's, Cen-
tury, and Good Housekeeping magazines.
Miller points out that Hull’s novella
“Last September” was applauded by a
New York Times reviewer who predicted
when it appeared in 1940 that it would
become a literary classic.

Although Hull’s work was widely
appreciated in her heyday, her
woman-identified writing and her bold
existence in Maine with her lifelong
companion, Mabel Robinson, kept her
novels and short stories from flourishing
over the long haul. What a pity! The
forceful and moving stories Miller has
chosen for this collection transported
me to another place and time, yet car-
ried me deeply into myself.

The Cynthia stories are particularly
poignant in their portrayal of a young
girl’s search for a way out of familial pro-
vincialism. In “The Fire,” for example,
Cynthia is forced by her mother to give
up art lessons with the town’s spinster,
Miss Egert. Making one last visit to the
teacher, the heartbroken Cynthia ex-
plains that she cannot return. Miss Egert
encourages her to continue art on her
own, to “go on looking” and not to “shut
her eyes again.” Cynthia’s mother, dis-
covering her at Miss Egert’s, pulls at
Cynthia with such comments as, “You
disobey your mother, hurt her, to talk
about beauty at night with an old maid!”
In the end, empowered by a renewed
pledge to “a conflict as well as to a
search,” Cynthia discovers that she is
her own vehicle for emerging from paro-
chial bonds. —Suzanne Scott

@ Collected by Morgan Grey and
Julia Penelope, a witch and a linguist,
the eponymous Found Goddesses (New
Victoria, $7.95, 122 pp., PB) help
soothe, sort out, reveal, or intensify a
diversity of lesbian realities. Coming

from classes on “lost goddesses” and
wanting to use language to create suita-
ble lesbian space, the authors created
these deities, and they encourage read-
ers to continue searching and sharing
other namings. “What we conceive we
name, and the naming makes it so,”
they write in the introduction.

There is a feeling of fun and liberation
here. Some revelations are bawdy (as
Evacua’s porcelain shrines) and others
are tender (“Delores, she who loved me
well is gone. / I will pour out my grief,
loud and long.”).

The playful writing is highly concen-
trated with puns. The recognition and
the laughter are often serious. Ritual is
too often remote from everyday experi-
ence, but this brief book takes it to the
parking lot, the laundromat, the
potluck gathering, and brings our atten-
tion to the sacred at hand, merging the
sacramental with our practical needs.

—Martha Ficklen

@ The Bar Stories (St. Martin’s,
$17.95, 356 pp.), a robust, sensually
rich, and beautifully crafted novel by
Nisa Donnelly, braids the individual
stories of several lesbians who, over
twenty years' time, meet in and through
Babe’s Bar. The resulting story is a ver-
bal frieze representing the complexities
of survival, hope, and defeat. The
novel’s form, like that of Gloria Naylor's
The Women of Brewster Place, cuts
through the often self-serving pro-
tagonist-versus-world form of the aca-
demically lauded novel. Instead we see
the rich interface between a number of
lesbians who together create a life be-
yond paralyzing homophobia, internal
and external. Life shared communally is
the protagonist; the bar is a metaphor of
survival. —Mab Maher

@ Anne Miller found Ellen Frye’s
first novel, Look Under the Hawthorne
(New Victoria, Box 27, Norwich, VT
05055; $7.95), “much more than a
well-written lesbian novel”:

I found myself anxious to have
alone time with the book and
looked forward to seeing how Frye
would develop her characters and
plot.

Frye’s novel deals honestly and
sensitively with the issue of adop-
tion, sex roles between women,
racism, and, of course, love. Cen-
tral to the book is Edie Cafferty, a
Vermont bookkeeper, welder, and
lesbian. Her steady lifestyle drasti-
cally changes when she suddenly
decides to try to find the daughter
she gave up for adoption thirty-two
years ago in Boston. A chance
meeting with Anabelle, a celibate
jazz pianist trying to locate her birth
mother, adds new insights to Edie’s
search for her daughter. The strug-
gles of the two women keep the
reader captivated throughout.

Frye’s writing style is both simple
and compelling, much like Edie. I
recommend the novel to anyone
who likes fiction with substance and
pertinence — especially to women’s
book groups.

@ The success of Naiad Press has
proven that the dearth of lesbian fiction
is not matched by lack of interest on the
part of readers. The Seal Press is at-
tempting to fill the gap also with a new
series called Voyages Out, which will
appear twice yearly and will feature the
work of two women in each volume.
Interested authors should send six to fif-
teen stories to Barbara Wilson, The Seal
Press, 3131 Western Ave. #410, Seat-
tle, WA 98121. Writers of novel-length
fiction that focuses on the lives of
lesbians can enter a contest sponsored by
Spinsters/Aunt Lute with a cash prize of
$2,000 and a book contract. Man-
uscripts should be postmarked between
January 2 and February 28 and sent to
P.O. Box 410687, San Francisco, CA

94141 (write for contest rules brochure).

Summer 1989