Journeys Beyond Gender

Transcending Gender: The Male/Female Double in Women’s Fiction, by Joanne Blum.  
Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1988, $34.95, 90 pp.

by Claire Sprague

The provocative title of Joanne

Blum’s book depends on the as-

sumption that sexual identity
belongs to nature and gender behavior
to culture. Feminists work with the dis-
tinction between nature and culture, as
well as with the knowledge that no pure
example of one without the other exists.
If, however, sex (male/female) is given
and gender (masculine/feminine) is
malleable, then anatomy is not destiny.
The basic optimism embodied in such a
view informs Blum’s book.

Blum argues that the interchange be-
tween female and male characters in
eight novels by women undercuts and
modifies gender roles, making the men
less masculine and the women less femi-
nine. Her next step, that the
female/male interchange described
amounts to the transcendence of gender,
is more problematic. Transcendence is a
large word for what goes on between the
fictional men and women involved. It
does fit the three science fiction novels
Blum addresses in her last chapter:
Ursula LeGuin’s The Left Hand of Dark-
ness (1969), Dorothy Bryant’s The Kin of
Ata Are Waiting for You (1971), and
James Tiptree, Jr.’s Up the Walls of the
World (1978). Consider the example of
LeGuin, who tells us she quite
deliberately “eliminated gender to find
out what was left. Whatever was left
would be presumably human.” Her
Gethanians have the capacity to func-
tion sexually as either male or female. In
such a society there can be no traits
called masculine or feminine. The world
of The Left Hand of Darkness is gender-
less, to use Blum’s synonym for transcen-
dence. In it, gender has, like the state
under perfect communism, withered
away.

LeGuin, Bryant, and Tiptree can un-
dercut familiar sexual scripts more radi-
cally than mainstream novelists. Emily
Brontë, Charlotte Brontë, Virginia
Woolf, Margaret Drabble, and Margaret
Laurence, the other novelists Blum in-
cludes in her study, adhere to more rec-
ognizable sexual scripts. Their subver-
sions are different. Their men and
women are called doubles because they
share a very special symbiotic attach-
ment. As late as 1985, critic Karl Miller
believed that “comparatively few
women are awarded doubles, or write
about them.” He is partly right. By com-
parison with the nineteenth-century
outpouring of novels about male
doubles, there are few novels about
female/male doubles or female/female
doubles. The list of male/male doubles
in novels is long indeed. In its charac-
teristic form, the doubles novel was
about a man divided into two selves, one
good and one bad, one socially accept-
able, the other amoral, violent, or mad.
This description fits Poe’s William Wil-
son, Stevenson’s Jekyll and Hyde,
Wilde’s Dorian Gray and his portrait,
and Dostoevsky’s two Golyadkins.
When the divided single personality was
transformed into two physically sepa-
rated but symbiotically attached secret
sharers, the phenomenon of doubling
became more complicated and less
transparent. More recently, when, under
the impetus of feminist theory,
female/female doubles were discovered
to exist in earlier novels, our perspective
on doubling was enlarged. The twen-
tieth century has seen fewer novels
about male doubles, more novels about
female doubles, and almost for the first
time, novels in which women and men
function as doubles of each other. This
larger constellation of doubles novels
provides feminist critics with a rich new
canvas upon which to explore enduring

Spring 1989

issues of sameness (same-sex doubles)
and differences (mixed doubles). There
has been some speculation about the
meaning of the female/male double, but
Joanne Blum has written the first book
about this important phenomenon.

The phenomenon of doubling, once
rooted in the pathology of the divided
personality, is no longer necessarily at-
tached to the pathological. It can and
often has become a mode of possibility.
The empathic interchange between
female and male can, Blum believes,
function “as metaphorical agent for radi-
cal social change.” Furthermore, in
twentieth-century novels, the single
protagonist can have more than one
secret sharer or second self. We need a
term for that protean self, the one that
divides into more than two, the one that
so often functions as a metaphor for en-
richment and variety and for the under-
mining of “hierarchy and containment,”
in critic Molly Hite’s phraseology.

Wuthering Heights and Jane Eyre
embody the fierce dualities of the
nineteenth-century doubles novel. The
major male characters, Heathcliff and
Rochester, are aggressive, mysterious,
demonic figures whose female doubles,
Cathy Earnshaw and Jane Eyre, have a
strength of spirit not stereotypically fem-
inine. Rochester’s masculine behavior is
modified permanently through his inter-
action with Jane; Heathcliff’s behavior is
modified only in the idyllic childhood
he shares with Cathy before social dis-
tinction and sexual growth separate
them. The rich critical literature that
has accumulated around these novels is
synthesized in Blum’s first chapter,
which can fairly be described as a cur-
tain raiser.

The twentieth-century novel is where
we would expect Blum to make her orig-
inal contribution. She begins with
Woolf’s Mrs. Dalloway (1925), incon-
testably the pioneer work in the topos we

The MOMENT

and other essays

by Virginia Woolf.

Dust jacket by Vanessa Bell for the Hogarth
Press edition of The Moment and Other Es-
says, by Virginia Woolf. From The Sisters’
Arts: The Writing and Painting of Virginia
Woolf and Vanessa Bell, by Diane Filby
Gillespie (Syracuse University Press).

who does it for her was a brilliant deci-
sion. The displacement of Clarissa’s
shaky psyche and her suicide onto a
male figure resulted in a novel that reso-
nates with questions about gender roles
and the nature of human affinities. The
proposition that Richard Dalloway,
Clarissa’s husband, and Peter Walsh, her
rejected suitor, are doubles of Clarissa is
not entertained, but should have been.

The novel also has same-sex doubles,
Clarissa/Sally Seton and Septimus/Evans, whose relationship to the
main plot is of some interest, given
Blum’s point elsewhere in her book that
such doubles tend to loosen extreme
gender identification. The pattern of
doubling in Mrs. Dalloway seems, fi-
nally, richer than the single male and
female Blum discusses.

The chapters on Margaret Laurence’s

Science Fiction — The Next Generation

Women have transformed the face (and innards) of fantasy and science fiction. They
have enriched, widened, and deepened the genre to the point where it can take its
place with mainstream fiction. The following list of gifted sci-fi writers compiled by
Athena Andreadis supplements those discussed elsewhere in this issue.

C.J. Cherryh: hard sci-fi; the Alliance/Federation cycle (especially Downbelow
Station) is outstanding space opera.

Tanith Lee: myth retelling; her tale collections (Red as Blood, The Gorgon) are
hypnotic in their power.

Elizabeth Lynn: fantasy and sci-fi; the Tornor/Cheari trilogy is unique.  
Vonda McIntyre: sci-fi; Superluminal is an astonishing novel in its integration
of disciplines.

Patricia McKillip: fantasy; Stepping from the Shadows is almost dangerous in its
inward search.

Joan Vinge: sci-fi; the Eyes of Amber collection is literally incredible, each
story a jewel.

Kate Wilhelm: hard sci-fi; Juniper Time is an absorbing exploration of
“alienness.”

Jane Yolen: fantasy and sci-fi; The Cards of Grief is akin in quality and content
to LeGuin’s writing.

are calling the female/male doubles
novel. That novel substantially revises
nineteenth-century models. Clarissa
Dalloway experiences a profound mo-
ment of affinity with Septimus Smith,
who commits suicide at the end of the
novel. That moment seems inexactly
characterized by terms like “conscious-
ness sharing” or “psychological reciproc-
ity” since the characters never meet.
Only the reader is meant to interact
fully with both Septimus and Clarissa.
Woolf connects her two strangers psy-
chically through “images and events”
that link them in place, time, and sensi-
bility. We know that Woolf's original
plan for the novel included Mrs. Dallo-
way’s suicide. Creating a male double

The Diviners (1974) and on the science
fiction novels are the best in the
volume. In The Diviners, writer-heroine
Morag Gunn moves from present to past
to an understanding of her roots, her art,
her relationships with her daughter and
with men. The most important man,
Jules Tonnerre, serves as muse, fellow
artist, and sexual partner. Tonnerre’s
characteristics are more gender mixed
than Morag’s; as a half-breed he is a vic-
tim, but as his name, which means
thunderclap, suggests, he has power,
here defined as creative. For Morag,
Blum argues, “identification with male-
ness is a creative necessity.” Morag
learns from other men as well. Tonnerre
is one of the diviners in the novel; her
stepfather, Christie, and Royland, the
old man who can find water, are others.

Morag has to learn that she is yet
another.

Blum’s original assertion that The
Diviners is “strikingly similar” in “subject
and method” to Doris Lessing’s The
Golden Notebook is, unfortunately, never
fleshed out. Moreover, the comparison
highlights the startling omission of Less-
ing from the volume. Surely the major
female novelist since Woolf ought to
have been included. Her omission re-
flects one of several limitations in
Blum’s presentation of historical and
theoretical context. Her introduction
does not describe the basis for her selec-
tions: what her pool was, why some
novels were chosen and others not.
Neither does it indicate whether there
are destructive examples of male/female
doubling or consider whether same-sex
doubles differ from cross-gender doubles.
Blum also tends to assert, “There are
many examples of single sex doubles in
women’s fiction,” she says, for instance,
without citing any. And she might oc-
casionally say “female/male double” in-
stead of “male/female.” This reversal of
precedence would seem particularly
appropriate when the female figure is the
primary self, as she is in most of the novels discussed.

Blum supports her reading of women as more “relational” than men by citing
the work of psychologists like Nancy
Chodorow, Jean Baker Miller, and Carol
Gilligan. (Her slighting of earlier psy-
choanalytic theory I take to be
deliberate.) For Blum, women’s tre-
lational capacities help to explain why
women writers can “perceive and iden-
tify with the other as a separate, yet very
much related, self.” The meaning of this
statement is more assumed than argued.
Does it mean that men can only write
about men, while women are able to
write about both sexes? Are not writers,
male and female, supposed to be persons
above all who can “perceive and identify
with the other”? This hoary question is
still with us.

Blum’s decision to include three
science fiction novels in an otherwise
traditional academic roster signals the
growing respectability of the genre, as
well as an erosion of borders. In the
three science fiction novels, gender
functions as the primal division, the one
that typifies, perhaps even occasions, all
other oppressive human social, political,
economic, and cultural divisions.
Marriage becomes the appropriate meta-
phor for the healing of division. Often,
as the novels by LeGuin, Bryant, and
Tiptree demonstrate, that marriage oc-
curs across space, time, race, and class. It
is never long-lasting and is never the
kind of marriage sanctioned by church
and state. It is exceptional and transient,
but it happens.

Blum says of Tiptree’s Up The Walls of
the World, “a purer example of collapsed
gender barriers can hardly be imagined,”
yet Tiptree chose to present herself to
the world as a male writer. This strategic
and paradoxical choice is important.
Before her real identity as Alice Sheldon
was revealed, one critic described
Tiptree’s work as “ineluctably mascu-
line.” The pseudonym had made its
point.

The Brontës prefigure and the other
novels reflect the sex change that has
occurred in doubles novels in our cen-
tury and their dazzling explosion from
twoness into multiplicity. The psychic
fragmentation once so blatantly a part of
the older doubles novel cannot entirely
disappear. It is still there metaphorically,
if not always actually, to remind us we
are not whole and that gender may
never be transcended. Yet we continue
to imagine a terrain beyond gender and
are grateful for a study that ventures so
far into it.

© Claire Sprague is the author of Reread-
ing Doris Lessing: Narrative Strategies of
Doubling and Repetition.

Belles Lettres @ 5