A Concert in  
the Desert  

Honeymoon: Stories, by Merrill Joan  
Gerber. Urbana and Chicago: University  
of Illinois Press, 1985, $11.95, 126 pp.  

by Susan Koppelman  

Reading Merrill Joan Gerber’s  

short stories makes me feel as if a  

part of the world of my child-  
hood I had thought lost has survived —  
and I am glad. Gerber has been one of  
my favorite story writers ever since I  
came to know her unforgettable “How  
Love Came to Grandmother,” in which  
an adolescent girl forces her mother to  
look at her own beloved mother in an  
unflattering light, shattering cherished  
family myths. (This story is included in  
Charlotte Zolotow’s valuable anthology  
about adolescence, An Overpraised  
Season: 10 Stories of Youth, Harper &  
Row, 1973.)  

Merrill Joan Gerber. Photo by Lesley Dahl.  

Sometimes Gerber’s stories give me  
the same pleasure I get from Billy  
Crystal’s skits about growing up with  
elderly Jewish grandparents. There is in  
the comedy of Crystal and the often  
comic fiction of Gerber a special kind of  
richness that comes from closeness and  
interaction among the members of three  
generations of one extended family —  
the middle-aged parents who are still  
children to their parents; the aged  
grandparents who are still squabbling  
siblings; and children who nurture their  
grandparents, conspire with their  
parents, and imagine themselves grown  
up.  

What is absent, or has been absent, is  
response from Jewish feminists.  

Her recent stories are sparer than her  
earlier ones. The craft of a practitioner  
with years of caring commitment to the  
art of telling stories is evident. So is the  
passage of time in her personal life. She  
writes now of the same relationships —  
mothers and daughters, daughters and  
mothers; the aunts and sisters-in-law,  
the other women of the mother’s  
generations who participated in raising  
up the daughters into womanhood;  
aging and loss and the tearing of the  
heart of a woman whose mother and  
husband do not love each other and who  
have not yet learned to leave each other  
alone — but now she writes about those  
relationships from the other side. Now it  
is the voice of a middle-aged woman  
whose aged mother is dying, whose own  
daughters have begun to move away into  
their own adult lives, whose husband  
has been in some final way domesticated  
and bound to her by rules they both feel  
protected by. It used to be the voice of  
the graduate-student wife, putting her  
husband through school, wanting  
babies, missing her mother, uncertain  
about either her own or her husband’s  
ability to take seriously the commitment  
they have made to each other: scared,  
hungry, greedy, insecure, passionate.  
For Gerber filters all experience through  
a weave of women, who are, for each  
other, the primary references for all of  
life’s events. She is a celebrant of the  
mother-daughter bond.  

When Gerber published Stop Here,  
My Friends, she was hailed as a writer in  
the newly forged tradition of Philip  
Roth, Saul Bellow, and Bernard  
Malamud. However, I think that she  
was in another tradition: that of the  
Jewish-American, Ashkenazi woman  
writer with peasant heritage and mid-  
dle-class or on-their-way-there parents.  
That tradition seems to begin at the very  
end of the last century with the short  
stories of Martha Wolfenstein and to  
continue with the work of Mary Antin,  
Anzia Yezierska, Fannie Hurst, Edna  
Ferber, Thyra Samter Winslow, and  
other, less known names. In this new  
book of stories, published exactly 20  
years later, Gerber seems to have moved  
away from this tradition. Why might  
that have happened?  

What I think has happened with  
Gerber is that she has been starved. Her  
passion for her art, her ambitious com-  
mitment — or perhaps compulsion — to  
write stories has not abated. But she has  
not gotten back what she should; she has  
not heard her stories feted. They have  
been published in places that pay fairly  
well (she has had more stories published  
in Redbook than any other writer).  
They have been anthologized sporadically. But essentially, I think  
that for her it has been like playing a  
concert in the desert. She has not had  
what an intelligent, collegial, empath-  
ic, responsible readership gives a writer.  
She may be one of those writers, like  
May Sarton, who writes for decades,  
true to the work, but is never certain  
that she is worthy of it, because what she  
empties out of herself is not replenished.  
Sarton is finally receiving the serious  
attention her work deserves. Now, with  
the increasing number of women’s  
review periodicals, so will writers like  
Gerber.  

© Susan Koppelman is the editor of three  
volumes of women’s short stories: Between  
Mothers and Daughters: Stories Across a  
Generation, The Other Woman:  
Stories of Two Women and a Man, and  
Old Maids: Short Stories by Nineteenth  
Century U.S. Women Writers.  

Words From the Wordless Ones  

Getting to Know the Weather, by  
Pamela Painter (117 pp.); Tentacles of  
Unreason, by Joan Givner (134 pp.); The  
Christmas Wife, by Helen Norris (136  
pp.) — all published by University of  
Illinois Press, 1985, $11.95  

by Nancy Hall Rice  

Right away I was hooked by the  
jackets of these three books pub-  
lished in the 10th anniversary  
year of the Illinois Short Fiction series:  
Bright colors and photographs of women  
with intelligent and enigmatic smiles  
hinted of treasures within. I was not dis-  
appointed. Behind all three jackets are  
unforgettable stories, stories that will  
surely be acclaimed.  

Pamela Painter, the recipient of a  
1985 Massachusetts Artists Foundation  
scholarship, now lives in Boston. Joan  
Givner was born in 1936 and is an En-  
glish professor in Canada. Helen Norris  
was born in 1916, lives in Montgomery,  
Alabama, and is the author of three  
novels, which I would love to be able to  
get my hands on. Three of her stories  
have been reprinted elsewhere, two of  
them in O. Henry prize anthologies.  
One of these, “The Love Child,” also  
won the 1983 Andrew Lytle Fiction  
Award.  

Pamela Painter. Photo by Lilian Kemp.  

These writers delineate characters  
and situations with deft, sometimes  
hilarious, dialogue or interior  
monologue. In Givner’s “Conversation  
Pieces,” the brash mother of a GI visits  
the stick-in-the-mud parents of his  
British war bride for the first time: “And  
to think, thought Bea Zack, almost dis-  
solving into tears, that we sent our boys  
over here to fight for people like this.  
Young, promising boys and many of  
them lost lives and limbs.”  

From Painter’s story, “Getting to  
Know the Weather,” comes a conversa-  
tion between a Woolworth’s manager  
and a woman who has just left a long-  
term marriage and triumphantly landed  
herself a waitressing job, partly because  
she has gotten to know a bleak Midwest  
weather rather well. The new boss lets  
her know the interview is over with:  
“Still raining?” Jessie rises. “Stopped,  
but not for long,” she says, “looks like  
it'll keep up through the week.” He is  
cheered by this as if she predicted  
tropical temperatures. He laughs and  
she laughs too.”  

Eleven-year-old Emilu from Norris’s  
profound story, “The Singing Well,”  
thinks as she lies on her back in a corn  
field and races her feet “a toe at a time”  
up the corn stalks, letting one foot, then  
the other, win: “How you gonna handle  
these things that come up? Get around  
these grown-ups pushin’ you into some  
kinda way you never wanted to be?”  
Emilu’s basic problem is to make her way  

Joan Givner  

creditably into adulthood; she forms an  
alliance with her grandfather, who is  
trying to make his way creditably out of  
it.  

Each book contains stories that pre-  
sent relatively powerless people on the  
ends of the age continuum, and both  
children and elders are complexly  
drawn. Painter, whose assortment of  
protagonists is unusually eclectic, has  
three or four stories in which children’s  
welfare or awareness is of paramount  
concern. In a stunning story, “Winter  
Evenings: Spring Night,” the castration  
of his father’s former crony in an  
abandoned strip mine is communicated  
to us by the reaction of a virtually word-  
less 6-year-old. Givner’s stories contain  
several grannies who figure importantly  
in their granddaughters’ lives. “Brains”  
is particularly noteworthy: Teenaged  
Sophie’s conversations with members of  
her family reveal a sexist situation in  
which the societal “tentacles of un-  
reason” spoken of in the book’s title  
have prejudiced her parents against their  
daughter’s mathematical abilities and  
have obscured as well the shrewd  
financial powers of the more maligned of  
her two grandmothers.  

But it is in several of Norris’s stories  
that the multigenerational confron-  
tations and alliances between young  
and old teach their quintessential de-  
velopment. Her justly acclaimed story  
“The Love Child” is one example; “The  
Singing Well” is another. In this Emilu  
sets out explicitly to help her  
grandfather remember the good, good  
thing that his senility — and the way the  
world was — made him forget. She suc-  
ceeds, against horrendous odds, and  
when the two of them are found far from  
home near the (dry) well that they have  
together made to sing, the parents start  
in scolding. Emilu lets them have it:  
“Shut up!” she cried, coming out of the  
rain. “I was helpin’ Grandpa. I'll never  
tell what it was. Not if all my teeth rot  
out! Not if you lock me up forever!” But  
he was the one they locked away. . .”  
Her grandfather gives her a reason to  
suppose that growing up will not be an  
impossible betrayal of self, but in spite of  
her fierceness Emilu could not really  
have said what good, good thing he  
communicated to her until she has a  
child of her own and her own well begins  
to sing.  

Children and elders are not the only  
disadvantaged individuals these writers  
present. Painter has a special ability to  
engage our sympathies by taking us suc-  
cessively into the minds of ex-  
traordinarily varied people. For ex-  
ample, in two stories dealing with inter-  
racial tensions, “Night Walk” and  
“Sylvia,” we are alternately inside Black