Waifs Out West

The Bean Trees, by Barbara Kingsolver. New York: Harper & Row, 1988, $16.95, 232 pp.  
The Silver DeSoto, by Patty Lou Floyd. Council Oak Books (1428 South St. Louis,  
Tulsa, OK 74120), $14.95, 257 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

The Bean Trees opens with Newt  
Hardbine’s father being thrown  
on top of a Standard Oil sign by  
an exploding tractor tire. By the time  
the volunteer fire department arrives to  
haul him down, “he wasn’t dead but lost  
his hearing and in many ways was never  
the same afterward,” the narrator informs us, adding: “They said he over-  
filled the tire.”

It is a visual introduction appealing  
both for its incongruity and its specificity. Not only are we presented with a  
man dangling atop a Standard Oil sign — the heights of drama — but the tragedy  
spins down to its lowly origin — an overfilled tire — all in one paragraph.  
Never mind that neither Newt Hardbine  
nor his father appear again after the first  
chapter; the tone is set.

Barbara Kingsolver’s first novel shuttles  
constantly between high drama and  
low comedy; her genius is in disguising  
which is which. The narrator is a  
scrubby young woman from Pittman,  
Kentucky, who saves up enough money  
to buy a decrepit VW Bug, romantically  
swearing to “drive west until my car  
stopped running.” Likewise determined  
to discard her old Pittman persona,  
“Missy” decides to rename herself after  
the first town she runs out of gas in (narrowly missing Blue Mound) and winds  
up as Taylor. Her car breaks down in the  
middle of the Cherokee Nation in  
Oklahoma. She manages to get it going  
again, accidentally acquiring an abused  
Indian baby at a truck stop along the  
way, and finally putters to a halt in Tuc-  
son, Arizona.

Things slow down a bit after the first  
chapter. Taylor meets Mattie, who  
owns the Jesus Is Lord Used Tire lot,  
which doubles as a sanctuary for illegal  
aliens. Looking for a room to rent, she  
moves in with Lou Ann, an overweight  
and hysterically insecure single mother.  
Taylor and the baby (whom she names  
Turtle) settle in and begin to make a life  
for themselves in Tucson. Taylor even  
overcomes her terror of overfilling tires  
to work for Mattie at the used tire lot.

Gradually these relationships  
deepen, and a family is born. Much of  
the book revolves around Taylor’s growing  
attachment to Turtle and her determination  
to erase the damage Turtle has suffered.  
There are also portraits of political refugees  
hiding precariously at Mattie’s; Taylor’s  
friendship with sloppy, depressed Lou Ann  
(“I ought to be shot for looking like this,”  
Lou Ann tells herself regularly. “I look like I’ve  
been drug through hell backwards”); and  
her tentative love for one of the refugees,  
Estevan, a married English teacher from  
Guatemala.

What makes The Bean Trees such a  
winning book, however, is not so much  
the story but the chatting that goes on.  
The primary relationships are all between  
women, and they do love to talk. It is fun  
sitting around on hot Arizona summer  
evenings, the cicadas buzzing outside,  
eating potato chips with Lou Ann and  
Taylor as they discuss the world’s vicissitudes. Characters listen to each  
other in this novel. They marvel,  
criticize, share information, respond.  
They help each other in strange ways.  
Like the bean trees of the title, which  
can flourish in poor soil by existing symbiotically with a microscopic parasite,  
people alone languish, but “put them  
together,” says Taylor, “and they make  
miracles.”

With the encouragement of her new  
associations, Taylor evolves from a  
squinty-eyed Kentucky waif into a person  
with family, connections, importance in  
her own community. As she attains stature,  
the demands of those she loves, particularly  
Turtle, require her to be more responsible  
and wise than she ever thought she could be.  
“I’m just not up to the job,” she tells Lou Ann  
at one point. But in the end, in the face of great  
odds, and with a little help, she is capable  
of something close to a miracle.

Judith Grossman

Her Own Terms  
by Judith Grossman

Soho Press, Inc. (1 Union Square, NY,  
NY 10003), 1988, $16.95, 277 pp.

Her Own Terms is a bildungsroman  
about a woman from a working-class  
British family who attends Oxford Uni-  
versity and is thus put in the margin by  
both her gender and class. As the novel  
begins, Irene Tanner is on her way to get  
an illegal abortion and, while under-  
standably afraid, is exhilarated: “I’ve  
never felt less like a woman — it’s terri-  
bly exciting. This absolute no.”

Irene’s coming of age — breaking  
from patriarchal expectations — has not  
been easy. When she enters Oxford, she  
seems to separate irrevocably from her  
family. At the same time, she feels aca-  
demically underprepared for a university  
education. So she covets the approval of  
the “gifted” men at Oxford. They in turn  
fault her logic, look down upon her  
study of English (as opposed to the clas-  
sics) and proceed to mold her into a suit-  
able intellectual companion for a de-  
serving male. Sometimes Irene literally  
tries to study in her boyfriend’s shadow.  
She finds it increasingly difficult to write  
poetry, and almost impossible to submit  
her forceful love lyrics (to a woman) for  
publication.

When she gets pregnant, Irene al-  
most instinctively decides against the  
kind of demeaning, loveless marriage  
her mother knew. Her choice is certain-  
ly fraught with pain. The abortion is  
agonizing and the appearance of the  
four-month-old fetus that resembles  
Roger is disturbing. But although she  
feels emotionally battered, Irene knows  
she can recover: “the animal, at least, is  
intact. It’s glad to have got away. . .  
and it wants to be happy.”

Her Own Terms truly depicts the edu-  
cation of a young woman in an environ-  
ment hostile to her development. Its  
style is clear, polished, and often lyrical.  
The novel is a must for anyone inter-  
ested in the woman’s bildungsroman,  
working-class literature, or in the work  
of promising new novelists.

—Michelle Tokarczyk

Patty Lou Floyd

Patty Lou Floyd’s The Silver  
DeSoto, another first novel, also  
attempts to notice the world care-  
fully and to remark on its astonishing  
aspects. But where Kingsolver manages  
to weave observations in and out in the  
service of her narrative, Floyd sacrifices  
her narrative to perceptions.

Set during Oklahoma’s Dustbowl  
years, the story focuses on young,  
tongue-tied Betty Jane, an only child,  
who lives with her mother, “Nanna,”  
and “Grand-daddy,” until everyone  
begins dying off. Finally Betty Jane is left  
with just Nanna, a grumpy, parsimonious  
old woman who is depressing company for  
a young girl.

But then, Betty Jane is probably  
equally depressing company for Nanna,  
although that angle is not explored.  
Betty Jane appears to exist for the sole  
purpose of recording mournful events.  
We begin at the end: Nanna is dying and  
Betty Jane is facing the prospect of being  
thoroughly abandoned. She spins im-  
mediately back into the past to when  
“Little Auntie,” her mother’s younger  
sister, is dying of an unspecified disease.  
Usually when she visited Little Auntie,  
Little Auntie would play a game that  
culminated in the offer of Juicy Fruit  
gum: “This time, no offer. No game. No  
laughter.” When Betty Jane asks for the  
gum, it is simply given to her. “Without  
the game, the prize had lost its savor,”  
she tells us glumly. “On this, my last  
visit to her bright nest, there were to be  
neither smiles nor banter nor hugs.”

Betty Jane is convinced Little Auntie  
is dying because she asks for gum all the  
time. In the hands of a deft writer, this  
incident could become poignantly comic.  
Floyd, however, beats the pathos out  
of the scene like dust out of a rug. Little  
Auntie is brought to Nanna’s to die:  
“For the first time ever, my beautiful  
aunt brought none of her light and color  
to our gray house,” notes Betty Jane  
lugubriously. “Or if she did, I was not  
allowed to share it; I was kept out of the  
room. In fact, everywhere I turned, I  
was unwelcome. . . . I wondered what  
terrible thing I had done.”

We soon discover that Betty Jane is  
not going to be allowed any quiet drama  
and confusion. Inevitably, her un-  
happiness is underdeveloped and over-  
explained, her “later life” constantly  
intruding to comment on her childhood.

Similarly, the narrative never orders  
itself from a pastiche of anecdotes,  
vaguely collected together under the  
leitmotif of Betty Jane as Lonely Young  
Girl. These anecdotes are recorded with  
a camera-like faithfulness, but none of  
the participants ever seems lifelike ex-  
cept, at rare moments, Nanna. People  
are identified, Floyd mentions a few of  
their characteristics, and then the album  
page is turned. No pattern or design  
convinces the reader that this is any-  
thing but a hastily compiled scrapbook.

For all her documentary efforts, Floyd  
also fails to give a clear picture of the  
times. The Silver DeSoto, even as a title,  
is meant to revive the pulse of  
Oklahoma’s Dustbowl thirties — with  
its blistering sidewalks, its red dust, its  
commodious, streamlined cars, and of  
course, its ruined dreams. But  
Oklahoma and that era, like the charac-  
ters in this novel, remain curiously mor-  
ibund. The narrative never goes inside  
far enough to produce anything but pic-  
ture postcards.

@ Suzanne Berne is a critic, teacher, and  
fiction writer who lives in Massachusetts.

Safe Passage  
by Ellyn Bache

New York: Crown, 1988, $16.95, 200 pg.

I sometimes wonder why writers never  
describe conception. Perhaps it is in-  
describable, since, on a conscious level,  
it is not experienced. But certainly the  
reasons for bringing a baby into the  
world — or the feelings — are experi-  
enced and describable. Yet we do not  
read about them. Ellyn Bache steps onto  
this undiscovered land.

In Bache’s novel Safe Passage, Mag  
has seven sons, most of whom are adults.  
This is the central fact of her life. Why  
does she have seven children? She never  
wanted to have children at all.

When her eldest son, who is about to  
become stepfather to two boys, talks  
about birth control and abortion as logi-  
cal alternatives in certain situations,  
Mag is outraged. She screams (silently),  
“As if there were no more to such deci-  
sions than logic. She herself wouldn’t  
have had abortions even if they’d been  
legal.” Later she remembers that various  
birth control devices failed her. What  
never failed was her willingness to pro-  
vide sexually for her husband — the only  
time she felt, if not kingly, certainly  
queenly.

Mag’s vision is discolored by her end-  
less labor as full-time worker and pro-  
vider. Patrick, her husband, is exempt  
from all household duties; he invents  
disposable diapers and tear-off warm-up  
suits called RipOffs. Mag came up with  
the name.

She hates her eldest son’s woman  
friend because she has big breasts. She  
hates her husband’s ability to detach  
himself through temporary blindness,  
from the catastrophe that approaches  
them when another son is temporarily  
missing in the bombing of military head-  
quarters in Beirut. Mag hates, bears up,  
and is silent. She resembles many  
women we all know.

When she can stand no more of the  
confusion, the mess, and the demands  
her male family heap upon her, she re-  
treats to the stereo and turns the music  
up so loud that everyone has to notice —  
the only time they notice her. She is the  
center of no scene.

Mag has no access to metaphor. She  
sees herself, guiltily, as a failure, because  
she accepts the definition of femininity  
her society promotes. She has no alter-  
native.

Near the end of the novel, a slight  
relationship develops between Mag and  
Cynthia — Alfred’s lover. The friend-  
ship, and a momentary closeness to her  
competitive, sealed-off sons, give Mag  
some respite. She thinks that perhaps  
she will find a career — she has held a  
succession of jobs — and leave Patrick.  
But at the end she is still caught in the  
“web. . . woven by lives.”

Lives, or lies? The wife role has Mag  
in its grip. Her self-sacrifice, her silence,  
and her rage form a perfect circle. She  
never learns of another way of being.  
She does not read, and she has no  
women friends.

Yet she is a highly sympathetic, even  
admirable mother and wife. We need to  
read about her because our answers to  
her questions are still tentative.

—Sallie Bingham

Fait 1988