€) Southern Hemisphere

Desperate for Refuge

Night Train to Mother, by Ronit Lentin. Pittsburgh and San Francisco: Cleis Press,

1990, $9.95, 219 pp. (PB)

by Miriyam Glazer

Every immigrant to a new country
has a “There,” which is too often
in our century the place of hun-
ger, war, or devastation from which to
flee. Like the United States, Israel is a
nation of immigrants, most of them
bloodied by their own Theres. But — as
in the United States — when the new-
comers arrived in the Promised Land,
they find prejudice and discrimination.
The United States has its dagos, spics,
and kikes, Israel its yekkes and shvartzes.
As Ronit Lentin reminds us in her
second English-language novel, to be
called a Romanian in the Israel of the
1950s was an insult. “Never forget the
horrors of There” was one message of
that culture. “Disown all ‘Thereness”
was another. The avatar of Jewish pride
was the native-born Israeli, the ide-
alized, mythologized Sabra. Says Ruth,
the narrator of this semiautobiographi-
cal work:

You could have been a child from there,
but they did all they could so you would
be a child from here. A strong, earth-
smelling Sabra. . . . “You, my Sabra,”
father said, “must eat and be strong.” But
he never spoke of there.

From her earliest childhood, Ruth
senses, knows, that There was “always
bad. The [goyim], the troubles, the
endless moves, the camps, the sick
stomachs.” But perhaps because Ruth
was skinny, pale, like a “little girl from
there” — so unlike the suntanned,
thick-skinned Sabras at school — per-
haps because Jews of Romanian origin
like herself were belittled and mocked,
she grew up feeling that she was neither
of Here nor of There.

“When did the journey begin?” Ruth
asks herself. “Was there ever a time you
weren’t journeying?” Like Lentin, who

Wild Thorns
by Sahar Khalifeh

Olive Branch Press, 1989, $9.95 (PB)

Wild Thorns is a novel about the lives of
Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied
West Bank. The action takes place
sometime between the June War of
1967, when the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip were occupied by Israel, and
the October War of 1973. Khalifeh es-
tablishes an important context for un-
derstanding the roots of the Intifada, the
Palestinian uprising now in its third
year.

Sahar Khalifeh is a Palestinian
woman born in Nablus on the West
Bank. Wild Thorns, her third novel, was
written in Arabic and published in
Jerusalem in 1976. In 1985, an English
translation was done by Elizabeth Fernea
and Trevor Legassick.

Usama al-Keharmi, a young Pales-
tinian, left after the June War and went
to work in the Gulf, where he joined the
Palestinian Resistance and was trained
as a guerrilla. He is returning to his home
and family in Nablus with a mission —
to blow up the buses that transport
Palestinians to Israel for work, because
he believes that Palestinians who work
in Israel or buy Israeli-made products are
traitors to the cause. As Usama experi-
ences the realities of life under occupa-
tion, however, he comes to understand
that Palestinian life on the West Bank
has drastically changed.

Palestinians who do not want to leave

12 @ Belles Lettres

Ronit Lentin

moved to Ireland with her Irish-Jewish
husband nineteen years ago, Ruth leaves
the Homeland believing that to know
herself now she must face her original
There.

“Why go there when there are so
many places?” her mother shudders. “I
wouldn’t go there for anything.” But as
so many second- and third-generation
immigrant women are discovering, Ruth
needs to untangle her roots. Despite her
mother’s misgivings, Ruth sets out for
Romania. She needs to re-member the lives of the figures who loomed over
her childhood: her great-grandmother,
grandmother, aunts, and great-aunts.

The first chapter, “Ruth’s 1984,”
captures the poverty, desperation, and
corruption of the bitter Ceausescu re-
gime. “Close the window,” the Ro-
manians joke in Bucharest’s winter.
“The street will get cold.” The “mere
rumor of lemons in town sends shivers
of delight down your school friend’s
spine.” Like most of Eastern Europe,
Romania had been a vast killing field for
Ashkenazi Jews, so most of the pre-War
place names Ruth knows from her child-
hood have disappeared.

In each of the chapters that follow,
Ruth retraces and reconstructs the past,

their homeland for the Gulf or Europe
are forced to find work in Israel. Prod-
ucts made there, from cigarettes to
tahini (a sesame paste that is a staple in
Arab kitchens), have replaced Palestin-
ian goods in the markets. Usama is
shocked to learn that his cousin, Adil,
head of the upper-class landowner Al-
Keharmi family, is one of the Palestin-
ians who travels daily to Israel to work in
a factory. The educated and sensitive
Adil, who can no longer maintain the
family farm and orchards, is forced to
work as a laborer in Israel in order to
support his family, including a sick fa-
ther who needs expensive kidney dialy-
sis. Through her characters, Khalifeh
exposes the oppressive nature of the
Israeli occupation. For example,
Palestinians like Usama who left the
West Bank after the war are denied
reentry because they are no longer con-
sidered West Bank residents by the
Israeli government. Usama can only
return home with Israeli permission
under the family reunification program.

Palestinian workers who travel daily
to Israel to work at unskilled jobs in fac-
tories or construction sites are paid less
than Israeli workers, have no job securi-
ty, and receive no benefits such as
health insurance or pensions. When
Adil’s friend, Abu Sabir, loses his finger
in an accident at work, the factory own-
ers declare that he is not eligible for
compensation. As Khalifeh also shows,
the Palestinians are subject to arbitrary
arrests, imprisonment, and even tor-
ture. Collective punishments such as
curfews are imposed on whole villages,

from her great-grandmother Dora in
1895 — then a young woman on the
verge of an arranged marriage to a gen-
tle, obsessed Talmudic scholar — to her
grandmother Rosa and great-aunt Hetti,
across the century. As her ancestors
come into their womanhood; seek to
love; make and lose money; argue about
Zionism, socialism, and communism;
struggle to survive anti-Semitism,
pogroms, the disillusion and chaos of the
Hapsburg Empire, and the ravages of
World Wars I and II, they are always
unpacking, settling, packing, fleeing.
Like most Eastern European Jews,
Ruth’s family spent the twentieth cen-
tury desperate for refuge. By 1940, those
who had survived had made their way to
Israel. “I hated it there,” said Ruth’s
mother, “this is where I belong.”

In the end, one feels no testimony to
the hardy human spirit, no celebration
of womanly being, certainly no paean to
the homeland, no triumph. Only the
“longing, the searching for true love,
the perpetuation of women looking for
acceptance and men yearning for power
which eludes; they are a lost genera-
tion.” By the time old age and war breaks
that generation, all the sisters are poor
and widowed. Hetti is swollen-legged,
sad, feeling alien and alone amidst
Israel’s North African Jews, the
“shvartzes.” “Toothless mouth fixed in
eternal expressionless pain,” the aged
Dora sits on her Tel Aviv veranda “hic-
cuping endlessly and asking every hour Is
it already one? Is it already two?” Broken
lives, broken hearts, that even the Sabra
child cannot heal.

After all these women had endured,
this ending for them made me angry,
made me weep. I wanted some sense of
redemption. But now that Lentin has so
movingly written out her There, per-
haps such redemption will give shape to
her vision when she goes on from Here.

@ Miriyam Glazer edited Burning Air
and a Clear Mind: Contemporary Israeli
Women Poets. She is an associate professor
of English and Literature at the University
of Judaism.

and homes are demolished by the Israeli
military government if one member of a
family is arrested or suspected of an ac-
tive resistance to the occupation.

Yet while Khalifeh chronicles the
daily abuses and sufferings of the
Palestinians at the hands of the Israeli
authorities, she is also critical of the
weaknesses of Palestinian and Arab so-
ciety. In her view, the Palestinians and
Arabs themselves must bear some re-
sponsibility for the loss of Palestine. For
example, Khalifeh criticizes Arab dis-
unity and the willingness of Arab oil
producers to invest their money in
Europe and the United States. As one of
her characters points out, Arab oil mon-
ey, invested in the West, helps to pay for
Israel’s war planes.

At the time the novel was written,
Palestinians in the occupied territories
looked “outside” — to the Arab States
and the Palestinian resistance groups —
for salvation from the Israeli occupa-
tion. By 1987, with the outbreak of the
Intifada, the Palestinians in the West
Bank and Gaza were demonstrating their
determination to take the initiative in
ending the occupation. Although Khal-
ifeh’s novel was written eleven years
before the Intifada began, there are
times in the novel when she seems to
anticipate the future. For example, in a
heated and acrimonious conversation
between Adil and Usama, Adil criticizes
the wealthy Palestinians who made for-
tunes in the Gulf and refused to invest in
industries in the West Bank and Gaza:

“You know why? Because they don’t want

Doing Daily Battle:
Interviews with

Moroccan Women

by Fatima Mernissi

Translated by Mary Jo Lakeland

London: The Women’s Press, 1988

In Doing Daily Battle (originally Le
Maroc Raconté par ses Femmes), Mernissi
begins by saying that her objective is to
“break the ancestral silence” of women
by allowing them to speak. The intro-
duction provides a framework that ori-
ents the reader to the importance of
hearing Moroccan women’s voices and
points out the central issue that recurs
throughout the text.

Straightforward and lively, it pre-
sents eight interviews of twelve women
who talk about life experiences spanning
most of this century, with an emphasis
on the 1970s. The interviews provide
important and seldom-discussed infor-
mation concerning many aspects of
these women’s lives: raising crops and
animals, working for wages in cities,
marriage and interactions with men,
friendship, and relationship with the
supernatural.

Mernissi argues that the pervasive
speaking voice in Morocco is male. She
describes what she calls “terrorist” tac-
tics that Moroccan men use to silence
women like her who clamor to be heard.
Moroccan men either claim her ideas are
imported and deny their cultural heri-
tage or assert that they are scientifically
invalid. Mernissi’s interviews reveal
female perceptions and realities very dif-
ferent from the pervasive Moroccan dis-
course. The women interviewed are
mostly uneducated (as are nearly all
Moroccan women over forty), and only
one would be called “bourgeois”: a high
school teacher formerly married to a
doctor. The women vary in age and ac-
tivities, from a ten-year-old maid to a
woman over sixty who says she married
at nine. It includes weavers, domestics,
housewives, and a psychic. Mernissi
stresses the importance of building re-
lationships in interviews, and this shows
in the women’s responses. She evokes
interesting materials through her use of
factual questions about daily activities
and queries about sexual harmony and
the spiritual life. She concludes with a
defense of her interview techniques and
qualitative research that echoes some of
Carol Gilligan’s arguments about the
limitations of most psychological re-
search. In sum, she illustrates Muslim
women’s dignity, strength, and impor-
tance in their culture.

Susan Schaefer Davis

to risk their money; yet they want [us] to
bear all the burdens or risk and sacrifice
on our own.”

“Yes,” Usama agreed. “And that’s
exactly what we have to do. It’s we who
are responsible for resistance, us first and
last.”

—Mary Ann Fay

YOU CAN SUPPORT
‘SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE’

We need reviewers, editors, and writers
with background, expertise, or interest in
the work of women from Latin America &
the Caribbean, Oceania & Asia, Africa &
the Middle East, and Diaspora. Original
fiction and poetry will be considered. Next
issue: Oceania & Asia (including India & 
Pakistan). Contact the section editor,
Leslie A. Moushey, at 228 10th St. NE,
Washington, DC 20002.

Spring 1990