D

| ‘YT Your years in the making, Forbid-
[1 den Stitch: An Asian American
| .. Women’s Anthology from Calyx
Books ($24.95 HB, $12 PB, 252 pp),
edited by Shirley Geok-Lin Lim and
Mayumi Tsutakawa, is a significant, en-
during achievement. The “forbidden
stitch,” says editor Lim, is “an
embroidery knot which, while it resulted
in a luxurious beauty, was so difficult to
sew that it led to blindness in many of
the Chinese artisans assigned to
embroider the robes and altar hangings
so beloved in feudal China.” In reading
the selections, I was struck by something
; the editors also point out: the col-
lection’s diversity. The mix of genera-
tions, backgrounds, geography, and gen-
res, combined with the overall excel-
lence of the selections, is truly exhilarat-
| ing. Emiko, an ex- relocation camp in-
mate, wields a shovel to kill a scorpion
that is threatening her daughter, an act
that puts the quietus to the obnoxious
| attentions of a neighbor; Mariko, a sur-
vivor of Hiroshima, plants a spring gar-
den as the invitation she has just re-
ceived to speak about her experiences
| brings them flooding back; and an old
couple in Chinatown heroically manages
to summon a rescue squad that saves the
| life of their Italian landlady, although
they know no English.
| There are sexual awakenings: young
| Mei Sim tries to fathom the overheard
| gossip of her cruel and indolent Malay-
| sian aunt and later suffers a shameful
rebuke for an innocent interchange with
a local boy; Chinese-American Lucy,
who is mistaken for an Eskimo as she ar-
| rives to be a public health nurse in An-
| chorage, fights her attraction to a mar-
ried man. One welcome aspect is the in-
clusion of Indian and Pakistani writers.
Tahira Naqvi sympathetically recreates
the shocked consciousness of an old world
| mother dismayed by the vast expanses of
flesh displayed so carelessly at the beach
| to which her westernized son takes her.
| Anjana Appanchana also creates an a-
| cute sense of identification with a be-
| leaguered wife, trying to work and run the
| house on a pittance whilst her husband
invites friends over willy-nilly for her to
entertain and criticizes her for not hav-
ing more joie de vivre.

Calyx, the literary magazine, has al-
| ways had wonderful art, and that facet is
| present here also. The rigor and the
honoring of Asian women’s work that
went into compiling the extensive bibli-
ography are also commendable.

@ Hualing Nieh is the director and
co-founder of the Iowa International
Writing Program. The first uncensored
| English translation of her novel Mulber-
| ry and Peach has been published by
| Beacon Press in their Asian Voices series
| ($18.95, HB, $8.95 PB, 207 pp.). It tells
| of the schizophrenic breakdown of a
| Chinese girl who must cope with the
stresses of illegal immigration to
| America.

@ The stereotype of Japanese women
as docile and submissive could not be
further from the reality of the activists
who speak in their own words in Reflec-
tions on the Way to the Gallows; Rebel
Women in Prewar Japan (translated,
edited, and introduced by Misiko Hane;
University of California Press, $22.50,
275 pp.). Coming from various social
classes and united in their commitment
to social justice, these women effectively
| fought public brothels, economic oppres-
sion, and rampant militarism — despite
cruel reprisals. In the title selection,
anarchist Kanno Sugako writes from her
prison cell as she awaits death for
| treason:

|
}

2 @ Belles Lettres

Beyond Jade Snow Wong

Impressions

Snow has settled on top of the pine trees
and the dead branches of the cypress trees.
The world has been covered in silver during
the night. Since the beginning of the year
there have been several short flurries, but
this storm doesn’t look as though it will stop
soon. Let it snow, let it snow! A foot, two
feet. Pile it up high. Envelop this sinful city
of Tokyo in snow, like a city buried in ashes.
Level the entire landscape.

@ Children of China talk about their
lives to scholar Ann-ping Chin in the
book of the same name from Knopf
($22.95, 309 pp.). In 1979 and 1984 she
interviewed hundreds of children of dif-
ferent ages and backgrounds, asking
them about their parents, siblings,
schools, games, politics, and dreams. Her
opening chapter sets the historical/cul-
tural context for the interviews.

@ The Unbroken Chain: An An-
thology of Taiwan Fiction Since 1926
(Indiana University Press, $12.95, 275
pp.) contains only a few stories by
women, but I thought I should mention
it because fiction from that country is so
rarely seen. On the other hand, Bound
Feet by Catherine Dai (Bookman Books,
$7.95, 270 pp.), is a hefty book of short
stories by a teacher of comparative

“Portrait of a Japanese Girl.” Etching by
Tomie Arai from Forbidden Stitch.

literature at a private university in
Taipei that focuses on the Chinese
woman’s view of herself in a rapidly
changing society.

@ I could not let another issue with
an Asian section go by without includ-
ing a mention of our beloved Carmen

Carmen Johnson in 1948 and today.

by Janet Palmer Mullaney

Johnson-san. For the past few years,
Carmen, a retired executive editor, has
been applying her rigorous standards to
copyediting and proofreading this
magazine — despite several eye opera-
tions and attendant annoying problems.
I truly do not know what we would do
without her! Carmen is herself an
author, but unfortunately her book, The
Phoenix Stirs, is available only in a
Japanese edition (which was very well
received in that country). It deals with
her experiences at the grass-roots (or
“rice roots”) level, as women’s affairs of-
ficer on several small Japanese islands
during the American occupation. In the
excerpt below, Carmen describes attend-
ing a reunion of Japanese women who
went to the college of English in Tokyo:

To enter a building partially destroyed in
bombings was rather an uneasy experience.
In the room of the hostess were eight
Japanese women: four teachers, three
translators, and a librarian. Still wearing our
coats, we sat on the floor, of course, around a
long table covered with blankets. When we
put our feet under the table and the blankets
over our laps, our feet were kept warm by
heat from under the table. Curiosity about
its source led me to peek under the covers —
inconspicuously, I hoped — to see an
electric toaster.

We were served tea and three kinds of
cakes, two made from sweet potatoes and
one from red beans, both available staples
common in cakes. Because the Japanese
seemed shy and we Americans were at a loss
to know what to talk about, long pauses of
silence resulted. When we were asked to sing
a Christmas song, we chose “Silent Night,”
in which some of them joined. Then in
response to our request, they sang the song
of their alma mater. Next on our program
was “White Christmas,” followed by their
folk song. In spite of some awkwardness, our
visit passed quickly and pleasurably.

A further meeting with this group of
women took place at a small Buddhist
temple run by a priestess instead of the
usual priest. Adjoining the immaculate
temple was her house, livable and pleasant.
We were served ceremonial tea— very
strong and very hot — in the tea room. Our
hostess, who neither spoke nor understood
English, was beautifully robed, with shaven
head. I decided later that she was the most
impressive Japanese woman I had yet met,
perhaps because she occupied a place of
honor and was a leader in her own right.

Briefly Noted

Survivors of incest speak out in the

following recommended books.

Suzanne Scott and Lynne Con-
stantine praise The Obsidian Mirror:
An Adult Healing From Incest, by
Louise M. Wisechild (The Seal Press,
$10.95, 256 pp, PB) as “an unusual and
very moving approach to telling a dif-
ficult story.” They call Wisechild a
“gifted writer” whose imaginative coping
methods were a primary means to sur-
vival. I Couldn’t Cry When Daddy
Died, by Iris Galey (Mother Courage
Press, $9.95, 169 pp. PB), was a best-
seller in New Zealand and Switzerland.
The memoir tells of Galey’s successful
struggle to overcome the effects of abuse
by her father, culminating in his suicide
after his actions were uncovered.

Don’t: A Woman’s Word, by Elly
Danica (Gynergy Books, Box 132,
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island,
Canada CIA 7K2; $12.95, 96 pp. PB) is
a “fictional” incest survivor’s story
broken up into fragmentary, controlled
doses of memory. Compelling is its
depiction of the utter powerlessness of
the child and the transcendence that
comes from her ability to articulate her
experiences and feelings so eloquently.
The biblical observation that there is
nothing new under the sun is
demonstrated once again by The His-
tory of Childhood: The Untold Story
of Child Abuse, edited by Lloyd de-
Mause (Peter Bedrick Books, $25 HB,
$12 PB, 458 pp), a reprint of a

groundbreaking book of essays about the
maltreatment of children.

@ If you imagine that a book called
Get Smart might concern the revenge of
Agent 99, you’re wrong. But you won’t
have to go to the back of the class if you
read this new offering from the Feminist
Press ($9.95, 163 pp., PB) by Montana
Katz and Veronica Vieland, which is
subtitled “A Woman’s Guide to Equality
on Campus.” A lot of us will recognize
issues like romantic involvements with
professors, inappropriate offers of same,
intellectual belittlement, and other such
situations mostly peculiar to female col-
lege students. Analyses of policy
decisions, legal remedies, and sample
problems and solutions round out this
“course” on how to take control of your
education, regardless of your age or the
type of institution you attend.

@ Who could resist a title like Hard-
Hatted Women? This book of twenty-
six inspirational “Stories of Struggle and
Success in the Trades,” edited by Molly
Martin, is new from The Seal Press
($10.95, 265 pp. PB). “For me, one of
the biggest rewards of a high-paying
construction job,” says Susan Eisenberg,
an electrician, “has been to feel less
trapped by traditional gender roles at
home. My husband and I have been able
to switch back and forth being the
primary income-earner and being the
primary home- and child-care person...

struggle with the differentiations of boys
and girls, I am glad that she can try on
my work boots as well as my jewelry.”

¢ Bharati Mukherjee, whom we in-
terviewed last March, has won the Na-
tional Book Critics Circle award for her
most recent collection, The Middleman
and Other Stories.

@ Toni Cade Bambara, Barbara
Smith, Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz, Paula
Gunn Allen, and Angela Davis are
some of the speakers and panelists at
Parallels and Intersections: A National
Conference on Racism and Other
Forms of Oppression, coming up April
6-9 in Iowa City and sponsored by the
Women Against Racism Committee at
the University’s Women’s Resource and
Action Center (130 N. Madison St.
Iowa City IA 52242).

@ Among women’s conferences, the
Women’s Writers Conference of the
University of Kentucky is distinctive in
that its focus is on celebrating living
writers. A wealth of readings by and
conversations with writers; workshops;
performances; and the intimate scale
make this conference enjoyable and
stimulating. Participating this year
(April 5-8) will be Claribel Alegria,
Michelle Cliff, Carolyn Forché, Barbara
Kingsolver, Alicia Partnoy, and Sonia
Sanchez. Contact the conference at the

University of Kentucky, 106 Frazee

As I listen to my four-year-old daughter | Hall, Lexington, KY 40506-0031.

Winter 1989