Dreams of Love

The Book of Ruth, by Jane Hamilton.  
Ticknor & Fields, 1988, $17.95, 328 pp.  
The Beginner’s Book of Dreams, by  
Elizabeth Benedict. New York: Knopf,  
1988, $18.95, 325 pp.  

by Suzanne Berne  

You would miss Honey Creek,  
Illinois, if you were driving  
through “listening to your favor-  
ite song on the radio or telling a story  
about your neighbor.” It is one of those  
small, depressed towns that flick by your  
car window, just another collection of  
houses needing paint and a cow pasture.  
But in this town lives Ruth, a luminous  
spirit encased in a homely child, waiting  
for someone to stop and discover her.  
Jane Hamilton’s first novel, The Book  
of Ruth, is about the dream of happiness.  
It is also about the nightmare of depriva-  
tion. Ruth’s favorite recollection is of  
the time her father, scooping ice cream  
at the dinner table, missed her dish and  
the ice cream landed on Ruth’s head  
instead. Everyone became hilarious. “I  
wanted to preserve the scene,” she tells  
us, “just as fossils do, keeping rare ani-  
mals so still in stone . . .; on that July  
night we were actually experiencing the  
gladness some people feel every day, not  
just once in a summer.” That “gladness,”  
which many of us take for granted, is like  
a starving child’s vivid memory of a  

Holy Mother  
by Gabrielle Donnelly  

New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press,  
1987, $7.95, 252 pp. (PB)  

With so many young Londoners in this  
book examining their consciences and  
having spiritual crises all over the Eng-  
lish countryside, one is shamefaced to  
admit that Gabrielle Donnelly’s first  
novel is so much fun. In it we meet a re-  
ligious discussion group of 1980s rene-  
gades, romantics, pragmatists, and  
fools, each trying to find his or her place  
in the universe with the help of Holy  
Mother Church. It’s their Catholicism  
that brings them together each Friday  
night, and as Ms. Donnelly weaves their  
rivalries and yearnings, it’s their catho-  
licity that makes us smile. “They talked,  
of course, about religion . . . about the  
hopelessness of trying to convince those  
parents that the way they were living was  
not a lapse from duty, but a duty itself.”  
Catholic or otherwise, we know these  
people. Struggling with our own codes of  
ethics, we’ve asked ourselves the same  
cosmic questions.  

Anne and Stephen have a terminal  
case of the warm fuzzies. Geoffrey is sim-  
ply mad. Maureen storms heaven with  
curses and denials, while Denis loves the  
Church for its peace. Kate can’t con-  
front her doubts about religion without  
endangering her membership in the be-  
loved group. Bob, the hip priest moder-  
ator, struggles with his vow of celibacy.  
In the halls of Parliament, in candlelit  
restaurants, and in their kitchens over  
bubble and squeak, we learn their preju-  
dices, allegiances, and delusions. One  
Friday night, a beautiful visitor puts a  
match to the group’s slow fuse. On a St.  
Patrick’s Day pilgrimage, all hell breaks  
loose among the faithful and faithless,  
and no one comes away quite the same.  

Gabrielle Donnelly shares a London  
Catholic background with Holy Mother’s  
children, and she balances their intro-  
spection with lively humor. Her light  
touch doesn’t trivialize: She makes the  
subject of soul searching accessible in-  
stead of forbidding. We can look forward  
to more work in her clean, buoyant style  
and from her newly acquired California  
perspective.  

—Lorraine E. McCormack  

Farr 1988  

Elizabeth Benedict  

Lollipop: Insubstantial but intoxicating,  
the memory itself measures the depth of  
the craving.  

Ruth was ten when her father ran  
away to Texas to escape the frustration  
and rage of her mother, May (who looks  
“like she went and slept face down on an  
oven rack”), and the drabness of Honey  
Creek in general. “I couldn’t stand the  
thought of him being happier there,”  
says Ruth of her father in Texas, “but I  
had sense enough to know it was true.”  
Ruth’s brother, Matt, also leaves the  
first chance he gets. A math whiz, as  
adored as Ruth is ignored, Matt goes off  
to MIT, becomes a scientist, gets writ-  
ten up in Time, and abandons Ruth and  
May to each other.  

They are not a well-matched pair.  
Embittered by an early disappointment,  
May is addicted to suffering. She devotes  
herself to making life harsher than it al-  
ready is for a family trying to get through  
midwestern winters selling eggs. The  
only person who ever makes Ruth feel  
special is her Aunt Sid; they correspond  
throughout her childhood, allowing  
Ruth the tenuous pleasure of writing  
made-up stories about her happy family.  
Aunt Sid tells her she’s resilient — “I  
liked being resilient,” says Ruth, “be-  
cause it sounded like a jewel glittering in  
the light.” As life gets grimmer, she  
clings to the notion that “the meek are  
going to inherit the earth,” convinced  
her time is coming.  

It is not surprising that Ruth falls in  
love with someone even more deprived  
and dismissed than herself. It is also not  
surprising that the marriage is a disaster.  
Two famished people cannot feed each  
other. For a while they subsist on fanta-  
sies about independence from baleful  
May — with whom they live — and the  
perfect lives they will have someday.  
Ruth is waiting for her inheritance, and  
all the while her jewel-like resilience is  
ground down.  

Finally, after a devastating tragedy,  
she realizes how she has wasted her time.  
“No one inherits one single thing,” she  
says. “We’re only passers-by, and all you  
can do is love what you have in your life.  
A person has to fight the meanness that  
sometimes comes with you when you’re  
born.” Dreams, she decides, are only  
useful if they foment change; and  
“meanness” does not have to be a birth-  
right.  

Hamilton has written a breathtaking  
book, precise and beautiful in its lan-  
guage, full of sharp wisdom, and perme-  
ated by an appreciation of the world’s  
ironies even in the midst of great pain.  
Hamilton handles incongruities like a  
snake charmer, coaxing all kinds of  
shimmies out of a sentence. May, for  
instance, wears an “extra-large fuzzy  
green sweater that looked like a bloated  
zucchini consuming her.” A neighbor  
has the “shortest fattest legs in the state  
of Illinois. If she wasn’t a person you’d  
laugh at the shape you saw out there in  
nature.” And describing her cruel  
father-in-law, Ruth says: “He’s the kind  
of person you could imagine biting the  
heads off of game birds.”  

The Book of Ruth is the story of poetry  
trapped inside ugliness, and of the  
spirit’s revenge when love is denied. It  

began with a girl who was waiting to be  
discovered; it ends with a young woman  
beginning to discover herself. Along the  
way, the splendor of the telling illumi-  
nates the desperate story being told.  

Love is not denied in The Beginner’s  
Book of Dreams but it comes hobbling  
along, moaning and asking for hand-  
outs. Elizabeth Benedict’s second novel  
opens with eight-year-old Esme Singer  
lighting candles in St. Patrick’s Cathe-  
dral with her beautiful mother, Georgia.  
Esme is trying to decide what to pray for.  
Her father? “That when he comes to  
New York he will take her skating?” Or  
something with long-term benefits:  
“That she will not be fat?” Or with im-  
mediate benefits: “That her mother will  
not get drunk again the way she did last  
week?” By the time Esme finishes her  
wish list, the sad infirmities of her life  
have been revealed.  

Georgia Singer is a woman who runs  
through husbands like pantyhose. “You  
pulled too hard, put them on in a hurry,  
sat too far back on a bench ... you  
didn’t even have to move and they ran.”  
A tall Lauren Bacall look-alike from  
Redondo Beach, Georgia is also a hope-  
less, helpless lush who waits for a  
“knight in shining armor” to wake her  
out of sodden bad dreams. She is looking  
for the Holy Grail but keeps settling for  
glasses of Scotch and for men she does  
not love. “The worst thing,” she tells  
herself, “is not having anyone to kiss on  
New Year’s Eve.”  

Her ballast in life is Esme. Prema-  
turely old, Esme is there through all the  
husbands, boyfriends, apartments,  
fights — noting everything. Georgia is  

Grace Edwards-Yearwood.  
Photo by Bob Des Verney.  
5 Ba  

In the Shadow  
of the Peacock  
by Grace Edwards-Yearwood  

New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988, $17.95,  
279 pp.  

Grace Edwards-Yearwood performs  
magic in her first novel, In the Shadow of  
the Peacock. Not only does she manage  
to rivet you to her story immediately af-  
ter the first sentences, but she creates a  
world with which you cannot help but  
become thoroughly involved. Her main  
character, Celia, says it all when, after  
her first sexual experience with a man,  
she reflects: “I never knew I could hurt  
so much and feel so good at the same  
time.”  

Though oftentimes painful, this  
novel, set in Harlem, is not sensational  
in its depiction of brutality or the death  
of fragile innocence. Edwards-Yearwood  
is masterful in capturing the polyphony  
and high wit of Black language at its  
best, and in tempering the hard realities  
of urban poverty, personified by the  
women and men in the Peacock Lounge,  
with victory in regaining lost love and  
faltered strength.  

The story centers on Celia, born the  
night her father dies under ironically  
tragic circumstances. Celia’s weak leg  
gives testimony to her mother’s sorrow  
and intense protectiveness of her daugh-  
ter and only child. Tessie, Celia’s only  

friend, grows into adulthood as no one  
should have to and becomes the reason  
for a detective’s murder in front of the  
Peacock. The story follows both these  
young women from 1940s Harlem to the  
Caribbean in the 1960s where they each  
have the chance to start their lives anew  
with Carnival as a backdrop. Celia,  
Tessie, and the men who are constant  
players in their development are so viv-  
idly depicted, you can actually see them  
sweat, hear their impassioned murmurs  
during lovemaking, and feel their antici-  
pation before a bar raid.  
Edwards-Yearwood weaves such an  
acute race riot at the novel’s opening  
that you believe you would bleed should  
you fail to successfully duck a thrown  
brick. Her ending is as hopeful as life can  
possibly be for Black women in America:  

It occurred to [Celia] that Frieda  
[Celia’s mother] had spoken most of  
the time about the men in the  
family, who had been sacrificed to  
other people’s fears. But the  
women, rarely mentioned, had been  
left to take vague and difficult shape  
in her imagination — which after a  
time enabled her, in vivid day-  
dreams, to carve them into steel-  
willed women, able to take on, take  
down, and take over. Steel willed.  

In the Shadow of the Peacock is good  
fiction full of crystalline imagery and  
heartsong. You will remember it long  
after the reading is done.  

—Terri L. Jewell  

Belles Lettres @ 13