Before the Ink Dries

The Temple of My Familiar, by Alice Walker. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,

1989, $19.95, 432 pp.

by Jewelle Gomez

A large, two-year-old German
shepherd named Holly lives in
the backyard of my apartment
building, kept there by my landlady to
scare away potential burglars. Although
I have hinted to my landlady that dogs
are pack animals that hunger for friend-
ship and attention, every morning I hear
Holly crying. In the afternoon when I
come home and open my kitchen win-
dow, she peers up expectantly as if I
might come downstairs and play with
her. I wave at Holly and call her name to
let her know someone responds to her.
At these times I always think of Alice
Walker, who has written much about
empathy (or, more precisely, about how
we are part of every living thing). In her
most recent collection of essays, Living
by the Word, she speaks about the con-
nections among living things — human
beings to animals, to plants, to earth. In
fact, one of the essays is about a horse
who lives alone in a field. In “Am I
Blue,” Walker apprehends the horse's
sadness and anger at being left in isola-
tion, kept alive simply to act as a stud for
horse owners. Her phenomenal ability
to open herself to the reality and value of
all life is one of the most powerful ele-
ments of her writing. In her new novel,
this enviable trait works in two rather
opposing ways.

First, it allows Walker to imagine a
panorama of characters and situations
that give her story a rich, informative
scope rarely found in contemporary
American fiction. On the other hand,
this feast of information, once served
up, leaves the reader feeling a bit hun-
gry. It is as if behind each page there
should be several more to provide depth
and texture to characters and social situ-
ations. Walker creates a family tree the
likes of which has not been seen since
Alex Haley’s Roots, yet the emotional,
psychological, and social interconnec-
tions of the characters on a personal
level are not evident. The overall effect
is that of hearing about a dramatic inci-
dent that happened to someone you
don’t know.

Women's Books in Literature and History
from the University of South Carolina Press

LITERATURE

New Stories by Southern Women
edited by Mary Ellis Gibson

This collection brings together 21 stories by women who grew up in the South and
have published important fiction in the last decade. “The Southern literary imagi-
nation courts unusual breadth in this collection ... Gibson has chosen wisely in
ranging widely, avoiding provincialism in a regional guise.”—Publishers Weekly
291 pages—Cloth, 0-87249-633-3, $24.95s—Paper, 0-87249-634-1, $14.95

Understanding Denise Levertov
by Harry Marten
A critical guide to all of the works of poet
Denise Levertov, through Breathing the Wa-
ter, published in 1987. 219 pages—Cloth, 0-
87249-578-7, $21.95s—Paper, 0-87249-579-5,
$10.95s

Understanding Carson McCullers
by Virginia Spencer Carr

An examination of McCullers’ extraordinary
acclaim and her use of theme, character, nar-
rative technique, and language. 165 pages—
Cloth, 0-87249-661-9, $21.95s

Understanding Joyce Carol Oates
by Greg Johnson

A general discussion of Oates’ distinctive
style, themes and fictional concerns from 1967
to 1984. 224 pages—Cloth, 0-87249-524-8,
$21.95s—Paper, 0-87249-525-6, $10.95s

HISTORY

Understanding
Katherine Anne Porter
by Darlene Harbour Unrue
An analysis of the way in which Porter’s ca-
nonical themes and concerns are expressed
in individual stories, essays and Ship of Fools.
196 pages—Cloth, 0-87249-583-3, $21.95s—
Paper, 0-87249-584-1, $10.95s

Understanding Mary Lee Settle
by George Garrett
Instruction on how to read the works of Settle
including themes, use of language, point of
view, structures, symbolism, and responses
to experience. 187 pages—Cloth, 0-87249-
540-X, $21.95s—Paper, 0-87249-541-8, $10.95s

Call or write for our current catalog
and complete books-in-print

Charleston Recollections and Receipts:
Rose P. Ravenel’s Cookbook
edited by Elizabeth Ravenel Harrigan
This is a unique collection of the Charleston memories and receipts of Rose P.
Ravenel (1850-1943), daughter of a Huguenot planter, merchant, and shipowner.
125 pages—Illustrated—Cloth, 0-87249-647-3, $14.95

A Rebel Came Home:
The Diary and Letters of Floride Clemson, 1863—1866
edited by Erest McPherson Lander, Jr. and Charles M. McGee, Jr.
The daughter of Thomas Green Clemson and granddaughter of John C. Calhoun
records the problems of wartime travel and the shocking change of circumstances
found in the Confederacy upon her return. Revised edition—225 pages—Cloth,
0-87249-642-2, $22.95

A Woman Doctor’s Civil War: Esther Hill Hawks’ Diary
edited by Gerald Schwartz
The diary of Esther Hill Hawks—a physician, Northerner, teacher, school administrator,
suffragist, and abolitionist—who went South to minister to black Union troops and newly
freed slaves as both a teacher and a doctor. 325 pages—Illustrated—Cloth, 0-87249-435-7,
$21.95—Paper, 0-87249-622-8, $9.95

Available at your local bookstore or directly from the
University of South Carolina Press
1716 College St., Columbia, South Carolina 29208
(803) 777-5075

Fatt 1989

The Temple of My Familiar narrates
the lives of Suwelo, a middle-aged his-
tory professor who, in exploring the life
of his late uncle in Baltimore, learns
about himself; of Suwelo’s ex-wife,
Fanny, the granddaughter of Celie from
The Color Purple, who is also on a spiri-
tual quest; of Arveyda, a famous Black
singer; of Carlotta, a Latin American
refugee; and of her mother, Zedé. They
are all searching for a past that will give
shape to their present life and direction
to their future.

The past is ably presented to them
through the narratives of Miss Lissie and
Mr. Hal, close companions of Suwelo’s
uncle. Unfortunately, once we have
been treated to the scintillating love
story of Miss Lissie, Mr. Hal, and
Suwelo’s Uncle Rafe, we are faced with
the past lives of Miss Lissie — which are
considerable. They include a number of
women (whose visages have been mys-
teriously captured by a traveling photo-
grapher), an African lion, and a white
slave owner. Miss Lissie’s concealment
of these last two past identities is the
only tension between the ancient, idyl-
lic couple. But this small deception
(within the context of the grand scheme
of past lives and timeless love) feels sim-
ply extrinsic, like many other plot de-
velopments.

Early in the novel (within the space
of a few pages), Arveyda falls in love
with Zedé and runs away with her.
Walker’s explication of this potentially
traumatic event is unsatisfying:

He finally knew why he was capable of
falling in love so easily, even with his
own wife’s mother. It was because he was
a musician, and an artist. Artists, he now
understood, were simply messengers. On
them fell the responsibility for uniting the
world.

Walker provides no interlocking emo-
tional complexities, only small personal
blindnesses that are alleviated once a
cosmic truth (like “Artists ... were
simply messengers”) is unfolded.

Because the character development is
so superficial, it is difficult to hang the
movement of the story on anything ex-
cept the narrative voices. In “Coming In
from the Cold,” another essay from
Living by the Word, Walker responds to
the refusal of a Black women’s magazine
to publish segments of The Color Purple.
The magazine editors stated, “Black
people don’t talk like that.” Walker re-
sponds, “Yet Celie speaks in the voice
and uses the language of my step-grand-
mother, Rachel, an old black woman I
loved. Did she not exist? ... And I say,
yes, she did exist, and I can prove it to
you, using the only thing that she, a
poor woman, left me to remember her by
— the sound of her voice. Her unique
pattern of speech. Celie is created out of
language.”

But Walker’s omnipotent and ulti-
mately distancing voice subsumes those
of the characters. Temple does not evoke
the music of Southern, Black, rural
speech that was so poetic in The Color
Purple. Instead Walker’s ideological in-
tonations are forced through the mouths
of her characters. I know Carlotta and
her mother are from Latin America only
because Walker the narrator says so. Yet
that is not information I would discern
from the use of language, although easily
translatable phrases in Spanish are
sprinkled awkwardly throughout the
dialogue. Walker’s usage is not impro-
per; nor should she refrain from includ-
ing Spanish-speaking characters in her
stories. (I wish more authors would be so
bold.) Such an endeavor, though, re-
quires more of a commitment to those
characters and less adherence to an
immutable agenda. Walker has set about
delivering an expansive, sweeping story
in the magic realist style of Allende or
Marquez; instead we get only an episod-
ic, emotionally remote outline for many
stories yet to be written.

After the publication and the filming
of The Color Purple, Walker was assailed
by bitter, self-defensive, homophobic
criticism from men (and some women)
who, years later, continue to make ca-
reers out of delivering lectures on her
work at conferences. This must have
been a terrible blow, particularly in light
of the book’s social and literary signifi-
cance. The Temple of My Familiar seems
to signify a drawing inward, perhaps in
response to these critics. Her voice is less
one of revelation than of eternal opti-
mism. And it is here that the novel loses
its resonance. Only in conjunction with
probing revelations about human nature
(whether they are embodied in acts of
deprivation, violence, resilience, or
joy) is such powerful optimism compel-
ling (as in Walker’s previous works).

Walker’s vision, intelligence, and
sensitivity are important to our culture.
She is one of the artists (like Stevie
Wonder, Toni Morrison, or Joanna
Russ) whose work I rush out to meet be-
fore reviews or word of mouth, before
the ink dries. Even when their work is
not totally successful, their misses are
more interesting and meaningful than
the so-called successes of other artists.

In much of her writing, Walker
points out the importance of response,
of connection, and of communication.
The horse, Blue, standing alone in the
field is hungry for response — human or
animal. He is like Holly in my landlady’s
backyard, barking out a message and
hoping someone will respond. Perhaps
someone will. Walker's ability to make
connections makes her invaluable to
those who refuse to see issues from the
narrow perspective of self. It has served
her well in exploring the specifics of a
woman’s survival in this culture.

In an essay entitled “The Universe
Responds,” Walker postulates that what
we ask for is often what we get. If we ask
for the right things, the things that will
save the planet and enrich our souls,
that is what we will receive. Her new
novel, even in its incompleteness, is a
call for attention to ideas about ways of
loving, to people from different cultural
backgrounds, to the difference between
how men and women define themselves,
to the history of colonialism, and to the
possibilities for magic and change in life.
Her next book (or that of another
writer) may begin to answer this call.
Perhaps the universe will respond.

® Jewelle Gomez writes fiction, poetry,
and criticism.

Belles Lettres @ 37