counter with psychoanalysis in 1912.  
She was especially receptive to Freud’s  
depth psychology, and it has been  
claimed that she took this path solely  
for Rilke’s sake—to make it available to  
him as a source of knowledge while pro-  
tecting him from undergoing it at the  
hands of a third person. Lou had  
always been interested in describing the  
mind’s experiences, investigating, com-  
paring, and synthesizing differences,  
and the status given in psychoanalysis  
to daydreams and fantasies called up  
her own childhood experience.  

Lou went to Vienna in October 1912  
and attended Freud’s lectures and the  
meetings of the Vienna Psychoanalyti-  
cal Society. For the first time since  
Gillot, she again abandoned herself to  
reverence for a great man, only this  
time she was 50 instead of 17, and was  
admired, encouraged, and guided by  
her teacher but was not desired. From  
1914 onward Lou’s primary activity  
was her work as a psychoanalyst, as  
Freud and others recommended pa-  
tients to her. In the 1920s, following  
the war years, Lou had increasing  
financial problems, often working long  
hours, yet she undercharged her pa-  
tients and sometimes gave free analysis.  
Although she needed the money, her  
love of the work kept her going, and  
she was apparently good at it. Living-  
stone writes that “her famous ability to  
listen, to make people feel better, wiser,  
by the way she listened, and to talk of  
anything, no matter how intimate,  
without inhibition, had come into its  
own” (p. 173). Although Lou was never  
analyzed, in the course of analyzing  
others she was able to understand some  
of her own childhood obsessions, past  
relationships, and people she had  
known.  

Lou’s friendship with Freud lasted  
from the Vienna years until her death  
in 1937. She was the second woman—  
and the only woman among his col-  
leagues—with whom Freud kept up a  
long correspondence, full of intellectual  
exchange, scientific discussion, and  
often-declared friendship. Freud con-  
sistently but not uncritically admired  
Lou through all the 25 years he knew  
her. But his caution and occasional  
skepticism about her tendency to syn-  
thesize where he separated and left  
distinct gradually gave way to an ap-  
preciation of the order and tidiness she  
created amidst the “eternal ambiva-  
lences” to which he had grown re-  
signed—something he attributed to her  
“womanliness.”  

Lou’s affirmation of life stayed with  
her until the end of her 75 years. Age,  
she was convinced, brings an increas-  
ing capacity for contact with what is  
universally human, and she recognized  
that her nearly 20 years of close contact  
with people through psychoanalysis  
had enabled her to feel and enjoy this  
benefit to the fullest.  

Rilke said of Lou that “she moves  
among the most burning mysteries.” No comment  
could be more telling in describing at  
once her strength and her weakness—  
the former in her courageously facing  
the depths and heights of experience  
and refusing the easy refuge of conven-  
tion, the latter in her naively assuming  
that life’s most pressing questions are  
not worthy of fear for their sheer power  
over heart, mind, and soul. Oddly  
enough, while the philosopher, poet,  
and psychoanalyst may have been at-  

tracted to Lou’s attentiveness to the  
mysteries, the very thing that sets her  
apart from each of them is the fearless-  
ness of her attention. As Lou sailed  
from one experience to another,  
Nietzsche succumbed to madness, Rilke  
to melancholy and torment, and Freud  
to cocaine. Livingstone describes the  
contrast in terms of Lou’s profound joie  
de vivre, her synthesis of others’ ideas,  
and her certainty of the goodness of  
human life, juxtaposed with Nietzsche’s  
struggle for affirmation, Rilke’s an-  
guished praise, and Freud’s skepticism  
and final misanthropy.  

There was much about her famous  
associates that Lou misunderstood, and  
Livingstone’s appraisal of these mis-  
understandings is sharp and perceptive.  
With Nietzsche she mistook his reso-  
lute iconoclasm as preparation for a  
substitute religion, seeing the Super-  
man not as a hero who endures the  
emptiness but as a god designed to fill  
it up. Nor did Lou appreciate Nietz-  
sche’s unprecedented observation of  
the problems of language and his at-  
tempt to philosophize through mask  
and aphorism to avoid the pitfalls of  
conventional word and thought. With  
Rilke Lou misdiagnosed his incurable  
Angst as a mere “fear of something,” a  
fear that could be explained and re-  
moved, when instead it was existential  
dread that needed to be deepened and  
borne if truth were to be found. With  
Freud there were several points of de-  
parture: where he saw the Unconscious  
mainly as a receptacle for repressed  
material, for Lou it was there long  
before anything had been repressed, as  
a shared and infinite substratum to  
consciousness—something she had  
more in common with Jung. Her inter-  
pretation of narcissism was also strik-  
ingly different from Freud’s: for him,  
after infancy it tended to mean some-  
thing pathological or regressive. But  
Lou read the original legend not as  
Narcissus gazing at himself in a man-  
made mirror but as Narcissus looking  
into a forest pool and seeing not only  
his own face but his face in union with  
all of nature, the union being what he  
fell in love with.  

But despite these “misreadings” Lou’s  
own strength of person, intensity of  
will, and enthusiasm for life are worth  
attention. Livingstone writes, “What-  
ever it was—will, fate, or the belief in  
fate, or perhaps belief in herself—it was  
something which others always sensed  
in her and were attracted by” (p. 11).  

Interspersed in Livingstone’s chro-  
nology of Lou’s life is a discussion of  
her writings, which were considerable:  
in addition to essays on religion, books  
on Ibsen and Nietzsche, essays on love  
and woman, books on Rilke and Freud,  
and an autobiography, she wrote  
stories, novels, and a play. Lou’s fic-  
tional writings carried two themes: the  
loss of religious faith in early youth,  
and the disenchantment with an older  
man after a devoted and subservient  
attachment to him. Other themes, such  
as the explosive collision of eros and  
love, woman’s capacity for self-sacrifice  
and masochism, and intensity and free-  
dom being their own justification re-  
surfaced in her nonfictional writings  
and echoed in her life. Livingstone  
treats these works in a separate section  
at the end of her book. Of more note,  
however, is Lou’s nonfiction, and a  
brief sketch of these works will show  
the seductive power of her mind and  
spirit. This is not to suggest, however,  

that at times her thoughts were not  
banal, or her enthusiasm uncritical.  
Lou’s essays on religion reveal that,  
for her, the study of religion was a  
study of religious feeling rather than  
faith. The courage to feel the loss of  
God was more creative than clinging to  
an image of God, and only from such  
courage would greatness be born. This  
courage, she believed, enables us to ex-  
plore “the dark places” where tradi-  
tional believers do not dare enter.  

Henrik Ibsen’s Female Characters,  
Hetistes in 1892, was Lou’s  

first scholarly book, and it es-  
tablished her as a writer. As Living-  
stone observes, the book is not so  
much a work of literary criticism as it  
is an extended psychological explora-  
tion. And what it explores is the  
familiar Romantic dichotomy between  
wildness and domesticity, ecstasy and  
contentment, the infinite mysteries and  
the bourgeois life. “She is contemptu-  
ous of all mediocrity and lack of  
aspiration and wants the bourgeois life  
to be transcended by, or infused with,  
‘wildness,’ ” writes Livingstone (p. 80).  
Lou scorned the ordinary marriage not  
only because it can be a trap for an  
aspiring wife, as in “A Doll’s House,”  
but also because it can stifle with  
dulling comforts a dreaming husband,  
as in “The Wild Duck.” It is the human  
spirit Lou wanted to see liberated.  

Lou’s second scholarly effort, Fried-  
rich Nietzsche in his Works, in 1894, was  
considered the first serious book on  
Nietzsche ever published. Again adopt-  
ing a psychological approach, she was  
the first to grasp the “intimate con-  
nection” between Nietzsche's work, on  
the one hand, and his temperament  
and way of life, on the other. Through  
the course of his development she  
identified the central “enigma of his  
being”—an extraordinary need of suf-  
fering and insistence on difficulty if  
satisfaction and the intoxication of  
truth are to be achieved: without mad-  
ness and chaos, no birth of the dancing  
star.  

In the late 1890s Lou’s writings  
shifted from religion to sex, both in  
terms of physical love and the dif-  
ference between woman and man.  
Contrasting the two sexes, Lou pro-  
posed that the greatness of woman con-  
sisted in the absence of ambition—that  
woman takes from around her only  
what she needs for the unfolding of her  
self, for she is already anchored;  
whereas man seizes what is logical, not  
because he is so clever but because he  
needs to anchor himself by adopting  
the truths held by the majority.  
Woman is already “at home” in who  
she is and does not need man in any  
sense; man, however, needs woman,  
for without her he is homeless. Of the  
sexual act Lou thought that for the  
man it is partial, brief, and indifferent,  
whereas for the woman it involves the  
whole body and soul, an integrated ex-  
perience that speaks of a higher union  
than simply that with a man. In her  
writing about love Lou declared that  
happiness is found not in being loved  
but in loving, that the loved one is  
merely an “addition,” and that what  
we in fact find most fulfilling is not the  
loved person but the condition we are  
in when we love another.  

Between the ages of 67 and 73 Lou  
wrote her last three books. In Rainer  
Maria Rilke, published in 1928, she  
charts Rilke’s development not so  

much as being a fragile person but as a  
person carrying something fragile that  
he had to protect, a task to which he  
eventually sacrificed himself. In My  
Thanks to Freud she recapitulates  
Freud’s ideas, attaching to them her  
own conclusions about psychoanalysis,  
religion, and art, as well as affirming  
the continuing relationship she and  
Freud have had. Looking Back, finished  
in 1932, is Lou’s “retrospective medi-  
tation” on the significant moments and  
periods of her own life—“a leisurely  
backward look in gratitude, a count-  
ing of blessings,” Livingstone writes. As  
her biographer observes, apart from  
Freud, no individual is called an ex-  
perience, and the only two men Lou  
thought back to as relationships were  
Rilke and Andreas. As for Nietzsche,  
he has no place as experience or re-  
lationship but is mentioned in her dis-  
cussion of friendship and Paul Ree.  

Livingstone points out the difficulties  
in reading this last book by Lou as an  
autobiography. In spite of its chrono-  
logical structure and the details it  
offers, particularly about her family,  
there is an absence of all dates and of  
all historical and circumstantial back-  
ground, a tendency to see things  
through a rose-colored lens, a predi-  
lection for abstraction, and a series of  
particular omissions. Lou never saw  
herself in life’s larger context but only  
in terms of her own life, and the tale she  
tells conspicuously omits any criticism,  
correction, or laughter that is self-  
directed. The book must then be read,  
as her biographer cautions, chiefly as  
a series of meditations. Between ob-  
serving the shape and pattern of one’s  
life and giving it shape and pattern,  
writes Livingstone, only a fine distinc-  
tion can be made, and Lou did both  
with little sense of a difference.  

Lou’s inability or unwillingness to see  
herself as part of the world at large is a  
recurring characteristic. It is what pre-  
vented her from appreciating the irony  
and paradox in Nietzsche; it is what  
allowed her to see, on her trip to Russia  
with Rilke, only purity and light in the  
spirit of the people and not also the  
poverty, ignorance, and lack of rights  
that conspired against that spirit; and it  
accounts for her astonishing neglect to  
record a single word about the political  
changes in Germany when for four  
years she lived under Hitler’s govern-  
ment. All her thoughts were of religion,  
psychoanalysis, her own past, and her  
immediate surroundings. Her concept  
of woman as “already anchored” fulfills  
itself negatively here.  

In commenting on Lou’s early essays,  
Livingstone might well be making a  
summary comment on Lou’s outlook  
and life, when she writes: “Some of the  
essays are more scholarly, some more  
personal. All suffer from looseness of  
expression and structure; one would  
like to rewrite them concisely, put in  
paragraphing, and request some refer-  
ences and facts. She often talks of  
history, of developments and changes,  
without mentioning time or place, and  
sums up literature without naming a  
book; she seems carried away by ideas  
too pressing to allow time for detail or  
proof. None the less, all are worth read-  
ing: in addition to their interest as part  
of a contemporary debate, there is in  
these writings a forthrightness and vi-  
tality which greatly commend them”  

(p. 74).  

continued on page 8  

Belles Lettres ¢ 3