young reader develops her taste

by noticing similarities as well as

differences between authors’ styles and between various appealing
works. In exactly the same way, much of
experienced readers’ fun grows directly
from comparing similarities between
stories from different periods, different
pens. The more we know, the more we
can enjoy. It may not seem wholly logi-
cal, but that’s the way it works.

If, as many readers and writers agree,
we are happily in the midst of a new
Golden Age of Mystery, the reason con-
nects closely with this same phenome-
non. Our favorite new crime stories (like
our old favorites) satisfy well-established
expectations and at the same time offer
new diversions. Similarly, several
writers may address the same question,
each delighting the reader individually,
and each work enhancing the others if
they are read in conjunction with one
another. Devotees of specific subgenres
count on this sort of pleasure. Currently
available to the criminal element of
Belles Lettres are several unintended but
intriguing clusters of novels that differ in
style, content, and force, perhaps, but
that share a number of strengths and at-
tractions.

The titillation of the partially dis-
closed creates suspense in one of those
clusters: The House of Stairs, in which
Barbara Vine reflects the influence of
Henry James; The Book of Ruth, Jane
Hamilton's “mainstream” novel, which
— like so many of Dickens’s works — is
powered by a criminal act; and My
Search for Ruth, a reissue from the reli-
able Anna Clarke. Each plot is as much
a character study as it is an action-
oriented story, and in each, some facet
of the protagonist’s personality keeps
readers a bit off balance; it is not always
easy to like these characters.

Each central character tells her own
story as straightforwardly as possible.
Nevertheless, they constantly remind
their audiences that truth wears many
guises and that no one understands, or
even notices, every truth in every situa-
tion. And, of course, each plot either
centers on a crime toward which the
action speeds or it inexorably circles
back toward a crime that has defined the
narrator's life. The terrible event is an-
nounced early in each novel; the details
are withheld until late in the action.
Each author manages these devices dif-
ferently; each does it very well.

The most appealing of these three
heroes is Ruth Dahl in The Book of Ruth
(Ticknor & Fields, $18.95, 328 pp.),
but she is far from being an ideal child.
Seemingly, she is every teacher’s night-
mare, considered to be unteachable and
unreachable. Inwardly, she is a sensi-
tive, introspective youngster who is en-
raptured with narrative yet is almost
voiceless because no one hears or re-
sponds adequately. Impoverished,
abandoned by her father, emotionally
battered by her mother, ignored by her
gifted brother, Ruth seeks identity
and comfort in the arms of Ruby, a
drugged-out dropout whom she marries.
Jane Hamilton depicts the love between
these doomed youngsters sparely and
persuasively, and the unself-serving
honesty in Ruth’s voice never falters as
she recounts the horrible, inevitable
clash between her husband and her
mother. Combining elements of the
mystery, the confessional novel, and the
maturation novel, The Book of Ruth is
splendidly realized.

The House of Stairs (Harmony Books,
$18.95, 277 pp.) follows A Dark-
Adapted Eye and A Fatal Inversion in the
Barbara Vine canon, and all share an
organizational pattern: the search for
the whole truth and for sense or meaning
behind some terrible crime. Among the
author’s books published as Ruth Ren-
dell, A Judgment in Stone is the most

Part 1989

similar. Yet The House of Stairs is quite
different from any of these. Here,
Elizabeth Vetch, successful writer of
popular, fairly sensational novels, pon-
ders her affection for two women, Co-
sette Kingsley, her indulgent substitute
mother, and Bell Sanger, her sometime
lover. The stories of these willful women
are also studies in sexuality and explore
the purposes that desire and fulfillment
can serve.

Like Eunice Parchman of A Judgment
in Stone, Bell is single-minded and un-
empathetic. But she is, perhaps, even
more dangerous because she is stunningly
beautiful and vastly intriguing. As
Elizabeth pursues experience, pleasure,
and success, Cosette, widowed and
wealthy, attempts to recapture her
youth. When Bell, unwaveringly press-
ing toward her own goals, joins the
oddly assorted company living in Co-
sette’s “house of stairs,” murder accom-
panies her, and the suspense (despite the
many correct guesses the reader makes
along the way) intensifies steadily. Sel-
dom has an open ending been so satis-
fyingly right as is Judgment’s conclusion.

Elizabeth in The House of Stairs wants
a substitute mother because her own
mother was incapacitated early by a fatal
hereditary disease. Elizabeth has a
fifty-fifty chance of falling victim also,
and that fact largely controls her. She
packs sensation and achievement into
every moment because she may have
relatively few, a preoccupation that
gives her emotional blinders when it
comes to understanding and having
empathy for others. Thus, it could be
fairly said that uncertainty defines her.
The same is true for the protagonist of
My Search for Ruth. She doesn’t know
who she really is. As a result, it is almost
impossible for Ruth to trust anyone ful-
ly. Because her life seems to consist of
lies and concealment, she is often angry
and scornful, and she looks backward
rather than forward.

My Search for Ruth (Richardson,
Steirman & Black, $14.95, 188 pp.)
recounts Ruth’s efforts to uncover the
dreadful moment that shattered her par-
ents’ lives, information carefully con-
cealed by her mentors — an elderly
working-class couple; a thoughtful, re-
sponsible schoolmistress; and a very
honorable but most unsuitable suitor.
Despite their best intentions, they al-
ienate and isolate the unfortunate young
woman for whom they feel so much pity
and affection. Moreover, Ruth only
narrowly avoids repeating their mistake.
Happily, she is kept from doing the
wrong thing for the right reason, and the
novel concludes on a hopeful note.

Romantic suspense fiction is well-
represented in the current crop of mys-
teries. Written by experienced authors
whose work is widely admired, these
novels depict talented, honorable young
women imperiled through no fault of
their own — indeed danger stalks them
because they are particularly decent or
gifted. Preoccupation with danger and
responsibility tends to cloud their emo-
tions so that these heroines also risk
making unwise romantic choices. These
stories are told forthrightly, with action
dominating characterization, to the sat-
isfaction of many readers.

While My Pretty One Sleeps (Simon
& Schuster, $19.95, 318 pp.) zoomed
directly onto the bestseller lists, almost a
given for Mary Higgins Clark’s novels.
The murder of waspish author Ethel
Lambston, about to publish an exposé of
high-fashion mavens, and an old grudge

THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN

against her father, the retired police
commissioner, complicate the life and
love of beautiful Neeve Kearney, owner
of a successful boutique and herself the
target of an assassin. A host of characters
with scores to settle and axes to grind
keep this story rolling.

Perennial favorite Phyllis A. Whit-
ney takes her readers to the Blue Ridge
Mountains of Virginia where Christy
Loren hopes to avoid using her psychic
powers in Rainbow in the Mist
(Doubleday, $18.95, 310 pp.). An un-
timely death and a mysterious disap-
pearance, however, have already de-

On this page, Council Oaks Books’
“Brown Bag” mystery series logos

stroyed the peace of her refuge, and
Christy finds abundant challenge, love,
and reconciliation by serving rather
than denying her unusual ability.

The special bonds between loving
cousins, recently deceased Laney
McCall and grieving Laura Graham,
generate action in Mignon F. Ballard’s
Cry at Dusk (Worldwide, $3.50, 219
pp.). Uneasy about the mysterious facts
surrounding Laney’s death and con-
cerned for her cousin’s small son, Laura
returns to Redpath, South Carolina,
where she must investigate an old ghost
story in order to solve the current mys-
tery — and find a mate.

Romance, marriage, and murder are
topics shared by a recent pair of sprightly
novels. Despite the schemes of dastardly
criminals, cheerfulness dominates
Charlotte MacLeod’s new Peter and
Helen Shandy comedy, Vane Pursuit
(Mysterious Press, $15.95, 185 pp.), in
which the happy couple track down
thieves who are stripping their cherished
Balaclava County of valuable antiques.
Some of the Shandys’ seemingly in-
exhaustible array of eccentric but lova-
ble friends join the hunt; among them
are a zany writer who scorns word proc-
essors — “ ‘If God had meant us to spend
our lives staring at green neon letters on
a dinky little screen, She'd have given us
styrene eyeballs’ ” — and a dispossessed
heiress who is a survivalist of very un-
usual stripe. (MacLeod’s fans now pro-
duce the Charlotte MacLeod Newsletter;
for details, write Box 481, Brunswick,
Maine, 04011.)

A Honeymoon with Murder
(Bantam, 1989, $3.95, 227 pp.)
threatens to be no honeymoon at all,
according to Carolyn G. Hart’s latest
Annie Laurance-Max Darling adven-
ture. Annie, owner-operator of Death
on Demand, a mystery bookstore, and
Max, proprietor of Confidential Com-
missions, his compromise with full-time
gainful employment, once again pool
their skills to solve a complex case in-
volving murder, blackmail, and abduc-
tion that begins immediately after their
wedding reception and delays the
honeymoon. As usual, Hart makes the
most of her setting, Broward’s Rock, off
the Carolina coast, stuffs her dialogue

with allusions to other mysteries, and
provides lots of fun for her readers.

If you favor “soft-boiled” mysteries
such as those by Clark, Whitney, Bal-
lard, MacLeod, or Hart, you might wish
to indulge in Malice Domestic, a
Washington, D.C., mystery conven-
tion scheduled for April 27-29, 1990.
Memberships, which include the price
of a banquet, cost $65 until November
1, 1989, $75 thereafter. To register or
for further information, write Malice
Domestic, P.O. Box 701, Herndon,
VA 22070-0701. It will be a great week-
end. If you plan to attend, let me know
(RR23, Box 131, Terre Haute, IN
47802). I'll arrange for the Criminal
Element to get together.

Paula Gosling seems to be turning
from the adventure story to the police
procedural. Backlash (Doubleday,
$12.95, 191 pp.) recounts Lieutenant
Jack Stryker’s hunt for a cop-killer and
the very different but equally interesting
adventures of his beloved Kate
Trevorne, who is in England attending
an academic conference. The comrade-
ship, fear, and anger of Stryker and his
colleagues are particularly convincing,
depicted with understanding but no sen-
timentality. Perhaps because Gosling,
an American, lives abroad, some British
usages crop up among her midwestern

characters, lending an odd flavor.
Scent of Death (New York: World-

wide, $3.50, 218 pp.), by Emma Page,

is also an absorbing procedural. Detec-
tive Chief Inspector Kelsey and Detec-
tive Sergeant Lambert investigate the
murders of sisters. Escaping an arid
home life, Joanne and Helen Mowbray
come to Cambridge expecting happi-
ness. Instead, they die at the hands of a
smoothly selfish villain — just one of
several respected citizens with much to
hide. Page couples disclosure with clear
analysis of Kelsey’s personality, creating
a dandy balance between procedure and
characterization.

Three strong novels feature the joint
efforts of on-the-scene amateurs and
professional investigators. The Killings
at Badger’s Drift (Avon, $3.50, 249
pp.), Carolyn Graham’s first crime
novel, is notable for its wit as well as its
neatly turned plot, making one hope for
a series. When aged Emily Simpson dies
suddenly, her close friend insists upon
an inquiry. Miss Lucy Bellringer, an
elderly eccentric, and deliberate,
thoughtful Detective Chief Inspector
Thomas Barnaby, the investigating offi-
cer, make an odd but satisfying pair,
united in their interest in the case and in
their basic decency.

Maggie Elliott, the protagonist of
The Cable Car Murder (Ivy Books,
$3.50, 230 pp.), is a terrific character.
A recovering alcoholic trying to regain
emotional balance after losing her hus-
band, Maggie gives what help and
comfort she can when two sudden deaths
shatter her half-sister’s family. When
she meets Richard O’Reagan, an ex-cop
who witnessed one of those deaths, her
uneasiness and his observations prompt
an investigation. Elizabeth Atwood
Taylor capitalizes on a good eye for de-
tails of her San Francisco setting and a
sound ear for the apposite pop song in
this lively and absorbing novel.

Beth Austin, a teacher of literature,
and Gil Bailey, an FBI agent, combine
sleuthing and courtship in The Mark
Twain Murders by Edith Skom (Coun-
cil Oak Books, $12.95, 277 pp.). The
professional skills of both are useful in
solving a case that involves murder, pla-
giarism, and the theft of valuable books
from the Midwestern University library.
Though some passages are a shade over-
written, the plot moves briskly in this
first of the Brown Bag Mystery Series.

® Jane Bakerman is writing a book on
emerging crime writers who are women.

Belles Lettres @ 33