Brush W

|

th Greatness

Making Their Mark: Women Artists Move into the Mainstream, edited by  
Randy Rosen and Catherine C. Brawer. New York: Abbeville Press, 1989, $45.00,  

183 illus. (73 color)

by Sarah Wright

Women have been creating

significant art for centuries,

but until the 1970s surge of
the women’s movement and other pro-
tests against dominant authority helped
pave the way for them politically, few
women artists were represented in muse-
um collections and exhibitions, galler-
ies, art texts, reviews, or auctions —
the “mainstream” art community. Then
things began to change. “At a certain
point during the 1970s,” says Making
Their Mark contributor Calvin Tom-
kins, “it suddenly occurred to me that
half the interesting new artists in
America were women.”

That unprecedented visibility of wo-
men artists is the subject of this volume,
which is also the catalogue for a travel-
ing exhibition. Of course, any such dis-
cussion also brings up the position of
women in art today and speculation
about their future place. Every contrib-
utor to this book has much to say on both
subjects.

The show focuses on the art of
eighty-seven women painters, sculptors,
photographers, performance artists, and
video artists active in this country be-
tween 1970 and 1985. Some of the most
renowned artists working today are
among them, but this is not a show com-
posed only of name artists. Rather it
emphasizes the extraordinary variety of
art by women during this exciting time.

Although the book is profusely illus-
trated, it is the text (six in-depth, per-
ceptive essays) as much as the art that
fascinates, for here are artistic as well as
political explanations of why the period
saw such an efflorescence of female cre-
ativity. Not only were many women art-
ists then prominent, but they were cata-
lysts in redirecting and redefining main-
stream art.

Most women artists had worked in
forced isolation, outside the male-
dominated social network of curators,
dealers, critics, and collectors prior to
the 1970s. Only in the 1970s and 1980s
were significant numbers of women even
able to exhibit in galleries. Grace Harti-
gan remarked, “If you’re an exception-
ally gifted woman the door is open.
What women are fighting for is the right
to be as mediocre as men.”

In reaction to the austerities of mini-
malism and conceptualism, many wo-
men during the 1970s and 1980s
brought their personal and social con-
cerns with them into mainstream art.
Distinctions between abstraction and
representation began to fade. As Nicho-
las Africano said, “Women made subject
matter respectable again.” For the first
time in decades, ingrained notions of art
history were challenged. The New York
art world of the 1970s was opening up:
No longer was there a single main-
stream. The dominant style of the 1950s
had been abstract expressionism. In the
1960s pop and minimalism took over.
But in the 1970s came pluralism. Process
art, body art, earth art, performance art,
video art, and many other experiments
vied with the remnants of minimalism
and conceptualism. There seemed to be
little sense of direction. Says Calvin
Tomkins in “Righting the Balance,”

As a result of pressure by militant femi-
nists the whole art world seemed to be
opening up just as some very talented and
ambitious women appeared on the scene.
The change for the worse which seems to
have made it more difficult for younger
women artists to be recognized in the
1980s is a reflection of the social backlash
that affected the feminist movement as a
whole. The art world of the early 1980s
was marked by a return to macho, male-
dominated painting on a heroic scale —

Neo-Expressionism. The pictures were easy
to understand, big and loud.

26 @ Belles Lettres

The early 1980s was a discouraging
period for many women artists. But
Tomkins notes that the new generation
has the entire generation before it as role
models. And he asserts that recent art
world developments suggest that the cli-
mate is changing again. Neo-express-
ionism is losing its fire. The Guerrilla
Girls — an anonymous group of artists
working in New York, whose videotapes

and posters sardonically address inequi-
ties by citing names and statistics —
have revived the militant feminism that
buoyed the art world in the late 1970s.
Tomkins believes a new wave may be
building up and that the past cannot be
seen as a prophecy.

In the chapter “Tough Choices: Be-
coming a Woman Artist, 1900-1970,”
Elen G. Landau reminds us that the dif-
ficulties facing women who chose to
become artists were established in the
early 1900s and changed little during the
prefeminist eras. Her discussion shows
the brutal choices many women were
forced to make because of society’s ex-
pectations of them or their own accep-
tance of the primacy of their roles as

nurturers. Several of these women were
married to fellow artists and chose to
submerge their careers while supporting
the man’s. Lee Krasner, originally con-
sidered by many as the better artist, is
quoted as saying that her own work
seemed “irrelevant” as she became more
deeply involved with Pollock during the
1940s. Later she was called “the wife
who also paints.” Although Louise Nev-
elson eventually became the doyenne of
American sculptors, she faced fierce dis-
crimination when she first began to
show in the 1940s.

“We learned the artist is a woman, in
time to check our enthusiasm,” read a re-
view of Nevelson’s work in a 1941 issue

of Cue magazine. “Had it been otherwise,”

Two of the many beautiful works, spanning
four centuries, that are showcased in Abbe-
ville Press’s Women Artists: 1990 Engage-
ment Book/Calendar. At left, “Sky Blue and
Peach” (1989), watercolor on paper by Car-
olyn Brady. Below, “In the Studio” (1910),
oil on canvas by Ellen Emmet Rand.

the critic continued, “we might have hailed
these sculptural expressions as by a
truly great figure among moderns.”

Judith Stein and Ann Sargent Woos-
ter do a brilliant job of describing each
artist’s style and artistic concerns during
the period. At least one illustration of
each artist’s work is included (and they
are generally well produced). In an im-
portant resource section for scholars and
students, Ferris Olin and Catherine C.
Brawer include eighty-nine pages of data
from their research in “Career Makers”
(charts and graphs showing the repre-
sentation of women in exhibitions, art

magazines, corporate collections, art
auctions, and the grant awards); “Indi-
vidual Milestones” (tables comparing
the speed with which women artists of
three generations attained career goals);
concise biographies of each artist; anno-
tated lists of major group exhibitions and
public collections; and a bibliography.

Thomas McEvilley, a professor and a
contributing editor of Artforum, offers
an enlightening discussion called “Re-
directing the Gaze,” in which he notes
that since the late eighteenth century
the role of the artist has become con-
fused with that of the male hero. Be-
cause our culture honors few female he-
roes, “reading man as active and woman
as passive assigned to women the role of
model rather than artist.” He is also
concerned about the signs of regression
in the air today. “The march down Fifth
Avenue is not over!”

Marcia Tucker, director of New York
City’s New Museum, concludes “Wo-
men Artists Today: Revolution or Re-
gression?” on an equally disturbing note:

Part of the reason that so little substan-
tive change has taken place is that once
again we are living in a politically conser-
vative climate. . . . In the 1970s many
women “cleaned house” in a struggle to
achieve power and autonomy in the
home, the workplace and the political
sphere. . . . The woman’s movement was
all practice and no theory. Today, with
the exception of a few individuals and an
occasional group effort (like that of the
Guerrilla Girls), most feminist efforts are
taking place in the arena of criticism and
theory. . . . While more women are visi-
ble now than in 1970, and while the rare
woman artist (without exception white)
may be highly visible, practice and theory
— in the arts as elsewhere — have yet to
meet in our century to provide the equity
that might lead to real social change.

Making Their Mark is an imaginative
and thought-provoking book. It raises as
many questions as it answers, all of them
interesting. The authors’ pictures of the
present and future for women in art
range from guardedly optimistic to
downright bleak. Overall, they make
clear the necessity for ever more vigi-
lance and pressure if women are to retain
even the shaky foothold they have man-
aged to achieve in today’s art world.

@ Sarah Wright, now a freelance
writer, worked in book publishing for many
years. She is a painter and a printmaker who
has exhibited in Martha’s Vineyard and
New York City.

Architecture:

A Place for Women  
Edited by Ellen Perry Berkeley  
and Matilda McQuaid  
Washington, D.C., and London:  

Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989,  

$19.95, 277 pp. (PB)

As a woman who studied architecture in
the early 1970s, I found it interesting to
discover in reading this new book that
the first American woman architect
began her practice a mere eighty-four
years before I walked into my first design
studio. In addition, as editor and pub-
lisher of the magazine Design Spirit, I was
surprised to learn that my publication’s
“alternative” perspective unwittingly ex-
presses what several of the book’s con-
tributors identified as feminist values.

Consequently, I found Architecture:
A Place for Women, a collection of
twenty-two essays on women in archi-
tecture, to be a source of new insights
and revelations. Certainly it forever al-
tered my sense of the broader social and
historic contexts within which I func-
tion as a woman in my field.

Yet, unfortunately, I can compare
much of the first half of this volume, dri-
ly written and scant in historic detail, to
certain required architecture school

Students of the Cambridge School, a
women’s architecture and design graduate
school that existed during the first half of the
twentieth century. From Architecture: A
Place for Women.

subjects — important to know but not
terribly engaging. Admittedly, this is
the reaction of someone who chose ar-
chitecture, not scholarship, as a profes-
sional field of endeavor and who tends to
be impatient with the chronicling of
certain information that a more aca-
demically oriented person might find
compelling.

Nonetheless, a number of essays were
of great interest. One was Adele Chat-

field-Taylor’s description, told with
verve and style, of the ways in which her
two grandmothers channeled their crea-
tive energies into the design of their re-
spective families’ rituals and residences.
Also fascinating were the forthright re-
flections of Denise Scott-Brown on what
it was like to have her colleague and
husband, Robert Venturi, turned into
an architectural “guru” by the press,
while her own contributions to their
work together were ignored or in-
accurately attributed to him.

Mimi Lobell’s “Buried Treasure,” on
the art and architecture of the Neolithic
and Paleolithic cultures, points out that
these periods were banished to “pre-
history” and therefore never taught. The
effect was to deprive women of arch-
etypes from female-centered cultures,
significant not just for their female im-
agery but even more importantly as
manifestations of cultures that valued
peace and egalitarian social structures.

Two other essays of note were Diane
Favro’s analysis of the different ways that
male and female architects are portrayed
in ads, and Martha McQuaid’s piece
highlighting with lively detail a diverse
group of little-known women included
in the American Institute of Architects’
archive on women in architecture.

—Suzanne Koblentz-Goodman

Fart 1989