I always get a kick out of this word be-
cause it’s what my sister Pat’s Head Start
class makes of “Miss Mullaney.”

® Felicitations go to Belles Lettres
consulting editors Michelle Tokarczyk
and Faye Moskowitz. Michelle’s new
book of poetry, The House I’m Run-
ning From, will be out in May from West
End Press. The collection is about mo-
bility and roots, and its title comes from
a speech by Jesse Jackson. This fall,
Michelle will leave Rutgers for a teach-
ing position at Goucher College in
Maryland.

A writer who began publishing after
her children were grown, Faye
Moskowitz has been appointed head of
the writing department at George
Washington University in Washington,
D.C. Three male academics were also
considered. “So much for the unortho-
dox track,” says Faye, who went back to
school and began writing when her chil-
dren were grown. “Mothers of the
world, unite! You have nothing to lose
but your chains.” Granddaughter Baby

fo ne ae

Michelle Tokarczyk

Plume Reprints

Filling in the gap left by the Library of
America’s focus on a handful of “greats”
and Rutgers University Press’s scholarly
editions is Michele Slung’s affordable
new paperback series Plume American
Women Writers. You can tell from her
enthusiasm about the Pandora Austral-
ian reprints (reviewed in this issue) how
much Michele loves to unearth good
women’s fiction from the past, and in-
deed, she has worked for many years to
develop and find a publisher for her se-
ries. In fact, some of the works she
would like to have included have in the
meantime been picked up by other series
(e.g., Beacon Press’s Black Women
Writers), and she has been plagued by
the slow process of obtaining rights.

Although “inspired and entranced”
by Virago Press, Michele feels that some
of their titles have fallen flat. In her
search for books that would appeal to
ardent and committed readers (in addi-
tion to feminist historians), she haunted
junk stores, book shops, and the Library
of Congress to find writers with whom
she was not acquainted. For Michele,
retrieving these books is looking back
into people’s lives to see how they lived
— like visiting antique stores. Al-
though she eschewed books that were
too “creaky,” she concedes that perfec-
tion is hard to find. Her titles are unique
but also representative of popular fic-
tion. (Old lists of best sellers provided
quite a few leads.)

Laura Hapke reviews one of the Har-
riet Beecher Stowe reissues in this issue.
The Prodigal Daughter by Nancy Hale,
published simultaneously, came out just
after the death of its author, preventing

22 © Belles Lettres

Impressions

Faye Moskowitz. Photo © by Sally Troyer

Helen is doing well and sports two teeth
“like tiny grains of rice.”

® Would you like to belong to a club
whose top three concerns are awards for
women writers, reviews for mysteries
written by women, and the increasing
sadism against women and children in
books? Then send $15 to Sisters in
Crime, c/o Kate’s Mystery Books, 2211
Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA
02140. Many crime writers belong to the
organization, as well as our mystery col-
umnist Jane Bakerman. In line with the
statistics I mention in my plea for con-
tributions elsewhere in this column are
the results of the Sisters’ Book Review
Project, which found the percentages of
mysteries by women reviewed in The
New York Times to be fifteen in 1985,
sixteen in 1986, and seven in 1987.
Because a third of books in the genre are
written by women, one would expect
the figure to be at least thirty percent.

Michelle Slung. Photo by Diana Walker

her from seeing the new edition to which
she had looked forward. The introduc-
tion is by Mary Lee Settle, an apt
choice, as are all the introducers.

Although not particularly eager to be
identified as a woman writer, Martha
Gellhorn contributed the afterword to a
new edition of The Wine of Astonish-
ment, which she allowed to be repub-
lished with the stipulation that its origi-
nal title, Point of No Return, be rein-
stated. She had let her editor, Max
Perkins, change this pilot’s term because
he thought it too downbeat at the end of
the war.

In the authors and characters of these
novels, Michele thinks that American
women will recognize peculiarly
American heroines — vis-à-vis, for in-
stance, British ones — equally willing to
grapple with issues like suffrage, social-
ism, and world peace.

Help Bail Out Belles!

Three years have passed since our last
“state of the union” message. To put it
bluntly, WE NEED YOUR HELP. We
need money — more than $6,000 —
and we need equipment. Belles Lettres is
losing loaned equipment vital to our
operations, including our computer.
Some of the things we use it for are mail-
ing lists, book and issue logs, accounting
records, and typesetting. We use it so
much, we don’t even have computer
games! We would rather be reading any-
way! We also need to buy (or have don-
ated) a modem, printer, software, co-
pier, and postage meter. Printing and
postal rates have both gone up drastical-
ly, but our subscription rates have yet to
increase.

Our income from issue sales and ad-
vertising equals half of the minimum
expenses of putting out the magazine,
even omitting in-kind donations like
salaries. A subscription would cost about
$100 per year if we charged what it
would cost to produce Belles with a paid
staff and without donations or grants.
We keep our rates low to make the mag-
azine affordable to more women. We
don’t have an institutional affiliation, so
the rest must be rustled up in grants,
from under rocks, or from generous peo-
ple like you.

Help us get this much-needed equip-
ment. Help us stabilize ourselves so that
we can be a more effective forum for cel-
ebrating, criticizing, and promoting
women’s writing. . . and get something
for yourself in return. What? you ask.
Well, there’s the attractive glow that
comes from knowing you did something
enduringly important for women. More
concretely, we will also send you a
“novel” gift — books! For isn’t that what
brought us together in the first place?

You may have noticed that we like to
give away books to winners of subscriber
drawings and to people who send contri-
butions with renewals. To seduce you
into helping us through this equipment
shortage, Daedalus Books has provided a
mountain of fiction for this urgent fund-
raising effort. Here is the deal. For each
$50 increment you donate, check off
one book from Category A or two books
from Category B. For those of you who
can’t squeeze one more book into your
houses (Renée Hartman, I’m thinking
of you), you can always give them as
presents! Just check off how much you
can contribute on the form below and
we'll get your gift to you pronto.

¢
The more I do this work, the more I
see how crucial it is to keep it up. When

by Janet Palmer Mullaney

I judged the Editor’s Grant Awards for
the Coordinating Council of Literary
Magazines, I found a mere sprinkling of
women editors and writers in three boxes
of submissions. Nearly every week, I see
something that slights women in print.
Last January, Ms. lavished space on
three overly publicized male writers. I
found this gem in a recent New Yorker:

One of the more banal things you can do
to an artist is to ask him [sic] for a de-
scription of his [sic] work. We slipped and
did just that the other Saturday as we
stood in front of Deborah Masters’
sculpture-in-progress . . . . Deborah had
called us the night before.

Would they have called Calder
“Alexander”?

The many letters from women writers
to the Times Book Review testify to the
belittling of their work in its pages. In
1988, all sixteen “Editors’ Choice: The
Best Books” were by men. A three-
month study of this most influential of
book reviews found that ninety percent
of the front-page reviews, eighty-three
percent of the full-page reviews, and
seventy-three percent of the partial page
reviews were of books by men. I won’t
even get into the problems women
writers have with getting fair or sensitive
reviews.

“Some people think a woman’s novel
is anything without politics in it,” says
Margaret Atwood. “Some think it’s
anything about relationships. Some
think it’s anything with a lot of opera-
tions in it, medical ones I mean. Some
think it’s anything that doesn’t give you
a broad, panoramic view of our exciting
times.”

These are tremendously exciting
times for women writers, who are emi-
nently capable of being both intimate
and panoramic. Merrill Joan Gerber,
whose career was profiled by Susan Ko-
ppelman in our pages, recently won a
Pushcart Press award and publication of
her “noncommercial” novel King of the
World after nearly despairing over the
continual market-driven rejections of
her confronting, blackly comic novels.
Anne Tyler and Wendy Wasserstein just
won Pulitzer Prizes for fiction and play-
wrighting, respectively. Gloria Naylor's
powerful book The Women of Brewster
Place was recently translated to the
screen, immersing millions of people in
the lives of diverse Black women.

You have a stake in empowering
women by supporting Belles Lettres,
which is the only general-interest review
of books by women in the country. Help
us keep “steaming on ahead” (to borrow
the slogan of London’s Women’s Press,
whose logo is an iron). Please return the
enclosed contribution form with your

check today!

Enclosed is my tax-deductible contribu-
tion of []$50 [$100 [$150 [$200
[IMORE!! toward the Belles Lettres
equipment fund.

NAME
ADDRESS

Mail check and form to Belles Lettres,
11151 Captain’s Walk Ct., Gaithers-
burg, MD 20878.

Category A

THE COUNTRY GIRLS TRILOGY AND EPI-
LOGUE by Edna O’Brien

THE GOOD APPRENTICE by Iris Murdoch
BLOOD TIE, THE KISS OF KIN, and THE
LOVE EATERS by Mary Lee Settle (trio
constitutes one selection)

THE STORIES OF MURIEL SPARK

THE WELL by Elizabeth Jolley

THE SWIMMING POOL SEASON by Rose
Tremain

IN COUNTRY by Bobbie Ann Mason
THE MAGNIFICENT SPINSTER by May
Sarton

THE MULBERRY TREE by Elizabeth Bowen
NO EARTHLY NOTION by Susan Dodd

Category B

AUTHOR FROM A SAVAGE PEOPLE by
Betty Pesetsky :

THE BUS OF DREAMS by Mary Morris
GODS SNAKE by Irini Spanidou

JULIA AND THE BAZOOKA by Anna Ka-
van

THE QUIET ENEMY by Cecil Dawkins
RICH REWARDS by Alice Adams
VIRAGO REPRINTS (various titles)
PANDORA REPRINTS (various titles)

———S———SSI3 SSS _ OEE SSS ees eee)

Spring 1989