Triple Jeopardy

Color, Sex, and Poetry: Three Women Writers of the Harlem Renaissance, by Gloria T. Hull. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987, $29.95 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 240 pp.

by Kamili Anderson

The days fall upon me;

One by one, they fall,

Like Leaves... . .

They are black,

They are gray.

They are white;

They are shot through with gold and fire.

They cover me,

They crush,

They smother.

Who will ever find me

Under the Days

—"Under the Days,” unpublished, by Angelina Weld Grimké

Gloria Hull has written an ex-

haustive biocritical study that

examines the lives and works of three forerunners of Black American female literary traditions, Angelina Weld Grimké (1880-1958), Georgia Douglas Johnson (1880-1966), and Alice Dunbar-Nelson (1875-1935). Grimké (whose name is often confused with that of her famous white abolitionist aunt, Angelina Grimké Weld) received widespread acclaim for her 1916 protest play, Rachel, the first successful stage drama “written by a Negro.” The only female poet to publish not just one but three volumes of her work during the period, Johnson in her time was hailed as the foremost woman poet and “hostess” of the Harlem Renaissance. The surfacing of poet-journalist Dunbar-Nelson’s diaries and discoveries of her other unpublished writings (Gloria Hull, The Diaries of Alice Dunbar-Nelson, 1984) enhanced her standing as a clarion feminine voice during the early twentieth century’s Black cultural heyday. (Dunbar-Nelson was also the wife of the stellar Black poet, Paul Lawrence Dunbar.)

Though Johnson and Grimké lived in Washington, D.C., during their most productive periods and Dunbar-Nelson orbited between Philadelphia and Wilmington, Delaware, they each shared in the protracted glory and short-lived good fortune of the Harlem Renaissance period of the 1920s. They mined a broad, bold array of feminine and traditional lyric topics, utilizing the major genres of poetry, short stories, novels, and plays, to produce a remarkable and diverse body of work.

Unfortunately, what editors and anthologists of their time most often sought and what publishers likewise bought was their most race- and sex-stereotyped work. They left behind a dishearteningly large amount of unpublished material. Hull contends that, because of the sexual and racial constraints of their times, these Black women authors could not always effectively reconcile their creative and situational selves in their belletristic literature. She further contends that, lacking keen feminist critical review, Dunbar-Nelson, Grimké, and Johnson have never received attention on par with their prominence or productivity.

Previous evaluations of their contributions have been based primarily on their published work; as a result, they have appeared as traditional, feminine verse makers who treated themes of love, death, sorrow, nature, selfhood, and identity, with a smattering of indirectly handled racial material. Hull’s penetrating investigation of the three through their total writings and archival records in conjunction with her analysis of the social, racial, and gender-based assumptions of their time has yielded a much more accurate picture of them. Her painstakingly close scrutiny — of manuscript diaries and archival documents rectifies the myopic view of their work and roles:

It would require willful blindness to continue to see Dunbar-Nelson only as Paul Lawrence Dunbar’s elegant, poetic appendage, or Grimké as a shy lyricist who simply did not publish enough, or Georgia Douglas Johnson as the contented “poet-housewife.”

Concomitantly, Hull’s focus on these three provides a vehicle for a fresh perspective on the overall place of women in the Harlem Renaissance vis-à-vis their male cohorts. A vastly better comprehension of their lives as writers and remarkable women has been achieved. Thus, they emerge as three Black women/writers who should be acknowledged for struggling against unfavorable odds to create their personal and artistic selves — multigenred Johnson, for her pseudonymous prolificacy; Grimké, for the depth of her unpublished work (especially her lesbian poetry); and Dunbar-Nelson for her vigorous literary output and crusading journalism.

Color, Sex, and Poetry provides both the bread and the meat of critical analysis and exploration of the lives and work of three Black women writers. Or, if one would rather imagine there being a “cutting edge” of research in the “soft” science of literary history, then this extraordinary effort to construct a truer American literary history would be state-of-the-art stuff. With dedicated scholarship, Hull further establishes herself as an important and pioneering researcher in the field of Black women’s literature studies and feminist literary criticism.

@ Kamili Anderson is an associate editor of The Journal of Negro Education and a Belles Lettres consulting editor.

taposes narrative, poetry, and photo collages — which show a slightly pensive little girl, with large eyes and a bow in her hair, seated on the lap of a bespectacled, middle-aged man in a suit. Large capped mushrooms appear in some of the collages, as do photos of Grandfather leafing through respectable magazines, and portraits of young Margaret holding her mother’s hand. Randall’s poems add details that symbolize one level of her grandfather’s behavior:

In this portrait nothing betrays your dozens of cameras,

hundreds of unworn socks

obsession of screwdriver and pliers.

Nothing beyond your Christian Science eyes posture of confirmed authority.

—from “Watching It Grow Between Your Legs”

Some of the poems recall Sylvia Plath’s “Daddy.” Plath wrote: “I have always been scared of you / With your Luftwaffe, your gobbledygoo and your neat mustache”; there is a similar sense of powerlessness as Randall realizes her grandfather is the trusted parent of her own mother, and any confession would therefore be questioned. Years later, when she finally reveals what grandfather has done, her mother does not always believe her. “I understand why she feels the confusion of love/hate much more than I do,” Randall writes. “I’ve worked at this for a long time. It’s my problem.”

But sexual abuse is part of our collective culture and therefore everyone’s problem; it robs individuals of their self-worth and the ability to trust others. Abuse by parents, family members, strangers, and neighbors in Rebirth of Power has a variety of effects; some victims describe immobilization, others admit to becoming victimizers. What the poems, stories, and journal entries overwhelmingly reveal, however, is determination and courage not only to survive, but to become empowered; these written accounts are public exorcisms, demonstrating how ritual and recognition release us from what potentially might destroy us.

@ Cheryl Fish is the author of the poetry chapbook My City Flies By and a teacher of writing at Hunter College.

Belles Lettres @ 15