Henrietta L. Moore (1989, University of  
Minnesota, 246 pp.) follows the develop-  
ment of feminist critique in social anthro-  
pology. Although women have always  
played a vital role as anthropological re-  
searchers, and have been among those  
studied in ethnographic research, the  
problem of male bias in this discipline was  
not confronted until the early 1970s, ac-  
cording to Moore. She assesses a triad of  
biases and the feminist studies of women  
that grew from new awareness of them.  
Moore goes a step further and addresses  
the effects of the study of gender relations  
on the discipline of anthropology, and in  
her broadest analysis outlines the implica-  
tions of feminist anthropology for femi-  
nism itself.  

Scientists have long known they can  
manipulate the reproductive cycles of  
plants and animals; they have been ex-  
perimenting with women’s cycles for years  
and are now poised for the practice of  
countless interventions in the name of  
fertility and health. Women must control  
this process legally, scientifically, and  
personally. Fortunately, we can educate  
ourselves through books that put some  
handles on these slippery, complex issues.  

Embryos, Ethics, and Women’s  
Rights: Exploring the New Reproduc-  
tive Technology, edited by Elaine Hoff-  
man Baruch, Amadeo F. D’Adamo, Jr.,  
and Joni Seager (Harrington Park Press,  
1988, 259 pp.) presents an excellent col-  
lection of papers that discuss the possibili-  
ties and problems of new technologies in  
procreation. Men and women concerned  
with the scientific, cultural, and psycho-  
logical effects that technologies like ge-  
netic manipulation, in vitro fertilization,  
and prenatal screening will have argue  
their dangers and wonders. The editors  
have constructed a strong framework of  
the controversies surrounding these is-  
sues, building with a primarily feminist  
perspective to provide a thought-pro-  
voking forum of well-considered argu-  
ments by the experts.  

Renate Klein has put together two  
important books on infertility — The  
Exploitation of a Desire: Women’s Ex-  
periences With In Vitro Fertilization, an  
Exploratory Survey (1989, Geelong,  
Australia: Deakin U. Press, 65 pp.) and  
Infertility: Women Speak Out About  
Their Experiences of Reproductive  
Medicine (1989, Pandora Press, 328  
pp.). The first book surveys forty women  
who have attempted in vitro fertilization.  
Klein focuses on the experience of in vitro  
fertilization — how these women felt be-  
fore, during, and after this (usually un-  
successful) process. She uncovers the  
confusion, depersonalization, misinfor-  
mation, and emotional pain that accom-  
pany this controversial procedure through  
a compilation of shocking statistics and,  
most piercingly, the words of these  
women who suffered its false hopes. “I felt  
like a baby machine; no one was inter-  
ested in me as a person. I was just a chook  
with growing eggs inside — and if they  
didn’t grow properly, it was my own  
fault.” Infertility is a wonderful book of es-  

says by women who have undergone in-  

Italian-American  
literary feast...  

Umbertina  
a novel  

questions and more.” —Alice Walker  

please add per order  
$2.50 for book post  
handling, $3.50 UPS  

Spring 1990  

2 books by HELEN BAROLINI  

Umbertina — three generations of  
women in one family: their loves and  
conflicts, their divided loyalties to their  
Italian heritage. Winner of several  
awards; don't miss it! “A tremendous  
piece of fiction” —Jean Rikhoff “a dazzling  
interplay of Italian and American characters in  
both countries” Jerre Mangione  

now in paperback, 432 p. $9.95  

The Dream Book—Poetry, short stories, essays, memoirs, drama from 56  
contemporary writers, with a splendid Introduction by Barolini. “For  
years I have wanted to hear the voice(s) of the Italian-American woman. Who is she?  
...What is her view of life? Does she still exist? The Dream Book answers these  

Summer reading special — save 16%! Mention this ad, buy both for $25.00  

Ayer Company Publishers, Inc.  
P.O. Box 958 * Salem, NH 03079 603 * 898-1200  

fertility treatments and found alternative  
responses to infertility. Klein has col-  
lected over twenty testimonies from  
women of various countries and back-  
grounds to bring reflective, personal in-  
sights that resonate for all women. Ex-  
ploitation of fertile women through sur-  
rogacy and infertile women through in-  
effective, dangerous technological “fixes”  
becomes through this book not a theory or  
argument but a shared, articulated experi-  
ence. Klein urges the reader to action in  
her final chapter that overviews the latest  
developments in this field and identifies  
some of what’s to come unless women re-  
sist these technologies and find other  
means of coming to terms with infertility.  

~ A i Ae Aa Bhd |  
Marie Curie (Bettmann Archives)  

Four books of note focus on specific is-  
sues in reproduction: Reproductive Laws  
for the 1990s, edited by Sherrill Cohen  
and Nadine Taub (Humana Press, 1989,  
458 pp.) offers proposals and model legis-  
lation to further reproductive freedom.  
Decoding Abortion Rhetoric: Commu-  
nicating Social Change, by Celeste  
Michelle Condit (University of Illinois  
Press, 1990, 236 pp.) documents the his-  
tory of opinions in the abortion debate  
and how they have shaped policy and  
practice. The Woman in the Body: A  
Cultural Analysis of Reproduction by  
Emily Martin (Beacon Press, 1987, 276  
pp.) studies the cultural gaps between sci-  
ence and women in imaging and working  
with our reproductive processes. Bi  
Power: The Case for Surrogacy, by  
Carmel Shalef (Yale University Press,  
1989, 201 pp.) argues in favor of surrogacy  
as a legally binding contract that can be  
used for empowerment rather than for  
exploitation.  

Grand Obsession: Madam Curie and  
Her World by Rosalynd Pflaum (Double-  
day 1989, 430 pp.) brings the heady realm  
of this scientific dynamo to earth with  
personal details and reflections that place  
her astounding work in context. Pflaum’s  
biography of Curie is an exciting, provo-  
cative portrait of her life, her family, her  
times, and, most important, her passion  
for scientific discovery. “Dull, dry” phys-  
ics is animated by Curie, and the reader is  
inexorably swept as if by Sappho’s “down-  
rushing wind” into the laboratory, where  
each experiment is a reaffirmation of life.  
Curie — who won two Nobel Prizes —  
was not elected to membership in France’s  
Académie des Sciences; in fact, no  
women were admitted until 1979.  

THE  
DREAM  
BOOK  

An Anthology of  
Writings by  
Italian-American  
Women  

hardback, 412 p. $19.95  

A Vindication of the Rights of Whores, edited by Gail Pheterson. Preface by Margo St.  
James. Seattle: The Seal Press, 1989, $16.95, 293 pp. (PB)  
Working, by Dolores French with Linda Lee. New York: Pinnacle Books, 1989, $4.50,  
413 pp. (PB)  

by Penny Skillman  

Prostitution has historically been  
shrouded in the mystery of the il-  
licit. It has been stigmatized and  
subject to the violence of insti-  
tutionalized victimization. Traditional-  
ly, prostitutes have been isolated from  
mainstream society. In the last two de-  
cades, in the process of organizing  
themselves for the first time in modern  
history, prostitutes have begun to iden-  
tify themselves publicly and to discuss  
their lives. A Vindication of the Rights of  
Whores, while scholarly, is also meant to  
be part of this process of creating ad-  
vocates for change by familiarizing us  
with the issues involved.  

Prostitutes’ rights advocates want  
decriminalization, to stop legal and  
physical abuse, and to improve working  
conditions — to see prostitution dealt  
with as a labor issue, not as a moral issue.  
This idea may sound untenable, but  
Pheterson offers this groundbreaking  
anthology as both “an historical docu-  
ment and an impetus for a new politics of  
prostitution.” This book, and the or-  
ganizing movement, probably would not  
exist without the modern women’s  
movement, yet it is ironic that feminists  
present the most challenging objections  
to the demands of prostitutes’ rights  
advocates for economic and sexual  
self-determination. Pheterson (a former  
professor of psychology and women’s  
studies) means to show us that pros-  
titutes are, in many ways, no different  
from secretaries or nurses, in that they  
share the real problems of all women in  
service industries, although they lack  
the legal and other benefits and protec-  
tions that their counterparts in non-  
sexually related jobs enjoy.  

This book tracks the first organizing  
efforts, starting with Margot St. James’s  
1973 formation of the prostitutes’ rights  
organization COYOTE through to the  
1986 Second World Whores’ Confer-  
ence held in Brussels. This historic  
event gave prostitutes’ rights organizing  
serious widespread attention. Pheterson  
includes transcripts of rights advocates  
and of feminists who were meeting pros-  
titutes and confronting their demands  
for sexual self-determination for the first  
time. Further sections look at forced and  
international prostitution, as well as at  
AIDS. It is shown that prostitutes, who  
historically have been safe-sex con-  
scious, do not spread the disease, al-  
though women who use IV drugs and  
who are also prostitutes have shown a  
higher incidence of HIV infection.  

The women in this anthology grapple  
with difficult questions, for example, Is  
it true — as prostitutes’ rights advocates  
claim — that every woman’s rights are  
tied to prostitutes’ rights? Can a service  
that centers around men’s desires be  
made up of feminists? Can it promote  
feminist consciousness, or does it and  
the sex entertainment industry per se  
cater to and encourage men’s weirdest  
sexual whims? Do prostitutes draw to  
themselves male violence and hostility  
that is meant for women generally?  

Pheterson could be faulted for not  
addressing other areas of the sex enter-  
tainment industry, which tend to raise  
even knottier questions (e.g., the erot-  
icization of the abuse of women and  
children in print and film pornog-  
raphy/labor issues). She has taken on a  
broad subject with a developing, fluid  
history and has done an admirable job.  

Working, written by activist/  
prostitute Dolores French with Linda  
Lee, further demystifies prostitution. It  
goes along with Pheterson’s volume in  
that it is a personal story that fits into the  
context of the prostitutes’ movement for  

full civil rights. Working is one woman’s  
story of how she learned the hooker’s  
craft and why she prefers that job to any  
other. We learn the mechanics of the  
job, as well as the frightful, rewarding,  
and thrilling adventures French had  
working in Atlanta, New York, Puerto  
Rico, and San Francisco. French, who  
has been appointed by Atlanta Mayor  
Andrew Young to a municipal task force  
on prostitution, is a celebrity of sorts,  
but unlike the authors of similar auto-  
biographical works, she identifies herself  
as a “working woman.” She presents her  
choice of career as a wise one for a  
woman like herself who needs inde-  
pendence, flexibility in working hours,  
and better-than-average economic  
compensation. She believes that a  
woman has a right to exchange her sexu-  
al skills for money in the same way that  
teachers or secretaries exchange their  
skills for economic benefit. Working is  
interesting to read for its descriptions of  
quirky sex acts as well as for its coherent  
explanation of the interaction between  
clients and female prostitutes that con-  
veys how businesslike this business of  
sexual service is. This is a highly intelli-  
gent woman who might just as easily  
have become a member of Congress as a  
call girl if there were gender parity in the  
world. French is in touch with social  
history, economics, and the politics of  
cities — with how the “old boy system”  
keeps the antiquated engine of inequal-  
ity rolling down its rusting track.  

In a radio station in Atlanta, French  
meets “Elaine,” a courtesan co-worker  
who jogs every day and looks twenty-  
seven at forty-nine. She is a runaway  
housewife and mother of five grown  
children who one day walked out of her  
middle-class Lake Forest, Illinois, home  
and hitched a ride with a truck driver to  
Atlanta, paying for it with sex.  

Elaine becomes French’s mentor in  
the sex service business. At age  
twenty-seven (“I was nearly too old to  
begin”), the author launches her career  
by reading Xaviera Hollander’s The  
Happy Hooker and working out of  
Elaine’s apartment, decorated in high  
style with original art, linen, crystal,  
and lace. From the start, French learned  
good business practices. Here is a view of  
prostitutes as mature, professional  
women. They realize their job is similar  
to being an actress and learn to separate  
their emotional intimacies and love re-  
lationships from their job. It might be  
the ability they have not to let the femi-  
nine addiction to romance (surely a  
carefully indoctrinated behavior) rule  
their lives that most upsets other  
women. They have a different perspec-  
tive on sex and what it should mean for  
women, and it might be argued that they  
have a much clearer understanding of  
what sex means for most men. Elaine  
counsels French about the life of pros-  
titution: “If you enjoy sex, it affords you  
the opportunity to have a lot of sex. And  
if you don’t enjoy sex, at least you’re  
being paid.” Does this sound too emo-  
tionally cold? Too much like a “mascu-  
line” perspective for us to stomach? If  
there really is a war between the sexes  
going on — and there certainly is a con-  
quered and conquering class in terms of  
how the economic pie is cut up — then  
doesn’t it make more sense for women to  
understand the perspective of the oppo-  
sition? We all must understand the sex-  
ual politics behind the idea that an abu-  
sive husband can feel justified in batter-  
ing his wife after he’s accused her of be-  
ing a “whore.” If American women read  
no other feminist literature in their  
lives, they ought to read this book. And  
Dolores French, if you ever run for of-  
fice, you’ve got my vote.  

Belles Lettres @ 11