Chronicles of Toil

An Island of Yearning

Hard Times Cotton Mill Girls, by Victoria Byerly. ILR Press (New York State School of In-
dustrial and Labor Relations, Ithaca, NY 14851), 1986, $26.00 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 232 pp.,

photos

To Toil the Livelong Day: America’s Women at Work 1780-1980, edited by Carol Gronerman
and Mary Beth Norton. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1986, $34.95 (HB), $9.95

(PB), 320 pp.

by Carmen Buford
These books constitute signifi-
cant additions to the meager

history of the work of women

in the United States, and, moreover,
help to redefine work itself as applied to
both the paid and unpaid labor of
women. Byerly’s work focuses upon the
oral history of women who worked in
the textile mill villages of the Carolina
Piedmont area. The intersection of race
and gender within this particular work-
ing-class subculture in the New South
serves to delineate the similarities and
differences between the experiences of
Black and White working-class women,
while also reinforcing the com-
monalities among women of different
classes.

While reading the highly indi-
vidualistic first-person accounts of the
women in Hard Times, one is struck by
the points of identification that seem to
leap off the page. Recorded in their own
down-to-earth, everyday language,
these are the stories of our mothers, our
aunts, our grandmothers, our cousins.
The accounts evidence a strong sense of
place, and the feelings and behaviors of
these women reinforce the universality
of the experience of working women in
the United States. Their pain becomes
our pain, their joy ours also. Most im-
portant, their triumphs over the despair
of their lives become our celebration of
the particular strengths and the resil-
iency of the female experience. To
paraphrase Margaret Mead, whatever
happens, the babies must be tended, the
food must be cooked, the clothes must
be washed, the home must be cleaned,
the family must be cared for.

Amanda King. Photo by Victoria Byerly.

The opening essay, “A Writer Re-
turns Home,” is Byerly’s own story of her
journey through the cotton mill experi-
ence, her transcendence over her early
upbringing, her felt need to return to
document the history of her sisters, and
the actual taking of their oral histories.
Her writing here is clear and eloquent.
Byerly organizes the book into topical
headings that represent various phases
of these women’s lives (e.g., “From
Farm to Factory,” “Motherhood and
Work”), an arrangement that is condu-
cive to comparative analyses. To her
credit, Byerly has a special section on
Black women, as well as including their
stories throughout the other sections of
the book. The book also has an excel-
lent introduction that synthesizes the
experiences of these women, who took
great pride in their work because of the
freedom it gave them to determine their
own destiny, although they fully realized

that they were being exploited by the
mill owners who demanded long hours
while giving only minimum recom-
pense.

To Toil the Livelong Day is a com-
prehensive chronicle of the history of
women and work from 1780 to 1980.
The book provides an overview of the
complexity of the labor picture as it per-
tains to women in the United States,
showing the various types of labor, in
and out of the home, paid and unpaid,
that women have contributed to the
economy of this country. The histories
of unpaid and paid domestic work as
well as unionized labor are included.
The 17 essays were first presented at the
Sixth Berkshire Conference on the His-
tory of Women, which was held at
Smith College in June of 1984.

The first essays, covering the periods
1780-1880, address themes such as self-
sufficiency and community in New Eng-
land, the sexual division of labor and
the artisan tradition, working-class ac-
tivism among women wage workers, and
the work of female slaves. Relations
among women and men in agricultural
communities; working-class leisure in
New York City; and conflicts among
physicians, families, and wet nurses are
the focus of the period 1870-1920. The
essays pertaining to 1910-1940 show
the effect of the industrial revolution on
the lives of American women. The cor-
setmakers’ strike of 1912, employer—
employee relationships between house-
wife and household workers, the
mechanization of agriculture and the
subsequent changing of the farm family,
and the beginnings of the comparable
worth concept are some of the topics co-
vered. The change from live-in employ-
ment to paid daily domestic work and
the relations with unions in the tobacco
industry in the South profoundly illumi-
nate the picture of the African-Ameri-
can women prior to World War II. From
1940 to the present, the growth of
women in the paid labor force has
rapidly progressed. Women in unions,
women’s work in farm families, the
Mexicana domestic, and the develop-
ment of a working women’s conscious-
ness are all included in these essays.

These essays are by both well-known
and less-recognized women historians,
and they are all well-written, as is the
introduction, which gives a very good
synthesis of the material presented.
Some of the essays will cause con-
troversy, as they call for new conceptual
models of women’s work that are differ-
ent from the traditional models, ques-
tion the current written history of the
labor movement in the United States,
contradict the conclusions of some his-
torians regarding the female slave, and
disregard conventional wisdom within
women’s studies on the intersections of
race, gender, and class over time.

An unfortunate omission is a section
on the work of white-collar women —
clerical, technical, and professional,
which the subtitle, “America’s Women
at Work, 1780-1980,” would lead one
to believe would be included. One
hopes that a second volume of essays
will research and chronicle the experi-
ence of the teacher, the social worker,
the scientist, the artist, and others left
out of discussion in this work.

Both books are well-indexed and
would make excellent supplementary
reading for labor, women’s and Black
studies, and history courses.

Carmen Buford is the Director of Stu-
dent Programs at California State Univer-
sity, Dominguez Hills.

The Weir ($8.50, 342 pp.) and Spoonhandle ($8.95, 377 pp.), by Ruth Moore. — Blackberry
Books (Box 687, South Harpswell, ME 04079), 1986 (PB)

by Jarelle S. Stein
Two years ago, readers came
into a valuable inheritance!

Blackberry Books rescued The

Weir and Spoonhandle from the dusty
shelves of the undeservedly out-of-print.
Despite 40 years of entombment, the
power of Ruth Moore's novels has not
diminished — they are vividly alive and
waiting to be claimed. Both The Weir
and Spoonhandle concern the lives of a
unique people — islanders living off the
coast of Maine. With a skill reminiscent
of Mark Twain’s, Moore reproduces
their peculiar speech and rhythm of life
in a way that is effective and true. By
the time the last page of the last novel is
turned over, the reader knows these is-
landers as well as anyone who is not is-
land born can.

“This place here, this countryside,
was what she loved and wanted fiercely
to be a part of, yet the way she was now,
divided, it hadn’t anything to offer her.”
Those words draw us to the heart of The
Weir. There we discover a people in-
fected with blind yearning and bitter
frustration and a land set adrift by
change. The land is Comey’s Island,
which for 150 years had sheltered the
descendants of its original families. Dur-
ing those years, the islanders have lived
independent of the mainland, “going on
the water” in their own boats and pull-
ing from the sea whatever they have
needed. But now something foreign has
washed up on the island. People are be-
ginning to stir restlessly and to scan the
mainland, yearning for something that
most of them cannot name.

Hardy Turner is one of those people.
For over 20 years he has tended weir —
hauling up and selling fish, dropping his
nets in the dark hours before morning,
rebuilding what the storms destroy.
Those years and a lifetime on the island
made him skillful and fitted him per-
fectly for the life he leads. But somehow
the years have also worn away at him,
left him looking for a sense of content-
ment and peace that he cannot find on
the island. Yet while the longing dis-
turbs him, letting go of what he knows
and has always known disturbs him even
more. Hardy is too frightened to bring
himself either to act to change or to let
fate act for him. Thus when a storm rav-
ages the weir, he cannot prevent himself
from salvaging the nets. “If I’d only let
them go... If I hadn’t saved a one of
them, maybe it would have been worth my
while to quit here and go somewhere
else to start over!”

Alice Lacy understands the pain of
longing and frustration. For the last five
years, she has spent her winters in Bos-
ton, working in a canning factory. She
admits that it is not what she wants, but
she is driven by a “restless, craving
energy, a determination not to let the
worth she [has] be wasted.” But she is as
frustrated in her desire as is Hardy.
Growing up in Harbor, a coastal town
just across the water from the island, she
has seen the drudgery of women’s lives
there. Rejecting it, wanting more, she
spends time in the city. But the city is a
lonely, disconnected place. Alice wants
fiercely to be a part of coastal Maine, if
only she could find in it more than she
has seen.

In contrast to Hardy and Alice and
most of the islanders, Leonard Turner
wants only that his way of life remain
the same. As a fisherman, he is his own
boss and can steer his life as directly as
he does his boat. He does not under-
stand the undirected desires around
him. To him, the islanders have every-
thing they should want — food, shelter,
their own houses and boats and land.
But because it is not enough, the life

that Leonard cherishes is
threatened with change.

Through the lives of these three
characters and the others in her novel,
Moore reveals and explores the different
manifestations of a universal desire for
fulfillment and contentment. Moore
unwraps the emotions of each character
carefully, subtly, and completely. There
are few characters whom we do not come
to understand and sympathize with. It
is not difficult to do so when we finally
realize that Moore is often showing us
the mirror of our own emotions. Having
offered us women and men rooted in a
particular place and time, she proceeds
to dig them loose and give us every-
woman and everyman. It is therefore
doubly disturbing to realize that Moore’s
people have a great many desires and
needs but few answers. They seem un-
able to change this situation or recon-
cile themselves to it. In fact, the ending
of The Weir, with its strained sense of
hope, seems a false afterthought, tacked
on, perhaps, for publishability rather
than truth.

By the time the last page of the
novel is turned over, the reader
knows these islanders as well
as anyone who is not island
born can.

Fortunately, Spoonhandle ultimately
does provide some reason for hope. As
with The Weir, it is a novel about yearn-
ing and its frustration. In this second
novel, a new set of yearners is intro-
duced — summer people. They are the
wealthy of the world who are in search
of a “quiet niche,” a refuge from their
larger world. Ironically, their very pre-
sence on Spoonhandle transforms the is-
land into a small replica of the place
they are trying to escape.

Ann Freeman is not a summer person;
she is an islander who ran away from
Spoonhandle six years ago. But she too
is seeking something on Spoonhandle, a
fulfillment she never found in New
York, despite her success as an author.
Initially, she is disappointed. “When
she finally had come, she was still
homesick, finding the reality and not
the dream.” Gradually, her feelings
change. When Ann begins to accept
the differences between her dream and
reality, she frees herself to find fulfill-
ment and make a reality of her own.
With Ann, Moore at last gives us an
answer that is both real and hopeful.
Therefore, Spoonhandle has the more be-
lievable and satisfying ending of the two
novels. It is also a richer and better
crafted novel than its predecessor. It is
not surprising that Hollywood was at-
tracted to this book and made a movie of
it in 1948. Knowing Hollywood and the
quality of Spoonhandle, it is also not sur-
prising that they did not do the book
justice.

Ruth Moore has a distinctive and
compelling voice. Her writings about
the people of Maine are not some
romanticized view of lonely beaches and
hardy people. Rather, they tell the
straightforward story of island life and a
people who are as fortunate and unfortu-
nate as most of us.

Jarelle S. Stein once stood on a coastal
jetty in Maine gazing out at the ocean and
yearning for dry feet.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988