Impressions

A Biography Boom

The women’s movement has

prompted an upsurge of bi-

ographies about women, espe-
cially literary women and activists.
Scholars such as Carolyn Heilbrun are
working on theories of women’s biog-
raphy, and feminists are both writing
revisionist biographies of known figures
(such as Willa Cather and H.D.) and
groundbreaking ones of important
women saved from oblivion. Both the
University of Indiana Press and Panth-
eon, a trade publisher, have inaugurated
biography series. Indiana’s is entitled
“Key Women Writers,” and its editor is
Sue Roe. Strictly speaking, each book
is a critical study in which a considera-
tion of the subject’s life is part of the
overview. Titles received so far (all writ-
ten by known scholars) are George Eliot
by Gillian Beer, Katherine Mansfield by
Kate Fulbrook, Elizabeth Barrett Brown-
ing by Angela Leighton, and H.D.: The
Career of That Struggle by Rachel Blau
DuPlessis. Volumes on Colette and
Elizabeth Gaskell were due to be pub-
lished in April, and ten more are forth-
coming. The books, all paperbacks, sell
for under $10. Pantheon’s series, in col-
laboration with England’s Virago Books,
is entitled “Virago/Pantheon Pioneers”
and includes biographies of Simone de
Beauvoir by Judith Okely and of Emily
Dickinson by Helen McNeil (both
$7.95, PB). Biographies of Mary
Wollstonecraft, Queen Victoria, Willa
Cather, Eleanora Duse, Sappho, and
George Eliot are forthcoming.

St. Martin’s has brought out a critical
biography of Margaret Oliphant by Mer-
ryn Williams. If that whets your appetite
for Oliphantiana (I couldn’t resist), Pen-
guin/Virago has published a number of
her novels. (One trusts that they have
selected the best from among the scores
she wrote. The pressures of supporting
an extended family forced her to be pro-
lific — a detriment to her work, al-
though good for her pocketbook.)

Other recent biographies include The
Bondage of Love: A Life of Mrs. Samuel
Taylor Coleridge by Molly Lefebre (Lon-
don: Victor Gollancz) and Daughters and
Lovers: The Life and Writing of Mary
Webb by Michéle Aina Barale (Wes-
leyan University Press). Novelist
Webb’s life sounds as captivating as a
work of fiction; the publisher’s descrip-
tion of the book gives us these high-
lights:

Webb was a woman of passion and
eccentricity, who invited the residents
of the almshouse to be guests at her
wedding, hid in the bushes to watch
children play, and demanded money
constantly from her publishers, only to
give it away to others while she and her
husband ate crusts and tea.

Another arguably eccentric British
novelist was Nancy Mitford, whose biog-
raphy Selina Hastings has written (Dut-
ton), using many unpublished letters
and interviews with Mitford’s friends
and relatives. Finally, Beacon’s paper-
back reprint of Alice Wexler’s biography
of Emma Goldman should be noted,
newly titled Emma Goldman in America.
All of the nonseries biographies are re-
plete with photographs and illustrations.

Briefly Noted

Experiences of Japanese Ameri-

cans interned in the West during

World War II are depicted in a
new book from Cornell University Press,
Beyond Words: Images from America’s
Concentration Camps ($24.95) by De-
borah Gesensway and Mindy Roseman.
The authors accidentally discovered “a
cache of detainees’ artwork” in an attic
and were so moved by it that they sought
publication for what eventually became
a “montage of paintings, drawings, and
oral histories.”

West End Press has a stellar record of
publishing ethnic and radical women’s
writing. One of their latest titles is a
book of poems and several prose pieces
called The Death of Long Steam Lady by
Nellie Wong (P.O. Box 291477, Los
Angeles, CA 90029, $5.95, PB). The
following excerpt comes from the title
piece:

Paisley had watched the old woman
with wonder, with awe. “Well, aren’t
you ever going to tell me your real
name?” Paisley had asked impatiently.
“I really want to know. Is it Estelle,
Miranda, Sylvia?” The old woman
closed her eyes for a moment, ignoring
the beautiful names that her young
companion had tossed at her like newly
burst fireworks. “Ah, no, that doesn’t
matter. No names matter, don’t you
know that? I am Long Steam Lady. I
am Cheong Hay Poa because I talk too
much. I talk so much that no one ever
listens to me because they can’t make
sense of what I say. Who has time?”
She shrugged her shoulders. “I talk
about everything, this and that about
love, not just worrying where my body
will be laid to rest, whether it will be
pointed in the right direction of hea-
ven’s blessing. Ah, no, life is too short
to worry about dying when all one has
to do is to love... .”

Two books I ran across recently while

looking at catalogs intrigued me — Asian
American Literature: An Introduction to

May/June 1987

the Writings and Their Social Context by
Elaine Kim (Temple University Press)
and Rice Bowl Women: Writings by and
About the Women of China and Japan
edited by Dorothy Shimer (a New
American Library paperback). Also, on
the backlist of the University of
Washington Press, which publishes a
great deal of ethnic writing, I found Nisei
Daughter by Monica Sone and Desert
Exile: The Uprooting of a Japanese Ameri-
can Family by Yoshiko Uchida, both
paperbacks.

“Arrival in Camp Jerome” by Henry Sugimoto.
From Beyond Words.

This March the University of Georgia
Press published a young adult novel that
has received acclaim here and abroad.
To Spoil the Sun, by Joyce Rockwood
($9.95, PB), tells the story of Rain
Dove, a Cherokee woman whose life in-
tersected tragically with the “pale men
dressed in metal” who arrived in “strange
floating townhouses.” And an excellent
annotated bibliography called North
American Indian Women: Selected Sources
by Catherine Loeb is available from the
Women’s Studies Librarian at Large,
112A Memorial Library, 728 State St.,
Madison, WI 53706.

New Books by Belles Lettres Editors

Three of Belles Lettres’s consult-

ing editors have had books pub-

lished recently: one novel, one
book of poems, and one scholarly study.
Doris Grumbach adds to her substantial
body of novels with The Magician’s Girl
(Macmillan), an expansive story about
three literary women who were friends
in their youth. Richard Wright’s Art of
Tragedy by Joyce Ann Joyce was pub-
lished last fall by Iowa State University
Press, and Jewelle Gomez’s Flamingoes
and Bears is available from Grace Publi-
cations (247 Liberty Ave., Jersey City,
NJ 07307). “Our Feminist Who Art in
Heaven” is an excerpt from the collec-
tion, which contains a wide range of
moods and themes:

Bless me sister

for I have sinned.

It has been too long

since my last confession.

I lied once for non-political reasons,
I swore three times

(saying God

instead of Goddess)

But the most mortal sin of all:
politically incorrect sex.

Just one little thing,

it only took a moment

then my wrists were freed.

I’m sure it will never happen
again.

Alternative Publishing

Chapbooks, those slim volumes

with a stapled cover rather

than a spine, have long had a
valuable place in the women’s publish-
ing movement, and many have been
self-published. Cheryl Clarke’s Narra-
tives, Audre Lorde’s From a Land Where
People Live, Minnie Bruce Pratt’s The
Sound of One Fork, Judith McDaniel’s
Metamorphosis, and Dorothy Allison’s
The Women Who Hate Me were all pub-
lished as chapbooks. Clarke’s book is an
example of a self-published volume that
was subsequently published and distri-
buted by a press — in this case, Kitchen
Table: Women of Color Press. Chap-
books have enabled some writers whose
persona and message are inimical or un-
interesting to the sensibilities of
mainstream publishers to get their mes-
sage out to the people who want or need
to hear it. Two excellent examples are
A Small Pain by Flyin’ Thunda Cloud
($6.00, WIM Publications, 2215-R
Market St., San Francisco, CA 94114)
and Pissed Off Poems and Cross Words
by Marlene Mountain ($6.73, Route
One, Hampton, TN 37658). Both poets
are intensely aware politically, and they
both have created their symbolic names
to more truly reflect who they are. Flyin’
Thunda Cloud describes her work in the

preface to the volume:

In A Small Pain, I talk about how life
is for women of color. Women of color
are still expected to teach white
women about dark women’s lives.
This has got to be ended. I always en-
vision justice, that things in the com-
munity (of women) will get better for
women of color. To educate themselves,
white women have to read magazines
that are supposed to be aimed at women
of color.

Her work focuses (always with this
inventive orthography) on love —
whether romantic love for a lover or
aching, protective love for her daugh-
ter — and on recreating her experience
as a Black woman in a racist society (in-
cluding women’s groups). For example,
in “Radical/Extremista,” she responds to
a group of White women who ask her
whether she is afraid of repercussions for
her outspokenness:

Thank you sister,
ten Hail Mary’s
on my knees.
Thank you sister.

Is this penance
something

I might do

in the privacy

of my own home?

Flyin’ Thunda Cloud

“Often I’m mistaken for being

very brash.

Actually, I am more afraid than

anybody knows... ,

but when the civil rights

movement, the women’s rights

movements were in full tilt, I was still
very young, & no

one noticed that I was always

listening.

No one noticed my growing stronger

(like a seed of the mothers, so strong)

Growing right under the patriarchy’s nose.

Sometimes I feel so vulnerable

so nude,

but I have learned to be as deadly

as a snake, as sinister.

My friends of color say, my lover & me
know that the bottom is

coming to the top,

I am one of those women on the
bottom

who has come up to the top

that’s my brashness

my brash ass

if anything should ever happen to me

if my voice is ever silenced

so many more will rise in my stead . . .

Out of miscomprehension, misogyny,
or a combination of the two, the first
printer of Marlene Mountain’s self-pub-
lished chapbook botched the job, de-
clared the work obscene, and refused to
give her a full refund. Obscenity is pre-
sent surely, but only insofar as the images
evoked and the targets of bitter com-
mentary are obscene: the destruction of
the earth and acts such as rape and
clitorectomies that are perpetrated on
women. Mountain has been praised for
her experimental work with haiku,
which has been anthologized. In this

— continued on page 15

Li 13
Belles Lettres