At Home with the Maoris

The Bone People, by Keri Hulme. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985,  
$17.95, 450 pp., translation of Maori words and phrases.

Searching for  
Female Identity

Room to Move: An Anthology of Aus-  
tralian Women’s Short Stories, edited by  
Suzanne Falkiner. New York: Franklin  
Watts, 1986, $15.95, 246 pp. [Originally  
published in 1985 by Allen & Unwin,  
Australia Pty. Ltd.]

by Janet Overmyer

In the past five or six years, Australian

movies have, with reason, become

popular outside of Australia’s borders.  
It would now seem to be the turn of Aus-  
tralian literature, but this collection of 32  
stories by Australian women will probably  
not do it. To say that the collection is  
highly uneven is to say what is true of  
many anthologies. The quality of the  
unevenness here is of particular interest,  
though. The not-so-hot can be dreadful;  
the good can be excellent.

As Elizabeth Riddell says in her  
foreword, “this is interior writing” with  
little emphasis on current events. In Room  
to Move the emphasis is on “what  
characters feel rather than what they do.”  
The authors’ ages range from the early 20s  
to the 70s. The stories are personal, often  
told in the first person; many of the  
characters are “displaced, disoriented,  
dislocated,” or disenchanted; and there is  
no humor to speak of. (The stories that  
Riddell claims are humorous did not have  
me rolling on the floor.)

To begin at the bottom, some of the  
stories are, beneath a carefully crafted  
exterior, empty, leaving the reader un-  
caring. Others, like Inez Baranay’s “The  
Saddest Pleasure,” are pretentious, reach-  
ing an obvious conclusion — love wears  
many faces — without engaging the read-  
er’s emotions. Some, like Carmel Bird’s  
“In the Conservatory” and Bronwyn  
Sweeney’s “Licorice Lozenges, French  
Safety Pins, and Jelly Snakes” (love that  
title), use off-beat styles that do nothing  
but irritate the reader, who must supply  
punctuation and capital letters (Sweeney)  
or logical connections (Bird) while also  
trying to figure out the people and the  
plot. Most of the stories are, as might be  
expected, somewhere in the middle:  
mildly interesting but nothing to mourn  
for having missed. A few, however, are  
superb.

One of these is Penelope Nelson’s “The  
Dowry,” a subtle, intense, metaphoric  
connection of the funeral of the narrator’s  
mother with the latter’s “dowry,” which is  
a love of correct language: “Thanks to  
her, I twitch every time someone says  
‘between you and I’. . . . She taught me  
my mother tongue.” She compares her  
mother’s gift with that left to the Au-  
stralian poet Les Murray, his memory of  
his mother’s cutting out dough and telling  
him about French, described in one of his  
poems. The narrator in “The Dowry” says  
that Murray’s handmade (by his mother)  
christening robe is “a poem.” Her mother,  
his, their gifts — all a priceless dowry.

“Nothing Happened,” by Margaret  
Coombs, burrows inside the fears of a  
young girl who, against her better judg-  
ment, accepts a ride with a strange man.  
He will take her to her destination for  
free, he says, and, worrying more over  
what her mother would say if she knew  
than over his intentions, she accepts. He  
stops his car to put the girl’s hand over his  
clothed crotch. This is as far as he goes; he  
then drives her on. The girl meets her  
friend and wants to tell her how upset she  
is but cannot because, after all, nothing  
happened.

Other well-written stories include  
“The Lang Women,” by Olga Masters,  
wherein a young girl, her mother, and her  
grandmother, unknowingly (?), as they  
undress at night, put on a free show for  
passersby, and the girl discovers a truth  
about a male neighbor. “Vida’s Child,” by  

September/October 1986

Freda Galloway, is an account of a girl  
who, while spending time at her aunts’  
home, learns some truths about herself  
and others. “Night Runner,” by Elizabeth  
Jolley, tells of a night nurse who is not the  
obedient lady of mercy her superiors  
believe her to be, and “End of the Affair,”  
by Nancy Keesing, presents a woman pay-  
ing a visit to a former fiancé and his wife,  
with unspoken tensions rumbling  
beneath. 

Varied as they are, most of the women  
in these stories have learned an important  
truth about themselves or about others  
and have taken a step forward in their per-  
sonal development. They are not super-  
women; indeed, one wants to shake or  
have a long talk with some of them. This  
anthology suggests that if Australian  
women’s fiction is not yet ready to aston-  
ish the literary world, it is at least on its  
way to presenting interesting protagonists  
who, like all of us, are trying to find their  
female identity.

® Janet Overmyer’s major talent is cud-  
dling Dana and Caitlin, the most beautiful  
cats in Columbus, who occasionally move  
off her papers long enough for her to do her  
own writing and to grade the papers of her  
English students at Ohio State University.

%

Home Time  
by Beverly Farmer

New York: Penguin Books, 1986, $4.95,  
204 pp. (PB)

In her second anthology of short stories,  
Beverly Farmer continues to draw intense  
pictures of people in Australia and in  
Greek villages. With ease she moves from  
writing about a rapist watching to attack a  
bedridden pregnant woman in the foreign  
surroundings of a Greek village to a blind  
woman facing emptiness and aging with  
only her knitting to console her.

Farmer's raw descriptions vividly create  
her characters’ emotions of pain, longing,  
shame, fear, and alienation. Her  
characters are “red and gasping,” “stiff and  
grey,” or “faded and creased.” They live in  
worlds where fire, water, and time take  
lives with almost unbearable carelessness.  
Their relationships with those closest to  
them are often tortuous.

In fact, most of the women in Farmer’s  
stories are victims of a harsh society or of  
brutal men. In “A Man in the Launderette,”  
an unnamed woman in a foreign  
country begs a few moments away from  
her unsmiling companion only to be  
harassed by a disgusting drunk in a  
launderette. She rushes back, panting  
with terror, only to find that her compan-  
ion believes she brought the harassment  
on herself. In “Cafe Veneto,” a young  
woman challenges her father for his in-  
fidelity: “ ‘You really don’t care.’ She  
gazes in disillusion as he sighs. The im-  
petuosity which all her life she has loved  
in him is not, after all, boyish. In the light  
of this evening it is shown up as shallow  
and rash; even, perhaps, brutal.”

Farmer's descriptions of human inter-  
actions are merciless, much like the  
sunlight of Greece, where many of her  
stories are set. However, her harshness  
seems unfailingly accurate. Her characters  
ring true, as does the strength and  
endurance they use to survive.

In the title story, a writer is accused by  
her lover of being a scavenger rather than  
a writer. He is angry at her willingness to  
fully expose the real and often tragic lives  
of those she meets and demands that she  
never write about him. No doubt Farmer  
is such a scavenger. Equally as little in  
doubt is the fact that she is a writer of  
merit.

— Kay Ostberg

by Susan P. Willens

I began The Bone People without

knowing much about New Zealand.

“Maori” and even “New Zealand”  
were such vague concepts to me that I had  
to look them up in the encyclopedia.  
What I found hinted at the exotic:  
“volcanic mountains, fiords, hot springs,  

unusual animals like the albatross,  
the kiwi bird, rare parrots ... The  
Maoris, Polynesian natives, surrendered  
their sovereignty to the British who often  
engaged in bloody attempts to subdue  
these hostile natives” (Columbia Desk  
Encyclopedia). These are the landscape  
and history that underlie Keri Hulme’s  
prize-winning novel. It reveals, as novels  
do, that dramatic interplay of amazing  
landscape, violent people, and competing  
traditions that create a world different  
from our own, a world that is fresh and  
strange. This other world justifies the  
unusual amount of attention the book has  
received.

Keri Hulme

The Bone People has been awarded  
England’s Booker Prize, the New Zealand  
Book Award, and the Pegasus Prize for  
Literature, established by the Mobil  
Corporation “to introduce American  
readers to work from countries whose  
literatures are rarely published” here. In-  
deed the story of getting this novel  
published at all makes a good read in itself:  
The book earned international notice  
against odds imposed by both the author’s  
physical isolation in rural New Zealand  
and her peculiar, quirky imagination.

The novel is set in small-town and  
backwoods New Zealand, a landscape of  
tract houses, working-class bars, clinics,  
package stores, and rutty roads, giving  
way suddenly to scrub and sea. We are in a  
landscape of vast night skies, breathtaking  
mountains, sea creatures, and vegetation  
made into poetry. The story tells of three  
survivors: woman, child, and man,  
tenuously attached, clinging together and  
fighting each other off, as violently as a  
drowning swimmer struggles with a  
rescuer. Their embracing is terrible to see.

The woman, Kerewin Holmes, is an  
artist who can no longer paint. She is a  
muscular, hard-drinking, cheroot-  
smoking Rapunzel living alone in a tower,  
but she has cut off all her hair. She is  
tugged back into life by the hand of a  
mysterious, silent child called Simon.  
Although Simon is only six or seven years  
old, he has suffered loss enough for a life-  
time. His past, to the extent that we can  
understand it, is a chaos of storm at sea,  
lost parents, a foster family suddenly  
reduced to one man. That man, Joe  
Gillayley, loves Simon yet beats him  
violently, mercilessly.

These three knit into a single figure, a  
deformed trinity. After a brief time of  
peace together, the adults explode into  
violence, hurting Simon. Then Kerewin  
models their images into a three-sided  
statue, with Simon’s face smiling,  
Kerewin’s gazing, and Joe’s expectant.  
“The hair of their heads is entwined at the  
top in a series of spirals. Round and  
round, the faces become more alive... .  
She saw us whole, as a set [Joe thinks].  
And soon we'll be parted forever. (Not  
forever, not forever, not forever.)” This  
image of the three faces bound in one  
sculpture captures the central experience  
of reading this unusual novel. The reader  
yearns for these three sufferers to unite in  
their lives as they do in the sculpture. The  
tragedy is that they cannot.

At its marrow this is a simple and com-  
pelling story — but it tries to do too much.  
With admirable ambition Hulme wants to  
blend together autobiography, sociology,  
anthropology, and Maori and Western  
literary styles. The mix becomes lumpy.  
Still, while the novel galumphs self-  
consciously along, it fascinates.

The heroine’s name is similar enough  
to the author’s to signal autobiography.  
She emerges as an amazingly original  
character, full of lore about gems and  
cooking, of skills at easel, ham radio, oar,  
and fishing line. But the author ducks the  
pain of self-searching; we learn less about  
Kerewin’s past than we need in order to  
understand her artist’s block, her terror of  
love, her despair.

More than wanting to reveal herself,  
Hulme intended to dramatize the un-  
comfortable union of Maori and English  
consciousness in New Zealand. Most of  
the characters are mixed-blood Maoris.  
They live the ordinary Western-style life  
of factory jobs, young marriage, and  
children, with drinking and fighting to fill  
the weekends; yet they also feel the pull of  
tribal ways. In Joe Gillayley’s extended  
family, for example, his kinfolk form  
traditional households, several  
generations with many children, gov-  
erned by the folk wisdom of the women.  
To embody the more formal Maori ritual,  
Hulme introduces an ancient hermit  
whom Joe meets by accident, just when he  
needs moral uplift. At the appearance of  
the hermit, the novel suddenly fills with  
magic relics from the Maori past, mystic  
initiations, even an earthquake from the  
gods. The effect of all this cultural educa-  
tion on the reader is just too much, like  
being locked in the Natural History  
Museum overnight.

Hulme’s style, too, is ambitious. She  
tries to combine the Maori language and  
way of thought with many layers of Eng-  
lish style. The language never forges into  
unity, however, caroming wildly from  
high T. S. Eliot to imitation Tonto. On a  
foundation of strong realism, Hulme  
builds too much sophomoric poetry and  
interior monologue. Like the wonderful  
spiral tower where we meet Kerewin, the  
novel is destroyed in the end, crowded  
beyond what it could hold.

Like Love Medicine, Louise Erdrich’s  
more shapely novel about Native  
Americans, The Bone People is about  
ordinary people, “natives” transformed by  
a colonial power into strangers in their  
own land. Although it does not succeed as  
well as Erdrich’s novel, The Bone People  
does reflect the tragedy of ordinary people,  
evoke an uncommon landscape, and trace  
the texture of non-Western culture. In  
the process it brings Western readers a  
new world of stars and sea animals,  
frontier towns and remote habitations.  
Mostly, it brings us three lonely people  
racked by a violent fate, reaching for each  
other and missing.

® Susan P. Willens teaches literature and  
directs the new adult education program of the  
Edmund Burke School in Washington, DC.

Belles Lettres @ 3