— Lions Learn, continued

It is the tension between Dessa and  
Rufel, and Rufel’s interaction with the  
other runaways, that brings her to ques-  
tion the presumptuousness of the  
slaveholder. She had expected all Blacks  
to be like Mammy, “like family.” But  
these Blacks, who were almost free, were  
neither obliging nor subservient; in-  
stead, they were “cheeky” and willful.  
Even the bedridden Dessa, captive audi-  
ence to Rufel’s litanies about Mammy  
and the good old days, chastises her.  
Dessa’s verbal tongue-lashing embarras-  
ses Rufel out of her remaining racist  
complacency: “Wasn’t no ‘mammy’ to  
it,” Dessa screams, delirious, “You ain’t  
got no ‘mammy.’ ”

In reexamining her memories of  
Mammy, Rufel is chagrined by their  
shallowness: What else, she questions  
herself, had she refused to see? Slavery’s  
inhumanity is made even more real to  
her when she sees Dessa’s thighs and  
hips, mutilated by repeated whippings  
where the scars would not “impair her  
value.” Although Rufel keeps her dis-  
tance from Dessa, she comes to respect  
the woman who had helped to make  
herself free. A love affair with Nate, the  
Black driver who had escaped from the  
coffle with Dessa, completes Rufel’s in-  
tellectual and sexual emancipation.  
Through Nate Rufel gets her most rivet-  
ing accounts of the viciousness of slavery  
and of Dessa’s particular courage:

I don’t know how long they had her  
in that [sweatbox]. Her face was  
swollen; she was bloody and dirty,  
cramped from laying up in there. I  
didn’t think she could stand up; but she  
did. . . . She was crying, you know,  
tears making mud on her face, dirt from  
head to toe so she looked like some-  
thing abandoned alongside the road. She  
picked up her own self and I know her  
skin must've been screaming. But she  
didn’t ask that white man for no mercy,  
not then, not ever.

Nate is depicted as sensitive, handsome,  
intelligent, and scandalously funny — a  
trained ladies’ man. Goaded by fear and  
desire, he had served as one of his former  
mistress’s lovers until she sold him away.  
Nate is sympathetic to Rufel’s loneli-  
ness, treats her “like a person,” and  
shocks her with “outrageous” ideas of  
women’s equality.

As if shocked into speech by her sur-  
prise and indignation at stumbling upon  
Nate and Rufel in bed together, Dessa’s  
voice commands the remainder of the  
story. The triangle of the relationship  
between Dessa, Nate, and Rufel pro-  
vides a novel opportunity for the author  
to unravel the historical animosities be-  
tween Black women and White women  
that have their roots in the slavery ex-  
perience. As a common field slave Dessa  
had had only rare and unpleasant con-  
tact with Whites. To her, the power of  
Master was absolute and evil; White  
women symbolized everything Dessa  
feared and hated. The White woman  
“wasn’t no part of the knot” of kinship  
between Black men and women. Discov-  
ering that one of her brothers is capable  
of intimacy with a White person and  
vice versa further compounds Dessa’s  
confusion in her new surroundings and  
state of relative freedom.

But the conditions necessary for the  
flowering of romantic love between the  
slaves had been so severely and systemat-  
ically restricted that Dessa questions  
whether it had eliminated the Black  
man’s desire for the woman who shared  
in his denigration:

There was that old mallet-head Ned  
squawking about, “Dumb? Dumb!  
Yo’all just jealous cause [Nate] not  
diddling you.” Then he say under his  
breath, “Don’t nobody want no old  
mule like you,” but loud enough for  
everyone to hear. And somewhere in  
the darkness a voice went, “Humph,”  
like it wanted to laugh but caught  
itself before the laugh could get out  
good. And then there was a silence

... [had to close my eyes. Was this  
what they thought of us? Mules? I was  
so choked I couldn’t speak.

May/June 1987

Dessa’s doubts are quelled when Harker  
pronounces his affection for her and lov-  
ingly dubs her ‘“‘Negress,” a title of re-  
spect for a Black woman of that day.  
Secure and distracted by her joy at love’s  
reappearance in her life, Dessa’s resent-  
ment of the couple dissipates.

Circumstance forces Rufel and Dessa  
to open to each other. Harker devises a  
scheme to finance the Blacks’ escape to  
the west and Rufel’s return to Charleston  
society. The plot to turn the tables on  
slavery represents the ultimate White  
male nightmare: A conspiracy between  
Blacks and White women to erode the  
patriarchal, racist, capitalist system.  
With Dessa posing as her maid, Rufel  
travels throughout the South swindling  
slave-mongers by selling Blacks who  
promptly escape from their new owners  
and reunite with the group in the next  
town, where the scam is repeated. The  
heroic escapades of Rufel, Dessa, and  
the runaways in pursuit of their freedom  
are told with hair-raising suspense, jubil-  
ant good humor, and rollicking adven-  
ture, which, no doubt, prompted Alice  
Walker’s tongue-in-cheek comment,  
“what a film it would make!”

We'd come a long way from the time  
we'd watched Harker and Ned walk  
back into slavery. What we used to do  
with fear and trembling, we now did for  
fun. I told myself this was good, that it  
showed slavery didn’t have no hold on  
us no more . . . We had made so much  
money. . . this would put us beyond  
the reach of any slave law and the more  
we had, the better.

By the novel’s end, the two women come  
to a reckoning: Dessa’s very survival rests  
in Rufel’s hands, due to the reappear-  
ance of her nemesis, Nehemiah, and the  
threat of the scam’s exposure. Just as  
ignorance had kept the two women at  
odds, their friendship diminishes the  
barriers of race and class between them.  
The “dark night of slavery” opens to a  
bright day of freedom for both.

It has been said that fiction reveals  
truths that reality obscures. In words sto-  
len from an essay on the Irish poet  

Robert Blake, Williams has displayed  
that she, too, is able to “alchemize bitter  
experiences into poetic gold.” From  
“that brief moment of exultation in the  
clearing, when all had stood free, by  
their own doing, of beads and chains”  
to the elderly Dessa’s musings in the  
epilogue, this novel focuses our reflec-  
tions upon the personal toll exacted by  
an inhumane system. Yet, despite its  
tragedy, Dessa Rose retains a lightness  
of spirit. And despite its humor, it re-  
mains very serious fiction, perhaps one  
of the most significant novels in Afro-  
American letters.

@ Kamili Anderson works in the market-  
ing department at Howard University  
Press.

5

“But this,” the father told an inquisi-  
tive child, who wondered why the  
“king of beasts” was always the loser  
in jungle stories, “will change, when  
lions learn to write.”  
— Houston A. Baker  
Singers of Daybreak

This is what I hold against slavery. May  
come a time when I forgive — cause I  
don’t think I’m set up to forget — the  
beatings, the selling, the killings, but I  
don’t think I ever forgive the ignorance  
they kept us in.

— from Dessa Rose

&

— Interview, continued

Do you think your fiction has an impact on  
how people look at events in your country?

Books do tend to change people, and  
fiction, I think, changes people more  
than nonfiction does. I think that’s why  
many people find it dangerous. You can  
tread the newspaper and forget about it.  
But when you read fiction, it stays with  
you. When a friend of mine read Await-  
ing Trespass, she said to me, “That’s a  
tough book.” And I hated to tell her  
that I had written another book that was  
even tougher. I wanted to protect her.

Do you find them tough to write, too?

Oh yes. That’s why I think I’ll write  
one more book about the present and  
then, forget it, that’s it. I'll go back to  

Vv Belles Lett

Check the subscription rate that applies

@ $12.50/year

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216

1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year

1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)

subscriptions, two people) @ $25.00  
OO Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription

I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a free issue.

1899. I think I should write about the  
revolution of 1899; to the Filipino  
people, it’s something like the curse of  
Vietnam. Filipinos have done very little  
writing about the 1899 revolution. In  
1974, I wrote two short stories about it  
and sent them out to magazines. I got  
lots of rejections. Sometimes the editors  
would say, “The soldiers in the story  
think, and soldiers just don’t think.”  
Other times, the editors would say, “Not  
bad for a woman writing war stories.”  
But they rejected it anyway. If someone  
else would write about it I’d be happy  
not to. But no one else is. So that’s  
what’s in the future for me.

% Suzanne Scott and Lynne M. Con-  
stantine are freelance writers and critics in  

Washington, DC. They collaborate every  
chance they get.

Please send

res

Name

1-year subscription[s] or  
subscriptions beginning with the next issue. Enclosed is a check  
or money order in the amount of  
Lettres, along with this completed subscription form, a  
photocopy, or handwritten copy.

— Reconstructing, continued

Ways of Indian Magic, by Teresa Van-  
Etten, retells traditional Pueblo stories  
that were originally told to Van Etten in  
the Tewa language. This is more a study  
than a storybook, however, because the  
tales retold are at least once removed  
from their original source and hence  
have undergone some interpretation.  
Van Etten frames the Tewa stories within  
a setting that creates a continuity from  
tale to tale. The overall narrative re-  
counts a young woman’s visits with the  
storyteller. Each visit takes place in a  
cozy room warmed by a pot-bellied stove  
on a winter’s day, which creates an al-  
most overly romantic ambience. The  
language and style are internal and  
simple, and this lends to the fairytale-  
like quality of the book.

The individual stories contain the  
qualities of myth and legend. They are  
full of transformation and metamorph-  
oses that transcend the material world,  
yet this ethereal quality is somewhat dis-  
turbing. They do hold a bit of magic and  
a sort of spirituality, yet the tone of the  
work echoes a deep romanticism and  
wishful nostalgia. Although the source  
of the stories is feminine, they seem vag-  
uely prescriptive. They have their mo-  
ments though, and each story at least  
gives the sense that there is something  
beneath it — something that is not  
being said.

— Alternative Publishing, continued

volume she manipulates form in two  
ways. One part of the book consists of  
a sequence of innovative haiku-like  
meditations that were all written over a  
five-month period. This stanza comes  
from a section called i grow older:

1

i grow older radioactive wastes live 250  
centuries

old pond a frog rises belly up

year ends another 96 billion lbs of  
hazardous waste

universe love it or leave it...

3

not against men in general just generals  
and

autumn nears a gun sale

full moon oh to hex the world back  
from them

we should have stayed seaweeds

And this is a poem entitled “moments  
keenly perceived”:

haiku poets can write satirical haiku  
haiku poets can write cynical haiku

haiku poets if they’re women can bitch  
bitch: a sacred name of goddess

The second part of the book is com-  
posed of clueless crossword puzzles,  
which represent litanies of terms that  
have been used to describe or demean  
women. Lists of the words used in each  
puzzle form the book’s cover design. One  
can easily see why Mountain would be  
“cross” with these words — and her  
printer uncomfortable.

2-year

payable to Belles

Street

City

State Zip

* Please tell us how you found out about Belles Lettres:

O 1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year

(1 2-year individual rate (2 years, one person or 2 1-year

Send gift card name 0) A contribution of $ _______ is enclosed =  
lon  
Name =  
é  
Street —  
City State Zip =  

SN tb er hs ss os ng esse me ion oT i

a  
un  

Belles Lettres