But we can understand it when Doody  
reminds us that Burney’s adored father  
remarried shortly after her mother’s  
death, imposing a hated stepmother on  
Frances and her sisters and brothers. Less  
convincingly, I think, Doody connects  
Thrale with the admirable but flawed  
mother of the hero in Cecilia: Both Mrs.  
Thrale and Mrs. Delvile were proud of  
their family and impatient of stupidity  
and sacrificed their youth to loveless  
marriages, but Mrs. Delvile shows no  
trace of Mrs. Thrale’s lively, iconoclastic  
wit. Nevertheless, Doody’s characteristic  
method of drawing connections between  
life and work, or between one work and  
another, is always provocative and in  
most cases illuminating. After drawing  
attention to a ludicrous performance of  
Othello in Camilla, she traces allusions  
to the play in the novel and relates them  
to Burney’s theme of misjudgment, par-  
ticularly Edgar’s and Marchmont’s of  
Camilla.  

Evelina has remained constantly avail-  
able, and modern editions or reprints of  
Camilla and Cecilia appeared in 1972  
and 1986. But The Wanderer has been  
inaccessible since its original publication  
in 1814. Hence its reprint in Pandora  
Press’s Mothers of the Novel series is  
most welcome. Although not everyone  
would agree with Doody that it is a great  
novel, The Wanderer is now widely ap-  
preciated for its representation of sexual  
politics. Burney was conservative by  
upbringing and temperament, but intel-  
ligent and honest enough to examine  
with sympathy and fairness both the  
economic problems of women in her  
society and the radical solutions that  
were being offered. The new World’s  
Classics Cecilia is more thoroughly an-  
notated than the earlier Pandora reprint  
and has an excellent introduction by  
Doody. Burney’s journals were published  
shortly after her death, with many  
abridgments, particularly for her later  
years. Joyce Hemlow and others have  
edited the Journals and Letters from  
1791, when Burney escaped from her  
service at Court, until her death in  
1840. Oxford has now issued a selection  
from this great twelve-volume edition,  
which includes much fascinating  
material, such as Burney’s account of  
her and d’Arblay’s ‘courtship (as ex-  
quisitely sentimental as anything in con-  
temporary fiction), her impressions of  
Napoleon, her mastectomy, and her  
journey to join her husband after Water-  
loo. Burney’s Early Journals and Letters  
(1768-91) are being re-edited by Lars E.  
Troide; Volume I is now available in  
England.  

@ Katharine M. Rogers, a Research  
Professor at American University, has pub-  
lished Feminism in Eighteenth Century  
England (1982) and co-edited The  
Meridian Anthology of Early Women  
Writers (1987). She is currently writing a  
book on Burney’s presentation of wom-  
en’s problems in her novels.  

FEMINIST WOMEN’S  
WRITING WORKSHOPS  

JULY 9-21, 1989  

Guest Writers:  
Lucille Clifton  
and  
Judith McDaniel  

Guest Publisher:  
Nancy Bereano  

Resident Faculty:  
Mary Gilliland  
and  
Rachel Guido deVries  

For brochure:  
Send SASE to FWWW-a  
Box 6583, Ithaca, NY 14851  

Winter 1989  

Hewing Our Creative Time  

Tide-Race, by Brenda Chamberlain. Dufour Editions (Box 449, Chester Springs, PA  
19425), 1988, $9.95, 228 pp. (PB)  

In Deep, by Maxine Kumin. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987, $8.95, 180 pp. (PB)  

by Leslie Hunt  

What is waiting on the other  
side? Maybe nothing special,  
maybe only more of the same,  

dear enough for this watcher. But the  
quest is real. To get there you have to go  
in deep." This  
Kumin’s first essay of the collection In  
Deep serves as a point of departure for  
our quest into her life in the country,  
while her question and response echo  
the voice of Brenda Chamberlain in  
Tide-Race. Chamberlain charts her life  
on a remote, sparsely populated island  
off the coast of North Wales, whose in-  
habitants coexist uneasily with each  
other and with the sea. For both writers,  
the journeys they describe are at once a  
movement outward to discover the es-  
sential rhythms of the natural world and  
inward to find each writer’s place and  
purpose in this scheme.  

In part because her geographical isola-  
tion is more profound than Kumin’s,  
Chamberlain is more completely and  
constantly absorbed in the business of  
daily survival. Haunting and graceful,  
her writing expresses her sustaining bond  
to the natural world. Weaving together  
physical description, legend, and poetry,  
she evokes the very soul of the island —  
its weather, its geography, the ebb and  
flow of life upon it. Descriptions are as  
clear and evocative as her drawings of  
the sea and of the creatures who dwell  
there; her training as an artist comple-  
ments her writing, while her word  
portraits by themselves illustrate the  
striking power of her observations.  

The water was limpid, simple as the blue  
height of sky. But the island, the island, was  
the legendary rock, the magnet of our blood.  
For an instant forgetting the reality in dream  
I saw it as an unattainable, nameless vision.  
Going back through troughs and rainbow  
sprays, nobody in the world seemed more  
fortunate than I, for this was life and colour  
and movement under the sun.  

While Chamberlain focuses steadily on  
revelations and challenges that con-  
stitute her daily existence, she is also  
stirred by visions of past and future and  
by what she calls “the strong pulling of  
the dead.” Here on this island, the  
nourishing and destructive aspects of the  
sea are equally present. But despite social  
conflicts, scant food supplies, and the  
ever-present possibility of death on the  
sea, she finds in this threatening  
landscape a sustaining continuity. Her  
dream fantasies about joining her  
mother seal in the sea symbolize her  
identification with the natural world;  
but, on another level, these dreams  
simply show her strong affinity with the  
natural life forces around her. Her sense  
of belonging to this cycle is most elo-  
quently expressed when she writes that a  
seabird “is handing on to me the living  
tradition of the island’s past that is the  
present moulding the future.”  

Maxine Kumin’s essays also reflect a  
deeply rooted sense of time and place.  
Kumin sees an awareness of the past as  
essential to the creative process and  
posits that “a sense of region” is also  
present. She wonders where women  
writers derive their sense of place, in-  
cluding their plumbing of “interior  
landscapes.” Like Chamberlain, she  
depends on the natural world for both  
her creative and physical sustenance.  
But — in part because of her academic  
obligations, in part because her isolation  
is not as complete — Kumin feels a  
deeper conflict than Chamberlain be-  
tween the urge to write and the need to  
hew a life from the land. While she cites  
“the centrality of the natural world” as  
the foundation for her writing, she finds  
herself unable to resist the pull of the  
outside world away from that center.  

Writing of this conflict, she seizes upon  
a quote from Anne Tyler about “hewing  
our creative time in small, hard chips  
from our living time.”  

Despite her self-proclaimed struggle to  
accommodate both her living and her  
writing, Kumin’s work resonates with  
striking harmony; on these pages, at  
least, life and work coexist amicably.  
She leads us through the seasons with  
the vigilant eye of Thoreau, to whom  
she is unabashedly indebted. Although  
her descriptions are detailed — she goes  
on for pages about varieties of mush-  
rooms — they are lively and engaging,  
never pedantic or esoteric.  

The polypores are also tree-dwellers, and  
they are probably the most obvious fungi in  
the wood .... Everyone has seen tough old  
“conks” — shelf-like protrusions adorning  

Mid-nineteenth-century London sweatshop  
(Mary Evans Picture Library).  

Adorned in Dreams:  
Fashion and Modernity  

by Elizabeth Wilson  

Berkeley: University of California Press,  
1987, $30 (HB); $9.95 (PB), 304 pp.  

One irony in fashion is the contrast be-  
tween the luxury of fashionable dress  
and the exploitation of female workers  
who have created it, seen from seven-  
teenth-century England to present-day  
Asia. Such a contrast appropriately il-  
lustrates how in all fashion “the shell of  
chic, the aura of glamour, always hides a  
wound.”  

In Adorned in Dreams, Elizabeth Wil-  
son discusses the tensions and conflicts  
that fashion embodies between fantasy  
and reality, public and private, mas-  
culine and feminine, artificial and  
natural, belonging and alienation. The  
smooth exterior of dress provides a  
bridge between conflicts in ourselves  
and the world we inhabit — a link full of  
ambivalence and dual meanings.  

Such ambivalence, argues Wilson, is  
key to any discussion of fashion, which,  
perpetually changing, defies the un-  
changing, universal precepts that many  
theorists use. Therefore, Adorned in  
Dreams offers a kaleidoscopic approach,  
discussing fashion in history, theory, in-  
dustry, eroticism, sexual identity, city  
life, oppositional dress, and feminism. In  
each of these areas, Wilson points out  
conflicting tendencies.  

In erotic dress, for example, fashion is  
“a compromise between modesty and  
eroticism [because] overt sexuality has  
been necessarily largely repressed in civi-  
lized society and it must therefore ex-  
press itself in furtive and oblique ways.”  
One apt theorist said that fashion is thus  
analogous to a neurotic symptom, “a per-  
petual blush upon the face of civiliza-  
tion.”  

Wilson finds a “mocking quality” and  
“elusive double bluffs” in approaches to  
dress by feminists, among others, who  
early on sought freedom from fashion  
dictates and individualism in dress. Yet,  

the torsos of aged trees, and most people  
have idly picked up dried birch polypores for  
the fun of drawing pictures on their flat  
white undersurfaces.  

Much of the book is devoted to writing  
about horses of one kind or another, but  
you do not have to be an equestrian to  
appreciate Kumin’s meditations about  
them. As she builds a fence, waits at  
night for the birth of a foal, and reflects  
on the similarities between poets and  
mules, she writes so precisely and so in-  
timately that we feel we are sitting in  
her country kitchen or out in the barn.  
Of animals, for example, she confides,  
“[they] are my confederates. They arrive,  
sometimes with speaking parts, in my  
dreams. They are rudimentary and untir-  
ing and changeless, where we are sophis-  
ticated, weary, fickle. They make me  
better than I am.” She goes on to ob-  
serve that her daily life provides a  
metaphor for her work, confirming that,  
despite the difficulty of finding time to  
write, life on her New Hampshire hill  
provides a rich source for her thoughts.  

I think that Kumin may speak for  
Chamberlain and does so for herself  
when she refers to the choice to live in  
relative seclusion as “a paradox ... it is  
making the world over as you want it to  
be, while at the same time coexisting  
with nature.” Yet the work of both  
writers is grounded solidly in this  
paradox. Even in the midst of physical  
hardship, hostile weather, and sudden  
death, each finds renewal in the promise  
of change.  

@ Leslie Hunt has been a composition in-  
structor at community colleges in Mary-  
land and currently teaches writing to federal  
employees.  

“If liberated dress meant doing your own  
thing, no one ever commented on how  
strange it was that everyone wanted to  
do the same thing” in the 1960s and  
1970s.  

Adorned in Dreams contains a wealth  
of historical tidbits that only a fashion  
maven could assemble. Readers will  
learn how in eleventh-century Japan,  
for example, women in the royal court  
shaved their eyebrows and blackened  
their teeth, as “gleaming white teeth  
were considered hideous.”  

In another chapter on oppositional  
dress, Wilson relates more historical  
lore. Lord Byron, like many dandies of  
the nineteenth century, lived a life of  
studied leisure and may have been the  
first popular figure to wear jeans. The  
now-alien concept of mourning cloth-  
ing, once a huge business with a section  
in every department store, is brought to  
life. The shocking impressions created  
by zoot suits of the 1940s and by British  
teds and mods twenty years later also  
make fascinating reading.  

In Wilson’s end analysis, fashion is art,  
“an aesthetic medium for the expression  
of ideas, desires and beliefs circulating in  
society ... its function to resolve for-  
mally, at the imaginary level, social con-  
tradictions that cannot be resolved.” In  
some ways, she says, it is like Freud’s  
conception of the unconscious, capable  
of serenely containing mutually ex-  
clusive ideas; in the mind, as in fashion,  
emotions are transformed into images  
and conflicts are resolved by becoming  
symbols.  

Wilson’s primary achievement is in  
conveying both the richness of fashion  
and the ambivalence it represents. In  
covering so much ground, however, she  
tends to leap from one century to  
another, even in the same paragraph, to  
illustrate her ideas. Her book may leave  
readers with an “obliquity of view, even  
of astigmatism or blurred vision,” which  
she readily acknowledges to be a poten-  
tial hazard of her multifaceted perspec-  
tive. Even so, Adorned in Dreams should  
be required reading for anyone who  
denigrates the serious study of fashion.  

—Holly Hall  

Belles Lettres @ 21