A Leap

Forward  
by Diane Dewhurst Belcher  

Seven Contemporary Chinese Women  
Writers, translated by Gladys Yang et al.  
Beijing: Chinese Literature (Panda Books).  
Distributed in the U.S. by China Books,  
San Francisco and by University of  
Washington Press, Seattle. 1982, $4.95,  
282 pp. (PB)  

This book has suffered the same  
fate as have a number of  

translated Chinese literary  
works and works about Chinese  
literature. Although this collection of  
seven stories by writers who are well  
known in the People’s Republic came  
out in 1982, so far no major Western  
journal has reviewed it. Certainly this  
anthology, which signals an  
extraordinary, even courageous leap  
forward for Chinese literature,  
deserves much more attention. It is  
not difficult, however, to understand  
why this book has been largely  
neglected here. Judged by Western  
standards, the narrative is likely to  
appear unadventurous and overly  
moralistic in content.  

The most ambitious and successful  
story, Shen Rong’s novella, “At  
Middle Age,” has been heralded in  
the Chinese press for its experimental  
stream of consciousness, but to a  
reader familiar with Joyce or Woolf, it  
looks fairly conventional. The  
Western reader is even less likely to  
be impressed by the anthology’s  
conspicuous messages. Wang Anyi’s  
“Life in a Small Courtyard,” for  
example, is a charmingly simple story  
with an annoyingly obvious moral. Its  
heroine discovers that a materialistic  

lifestyle does not necessarily bring  
happiness. Another stumbling block is  
the uneven quality of the translations.  
In Wang’s story we find such  
unidiomatic English as, “Were you an  
educated youth from Shanghai?” Or  
worse, “Did you chat to Hai Ping  
yesterday?”  

One of the ironies of modern  
Chinese literature is that the current  
fiction portrays Chinese women more  
honestly than do any of the numerous  
nonfictional stories about “model”  
women written in China since the  
1940s. Such works are meant to hold  
up for emulation certain ideologically  
advanced women who overcome all  
hardships and suppress all personal  
needs for the revolutionary cause. The  
actual women who inspired these  
stories acquire mythic dimensions in  
the narratives. Comrade Ch’en Min,  
for example, with a baby in one arm,  

for her family with insufficient social  
support and few modern  
conveniences. After grueling hours of  
practice, Lu must run home to cook  
lunch for her children. She spends her  
evenings, after her son has finished  
his homework at the desk in their  
one-room apartment, poring over the  
latest issues of medical journals or  
mending clothes. Lu knows she is a  
fine doctor, yet she feels she is a  
failure as a wife and mother. At the  
end of the story the reader does not  
know what Lu’s chances are for  
continuing her career, or even her  
life, after a heart attack brought on by  
too many years of overexertion and  
emotional strain. The highly imagistic  
final scene is both hopeful and  
ominous: A recovered yet still fragile  
Lu steps out of her hospital room into  
the sunshine and the relentless cold  
wind typical of northern China.  

Certainly this anthology, which signals an extraordinary, even  
courageous leap forward for Chinese literature, deserves more  

attention.  

spins yarn for the Red Army with the  
other, producing over 60 pounds of  
yarn in a year. In a more recent story  
(1980) Ting Chih-hui cuts up her  
padded gown to wrap the feet of  
frostbitten soldiers.  

In contrast with the model worker  
accounts, many of the stories in this  
collection reveal the problems that  
plague the most dedicated of women,  
problems that seriously inhibit their  
contributions to the people. By far the  
most affecting of these works in its  
exposure of women’s problems is “At  
Middle Age,” by Shen Rong. Her  
heroine, Lu Wenting, is a brilliant  
ophthalmologist who makes as much  
as a factory worker and who must care  

Clearly a story such as Shen’s is no  
simple promotional vehicle for the  
Chinese Communist Party. Indeed,  
this entire collection is testimony to  
the greater freedom allowed writers in  
China since the “ten years of chaos”  
(1966-1976), the Chinese revolution,  
ended. Nothing like Shen’s satirical  
vignettes of a high Party official and  
his self-righteous wife would have  
been likely to appear in print during  
that time. Shen goes so far as to have  
a colleague of Dr. Lu refer to the  
wife, who urges Lu to “strive for”  
Party membership, as “an old lady  
spouting revolutionary phrases.”  

Other stories in this anthology  
movingly depict a younger generation  

whose lives were blighted early by the  
Party’s excesses during the Cultural  
Revolution. In Ru Zhijuan’s “The  
Path Through the Grassland,” Yang  
Meng, a self-taught geologist, is  
refused admission into college because  
she is “over age” after eight years of  
involuntary labor in the oil fields of  
Inner Mongolia. Still more disturbing  
is Zong Pu’s psychically wounded  
Liang Xia in “Melody in Dreams.” A  
promising young musician orphaned by  
the Cultural Revolution, Liang is not  
excited by the music she makes or by  
anything but the thought of avenging  
herself on the Gang of Four.  

None of the stories I have  
mentioned, however, is free from  
Party rhetoric. In “At Middle Age,”  
Lu’s best friend, Jiang, realizes that  
she is turning her back on China, a  
country that needs her, when she  
emigrates to Canada for the sake of  
her own medical career and her  
daughter's future. In “The Flight of  
the Wild Geese,” Qin remarks  
pointedly that she blames neither the  
Party nor the people for her  
imprisonment. In “The Path Through  
the Grassland” Yang remembers with  
sadness that because of her father’s  
unmerited detention in a labor reform  
camp she was unable to become a  
Young Pioneer. And in “Melody in  
Dreams” the hardened and vengeful  
Liang nevertheless reads Marx and  
Lenin and mourns the death of Zhou  
Enlai. A cynic might respond to the  
apparent political waffling in these  
stories by noting that without some  
expression of faith in Marxist China  
these authors would probably never  
have had their works published. A  
less cynical and probably more  
appropriate response would be to  

continued on page 10  

Under the  
Wingprint of  
the Mountain  
by Jean Nordhaus  

Scaffolding: New and Selected Poems,  
by Jane Cooper. London: Anvil Press  
Poetry, 1984, $7.95, 144 pp. (PB) [Order  
from Small Press Distribution, 1784  
Shattuck Ave., Berkeley, CA 94709.]  

“Autobiography is not true enough.  

I: Scaffolding Jane Cooper writes:  

It has to be rearranged to release  
its full meaning.” If this is so, then  
the preparation of a volume of  
selected verse offers the poet some of  
the same opportunities and challenges  
as the composition of a poem. The  
selection and ordering of poems is an  
act of retrospection that allows the  
poet to revise, correct, and complete  
a particular region of her or his auto-  
biography so that its cumulative  
“meaning” can become visible.  
Hindsight can foster distortion —  
revisionist history — but what comes  
across most forcefully in Scaffolding,  
both in the individual poems and in  
the arrangement of the book as a  
whole, is a sense of Cooper’s  
strenuous honesty. The intention of  
these poems is not to charm or  
apologize, but to tell the truth, and  
the very slimness of this book,  
encompassing 36 years of creative  
work, is a testimony to Cooper’s  
reticence, her fortitude as a writer.  
“To the sea of received silence,” she  
writes in “The Weather of Six  
Mornings,” the title poem of her first  
volume of published poems, “why  
should I sign/ my name?”  

4 % Belles Lettres  

Cooper’s decision to present her  
poems chronologically in Scaffolding  
represents a genuine rearrangement,  
since the earliest poems, written from  
1947 to 1951 and presented here in  
the section entitled “Mercator’s  
World,” were not published until  
1974 in Cooper’s second volume,  
Maps and Windows. Also included in  
the new volume is a long and very  
illuminating autobiographical essay  
from 1974 explaining the inner con-  
flict that led her to abandon the  
“Mercator’s World” poems and stop  
writing poetry for the next five years.  

The intention of these poems  
is not to charm or apologize,  
but to tell the truth.  

Cooper, who was in her twenties  
in the years following World War II,  
set out to write poems of political  
awareness, “war poems from a civil-  
ian’s, a woman’s, point of view,” and  
to do so in the grand tradition of  
Hopkins, Yeats, and Auden. But the  
poems of that period were often as not  
love poems in which war provided  
pretext and imagery. They reflected  
difficulties she was having in balanc-  
ing the demands of the artist/self  
against societal expectations and her  
own personal and sexual needs. In  
“Eve,” sexuality appears as both a  
necessary deliverance and a form of  
conquest. “After the Bomb Tests,” a  
trio of linked sonnets, equates  
creativity and destructiveness and ends  
with a vision of the scientist, the  
creative intellect, poised between the  
claims of tradition and recognition of  
his own gift: “Kepler, curious, rose/  
started to cross himself — then like a  
lover/ or virgin artist gave himself to  
his power.”  

Artistic and intellectual creativity  
represented power (and the con-  
comitant potential for destructiveness),  
and the problem for Cooper  
was that to seize this power was to  
begin to take responsibility, to  
become dangerous. “Was I wrong to  
declare myself innocent?” Cooper  
would write years later in “The  
Flashboat.” In the years between 1951  
and 1956, however, the struggle  
between her desire to be creative as a  
woman and as an artist essentially  
silenced her. She had become  
appalled by the violent implications of  
her own imagery, the recognition that  
“the war had begun to seem like a  
mask, something to write through in  
order to express a desolation that had  
become personal.”  

It has been, for Cooper, an  
arduous artistic journey from the  
tense, elaborately contrived stanzas of  
“Mercator’s World” to the open,  
free-verse lines of “Threads,” a  
dramatic monologue based on Rosa  
Luxemburg’s Prison Letters to Sophie  
Liebknecht; from a poem that laments,  
“I might as well stick my head in the  
maw/ Of the ocean as live this  
generously” (“The Knowledge That  
Comes Through Experience”) to the  
captive Rosa Luxemburg’s realization  
that “passing through my cell in all  
directions/ are fine threads connecting  
me/ with thousands of birds and  
beasts.” In the course of this artistic  
evolution, Cooper has managed to  
attain the quality she had initially at-  
tempted to emulate in Auden and  
Spender — “a contemporary,  
politically aware tone of voice.”  

Curiously, the equation of creativ-  
ity and destruction in Cooper’s early  
work, and her ambivalence about  
this, resurfaces in the later work as a  
kind of double vision, the ability to  
hold two seemingly contradictory  
truths in the mind at once. The dif-  
ference is that the contradictions that  
paralyzed the young writer become, in  

the paradoxical imagery of the later  
work, a mystery that the mature  
artist’s vision is able to contain. In  
“All These Dreams,” a poem written  
over the 16-year period between 1967  
and 1983 and dedicated to Jean Val-  
entine, the recurrent dream images of  
bare boards and scaffolding are  
suggestive of a bombed-out landscape,  
but they also represent, on a positive  
scale, a place of beauty and serenity  
— the artist’s studio as contrasted  
with her grandmother’s “overfurnished  
house,” the paring down to essentials  
necessary for art. The image folds  
back on itself like a Mobius band.  
What Cooper’s odyssey suggests is that  
the same doubleness of vision that  
permits the artist to survive may be  
necessary for our sane existence in the  
nuclear world:  

To live in the future  

like a survivor!  

Not the first step up the beach  

but the second  

then the third  

— Never forgetting  

the wingprint of the mountain  

over the fragile human settlement —  

— The Blue Anchor  

© Jean Nordhaus is the author of a  
chapbook of poems, “A Language of  
Hands” (SCOP, 1982) and is a former  
poetry coordinator at the Folger Shake-  
speare Library.  

September/October 1985