Euphoria  
in the Theater  

Plays: One, by Caryl Churchill. New  
York: Methuen, 1985, $5.95, 320 pp.  
(PB)  

by Joyce Van Dyke  

Literary genres written in seclusion  

and read in solitary enjoyment  

were naturally the most suitable  
for that creature who used to be called  
Woman. Her voice was ever soft,  
gentle, and low — an excellent thing in  
woman (as King Lear put it).  

But in writing for the theater, a  
woman multiplies and projects her  
voice; in that public world, a world of  
action, she makes things happen. As  
women have grown more active, out-  
spoken, and visible in politics and other  
public arenas, so have they grown as  
playwrights. Among those with cur-  
rently active careers are Wendy Was-  
serstein, Emily Mann, Beth Henley,  
Marsha Norman, Maria Irene Fornes,  
Tina Howe, Pam Gems, Louise Page,  
and Caryl Churchill.  

It has already become a byword that  
women speak “in a different voice,” but  
of course they speak in many different  
voices. These playwrights do not have a  
common social or dramatic vision —  
although most do write an unusually  
large proportion of roles for women (the  
usual ratio of male to female characters  
having changed little since the days  
when renaissance theater touring comp-  
anies managed with four men and, to  
play the women’s parts, one boy).  

Among the most original and daring  
of these new voices is that of the English  
playwright, Caryl Churchill. Now in  
her late 40s, she has written more than  
30 plays for stage and radio. Plays: One  
consists of five stage plays, with pre-  
fatory notes by the author, which mark  
her evolution from a private playwright  
(“I never discussed my ideas while I was  
writing, or showed anyone anything  
earlier than a final, polished draft”) to  
one who prefers a collective method of  
creation.  

Three of these plays result from the  
collective method: “Vinegar Tom,” a  
play about 17th century witch persecu-  
tion in England, written with a women’s  
theater collective called Monstrous  
Regiment, and “Light Shining in Buck-  
inghamshire” and “Cloud Nine,”  
written with the Joint Stock Company.  
In each case the script evolved through  
group discussion and research by the  
actors, director, and playwright. As an  
artistic method, it fits Churchill’s  
socialist vision:  

I know quite well what kind of  
society I would like: decentralized,  
non-authoritarian, communist,  
non-sexist — a society in which  
people can be in touch with their  
feelings, and in control of their  
lives. But it always sounds both  
ridiculous and unattainable when  
you put it into words.  

Churchill has been called utopian.  
What she dramatizes, though, is not  
utopia but euphoria, the euphoria of  

distinct: [Clive] “There is something dark  
about women, that threatens what is  
best in us... [they] are irrational,  
demanding, inconsistent . . . and they  
smell different from us.”  

There is a long tradition in the thea-  
ter of cross-casting, and Churchill has  
employed it to brilliant effect in this  
play. Betty, the colonial wife who  
strives to be the complete fulfillment of  
her husband’s wishes, is played by a  

From left to right: Halo Wines, Stephen Mellor, Christina Moore, Mark Hammer, Kevin  
Donovan, and Cherry Jones. From the Arena Stage (Washington, DC) production of “Cloud  

Nine.” Photo by Joan Marcus.  

possible freedom. Her characters are  
usually realistically trapped, confused,  
or desperately miscast by society, but her  
drama brings them and the audience to  
the brink of release from individual,  
sexual, social, political, and religious  
straitjackets.  

Not only are Churchill’s characters  
sprung free, however. Her innovations  
with roles, character, casting, and time  
and space release the audience’s humor  
and free its vision from conventional  
blinkers. For example, in “Light Shin-  
ing in Buckinghamshire,” the sense of  
shared experience and upheaval during  
the revolution is dramatized in part by  
the characters’ usually being played by  
different actors each time they appear.  

Churchill used a related technique in  
“Cloud Nine,” a play about sexual  
politics, and her most brilliant, comic,  
euphoric, and commercially successful  
work. During the 3-week workshop, the  
participants discussed the analogies be-  
tween sexual and colonial oppression  
and their common perception that they  
had been raised with Victorian values  
about sex and marriage. These discus-  
sions helped give the play its distinctive  
structure. The farcical first act is set in a  
British colony in Africa under the rule of  
Queen Victoria and an archetypal col-  
onial father, Clive. Sex roles and the  
sexes are hysterically and comically dis-  

man. Edward, her young homosexual  
son, is played by a woman. Introducing  
himself he says, “What father wants I’d  
dearly like to be. I find it rather hard as  
you can see.” Theatrical technique be-  
comes theme, as cross-casting exposes  
the deforming effects of sexual  
stereotyping.  

Between the acts, although the  
characters age by only 25 years, the play  
jumps to contemporary London, and all  
of the actors switch characters. Each is  
now a different class, age, race, sex, or  

gender. In the most extreme switch, the  
White man who plays the Black African  
servant in Act I becomes in Act II a  
gigantic, tyrannical 5-year-old English  
daughter. The cross-casting that in Act I  
gave comic-poignant expression to liv-  
ing against the grain becomes an occa-  
sion for euphoric liberation and self-  
acknowledgment: The male Betty is  
freed to become her truer female self;  
Edward’s secret feminine tendencies can  
be openly incarnated by a man; and the  
girl, Victoria, “a little doll” (represented  
literally in Act I by a dummy), has  
become a real woman.  

The Act II world, however, still falls  
far short of cloud nine. Sexual liberation  
has arrived, and the scene is dominated  
by women and gays, but the new free-  
dom is difficult to negotiate. The  
characters are still entangled in their  
Victorian upbringing, haunted — as we  
perceive through their ghostly resurrec-  
tions in each other — by what they and  
their parents used to be.  

Nonetheless, the cross-casting and  
the character-switching between the  
acts are so resonant that the poignancy  
of this entanglement is clear even with-  
out words. Edward in Act II, played by  
the same actor who in Act I played his  
father, Clive, has grown to be the very  
image (so to speak) of a parent whose  
values he needs to repudiate in order to  
find happiness. When in the end the  
former (male) Betty reenters to meet the  
Act II Betty, their silent embrace is both  
a reconciliation and an admission of a  
painfully split self.  

In the theater, we come together to  
witness a vision of our own society in-  
carnated on the stage. Churchill’s gift is  
to show us not only what our society is,  
but what we yearn for it to be.  

® Joyce Van Dyke is a writer who has a  
special interest in the theater and reads  
scripts for Arena Stage in Washington,  
DC.  

Caryl Churchill’s “Light Shining in Buckinghamshire” is a play about the millennial  
movement of the English Revolution with an extensive hierarchy of characters. The  
final scene gathers together the social flotsam thrown up by the revolution, including  
a vagrant woman preacher, Joan Hoskins. Together, they have a homemade,  

blasphemous, impromptu communion:  

Hoskins:  

. what’s it matter now if we’ve no work and no food or can’t get  

parliament like we want? It’s only till next year. Then Christ will be here in his body  
like a man and he'll be like a king only you can talk to him. And he’s a spirit too and  
that’s in us and it’s getting stronger and stronger. And that’s why you see men and  
women shining now, everything sparkles because God's not far above us like he used  
to be when preachers stood in the way, he’s started some great happening and we're  

in it now.  

Claxton: St. Paul to Timothy, “Let the woman learn in silence.”  

Hoskins:  

Joan Hoskins to St. Paul, fuck off you silly old bugger. [They laugh and  

start getting food out. Claxton holds out his food.]  

Claxton:  
Brotherton:  
Claxton:  

Christ’s body.  

There’s plenty.  

I'm afraid I haven’t anything.  

— Unmarried, continued  
desperately ill (probably due as much to her  
punishing work schedule and the un-  
palatable fare of the parsonage as to the  
loss of a year’s labor).  

Anyone who believes that women’s  
liberation in the United States is a myth  
would do well to read both Red Pottage  
and Poor Caroline, by Winifred Holtby.  
Although the latter book was written 30  
years after Cholmondeley’s novel, and  
its author was a successful, Oxford-  
educated journalist and writer, it also  
presents a picture of the unhappy lot of  
unmarried women in the society of that  
time. Women were not only denied the  
education given their brothers, but also,  
if they were unmarried, they were, in  
Cholmondeley’s words, “kept idle and  
unhappy at home, after their youth was  
over, not allowed to take up any pro-  
fession, only to be callously turned adrift  
in their middle age at their father’s  
death, with a pittance on which they  
could barely manage.”  

Caroline Denton-Smythe (“Poor  
Caroline” as other characters in the  
book call her) was just such a person.  

® Belles Lettres  

Never properly educated or married,  
swindled of what little money she had  
inherited, she is at 72 the unpaid secre-  
tary of the Christian Cinema Company,  
whose purpose is the moral uplifting of  
British films. She scrapes out an ex-  
istence by borrowing small sums from  
her friends whom she assures (and  
believes) she will soon pay back with  
generous interest. The Christian  
Cinema Company’s Board of Directors,  
each of whom is the subject of one chap-  
ter of the book, is a ragtag group of op-  
portunists and idealists, none of whom  
has any real interest in the company.  
Basil St. John must find a job, for his  
wife is no longer able to support them  
both; Joseph Isenbaum hopes that St.  
John will sponsor the sole Isenbaum son  
at Eton; Hugh Macafee is looking for a  
buyer for the sound process that he has  
invented; Clifton Johnson is trying to  
find students for his correspondence  
course in scenario writing. Even con-  
scientious Father Mortimer has an ul-  
terior motive: He has fallen in love with  
Caroline’s niece from South Africa,  
Eleanor de la Roux. And Eleanor (per-  

haps an alter ego of the author, who had  
been in Africa, was well educated, and  
was an heiress) has given her inheritance  
to the Company, hoping that her work  
there will lead to a high-paying, tech-  
nical job in the United States.  
Caroline’s relatives, convinced that  
she has “gone round the bend,” urge her  
to go on the Old Age Pension. She is  
equally convinced that at age 72 she  
looks scarcely 50, that her moldy furs  
and jingling necklaces are the height of  
fashion, and that she is a high-powered  
executive of an up-and-coming com-  
pany. Caroline is, indeed, a pathetic,  
ridiculous figure. Yet, by the book's end  
she and her spurious company have  
changed everyone’s life. St. John is  
helping his wife run a dress shop on the  
Riviera; Isenbaum’s son has his coveted  
letter of acceptance from Eton; Macafee  
is on his way to Hollywood; Johnson has  
eluded his creditors, his wife, and his  
mistress and run off to Turkey with the  
Company’s remaining funds; and Father  
Mortimer has not only convinced  
Eleanor that she should marry him, but  
he has convinced himself that he would  

be happy with a wife who pursued her  
own career, on whatever continent, and  
left the running of the parish do-good  
societies to whoever wished to run them.  

This last would be advanced thinking  
for a clergyman even in the 1980s and  
may be wishful thinking on the part of a  
writer who saw a whole generation of  
men wiped out in a World War and very  
few marriages because of it. Holtby  
herself never married, and when she  
died at 37, she had written a number of  
novels and was well known as a jour-  
nalist and lecturer. Her biography,  
Testament of Friendship, was written by  
Vera Brittain, with whom she shared a  
flat in London and who had been a close  
friend since their undergraduate days at  
Oxford. Their era was recreated in a  
BBC series made from Brittain’s auto-  
biography and shown on Masterpiece  
Theatre in the U.S. last year.  

® Barbara Mullaney is the mother of five  
daughters and two sons, who are not being  
forced to stay at home and care for their  
parents.  

Jury/August 1986