Chaos and Miracles

Jasmine, by Bharati Mukherjee. New York: Grove Press, 1989, $17.95, 208 pp.

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Bharati Mukherjee’s superbly

fashioned novel Jasmine extends

Philip Roth’s famous observation
that reality in the twentieth century has
become so much more incredible than
the fiction of the most wildly imagina-
tive writer that fiction now faces near-
impossible challenges. In the universe of
Jasmine, which extends from a remote
feudal village in India to the Iowa
cornfields, the premise of the survivors is
“there’s nothing in this world that’s too
terrible” to happen. The unthinkable
has become the global norm.

But the flip side to the bizarre inci-
dents of violence and terror that sear
through the book is the occasional ma-
terialization of a lucky break, a virtual
miracle. It is the second, more benign
manifestation of fate that keeps life go-
ing and makes change, hope, and even
happiness conceivable.

Jasmine, the young heroine, is one of
the names (or “incarnations,” as she
aptly calls them) that the various cir-
cumstances and men in her life have
bestowed upon her. She begins as Jyoti,
the unwanted fifth daughter of an im-
poverished family in rural Punjab. She
escapes from this literally windowless,
brutal existence by her marriage to
Prakash, a poor but educated and egali-
tarian accountant who chooses her,
dowryless, for her brains and compas-
sion. For Jasmine, this nontraditional
relationship is perhaps the first miracle.

Prakash takes her to a small city with
at least a toehold on modern civilization
and liberates the adoring girl of fifteen
from her ignorance. For two years he
saves, conspires, and bribes their way to
exit papers to America, Jasmine’s with a

Back Before the
World Turned Nasty
A Collection of Short Stories
Pauline Mortensen

Winner of the 1988 Utah Arts
Council Publication Prize

“Cumulatively, Mortensen's
tales evoke an uneasy contempo-
rary America where rapid, threat-
ening change has become the
norm for too many of its citizens.
... [T]he drab, pessimistic atmo-
sphere [is] leavened by an artistry
that is unsentimental, and rich in
love and sly humor.”

— Publishers Weekly

“She [Mortensen] has a
unique voice and a strong sense
of place and people, which make
these stories memorable. I also
admire her laconic and relevant
humor.”

— Leslie Norris

$17.95 cloth, $8.95 paper

FAYETTEVILLE 72701

Far 1989

Available at fine bookstores or directly from

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS PRESS

forged birthdate to make her legally old
enough. On the eve of his departure for a
technical school in Florida, he is sense-
lessly killed by a religious fanatic whose
bomb was intended for Jasmine, for fail-
ing to dress with sufficient modesty by
his crazed standards. Grief-stricken,
Jasmine seeks to fulfill her husband’s
careful plans and sets out, vaguely, for
the strange Promised Land that she
knows only from films like Shane.

Through a hazardous journey of
mind-boggling difficulty, Jasmine makes
her way on unregistered boats and creaky
airplanes crammed with refugees and
captained by thugs. Dumped in agricul-
tural Florida, she endures rape, murders
her attacker, ritually burns Prakash’s
suit, and starts walking. Dazed by cru-
elty and thirst, she contemplates sui-
cide. Destiny again shows its kinder
side, however. She is rescued by an el-
derly passerby, Lillian, whose self-
assigned task in a sorry world is to save
some of the illegal immigrants who
trudge by her farm, perhaps into the
arms of the law, perhaps worse. She
teaches Jasmine how to dress, walk, and
talk “American,” how to use a kitchen,
and other marketable skills. Most of all,
Lillian imparts a philosophy. She gives
the past short shrift, asking Jasmine and
the other desperate illegals that she har-
bors not to let it deform them. This atti-
tude, it turns out, is the most essential
survival skill of all.

Jasmine’s next major incarnation is
Jase, the au pair of a Columbia Univer-
sity couple to whom Lillian’s urban
daughter passes her. Here she becomes
their close friend as well as the beloved
“day mommy” and odd pupil of their

Power Lines and
Other Stories
Jane Bradley

“... the best [of these stories]
are grim accounts of battered or
broken families, the others evoca-
tive mood-pieces. . . . Delicacy
and grim power in a promising
debut collection.”

— The Kirkus Reviews

“Bradley's clean, declarative
prose yields stirring moments.”
— Publishers Weekly

“Power Lines illuminates lives
where loving is dangerous, but so
is the failure to love. These
unflinching stories are as tough
as they are tender, fearless and
full of heart, and beautifully writ-
ten. Jane Bradley is a force to be
reckoned with.”

— Ellen Lesser

$17.95 cloth, $8.95 paper

(501) 575-3246

adopted little girl, Duff. In addition to
learning about friendship and normal
childhood, Jasmine becomes an avid
student, well-paid tutor in Hindi, and
greedy user of the 1-800 charge number
of TV commercials in this amazing land
of plenty. She emerges as a sophisti-
cated, self-assured adult in her early
twenties — just in time for the collapse
of her friends’ marriage and for falling in

Bharati Mukherjee.
Photo by Stephanie Karakas

love with Duff's father, Taylor. Pan-
icked, Jasmine flees to Iowa for no other
reasons than that it was Duff's birthplace
and sounds dull.

Here she assumes her next identity:
Jane, the presumed wife (she evades the
paperwork of marriage) of a small-town
banker in the throes of a midlife crisis.
To Jasmine, Bud is stability, the person-
ification of America as a haven. To Bud,
she is renewal. To Bud’s devastated
ex-wife, she is “a tornado.” All three are
partly right.

When Bud is crippled by a bullet in
the back, fired by a distraught farmer
terrified of foreclosure, Jasmine becomes
his dutiful helpmate. This life, as she
tells herself, is “worthy” in a place no

longer exempt from meaningless vio-
lence, but it is not enough emotionally.
On impulse, she and Bud adopt a
Vietnamese teenager from a refugee
camp. Perhaps the most intriguing char-
acter in the novel, Du is the only person
in her Iowa life that Jasmine un-
reservedly loves.

A “gearhead,” or electronics wizard,
Du restlessly pieces equipment together
with ingenious connections. Jasmine
grasps the subtext of this peculiar hobby;
he wants to make some functioning
whole out of the fragments of his past,
the loss of country, culture, language,
family, and innocence. She becomes for
Du what Lillian was for her, a “facilita-
tor” of the ordinary life that survivors
like themselves crave above all. She
even enables him to leave the comforts
of his new home to join his one living
sister, who has finally made it to Cal-
ifornia; Jasmine understands the choice.
Missing Du, pregnant with Bud’s baby,
she too has been silently preparing for
flight.

Taylor and Duff eventually trace her.
Jasmine accepts Taylor’s offer to be “an
unorthodox family,” weeps for all her
losses, and leaves for unknown new
Karma, this time with at least a chance
for joyous fulfillment.

Life is a series of jolting transitions or
transformations of identity for us all, the
novel suggests, or we die. Despite the
specific horrors of Jasmine’s or Du’s alien
past, their experiences have a curious
Sophoclean timelessness and universal-
ity. The difference at this historical
moment, Mukherjee implies in this, her
finest work so far, is not one of extremity
or of degree; it is that all of our lives run
only on fast-forward now. Before we can
assimilate our insights; we have already
become someone else.

@ Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger is
a professor of literature at Manhattanville
College, where she teaches courses on inter-
national writers in English and British
women writers of the twentieth century.

Light After Darkness: An
Experience of Nicaragua
by Betty Purcell

Dublin: Attic Press, 1989, 160 pp. (PB)

Betty Purcell loves the Nicaraguan rev-
olution, and her book explains why. In
lively, highly readable chapters, this Ir-
ish journalist manages to balance critical
journalism and empathetic support for
the Nicaraguans she came to know
through her six-month travels in 1986
and 1987.

Purcell takes no pride, as do many
other journalists, in maintaining an at-
titude of cynical distance or noncha-
lance in the face of tragedy. Her report-
ing is engaging and moving, as in this
description of the funeral of three chil-
dren killed by Contra forces:

The air was rent with despair. The chil-
dren’s fresh complexions and delicate eye-
lashes remained young, but the dressed
wounds hung with tiny crosses of lace and
starched cotton were a grim reminder of
their bloody and indiscriminate death.
The brother of one of them leaned into
the coffin to half-lift his brother, and cry-
ing again and again, “Why him,
why do this?”

As well as providing historical infor-
mation and an analysis of the current
economic and political situation, the
book brings to life the voices of Nic-
araguan women who explain the ways
their lives have changed since the revo-
lution. Of the literacy program launched
soon after the July 1979 triumph, Mari-
sol, a coffee picker, says, “It was like we
were getting control of our own lives for
the first time.”

The book also introduces us to prom-
inent Nicaraguan women, such as jour-
nalist Sofia Montenegro and poet Gio-
conda Belli. Purcell cares for both of
these women and respects the sacrifices
they have made for the revolution. Of
Belli’s poetry, she writes, “I love the
immediate warmth of her writing, which
gives a real sense of a vibrant and ful-
filled womanhood.” In her chapter on
revolutionary leader Augusto Cesar San-
dino, Purcell tells of interviewing Maria
Soledad, Sandino’s fiancée from his
hometown. Maria waited for years while
he was organizing guerrillas and vowed
never to marry after she heard he had
married a telegraph operator.

Aside from its feminist viewpoint, a
second strength of the book is its com-
parison of Nicaragua and Ireland, espe-
cially useful to those who know little
about Irish politics. While feminists in
Ireland organize around individual issues
(as we generally do in the United
States), women in Nicaragua under-
stand their struggle to be linked to the
continuing defense of the revolution.
Since 1979, Nicaraguan women have
won the right to equal pay, child care,
maternity leave, and divorce. In Ire-
land, divorce is still illegal. In the
United States, we have yet to see the
government confront the need for child
care and maternity leave. We can learn
a lesson from this “underdeveloped”
country, as Purcell states: “Nicaragua’s
example is that of independence and of a
society where people are a priority.”

Purcell may be overly optimistic
about women’s advances. She claims
that women have been fully integrated
into the armed forces, but while I was
there last summer a soldier told me the
female soldiers cook for the men. The
gains Nicaraguan women have made,
however, are a testament to their ideal-
ism and determination.

—Lori Peters

Belles Lettres @ 29