books in our house except for Jane Eyre. Actually, an  
addiction to the library started me reading. And because I  
had no guidance, I took just about anything off the shelves,  
usually because I liked the jackets. I read five or six books  
a week.  

What writers do you feel a particular affinity with?  

The writers who particularly influenced me are Italo Calvino  
and Virginia Woolf. A contemporary poet I like is Marilyn  
Hacker. I like them all for the same reasons. I look for a  
dedication to language and an economy of language — a  
thorough searching for the right word at the right place,  
without sloppiness, and a determination to hone a hard,  
bright image that the reader can keep over time. Very often  
if you read a lot of books, you forget plot and you forget  
character. But if the writer can leave in readers’ minds just  
one image that they can turn over and over and draw on and  
take out and look at now and again, then the writer has  
succeeded. I’m very much a writer who enjoys poetry and  
takes the tenets of poetry into her own work.  

That fact is evident in your economical style of writing.  
I think it’s rude to write long books. This is the late twen-  
tieth century, and never before have people’s time been so  
compressed with so many demands made on it. It’s not the  
nineteenth century, the heyday of the novel, where the  
choices for your leisure time were whether to play the piano  
or read the latest installment of Dickens. Now people have  
very little time. I think if you’re going to say, “Yes, read  
this book. Don’t go to a movie. Don’t go to the theater or  
the opera," then you’ve got to be offering something very  
special.  

That attitude toward the writer’s responsibilities seems  
to be particularly an attitude of someone who did not  
grow up among the privileged classes.  

That’s absolutely true. Because overwhelmingly still, writ-  
ing is a middle-class, private-income domain — certainly in  
my country. And probably only when that truly breaks  
down will we begin to see exciting things happening in  
literature and start to hear voices that have previously been  
silent.  

The Passion is set in the Napoleonic era. Sexing the  
Cherry is set in the age of Cromwell. How did you come  
to be so interested in history?  

I’ve always been fascinated by history. When I was a kid,  
history books were among the ones I used to take out of the  
library. My interest may be because I have no discernible  
past: I don’t know who my ancestors are or where I come  
from. I’m not tethered by family. So in that sense, I’m  
rather like Henri in The Passion. I can make up things  
about the past. The past is a playground adventure.  

My interest is also expedient — how can you most readily  
persuade people to come around to your point of view? I  
sometimes think that setting scenes in the present makes  
people too uncomfortable. Anything that you’ve got your  
nose right up against is going to be a great scene of emo-  
tions reaching boiling point. It’s difficult to stand back. So  
what I do — which is what Shakespeare does in the come-  
dies, and especially in As You Like It — is to create a space  
free from the problems of gravity. A place of escape. Free  
from the content of the everyday, or so it seems. People  
feel free to wander about, touch and look and smell. It’s not  
frightening. And then, gradually, I begin to challenge the  
very things they thought they were escaping from.  

Why do you think the stories you tell have struck such a  
chord in so many readers, particularly women?  

I think because they’re universal stories. Also, they include  
voices that aren’t always heard. All of the characters are  
outsiders, who come at life at an angle. They’re not privi-  
leged and wealthy, nor do they expect things from life.  
They’re people for whom, at best, life is going to be a  
continual challenge. So often we have only the pat voices of  
people who are rather comfortable.  

Another factor is that the characters in my stories come to  
a personal crossroads (the frontier of common sense) and  
have to decide whether or not to cross over into an un-  
known, risky world or whether to turn back into what is  
safe but unsatisfactory. I describe that crisis in my work  
because it is also in most people’s lives.  

I think, too, it’s a question of language and the way you  
express your own stories. There are certainly subtle skills  
that a writer can employ to make sure the story locks in the  
mind. I can do that because, remember, I was an evangelist.  
Everyone out there to me is a soul to be saved. I think of  
my audience as the whole world.  

Do you find men responsive to your work as well?  

My books are published in fourteen languages, so I’ve  
received letters from men of all ages, persuasions, and  
classes. Many of them say, "Yes, I was in national service,  
I was a soldier, and I felt like Henri [in The Passion], but I  
couldn’t tell anybody because they’d call me a girl."  

Every so often I get men thundering up and down saying,  
"Oh, she’s so horrible to us." But on the whole, the over-  
whelming majority of them breathe a great sigh of relief and  
say, "We’re delighted to think of ourselves as Henri or as  
Jordan [in Sexing the Cherry] because it gives us space not  
to be a joke."  

You obviously come at your work from a very strong  
class perspective and from a strong feminist conscious-  
ness. Do you think of yourself as a feminist writer?  

I don’t think of myself as a feminist writer. I think of my-  
self as a feminist. I think every woman should think of  
herself as such — and probably every sane man, too. There  
is no proper alternative to it. And naturally it informs my  
whole life, my whole consciousness.  

I would never put a woman in my books who is less than  
what I think a woman can be. In many ways, these books  
are about potential — about what people can achieve against  
overwhelming odds. The women I write about are strong,  
very controlled, in touch, and always at least one step ahead  
of the men in whatever context. I won’t accept woman as  
the weaker sex. I don’t bother to deal with it.  

There is a great deal of blurring of distinctions between  
the sexes in your work, with women and men cross-  
dressing and acting, in fact, as if they possess multiple