Love It Back

Whoever Finds This: I Love You, by Faye Moskowitz. Boston: David R. Godine, 1988,

$15.95, 178 pp.

by Merrill Joan Gerber

Coming of age in a series of gentle

shocks has gone out of style. The

world has gotten so tough and
sophisticated that the kinds of stories
Faye Moskowitz tells in Whoever Finds
This: I Love You are found these days
mostly in books for young-adult readers
or, even more likely, for middle-grade
readers in grades four to six. What a
shame that these moments of coming to
awareness (on which we all build our
knowledge of reality) have been bullied
out of fashion in adult fiction by "bigger"
stories, more in line with our times.

When Thelma, in the story by that
name, sees an old man urinating in an
alley, she "had seen a thing hang out of
his unbuttoned pants she thought were
his intestines. The pink and gray mass
figured in her dreams for a long time. . ."
Likewise, after Thelma finds a book in
the Sandows’ house called Frigidity in
Women, she wonders, when Mr. Sandow
approaches her suggestively on the way
home, "if Mrs. Sandow knew what her
husband did with babysitters. Perhaps,
being frigid, she was happy to have his
attention elsewhere. Thelma was certain
Mrs. Sandow was frigid. Why else keep
those particular books where they could
be referred to without even getting out
of bed?"

In "The Runaround," the young wom-
an heroine who has her first sexual en-
counter with her cousin Shel confesses
that "I was always worrying about my
breasts in those days... my breasts were
big and floppy with no nipples at all, at
least as far as I could see — and believe
me, I looked all the time." When Shel
drives her to an isolated, wooded area,
she states, "I knew something was going
to happen, and I was vaguely curious

A Boy Like Astrid’s
Mother

by Mae Briskin,

New York and London: Norton, 1988,
$16.95, 194 pp.

Mae Briskin started writing at forty-five,
a heartening fact for late bloomers. This
first collection includes several award-
winning titles and suggests that time can
open up a writer’s talent rather than
bury it. Briskin’s treatment of children
and parents and her compassion for suf-
fering are especially sensitive, showing a
particular insight into the feelings and
connections between people.

The most successful stories have no
stray details, or obvious or abrupt end-
ings; rather, they present a coherent and
moving picture of situation and charac-
ter. "Giant Sequoia," for instance,
probes intergenerational conflict with
humor and empathy. Bonnie and
Robert, a young couple, entertain
Bonnie’s visiting parents. When Mom
expresses concern about their integrated
neighborhood, Bonnie makes clear her
position by saying of a "very black"
neighbor, "That’s Martin Luther
Freeman. He’s an M.D. and Ph.D. at
Lockheed .... I wish Rob could work
there, instead of in a junior high."

Such sarcasm might pall if continued,
but Briskin is more subtle. The family
drives out to see the sequoias, and Bon-
nie is moved by her mother’s awe at the

magnificent trees. A little Black girl
running over a tree’s roots upsets ecol-
ogy-minded Mom. Goodwill is restored
between parents and children, however,
when Mom maintains her position and

6 Belles Lettres

about it. In a strange way, it was as if it
had already happened and was simply
waiting for us to catch up to it."

Moskowitz’s stories are studded with
insights like these. In many of them, we
feel the crossover take place from com-
ments of the wise adult writer back to
the mind of the innocent child, as when
Shel assures the young girl, "The more
you make love, the bigger your nipples
will get."

A sweetness in Whoever Finds This: I
Love You — the title as well as in the
stories — suggests life is some kind of
gift we all are entitled to have, if only
we can unravel and survive the tangles
of the difficulties.

Some of the stories create an environ-
ment and then just fade away, un-
resolved, leaving us to think seriously

= BS om ¥

Mae Briskin

shows more interracial savvy than ex-
pected.

"Present Tense" describes a middle-
aged narrator visiting her querulous
mother and passive father, long stuck in
a pattern in which the mother, now
eighty-one and blind, still serves her
husband meals while she eats at the
kitchen sink. The daughter’s lifelong
quandary has been how to deal with this
woman, both needy and proud, whose
verbal arsenal belies her vulnerability.
This marvelously rendered figure, only
nearly an exaggeration, utters lines like
"It wasn’t us you came to see. You came
for Broadway shows" and "Do you want
to show how devoted you are? Move
back to New York." To Briskin’s credit,
the reader, on reflection, feels sympathy
also for the mother in her selfish need.

Four stories about Italy in the second
part of the book show another side of
human relations. In "Florence, May ’86"
and "My Father and Signor Corelli"
(variations of the same story), the tell-
ing of the unforgotten gratitude of
Italian Jews saved by neighbors from the
Nazis reads like fact turned into fiction.
More rewarding because more complex
is "Vincenzo and Giulia," the longest
and most well-crafted piece in the col-
lection. A Catholic couple who moved
to America after the war cut off all ties
with Italy: names, language, return trips.
Although their son and grandson figure
here, their wartime memories, kept
secret from even each other for forty
years, are the crux of the story. What
Giulia and Vincenzo did in relation to the
Jews they knew and their eventual ac-
ceptance of the past make for a poignant
human document and are a testimony to
Mae Briskin’s art.

—Diana Bloom

about the scene that has been carefully
set. "They All Ran after the Farmer’s
Wife" presents the relationship of a
long-married couple who go to their
farmhouse for a short stay. "She knew
what it was the moment she turned the
key in the door: the awful smell, some-
thing dead, a mouse that had bled to
death somewhere, gorged on the D-Con
they had put out when they closed the
house for the winter. Over her shoulder,
she saw that her husband lagged behind
as he always did when they entered a
house ... anything to get her to en-
counter first whatever might be amiss in
whatever house they lived." What is
amiss in the marriage? "Why did it seem
sometimes that their connection was
like a scarcely healed-over scab, ready to
start bleeding at the smallest scrape?"
The author gives no answer to this ques-
tion but paints a living picture of the
marriage in its dire complexity. When
the wife hands her husband her gloves
to retrieve the dead animal from the
water heater, she says, "It’s your turn. ..
you do it if you’re so brave." "I’m not
brave," he answers. The story ends in-
conclusively. "She knew she would be a
long time forgetting the image of the
brown rat like some perversion of a pre-
cious jewel, resting so neatly in its bed
of cotton."

The characters in Moskowitz’s stories
live in a world of acute sensibility. "One
day when the snow was all pure and
white like a new fur muff... we ran and
chased each other and sucked the little
hard beads of ice from our mittens ...
The world was white that minute and
quiet like a huge movie theater just
before the show begins ... All of a sud-
den we screamed and the day cracked
into a picture puzzle."

Faye Moskowitz writes hard and deep;
she tries to understand and communi-
cate to her readers what being alive is
like. I think she is least successful when
she reaches too far out of her ex-
perience, as in the story of the country
folk in "The Change" in which the hus-
band and wife talk in unconvincing
dialects. "I’ve been thinking, Cora ...
the girl can’t stay at Kilby’s what with
the talk and all, and she ain’t got no
place to go. Now, I been figurin’ on
helpin’ Kilby out ..." Where she suc-
ceeds best in Whoever Finds This: I Love
You is in opening those secret, vul-
nerable places of the heart from which
we take strength and from which we
make assessments about life. Whoever
finds this book should love it back.

@ Merrill Joan Gerber writes fiction for
both young adults and adults.

Egypt, Maine — Revisited

Letourneau’s Used Auto Parts, by Carolyn Chute. New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1988,

$16.95, 224 pp.

by Michal Smith

Carolyn Chute’s extraordinary

first novel, The Beans of Egypt,

Maine, charted the strikingly
new fictional frontier of precarious living
in rural Maine. Chute has bravely
returned to this now familiar territory in
her second novel and emerged with
more excellent writing.

True to its utilitarian title, Letour-
neau’s Used Auto Parts centers on a com-
munity where people are tied to the per-
petually cold junkyard of the title, where
men numbly scavenge for a living. Grim
as it is, Letourneau’s is the sun in this
small universe, owner Lucien Letour-
neau its god.

The elusive Big Lucien is benefactor to
residents of Miracle City, a collection on
his land of trailers and hastily erected
shacks. His home is a congested, wildly
chaotic shelter for the homeless, a refuge
that offers food, warmth, and a bizarre
brand of hospitality. Although he is al-
ways just out of sight throughout Chute’s
novel, evidence of Lucien’s immense, in-
discriminate charity is exceeded only by
his sexual appetite. He is father, lover, or
husband to most inhabitants of Miracle
City, the creator of much of the misery
about him.

The lives of Miracle City are mirac-
ulous only in that they continue to be
lived. Here people survive on castoffs of
America’s affluent and find treasure in
useless, forgotten yuppie toys left in the
trunks of abandoned cars. They wear
clothes bought at garage sales, play cat-
and-mouse games with irate landlords,
and live at the mercy of their bodies.

Like the good-looking but inoperable
cars that Letourneau’s men feed into a
menacing crusher, the inhabitants of
Chute’s novel are defenseless. Desper-
ately poor and struggling to survive, they
are pushed aside by real estate devel-
opers who remain an understated threat
throughout the novel.

Against this backdrop of the powerful
against the powerless, Chute illuminates
the lives of men and women who grope
for connection but lack tools and, per-
haps more important, time and the ener-
gy to realize anything beyond the out-
lines of meaning. The flashes of beauty

and creativity we witness in members of
the Letourneau circle are lost in a
nightmarish whirl of “kids ’n’ bills.”
Awkward, rare moments of connection
occur between characters, but, as more
than one character observes, "This ain’t
a normal place."

Though men are menacing presences
in Letourneau’s, Chute reveals them as
painfully impotent in every realm but
the biological. They are sexually unin-
teresting, uncommunicative sorts whose
smoldering rage holds a continual threat
to women and children. Madness seems
to etch their lives.

Surrounding the men of Letourneau’s
are colorful, spirited, poignant, and
oddly compelling women. They usually
shoulder much or all of the burden of
supporting their families by working in a
nearby mill, the inside of which we
never see — only the consequences of
working there, a hand limp in sleep,
dangling from a divan.

The emerging generation of Miracle
City women are the novel’s only offer of
hope. They organize the domestic front,
tell men when sex is boring and disap-
pointing, and steal adventure from a life
that would otherwise be too bleak to
bear. But they are still hostages to their
own bodies, imprisoned by pregnancies
that fleetingly transform them into
queens, only to condemn them to life-
long poverty.

From Chute’s opening dedication of
the book to "all the Bleeding Hearts and
Hearts of Gold" to the novel’s con-
clusion, the reader gets a close, often dis-
comforting, look at the consequences of
a compassionless America. Ernie Train,
Blackstone’s has-been country singer
brother, knowingly tells him, "Hell,
Gene, there ain’t no God but you." And
there is no god for those who live in
Miracle City — only Big Lucien. Chute
reveals in the novel’s final vignette just
how much room that leaves for hope.

@ Michal Smith is a writer who lives in
Lexington, Kentucky. She is research and
education director for the Southeast
Women’s Employment Coalition.

Winter 1989