Women and Spirituality

Woman-Church: Theology and Practice, by Rosemary Radford Ruether. San Francisco:

Harper & Row, 1986, $16.95, 306 pp.

Womanguides: Readings Toward a Feminist Theology, by Rosemary Radford Ruether. Bos-

ton: Beacon Press, 1985, $10.95, 274 pp. (PB)

Sophia: The Future of Feminist Spirituality, edited by Susan Cady, Marian Ronan, and Hal
Taussig. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986, $14.95, 103 pp. (PB)

Immaculate and Powerful: The Female in Sacred Image and Social Reality, edited by Clarissa
W. Atkinson, Constance H. Buchanan, and Margaret Miles. Boston: Beacon Press, 1985,

$16.95, 330 pp.

Diving Deep and Surfacing: Women Writers on Spiritual Quest (2nd ed.), by Carol P.
Christ. Boston: Beacon Press, 1980, $8.95, 159 pp. (PB)

The Hero Within: Six Archetypes We Live By, by Carol Pearson. New York: Harper & Row,

1986, $12.95, 113 pp. (PB), illus.

The Women’s Spirituality Book, by Diane Stein. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications,

The Kwan Yin: Book of Changes, by Diane Stein. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications,

The I Ching of the Goddess, by Barbara G. Walker. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986,

The Stories We Hold Secret: Tales of Women’s Spiritual Development, edited by Carol

Bryhac, Linda Hogan, and Judith McDaniel. Greenfield Review Press (RD 1, Box 80, Green-

field Center, NY 12833), 1986, $12.95, 290 pp. (PB)

Hear the Silence: Stories by Women of Myth, Magic, and Renewal, edited by Irene Zahava.
The Crossing Press (1048, 22D Roache Rd., Freedom, CA 95019), 1986, $8.95, 194 pp. (PB)

by Patricia Roth Schwartz

Worlds, and worldviews,

change only when their

building blocks — the con-
structs of language and thought —
change first. Feminism has never meant
the simple substitution of “female” for
“male.” Rather, it has involved the radi-
cal transformation of all that we, as
women, have been taught is true into
shapes that can contain what we truly
know. Established religions in male-
dominated cultures have always served
as forms of social control, arbitrating
concepts of justice and morality, sexual
and otherwise. Such societies have
taken over images of female spiritual
power, either suppressing them entirely
or co-opting them into tame, acceptable
role models.

To crack open the cover of any of the
books reviewed here is to begin to re-
claim an authentic sense of women’s
own spiritual selves. The experience is
much like that of emerging from a dim
sanctuary peopled by statues into an
open-air festival, full of the pungency of
incense, the beat of the drum, the whirl
of dancers. Such books are vital for the
feminist seeking a spiritual path, often
serving as the only lifeline, until an ac-
tual community of like-minded others
can be found. These books, too, offer an
essential resource for women striving to

develop new ways of celebrating the pas-
sages of their lives.

Feminist works on spirituality tend to
fall into either of two distinct categories:
“reformist theology,” in which many of
the tools and structures of establishment
religious thought undergo rigorous
transformation to be of use to women
today, and grass-roots, self-created
spiritual practice, usually goddess-iden-
tified or Wiccan, which is a matriarchal,
holistic vision. One of the most
prominent writers in the first category is
Rosemary Radford Ruether, a professor
of theology at Garrett-Evangelical
Theological Seminary in Illinois and a
widely published scholar in history and
theology. In Woman-Church she offers a
radical, feminist version of Christianity
in which church means “spirit-filled
community.” “Creating woman-church”
involves the evolution of rituals to com-
memorate days such as Easter and Pass-
over, as well as newly claimed “feast
days” such as Hiroshima Day, Winter
Solstice, and Earth Day in new ways.
Her section, “Healing Our Wounds,” is
especially useful in detailing rituals
women can offer each other to com-
memorate the survivors of wife-batter-
ing, incest, rape, and other violations.

Women who have invested a good
deal in Christian observance yet seek an
infusion of feminism into their religion
will feel most comfortable with
Ruether’s suggestions; she integrates
scripture, traditional prayer, and sym-

bols such as the cross along with more
purely woman-identified images and
practices. In Womanguides Ruether
offers a different set of resources. As a
“springboard for constructing what must
become a new expression of theology
from the perspective of the full person-
hood of woman,” Womanguides contains
readings from ancient Near East and
early Christian sources, as well as from
religious groups of the recent past and
contemporary times. These fascinating
articles contain such treasures as ancient
incantations to gods and goddesses that
disavow our 20th-century Judeo-Chris-
tian insistence on God as “he,” stories of
creation, and tales of our foremothers
Miriam, Deborah, Huldah, and Mary
Magdalene. Excerpts from Gnostic
theology, in which female imagery was
prevalent, appear next to a history of
the concept of the Female Messiah,
which was the core of American
Shakerism.

Another volume of reformist theology
is Sophia, co-authored by Cady, Ronan,
and Taussig. A female goddess-like
figure who appears in Hebrew scripture,
and to a lesser extent, in the Christian

gospels and epistles, Sophia is believed
to have evolved from earlier goddesses
Demeter, Persephone, Hecate, and Isis.
Sophia is also related to a concept of
wisdom, which, in all its “splendor and
mystery,” has a female source. This vol-
ume traces references to Sophia in
Christian scripture, the Synoptic gos-
pels, Eastern Orthodox tradition, and in
contemporary Jungian psychology, as
well as urging women who seek to break
out of patriarchal spiritual confines to
incorporate Sophia as a part of a per-
sonal identity of empowerment and
worth. Brief lip service is paid to Sophia
as a force for social change and activism,
which amounts only to a series of liberal
platitudes.

Unfortunately, this volume attempts
to debunk Wicca, the contemporary
neo-Pagan movement in which return
to ancient matriarchal and goddess-wor-
shipping roots is seen as a basis of indi-
vidual and group spiritual practice.
Cady, Ronan, and Taussig accuse Wic-
can spokeswomen such as Starhawk
(The Spiral Dance and Dreaming the
Dark) of setting up divisive polarities in
the feminist spirituality movement by
encouraging divorce from Christianity.
The authors’ presentation of the issues is
superficial, their analysis sketchy; what
seems to be a personal defensiveness
about the superiority of Christian prac-
tice shows through. Sophia, which has
no real information on how women can
realize themselves, seems far less appeal-
ing and useful than many Wiccan texts
that abound with experiential ways to
expand one’s own personal spiritual re-
ality.

Immaculate and Powerful is a dense,
academic tome with articles by well-
known scholars on topics such as female
symbols and the women of Tibet, Black
women’s literature and feminist theo-
logy, Paul’s views on the nature of
women, female sexuality in the Hindu
world, and the religious imagery of
Simone Weil. Such a text is valuable in
settings in which women strive for
validation from establishment au-
thorities for the existence of the female
principle in the history of religious
thought. This book offers thorough his-
torical documentation of the ways in
which dominant religions both overtly
suppress women, and, through those un-
derground, subversive, and alternative
elements that can never quite be an-
nihilated, keep alive that female source.

— continued on page 14

Back to the Future

Laughter of Aphrodite: Reflections on a
Journey to the Goddess, by Carol P. Christ.
San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1987,
$15.95, 238 pp., illus.

The Great Cosmic Mother: Rediscovering
the Religion of the Earth, by Monica Sjéé
and Barbara Mor. San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1987, $16.95, 501 pp. (PB), illus.

by Kristina Nielson

The movement of these two in-

triguing and important books
may be likened to the form of a
labrys, the double axe used ritually by
the priestesses of the Mother Goddess
on Crete before 1500 B.C.E. Sjéé and
Mor begin their book by describing
chronologically the paleolithic and
neolithic goddess-cultures of Western
Europe, the Near East, and Africa and
their destruction with the imposition of
patriarchal exploitation mentality, a
mentality reinforced by patriarchal re-
ligion. Carol P. Christ’s perceptions
shift from those of a theologian, that is,
a woman trying to make sense of a male
god who is misogynistic, to those of a
thealogian, a woman who has made a
journey forward to deep spiritual con-
nection with the Goddess. For those
who are not involved as yet with the re-
clamation of the Goddess but who are
feeling dissatisfied with the negative at-

10 ® Belles Lettres

titudes of traditional Judaism and Chris-
tianity toward women, Christ’s book is
an excellent point of departure.

Her essays begin with her quest as a
divinity student for a personal connec-
tion with Yahweh. “Dialogues with God
and Tradition” elucidates the duality of
the God who promises, through cove-
nant, to care for his people and yet often
appears to be indifferent to the human
situation. “Expressing Anger at God”
places women in the position of Job,
whereby they can petition an answer
from Yahweh for his attitude toward
women. “Heretics and Outsiders” is an
exposition of the interplay of politics
and religion in the Hebrew Bible;
“Yahweh as Holy Warrior” points out
the real dangers of using liberation
theology for achieving peace, noting the
connection between the rise of patriar-
chal religion and large-scale warfare.
Christ reminds us that Yahweh promises
his “chosen people” other peoples’ lands
and goods by portraying them as evil and
deserving of slaughter.

Lest anti-Judaism be encouraged, she
also addresses this issue and goes on, in
“Journey to the Goddess,” to describe
her growing awakening to the Goddess
and Goddess-religion. This section in-
cludes her justly famous “Why Women
Need the Goddess,” which I feel could
easily be retitled “Why People Need the
Goddess.” The final essay, “Finitude,
Death and the Reverence for Life” is a

plea for the acceptance of human mor-
tality as a way to get beyond the pa-
triarchal destruction of life. A culmina-
tion and reflection of all that has gone
before, the essay is also a celebration of
spiritual possibilities; the message of
Goddess-worship is “that which is life-af-
firming is spirit-affirming.”

This message is reiterated throughout
Sjéé and Mor’s massive spiritual history,
The Great Cosmic Mother. Subtitled “Re-
discovering the Religion of the Earth,”
the work chronicles the decline and fall
of the quality of life for the peoples of
the West through the systematic de-
struction of the wisdom, harmony, and
richness of early Goddess-centered cul-
tures. Parts 1 through 3 recount women’s
lost spiritual heritage from the Nean-
derthal beginnings through the neolithic
period. Part 4 describes the imposition
of patriarchy during the Bronze Age,
with its various institutions aimed at
exploiting and ultimately destroying
peaceful peoples, the earth, and
especially women, who are symbolic
representations of both. The last few
pages contain hope for the salvation of
the earth and her creatures through turn-
ing away from this cult of death and
toward the religion of life, as represented
by the Goddess.

The book is unevenly written, with
sentence fragments, grammatical errors,
and a text that vacillates between color-
less narration and prose poetry of ex-

quisite depth and beauty. Yet the book
is valuable: It details the cultural, artis-
tic, and spiritual achievements of a
species that was peaceful and connected
with the earth and each other for mil-
lenia, and it describes the destruction of
this harmony. The text is illustrated
with Goddess figures from diverse early
cultures and with Sjéé’s own paintings.
This provides a visual account of
300,000 years of goddess-centered cul-
ture.

In addition, the authors include as-
tute political analyses of the institutions
of patriarchy, drawing primarily upon
the methodology of Foucault. Their
critiques of sociobiology, Marxism, and
Jungian psychoanalysis are fresh and,
when juxtaposed with spiritual insight,
have a positive, liberating effect. The
“message” of the book mirrors Christ’s,
and its urgency is powerful: For 5,000
years the patriarchy has worked for the
destruction of the planet, teaching
death and despair, hatred of the body, of
the earth, and of women. This has
brought us to certain ecological disaster
and likely nuclear destruction. The an-
swer to going forward — in feminine,
cyclical time — is found in going back.

@ Kristina Nielson teaches Classics at
the University of Maine. Her areas of re-
search include mythology and ancient reli-
gion; she is also active in contemporary is-
sues of women’s spirituality.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988