Stories Versus Fictions

PF.

Stories From the Warm Zone and Sydney Stories, by Jessica Anderson. New York:

Viking, 1987, $15.95, 246 pp.

Circles of Faces, by Mary Dadswell. Queensland, Australia: University of Queensland
Press (250 Commercial Street, Manchester, NH 03101), 200 pp. (PB)

by Ellyn Bache

One can hardly imagine two

more different volumes of short

fiction being published by Aus-
tralian women in the same year. Jessica
Anderson, already a well-known novel-
ist, has produced a warm and readable
book of traditional stories in which
character is the main consideration and
the sense of place is strong. Mary
Dadswell, a sometime nurse, jazz piano
teacher, and art gallery director who
lives in Canberra, has given us
twenty-three experimental fictions
(most can hardly be called “stories”),
told in a cool, remote tone in which
character is subordinated to theme and
the geography is largely that of the hu-
man psyche.

Of the two, Anderson’s book is by far
the more successful. Its first section,
“Stories from the Warm Zone,” is a se-
quence of partially autobiographical
tales about her girlhood in Queensland,
told through the narrative voice of Bea,
the youngest of four children. The
“warm zone” is both Brisbane and its
environs and the tangle of warm family
relationships that dominates Bea’s life
— with an ailing father, a mother much
younger than the father, and a brother
and two sisters.

Bea is four in the opening story and
still a preadolescent in the last, but the
narrative voice is that of a middle-aged
woman looking back. In “Under the
House,” the very young Bea begins to
test her mettle against her older sisters,
but it is the adult Bea who gives the small
adventure perspective, recalling as her
four-year-old self walks beneath her pat-
ents’ bedroom that it was “white, star-
chy, insipid, and often locked.” In the
later stories, the young Bea tries to un-
derstand her sister Rhoda, who develops
a sudden passion for attending church,
and her mother, who tutors Bea at home
for a year when a bad stammer embar-
rasses her at school. The mature Bea’s
voice again lends depth, relating that
she “wept long and hard when Rhoda
died” in her forties and that her mother,
now a “woman in her eighties, walking
about that house and garden, threatens
to absorb the vigorous middle-aged
woman who supervised my lessons that
year.”

The second section of the book,
“Sydney Stories,” moves away from

the writing, although at times certainly
clear, lacks compassion. The characters
are mostly caricatures; their escapades
have little fizz; their relationships are
one-dimensional; and the whole
shebang ends on a stale, irritable note.

Dadswell would have done well to
modulate some of the satire with true
sentiment. As a film director once said
about movie making, “Name me one
good movie where you didn’t like at least
one of the people in it.” The same, of
course, is true of novel writing.

# Suzanne Berne is a writer currently
living in San Francisco.

new fiction and poetry by Australian
writers essays 2) reviews
interviews notes published
twice yearly by the American Association
of Australian Literary Studies

Antipodes

A North American Journal
of Australian Literature

Address inquiries to
190 Sixth Avenue
Brooklyn, NY 11217 USA

JULY/AUGUST 1988

memories of childhood to the experi-
ences of middle age itself — a confused
and difficult time for the characters
Anderson gives us, all of them wrenched
in one way or another away from the
protective “warm zone” of family. A
woman’s adjustment after her divorce is
crystallized in an ongoing battle with her
milkman. A divorced man has an affair
with his daughter’s mother-in-law. A
scholar away on business is forced to re-
assess his marriage after an encounter
with an aging countess. Not without
humor, these “middle-aged” stories are
nevertheless often as discomforting to
the reader as to the characters within
them.

The great strength of Anderson’s
book lies in her characters. There is an
admirable completeness in their quirks
and strengths; each seems vividly alive.
Not so the women in Mary Dadswell’s
Circle of Faces. Here, the actors are vir-
tually interchangeable, not characters
so much as tools through which to pre-
sent an idea, a theme, an emotion.
Dadswell gives them voices but almost
nothing else — no physical attributes,
no gestures, often no environment be-
yond a room or a garden.

What is left is reminiscent of Theatre
of the Absurd without the stage. A cou-
ple gorges on hors d’oeuvres because
they aren’t sure if they were invited to
dinner. Another couple keeps ordering

=~ 2

Jessica Anderson: “I always have been pre-
occupied with people who are strangers in
their society.” Photo by Robert McFarlane.

food while waiters try to close a restau-
rant, refusing to leave until they are
asked to in words. A narrator describes a
concert — not the sounds being made by
the orchestra but those emanating from
the audience, as it sneezes and coughs.

Clever enough, in small doses — and
to Dadswell’s credit, most of the fictions
are short. But when the point is to con-
vey emotion, cleverness is not enough.
Dadswell’s women suffer from the loss of
their lovers, from alcoholism, from in-
sanity. But since they are only stick fig-
ures, their eloquent voices become
strings of empty words.

This is unfortunate because
Dadswell’s themes deserve better. In

“Retirement,” the story from which the
title is taken, the author distances the
main character from the audience by
calling her Mrs. Jinks. (Jinx? Hi-Jinks?
Please!) As the story opens, Mrs. Jinks is
about to retire — happily — from a long
schoolteaching career. Then she is in-
terrupted late at night by a mysterious
visitor, Ms. Novak, who insists she was
once Jinks’s student but now is known
for her advertising jingles. Lest we forget
this woman is a device and not a “char-
acter,” Dadswell has her recite her jin-
gles periodically throughout the story.
In between, Novak relates how Mrs.
Jinks changed her life by criticizing one
of her early, nonrhyming poetic efforts.
It was then, because of the pain Mrs.
Jinks caused her, that she turned to
rhyme and became a success. Mrs. Jinks
cannot remember the woman or the in-
cident, but she is shocked. Novak man-
ages some unkind remarks about Mrs.
Jinks’s daughter and then departs. Mrs.
Jinks is left lying awake in bed, staring at
a dark window in which she sees “circles
of faces crowding the pane.”

The writing is lovely, the philosophy
intriguing. How, after all, does one
measure one’s life? But how much more
haunting if there had been a “real” char-
acter involved — such as the ones Jessica
Anderson is able to create.

@ Ellyn Bache has published short fiction
in a variety of commercial and literary mag-
azines both in this country and Europe. Her
first novel, Safe Passage, will be published
by Crown in September and offered as an
alternative selection by The Literary Guild.

A Woman Full of Greed

Dreamhouse, by Kate Grenville. New York: Viking Penguin, Inc., 1987, 170 pp.

by Hariclea Zengos

Dreamhouse, Kate Grenville’s
second novel, gives her readers
a rather unpleasant narrator in
Louise Dufrey. Louise is a woman
willingly trapped in a marriage of con-
venience. She admits that her husband,
Rennie, is nothing more than financial
security, a man “soon to be a professor
with an income and a position,” while
she “could never be anything wealthier
than a striking secretary with lovely legs
and little future.” In her narration,
Louise is brutally honest about herself
and her life. Because she is “a woman full
of greed,” she stays with Rennie, despite
hating him (“There were times when I
would have liked to rip [his moustache]
off his face”) and their life together.
That Louise does not try to escape is par-
ticularly frustrating to the reader — her
greed and laziness stand in her way —
but she must discover unconventional
possibilities to take the place of her sti-
flingly conventional life. Louise, in
fact, must discover her “dreamhouse.”
To complete without disturbances or
disruptions his dissertation on Malthus
and the doctrine of necessary catastro-
phe (and this is the sense the reader gets,
that some catastrophe is inevitable in
this novel) Rennie’s mentor, Daniel,
offers to share his remote Tuscan villa for
the summer. Louise imagines the house
to be the stuff of dreams: “A villa: I heard
that word and became languorous with
visions of balustrades, a view of blue
water, cool white wine, bare feet on
marble.” But the house is a nightmare of
dirt and decay: Mice nest in the mat-
tresses, beams and ceilings creak with
age and strain, birds roost in the roof.
The villa seems to inspire Rennie, who
labors on his dissertation while Louise
plays the faithful wife and devoted typ-
ist/amanuensis — and hates every min-
ute of it. “I often wanted to heave the
typewriter against the wall,” she con-
fesses, “and watch its guts tinkle down

Kate Grenville: “To feel compassion for a
character in fiction that you almost certainly
wouldn’t like in real life seems to me a gen-
uine kind of enlarging, because when you're
reading a book you’re in a special state of
mind.” Photo courtesy Australian Overseas
Information Service.

among the mouse-dirt.” The work leaves
Louise with too much time to contem-
plate the ruin of her marriage. The
run-down villa is much like her mar-
riage; for both, the “final collapse was
only a matter of time.” Louise realizes
that, while her greed chains her to Ren-
nie, his vanity binds him to her. He
appreciates Louise as a possession, en-
joying the way people admire his beauti-
ful wife — “slim like a model.” For his
part, Rennie is too absorbed with his
academic future to notice that his mar-
riage is foundering. Both he and Louise
mutter the standard “darlings” and “I
love you’s” — Louise through clenched
teeth, Rennie out of sheer habit.
Through it all, Louise waits for her
moment to escape.

Grenville has described Dreamhouse
as a “malevolent and cruel book in some
ways,” and most of this cruelty emanates
from Daniel and his son, Hugo. Louise
finds Daniel’s family, which includes
the mysterious daughter, Viola, sinister
yet seductive. Daniel is a suave manipu-

lator. When he chooses not to ignore
Louise, he patronizes her, and Rennie,
mimicking his mentor, joins in on these
backslapping male-only activities. From
his father, Hugo inherits a love of cru-
elty; he keeps a collection of stuffed
birds, “all with vicious beaks and
threateningly fanned wings,” which he
shows Louise with sadistic delight. Viola
remains an aloof figure, the “nutty sis-
ter,” as Rennie pegs her. Louise’s anger
towards this family (“I was sick of laugh-
ing at things that were not funny, hated
this house and our hosts, and wished I
could roar out a yodel of rage and up-end
the table”) turns to a strange fascina-
tion, and ultimately one of them opens
up new possibilities for change in her
life; one of them directs Louise to her
“dreamhouse.”

With a less talented writer,
Dreamhouse could have been yet another
ordinary novel concerning the dissolu-
tion of a marriage. But with Grenville
nothing is ever ordinary; small yet sig-
nificant details betray her extraordinary
talent as a novelist. Her plotting is intri-
cate yet economical. Each chapter is
short and dense, ending with a cliff
hanger; like Louise, we cannot “imagine
what might come next,” what surprises
are in store. The novel is tension-
packed, suspenseful, and full of mystery.
And by what seems like a trademark (if
one recalls the italics of Lilian’s Story),
Grenville chooses not to use much dia-
logue, allowing the reader to see the
novel’s world mostly through the angry
eyes of Louise. As in Bearded Ladies, a
sustained anger is present in Dream-
house, mostly directed at the men.

Grenville’s first novel, Lilian’s Story,
was published to major acclaim, win-
ning the Australian/Vogel Literary
Award for an unpublished manuscript by
a young writer and a Patrick White en-
dorsement: “It is a pleasure to be able to
praise a true novelist.” Dreamhouse, a
worthy follow-up of extraordinary wit,
vision, and imagination, proves not that
Grenville is up-and-coming but that she
has arrived.

® Hariclea Zengos teaches English at
Clark University, Worcester, Massa-
chusetts.

Belles Lettres @ 5
—__]