The Woe of Wives

American Wives: Thirty Short Stories by  
Women, edited by Barbara H. Solomon.  
New York: New American Library, 1986,  
$4.95, 408 pp. (PB)

by Emily Toth

When my consciousness-  
raising group blossomed in  
January most of us were  
married or in heterocouples. A year  
later, most of us were single — and now,  
nearly two decades later, I am the only  
one who still has her original husband.  
This state (Living Fossil!) made me par-  
ticularly interested in editor Barbara H.  
Solomon’s short story collection, Ameri-  
can Wives. I have taught Solomon’s ex-  
cellent collection The Experience of the  
American Woman; I have also used her  
fine edition of Kate Chopin’s The Awa-  
kening and Selected Stories, for the well-  
chosen stories and the exceptionally  
thoughtful introduction. American  
Wives is not quite up to Solomon’s usual  
standard.

Some of the stories are stunningly  
good. “The Women Who Walk” by  
Nancy Huddleston Packer is a haunting,  
surrealistic picture of abandoned wives  
who wander aimlessly. Patricia Zelver’s  
“The Little Pub” is an achingly realistic  
portrait of a wife who has totally imbibed  
the feminine mystique, but who fan-  
tasizes trekking to a bar by herself, order-  
ing her own drink, and reveling in the  
bartender’s name for her: “Sugar.”  
Another wrenching story is Joyce Carol  
Oates’s “Accomplished Desires,” about  
a gifted poet whose professor-husband  
brings home a nondescript student to  
clean house and be his mistress. He even  
assigns his wife to take the student for  
an abortion after, as he puts it, “She got  
herself pregnant. It seems on purpose.”  
But the wife finds a way to elude them  
all.

Oates’s story is one of half a dozen  
about husbands — mostly writers or  
professors — who leave their wives for  
younger women. All are well-written,  
but American Wives needs other kinds  
of stories, such as Charlotte Perkins Gil-  
man’s “Turned,” in which the wife and  
the younger other woman form an al-  
liance. Or Jane Rule’s “A Perfectly Nice  
Man,” in which a man’s soon-to-be-  
third wife visits his first two wives —  
who are now lovers. (Both stories are in  
The Other Woman: Stories of Two Women  
and a Man, The Feminist Press).

Missing from American Wives are af-  
firming stories like those of Gilman or  
Rule. The book does include Rebecca  
Morris’s “The Good Humor Man,” in  
which an abandoned wife heals herself  
by spending a summer at the pool and  
sampling every new flavor of ice cream.  
But most of the deserted American Wives  
do not take control of their lives. With  
a few exceptions (such as the wife in  
Mary Peterson’s “Travelling”), they do  
not become independent women.

Solomon’s introduction, much shor-  
ter than her usual standard, does not  
give a rationale for her choices: In fact,  
much of the introduction is devoted to  
how men writers have portrayed wives.  
And not all the stories are about wife-  
hood: Several are really about mother-  
hood, housework, or generational aggra-  
vations.

American Wives is well-balanced in  
some ways: There are four stories by  
Black writers (Toni Cade Bambara, Zora  
Neale Hurston, Paule Marshall, and  
Alice Walker); two by New South/K-  
Mart culture writers (Bobbie Ann  
Mason, Lee Smith); several by well-  
known stars (Alice Adams, Ann Beat-  
tie, Kate Chopin, Laurie Colwin, Mar-  
jorie Kinnan Rawlings); and some by  
relative unknowns (Marilyn Krysl,  
Stephanie C. Gunn). But the 19th cen-  
tury is represented mostly by conven-  
tional New England stories (by Louisa  
May Alcott, Mary E. Wilkins Freeman,  
and Elizabeth Stuart Phelps the elder),  
in which wives are happier when they  
become better household managers, or  
when husbands finally recognize that  
housework is work.

Some stories do have happy endings.  
Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s “Making a  
Change” shows two women forming an  
alliance, but they are solving the prob-  
lems of housework, not the problems of  
marriage. And one of the happily-ever-  
after stories, Sylvia Plath’s “Day of Suc-  
cess,” seems poignant now: It is clearly  
a portrait of Plath’s own attempts to be  
a good girl, perfect and uncomplain-  
ing — attempts that failed. The last  
story of the collection, Bobbie Ann  
Mason’s “Shiloh,” includes a character’s  
discovery that “the real inner workings  
of a marriage, like most of history, have  
escaped him.” That is also the case with  
many of the stories in American Wives:  
The inner workings of marriage have  
somehow escaped.

One character (in Mary Hedin’s  
“Plastic Edge to Plastic Edge”) does  
suggest that “twenty-four years of mar-  
riage is absurd,” revealing a “lack of im-  
agination, lack of adventuresomeness.”  
There are many pictures of pain, disin-  
tegration, and loneliness. But no one in  
American Wives explains why living fos-  
sils like me still exist. It could be that  
women writers tend to veer away from  
unanswerable questions — or that most  
women today already know too much  
about wifehood. And maybe they would  
really rather write about something that  
is a much surer bet to bring happiness —  
like money.

© Emily Toth, who teaches at Penn  
State, has published five books, including a  
historical novel and a biography of Grace  
Metalious. Her first book, The Curse: a  
Cultural History of Menstruation, is  
being reissued by the University of Illinois  
Press, and she is writing a biography of Kate  
Chopin and editing Chopin's letters and  
diaries.

— Rediscovery, continued from page 4

The beautiful and innocent Julian  
falls in love with her newly appointed  
and lecherous Cambridge tutor. To her  
sorrow, the tutor does not take her seri-  
ously and throws her poetry manuscript  
in the fire. “Y’are a maid, and formed  
for sweetness and love, and not for learn-  
ing. As to that, in my view no woman’s  
formed for learning, even be she ugly.”  
As the civil war deepens, so does Julian’s  
involvement with her tutor. The story  
ends in tragedy. The Royalists lose, and  
all the things that Macaulay cher-  
ished — the Anglican church, intel-  
lectual freedom, and intelligent and  
capable young women — are defeated.

The years of World War II were  
especially cruel for Macaulay.  
Her closest sister died in 1941  
as well as her lover, and her flat was  
totally destroyed during the Blitz. It had  
contained everything she owned, in-  
cluding her extensive and precious lib-  
rary. And at one point she became  
gravely ill.

The World My Wilderness (1950) was  
the first book Macaulay wrote after the  
war, and it evokes loneliness, fear, and,  
again, the savagery and futility of war  
and the emptiness of modern London.  
The book is beautifully written and  
moves rapidly. Barbary is the adolescent  
daughter of a well-meaning but stiff Eng-  
lish lawyer. Her mother, Helen, has left  
to marry her French lover. Helen is one  
of Macaulay’s big, sensuous, loving, lazy  
women. She has taken Barbary with her  
to a town on the Mediterranean near  
the Spanish border and stays there dur-  
ing World War II, where Barbary is al-  
lowed to run free with her stepbrother  
Raoul. They become part of the resis-  
tance operating in the foothills of the  
Pyrenees.

After the war a heartbroken Barbary  
is taken away from her adored mother  
and baby half-brother to London to live  
with her father in his fashionable flat  
with his young, fastidious wife and new  
baby. Raoul, whose collaborator father  
was drowned, is also in London, having  
been adopted by relatives. The children  
discover the bombed-out City and set  
up housekeeping in the ruins of a  
church. They continue to live as  
maquis — a life of fantasy, adventure,  
and, finally, burglary, not knowing the  
difference between right and wrong.  
Barbary is badly hurt running from the  
police, and Helen comes to London to  
care for her.

The Mediterranean elicits some of  
Macaulay’s finest prose, such as this de-  
scription of the view from Helen’s ter-  
race. “The cool evening wind rustled in  
the cork forest, crept about the thymey  
maquis; the sea, drained of light, was a  
wash of blue shadow, sparked by the  
lights of fishing boats putting out for the  
night’s catch. Collioure glimmered in its  
cove, shut by the Templars’ fortress on  
its northern jut of rock.” London’s ruins  
are described through the eyes of the  
children: “They peered down through  
the great broken circle of what had been  
the east window; below it the altar had  
stood; they looked along the bare nave  
to the tower end where, in the west win-  
dow, ragged painted glass swung mutter-  
ing in the wind.” Underneath it all is  
unspeakable cruelty — that which the  
children witnessed with the maquis and  
that which overcivilization can unwit-  
tingly cause. At the end, workers are  
excavating the bomb site and working  
their way down through the Middle  
Ages, the Dark Ages, Londinium, and  
Rome.

One day the churches would be dealt  
with, taken down, or mended and  
built up. The fireweed, the pink rose-  
bay, that had seeded itself in the burnt  
soil and flowered and blossomed every-  
where where bombs had been, would  
take fright at the building and drift  
back on the winds to the open country  
whence it came... . The redstarts  
and the wheatears, the woodpeckers  
and the hooting owls, would desert this  
wilderness too, and take wing for woods  
and fields.

The Towers of Trebizond (1956), pub-  
lished two years before she died, was  
Macaulay’s last novel and was a not-al-  
together successful attempt at her old  
satirical style. The Reverend Chantry-  
Pigg, Aunt Dot, and Laurie (the nar-  
rator) visit Turkey, accompanied by  
Aunt Dot’s neurotic camel. Father  
Chantry-Pigg intends to found a high  
church mission to save the Turks from  
Islam and dissenters; Aunt Dot means  
to investigate the plight of oppressed  
Turkish women. They venture too far  
up a mountain road and disappear be-  
hind the Iron Curtain, leaving Laurie to  
wander about on the camel and visiting  
her love, her pretty, plump, happy-go-  
lucky mother (a former vicar’s wife now  
living in Jerusalem with her “protector”  
of many years), and various friends up  
and down the Levant.

Laurie’s visits to or meditations on vir-  
tually every classical ruin in the eastern  
Mediterranean become a metaphor for  
life. She dreams of Trebizond back in  
Turkey:

Not Trebizond as I had seen it, but the  
Trebizond of the world’s dreams, of  
my own dreams, shining towers and  
domes shimmering on a far horizon, yet  
close at hand, luminously enspelled in  
the most fantastic unreality . . . there  
was some pattern that I could not un-  
ravel, some hard core that I could not  
make my own.

Laurie returns to London, where her  
lover is killed in a road accident because  
of her irresponsible driving. (This was  
based on a real incident, although  
Macaulay’s lover was not killed but seri-  
ously injured.)

This last novel ends on a note of de-  
spair. Laurie, in her grief realizes that  
she has been away from God for so long  
that she does not know how to get back.  
She concludes that

Still the towers of Trebizond, the  
fabled city, shimmer on afar horizon,  
gated and walled and held in a lumi-  
nous enchantment. . . . But at the  
city’s heart lie the pattern and the hard  
core, and these I can never make my  
own: they are too far outside my range.  
The pattern should perhaps be easier,  
the core less hard. . . . This seems  
indeed the eternal dilemma. *

This despair does not last. From  
Macaulay’s letters we know that she re-  
gained her love of life, running about in  
her “little green motor car,” writing a  
book about ruins; having lunch and  
country weekends with E.M. Forster,  
Vita Sackville-West, and Harold Nicol-  
son; attending mass regularly; and plan-  
ning a trip to southern Italy to look at  
still more of her beloved ruins.

© Barbara Griffith Furst is a writer and  
editor in the international health field who  
lives in Washington, DC.

Editors’ Note. Dangerous Ages, Crewe  
Train, and Keeping Up Appearances have  
been reissued in paperback by Carroll &  
Graf. Virago has recently reissued Told  
by an Idiot and The World My Wilderness;  
Oxford University Press has reissued  
They Were Defeated; and Farrar, Straus  
& Giroux has reissued The Towers of  
Trebizond.

Jury/August 1987 Belles Lettres @ 5