— Impressions, continued from page 13

(Braziller), The Border by Elaine Feins-
tein (St. Martin’s), and Tents of Israel
by G.B. Stern (Penguin/Virago). “The
Birthmark,” she told me, “lies on the
border between memoir and fiction, re-
cording in the first person a sister’s
memories of her brother and their family
from childhood through his death. It
uses few novelistic techniques; it has no
plot and little dialogue, scene setting,
or characterization. Time after time the
author tells what she might show. For
example, the brother is supposed to be
very talkative, but readers have to accept
this judgment because we never hear the
brother directly for any length of time.
Even for nonfiction, the writing is heavy
and humorless. Tenses shift, important
events occur offstage, didactic para-
graphs about assimilationist Jews pop up
in the most ridiculous places. In several
cases, Straus gives exactly the same de-
scription of frequently seen characters.
The speaker sees her brother as a
paradigm of a certain kind of self-hating
Jew, but she only asserts that idea. She
neither dramatizes it as a novel requires,
nor follows a logical construct as an essay
demands.”

The Border “is a good story,” focusing
on a violent resolution to a triadic re-
lationship that occurs on the border of
France and Spain during World War II.
It is “submerged,” however, “in opaque
diary entries” written by Hans Vendler
and his wife, Inga, which are supple-
mented by odd letters from Hans’s lover.
Willens also found fault with this novel’s
dramatization: “Major scenes are not re-
ported at all, and the rest is told in bits
and snatches.” The indirectness made it
hard for her to care about the people.

G.B. Stern wrote many other books
besides Tents of Israel — including 18
novels — yet it was this partly true family
chronicle that was reprinted repeatedly
between 1924 and 1929. It depicts a
huge German family of intermarried, as-
similated Jews (in fact, Jewishness is de-

Merchandise
and Memos

The following individuals are win-
ners of our poster drawing for sub-
scribing or renewing by August 1:
Beth Carter, Ft. Myers, FL; Carolyn
Greene, Newark, DE; Elizabeth
Patton, Elbridge, NY; Sally
Kornblith, Boulder, CO; and Gini
Duval, Fargo, ND. The color post-
ers, donated by North Point Press,
celebrate Ghost Dance by Carole
Maso and A Servant’s Tale by Paula
Fox.

Subscribe, renew, or buy a gift sub-
scription by October 1 and be eligi-
ble to win the following books, each
signed by the author:

The Good Mother
Inventing the Abbots
Sue Miller

Dessa Rose
Sherley Anne Williams

Ellen Foster
Kaye Gibbons

Going Out of Our Minds:
The Metaphysics of Women’s Liberation
Sonia Johnson

Double Your Money!

All subscriptions and donations re-
ceived from now until the end of
1987 count toward a matching grant
awarded by the Jennie Moore Fund.
Donations of $25 or more will be
acknowledged in the January 1988
issue of Belles Lettres.

14 @ Belles Lettres

noted chiefly by its gradual sloughing
off). Willens says that it is a little like
reading Buddenbrooks, although more
joyous, and it is dedicated to Galsworthy,
to whose The Forsyte Saga it is kin. Two
of its themes are the expanding potential
for women to be free and to make choices
to marry or not, and the way that
mothers keep the families together,
lending the (rather opulent) tone, even
though the fathers appear to have all
the money and power. Willens found an
“enormous life to all the people, with
genetic traits being passed down” and
that the book offered “the same pleasures
as good family gossip. Yet what we bring
to it is this terrible sense of doom of
which the author was, of course, un-
aware. We know from our vantage point
that these people had to escape or were
killed, that the way of life of this wealthy,
international, multigenerational family
would be soon all over.”

@ Three books dealing with Jewish
children’s views of terror, flight, and
refuge during World War II have been
published very recently: A Scrap of Time
and Other Stories by Ida Fink (Pantheon),
A Hidden Childhood: A Jewish Girl’s
Sanctuary in a French Convent, 1942—
1945, by Frida Scheps Weinstein (Hill
and Wang), and Little Eden: A Child at
War by Eva Figues (Persea). The latter
two are memoirs and the first recreates
in fictional form actual episodes remem-
bered by the author. Hidden Childhood
has the impressionistic immediacy of a
child’s perceptions, made more pathetic
by the eventual revelation that the
mother who had left her child in the
nuns’ safekeeping was captured and
never returned. Eva Figues (whose classic
Patriarchal Attitudes has just been re-
issued by Persea) writes in a more adult,
accomplished manner about her wartime
removal from upper-class Berlin to a
boarding school in Cirencester, Eng-
land, run by two spinster sisters who nur-
tured her intellectual hunger. Ida Fink,
the winner of the first Anne Frank Prize
for Literature for A Scrap of Time, sur-
vived World War II in hiding in Poland;
she now works at the Holocaust
memorial in Israel.

® People interested in Jewish women’s
experiences will want to obtain copies
of the following titles from Biblio Press:
The Jewish Women’s Publisher (P.O.
Box 22, Fresh Meadows, NY 11365-
0022): the new second edition of the
Jewish Women’s Studies Guide, compiled
by Sue Levi Elwell; Miriam’s Well, by
Penina V. Adelman (rituals for Jewish
women to use throughout the year); the
revised second edition of Written Out of
History: Our Jewish Foremothers, by
Sondra Henry and Emily Taitz; and Sex
and the Modern Jewish Woman, by Joan
Scherer Brewer (an annotated bibliog-
raphy with two essays).

Historians in particular will want to
read The Italians and the Holocaust by
Susan Zuccotti (Basic Books), which at-
tributes the 85 percent survival rate of
Jews to the fact that the Germans oc-
cupied Italy late in the war, to Italy's
tradition of tolerance for Jews, and to
the relatively low number, and self-
reliant nature, of Italian Jews them-
selves. Among Zuccotti’s sources are
many personal narratives.

Beacon Press has come out with a
biography of socialist leader and theorist
Rosa Luxemburg, who was assassi-
nated in 1919. Elzbieta Ettinger, the
biographer, previously edited and trans-
lated a collection of Luxemburg’s letters
to her common-law husband, Leo
Jogiches. Ettinger has extensively re-
searched Polish-Jewish history and cul-
ture in preparing this text, which
achieves a balance between the personal
and the political of which Luxemburg
would have approved.

Willa Cather: A Literary Life

By James Woodress

Willa Cather: A Literary Life is the first detailed, completed portrait of

this major American writer. The author of such classics as My Antonia
and Death Comes for the Archbishop was in love with life. Willa Cather: A
Literary Life gives us her passions, prejudices, and quirks of personality.
Thoroughly grounded in Cather's writings, which were autobiographical
to an uncommon degree, this volume will stand as the definitive biog-
raphy of her for years to come. October. ca. 660 pages. Foreword, notes,

photographs, index. $35.00

Available at bookstores or from

NEBRASKA

The University of Nebraska Press-901 N 17-Lincoln 68588-0520.

Announcing a new series

European Women Writers

Marion Faber, Alice Jardine, Susan Kirkpatrick, and Olga Ragusa, editors

Woman to Woman
(Les Parleuses)

By Marguerite Duras and Xaviére Gauthier
Translated by Katherine A. Jensen

"Marguerite Duras is, without doubt, one of the most important
French writers of the 20th century. One of her most important and
widely read books is not a novel or screenplay, but this interview
with Xaviére Gauthier. It is an underground classic, absolutely
essential to an understanding of Duras's work in general."—Alice
Jardine, Harvard University. October. ca. 190 pages. Preface,

afterword, notes. $16.95

“I could not put this book down.

Nothing Grows by Moonlight
By Torborg Nedreaas
Translated by Bibbi Lee

It is a book that makes any sensitive

reader anxious. That is its great power. Both men and women will
find it gripping and revealing and will be grateful for the experi-
ence."—Mary Kay Norseng, UCLA. "Compelling. An important
narrative of one woman's attempt to overcome her psychological
predisposition to masochistic dependence."—Marion Faber,
Swarthmore College. December. ca. 210 pages. Afterword. $14.95

available at bookstores or from

NEBRASKA

The University of Nebraska Press-901 N 17-Lincoln 68588-0520

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987