by Deborah Price

with a challenge. It was 1986, four

years after she had launched Berg
Publishers, and she happened to ask a
male colleague why a popular series in
England had no books about women.

“Oh we thought about it,” Berghahn
recalled him answering, “but we decided
women really haven’t made a substantial
contribution. We leave it to you femi-
nists to prove us wrong.”

Berghahn, furious, replied, “Oh we
will, we will.” The result is the Berg
Women’s Series, one of a growing num-
ber of series on women that trade and
academic publishers have established in
recent years. “My overall goal was to
show women as professionals,” Berg-
hahn said in an interview. “I was
amazed at the nineteenth century, what
those women achieved against incredi-
ble odds. Their example can be very
encouraging to us now.”

Her sense of mission was echoed in
numerous interviews with editors of se-
ries about women. “There weren’t many
good biographies about women in the
1970s,” recalled Merloyd Lawrence,
general editor of the Radcliffe Biog-
raphy Series. “There weren’t new looks
at their lives, and that was why Radcliffe
and I were interested.”

For Marion Berghahn, it all began

Merloyd Lawrence.
Photo by Steven Trefonides

In 1971, Radcliffe’s prominent
Schlesinger Library, known for its his-
tory collection of women in America,
sponsored Notable American Women, an
encyclopedia of essays. As Martina
Horner, president of Radcliffe College,
has explained, it was felt that many of
the featured women warranted full-
length biographies, so that “a wider au-
dience could grasp the many contribu-
tions women have made in American
life — an awareness of which is as yet by
no means universal.”

The Radcliffe series (whose first five
titles were published by Delacorte Press,
all subsequent ones by Addison-Wesley)
has focused on such women as Gertrude
Stein, photojournalist Margaret
Bourke-White, painter Mary Cassatt,
early feminist Margaret Fuller, and
English poet Charlotte Mew. In the
near future, biographies of Anna Freud
and Sarah Orne Jewett will be released.

Women’s series are also pet projects
of numerous academic presses, most of
which publish widely in women’s stud-
ies. These include Women in American
History by the University of Illinois
Press, Key Women Writers by Indiana
University Press, the Women and Cul-
ture series by the University of Michi-

20 @ Belles Lettres

gan Press, Feminist Perspectives by the
University of Minnesota Press, Women
in the West and European Women
Writers by the University of Nebraska
Press, the American Women Writers
series by Rutgers University Press,
Women in the Political Economy by
Temple University Press, and Men Who
Wrote About Women by Wayne State
University Press.

The overall quality of a set of books, they
said. Rutgers’s series, for example, relies
on three well-known scholars in wo-
men’s studies: Judith Fetterley, ground-
breaking author of The Resisting Reader,
Elaine Showalter, and Joanne Dobson.
Finances play an important part in
these series, most of which are described
by their editors as “breaking even.” Sen-
ior editor Carole S. Appel said books in

Illustration from the Women in American History series, University of Illinois Press

“I really felt there was a need to do
this,” senior editor Leslie Mitchner said
of the Rutgers project. “It was one of
those rare things where everything you
wanted was there.” Rutgers’s series spe-
cializes in works by American women
writers from the 1820s to the 1920s that
are out of print or unavailable in paper-
back. For example, Quicksand and
Passing, short novels about Harlem writ-
ten by Nella Larsen and published in the
1920s, have been released in one vol-
ume. Other titles include Alternative
Alcott, an anthology of journalistic, sa-
tiric, and feminist works by Louisa May
Alcott, and The Hidden Hand, a parody
of gender expectations by E.D.E.N.
Southworth. “We try to select books
that are usable in classrooms, that can be
taught alongside Melville, Hawthorne,
and Cooper,” Mitchner added.

Marilyn Williamson said she and a
male colleague were seized by the idea
for Wayne State University Press’s pro-
ject after publishing three books by men
about women. The series will focus on
texts written from ancient and medieval
times through the nineteenth century,
and, the press notes, “some argue
women’s excellence and equality, others
subtly endorse female subordination,
some are part of longstanding contro-
versies, others are extraordinary de-
partures from contemporary thought.”

“We have carved out a niche in the
feminist/women’s studies picture,” said
Williamson, who is co-editor of the se-
ries. “Our goal was to make available for
scholars and general readers works they
would otherwise not have access to.”

The Wayne State series has formally
gotten under way with the release of
Poullain de la Barre’s The Woman as
Good as the Man: Or, the Equality of Both
Sexes, a seventeenth-century treatise
arguing that popular views of female in-
feriority reflected socialized prejudice.

Why does a press set up a special series
if it already publishes widely in women’s
studies? Recognition, for one, editors
note, as well as the advertising gener-
ated by listing all the titles of the series in
each book. In addition, series are often
edited by the same small group of outside
scholars, which can speed up the process
— from “Do we want this?” to “When
can we release it?” — as well as ensure

the University of Illinois Press’s Women
in American History series “are selling
well, and certainly as well as those in the
other series.” The series includes such
books as Private Matters: American Atti-
tudes Toward Childbearing and Infant
Nurture in the Urban North, 1800-1860
and Civil Wars: Women and the Crisis of
Southern Nationalism. The press will
soon release Labor's Flaming Youth: Tel-
ephone Operators and Worker Militancy,
1878-1923 and Women Doctors in
Gilded-Age Washington: Race, Gender,
and Professionalization.

Publisher Berghahn said finances
forced her to some unpleasant realities.
“I discovered that the books about
women who are not well known do not
sell well. I had hoped to make those
women better known, but I found peo-
ple didn’t want to read about someone
they didn’t know the work of. Unfortu-
nately, I have had to give that up.”

Berg has published critical looks at
Emily Dickinson, George Sand, and
Canadian painter Emily Carr, among
others, and is preparing books on Harri-
et Beecher Stowe, Dorothy Sayers,
Sarah Bernhardt, and Mary Wollstone-
craft. “I am looking for something prov-
ocative, a different way of seeing a fe-
male historical figure,” Berghahn ex-
plained.

The Oxford-based publisher recently
opened an office in the United States
and will be distributing the series
through St. Martin’s Press. And, like
many of her counterparts, she is pub-
lishing more paperbacks to try to attract
readers.

What is the future for publishers of
women’s series? “I don’t think you'll run
out of subjects,” said Radcliffe series’s
Lawrence. “But the climate certainly
has changed” from when there was little
competition among publishers of books
about women. “Those days are over.
More than ever, we have to depend on
the quality of the writing of our books
and the vision of the authors.”

6¢ you are Stevie Smith. No
doubt of it. And Yellow Paper
is far and away your best

book.” Poet Robert Nichols was mis-
taken, of course. Virginia Woolf was not

Smith. But Nichols’s confusion in his
letter to Woolf is understandable: The
1936 novel sports the stream-of-
consciousness techniques that Woolf
was instrumental in developing, dis-
playing playful and powerful ingenuity
in language. This first novel, Novel on
Yellow Paper, and the ironic, witty
poems that followed are partly responsi-
ble for saving Smith from the fate of so
many good women writers: terminal
invisibility, or, at best, rediscovery.

The work of this British “poet of al-
ienation, orphanhood, and loneliness”
is “full of characters who are not at home
in this world,” Francis Spalding writes in
Stevie Smith: A Biography (Norton,
1989, $19.95, 331 pp.).

Smith is a difficult subject for a biog-
raphy, having lived a life that Spalding
concedes was, at least outwardly, “hum-
drum,” and critical opinion of her work
“remains unsettled, lacks consensus.”

Florence Margaret “Peggy” Smith was
born in Hull in 1902 to parents who were
so badly matched that her father left
shortly thereafter for the sea. As an in-
fant, she was precocious, and her “face
could express such cynical hauteur that
her elders sat her in the pram facing away
from them to avoid it.” Spoiled, frail,
and testy, she earned one of her first
nicknames, “Miss Baby.”

In her twenties (now “Stevie,” hav-
ing appropriated the name from a popu-
lar jockey), she became a London pub-
lisher’s secretary, an inadvertently smart
move because it handed her every
writer’s dream — free time. (The yellow
paper of her office provided the title for
her first novel.) This period was one of
“prodigious mental activity,” Spalding
notes, when Smith anchored her tumul-
tuous thoughts to notebooks and read
widely, from William Blake to Dorothy
Parker.

Novel on Yellow Paper made her an
instant celebrity. “Overnight this anon-
ymous secretary had become a personal-
ity with so distinctive a voice that for a
long while afterwards she was to be ham-
pered by association of her name with
the 1930s,” Spalding writes.

Smith wrote it “not with any scratch-
ing of the head or sucking of the pen, but
writing six thousand words in one night
‘in a dream state,’ as she told a journal-
ist, adding that she had completed it
within ten weeks. ... Stevie had
swiftly released an intoxicating stream of
observations which, though fresh and
surprising, grew out of a body of thought
that had matured over a long period of
time,” Spalding notes.

Two novels, Over the Frontier (1938)
and The Holiday (1949), and corrosive
book reviews followed, but she devoted
the bulk of her time to often wry, reflec-
tive, and haunting poems. One critic in
particular captured the effect of many of
Smith’s most memorable verses: “We
feel like mourners at a funeral where the
coffin is dropped and the corpse rolls
out. We are torn between horror and
mad giggles.”

One such poem is “Not Waving but
Drowning,” which presents a morbidly
absurd world in which cries for help are
misinterpreted. The poem exploits a
variety of points of view, including that
of the dead man, who extrapolates from
his circumstances, “I was much too far
out all of my life / And not waving but
drowning.”

Smith grew increasingly out of place
in this world, becoming as fragile and
enigmatic as many of the figures in her
linear drawings. Two years before her
death in 1971 of an inoperable brain
tumor, she wrote a friend with her char-
acteristically grim humor, “I am afraid I