Small Press Firsts

Faithful Rebecca, by Janice Eidus. Published by the Fiction Collective, distributed by Sun &

Moon Press (6363 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 115, Los Angeles, CA 90048), 1987, $15.95/$7.95,

175 pp.

Madonna on Her Back, by Alyson Carol Hagy. Published by Stuart Wright, distributed by

Small Press Distribution (1814 San Pablo Ave., Berkeley, CA 94702), 1987, $15.00, 118 pp.

Modern Romances, by Judy Lopatin. Published by the Fiction Collective, 1987, $15.95/

$7.95, 255 pp.

by Leslie Carper

As more publishing houses be-

come absorbed by multinational

corporations seeking formula
fiction that will guarantee a profit mar-
gin for their products, smaller presses are
playing a larger role in serving up serious
literature. It is a role that independent
presses have filled since their inception:
championing novels with idiosyncratic
or unpopular views, presenting pre-
viously ignored authors, and taking on
quirky, extremist, or misunderstood
prose styles. Small publishing houses
have introduced important literary
movements (e.g., French Surrealists,
Latin American Magical Realists) and
provided a forum for innovative writers
such as Raymond Carver, Jayne Anne
Phillips, and Ellen Gilchrist. Each of
the three small press books reviewed
here ushers into print for the first time a
bold new voice. Although all three are
written by women authors and focus on
women characters, these works are as re-
freshingly distinct, stylistically and im-
aginatively, from one another as they
are from more mainstream, popular fic-
tion.

Faithful Rebecca is the story of one
woman’s impassioned search for her kid-
napped daughter that ultimately leads
her to a true understanding of the mean-
ing of women’s roles as friends, lovers,
and mothers. Janice Eidus’s densely
plotted contemporary fable is by turns
wildly erotic and witty, and it inter-
polates ancient myth with current popu-
lar culture to reveal our most sincere
convictions. This fast-paced suspense
tale skillfully examines the place that
power — physical, sexual, hierarchical
— has in the lives of women.

At its heart is Rebecca, a vain, self-
absorbed temptress who seeks, in the
classic male mode, only her own re-
flected image in her conquests. Re-
becca’s mettle is tested when her infant
daughter, Lily, is kidnapped by Sagana,
Rebecca’s childhood chum, now the
fierce leader of a tribe of modern-day
Amazons. The pursuit of Lily leads Re-
becca to their mountaintop community
where the bizarre weather mirrors the
collective mood. Along the way Re-
becca wantonly seduces an adolescent
prep school runaway, is terrorized by a
body-building woman warrior, and be-
comes enmeshed in a macabre game of
dismembering dolls.

On another level, Faithful Rebecca
deals with the unremitting persistence
of memory to remind us of our deepest
longings and loyalties. Throughout the
novel, Rebecca is nagged by the failure
of her memory to provide essential clues
that will unlock the riddle of her present
confusion. Ultimately, it is the carnal
that unleashes Rebecca’s blind, baffled
grip as a suppressed memory surfaces,
that of a ménage à trois among Rebecca,
Sagana, and the man who impregnates
them both, and the raw sensuality and
erotic drive of the writing erupts.

Sagana’s claim on the distinctly non-
nurturing Rebecca is a powerful one.
Her aim in kidnapping the neglected
Lily is to transform Rebecca from a self-
indulgent slattern to a proud matriarch;
and in the process of warring with
Sagana, Rebecca is unwittingly trans-
formed and finally emerges as devotedly
maternal, strong, and triumphant. With
her first effort, Eidus has challenged the
traditional novel by introducing an un-
apologetically self-serving heroine who
is at once devoid of maternal impulses
and a seducer of younger men. And, in

10 Belles Lettres

Janice Eidus. Photo by Margaret McCarthy.

courageously finding the locus of passion
and emotional tension between two
willful, vital women, she has created a
moving feminist novel of charm and
bite.

Intimacy has always been the socially
sanctioned domain of women, because
men frequently relinquish responsibility
for personal involvement to their female
partners. Alyson Carol Hagy takes a
blunt and honest look at the damaging
effects of this burden in Madonna on Her
Back. This year’s winner of the prestig-
ious Hopwood Award for Short Fiction,
these eight stories underwrite with sub-
tle skill the needs and uncertainties that
inform women’s relationships with men.
Hagy’s characters are guileless and ear-
nest in their search for love, vulnerable
and gently bewildered in their pursuit of
sex.

“Shoreline” deftly tackles a daring
topic: the complex love between a
couple when the man’s true desire is for
other men. As in many of these stories,
the woman’s lust is the driving force,
and Hagy is as masterful at evoking
Laura’s palpable passion for her lover
and future husband, Colin, as she is at
displaying its pitiful ineffectiveness. Pre-
tending to doze, Laura preens and poses
naked on a beach, hoping to excite
Colin, whose attention is captured in-
stead by the birds they have journeyed
to observe. Later, after Colin relents
and makes halfhearted love to Laura,
disappointment propels her back to the
beach where he joins her to renew his
vow of having children together. It is a
chilling moment for this woman who is
trapped by the conflicting prerogatives
of her own body — erotic delight and
biological demands.

“Where Men Go To Cry” is the col-
lection’s premier piece about the mis-
matched union of an ugly, middle-aged
but extraordinarily gifted artist suffering
from a terminal disease and a beautiful,
manipulative younger man adrift from
his life and his own emotions. How their
tempestuous friendship coaxes them
toward testy love and benevolent for-
giveness is a startlingly original coupling
of adept characterization and innovative
plotting. Hagy’s stories build in power
(if not in suspense) as the tenor of her
characters is slowly revealed to one
another and to the reader. It is a credit
to the author’s subtle narrative skill that
we share her deep respect for the frailties
and valiant efforts they make despite
their warts-and-all depiction.

The 17 stories in Judy Lopatin’s Mod-
ern Romances are a hilariously winning

combination of depictions of comic book
creatures and postmodernist biographi-
cal plundering. “Trixie Taylor, Hospital
Nurse” exposes the collective male fan-
tasy of nurses as caretaker—seductress.
“The Real Life of Vivianne Romance”
chronicles the comic misadventures of a
gumshoe detective who inadvertently
kills the people he is hired to protect.
“Retrospective on Weegee” ruefully de-
picts, from the richly imagined eye of
the famous photographer, his missed,
perhaps best, shots. “Visitation by a
Ghost” eerily tells the story of two young
women who embark on a friendship dur-
ing the course of a stormy night by re-
counting their miserable childhoods. In
the morning, Marjorie is convinced that
she was indeed visited by a ghost but

later understands this apparition to be
the farewell departure of unhappy child-
hood memories. Free of punitive adoles-
cent resentments, Marjorie enters adult-
hood unencumbered.

The surprise of Lopatin’s writing is
that when she appears to digress from
her subject and follow the irresistible
lure of an unrelated tangent, such de-
lightful narrative eruptions are, in fact,
part of her deceptively disjointed prose
style; they make for the surprise of her
very contemporary screwball comedic
gifts.

@ Leslie Carper teaches English at Mem-
phis State University and has been writing a
short story collection, Miracles of Modern
Medicine.

— Vanguard, continued from page 8

I’ve never been accused of that one!
Most women think I’m a man. In the
early days I was accused of liking victims.
Then it was “oh you just say nasty things.
And you write about violence.” The
main problem is the stuff I have about
masochism, and to the degree I don’t
denounce it. Sometimes I’m a heroine
and sometimes I’m a horrible woman
who has been victimized into not de-
nouncing it.

Nihilism comes up in your work.

I see novels as either being expressive
or transformative. You take something
unbearable and transform it. The other
side of nihilism is birth.

Who is your favorite writer?

Gertrude Stein. She has done the
major work in the Western world in the
20th century. Her absolute placidity, her
refusal to let literature be anything but
joy... she was not the suffering woman
in any way. She was not writing out of
autobiographical disturbances. She
seems if anything to be a bit pompous.

— Top Stories, continued from page 9

Do you have an active purpose, perhaps
even a mission? How would you charac-
terize it?

I feel that there ought to be alternatives
to the big publishing conglomerates. In
the United States the big presses sell
who knows how many books? How many
copies did The World According to Garp
sell? And then the small presses sell 500
to 1,500 copies. But there’s nothing in
between. I’d like eventually to publish
novels. It may sound coy, but in many
ways I really don’t know explicitly what
I’m doing with Top Stories. I’m pre-
theoretic. I act on my intuitions, putting
things together and bringing them to
life, making a place for fiction that
otherwise wouldn’t come into view.
Readers will write to me and say “I’ve
been reading Stories, and I think this
manuscript is just the type of thing you
publish.” And I don’t even know what
that is.

Top Stories is now nine years old. Has it
changed over the years?

More and more it runs my life. It cer-
tainly has its own identity. I began to
notice about the time I published #7
that Top Stories had become something
out there, like a child, with a separate
identity. Yet I’m the one who makes the
choices. When I began the magazine I
never knew what I’d be getting — I
would solicit from authors and see what
I got. Now my role is changing. I’m be-
ginning to be a true editor — I make
choices.

A quick glance through Don Quixote
shows that besides drawing from Cer-
vantes, Acker culls and reworks material
from Russian and Italian novels (St.
Petersburg and The Leopard), from a Ger-
man play (Lulu), from Thomas Hobbes,
and from Latin grammars. Here, how-
ever, is the novel’s indubitably original
opening.

When she was crazy because she was
about to have an abortion, she
conceived of the most insane idea that
any woman can think of. Which is to
love. How can a woman love? By loving
someone other than herself. She would
love another person. By loving another
person, she would right every manner
of political, social, and individual
wrong: she would put herself in those
situations so perilous the glory of her
name would resound. The abortion was
about to take place: From her neck to
her knees she wore pale or puke green
paper. This was her armor...

... her wheeling bed’s name was
‘Hack-kneed’ or ‘Hackneyed,’ meaning
‘once a hack’ or ‘always a hack’ or ‘a
writer’ or ‘an attempt to have an
identity that always fails.’ Just as
‘Hackneyed’ is the glorification or
change from non-existence of ‘Hack-
kneed,’ so, she decided, ‘catheter’ is the
glorification of ‘Kathy.’ By taking on
such a name which, being long, is male,
she would be able to become a female-
male or a night-knight.

— Janet Mullaney

Does your work as editor relate to your
work as photographer and writer?

The fundamental similarity among
them for me is that you really can’t think
too much about what you’re doing while
you're doing it. You have to go on faith
and have confidence in yourself, other-
wise you can’t do the work anymore. If
I started thinking too much, I’d say,
“This is crazy, spending $600 on this or
giving so much time to that. It’s not
practical.” So I haven’t thought that way
and things have worked out. I’ve gotten
good writers, though the fact that some-
one like Ursule Molinaro publishes with
the likes of me, such a small publisher,
shows the sad state of American letters.
It’s amazing and sort of upsetting. I pay
no money or very little money. The fees
I give probably don’t even cover the typ-
ing time. My typist probably makes more
than my writers. It’s a labor of love for
everyone involved.

If you could wish one thing for the future
of Top Stories, what would it be?

No bookkeeping, no grant applica-
tions, but especially, better distribution.

® Catherine N. Parke teaches English
literature at the University of Missouri,
Columbia.

Note: Top Stories is distributed by
Bookslinger, Inland, Small Press Dis-
tribution, and Printed Matter. Individ-
uals can order directly from the publisher
(228 Seventh Ave., New York, NY
10011).

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987