Reductive Reprints

Self-Managed Socialism

The Mother’s Recompense, by Edith  
Wharton. New York: Scribners, 1986,  
$9.95, 272 pp. (PB)

by Dana Nelson Salvino  
and Delana D. Nelson

The Mother’s Recompense is an ex-  

quisite exploration of one  

woman’s relationships — with  
her husband Mr. Clephane, a well-  
placed, stodgy society member whom  
she left shortly after the birth of their  
daughter; with old Mrs. Clephane, the  
domineering matriarch, whose sensibil-  
ity ordered the Clephane household and  
haunts Kate’s memory; with the daugh-  
ter Anne, a headstrong and loving  
young woman who asks her mother back  
as soon as old Mrs. Clephane dies; with  
her old lover Chris Fenno, a war hero  
dilettante who shortly after her return to  
New York becomes engaged to her  
daughter; with the stalwart family friend  
Fred Landers, who continues in his de-  
votion to Kate, offering to alleviate her  
problems in matrimony; with the society  
that judged her harshly in her youth and  
accepts her with few perceptible reserva-  
tions now; and, most importantly, with  
herself. Edith Wharton sensitively and  
most realistically weaves the complex  
play of these relationships in the story of  
her character, Kate Clephane, who is  
often the picture of irresolution, but in  
the end lives a firm, while recondite,  
resolve.

Kate’s final course of action — to turn  
away from comfortable alternatives  
offered by Anne and Fred Landers in  
order to find and maintain integrity in  
her own way — is one that is baffling to  
many, especially to the scholar who in-  
troduces this reprint, Louis Auchincloss.  
In the feminist-spirited renaissance of  
women’s writing, we must question  
Scribners for their choice of critic to  
write the introduction. They might  
have chosen from a panoply of sym-  
pathetic and feminist Wharton scholars.  
Auchincloss, unfortunately, finds few  
intellectual points of connection with  
this Wharton novel, utterly failing to  
fathom the actions of the main charac-  
ter. While he is able to praise Wharton’s  
descriptive skills, he undercuts and  
oversimplifies the action of the novel in  
a neat plot summary.

From the cozy height of his male  
scholar’s point of view, Auchincloss  
finds the entire dilemma of the novel  
centered on what he characterizes as  
Kate’s clutching love for her younger  
lover and hysterical jealousy of her  
radiant daughter. He determines for an  
audience who has not yet read the work  
that “the central problem for the reader  
today .... is that Kate is making too  
much of circumstance.” Summarily, he  
dismisses as ridiculous Kate’s resistance  
to her daughter’s prospective marriage  
to a man Kate herself has found to be  
unreliable and insensitive, whom Au-  
chincloss himself glibly describes as “a  
bit of a mercenary.” He belittles Kate’s  
natural recoiling from a sense of an “in-  
cestuous horror” and ridicules her ex-  
tended internal debate over whether or  
not to tell her daughter of her affair with  
Fenno and stop the marriage. The entire  
range of emotion in the novel is for Au-  
chincloss limited to one question: “Will  
[Kate] speak out and ruin her daughter’s  
life?” Completely failing to account for  
the quality of Kate’s love for her daugh-  
ter, Auchincloss consequently ignores  
the very profound agony Kate experi-  
ences in trying honestly to sort out  
whether she is indeed sexually jealous of  
her daughter, jealous of Fenno (or for  
that matter, any man) for taking Anne  
away from the newly restored mother  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987  

Edith Wharton. Photo by Peter Powel, courtesy  
of Beinecke Library, Yale University.

and the relationship that has become so  
precious to her, or in fact concerned ob-  
jectively for Anne’s welfare.

Auchincloss smugly proclaims his  
position on this novel: “I impenitently  
fail to see why Fred Landers and Kate  
Clephane would not have happier and  
better lives married to each other.”  
Deftly, he sketches a hypothetical scene  
drawn from Wharton’s own life to bolster  
his point, arguing that Wharton’s end-  
ing to the novel is inconsistent to the  
way Auchincloss has judged Wharton  
would have acted under similar cir-  
cumstances. Setting aside the poor logic  
of this strategy, we can call to mind  
Kate’s own reflection while considering  
Landers’s proposal, “that all her suicidal  
impulses seemed to end in the same way;  
by landing her in the arms of some man  
she didn’t care for.” We can recall that  
Kate never considers marrying Landers  
out of love, but only because she con-  
sciously uses his proposal as a dodge to  
her near betrayal of what she decides to  
hide from her daughter. And we might  
suggest that it is entirely inadequate (and  
patriarchal) to assume that a woman’s  
best and most complete course of life  
lies in marriage.

Wharton has anticipated such a read-  
ing in her portrayal of the “sympathetic”  
Bishop in whom Kate confides while in  
New York, and who later in the Mediter-  
ranean counsels her to return and marry  
Landers. Kate tries to explain the nature  
of her resolve to him, trusting him to  
understand, but realizes that he lacks  
empathy: “No, he would never under-  
stand. His face had once more become  
blank and benedictory. He . . . passed  
on, urbane and unperceiving.” One  
scholarly and isolated man foreshadows,  
ironically, the next, both involved in  
reading and judging Kate, both compla-  
cently blind to the complexity of her  
resolve and to the positive quality of her  
recompense. The novel is rich and re-  
warding; it is only a pity that in the act  
of recovering a good and largely ignored  
novel we must redouble the act in order  
to retrieve the work from Auchincloss’s  
inadequate reading. And while  
Auchincloss may be excused for an  
honest difference in taste, Scribners can-  
not: They profit from a reprint produced  
in response to feminist demand, while  
maintaining a political stance that un-  
dercuts the spirit that provides for re-  
printing women’s writings.

@ Dana Nelson Salvino is currently  
writing, teaching, and studying for her PhD  
in East Lansing, MI. Delana D. Nelson  
lives in Reno, NV where she sells real estate  
and devotes loving hours to studying the  
piano.

liberazione della donna: feminism in Italy, by Lucia Chiavola Birnbaum. Middletown, CT:  
Wesleyan University Press, 1986, $25.95, 354 pp.

by Helen Barolini

When Betty Friedan’s The  

Feminine Mystique burst on  

our consciousness in 1963, I  
was in the United States. I was living in  
Italy during the years when the woman’s  
movement began there in 1968, and on  
into the seventies. I remember the  
marches in Rome, the weird and pro-  
vocative presence of anarchist feminists  
defying everything — Church, state,  
holy family, fashion, decorum; I witnessed  
the avalanche of writing in all genres,  
the theater, the films, the poetry. And  
I knew from previous years, the  
background of fascist-tainted restric-  
tions and gender bias out of which the  
movement exploded: the Fausto Coppi  
affair when he, the adored champion of  
Italian cyclists, was the lover of a married  
woman who, by application of the moral  
code written into law during the fascist  
years, was jailed for her adultery while  
he, just as married but untainted, re-  
mained always and forever the hero.  
And I was there when, with dramatic  
disdain, a young Sicilian woman,  
Franca Viola, pressed charges against  
her rapist, refusing to accept the tradi-  
tionally sanctioned view that her honor  
had been lost and could only be restored  
by her marrying her rapist. Franca Viola  
saw her rapist jailed. Her act symboli-  
cally stated the sweep and breadth of a  
woman’s movement in Italy that was to  
overturn centuries of cultural precepts  
and restrictions enforced by the institu-  
tionalized Church or left unaddressed by  
socialist parties.

It was a moment in women’s history  
when to be in Italy was to be witness to  
cultural revolution. And yet it is only  
now, in reading liberazione della donna,  
that I see the whole pattern and finally  
recognize in Lucia Chiavola Birnbaum’s  
broad and encompassing view of the is-  
sues, what has been achieved in the  
total society in a decade and a half  
through the impetus of both the  
women’s movement and the new left.  
Birnbaum, a historian “whose field is  
the history of beliefs,” has looked at Ital-  
ian women in relation to the two tower-  
ing realities of Italian life, Catholicism  
and communism: Italy is the seat of the  
Roman Catholic Church and the nation  
with the largest Communist party in the  
world after Russia and China. Birnbaum  
probes the cultures of Italian Catholic-  
ism and communism to understand the  
change in the collective consciousness  
of a country that, since 1945, has trans-  
formed itself from fascist monarchy to  
democracy, and from an agricultural  
society to the sixth industrial nation of  
the world.

It may come as a surprise to many that  
Italian and Italian American women,  
steeped in stereotypes, are so strong, so  
politically acute and articulate, so confi-  
dent and passionate in their role as  
transformers. But as Birnbaum shows,  
they derive from an ancient culture,  
from millennia past when the Great  
Mother of the Mediterranean world was  
everywhere worshipped, from a pre-  
Christian world of Greek and Roman  
female divinities, from the world of  
peasant wisdom that held onto its beliefs  
internally resistant of officialdom in  
whatever guise.

Birnbaum’s “participant observation”  
during 15 research visits to Italy has en-  
riched her pertinent observations, from  
the graffiti on the walls of Rome’s casa  
della donna to lullabies and saints’ festi-  
vals combined with liberation theology.  
An adherent of new left values, she is  
certainly Catholic in the sense of all-  
embracing, a wide-ranging culturalist  
who deftly weaves literature, religion,  

and life into the whole pattern of her in-  
formed observations.

Fascism relegated women to being  
passively dependent baby-bearers, and it  
institutionalized violence by writing  
into law a husband’s right to “correct”  
his wife. The 1948 constitution of the  
new republic of Italy recognized  
women’s equality with men in every  
field and their right to work for equal  
compensation while guaranteeing pro-  
tective legislation that “permits a  
woman to fulfill her task as a mother.”  
This country has far to go to reach the  
same enlightened position in closing the  
wage gap, depoliticizing childcare, and  
providing paid maternity leave. Pope  
John XXIII and his ecumenical council  
encouraged women’s advances in Italy  
(unlike succeeding pontiffs) more than  
did the Communist party, which had al-  
ways declared that there was “no specific  
woman question.” It was the women of  
the Communist party in Italy who  
pushed the question to the forefront  
and, in so doing, opened and advanced  
party views.

“As a pear tree belongs to the owner of the pears,  
so a woman is owned by the man, whose children  
she bears”: Caricature illustrating a quotation from  
Napoleon in the Aitologia del delirio

Drawing by Lydia Sansoni, by courtesy of effe, (April-May 1974)

What Italian feminists want is a self-  
managed socialism: equality of worth  
enriched by a multitude of differences.  
They have brought the concept of the  
unedited-from-above approach to the  
Bible and to Marx. Italian feminist  
leadership is premised not only on  
strong intellectual preparedness and  
political savvy, but also on indi-  
vidualism and a willingness to hear all  
voices, recognize all differences. The  
concept of “uneditness” is thrilling in its  
implications of autonomy and self-man-  
agement — almost a Protestant revolu-  
tion in the heart of Catholic Italy. Ita-  
lian feminists believe that making moral  
decisions about issues such as abortion  
or nuclear missiles is a matter of indi-  
vidual conscience.

In their competitive frenzy to be like  
men, many American feminists accept  
American society — they simply want  
equality with men. Italian feminists  
stress their differences from men and  
push for a radical subversion of the pa-  
triarchal culture into a more humanistic  
one. Women, they say, should develop  
their own full humanity, not concen-  
trate on emulating or combating men.  
Italian feminists have avoided the  
separatism that plagues the American  
women’s movement with its dissension  
among heterosexuals and lesbians,  
working women and intellectuals, those  
advocating pro-life or pro-choice, and  
White women and women of color.  
Americans have not effected the Equal  
Rights Amendment; Italian women,  
who still see their matrix as home and  
family and express the wish to retain their  
feminine identity, have nonetheless  
changed the collective consciousness.

@ Helen Barolini is the editor of The  

Dream Book: An Anthology of Italian  
American Women.

Belles Lettres ® 11