Rediscovery:  
Louise Colet  

by Barbara Meister  

Sen miles southwest of Naples, at the western end  
of the elegantly arched bay, stands the island of Ischia.  
Although it is the largest of the several islands in the bay —  
little Ischia seems far too insignificant to bear the weight of  
its stormy history.  

Nevertheless we know from ancient documents, and can  
see from the ruins of its many watchtowers and its still  
formidable fortress-castle, that before reaching its present  
state of apolitical indolence, Ischia had been fought over by  
many empires and a host of independent feudal lords.  

Nature, which has endowed Ischia with a dramatically  
beautiful coastline, a balmy climate, and wonderfully luxuri-  
ant vegetation, has often been a more devastating enemy  
than all the marauders of history, rocking the island time  
after time with earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Now  
that the deadly cataclysms have ceased — the most recent  
tremor was in 1883 — only the beneficial effects remain: the  
mineral waters and the medicinal hot springs valued since  
the days of Roman writer Pliny the Elder.  

It was to take advantage of its scenic beauty, pastoral  
serenity, and thermal muds and waters that in 1865 Louise  
Colet, French poet, novelist, and journalist, decided to  
spend some time in Ischia. For over five years Colet had  
been following the course of the Italian struggle for indepen-  
dence and unification, the Risorgimento, which had aroused  
her passionate support.  

Her L’Italie des Italiens, a four-volume account of her  
travels from northern Venezia to the southern tip of Sicily  
during this revolution — the battles she had witnessed, the  
heroes (Cavour, Garibaldi, Mazzini) she had met, the inci-  
dents she had observed, the sites she had visited — had just  
been published in France. To gather the material, she trav-  
elled through areas disrupted by insurrection, where food  
and lodging were scarce and the weather was cold and  
rainy. At fifty-five, exhausted from the strains of constant  
movement under difficult conditions and plagued by a  
chronic cough, Louise needed a rest.  

Risorgimento leaders, aware of the schizophrenic attitude  
of Napoleon III regarding their cause, and desperately in  
need of his military support, hoped that Colet’s enthusiastic  
reports might sway French public opinion in their favor. In  
gratitude for her efforts, they invited her to stay as long as  
she liked in the deserted Royal Villa in Porto d’Ischia,  
formerly the summer residence of Ferdinand and Maria  
Carolina, the recently deposed Bourbon monarchs of the  
Kingdom of Naples, of which Ischia had been a part.  

The first thing to strike Louise about the huge palace,  
which had a sweeping view of the port where passenger  
boats from Naples docked daily then as now, was its mag-  
nificent flowers. Since its vast rooms had been stripped of  
all but a few beds, tables, and chairs that had formerly been  
in the servants’ quarters, there was really little else to ad-  
mire. "The absence of interior comforts was of little import  
to me," wrote Colet:  

Outside I had the charming grace and the splendid beauty of  
nature; banks of marble or grass sheltered by shrubs; places  
to sit under little grottoes from which I could contemplate at  
my leisure the varied points and the magnificent ensemble of  
the horizon. I had an abundance of fruits and flowers with  
doubly delectable scents; a warm atmosphere, enlivened by  
the breezes from the sea, the blue sky, all powdered during  
the day by the rays of the sun, all sparkling during the night  
with myriads of stars.... The shores and the distant moun-  
tains had the nacreous tints of opal ... Oh! the warm and  
sweet hours! how I savored them with love!  

Less poetically, the first thing about Colet to strike the  
fourteen servants retained by the Italian government to care  
for the deserted palace and its guests was the absence of an  
entourage befitting this lady who, they assumed, must have  
been a Bourbon princess. She had brought with her no  
cook, no secretary, and, strangest of all to those who had  
served and observed so many royal guests, no lover. At  
fifty-five, Colet was a strikingly handsome woman, her blue  
eyes, small straight nose, luxuriant hair and delicate skin  
were ample evidence of the outstanding beauty she had  
been. To further confound the villagers, Colet soon sent  
back to the mainland the one serving girl who had accompa-  
nied her to Ischia, feeling more than adequately cared for by  
the resident staff.  

Colet’s behavior in Ischia continued to puzzle everyone  
around her. Unthinkable as it seemed, she never went to  
Mass, nor did she seek friendship of the local priests. Coin-  
ciding with her arrival on the island was the new govern-  
ment’s decision to close the renowned Seminary of Ischia;  
many blamed Colet for this blow to Ischia’s exclusively  
Catholic population.  

Although they seemed grateful for the alms she offered  
them, the local women were suspicious of Colet’s spending  
so much time watching them fetch water from the well on