History From Down Under

Joan Makes History, by Kate Grenville. Latham, N.Y.: British American Publishing,

1988, $17.95, 195 pp.

by Roberta Rubenstein

I thought until recently women

(save for a few queens) have

been virtually written out of
the historical record, they have created
history every bit as much as men have.
Yet because men have written history
they have managed to erase the female
contributions. In Joan Makes History,
Australian Kate Grenville sets out to
remedy this massive omission by rein-
serting the Joan of her title into the ma-
jor events of her country’s (and, by im-
plication, the world’s) history. As Joan
herself phrases it at the outset of her en-
tertaining account,

I am known to my unimaginative friends
simply as Joan. . . a wife, a mother, and
a grandmother: Joan who has cooked din-
ners, washed socks, and swept floors while
history happened elsewhere. What my
friends do not know is that I am also
every woman who has ever drawn breath:
there has been a Joan cooking, washing,
and sweeping through every event of his-
tory, although she has not been men-
tioned in the books until now.

In eleven scenes from the history of
Australia — from James Cook’s landing
at Botany Bay in 1770 to settlement by
British felons and other social rejects,
from the discovery of aboriginal peoples
to the gold rush and further European
settlement, and concluding with inde-
pendence from Britain in 1901 —Joan is
there. She is an active agent in the mak-
ing of (and, for Grenville, the revision
of) history. Among her most inspired
moments are Joan as a Moll Flanders-
like pickpocket, claiming title as the
first European to step ashore in Aus-
tralia, and later, as a gold-rush washer-
woman wittily reading the signs of peo-
ple’s intimate lives in their dirty linens.
(Some other scenes, in which Joan is
“wife of” famous historical figures, are
less compelling.)

Alternating with these revised scenes
from the past are installments in the life
of the contemporary Joan, from concep-
tion to maturity. This modern Joan
commemorates the traditional rites of
female passage — including romantic
love, sexual initiation, pregnancy, and

The Eternal Questions

Offshore, by Penelope Fitzgerald. New York: Carroll and Graf, 1989, $7.98,

141 pp. (PB)

The Beginning of Spring, by Penelope Fitzgerald. New York: Henry Holt, 1989,

$18.95, 188 pp.

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Written ten years apart, these
two amusing, unsettling
novels seem to share similar

points of departure: a missing spouse and
an offbeat setting. But while readers
wonder about the mystery elements
(whether the spouse will return, why the
departure, what is the family doing in
such a place), Fitzgerald sneaks up on us
with a wry, religious subtext. The jum-
bled circumstances of her central char-
acters and the collection of wild eccen-
trics who impinge on their lives event-
ually piece together into a crazy quilt of
eternal philosophical questions. In
short, we are in the serio-comic territory
of Fitzgerald’s fellow British novelists
Barbara Pym, Muriel Spark, and Iris
Murdoch.

The major difference is that Fitzger-
ald’s style is more terse, sly, and under-
stated, and her method of development
is digressive rather than progressive.
While we seem at times to be rambling
amiably through a series of delicious
anecdotes and irrelevant snatches of
wacky conversations, we are actually
doing the work of finding out not who
did what to whom but, rather, why
kindness is the most essential commodi-
ty in any human interaction in any cor-
ner of our imperfect world.

In Offshore, a deserted bohemian
mother named Nenna tries fitfully to
raise her two tough, precocious daugh-
ters among the lovable oddballs who live
in boats docked along the Thames. The
boats have symbolically loaded names
such as Grace, Lord Jim, and Maurice.
Walking the slippery planks between
them is likened to Dante’s descending
into the region of ghosts (and pausing
sensibly to think whether he should pro-
ceed). In this special fringe realm of
people too quirky, inept, or shady for
land living, the inhabitants enjoy a great
deal of camaraderie and human decency
as they struggle with leaks in their boats
or their lives. The setting almost seems a
Lewis Carroll invention, complete with
enormous wharf rats that chase cats, toi-
lets that operate by tides, and canny

30 @ Belles Lettres

Penelope Fitzgerald.
Photo by Tara Heinemann

children who consort happily enough
with homosexual pickup artists, smug-
glers, and aristocrats.

The dialogue is as pleasurable as the
setting. For example, Nenna’s elder
daughter, chatting with a friend, offers
this ruthless insight into middle age: “I
love Ma, but she must expect to be un-
happy because she’s reached that time of
life.” Her mother’s own worthy medita-
tion in a particularly harassed moment
also provides a choice tidbit: “and so
Nenna repeated a Hail Mary for every-
one in the world who was lost in Kings-
land Road without their bus fares.”

The situation of The Beginning of
Spring is similar in that a wife suddenly,
inexplicably, deserts her businessman
husband Frank and their three young
children. This time the unexpected set-
ting is Moscow in March 1913, in a
small British colony. Fitzgerald renders
the locale and period so deftly that one
gropes for parallels in Dostoevsky and
the early films of Eisenstein. The smell
of cabbage soup, the lyrical outbursts of
normally morose cabdrivers engendered
by a Russian thaw, the savagery and sen-
timentality of a people just nudging into
the modern era, the deafening taverns
— Fitzgerald captures the flavor of that
vanishing moment and shows none of
the research.

Throughout this universe of eccen-
trics trudges Frank Reid, coping ade-
quately, making patient allowances for
the oddities of long-term employees,
forgiving an obnoxious student-burglar,
preparing nervously in case the Revolu-

Kate Grenville. Photo credit: Bulletin

marriage (in that order) — and even an
interlude during which she becomes
“Jack,” passing as a man in order to dis-
cover life from the other side. Ultimate-
ly, Joan rejoins her faithful spouse and
resumes the traditional female script.

As the two perspectives of the remote
and recent past converge in the present,
Joan concludes that history is made not
simply through battles won or new lands
claimed but through a multitude of indi-
vidual acts on the part of the world’s
nameless laboring men and women,
those “unfairly excluded from the glory”
who have been

taught to despise what they spend their
lives doing, and to dismiss it as. . . not

tion occurs sooner rather than later,
doling out the usual bribes, reluctantly
falling in love with the mysterious new
governess, and suffering both the poetry
and Tolstoyan idealism of his clerk
Selwyn (a seeming altruist who was, it
turns out, the cowardly lover of Frank’s
wife). Frank seems at first an ordinary,
level-headed, kindly fellow. But the
more we meet the hilariously corrupt
officials, spies, and fools with whom he

worthy of anyone’s time or a place in the
books. But without those nameless multi-
tudes, where would the heroes be? If there
had been no one to wash their socks,
bring up their children, and peel their
potatoes, what would they have been able
to achieve? Nothing. . . . I saw that al-
though I had chosen to be that most in-
visible of creatures, the wife and mother

. . . mine was the history not of an indi-
vidual, but of the whole tribe of humanity
keeping the generations flowing along.

Examining history from “down un-
der” (in both senses) rather than from
the top down, Grenville imaginatively
accomplishes a dual effect: While writ-
ing women into critical moments in
Australia’s past, she also celebrates
Everywoman’s essential contributions
through her most enduring — albeit tra-
ditional — roles. Inevitably, some his-
torical glimpses are more engaging than
others; nonetheless, Joan Makes History
is an inventive reconstruction of history
from a female perspective. As the grand-
mother Joan exults at the conclusion of
her unusual tale, “There is nothing I
cannot claim as my own now. . . I am
the entire history of the globe walking
down the street.”

@ Roberta Rubenstein, author of Boun-
daries of the Self: Gender, Culture, Fic-
tion, teaches women’s literature at Amer-
ican University.

must deal, the more we realize that
Frank’s common sense and decency
make him unique, almost a saint. These
traits, Fitzgerald suggests, are rare,
whether in Moscow or London, in an-
other time or our own.

If these toothsome novels contain a
flaw, it is only that they stretch a bit thin
in parts. However, because they are so
entertaining, unpretentious, and well-
crafted, let’s overlook it. ¢

Women writers, past & present

The Princess

of Cleves
By Madame de Lafayette. Revised
translation by Walter J. Cobb. Intro-
duction by Nancy K. Miller. In this
forerunner to the modern psychologi-
cal novel, Madame de Lafayette simply
and directly describes the lives and
mores of aristocrats in the 16th-century
court of Henri II.
@ MERIDIAN
0-452-00986-3 $5.95.

May Your Days
Be Merry
and Bright
Christmas Stories
by Women

Edited by Susan Koppelman. A col-
lection of 15 insightful, imaginative
pieces written over the last 120 years

by such leading authors as Willa Ca-
ther, Pearl S. Buck, Grace Paley, and
Ntozake Shange.

© PLUME
0-452-26336-0 $8.95 October.

The High Road

By Edna O’Brien. “O’Brien reminds
us of our primal selves, our needy flesh.
She is the truest keeper of our souls
writing today,’ said Ms. Magazine of
O'Brien's first novel in 11 years.

© PLUME

0-452-26306-9 $8.95 October.

The Drowning Season

By Alice Hoffman. The author of At
Risk tells the story of a regally over-
bearing matriarch, her bitter grand-
daughter, and the weak-willed man
who is both son and father, lured each
summer by the ocean’s siren song.
“The story is hypnotic in its telling,
and the imagining astounding but
true.’’—New York Times

© PLUME

0-452-26302-6 $7.95 September.

The Custom

of the Country
By Edith Wharton. Introduction by
Candace Waid. Wharton’s brilliant
1913 classic of sharp cultural criticism
is her most biting indictment of Ameri-
can society.
© SIGNET CLASSIC
0-451-52367-9 $4.95.

© PLUME
American Women
Writers Series
Series editor: Michele Slung

Lummox

By Fanny Hurst. Introduction
by Alice Childress. Unrivaled
for her depiction of lower class
immigrants and first generation
Americans who lived during the
early 1900s, Hurst created an un-
forgettable character in her 1923
novel Lummox: Bertha—part
Slavic, part Swedish, and all pov-
erty—a nearly inarticulate soul
with an undaunted, beautiful
spirit.

© PLUME

0-452-26325-5 $8.95 December.

Colcorton
By Edith Pope. “One of the most
completely satisfying characters
this reviewer has met,’ said the
New York Times of Abby Clang-
hearne, heroine of this 1944 novel
which touches on all the great
themes of Southern literature.
© PLUME
0-452-26324-7 $8.95 December.

Prices subject to change.
Write to the NAL Education Department
at the address below for a free
Literature and Language catalog.

NAL

NEW AMERICAN LIBRARY
A Division of Penguin USA
1633 Broadway, New York, NY 10019

Fat 1989