grasps the meaning of the names of the  
towns he sees in the South, which goes  
beyond the geographic and inanimate  
world. But by and by I got finished with  
that type of interpretation. I didn’t want  
to fake it. One can have literary allu-  
sions, and I knew the risk of creating  
history in a deliberate way. In Tar Baby,  
I needed a special place, a background  
that had the ancient qualities to con-  
front the modern perspective of the story  
and of its characters.  

Sometimes nature misleads the characters.  

Well, the characters can misread it.  
Part of their ability to read it depends on  
their perception of themselves. The  
more perceptive human beings are about  
themselves, the cleverer they are at see-  
ing. Milkman could never have saved  
his life if he had not been listening to his  
surroundings. To be able to fly, he had  
to build up his skills as he went on, in a  
natural sense. The assumption being  
that he learns enough about himself.  

The reader senses your need to free your  
characters from the Judaeo-Christian tradi-  
tion. This seems to be effectively conveyed  
by their having Biblical names ironically  
inappropriate to their nature.  

Black people were very inventive and  
almost “ad hoc” about religion. They  
took from Christianity things that they  
could use and concentrated on what  
meant something for them. The Virgin,  
they could not get into; virginity was not  
something that they valued. But the  
Mother of God, that they took seriously.  
They were extremely loyal to the Bible  
for a number of reasons, not only relig-  

greedy person that wants more. I wanted  
her to have a quality like water, so that  
she took the shape of whatever held her;  
if it was a cup, she would have a cup  
shape, if a spoon, she would have a  
spoon shape. The historian asked me  
“What do you call her?” I said, “Sula.”  
“Well, that’s interesting,” she said, “do  
you know that there is an African lan-  
guage in which the word for water is  
‘sula’?” And then she said, “Have you  
heard that song ‘Sulame, Sulame’?”  
“Yes,” I said. “Well, it means ‘water  
run.’” But I didn’t know it. So I always  
trusted those immediate names, which  
are very imaginatively chosen. Usually I  
know them, but if I don’t, I just have to  
wait until they tell me their names. Ul-  
timately, and this is part of the choice,  
they have this other quality of ironic  
play, because they are not predictable.  
Biblical names are based on what they  
are called. The only trustworthy names  
are nicknames because they have been  
chosen. They come out from something  
that has happened. They are real names  
because it may take a long time before  
you get one. These names are based on  
some incident, physical characteristic,  
or tendency.  

The grotesqueness of your educated light-  
skinned characters (Geraldine, First  
Corinthians, Helen Wright) has provoked  
controversy. There are those who think that  
you try to present education as a destructive  
force.  

[She laughs.] These characters are ter-  
rible. Well, nobody knew about our own  
history. White education had displaced  
it. I think that the light education issue  

I had no literary precedent for friendship between  
women, and my idea was to try to show how valuable it was.  
I thought I would make a book about two women  
not at all alike but who loved one another.  

ious. It was against the law to teach  
Blacks to read, and you could die if you  
learned. So access to books, except for  
the Bible, was forbidden. Whites  
thought, I am convinced, that you had  
to write everything down because you  
were defective and couldn’t remember.  
This freedom from the written ex-  
pression was also true for the musicians.  
They could read music but they would  
not look at what was written because  
when you write it, it freezes and it will  
never be better than that. Once Miles  
Davis said that he didn’t own any of his  
records because a record was just the way  
he played it then and he ‘would not play  
it that way again. There is this insistence  
on invention and recreation. All this to  
say that memory and change were more  
important than this sort of record then.  
The Bible offered a fatalistic view of life.  
Christian religion is a double-edged  
sword. The Church provided things for  
Black people and it also became an edu-  
cational thing. On the other hand,  
Christianity as a practice was way over  
their heads. Somebody was complaining  
about the absence of religion in my  
books — not that I never mention it, but  
that I never give it a dominant place. I  
am not sure how I would feel about it.  

Your characters move away from their Bib-  
lical names. Is this done on purpose?  

[She laughs.] I guess I do it subliminal-  
ly. I just know my characters’ names, I  
don’t pick them. They come to me in  
some spooky ways. I knew Sula’s name  
instantly. I later learned something in-  
teresting. In describing Sula’s character  
to an African historian, I told her that I  
was creating a woman who was per-  
ceived in a different way. It was very dif-  
ficult because I didn’t want her to be a  
conventional villainess, some kind of  

JuLy/AuGusT 1988  

began when one had to go to school.  
There were choices to go to special  
schools. White society always chose  
light-skinned people, especially women  
because they were less of a threat than  
men. There is a whole line of books in  
this country about discrediting Black  
people for their black Black skin and  
about the tragic mulatta, light-skinned  
women who had a very complicated life.  
The Black woman never appeared be-  
cause they thought there was something  
impure about her. I was interested in  
restoring some currency, some value to a  
whole number of people. Geraldine is  
close to Helen Wright. They were very  
determined women who tried to get  
away from the darker skinned people  
who were shown contempt. This means  
despising people like Pecola.  

Your characters go beyond the norm.  

I am not interested in the norm, but  
more important than that, I find these  
people extremely powerful. Some call  
them bigger than life, but it doesn’t  
seem to me like that at all. It seems to me  
that they are as big as life. Life is very  
big. The so-called “normal people” put  
out those that they don’t want to be  
bothered about. They want to read  
about Geraldines. But I can tell you that  
in my youth I met more interesting peo-  
ple than I know now. They were more  
passionate, they loved more. I never  
knew people that were alike. I remember  
women talking about other women and  
the stories were really wild. All of them  
were like Anna Magnani’s film roles. It  
was incredible. Some of them were qui-  
et, some of them were mad. Some are  
still mad. It’s crazy being a woman in  
this society. If you are Black and a  
woman... [she laughs].  

The reader accepts your eccentrics.  

The characters are under pressure.  
You get a definition of yourself, you  
think you are “A” but something hap-  
pens and somebody calls this into ques-  
tion. You think you are afraid. What is  
loyalty? What is betrayal? What is un-  
licensed about love? Finally you decide  
that your child would be better dead  

It is that quality of  
being both the ship and the  
safe harbor that I like  

in my imaginary woman.  

than alive, as Eva, in The Bluest Eye,  
does. Well, people do that all the time.  
They don’t kill their sons but they say:  
“If you don’t do it my way you go out.” I  
just make it thick and theatrical and  
then the reader is off the hook. He or she  
thinks “Well, ha! that’s terrible! Oh! I  
wouldn’t do that!” But maybe there is a  
kind of mirror that makes the reader fo-  
cus on the nature of a relationship.  

I had a student who said she had been  
sexually abused and couldn’t talk about  
it. I told her not to try to bear that kind  
of thing alone. She said she had been  
attracted to my class because of my  
books. She was a white girl. White girls  
didn’t talk. It is certainly not true now,  
but this has to do with what we were  
talking about before, which is silence as  
a virtue. Women have always struggled  
with the lesson to be silent and to talk at  
the same time. The penalties for talking  
were incredible. The traditional woman  
is quiet. She fusses with her husband,  
she fusses with her child; but the virtue  
of the silent mother is universal. I have  
this problem with female students all the  
time. They are sabotaging themselves.  
They really don’t believe they can speak  
for themselves, or make judgments be-  
cause women are not trained for it. It’s  
not our world, our language. And the  
more scholarly we become, we translate  
it into masculinity. “She’s very objec-  
tive... very... [Morrison laughs], all  
these words that mean she thinks like a  
man, she acts like a man, and so on. So  
it is very difficult to give ourselves per-  
mission to talk.  

Can you talk about the myth of the blind  
horsemen that you use in Tar Baby? I  
couldn’t find any references regarding its  
sources.  

Mythology is like music. In it there is  
something important. In Tar Baby I  
made the myth of the blind men based  
on a newspaper story I read. A ship that  
was carrying a circus in the Caribbean  
sank, and nobody got out except the  
horses. I said to myself, “Suppose not  
only the horses swam ashore but that  
men had survived too. What would they  
have become?”  

But aren't myths supposed to come out of a  
collective consciousness? How do you feel  
about the responsibility of making up one?  

(Laughs heartily.) Oh!, I don’t think I  
will do that again. It’s true that myth has  
to come out of collectivity, but I  
couldn’t wait. [Continues laughing] I had  
to get one then!  

Both Milkman and Son achieve a mythical  
quality, which none of your “young” hero-  
ines achieves. (Only Pilate and Therese,  
but they play an ancestor-like role.) Are you  
implying that your young heroes are more  
suited to carry on the myth than your young  
heroines?  

Sula could be a mythical figure, but  
she is too young. Young women are dif-  
ficult to me in that line, it’s difficult for  
anybody. The twenties are difficult. It is  
a wonderful time in life but nothing is  
going on. No shape, no direction. So I  

have the worst time to get that woman’s  
substance. I can show her but I don’t  
want to do it flat. I wanted somebody  
that could attract you and that could  
annoy you.  

Are you talking about Jadine in Tar Baby?  

Yes. You can’t feel passion for some-  
one that does not feel passion, so I had to  
create it in her. It took forever. The  
trouble I had with her suggests this dis-  
crepancy of mine, because I have to cre-  
ate basing my ideas on the people that I  
know, and on myself. When I was  
twenty, I knew what I did but I didn’t  
have a vision of self. Then I got married,  
then I got divorced and I had my own  
self. At that time, in my twenties, I was  
doing wonderful things and it was a  
wonderful period but it was like there  
was nobody inside [laughs]. That’s my  
perception of it. You know, you have to  
have some connection in order to write.  

Death is an ever-present element in your  
works. Is this awareness rooted particularly  
in African culture?  

In this place we adjust ourselves to  
the fact that it is there all the time. The  
likelihood of dying for Black people is  
not whimsical. It was already very ex-  
cessive in slavery times. I have two sons,  
and the probability of either one of them  
living till they are forty — and I mean  
being killed — is one out of thirty. It’s  
very real. The Klan is still out there.  
That all sounds like “oh sensational,  
sensational,” but the fact is that every  
Black woman knows that if she has a  
son, there are possibilities that he will  
not make it. Not to speak of natural  
death by natural causes — bad housing,  
illness, and all that.  

What did the sixties mean for the Black  
woman? What changes did they bring to her  
status and her perception of herself?  

I guess it was visibility. What one did  
was done not only self-consciously but  
with an exterior consciousness, so peo-  
ple were aware of their actions at last.  

How do you view the eighties?  

There is a much more mature atti-  
tude. The movement now is not the idea  
of women-sisterhood together, but that  
the capitalist industry promotes hier-  
archies. To play into that you have to be  
extremely competitive.  

I wasn’t looking to include  
white characters... if they  
don’t put me in their books,  
why should I include them?  

Mobility in space becomes a common  
factor in the works of the eighties. Alice  
Walker's The Color Purple takes place in  
the South and in Africa; Paule Marshall's  
Praisesong for the Widow sets the action  
from White Plains to Grenada; Ntozake  
Shange’s Sassafras, Cypress and Indigo  
moves from San Francisco to New York;  
Tar Baby takes place in the South, in New  
York, and in the Caribbean. Can you com-  
ment on that?  

I’m so glad! Otherwise all of us would  
be claustrophobic. Sula is in this one  
room. That seemed to be natural be-  
cause women stayed at home, but now  
they are moving out. It is that quality of  
being both the ship and the safe harbor  
that I like in my imaginary woman.  

@ Angeles Carabi is a professor of En-  
glish literature at the University of  
Barcelona. Her special interest is women  
writers of color, many of whom she has in-  
terviewed. This interview was videotaped at  
the Alternative Museum of New York City  
in August 1986.  

Belles Lettres @ 9