———
Rediscovery

Evelyn Scott

Pretty Good for a Woman: The Enigmas of  
Evelyn Scott, by D.A. Callard. New York:  
Norton, 1985, $15.95, 202 pp., photos,  
bibliography, index.

The Wave, by Evelyn Scott. New York:  
Carroll & Graf, 1985, $9.95, 625 pp. (PB)  
Background in Tennessee, by Evelyn  
Scott. Knoxville: University of Tennessee  
Press, 1980, $16.95, 302 pp.

by Emily Vincent

Evelyn Scott flared in the literary  

firmament of the 1920s and  

1930s and faded quickly. An in-  
novative writer and lively participant in  
the postwar outburst of artistic activity,  
she and her work have been mysteriously  
erased from memory. With the avail-  
ability of D.A. Callard’s biography and  
of several reprints, Scott is ripe for redis-  
covery. The books are provocative and  
meaty, but do not wholly explain her  
once eminent reputation nor her disap-  
pearance. William Faulkner, asked in  
1940 about women writers, answered  
that Scott was “pretty good for a  
woman.” When Callard came upon a  
box of Scott’s letters, manuscripts, and  
books in a musty English bookshop, his  
curiosity led him to do a biography of  
her. For the title he quoted Faulkner,  
with more consideration of the source  
than for the subject.

Scott’s rise and fall might have been  
programmed by the conflicting elements  
of her personality. She was granted writ-  
ing talent, crystalline intelligence, a gift  
for friendship and love, a passionate  
rebel temperament, a delicate beauty,  
courage, intensity, and a decisive will.  
She used them brilliantly, but her hair-  
trigger sensitivity, inflexibility, para-  
noia, and lack of humor turned it all to  
dross.

When 26-year-old Evelyn arrived in  
New York in 1919, a collection of her  
poetry, Precipitations, was well received,  
and in 1921, her first novel, The Narrow  
House, was acclaimed. For two decades  
she published almost a book a year, in-  
cluding novels, poetry, and children’s  
stories. Then nothing more, although  
she endlessly revised a mammoth novel  
on the French Revolution and other  
manuscripts and composed tracts about  
a conspiracy she perceived in the pub-  
lishing world.

Most of her books were critical succes-  
ses, but only The Wave sold well. In this  
Civil War novel, she ambitiously tries  
to capture the feelings of southerners and  
northerners through vignettes, using a  
cast of hundreds of real and fictional  
people. Each character appears only  
once. Skipping across social, geographi-  
cal, and battle lines, she shows how the  
war touches everyone, even English  
millworkers who are left without jobs  
because there is no cotton and profiteers  
have made lucky investments.

In some scenes Scott astonishes us  
with her imagination. A soldier dies on  
the battlefield: “It was ended...the earth  
he bore upon pressed misery from his  
mind.... He relinquished himself to a  
torrent of dark.” Other leaps of imagina-  
tion, however, are contrived and heavily  
weighted with hindsight. For instance,  
she guesses what Lincoln was thinking  
in Ford’s Theatre and what Lee thought  
on the morning of his surrender.

The writing in The Wave also varies—  
from fresh and exciting to awkward and  
fuzzy. “He remembered leaves growing  
like vines over the dead moon’s face,”  
she writes at her most powerful, or, “The  
bayonets spangled all the road with steel,  
then shot to rest.” But then the stultify-  
ing occurs: “If she recalled what had  
passed between them so long ago, her  
momentary obsession was such that she  
gave no importance to the recollection.”

| Marcu/Apr. 1987

The Wave, though not easy reading, is  
an unusually balanced portrait of the  
sweep and divisiveness of the war from  
an author whose heritage straddled the  
Mason-Dixon line.

In Background in Tennessee Scott com-  
bines a paean to her childhood with a  
smidgen of Tennessee history and her  
idiosyncratic views on art and morality.  
Asked to write about Tennessee, a place  
she had avoided for 20 years and whose  
values she had decisively rejected, Scott  
delved into memory—“a voyage of dis-  
covery for the writer. I want to know  
what people are recognizing when, after  
an introduction, they say to me, ‘You  
are from the South.’” She considers  
what her forebears brought to Tennessee  
and contrasts the frontier state with the  
well-bred town she knew in 1900. The  
frontier prized daringness and often  
smudged the line between hero and law-  
breaker. A gentlemanly recklessness sur-  
vived. “There was scarcely a back-  
woodsman who did not envisage himself  
as a statesman.” And politics remained  
a favorite sport.

When Evelyn was growing up, the war  
was still a presence, and southern girls  
were taught that they were “little prin-  
cesses defrauded of their heritage.” But  
this granddaughter of non-combatants  
(one of them Yankee) brings an objec-  
tivity to that usually impassioned theme.

Scott experimented widely in other  
works. Escapade is a misty, lyrical mood  
piece about her years in Brazil, with an  
odd story tacked onto the end. In The  
Narrow House, which harshly indicts  
marriage and family life, she lets the  
characters speak their frank, uncomely  
thoughts without lubricating tact. And  
she wrote Blue Rum for children, using  
a masculine pen name. Scott showed a  
superb instinct for quality in her critical  
writing. In The Dial she wrote the first  
serious analysis in America of James  
Joyce’s work and she protested the ban-  
ning of Ulysses. The publisher used her  
perceptive essay on The Sound and the  
Fury to promote the young Faulkner,  
whose earlier books had not received  
much notice. Appreciating Jean Rhys’s  
talent, Scott tried to get her wider  
recognition.

Though imaginative, Scott’s own  

fiction lacked the luster and  

sensation of her life. Born in  
1893 in Clarksville and named Elsie  
Dunn, she lived near there for 15 years,  
then moved to New Orleans, where her  
father’s Yankee parents had settled after  
the Civil War. A precocious only child,  
Elsie felt she was not understood at  
home. Soon after arriving in New Or-  
leans she wrote to the newspaper urging  
legalized prostitution as a means of con-  
trolling venereal disease. She joined,  
then left, the suffrage movement. After  
a term at art school, she entered Tulane  
University as its youngest student, but  
left to explore learning on her own.

At 20, Scott rebelled dramatically by  
eloping with an older married man,  
Frederick Creighton Wellman, Dean of  
Tropical Medicine at Tulane. She was  
annoyed that he was given credit for  
ruining her. “What I resent most deeply  
is the attempt to deprive me of responsi-  
bility for my own acts.” They changed  
their names, he to Cyril Kay Scott and  
she to Evelyn Scott, and they sailed to  
Brazil.

Because Cyril could not use his skills  
without revealing his identity, he  
worked as a laborer and a bookkeeper,  
then homesteaded a sheep ranch. They  
rejoiced at the birth of a son, Creighton,  
but a botched delivery left Evelyn a semi-  
invalid. The Brazilian experience  
reached a nadir when all the sheep died  
suddenly and real poverty set in. They  

were living in a mud and thatch hut  
with the baby and Evelyn’s mother (who  
was hysterical after being left for a  
younger woman). Cyril then went to  
work for a mining company. Two years  
later they returned to the United States  
where Evelyn had corrective surgery and  
Mrs. Dunn was sent to live with relatives  
in Clarksville.

After that primitive existence, Evelyn  
gloried in the intellectual ferment of  

Evelyn Scott  

The Narrow House  
by Evelyn Scott  

New York: Norton (Shoreline Books),  
1986, $7.95, 221 pp. (PB) [Originally  
published in 1921]

Take two people with a cloyingly  

vicious relationship such as that  

of J.R. and Sue Ellen Ewing (on  
television’s Dallas); add a masochistic  
old-maid sister, parents who refuse to  
deal with their dead relationship, and a  
pistol; lock them in a dark womblike  
house; and what do you get—Evelyn  
Scott’s The Narrow House. Or at least  
part of it. Additional melodrama comes  
from Scott’s torrid prose (“Laurence felt  
his parenthood raped”), Anglicized  
tone, and sometimes irritating desire to  
catalog every roll of the eyeball a charac-  
ter makes. Back in the 1920s, The Nar-  
row House must have been such a racy  
exploration of sexual and psychological  
imprisonment that it knocked the  
booties off many a fireside granny. But  
to today’s savvy feminist reader the  
book, alas, seems plodding and over-  
blown. The only fair way to evaluate it,  
perhaps, is as an artifact and for what it  
can show readers about how little things  
have changed for women.

Greenwich Village and adapted quickly  
to the rampant sexual freedom. Waldo  
Frank was for a short time her lover,  
then the friend who criticized her work  
unsparingly and helped her through  
rough financial problems. William Car-  
los Williams advised her about her  
poetry and became her lover, but the  
affair ended unpleasantly. Cyril objected  
to some of Evelyn’s friends as “vicious  

—continued on page 15  

For example, protagonist Winnie  
(even her name sounds simpering!) is  
nothing but an empty urn who yearns  
to be filled with love wrung from her  
poor, confused husband, Laurence, and  
from her desperate but equally vacant  
children, May and Bobby. As her self-  
hatred increases, she commits an act of  
sexual suicide by getting pregnant when  
the doctor had forbidden it. Laurence’s  
mother, Mrs. Farley (with whom they  
live), can find no meaning at all in life  
beyond cooking and cleaning and feeling  
duty-bound to her philandering hus-  
band. Alice, Laurence’s sister, finds her  
unfulfilled longings for love and sex lead  
her near to death.

However, the truly awful revelation  
gained from reading The Narrow House  
is that 66 years later the reader can still  
recognize this type of woman: the vacu-  
ous half-person who cannot live without  
a husband by her side, the toiling house-  
wife whose sense of duty to husband and  
family keep her miles away from self-ac-  
tualization, the successful working  
woman who dreads the vision of a solit-  
ary old age. Perhaps in the end it is not  
Scott’s soap-opera writing that makes  
the book so undigestible but the reader’s  
familiarity with such women, which has  
bred contempt.

—Lesley Jane Nonkin

Belles Lettres @