Beautiful, Awful,  
and Misunderstood  

by Denise Giardina  

Fair and Tender Ladies is Lee Smith’s  

fourth novel set in the southern  

Appalachian Mountains, and it is  
also her best. Through the letters of Ivy  
Rowe, we follow the life of a woman  
from her childhood before World War I  
to her death in the 1970s. And twined  
with Ivy’s story as closely as grapevines  
on an arbor is the story of the mountains  
and mountain people subjected to  
wrenching change and relentless explo-  
itation yet surviving nonetheless.  

From the first paragraph, Smith mines  
Appalachian language for beauty. The  
girl Ivy writes a potential Dutch pen pal:  
“My dear Hanneke, Your name is not  
much common here, I think it is so  
pretty too. I say it now and again it tastes  
sweet in my mouth like honey or cane or  
how I picture the fetched-on candy from  
Mrs. Brown's book about France, candy  
which mimics roses.”  

Ivy says of Holland, “I cannot feature  
it all so flat there with flat water so brightly  
blue and never a mountain nor nary a  
cloud in the sky,” and says of her own  
heavy, black shoes with copper toes, “I  
disgust them and wish for wooden shoes  
and lace cap like yourn and such pretty  
long white stockings, you look like a  
little Queen.”  

Storming Heaven  
by Denise Giardina  

New York: Ivy Books, 1988, 293 pp. (PB)  

Now available in paperback, Denise Gi-  
ardina’s powerful novel Storming Heaven  
is a reading experience not to be missed.  
True to the time, the place, and the  
people depicted, this is historical fiction  
at its best, vibrant with human emotions  
that are immediate yet timeless.  

With Storming Heaven, Giardina did  
an imaginative about-face, shifting her  
attentions from the annals of British his-  
tory, which yielded her well-received  
first novel, Good King Harry, to familiar  
ground—the mountains of West  
Virginia. On home turf, Giardina was  
drawn to an almost forgotten incident,  
one that raised masses of exploited coal  
miners and their families in battle  
against tyrannical coal barons and the  
government they owned.  

Storming Heaven recounts the infamous  
1922 Battle of Blair Mountain and the  
tragic beginnings of the union move-  
ment in the coalfields of Appalachia.  
Though the backdrop for the novel is  
the political panorama of American his-  
tory, human drama holds the reader in  
this novel’s warm embrace. Speaking in  
four distinct, alternating voices, Gi-  
ardina’s beautifully realized characters  
seem almost palpable.  

Framed by the life of union organizer  
Rondal Lloyd, the novel begins with C.J.  
Marcum’s account of Rondal’s birth,  
marked as a portentous event by the  
baby’s reclusive Uncle Dillon Lloyd.  
“Bad times comin... The youngun will  
suffer it. He was in the womb when the  
papers was signed,” Dillon predicts. The  
papers are deeds to land and mineral  
rights that will ultimately displace and  
disenfranchise the people of the region.  

The political consciousness of the  
novel, C.J. is a proud socialist who even-  
tually takes the boy Rondal as his son  
and protégé. Orphaned as a child, C.J. is  
radicalized by the murder of his grand-  
father, who, unlike many Appalachian  
landowners, refused to sell his land or his  
mineral rights. After his grandfather is  
murdered, the Marcum land is seized by  
a powerful railroad on the basis of a  

10 © Belles Lettres  

Fair and Tender Ladies, by Lee Smith. New York: Putnam, 1988, $17.95, 316 pp.  

Lee Smith. Photo by Josh Seay  

By the end of her life, Ivy’s language is  
more standardized, flattened like the  
Dutch landscape she cannot fathom.  
And throughout the novel, she encoun-  
ters the forces that devalued mountain  
culture and destroyed the Appalachian  
landscape. First come the missionaries  
and educators who are also meddlers:  
kind, superior, and judgmental. One  
takes it upon herself to remove to a state  
home Ivy’s beloved sister Silvaney,  

document marked with an X, even  
though C.J.’s grandfather could read  
and write.  

Rescued from the coal mines by C.J.,  
Rondal is educated as a socialist, taught  
to love the United Mine Workers of  
America (UMWA), but pushed by his  
surrogate father to become a doctor.  
Eventually, the UMWA triumphs over  
status and comfort, and Rondal becomes  
a hunted man, perpetually pursued by  
company thugs.  

Through the voice of Carrie Bishop,  
who becomes a coal camp nurse and  
Rondal’s lover, we discover the idyllic  
landscape and lifestyle of rural Appala-  
chia. Carrie’s Homeplace, always with a  
capital H, represents the culture that is  
being destroyed by distant coal barons.  
As a child, the Homeplace’s “mystical  
boundary” is all that separates Carrie  
from “... forces in this world, principal-  
ities and powers, that wrench away the  
things that are loved, people and land,  
and return only exile.”  

In the coal camps, Carrie discovers the  
extent to which greed propels the mine  
owners. Paltry wages come in the form of  
scrip, company paper which can only be  
used at company stores. Miners are  
forced into perpetual debt. Their families  
go hungry and sick. Young boys are soon  
dragged into the mines to help boost the  
family’s wages, but there is never  
enough. And mine accidents are routine.  
The threat of death hangs like a pall  
over the coal camps, where nothing will  

marked by a brain fever.  

The fate of the wild and unpredictable  
Silvaney seems to parallel that of her  
culture. The old granny women with  
their dark, rich stories die out, and their  
cabins disappear. Trees are cut wholesale  
and floated downstream to the mills.  
Unscrupulous coal company agents take  
over mineral rights to the land with dev-  
astating consequences for the future.  
Families are scattered by social disrup-  
tions brought on by coal mining.  

Through it all, Ivy remains a vital pre-  
sence. She is a woman open to ex-  
perience, comfortable with her body and  
not afraid to live. She bears a child out  
of wedlock, marries and has other child-  
ren, runs away with a beekeeper. But al-  
ways she returns to Sugar Fork, her  
childhood home. Ivy stands in contrast  
to her sister Beulah. Beulah hates her  
background and craves the status and  
comfort of the American upper-middle  
class. Beulah succeeds and drinks herself  
to death. Ivy remains on her Virginia  
mountainside and survives.  

Lee Smith explodes the stereotype of  
the “typical” Appalachian. The people  
of this novel are varied. Some are Chris-  
tian fundamentalists of different stripes,  
others are rebelliously anti-religion.  

Photos by Warren E. Brunner from The  
Faces of Appalachia Simple Lifestyle  
Calendar. Produced by Appalachia —  
Science in the Public Interest, P.O. Box  
298, Livingston, KY 40445  

grow and people die needlessly.  

Though the passion for change is real-  
ized in the voices of Carrie, Rondal, and  
his mentor C.J., the voice of Rosa An-  
gelelli serves to remind the reader of the  
silenced masses, the real victims of sus-  
tained oppression in the coalfields. In-  
creasingly mad, Rosa is an Italian immi-  
grant wedded to the ways of the old  
country, adrift in a cruel new world of  
false promise. Abused by her husband,  
Rosa tends the house and the needs of  
an opulently wealthy mine owner and  
stands guard over his exotic collection of  
butterflies, trapped under glass.  

Though the story Giardina chose to  

tell is necessarily grim and sometimes vi-  
olent, it is made bright and beautiful by  

her understanding of Appalachian cul-  
ture. Mountain ways and mountain  
humor come to delightful, delicious life.  
But Giardina does not hesitate to take  
on issues that extend well beyond Ap-  
palachia of the 1920s, racism, classism,  
and sexism, to name a few.  

In her home state of West Virginia and  
her adopted Kentucky, Giardina is re-  
garded as a brave and brilliant creative  
spirit who has breathed passionate life  
into a story and a struggle too few know  
beyond the region. That regard is not  
one foolishly harbored by ignorant  
“hillbillies.” It is the knowing of a  
people who have witnessed truth in fic-  
tion.  

— Michal Smith  

Winter  

Some are deeply rooted to the land;  
others are wanderers. Ivy’s own children  
include a wild son turned Republican  
lawyer, a high school dropout making a  
good living in real estate, a housewife  
daughter who enters her own child in  
preteen beauty pageants, and another  
daughter who is a writer.  

Fair and Tender Ladies is marred with  
some of the flaws that marked Smith’s  
earlier novels. Her women, at least the  
most important characters, are invaria-  
bly beautiful. Her leading men are hand-  
some, although most do not age well,  
worn down by either high or low living.  
Her plots are somewhat predictable and  
sometimes overly optimistic. For ex-  
ample, at the end of this book, Ivy holds  
off a bulldozer that has come to strip her  
land. It is true that mountain men and  
women have placed their bodies in the  
paths of bulldozers. But they generally  
do not succeed as handily as Ivy does.  
The brute power of the multinational  
coal industry is an inescapable force not  
easily dismissed, even in fiction.  

Still, Fair and Tender Ladies overcomes  
these flaws in ways that an earlier book,  
Oral History, did not. Like Oral History,  
it is modeled on the striking Ap-  
palachian folk tales Smith loves to re-  
tell; despite the stock elements, it cap-  
tures the perversity and excitement of  
the originals. And few writers today can  
match Lee Smith for sheer page-turning  
readability.  

I discovered Lee Smith through her  
early novel Black Mountain Breakdown  
when I was just beginning to write. Her  
characters vacationed in Myrtle Beach  
and read the Bluefield Daily Telegraph  
just as I did. They knew about coal  
tipples and red dog and company stores.  
For a writer from Appalachia, who grew  
up burdened by outsiders’ negative eval-  
uations of mountain culture, that my  
place could be the material of fiction  
came as a joyous revelation.  

Ivy Rowe shares the misgivings of my  
own early writing days. She advises her  
author daughter, “I wonder, why don’t  
you write about New York City, since  
you have been up there so long? Or  
about Norfolk and the newspaper life? It  
seems like that would be more exciting  
than these mountains which nobody  
wants to read about, honey.”  

Here Smith puts her finger on the  
great wound that cripples Appalachian  
artists, harms the self-image of mountain  
people, and allows outside economic  
forces to rape and pillage the hills. It is  
the attitude that lets critics dismiss Ap-  
palachian fiction as “regional” and  
bookstores refuse to stock Appalachian  
books because, as I was told, “no one is  
interested in coal miners.” Fortunately,  
Smith has rejected the warning voices of  
self-doubt and continues to reveal a  
beautiful, awful, and misunderstood land  
to the world.  

@ Denise Giardina is the author of  
Storming Heaven, a novel about several  
families caught up in a West Virginia coal  
miners’ armed rebellion.  

SINISTER WISDOM  

Since 1976...  

“One of the most popular and widely  
read lesbian periodicals in existence”  
—Joy Parks, Women’s Review of Books  

“Just as lesbian imagination keeps  
discovering new vistas, so does Sinister  
Wisdom, while keeping a strong identity  
...in a repressive time.”  
—Adrienne Rich  

“...comes from and speaks to the heart  
of the feminist movement.”  
—Susan Griffin, Vine Reader  

4 Yearly issues: $17/individuals;  
$30/Institutions; $20/Out of US (USS)  
$35-200/Sustaining  

$6/Hardship;  
$5/copy. Free to women in prison &  
mental institutions Send SASE for info.  

SINISTER WISDOM has moved West!  
POB 3252 Berkeley CA 94703  

Spring 1989