% Belles Lettres ¥

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

Dorothy Abbott, Kamili Anderson, Eleanor J. Bader,  
Jane Bakerman, Regina Barreca, Suzanne Berne,  
Anne Bischoff, Cathie Brettschneider, Scarlet Cheng,  
Rosemary K. Curb, Myrna Goldenberg, Jewelle Gomez,  
Helaine Harris, Laura Hapke, Joanne Jimason,  
Darcie Conner Johnston, Susan Koppelman,  
Shirley Geok-lin Lim, Faye Moskowitz,  

Leslie A. Moushey, Deborah Price,  

Roberta R. Rubenstein, Michelle M. Tokarczyk,  
Susan P. Willens, Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING AND CONTRIBUTING EDITORS  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
DESIGN CONSULTANT  

Lisa Dreyfuss  
COPYEDITOR  

Cynthia Cassou, Adele Gorelick, Andrea Dale Lapin,  
Joyce Murdoch, Ilona Popper  
EDITORIAL AND PRODUCTION ASSISTANCE  

Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

©  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) is published four times a  
year in January, April, July, and October. Available by  
subscription and distributed by Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and Ubiquity  
Distribution, Brooklyn, NY. Member of the Council of  
Literary Magazines and Presses. Indexed by Book Review  
Index and Women’s Studies Index (G.K. Hall). Available in  
University Microfilms Underground Press collection.  
Funded in part by the National Endowment for the Arts.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres reviews books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and independent presses in the genres  
of fiction, nonfiction, poetry, biography, and criticism.  
Regular columns feature reprints, mysteries, interviews, and  
publishing news. Belles Lettres exists to promote and  
celebrate literature by women and, in so doing, to inform  
and entertain. All views expressed herein are those of the  
individual authors.  

Correspondence  

Editorial correspondence and books for review should be  
sent to Janet Mullaney at 11151 Captain’s Walk Court,  
North Potomac, MD 20878 (301/294-0278), except for  
poetry books and queries (send to Michelle Tokarczyk, 3811  

Canterbury Rd., Apt. 501, Baltimore, MD 21218) and  
mysteries (send to Jane Bakerman, RR 23, Box 131, Terre  
Haute, IN 47802). Contributors should query first, send  
clips, and enclose SASE. Subscription Rates and Queries:  
$40 for institutions; $20 for individuals; $15 for students  
with photocopy of ID; foreign +$9. Sample Issue: $3. Send  
subscription requests and inquiries to Karen T. Jenkins, 785  
Verbenia Drive, Satellite Beach, FL 32937.  

Advertising  

Camera-ready display advertising (stats or veloxes)  
preferred. If other forms are accepted, appropriate charges  
will be made. Deadline for space reservations is two months  
preceding the month of issue. Write for rate card or call  
(301) 294-0278. ©1990 Belles Lettres, Inc.  

Letters  

From the Editor  
Regarding our new look: With this issue we say goodbye to  
five years of tabloid publishing and inaugurate a new  
magazine format. Besides giving us the opportunity to be  
carried in more libraries and newsstands, the switch will  
enable us to get the review to you faster and less  
expensively through the use of desktop publishing, thus  
ensuring the long-term viability of America’s only general-  
interest book review by women!  
Returning in next issue: Nonfiction Bookshelf (Spirituality),  
Impressions (featuring the Feminist Bookfair in Barcelona,  
British publishing, and a Zora Neale Hurston conference),  
and Southern Hemisphere (Asian and Diaspora writers).  
Also coming up: interview with Marilynne Robinson,  
Evelyn Torton Beck on Irena Klepfisz, Myrna Goldenberg  
on literature of the Holocaust, special section on Soviet  
writers and artists, Lynn Z. Bloom on the diary of a New  
England midwife, Denise Marshall on Virginia Woolf,  
Barbara T. Christian on Frances E.W. Harper, and the  
index for Volume V.  

Sd  

Seeing Michele Slung’s letter about Mary Ellmann in the  
Spring issue, I looked up the date of publication of that  
wonderful book, Thinking About Women. It was 1968 (not  
1986)! Mary E. was in the forefront of feminist thought,  
and quoted, I remember, by such theorists as Kate Millett a  
few years later. I too own a cherished copy.  

And yes, indeed, if Contemporary Authors is correct, she  
was the wife of Richard E., who is recorded as marrying  
Mary Donahue in 1949. Since Thinking About Women is  
dedicated: "In memory of Nora Donahue,” Mary is indeed  
the mother of Lucy Ellmann by Richard. They had three  
children according to Contemporary Authors, one of whom  
was named Lucy. Mary herself seems not to be listed in any  
of the various listings of women and/or authors; since  
listings usually depend on filling out a form, perhaps she  
chose not to be personally listed.  

Thinking About Women is still in print (Harcourt Brace  
republished it in 1974).  

Cathleen Schurr  
Bethesda, MD