tent inarticulate. The most interesting part, whereas Marcus and Gilbert regard

Getting Round That One Woman

Virginia Woolf and the Real World, by Alex Zwerdling. Stanford: University of California

Press, 1986, $24.95, 374 pp.

Virginia Woolf and the Languages of Patriarchy, by Jane Marcus. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1987, $24.95 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 220 pp.

Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury: A Centenary Celebration, edited by Jane Marcus.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987, $24.95, 307 pp.

The Essays of Virginia Woolf: Volume One, 1904-1912, edited by Andrew McNeillie. New
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1986, $19.95, 411 pp.

by Molly Hite

“one wanted fifty pairs of
eyes to see with,” reflects
Lily Briscoe in Virginia

Woolf’s To The Lighthouse. “Fifty pairs
of eyes were not enough to get around
that one woman with, she thought.”
The intractably multiple viewpoint that
this judgment suggests — the layered
image built up from the images regis-
tered by “fifty pairs of eyes” — was one
of Woolf's own distinctive achieve-
ments. Her important characters, in-
cluding the powerfully nurturing Mrs.
Ramsay of Lily’s ruminations, seem to
acquire depth and reality by virtue of
being presented from an array of perspec-
tives, among them the perspective of
hypersensitive self-scrutiny. But no
perspective is privileged, sanctioned,
normative. None gives us the correct or
definitive view of such characters.
Woolf tends to withhold omniscience.
In her Godless, populous universes,
point of view is always somebody’s point
of view, contributing to rather than
constituting a character, who becomes
full, complex, haunting, and real inas-
much as she or he is necessarily, and
perhaps infinitely, incomplete.

For Woolf’s readers, almost inevita-
bly, it is Woolf herself who haunts and
tantalizes and refuses to be “got round,”
even given the hundreds of pairs of eyes
making up the institution of Woolf criti-
cism. If during her lifetime she gener-
ated contradictory impressions and
opinions, the years since her death have
multiplied the perspectives on “that one
woman” until there are any number of
conflicting accounts of her beliefs and
attitudes, any number of divergent read-
ings of her fiction and essays. The best
of these tend to be rather Woolfian in
their awareness of intrinsic limitation
and their commitment to getting round
as a condition of knowledge as well as a
narrative strategy. Not surprisingly,
many of them are feminist in orienta-
tion, for Woolf may be the single most
important factor in the formation of
contemporary feminist literary scholar-
ship. Her fictional practice has served as
both material and model for two genera-
tions of increasingly politicized readers.
And of course in many respects she
wrote the book on what we today con-
sider radical feminist theory.

Fifteen years ago, perhaps I might
have tried amending the preceding
statement in the interests of precision:
She wrote two such books, actually, A
Room of One’s Own and Three Guineas.
Now I find this notion of precision mis-
leading because it suggests that these
two long essays were her only radical
feminist works, that Woolf was only in
part or in spurts a theorist of privilege
and oppression. In the last 15 years,
however, a burgeoning of interest in the
material conditions of Woolf's literary
production, and especially in the stages
making the process of composition,
coincided with the release of a number
of manuscripts into the public domain.
There was suddenly a great deal more of
Woolf's work, and in response there
were suddenly a large number of scholars
trying to infer from the new evidence a
new vision of the writer. The Woolf
who has emerged from the scrutiny of
these eyes is chiefly “political,” in that
the unpublished and recently published
manuscripts overwhelmingly reinforce
our sense of how she saw hierarchies of
gender and class informing and structur-
ing the institutions of everyday life.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988

The three critical books under discus-
sion here are key documents in this revi-
sion of Woolf as a political animal. Of
the three, Alex Zwerdling’s Virginia
Woolf and the Real World is most explicit
in its concentration on “Woolf's societal
vision — her complex sense of how his-
torical forces and societal institutions
influence the behavior of the people she
describes in her fictional and nonfic-
tional works” and most limited in its
construction of how far such a “societal
vision” might extend. For Zwerdling,
the new material, particularly Woolf’s
recently published diaries and memoirs,
constitutes a revelation: “She is no
longer simply the author of a handful of
‘experimental’ novels and of some lively
criticism.” Once in possession of this in-
sight, he can go on to conduct separate
discussions of Woolf as satirist, Woolf
on the issues of class and money, Woolf
on the family, Woolf as feminist, and
Woolf as pacifist.

To the extent that these divisions
merely represent strategies for handling
a large body of material, they constitute
useful categories that allow Zwerdling to
place in the foreground different aspects
of Woolf’s concern with the real or
sociopolitical world. But to some ex-
tent, Zwerdling’s analysis presumes the
same separations in Woolf’s own
thought, in particular a separation be-
tween issues of class and gender. My
sense is that Zwerdling never comes to
grips with how comprehensive and sub-
versive a truly radical feminist analysis
can be, and thus he never quite recog-
nizes the scope of Woolf's own
feminism. Certainly his repeated rep-
resentations of the author as self-divided
— split, for instance, between “her twin
needs . . . to vent her anger about the
subjection of women and to conciliate
the male audience she could never en-
tirely ignore” — betray an ignorance
about the privileges that even an upper-
middle-class woman enjoys. If Woolf
goes to some trouble, at least in A Room
of One’s Own, to conciliate a male audi-
ence, she does so less because of “her
need” than because of their (and there-
fore society’s) requirement, and she ex-
pends a great deal of energy and ink
elucidating precisely this point.

She also reports on a masculine
shortsightedness about the gendered na-
ture of purportedly “universal” experi-
ence that suggests why Zwerdling’s often
admirable readings have blind spots.
Comparing Woolf with her contempor-
ary, James Joyce, Zwerdling observes,
“Joyce was much the better ven-
triloquist” of lower-class speech and in-
quires, “Why had it proved too difficult
for Woolf to see and hear a class below
her own with equal accuracy?” Granting
(for a moment) the validity of the ques-
tion, I could suggest a number of im-
mediate answers, but one of them is not
Zwerdling’s own: “The answer, I think,
lies in her middle-class guilt.” At this
point I actually flung down the book, a
resisting reader at last, and cried, “No,
no, the answer lies in her sex!” for
clearly Woolf could no more frequent
working-class pubs (as Joyce did) than
Judith Shakespeare could join a London
theater company. But the premise is
dubious. Did Woolf find it difficult to
see and hear a class below her own?

Zwerdling thinks so, largely because so
many of Woolf’s working-class and
lower-class characters are “minor” in
status (upwardly aspiring types like
Septimus Smith in Mrs. Dalloway do not
count, for his purposes) and because
these characters are to such a great ex-

cases in point for this contention are the
old female vagrant in Mrs. Dalloway,
who sings a song made up of the inde-
cipherable syllables “ee um fah um so/
foo swee too eem oo”; the grunting,
keening charwomen Mrs. McNab and
Mrs. Bast of To the Lighthouse; and the
caretaker’s children in The Years, who
sing shrilly and unintelligibly, “Etho
passo tanno hai/ Fai donk to tu/ do.”

But another sort of account of such
characters and their disturbing
utterances appears in Jane Mar-
cus’s Virginia Woolf and the Languages of
Patriarchy and, albeit in rather different
terms, in Sandra Gilbert’s essay
“Woman’s Sentence, Man’s Sentenc-
ing” in Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury.
Neither Marcus nor Gilbert assumes
that the cryptic near-speech created by
Woolf for her enigmatic singers and
chantets is somehow the consequence of
a failure to hear and “ventriloquize.”
Both construe the monosyllables as de-
liberate attempts on Woolf's part to un-
dermine a literary language that encodes
a ready-made ideology, inasmuch as this
language is the symbolic order of patriar-
chy. Marcus aligns the grunts and shouts
with the ecstatic babbling associated
with Eleusinian and Orphic mysteries,
ritual observances descending from the
matriarchal religions that Woolf studied
in the process of reading Greek with the
great classical scholar Jane Harrison.
Gilbert sees such vocalizing as an asser-
tion of the vernacular, the “mother
tongue” that underlies and challenges
the elite, specialized language of the
fathers. But both consider questions of
class under the larger rubric of social
marginality, reading the utterances of
these characters — who are also, and
significantly, female — in the context
of women writers’ preoccupation with
patriarchal language.
Zwerdling presumes that inchoate
syllables are signs of a failure on Woolf's

By Rochelle Gatlin

By Elaine Neil Orr

Conversations
Edited by Joan Givner

$19.95 cloth, $9.95 paper.

Edited by Rosemary M. Magee

3825 Ridgewood Road
Jackson, MS 39211

American Women since 1945

The first comprehensive study to focus on the whole spectrum
of American feminism, including both mainstream and divergent
forces within the women’s movement during this crucial and
pivotal era. $27.50 cloth, $14.95 paper.

Tillie Olsen and a
Feminist Spiritual Vision
An intense examination that interprets the subjects that inspire

and disclose Olsen's deep spiritual vision in such work as Tell Me
a Riddle, Yonnondio, and Silences. $25.00

Katherine Anne Porter:

With charm, gaiety, and grande-dame feminine allure Porter, a
brilliant raconteur, discusses the art of her life and of her fiction.

Conversations with
Flannery O’Connor
Two dozen interviews that offer O'Connor's “concise elucidation

of subtle philosophical stands, startlingly leavened with a wicked
wit" — Library Journal. $19.95 cloth, $9.95 paper.

The University Press of Mississippi

these syllables as intentional and thus
potentially meaningful. The difference
between these two ways of looking at
one of Woolf’s more disorienting narra-
tive strategies indicates why feminist ap-
proaches have proved so important in
understanding Woolf, and may indicate
as well why Woolf is so important in un-
derstanding feminist approaches.
Zwerdling is certainly right in caution-
ing that treatment of Woolf’s works “as
tools or threats by readers with their
own political agendas tends to distort
Woolf’s vision,” but to read his study
with Jane Marcus’s is to raise the equally
troubling possibility that large areas of
Woolf’s own politics might remain in-
visible to anyone unclear about what a
feminist agenda might be. Certainly the
contrast reveals Marcus to be passion-
ately in love with her subject, but then
Lily Briscoe’s example suggests that in
Woolf’s own mind, passionate love may

be the necessary condition for vision.
Virginia Woolf and the Languages of Pat-
riarchy is a loosely connected sequence
of individual critical essays, covering a
period of about a decade and charting
the progress of one of the foremost prac-
titioners of “lupine criticism” (Marcus
joyously appropriates the hostile epithet
and turns it to her own punning uses).
Although she initially regarded herself
as a Marxist critic, Marcus moved away
from what she saw as a tendency among
Marxists to accept “without question the
privilege of the printed text” and elected
instead “to grub around in libraries read-
ing drafts of novels, letters, and diaries,
proceedings of political meetings, and
newspapers.” The exuberant essays, full
of word play and startling insights, are
also full of the results of this grubbing
around, which has allowed Marcus to
bring fascinating historical and bio-
graphical material to bear on novels such
as Night and Day, The Years, The Pargiters,
and Between the Acts and on many of
— continued on page 14

Belles Lettres 4 11