Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

%

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  
%  
Kamili Anderson  
Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
®  
Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
%

Celia McEnaney  
ADVERTISING REPRESENTATIVE  

-

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly subscrip-  
tions $2.00 an issue for classes of 10  
or more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, essays,  
biography, and criticism. Our pur-  
pose is to promote and celebrate  
writing by women and in doing so,  
to inform and entertain. For a more  
detailed editorial statement, send  
SASE for a copy of the Guidelines  
for Reviewers. All views expressed  
in Belles Lettres represent the views  
of the individual authors.  

Submissions  
Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Deanna D’Errico or call 703-524-  
7743. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987  

Letters  

I was disturbed by Patricia Roth Schwartz’s  
evaluation of Recent Lesbian Fiction in the  
March/April 1987 issue, not so much by her  
actual criticisms of the works as by the  
generalizations she sets out, which you, as  
editors, might have questioned. Of course I  
was provoked and insulted by failing to ap-  
pear in her classification of “the gratifying  
exceptions,” thereby being relegated to the  
trash heap of “the forgettable.” As a sort of  
defensive reflex, I immediately drew up my  
own list of lesbian writers of fiction whose  
fiction has informed and enlightened my life,  
often not only because its concerns were close  
to mine, but also because of its literary quality  
and sometimes its literary bravery. Looking  
over your list of consulting editors, I noted  
at least two fine writers of lesbian fiction  
who had appeared on my list, Jewelle Gomez  
and Doris Grumbach. I could name the others  
but I won't. It would only demonstrate the  
limitations of my memory and scope the way  
Schwartz has already exhibited hers. It seems  
more constructive to ask questions about her  
underlying premises.  

Schwartz states, “I continue to be amazed  
at how a movement that has produced some  
of the most transcendent poets in the lan-  
guage can fall flat when it comes to creating  
fictions of people’s lives.” First there is the  
question, did the movement produce the  
poets she refers to (Rich, Lorde, Hacker)? I  
believe they were all practicing poets well  
before this wave of feminism. I doubt the  
movement can produce fiction writers either,  
rather it may nurture those whose values are  
harmonious with its. Not that I agree with  
the assumption that lesbian writers of fiction  
or writers of lesbian fiction have fallen so  
flat. Even among the authors she goes on to  
review, I am not able to determine from her  
criticism which ones are to be relegated to  
“forgettable.”  

While I don’t find it particularly edifying  
to compare poets and fiction writers, if one  
is going to do so, one might at least wonder  
about their differences. For instance, is there  
something about the novel as a form that is  
difficult to achieve if one must also earn a  
living in some other way? Not that poets do  
not also require extensive amounts of time  
and discipline, but usually a poem is a more  
discrete unit.  

Are commercial publishers more reluctant  
to publish novels with lesbians in them when  
the focus is centered around the lesbian com-  
munity or its concerns? And is this an influ-  
ence on Schwartz? She doesn’t specify the  
distinction, but she seems to direct her disap-  
pointment in lesbian writers of fiction to  
those who are published by feminist presses.  
Yet the “transcendent” poets are all published  
by commercial publishers.  

If one agrees with Schwartz, one might  
wonder if the movement does indeed hinder  
its fiction writers. I suspect from time to time  
it has hindered me. Perhaps the influence of  
any collective mode of thinking holds the  
potential to lure the novelist away from the  
complexity of individual character she is  
seeking to capture. On the other hand, the  
movement has nurtured my work in myriad  
ways. But this article, with its grandiose yet  
nonsensical generalizations does not seem to  
serve any writers of lesbian fiction support.  
Even those listed in some category as excep-  
tions have somehow failed to create a body  
of work which Schwartz would choose to  
move off from in her criticism. She prefers  
instead to stand back and classify — good  
egg, bad egg.  

I'm sympathetic with her desire for high  
quality, compelling lesbian fiction. I doubt  
that lesbian and feminist presses are turning  
it away. You, as editors, and Patricia Roth  
Schwartz are in as good a position as anyone  
to foster the continued growth of it by giving  
more serious and considered criticism to  
works of lesbian fiction appearing in Belles  
Lettres in the future.  

Maureen Brady  
W. Hurley, NY  

Surprises in the  
Mailbox  

If you have received a copy of Belles  
Lettres and you are not a subscriber,  
chances are that you have received  

a complimentary issue — we regularly  
mail complimentary issues to people  
who we think are interested in the  
writing of women. Enjoy your free  
issue. We hope you will subscribe.  

CONTENTS #@  

VOLUME 3/NUMBER 1  

JEWISH WOMEN WRITERS  

2 An Interrupted Life: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-1943  
and Letter From Westerbork ................. by Etty Hillesum  
Enchantment ............0.0. 000000 e eae by Daphne Merkin  
Breaking Bread «2.2... 2. eee eee by Joyce Reiser Kornblatt  
3 In the City .... 2. eee ees by Joan Silber  
The Memoirs of Gluckel of Hamelin  
I am a Woman — and a Jew .................. by Leah Morton  
4 Encounters: A Memoir .......0.......... by Dorothy Norman  
The Testing of Hanna Senesh ............... by Ruth Whitman  
The Messiah of Stockholm .................. by Cynthia Ozick  
Mbe Ri6Od pace eed ea RE Rd ew em ie by Carol Ascher  
6 A Scrap of Time ........ 0.00.0. 0 cee eee eee [an excerpt]  
The Little Virtues ............0.0.0.000, by Natalia Ginzburg  
REVIEWS  
? The Shrapnel Academy and The Fat Woman’s Joke by Fay Weldon  
10 Rhapsody and Winter Sonata .............. by Dorothy Edwards  
Year Before Last and My Next Bride .............. by Kay Boyle  
A Game of Hide and Seek and  
The Wedding Group ..................05. by Elizabeth Taylor  
The Little Company and Lantana Lane ........... by Eleanor Dark  
11 The Mother’s Recompense ...............4.. by Edith Wharton  
liberazione della donna:  
feminism in Italy ................. by Lucia Chiavola Birnbaum  
12 Homage To The Light .................. by Cynthia LeClaire  
Memories of the Future: The Daybooks of  
Tina Modotti 2. ......... 0.020.000. eee by Margaret Gibson  
Civil Blood 2... 2 ee by Jill Breckenridge  
Flight Patterns 2.01... ee by Lisa Ress  
Love, Death, and the Changing of the Seasons by Marilyn Hacker  
Fragments From the Fire: The Triangle Shirtwaist  
Company Fire of March 25, 1911 ............ by Chris Llewellyn  
The Riverhouse Stories: How Pubah S. Queen and  
Lazy LaRue Save the World ................ by Andrea Carlisle  
COLUMNS  
5 Belles Lettres Interview: Irena Klepfisz and Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz  
13. Impressions: Weaving Women’s Colors, More on Jewish Women  
by Janet Mullaney  
FEATURES  
7 Fay Weldon Speaks with Regina Barreca  
8 Firsts in Fiction: Reviews of Taking Leave, by Janet Shaw; Concertina,  
by M. J. Fitzgerald; Sense and Sensuality, by Rosalind Brackenbury;  
Mama, by Terry McMillan; Due East, by Valerie Sayers; Ellen Foster,  
by Kaye Gibbons; Fading, My Parmacheene Belle, by Joanna Scott  

On the Cover: Etty Hillesum. Photo reprinted from An Interrupted Life: The Diaries of  
Etty Hillesum (Pantheon, 1983).  

ee I WAS A DOCTOR IN AUSCHWITZ ¢ DR. GISELLA PERL  
"When I see the word 'Six Million Dead’ or 'Six Million Jewish Victims’ printed in a  
newspaper, my hands harden into fists and my heart beats stronger with revolt.  
Those six million dead are so many terrible, heartbreaking stories; they are  
Bettys and Roses and Annes, they are Julikas and Charlottes...” Dr. Perl, a  
Jewish gynecologist, gives us her memories of these women who experienced  
with her the horrors of Auschwitz, Dr. Mengele, Belsen Bergen. $15.00  

°° 920 O'FARRELL STREET * HARRIET LANE LEVY  

The warm and witty story of a German immigrant family's life in a multi-ethnic  
community in San Francisco; Alice Toklas is one of many neighbors who appears  
in this delightful account which ends with the 1906 earthquake. $23.50  

ee MY PORTION (An Autobiography) e REBEKAH KOHUT  

A rabbi's daughter, the wife of the great scholar Alexander Kohut, mother to his  
8 children, she was a founder of the National Council for Jewish Women. $25.50  
ee WHITE FIRE ¢ BERTHA BADT-STRAUSS  

This account of The Life and Works of Jessie Sampter tells of her Zionist ideals  
and her emigration to Palestine. Though afflicted with polio, she established edu-  
cational and social groups, wrote poetry and articles about kibbutz life. $20.00  

eee  
eee eee A eo  

for credit card orders. Our 28-page catalog, Judaica,  
phone 603-898-1200. will be sent free at your request.  

Ayer Company Publishers Box 958 Salem, NH 03079  

Belles Lettres @ 1