Orchids Among Weeds

Palm Latitudes, by Kate Braverman. New York: The Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, 1988, 

$18.95, 384 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

There is something alluring, seduc-
tive even, about las latitudes de las

palmas, the populous region
stretching from the Caribbean to
Central and South America, from

Havana to Miami to Los Angeles, the
lands where palm trees grow tall and
flowers thrive. There modernity touches
the remains of the ancients. This
polarity mars daily life for the region’s
inhabitants, as the struggle for perpetua-
tion of a historic connection surfaces in
family after family, barrio after barrio,
city after city.

That struggle takes center stage in
Palm Latitudes, Kate Braverman’s second
novel. It is the story of three women,
Mexicans by birth, struggling to survive
in Los Angeles and navigate the chan-
nels of family, work, friendship, politics,
and ethics. Theirs is not a linear course.

There are disappointments and triumphs, 
choices to be made and decisions
rendered. In language that approaches
poetry, Braverman (who is not a Latina)
has written a superb novel that is both
fatalistic and hopeful, disquieting and
comforting.

Francisca Ramos is a prostitute known
as La Puta de la Luna (the whore of the
moon). Even as a child, Ramos was dif-
ferent from the females of her village. A
curandera (local healer) said she
belonged to the air. "Such women bear
an allegiance only to the currents, the
tides and channels clouds carve in the
air," said the curandera. "You are an or-
chid among weeds." After having left
her pueblo and the years spent on her
hands and knees scrubbing floors, feed-
ing babies, and preparing meals, Francis-
ca believes only two things: "los hombres
son perros" (men are dogs) and the only
way to right the wrongs of sexual ine-
quality is to capitalize on lust. A beauti-
ful woman with few inhibitions and a
taste for the opulent, Francisca uses sex
for power and control. But her liaisons
also separate her from those she loves.
Almost daily she shops for greeting cards
to send to her family. Over time she has
accumulated dozens of boxes, cards
adorned with glittery flowers and the
words of anonymous poets. To send
them without a handwritten message
would be wrong, she concludes. How
can she write about her life so it is not a
lie? How can she express concern for
them while revealing nothing of herself?

Gloria Hernandez came to Los An-
geles as the teenaged bride of Miguel.
"My world was Flores Street," she says
from the jail cell she now inhabits, "my
white cottage with its glistening orange-
tiled roof, miniature square courtyard,
sloping front lawn and terraced back
yard with avocado, orange and lemon

Kate Braverman. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

trees. My personal realm was one short,
slightly arched block." After the birth of
two sons, Gloria became more and more
withdrawn from the world around her, a
world where English was spoken be-
wilderingly fast, where Miguel and the
boys talked incessantly of American
sports and politics. "They pronounced
these words as if they were an invoca-
tion, a spell containing magic," she says

later. To the outside world she was a
shell, empty and largely invisible. Not
surprisingly, Gloria’s fury eventually ate
away at her. In the end, she goes mad,
killing a neighbor woman who per-
sonifies all Gloria hates about the
United States. Her silence is finally
broken. Once again, Gloria is alive, feel-
ing, wanting.

Although Francisca and Gloria never
meet, they have much in common.
Neither betray emotion and both deal
with the male-dominated world by rely-
ing on themselves. In actuality they
have allowed themselves no other
choice; both are caught in a confusing
web of urban alienation, without friends
or family to turn to for support.

Marta Ortega is just the opposite. The
matriarch of Flores Street, Marta has a
huge family, all of whom periodically
land on her doorstep to ask “Que hago,
yo, mamacita?" (What should I do?) A
bruja (witch) who invented feminism,
according to her daughter, Marta is
shocked at Gloria’s final taking of con-
trol. Might she have transformed Gloria
if she had reached out? Might she have
helped the Mexicana to fit into the
California community?

Although Marta cannot answer these
nagging questions, her strength is intro-
spection and interpersonal communica-
tion. Her life is one of connectedness,
between the intellectual and the spirit,
the older and the younger, the male and
the female. Her days have no time for
exploitation or psychological sparring.
But Marta is no saint. She often rails
against the intrusions of her family,
people who feel they can walk in at any
time and find solace. Nor is she selfless.
Her love of beauty is manifest in her gar-
den, where lavish plants are grown for
sale to the rich. It is here, in the dirt,
that she gets her sustenance. Here she
discovers that she is part of the cycle of
all things.

In the end, says Marta, “Nothing is
permanent. Not the chinampas of
Xochimilco, not Tenochtitlan or the
pyramids, the magic, science or flowers 

. not the gardens or rivers, not the
rituals or music." Instead, our lives bear
out the cycles of the universe. We
choose to connect or remain isolated.
We choose to be silent, or communi-
cate. We respond or are responded to en

las latitudes de las palmas and beyond.

New Islands and
Other Stories

by María Luisa Bombal

Translated by Richard and Lucia
Cunningham. Ithaca: Cornell University

Press, 1988, $6.95, 112 pp. (PB)

This new paperback edition of New Is-
lands and Other Stories gives me a chance
to redress old criticism of the author.
María Luisa Bombal, Chilean-born, Sor-
bonne-educated, and a U.S. resident for
some thirty years, was not prolific; but
her stories from the 1930s and 1940s,
five of which were translated for New Is-
lands, presage the otherworldliness of
popular Latin American fiction. Critic
Bruce Allen points out, "The settings
and atmospheres repeat a few essential
elements: isolated country houses,
strange creatures prowling outside, mys-
terious sounds carried on the night air."
What is rarely appreciated is Bombal’s
distinct psychological premise: women
respond to life, especially the emotional
separation from their husbands and fear
of death, with rife imaginings and emo-
tional absorption in nature. And this
constitutes an actual way of perceiving,
a genuine response to mundane, emo-
tionally bereft social experiences.
Brígida, in "The Tree," puzzles over her
aging husband’s lack of affection and
finds solace in the verdant rubber tree
teeming with birds outside her dressing

room window. The woman in "The Final
Mist" experiences a communion of
desire with nature she does not with her
husband: "I feel as if I had fire in my
veins. I go into the garden, flee through
the mist to a spot near the pond where a
sun ray pierces my path like a lance
stuck in the earth, lending to the place
the golden lightness of a grotto dank
with the forest’s deep aroma." Over the
course of the story she rekindles her
memory of one night of love with a
mysterious lover.

The urgent, dreamy reflections of
Bombal’s women characters create the
otherworldliness of her stories. Fantasti-
cal elements are more the exception,
such as Yolanda’s vestigial wing on her
tight shoulder, which she is mortally
afraid that a passionate suitor will dis-
cover in "New Islands," the title story.

A charge sometimes brought against
Bombal’s stories is sentimentality — her
characters convey such a luxuriance of
emotion. However, her characters’ emo-
tional musings are constantly offset by
bits of callous conversation and prosaic
events intruding into their fantasy lives.
Allen judged Bombal’s characters "lone-
ly women who resist the quotidian,
reject the pleas for intimacy of their
families and lovers, and lose themselves
in overpowering dreams and fantasies."
But Bombal has crafted story contexts in
which these women’s preoccupation
with their inner lives is understandable
as well as evocative.

—Jeanne Casey

Belles Lettres @ 5