Letter from  
the Midwest  

Dear Friends,  

For the last two and a half days, I have  
been reading an advance copy of Dale  
Spender’s new book, The Writing or the  
Sex? or Why You Don’t Have to Read  
Women’s Writing to Know It’s No Good.  
Although the book is fairly short (220  
pp., including index) and the writing is  
utterly lucid, I haven’t been able to fin-  
ish it in my usual one sitting for a book  
that is so absolutely demanding of my  
love and attention. I become so agitated  
reading it that I have to put it down and  
pace, go outside to walk miles, make  
phone calls, wring my hands, and then  
go meditate to lower my soaring blood  
pressure.  

Dale’s voice comes through in this  
book more clearly than in any of her pre-  
vious works — although perhaps that is  
only my perception because now I have  
heard her speak so many times that her  
voice is imprinted in my ear’s memory.  
But even if that is the explanation, it is  
rare for a writer’s voice to be so en-  
dearingly close to her spoken voice. All  
her humor, her whimsicality, her rage  
and her outrage, her wit, her insight,  
her fierceness, her love of alliteration,  
her reasonableness, her revolutionary  
zeal — it’s all here in this completely  
outrageous book.  

The Writing or the Sex is my nomina-  
tion for all kinds of awards, including  
the Nobel and the Pulitzer. It should be  
required reading for every woman, de-  
tailing as it does how the domains of  
education, literacy, and letters are  
rigged against us.  

There is nothing complicated about  
the varieties of evidence Dale presents  
— from grade school teachers’ testimo-  
nies about how they favor boys over girls  
(and why) to those of editors of prestig-  
ious book review periodicals about their  
own prejudices and the misperceptions  
they try to pass off as truth in the face of  
data that contradict what they say. And  
the statistics — nothing mystical about  
them! They result from the simplest  
kinds of counting and measuring. How  
many column inches of review space is  
given to the books written by women?  
By men?  

Dale views the field of letters as a pro-  
fession with a product that has to be  
marketed and advertised. The profes-  
sionals (who are mostly men) are chan-  
neled into roles — as are the para-  
professionals and support staff persons  
(who are mostly women). How does  
such a thing happen, starting as early as  
first grade? The book makes me so angry  
and restless that I can’t discipline myself  
to review it: I become incoherent when I  
think about it and try to resay or sum-  
marize its contents.  

Much of what Dale is doing is synthe-  
sizing important research and thinking  
about women as users of a language  
about which we have little voice (and  
which we are supposed to use — if we  
must use it at all — in little voices); as  
victims of education in the patriarchy,  
which wishes for us to do the dishes  
rather than write; as subjects and cre-  
ators of knowledge about human life  
when we are not considered part of the  
category of “human” in the patriarchy;  
as competitors in the literary market-  
place in which we are completely disad-  
vantaged by every strategy we have yet  
imagined and then some.  

Of course, Dale does more than re-  
state and summarize the work of people  
in literary criticism, publishing, lin-  
guistics, and education — she juxta-  
poses ideas from all of these fields to cre-  
ate valuable new conclusions. She asks  
questions that haven’t been asked before  
because there has never been the syn-  
thesis of this material that might give  
rise to these questions. Her research is  

24 Belles Lettres  

imaginative and wide-ranging. She is  
truly a generalist, a synergist, a theorist.  

Her last chapter, “Polish, Plagiarism,  
and Just Plain Theft,” is a detailed study  
of the ways in which Lawrence, Tolstoy,  
Fitzgerald, and a few other Great Liter-  
ary Men stole their material from the  
lives and work of the women in their  
lives. In some cases, the men stole the  
writing of women, incorporated it into  
their own writing, and published it un-  
der their own names. In others, they  
requisitioned the stories of these  
women’s lives, making it the subject  
matter of their own writing but twisting  
it so that men were the heroes or the  
noble victims and women either subsidi-  
ary observers of the crises in their own  
lives; villainous, insensitive exploiters  

Dale Spender holding up a copy of The  
Writing or the Sex? at the 1989 annual  
meeting of the National Women’s Studies  
Association, in Towson, Maryland. She  
chaired a multidisciplinary panel there on  
women and the “information explosion,”  
which will also be a groundbreaking new book  
from Pergamon Press.  

of noble men; or silly, frivolous feeders  
off of the more worthy souls of the men.  
The best the men could do with the  
women whose lives they were stealing  
was to turn them into muse-objects —  
inspirations to/for/of men rather than  
creators of their own work.  

The feminists who created the awards  
for feminist work in popular and Amer-  
ican culture used Dale’s restatement of  
Matilda Joslyn Gage’s definition of fem-  
inism as the definition of “feminist” in  
the statement establishing the Popular  
and American Culture Association’s  
Women’s Caucus awards. The defini-  
tion talks about the history of women in  
the patriarchy being the history of men  
in their institutions, in groups, and as  
individuals having unlimited and nonre-  
ciprocal access to all of women’s re-  
sources. In a sense, this book is just a  
documentation of that idea in the field  
of literature. It makes me so furious. .  
and so sad.  

Reading, talking about, sharing, and  
wanting to write books has been at the  
center of my life as long as I can remem-  
ber. Dale documents more clearly and  
more painfully than I have ever known  
just how dangerous this trespass of mine  
has been — to me and to the patriarchy.  
I have a writer’s block so old that I have  
ceased to say that I am a writer and have  
instead redefined myself. This book  
makes me want to take a huge knife and  
open up my body from my throat to my  
vulva and reach in and find that damn  
writer’s block. I know it’s there! It must  
be palpable, findable, extractable. I am  
bloated with it. . . and with silence.  

—Susan Koppelman  
Editor’s Note: Dale Spender’s The Writing  

or the Sex? will be published by Pergamon  
Press in their Athene series this February.  

CONTENTS  

VOLUME 5/NUMBER 1  

WOMEN OF THE ARTS  
25 Unexpected Journeys: The Art and Life of Remedios Varo by Janet A. Kaplan  
Frankenthaler: Works on Paper, 1949-1984 ............ by Karen Wilkin  
26 Making Their Mark: Women Artists Move into the Mainstream  
edited by Randy Rosen and Catherine C. Brawer  
Architecture: A Place for Women  
edited by Ellen Perry Berkeley and Matilda McQuaid  
27 The Art of the Woman: The Life and Work of Elisabet Ney  
by Emily Fourmy Cutrer  
Utrillo’s Mother by Sarah Baylis  
Julia Morgan: Architect ................. by Sara Holmes Boutelle  
28 Lee Miller: Photographer............ by Jane Livingston  
The Lives of Lee Miller ............. by Antony Penrose  
Women, Art, and Power and Other Essays ............. by Linda Nochlin  
REVIEWS  
29 Jasmine..... by Bharati Mukherjee  
Light After Darkness ........ by Betty Purcell  
30 Joan Makes History ............. by Kate Grenville  
Offshore and The Beginning of Spring............. by Penelope Fitzgerald  
32 Midnight Sweets and Confessions of a Bad Girl .......... by Betty Pesetsky  
Preparing for Sabbath. ...... by Nessa Rapoport  
Hlonvelanndh: by Barbara Kingsolver  
34 The Evening Wolves .............. by Joan Chase  
The Fourth Dimension: Interviews with Christa Wolf  
and Accident: A Day’s News ........ by Christa Wolf  
35 Lust and Other Stories..................... by Susan Minot  
Sweet Desserts by Lucy Ellmann  
The House I’m Running From ................ by Michelle Tokarczyk  
Moon Passage ....... by Jane LeCompte  
37 The Temple of My Familiar................ by Alice Walker  
38 Shadow Bands: by Jeanne Schinto  
Everything You’ve Heard Is True.................. by Frances Sherwood  
COLUMNS  
31 Belles Lettres Interview: Marge Piercy  
33 The Criminal Element by Jane Bakerman  
36 Retrospective: Ann Petry  
39 Impressions: Briefly Noted, Art & Photography, Of Tea & Grendel’s Mother,  

Out & About  

THE  
AMERICAN  
VOICE  

publishes  
daring new writers  
& the more radical work of  
established writers  

feminist, pan-American  

‘A most impressive  
& ambitious new quarterly’  
Small Press  

available at bookstores  
or by subscription ($12) to  

The American Voice  
332 West Broadway  
Louisville, KY 40202 USA  

Fall 1989