Feminist Publishing  
Par Excellence  

664 went up in flames,” recounts Anita  
Miller of Academy Chicago, Pub-  
lishers, “when I read Sexual Politics.  

I realized that I’d hated many of the  

books I’d read and thought of myself as  

a prude. Women were being humiliated  

in those books.” Miller and her hus-  

band, Jordan, both “feminists before  
we were publishers,” are the guiding  
lights of Academy Chicago, a small  
publisher with a stellar list of women’s  
titles. How it got that way was no  
accident but began with a fortunate  
twist of fate.  

Miller returned to school for her  
doctorate in the 1970s and chose to  
research Arnold Bennett for her dis-  
sertation. Bennett wrote many reviews  
as well as novels and had reviewed  
quite a number of novels by women,  
most of them unknown to Miller. She  
tracked the books down and found  
them undeserving of obscurity, to say  
the least. Here was a ready-made list  
of reissues for her and Jordan’s new  
publishing venture.  

Ideas for reprints came in various  
other ways, too. After watching and  
enjoying the PBS series on George  
Sand, Miller tried to get copies of  
Sand’s works in bookstores. She found  
to her surprise that none were avail-  
able. Academy Chicago now has a  
series of works by the prolific and in-  
fluential Sand, including novels,  
letters, memoirs, and journals. A tip  
from a colleague that many feminists  
were interested in Amelia Earhart led  

Firebrand  
Books  

Her Own Brand of Fire  

Think of an editor who, while at  
Crossing Press, was responsible  

for bringing Judy Grahn’s The  
Work of a Common Woman and The  
Queen of Wands into print, as well as  
Abeng by Michelle Cliff and Sister Out-  
sider by Audre Lorde. You will then  
have no trouble believing why Nancy  
K. Bereano, editor and publisher of  
Firebrand Books, “had manuscripts en-  
trusted to me even before the press had  
a name. Authors have faith in me in  
preference to more established presses.  
One of the manuscripts in question was  
Mohawk Trail, prose pieces by Turtle  
Clan member Beth Brant. This spring  
release joins the few but highly re-  
markable works of literature by Native  
American women published in the last  
few seasons. Bereano points to the  
special edition of Sinister Wisdom that  
Brant recently edited, entitled A  
Gathering of Spirit, as an example of the  
“previously untapped voices of Native  
American women that are now emerg-  
ing. The quality of those pieces is  
astounding—and there are few well-  
known names.”  

Bereano is deeply committed to  

the reprinting of her very enjoyable  
autobiography, The Fun of It.  

Miller thinks that there have been a  
great number of “really good books by  
professional writers shunted aside and  
ghettoized as ‘women’s books’.” She is  
the editor of the partnership. Jordan  
Miller won me over completely at the  
most recent MLA conference with his  
enthusiastic espousal of The Home-  
maker by Dorothy Canfield as a novel  
about women’s lives that was far ahead  
of its time and Lolly Willowes by Sylvia  
Townsend Warner (a novel that should  
never be allowed to go out of print).  

He also showed me his edition of Down  
Among the Women by Fay Weldon, and  
we shared our predilection for that  
wickedly funny writer. Other Academy  
books of particular interest to feminist  
readers and scholars are The Love of  
Worker Bees by Russian author Alexan-  
dra Kollontai and three novels by Olive  
Schreiner, including the classic Story  

of an African Farm.  

Most of Academy Chicago’s titles  
come in a pleasing 5 X 8 inch size and  
are uniformly well designed. A case in  
point is the delightful “Provincial  
Lady” diary series. With three out and  
one to follow soon, I want to echo  
Peggy Lee and ask “Is that all there is?”  
Each paperback volume is covered with  

nurturing and publishing the work of  
minority and working-class writers.  
One reason is because in a white,  
middle-class society, they often “ex-  
plore issues about personal integrity in  
order to survive.” Many writers she  
comes into contact with “haven't had  
the chance to have their work sup-  
ported—by academic workshops or  
writing conferences. They need some  
kind of feedback. There are few  
geniuses around with drawers full of  
fantastic stuff. Writers need an audi-  
ence, a publisher. They need time to  
evolve.”  

Like her writers, Bereano values  
integrity. “One common denominator  
for me is that the authors I work with  
push past the boundaries of who they  
are ‘supposed’ to be, even within the  
lesbian or feminist communities. They  
just don’t fit in, and they refuse to give  
up any of the parts that make them  
less acceptable. This, in addition to  
their excellence as writers, makes them  
extremely interesting to read.”  

Her vision for Firebrand is to publish  
novels, short stories, poetry, essays, bi-  
ographies, memoirs, and what she calls  
“accessible theory—meaning you don’t  
have to be an academic to like it.”  
Asked how she came up with the name  
Firebrand, she responded “I wanted a  
name that sounded like me. Because  
I’ve been involved in activist political  
work for the last twenty years, people  
often think of me as a ‘troublemaker’  
or ‘instigator.’ It’s a word whose ‘nega-  
tive’ connotations date back to the  
time of the witch burnings in Western  
Europe, which as a feminist, makes me  

Impressions @  

a stunning art nouveau jacket in color,  
with the design reiterated in black and  
white on the actual book cover. The  
contents of this series are worthy of the  
wrapping. I picture the provincial lady  
being played by Greer Garson or Rosa-  
lind Russell—someone who could show  
the skeptical, ironic wit that is her  
salvation threatening to overcome her  
basic kindness and tolerance, qualities  
she perpetually brings forth as she is  
beset with life’s myriad calamities. Per-  
sons precipitating said state of affairs  
are often her husband Robert (a real  
pill), her not-so-model children, the  
highly strung French governess, and  
the provincial lady’s nemesis: obnox-  
ious, rich Lady B.  

It is understandable that contempo-  
rary reactions to the Millers’ reprints  
often differ from the books’ original  
receptions. Jordan Miller recently re-  
ceived a letter from Dorothy Middle-  
ton, the elderly author of Victorian  
Lady Travellers, in which she made the  
following rueful observation:  

You certainly chose the right moment  
to interest yourself in my VLT. I am  
constantly visited by earnest young  
women probing the psychological depths  
of these poor ladies—who would be  
horrified if they knew. Their sexual re-  
pressions? Were they in love with their  
fathers? And so on and so on. These  
dear girls all know much more than I do  
as they have dug into obscure archives  
and never let go.  

I have touched only on some high-  
lights of the Millers’ list. New women’s  
titles coming up are two science fiction  
bests—Marion Zimmer Bradley and  
Margaret St. Clair—and a mystery by  

that much more attached to it.”  

Another book on Firebrand’s spring  
list harks back to that very period:  
Moll Cutpurse, by Ellen Galford, re-  
counts the exploits of a lesbian swash-  
buckler and her lover, an apothecary.  
Bereano discovered the book at the  
London Feminist Book Fair and de-  
cided to share it with a North Ameri-  
can audience. Pat Parker’s fifth book of  
poetry, Jonestown and Other Madness,  
will also bear the Firebrand imprint  
this spring.  

Coming up in the fall are The Land  
of Look Behind, (including some  
“calypso storytelling song poems”) by  
Michelle Cliff; My Mama’s Dead Squir-  
rel: Lesbian Essays on Southern Culture  
by Mab Segrest (introduction by  
Adrienne Rich); and The Sun Is Not  
Merciful, short stories by Anna Lee  
Walters, a member of the Pawnee-Otoe  
tribe.  

Bereano is the rare editor who wades  
through unsolicited manuscripts, “to  
get in touch with what people are  
writing about, and to get an idea of the  
general quality.” She also peruses many  
feminist periodicals. In her philosophy,  
it’s all cyclical: “I have been an avid  
reader since I was a kid, and books  
have changed my life repeatedly. The  
word on the printed page always helps  
me make sense of things that are float-  
ing around in my head and connects  
me to a bigger world than just my own.  
Publishing books is one way to pay  
back some of the good things I’ve  
gotten from them, to make similar  
connections possible for other  
women.”  

Celia Fremlin, whom Ruth Rendell  
picked as her neglected writer in  
Writer’s Choice: A Library of Redis-  
coveries (Reston Publishing, 1983). With  
the prodigious output of Virago Mod-  
ern Classics added to the pioneering  
reissues of Academy Chicago, we  
should have plenty of women authors  
to rediscover for a long time to come.  

“Victorious” Writer  
Requites Reviewers  

Reviewers lavished praise on Ellen  
Gilchrist’s short story collection,  

Victory Over Japan, which won  
the American Book Award. None of  
them pointed out in print, however,  
the playful revenge Gilchrist took on  
them for being less than appreciative  
of her previous novel, The Annuncia-  
tion. The story “Crazy, Crazy, Now  
Showing Everywhere” turns on New  
Orleans socialite Lady Margaret Sar-  
pie’s mortification on meeting Anna  
Hand, author of The Assumption. Lady  
Margaret had been asked to review the  
novel for the newspaper and had  
panned it. Here is the unintentionally  
comical review, with its buried subtext,  
alluding to The Annunciation, pointed  
out in brackets:  

Ms. Hand’s new book abounds in  
cliches, crude language, and uses real  
names in a way that can only be called  
name-dropping. Her sketchy charac-  
terizations leave the reader wondering  
if a woman like Lelia Clark can be  
called a heroine. Lelia thinks only of  
herself as we see her living a debauched  
life in New Orleans, then running away  
to join a bunch of hippies in Montana.  
[a group of poets and philosophers in  
Arkansas] There, Ms. Hand would  
have us believe, she finds love and a  
sense of social consciousness by work-  
ing with delinquent boys. [Amanda’s  
youthful lover] The cover, a copy of a  
painting by El Greco, is a tasteless use  
of a religious painter’s work to decorate  
what can only be called a book by an  
atheist. [The painting on Annunciation  
is by Leonardo da Vinci] Last year Ms.  
Hand shocked the city by publishing a  
book of stories based on real-life  
tragedies in the Crescent City. [Gil-  
christ’s first collection, In the Land of  
Dreamy Dreams] Many people went out  
and bought the book anyway. Well,  
this time New Orleans is not going to  
pay to be attacked. Especially by a  
heroine who is supposed to be good at  
languages (she is teaching French to the  
delinquents) [Amanda’s new-found  
metier] but can only express herself in  
the sort of expressions better left in late  
night bars. The back cover of the book  
is a photograph of Ms. Hand wearing  
a big grin and a plantation hat with  
long streamers. The picture is doubly  
shocking considering the things inside.  
[See jacket photo of author on the last  
two Gilchrist titles]  

Gilchrist continues to have fun with  
Lady Margaret by having her turn from  
this “atheistic” work to a ghastly ante-  
bellum romance she has been writing  
for many years. The moral: Writing  
Well is the Best Revenge. (Thanks to  
another Amanda, Amanda Bozarth,  
for pointing out the parody.)  

Belles Lettres © 9