Gunga Duhl, the Pen Performer

by Mary Lynn Broe

Djuna Barnes Interviews, edited by  
Alyce Barry. Foreword and Commentary  
by Douglas Messerli. Sun & Moon Press  
(P.O. Box 481170, Los Angeles, CA  
90048), 1985, $16.95 (HB), $10.95  
(PB), 396 pp.

“You reporter girls; you're all so  
much more than cunning.”

— Jess Willard

On September 6, 1914, in  
support of imprisoned I.W.W.  
agitator Becky Edelson and  

hundreds of militant British suffragists,  
Djuna Barnes, bound like a corpse,  
her nostrils sprayed with a mixture of  
disinfectant and cocaine, had pea  
soup poured through a tube in her  
nose and down her throat. She either  
had to swallow or choke.

Literary history has called this a  
stunt, like Barnes’s rescue from a tall  
building by a fireman, or her visit to  
the Bronx zoo. Gorilla Dinah, orange  
peel on head and arms around Djuna,  
was quizzed about the high cost of  
Manhattan taxis and other topics that  
undercut the formulaic interview in an  
age of sensationalistic journalism. But  
the Barnes who was force-fed, who  
“burned with revolt at this brutal  
usurpation of her own functions,”  
wrote a blistering critique of personal  
violation, political injustice, and the  
nearly unbearable physical pain: “I  
saw in my hysteria a vision of a  
hundred women in grim hospitals,  
bound and shrouded in the rough grip  
of callous warders.” Barnes saw clearly  
the function of power.

Interviews overlooks this larger  
continuum of Barnes’s early newspaper  
writing for a partial view of her early  
talents, represented by her fascination  
with theater and film people. With a  
dull sanctity, literary critics have  
canonized Barnes for one work,  
Nightwood (1936), ignoring over 70  
years’ writings, much unpublished, but  
now available at the Barnes Archive  
at the McKeldin Library. Although  
Barnes has been handmaiden to  
shifting trends in the literary-critical  
Establishment, she has been ignored  
for her personal and cultural  
significance. In the years covered by  
this volume (1914-1931) Barnes also  
published an almanac, a volume of  
poems, short stories, and a number of  
one-act plays, three staged by the  
Provincetown players (1919-1920.)

Imagine the 21-year-old in braids  
and wooden clogs, fortified by  
grandmother Zadel’s sand cookies  
(good for digestion), straight from the  
Long Island farm, walking into the  
offices of the Brooklyn Daily Eagle  
where she was hired as an illustrator  
and freelancer. By the time she  
departed for Europe at 28, Barnes had  
proven herself to the tune of $15 an  
article (she wrote several a day) and,  
in 1917, $5,000 a year. Major New  
York newspapers and magazines carried  
her work: She was much in demand.

The Barnes who was a political,  
social, and cultural critic in these  
formative years goes stubbornly  
unnoticed in Interviews. Three months  
after she talked to the Piccadilly chorus  
girls (1915), she visited I.W.W.  
headquarters, noting that there were  
two classes of people — “those who  
wear caps and badges and those who  
wear hats and canes.”

A different book representing her  
early writing might borrow its title  
from Orwell: “Down and Out in  
Brooklyn, the Bronx and Bohemia.”  
Barnes sketched marginal street types,  

2 @ Belles Lettres

Two self-portraits by Djuna — off the farm and on the avenue — reproduced by kind permis-  
sion of Special Collections, McKeldin Library, University of Maryland.

Brooklyn local color, and even the  
pseudo-democracy of the Village’s  
Liberal Club. She mocked the  
gentrified pastime of going slumming  
and lamented the loss of communal  
ideals and passions in a Provincetown  
theater that was “always about to be  
given back to the horses.” The young  
journalist focused on the clash  
between reform and privilege in  
Greenwich Village life — between the  
grocer who tells French jokes and  
“wraps the prunes with subtleties” and  
the one who listens to the baker's  
daughter talk of reform. Repeatedly,  
Barnes saw the real and the sham  
mixed, “a wonderful terrible hash on  
the table of life.”

In contrast, the editors of  
Interviews (Barry and Messerli) advise  
us to read Barnes’s tales of public life  
with a shared sense of nostalgia.  
Although Barnes herself, more critical  
than reverential, emphasized the  
invasiveness of the interview format.

We are going to take something  
from Gaby Deslys... . Not her  
patience, for that has been taken  
and regained too often to count; not  
her right to a normal supply of  
clothes . . . nor her reputation, for  
long ago that was taken to make a  
column on.

I am going to take something  
away from Gaby that will be a new  
loss . . . her reputation for reckless  
deviltry.

Debunking the “stagey” nature  
of illusion, Barnes unravels  

both the interview format and  
our expectations, arming readers to  
see the art of her task. She shows us  
elsewhere, in “Hamlet’s Custard Pie,”  
what “makes of the primitive impulse  
the civilized action.” The actress  
Helen Westley phones her friend  
Djuna: “I want to be interviewed  
again.” Then, in the middle of  
Westley’s diatribe on the ironies of  
wisdom in age, Barnes prompts “Some  
advice for young actors would come in  
here very nicely.” Later Barnes prods,  
“A little faster with your youth,  
Helen.” Midinterview they crack up  
laughing. Westley: “Well, let’s stop.”  
Barnes: “We can’t, I have at least  
three more pages to fill.”

In discussing the hypocrisy of in-  
terviewing, Gunga Duhl, or the Pen  
Performer, as Barnes often refers to  
herself, turns the simple scheme of  
who-what-when-where into a highly  

evaluative art: [Pen Performer] “Hav-  
ing discussed morality and immorality,  
is there nothing that stands between  
the two?” [Lou Tellengen] “Yes. The  
public with eyes in both sides of its  
head.” Like the Bufano marionettes  
she did a feature on, Barnes the in-  
terviewer can construct tragedy while  
taking all things casually. The puppets  
enact a story, a plot, a design, “and  
having no desire to murder, they do  
not suffer the pains of remorse. . .  
instead of being at the beginning of a  
lifelong tragedy, they are at the end  
of an amusement.”

Barnes has been ignored for  
her personal and cultural  
significance.

If the interviewees here speak for  
themselves, as the editors promise, it  
is in that pure, rakish bumperstickable  
wit of Barnes herself: “In your mind  
‘Billy’ [Sunday] was a beautiful ballad.  
In reality, he’s not even a tune; he is  
a rest between bars.” Wilson Mizner,  
devotee of the motion picture, de-  
nounces national drama as “two  
corpulent gentlemen lying on twin  
cots; all is sleep.” Even “Plain Mary  
(Mother) Jones” speaks with Barnes’s  
high epigrammatic wit, combining  
street hawker, Sir Thomas Browne,  
and Pascal, with a dash of the de-  
cadents’ flair.

“You can use any of our brighter  
sayings,” Barnes announced to Donald  
Ogden Stewart in 1930. “They won’t  
get the breaks in any other way.”  
Without some literary or economic  
context — say, the careers of the  
Algonquin Round Tablers — Barnes’s  
jibe suggests only an inexplicable  
bitterness. Such bitterness echoes  
throughout the Stewart interview,  
which we are told holds the key to  
her art and aspirations. In brief,  
Barnes’s art parodies Stewart. She  
plays metaphysician or “straight man”  
to his cliché-tossing tributes to luck:  
“What’s the matter,’ he said. ‘In  
need of money?’ We laughed in that  
hollow way common to the little  
nonchalant match girl when she  
realizes that she has left her Dunhill  
at home.”

The celebrated Barnes acerbity also  
provides a preface to her reclusiveness  
and morbidity cited here and in the  
final interview: Djuna by Guido  
Bruno, “Fleurs du Mal à la Mode de  

New York.” That this slight and silly  
interview from much earlier in  
Barnes’s career (1919) is placed at the  
close of Interviews reminds the reader  
that the editors, with Guido Bruno,  
would push “fashionable moribundity”  
as the key to Barnes’s sensibility.  
Bruno’s piece strikes me as a perfect  
example of girl watching by an aging  
graphomaniac — Andrew Field’s term  
for this infamous publisher. According  
to Bruno, Barnes’s morbidity is “not a  
pose. It is as sincere as she is herself.”  
Barnes's response? “You make me  
laugh. This life I write and draw and  
portray is life as it is. . . I mean the  
life of people stripped of their masks.”  
This was Barnes at 26.

At the Barnes archive a few  
months ago, I was delighted to find  
that Djuna had revenge, if not per-  
spective, on this baiting fool. On the  
front of Bruno’s chapbook edition of  
Barnes’s The Book of Repulsive Women  
(1915) she had written “Balls!” Her  
sketch of him in “Life Among the  
Bohemians,” portrays Bruno sitting  
over Vichy and milk, writing his  
entire last edition on a paper napkin!

Again, take the Stewart inter-  
view’s editorial preface: “Barnes was  
never so revealing of her own art and  
aspirations as in this piece.” True  
enough. Barnes sees the social and  
economic differences between Stew-  
art’s system of literary mentoring,  
tagged by Edmund Wilson as “all-star  
literary vaudeville,” and her own  
scrappy efforts. Unlike Benchley,  
Parker, Sherwood, and Stewart,  
Barnes was not trotted around the  
Coffee House Club. She had not  
worked on the Harvard Lampoon,  
could not wear a soldier’s uniform to a  
first interview, and was not dating  
Frank Crowninshield of Vanity Fair. If  
the interview with Stewart breathes  
dark disdain, it is for his genial  
clubbiness and dilettantism, for the  
connections that permitted him both  
high living and productivity.  
Hobnobbing with the New York  
literati and country club set, Stewart  
had a croquet mallet in his hand at a  
Long Island estate about the same  
time Barnes wrote Charles Henri  
Ford: “Getting work is almost impos-  
sible — the only persons who have  
any are those who have been staying  
tight here for years — to go to Europe  
even for six months is to cut your  
wage-earning neck.” With limousines,  
private railroad cars, an MGM con-  
tract, and Rebound, the biggest hit of  
the 1930 Broadway season, Stewart  
was in the iron jaws of high living.  
Barnes, in contrast, borrowed a nickel  
for carfare from her brother and  
lamented that she could not afford  
theater tickets.

Why, if the whole oeuvre were in  
focus, should there be more of Barnes  
in the art and aspirations of the  
Stewart interview than, say, in her  
words at the end of the Frank Harris  
piece? Harris laments America’s fail-  
ure to endow and support people of  
talent. Barnes responds, “I know that  
he was referring to those of us who  
have been born with a little reverence  
for the things that are beautiful, and a  
little love for the things that are terr-  
ible; and I nodded my head.” Who is  
to say that there is not more of  
Barnes in Helen Westley’s comments  
on poverty or Stieglitz’s boast: “By  
their telling me what I am, I have  
learned what they are. . . . There is  
no love, there is no art, and I have  
learned that there are no people.  
There is only emotional learning,  
spectacular ABC’s and customers.”  
There’s even some of the  
Cornwall-on-Hudson cub reporter in  
Irvin Cobb’s country rube routine:  
“It’s not that I cannot get Man-  

September/October 1985