THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN

‘Crime fiction fans develop a kind
of intellectual shield, learning
“how” to ignore folk who persist in
thinking that genre fiction is, by defini-
tion, lesser fiction. With Bruce Cook,
as quoted in The Writer, they know that
“the crime novel at its best, and perhaps
merely at its better, is a form of fiction
like any other, and not some lesser order
of escapist literature fit only to pass
empty hours with.”

They further know that much “escap-
ist literature” is worthwhile because it
offers welcome respite from the ordinary
—or even the extraordinary—pressures
of everyday life. Above all, mystery
fans, like all devoted readers, recognize
good writing, genre fiction or main-
stream, because they know the differ-
ence between writers who divert their
audience and those who merely exploit
their formula—and their followers.
Straightforward puzzle-making, spy sto-
ries, studies of pathological personali-
ties, cheerful (if bloody) entertain-
ments, and stringent social criticism are
but a few of the proper forms and goals
for crime writers, and it has been readers
(far more than critics, theorists, or edi-
tors) who have established the broad
compass of this genre by recognizing
excellence—and fun—in the widely
(sometimes wildly) varied work of the
greats among crime writers in any of a
dozen fictional subcategories.

One of the most famous and most
loved of the great thriller writers is Mary
Stewart, whose welcome new novel,
Thornyhold (New York: Morrow,
1988, $15.95, 207 pp.), is a pleasing
mix of suspense and romance with just a
touch of witchcraft. Gilly Ramsey,
named for her godmother, Geillis, and
deeply impressed by their few visits to-
gether during her childhood, inherits
Geillis’s charming, mysterious, isolated
house. With the house, however, comes
a mixed bag of neighbors; among them
are a touchy woman who is thought to be
a witch; her “simple,” perhaps danger-
ous, adult son; a handsome widower and
his delightful little boy. The house and
its prolific, overgrown garden also im-
pose special responsibilities upon their
new owner. Shall she become the “new
witch,” who will continue to brew the
potions, mix the tinctures, and blend
the salves that Geillis, surely a benevo-
lent sorceress, created? The wishes of her
predecessor, the jealousy of a contem-
porary, and her own affections all influ-
ence Gilly, whose choices are not unex-
pected but are wholly satisfying. Stewart
makes house and countryside as vivid as
her characters in this tale that is the very
model of the modern female adventure
story.

Amanda Cross fans, every bit as de-
voted as Stewart’s, will delight in A
Trap for Fools (New York: Dutton,
1989, $16.95, 144 pp.), which recounts
Professor Kate Fansler’s ninth case.
Cross (who is Carolyn Heilbrun, the
noted feminist critic) has moved steadily
forward among the ranks of crime
writers, and this novel confirms her
place in the front line. The suspicious
death of an unpopular but fairly powerful
colleague at the urban university where
Fansler teaches raises fears at the highest
administrative levels. In an effort to
preserve donations, the school’s reputa-
tion—and their own—administrators
press Fansler to investigate. If she suc-
ceeds, they may avert scandal; if she
fails, let it be on her head. Fansler does
succeed, but she is unable to avert a sec-
ond murder, and she pays a price in a sort
of midlife loss of innocence, demon-
strating that brains and good intentions
are inadequate protection against an
increasingly uncertain world. Saddened
but not daunted, Kate Fansler sets right
what can be set right and moves ahead,
bringing this case to a just but bitter-
sweet conclusion.

Summer 1989

One of the past’s truly great crime
writers was Josephine Tey (pseudonym
of Elizabeth MacKintosh), whose realis-
tic, character-centered puzzles of the
1930s and 1940s are being republished in
paperback (all at $3.95) by Collier.
Unquestionably, Tey will please an
enormous new readership and, for old
acquaintances, her novels are a pleasure
to reread. This quintessentially British
writer understood much about human
nature, and she conveyed her insights
with unpretentious authority—and a
sense of humor that disarms and delights
from first page to last.

A Shilling for Candles, To Love and
Be Wise, The Singing Sands, and The
Daughter of Time all feature Tey’s re-
curring hero, the fascinating Inspector
Alan Grant. A Shilling for Candles re-
counts Grant’s investigation of the mur-
der of film star Christine Clay, and To
Love and Be Wise details his search for
Leslie Searle, an American photogra-
pher, and features actress Marta Hallard
and writer Lavinia Finch, also continu-
ing characters who generate considera-
ble interest. Both novels are absorbing,
traditional police procedurals in the qui-
et, untechnical British style, laced with
a bit of the glamour associated with the
rich and famous. The Singing Sands
follows Grant on a stress-induced
leave-of-absence from Scotland Yard to
Scotland, where he stumbles across a
murder even as his train is pulling into
the station. The ensuing adventures
involve a little poetry, a little romance,
a bit of the psychology of phobia and
obsession, and lots of local color.

Less traditional and very contro-
versial is The Daughter of Time, in which
a bedfast Grant explores the fifteenth-
century mystery of the princes in the
tower with the aid of a charming though
bemused American graduate student
who “finds himself” during the course of
the investigation. Debate rages over the
propriety of the Tey-Grant conclusions
about Richard III’s character and activi-
ties, but nevertheless, this novel, like
all Tey’s mysteries, is absorbing.

Other Tey releases include Miss Pym
Disposes, in which a guest speaker at an
English physical education college grap-
ples with murder and her own con-
science; Brat Farrar, a story involving
twins, uncertain identity, and a long-
ago accident, which was dramatized on
the PBS series “Mystery!” a couple of
seasons ago; and The Franchise Affair,
an entertaining tale of alleged abduction
peopled with some very likable, eccen-
tric characters (and others who may be
considered stereotypes reflective of the
era of their creation).

Novels packed with local color,
derring-do, and romance by Margery
Allingham and by Christianna Brand,
both extremely popular writers, have
also been reprinted to the delectation of
today’s readers. Allingham’s The Black
Dudley Murder (New York: Avon,
1988, $4.50, 214 pp.) begins as the typ-
ical English country-house mystery
when the host of a weekend party in an
ancient, secluded mansion—a sick,
scarred World War I veteran who con-
stantly wears a mask not unlike that of
the stage-version Phantom of the Opera—
is stabbed to death. The guests,
young jazz-age London sophisticates,
thereupon find themselves prisoners of a
bloodthirsty international gang, and the
plot goes on to incorporate a thrilling
chase and some armchair detecting.
Originally published in 1929, The Black
Dudley Murder reflects its period in one
distasteful moment of antisemitism as
clearly as it more cheerfully does in the
guests’ slangy, stylized dialogue, the
descriptions of their motorcars, and
their standards of conduct. Albert Cam-
pion, Allingham’s continuing hero,
appears in a minor role, but the pro-
tagonist, George Abbershaw, a young

medico affiliated with Scotland Yard,
neatly meets the formulaic obligations of
the rather unprepossessing man forced
into heroism by terrifying circumstance.

Brand’s punning title, Tour de Force
(New York: Carroll & Graf, 1988,
$3.95, 272 pp.), is but one of the jokes
that make this tale of murder during a
guided tour seem like a jolly, distracting
romp, an initial impression supported by
her liberal use of characters who might
well have been merely stereotypical in
the hands of a lesser writer. There are,
for instance, a campy fashion designer,
“One of the Bright Young Cookies from
Mayfair,” a mismatched married couple,
an old maid, and a vacationing English
police officer who cannot imagine en-
joying the trip. But, as is customary in
Christianna Brand’s work, Mr. Cecil
turns out to be anything but shallow,
pretty Louli is a widely praised author,
Leo and Helen Rodd specialize in com-
plex relationships, Miss Trapp is an
engagingly realistic romantic, and the
appealing Detective Inspector Cockrill
is (of course!) much more clever than he
looks. Brand sustains suspense nicely
throughout her complex plot and makes
readers care deeply about her characters.

Like Agatha Christie’s Death on the
Nile (1937), one of her best Hercule
Poirot mysteries, Tour de Force capi-
talizes on the country-house formula
translated to distant shores. That is, a
group of strangers becomes a closed cir-
cle of suspects because they are isolated
by circumstance (and often by national-
ity) during their travels to distant places;
one of their number must be a killer be-
cause no one else was in a position to
commit the murder that generates the
plot. More recently, Paula Gosling’s
thriller about hijacked airline pas-
sengers, The Zero Trap (1980), set in the
Arctic and successfully bolstered with
hints of international intrigue, mod-
ernized the pattern a bit.

In Rift (New York: Scribner’s, 1988,
$15.95, 240 pp.), Liza Cody temporari-
ly abandons Anna Lee, popular hero of
her earlier novels, but she, too, capital-
izes on and modernizes the isolated-
traveler motif, joining it to the novel of
psychological suspense. A young
Englishwoman, Fay Jassahn, having
completed her job as wardrobe assistant
for a film shot on location in Africa, in-
tends to drive through the Rift Valley,
crossing from Kenya into Ethiopia. She
wishes for adventure and all too readily
accepts assurances that the road is fully
passable. In fact, the road is a nightmare
and not the only one that haunts her
journey, for she feels partially responsi-
ble for a death, is made to discharge
someone else’s dangerous obligation,
and learns all too much about distrust as
felt by her and toward her. Most terri-
bly, Jassahn finds that precious few, if
any, of the social and ethical rules that
she has been taught serve her in this
alien environment. This is a powerful
story powerfully told, one of Cody’s
best. Though more peripatetic than
most novels of this type, Rift displays the
traditional cast of intriguing, disparate
characters to stunning effect.

Jessica Mann pays tribute to Christie
and further updates the “country house
abroad” story in Death Beyond the Nile
(New York: St. Martin’s, 1988,
$14.95, 191 pp.), which again features
Tamara Hoyland, who, despite being
“ashamed to recognize that she loved the
work,” is an effective British undercover
agent who also relishes the high pay
earned on her high-risk job. The usual
security reasons send her off as a hastily
prepared “expert” lecturer with Camsis
Tours in Egypt, a venture complicated
by heat, dust, noise, dysentery, jeal-
ousy, and eventually, murder. Despite
the traditionalism of the stranded-
traveler device and of the cast of unlikely
companions, this story is realistic in the
manner of the 1980s—the spurned
lover stalking a newly formed twosome is
meant to overhear their lovemaking, for
instance, and is openly taunted by that
fact, unthinkable in Christie. Also
modern is the emphasis on the physical
difficulties of the journey. The result is a
persuasive yarn only slightly limited by
sometimes awkward narration.

Jill McGown, who is steadily attract-
ing fans with her sound mysteries, also
pays tribute to Agatha Christie in
Murder at the Old Vicarage (New York:
St. Martin’s, 1988, $16.95, 256 pp.),
which will remind Sheila Radley’s fans
of Fate Worse Than Death (1985). To
compare Christie’s Murder at the Vicar-
age (1930), the first Miss Jane Marple
case, with these later novels is to see a
compelling situation recreated in three
individualistic modes. Christie’s vicar
doesn’t doubt his calling but does worry
about being a suitable mate for his
young, pretty wife and is deeply, gen-
uinely concerned with the social well-
being of his flock.

McGown’s novel explores a priest's
failure of faith, marital infidelity, and
spouse abuse. George Wheeler, a
Church of England vicar, is attracted to
a responsive young widow in his congre-
gation, Eleanor Langton. Neither takes
the situation lightly; both are sensitive
to his position in the community and in
the church; each is aware of family re-
sponsibilities—she to her child, and he
to his wife, Marian, who seems capable
of handling just about anything. The
Wheelers’ own difficulties are in-
tensified by those of their only daughter,
Joanna Elstrow, whose husband, Gra-
ham, is an alcoholic and a wife batterer.
When Graham is murdered in the
Wheeler home, Chief Inspector Lloyd
and Sergeant Judy Hill, his working
partner and sometime lover, are as-
signed to the case, enabling McGown to
contrast the investigators’ situation with
that of the investigated. Though some
readers will find the solution to this case
a bit too pat, Murder at the Old Vicarage is
a story well told.

Glory Days (The Seal Press, P.O.
Box 13, Seattle, WA, 1989, $8.95, 244
pp.), is an amazing book, an intricate
web of scenes ranging from a Maori wake
through art show openings to a rock per-
formance depicted as cleansing ritual.
When singer-painter Glory Day takes a
drugged-out kid to the emergency room,
she puts her own life immediately at risk.
Strong, individualistic, and self-
sufficient, Day sticks close to her
lower-class origins and her extended
family of bikers, cross-dressers, and
damaged souls who live on the fringes of
the Auckland, New Zealand, under-
world. Gifted, introspective, tender,
understanding, Day is also a loving
mother and a tough opponent. Readers
will remember Glory Day’s affirmations
of life at least as well as they recall her
clash with a deranged killer. Rosie
Scott, also the author of short stories
and drama, has made an exceptionally
strong debut as a novelist.

® From deep in the Midwest, Jane
Bakerman regularly brings us the pick of the
latest crop of mysteries.

Belles Lettres © 15 |