Bearing the  
Triple Burden  

How I Wrote Jubilee and Other Essays on Life and Literature, by  
Margaret Walker. Edited by Maryemma Graham. New York: The Feminist  
Press at CUNY, 1990, $9.95, 157 pp. (PB)  

by Jane Campbell  

One of the most distinguished and prolific African  
American writers of the twentieth century, Margaret Walker  
has suffered considerable neglect relative to her astonishing  
output. In addition to five volumes of poetry, including For  
My People and Prophets for a New Day, a biography of  
Richard Wright, and a novel, Jubilee, Walker has written  
countless essays and addresses. Felicitously mining some of  
the best of these nonfiction pieces, Maryemma Graham has  
compiled, introduced, and edited How I Wrote Jubilee and  
Other Essays on Life and Literature. Graham aims toward  
an introduction to Walker’s ideas, as well as “some sense of  
her vision as an Afro-American, a woman, and an artist."  

Honoring Walker’s fervor for merging personal, political,  
and artistic concerns, Graham juxtaposes the famous "How I  
Wrote Jubilee" with lesser-known, equally compelling  
pieces, many of which interweave autobiographical and  
literary elements. Several of these essays exhibit Walker’s  
awareness of feminist issues.  

"How I Wrote Jubilee," published as a book in 1972, is a  
landmark essay exploring both Walker’s creative process  
and the obstacles to writing she confronted. As a fictional-  
ization of Walker’s great-grandmother’s life, Jubilee re-  
quired that Walker fuse creativity with historical research, a  
challenging task even without the pressures of supporting a  
disabled husband and four children on a teacher’s salary,  
completing her master’s and doctoral degrees, and strug-  
gling against the triple burden of racism, classism, and  
sexism.  

"Growing Out of Shadow" (1943) documents such strug-  
gles, from her first experience of being called a “nigger” at  
age five. "Before I was ten I knew what it was to step off  
the sidewalk to let a white man pass; otherwise he might  
knock me off. I had a sound thrashing by white boys while  
Negro men looked on helplessly." Walker recounts family  
stories of mob violence enacted against women and calls for  
a spiritual understanding and a global perspective to sur-  
mount oppression.  

"How I Told My Child About Race" (1951) reveals Wal-  
ker’s humanism, as she remembers acquainting her daughter  
with the facts about racial oppression at the same time she  
counseled her that “not all white people are bad."  

In "Willing to Pay the Price" (1969) Walker observes that  
had she been male, her father would have steered her into  
preaching, but her gender forced her father to encourage her  
into the acceptably female profession of teaching. Deter-  
mined that his brilliant daughter would excel beyond any  
conceivable norm at a time when most women, Black and  
white, were discouraged from higher education, Sigismund  
Walker pressured Margaret, who completed her bachelor’s  
degree in 1934 at the age of nineteen, to earn her Ph.D.  
before she was twenty-one. "Luckily for me," Walker notes  
humorously, “neither health nor finances would permit it."  

Despite Walker’s brilliance, she confronted a lifetime of  
professional discrimination. “Richard Wright" (1971) points  
out the appalling discrepancy between Wright’s and Walk-  
er’s salaries when they worked together on the Federal  
Writers’ Project in 1939. A graduate of Northwestern Uni-  
versity, Walker received a paltry $85 a week compared to  
Wright’s salary of $125, notwithstanding his eighth-grade  
education. “Black Women in Academia" (1972) announces  
in no uncertain terms: "In every case where I have attempt-  
ed to make a creative contribution and succeeded, I have  
immediately been replaced by a man."  

Of the several excellent essays celebrating American  
literature, Walker’s unpublished "Rediscovering Black  
Women Writers in the Mecca of the New Negro" deserves  
special mention. Walker reminds newcomers to African-  
American literature that the Harlem Renaissance included  
several prominent women writers. Her essay provides suc-  
cinct introductions to the works of Nella Larsen, Georgia  
Douglas Johnson, Alice Dunbar Nelson, Gwendolyn Benn-  
ett, and others excluded by sexist literary historians.  

How I Wrote Jubilee is an accessible, important volume  
of carefully written, fascinating pieces. Maryemma Gra-  
ham’s retrieval of several previously uncollected essays and  
her cogent commentary offer an exciting tribute to a woman  
whose work spans nearly a century.  

Jane Campbell is the author of Mythic Black Fiction.