Impressions

Literary Awards

The following list highlights some of the
many books by women published in
1985 that won or were nominated for
literary awards. Congratulations to all of
the prize winners — and also to Knopf
for publishing so many of them.

@ The National Book Critics Circle
bestowed its fiction award upon Anne
Tyler — an overdue and worthy recip-
ient — for The Accidental Tourist
(Knopf). During the judges’ proceedings
partisans of Louise Glück (The Triumph
of Achilles, Knopf) and Amy Clampitt
(What the Light Was Like, Knopf)
spiritedly defended their choices for the
winner of the poetry award by quoting
lines back and forth. Perhaps it was a
case of “may the best meter win,” but
Glück’s volume prevailed. The Lamplit
Answer by Gertrude Schnackenberg
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux) was also a
poetry nominee. Elizabeth Frank’s ex-
cellent biography of poet Louise Bogan
(Knopf) was nominated, but Leon Edel’s
life of Henry James received the biog-
raphy award. The nonfiction nominees
included The Body in Pain, by Elaine
Scarry (Oxford) and The Reign of the
Phallus by Eva Keuls (Harper & Row).
Among the books nominated in the
criticism category was Mary McCarthy’s
Occasional Prose (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich).

® One might call 1985 the Year of
the Woman Poet if it were not so clear
that the work of many excellent women
poets can only continue to gather
momentum. Among those singled out
for attention this year are Carolyn
Kizer’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Yin (BOA
Editions), as well as her Mermaids in the
Basement: Poems for Women (Copper
Canyon Press). Christianne Balk won
the Walt Whitman Award from the
Academy of American Poets for
Bindweed (Macmillan), and Maxine
Kumin received the AAP’s Fellowship.
Lynn Emmanuel won the Great Lakes
College Association New Writers
Award for poetry with Hotel Fiesta
(University of Georgia).

@ Of the 40 choices the American
Library Association made for the “Best
Books of 1985,” seven were by women,
including The Accidental Tourist and The
Triumph of Achilles. Novels by Bobbie
Ann Mason (In Country, Harper &
Row) and Jamaica Kincaid (Annie John,
Knopf) were included, as well as Grace
Paley’s third and long-awaited book of
short stories, Later the Same Day (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux). Also cited was an
“adult fable” called Things Invisible to See
by Nancy Willard (Knopf) and a superb
book of Black history by Jacqueline
Jones, Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow:
Black Women, Work, and the Family from
Slavery to the Present (Basic Books). A
special ALA award for best gay book of
the year went to Judy Grahn’s Another
Mother Tongue: Gay Words, Gay Worlds
(Beacon Press) — welcome recognition
for a profound work of cultural history
that has been little noticed in major
book reviews.

@ First published by a feminist
cooperative in New Zealand, Keri
Hulme’s novel, The Bone People
(University of Louisiana) garnered both
England’s prestigious Booker Prize and
the Pegasus Prize for Literature. Alison
Lurie won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction
with Foreign Affairs (Random House).
The Ernest Hemingway Award from
PEN American Center went to
Josephine Humphreys for her novel,
Dreams of Sleep, and the National Arts
Club gave their Medal of Honor for
Literature to Marguerite Yourcenar.
Gloria C. Erlich received the Modern
Language Association of America Prize
for Independent Scholars for Family
Themes and Hawthorne’s Fiction: The
Tenacious Web (Rutgers).

@ Science fiction writer Octavia
Butler received the Locus, the Nebula,
and the Hugo Award for her novelette,
“Bloodchild,” which appeared in Isaac
Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine June
1984. In the realm of mystery writing,
Dorothy Salisbury Davis was given the
Grandmaster Award for Lifetime
Achievement by the Mystery Writers of
America. The Newbery Medal for
children’s books went to Patricia
MacLachlan for Sarah, Plain and Tall
(Harper & Row).

% Other prize-winning novels by
women include Stones for Ibarra by
Harriet Doerr (Viking), which was hon-
ored by the American Academy and
Institute of Arts and Letters, the Bay
Area Reviewers Association, and the
Commonwealth Club of California);
Her First American by Lore Segal
(Knopf), cited by Friends of the Chicago
Public Library; and Civil Wars by
Rosellen Brown (Knopf), winner of the
Janet Heidinger Kafka Prize in Fiction by
an American Woman.

@ Louise Erdrich’s first novel, Love
Medicine (Harper & Row) got too many
awards to list here. In addition to
Erdrich, the Before Columbus Founda-
tion American Book Awards went to the
following women authors: Sandra
Cisneros for The House on Mango Street
(Arte Publico), Colleen J. McElroy for
Queen of the Ebony Isles (Wesleyan Uni-
versity), Maureen Owen for Amelia
Earhart (Vortex Editions), and May
Sarton for At Seventy: A Journal
(Norton).

@ Alice Adams, Richard Bausch,
and Beverly Lowry will judge the sixth
annual PEN Faulkner awards this May.
Although no women were nominated
for novels, Grace Paley and Helen
Norris (The Christmas Wife, University
of Illinois) are up for the short story
award.

Note: Hardback copies of Tales for a
Stormy Night: The Collected Crime Stories
of Dorothy Salisbury Davis and At Seventy
by May Sarton are available for $2.98
each (add $3.00 for shipping) from
Daedalus Books, 2260 25th Place, NE,
Washington, DC 20018.

Acknowledgments

* To Nancy VanWormer, poet
and art history almost-graduate of
Wells College, NY. Nancy was our
first intern for the month of Jan-
uary. Her assistance in putting
together the March issue was in-
valuable; we can hardly find the
words to thank her.

* To Darcie Johnston, who gave
unstintingly of her time to help
edit, and who wrote about Jan
Clausen, Jo Sinclair, and Moa
Martinson, for this issue.

* To Jeanne Talpers, for picture
research.

Announcements

* Suzanne Kieffer of Evansville,
IN, is the winner of the subscriber
drawing announced in our January
issue. Suzanne receives a copy of For
the World To See: The Life of
Margaret Bourke-White (Viking,
1983, courtesy of Daedalus Books).
* Subscriber R. J. Rinn correctly
answered all of the questions from
“Freeze Frame” and wins a copy of
Taking it All In, by Pauline Kael.

Briefly Noted

If the first volume is any indication,

the Feminist Press’s new inter-

national series of feminist classics is
going to be something to treasure. Moa
Martinson’s Women and Appletrees
(translated by Margaret S. Lacy, 1985,
$8.95 PB, originally published in 1933)
is the semiautobiographical story of
working-class poverty and solidarity
among women in Sweden in the early
20th century. Events center on Sally
and Ellen, whose friendship is a source of
joy as well as a matter of survival in a
world of intolerable burdens. In their
first meeting, Ellen calls on Sally at her

hilltop shack:

Ellen wonders how on earth a person
could stand it here. So many
little ones, just the girl’s chatter
gets on her nerves, think of all the
rest — a crazy dog that bites a child
and tears his clothes to shreds, and
the cottage so cramped, so dark,
built probably for just one person to
live in, and the road to this place!
Only people with hard natures and
feet like leather could live here.
How could she, the woman, stand
it? With a drunk father-in-law that
shouts damned whore when folks
come? How could a person, a
mother, a beautiful young woman,
stand it with things like this?

In a voice so intimate that the book
reads like a conversation in the bath
house, Martinson reveals these women’s
world, where a crust of bread is a treat,
where they must give birth in isolation
on a cold floor, where the loss of a simple
piece of glass or the gain of a petticoat
becomes a lifetime memory. Struggle
and deprivation, strength and
resourcefulness, are taken for granted.

The Feminist Press also offers a
reprint of another exceptional
novel, this one touching closer

to home. In The Changelings, by Jo
Sinclair (1985, $8.95, PB, originally
published in 1955), the time is the 1950s
and the situation is the movement of
Black families into an established Jewish
neighborhood in a small Ohio city. The
“changelings,” Judy and Clara, are two
richly drawn teenagers — one Jewish,
the other Black — who overcome the
rage and distrust festering in the com-
munity and form a solid friendship. A
panorama of racial tension is played out
between and within the families of “the
Gully”; the hope for resolution comes
from the girls’ ability to accept and love.
The latest edition of this book in-
cludes two afterwords and a biographical
note on Sinclair, enriching our under-
standing of the universality of feelings
and problems surrounding a chapter in
America’s life, and giving us a glimpse of
this highly acclaimed writer’s life. The
Changelings is an important work with
many insights into the issue of integra-
tion, “a novel that does not let anyone
off the ‘hook,’ but which also does not
trivialize or simplify the search for
solutions,” as noted by Nellie McKay,
Black Studies scholar, in her afterword.

Lesbian parenting and custody,

another controversial social issue,

is examined by Jan Clausen in her
latest book, her first novel, Sinking,
Stealing (Crossing Press, 1985, $8.95,
PB). Clearly the work of a poet and
thinker, this story of what happens
when a 10-year-old’s mother dies
suddenly and the mother’s lesbian lover
— an “almost parent” with few legal
rights — and the child’s father both
want custody brims with crisp, evocative
language, fine detail, and vivid imagery.
In this scene, for example, Josie surveys
her almost-daughter, Ericka:

The shock has less to do with her
attire than with my sudden percep-
tion of just how soon she’s destined
to outgrow the slight convexity of
midriff, the childish plumpness of
thigh — and the saving lack of
sophistication intimated now by a
streak of rosy jelly above her rosy
lip. Already Daniel’s lean genes coil
to strike in her. Already she’s
rehearsing for the two-bit Mysteries.
She’s going to be a teenager.

Witty and highly charged, Clausen’s
treatment of her characters has a
seriousness and sensitivity that make for
thought-provoking as well as enjoyable
reading.

Read Spunk: The Selected Short Stories

of Zora Neale Hurston (Turtle Island
Foundation, 2845 Buena Vista Way,
Berkeley, CA 94708, 1985, $8.95).
Her personal exuberance is powerfully
reflected in her sharp and tender
characterizations and in her expert
manipulations of language and style.
Hurston sold these stories to magazines
from the 1920s through the 1940s, ex-
cept for “The Book of Harlem,” a
biblical parody published in this collec-
tion for the first time. “Isis” tells the
adventures of a “small brown” country
girl with an imagination and spirit that
soar brightly as the rainbow that names
her. “Muttsey” presents Pinkie Jones,
newly arrived at a Harlem whorehouse
from Eatonville, Florida (the author’s
hometown). Pinkie miraculously man-
ages both to remain pure and to
transform the gangster Muttsey into a
stevedore — and into a husband. Also
included are the widely anthologized
story, “The Gilded Six Bits” and “Story
in Harlem Slang,” which, to borrow a
phrase from its narrator, is “cooking
with gas.”

Colette’s sybaritic enjoyment in

what for her were the glorious

pleasures of nature opened up a
new paganism, a new pantheism. With
her painfully achieved, radiant prose,
she shares with us the apprehension of
her world: animal, vegetable, and
mineral. This passage from “The
Gardenia’s Monologue” is taken from
Flowers and Fruit (1986, $14.95), the
latest addition to Farrar, Straus &
Giroux’s uniform editions of Colette’s
works:

It is an exhilarating experience to

Six o’clock, well, not quite
.... All I am concerned with is
my waking, and I am slow to wake.
I am a long time in proclaiming the
confidence and clearheadedness that
assure my reign from nightfall to the
darkness of first light, faintly cut
into the east like a brown and
purple wound.

The day now drawing to a close
was a long one. While it lasted, I
held my breath, the exhalation of
which surrounds me at dusk and
makes the moths teeter and fall into
flight. I was sleeping, in my fleshy
petals, loosely done up, just mussed
enough so no one would confuse me
with the bland neatness of the
camellia. I sleep in broad daylight,
as do all things white and possessed
of the secret of scent. For those of
us with white blooms, charged with
the task of troubling human beings,
midday is a treachery we never tire
of.

Abbeville Press’s new pictorial biog-
raphy, Colette: A Passion for Life, by
Genviéve Dormann (1985, $39.95) is
lavish in the extreme, clearly surpassing
Belles Saisons: A Colette Scrapbook, by
Robert Phelps, and Colette: A Taste for
Life, by Yvonne Mitchell, in the number
and presentation of photographs and
illustrations of Colette, her era, and her
contemporaries. Lovers of Colette can
commune with her spirit as they savor
this book, feasting on it as she devoured
life, with unabashed — and sublime —
gluttony.

May/June 1986

Belles Lettres ® 11