| A) (SK

iz  
LSS  

Surrounded by Much Evil  

Rich Like Us, by Nayantara Sahgal. New York: New Directions, 1988, $8.95,  

236 pp. (PB)  

Mistaken Identity, by Nayantara Sahgal. New York: New Directions, 1988,  

$16.95, 196 pp.  

by Kathleen Collins Beyer  

Nayantara Sahgal’s Rich Like Us  

depicts modern India’s en-  

counter with its venality. It is  
1976-1977, during Indira Gandhi’s  
Emergency, and Sonali, ousted from her  
civil service post, broods over her  
country. Years earlier, in 1947, Indians  
had had a tryst with destiny; ravished in  
part by the language of revolution, they  
had, as Sonali notes, committed them-  
selves to “inevitable progress,” “peaceful  
change,” and “democracy everlasting.”  
Now, as the so-called Madame Supremo  
determines to establish dynastic power,  
and as the Emergency legitimizes politi-  
cal and economic sleaze, national pride  
and optimism stand blushing.  

This corruption corrodes the lives of  
the two women whose experiences frame  
the novel. For Sonali, the Emergency  
halts a career dedicated in sincerity and  
honor to the betterment of India. In the  
case of Rose, Sonali’s older English  
friend, the financial greed that fires the  
country consumes her own family as  
well. With her Indian husband incapac-  
itated by a stroke, Rose is prey to the fi-  
nancial machinations of Dev, her hus-  
band’s son by his first, Indian wife.  
Well-prepared for the world’s ways by  
her youth in Cockney London, Rose  
sees through the hokum of politics and  
finances. Drinking and talking too  
much, she becomes too dangerous for  
Dev to tolerate.  

The novel is very much the story of  
Sonali’s awakening to history. Rose has  
always known that “Some things never  
change” and that “There’s some that do  
the ordering and some that take the  
orders.” It is Sonali who, no longer  
steeped in optimism, assesses the wreck-  
age of the Emergency and confronts the  
tough wisdom found in her grandfather’s  
1915 journal: “I believe in a gradual  
progress towards self-government. But  
underneath there will be the subterra-  
nean layers of ourselves we cannot es-  
cape.” As Sonali reads on, one of the  
most riveting sections of the novel un-  
folds. It tells of her great-grandmother’s  
death by sati. When this ritual murder is  
essentially re-enacted in Rose’s death,  
Sonali realizes that history takes few  
leaps forward; instead, it usually gives  
rebirth to old corruptions.  

This new knowledge does not, how-  
ever, sour Sonali. Putting aside her  
grandfather’s manuscript, she is not so  
much horrified by cruelty as awed by  
heroism. She thinks of how her grand-  
father, seeing his mother perish “like a  
wax doll” in flames, threw himself at her  
murderers, “not men but the powers of  
darkness.” It is heroism like this that  
sustains Sonali, and although she and  
Rose are surrounded by evil, they are not  
crushed. United, for example, in their  
concern for a beggar who has lost his wife  
and both hands to brutalities of power,  
they make arrangements for him to be  
fitted with artificial hands so that he may  
share the dignity of other men and be  
able to “wipe his own tears.”  

Despite grim realities, the novel is  
often comic. One memorable scene  
spoofs aloof Indian matriarchs who plot  
their servants’ sterilizations as civic-  
mindedly as they consider an Ikebana  
display touting the Emergency’s eco-  
nomic program. Always, though, hu-  
mor has the bite of satire in this tren-  

chant novel.  
Like Rich Like Us, Sahgal’s most re-  

cent novel, Mistaken Identity portrays  
the aching slowness with which civiliza-  
tion advances. It is the 1920s, and the  
British, unsettled by political agitations,  
are swooping up dangerous types. Bhu-  
san Singh, the son of a petty raja, is mis-  
takenly jailed, although he is neither  
political nor politically dangerous. Bhu-  
san realizes how distorted justice can be  
as he is convicted and then suddenly  
cleared.  

Having spent his early childhood in a  
zenana (part of the house reserved for  
women) where “all time is story time,”  
Bhusan passes his three years in prison  
retelling his youth. Fascinated by the  
interplay of memory, history, and myth,  
he begins to intimate the slippery nature  
of truth. Even his innocence becomes  
questionable when we discover that,  

Nayantara Sahgal  

though he is not guilty of political agita-  
tion, he has secret sins, including a  
murder. And then there is Bhusan’s long  
and pointless quest for his lost love,  
Razia. Her whereabouts have eluded  
him because he has jumbled the clues.  
All this is revealed in Bhusan’s la-  
conic, tongue-in-cheek narration. Es-  
pecially wry is his assessment of his  
cellmates. He finally comes to respect  

A Magnificently Intricate Mosaic  

Daughters of Independence: Gender, Caste, and Class in India, by Joanna Liddle  
and Rama Joshi. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1989, $35 (HB),  

$15 (PB), 264 pp.  

by Geetanjali Singh  

When Indira Gandhi became  
Prime Minister of India in  
1966, Westerners wondered  
how, in a country where women are  
often treated like second-class citizens,  
she could hold the highest office. Mrs.  
Gandhi emerged, however, a powerful,  

almost imperial ruler of India. Her rise  
and her power are somewhat representa-  
tive of women’s status in India, but they  
are also a political fluke. This contradic-  
tion is easier to understand after reading  
the remarkable study Daughters of Inde-  
pendence. Joanna Liddle and Rama Joshi  
have untangled the complex web of his-  
torical and social factors that have  
shaped and continue to influence Indian  
women’s unfinished march to equality.  
The book is a history of the women’s  
movement and chronicles subtle  
changes in society told in women’s own  
voices, through their individual stories  
and struggles.  

Liddle and Joshi challenge the widely  

held view that westernization, first via  
the British and later through the modern  
education system, has led to greater  
freedom for Indian women. They show  
how under the British, the women’s  
cause became a divisive issue; both the  
British and Indian nationalists used  
women’s issues to fight other political  
battles. For example, the focus of the  
argument in whether to ban sati (in  
which a widow is burned alive on her  
husband’s funeral pyre) shifted from its  
effect on women to its being a litmus test  
of patriotism. The British sought moral  
superiority by banning sati, while Indian  
conservatives used it as one more in-  
stance of British interference and under-  
mining of their religio-cultural values,  
labeling Indians who did not support it  
as anti-Indian.  

The first women’s movements in  
preindependence India, organized with  
the help of some British women, aimed  
essentially to discuss the problem of edu-  
cation for girls and women. It soon be-  
came evident that the questions of edu-  
cation, social issues like purdah and  
dowry, and India’s political subservi-  
ence were so intertwined that “women’s  
issues” as such could not be isolated. The  
issues that were raised and the caste and  
class of women they attracted eventually  
backfired; and the colonial rule, rather  
than the patriarchal social system, was  
seen as the main cause for women’s sub-  
ordination.  

The issue of women’s rights was next  
subsumed by the overarching goal of  
India’s freedom. As the authors point  
out, Gandhi, the leader of the national-  
ist cause, “recognized the power of the  
women and the lower castes and con-  
tained it for the cause of Independence,  
uniting the nation behind the freedom  
struggle at the expense of injustices  
within caste, class and gender rela-  
tions.” This alliance forced men to take  
women seriously and sensitized the peo-  
ple to women’s questions. The authors  
argue that the prevalent male analysis of  

the problem, identifying colonization  
rather than patriarchy as the enemy,  
unfortunately prevented the women’s  
movement from seeking out other  
women across class lines at the grassroots  
level to join in the struggle.  

The slow breaking down of the caste  
system under colonial and economic  
pressure continues to affect women’s  
status. Traditionally, upper caste  
women have faced greater restrictions  
and seclusion because of concerns over  
honor, property, protection, and ritual  
pollution. The class structure was built  
upon caste. The British offered educa-  
tion to upper castes only, and the middle  
class developed from this group. Even  
further, economic necessity, the inde-  
pendence struggle, and the upheaval  
caused by the partitioning of India and  
Pakistan in 1947 have forced urban  
women of the upper castes into the  
workforce. Sometimes this led to os-  
tracism from the family and the caste.  
However, a gradual relaxation of atti-  
tudes has been taking place.  

Monetary gains and the fact of being  
employed in a society with high un-  
employment have led to an amelioration  
of working women’s status (although  
still only for those in white-collar jobs).  
The individual women interviewed, on  
the whole, see financial independence  
as an asset. It gives them leverage within  
a potentially oppressive family and social  
structure. Even at the cost of the double  
burden, where the primary responsibil-  
ity of the home and family is still theirs,  
the economic independence appears  
worthwhile.  

Daughters of Independence should be  
compulsory reading for anyone inter-  
ested in women and in India. Clearly  
and concisely, it ties together the  
threads of colonization, class, caste, and  
gender to present a magnificently intri-  
cate mosaic of the complexities of urban  
Indian society. It goes beyond stereo-  
types of the abject, passive woman and  
the obviously powerful, successful  
woman. Its greatest achievement is its  
women’s perspective. It evaluates their  
experiences and reactions, not as iso-  
lated incidents, but as part of an evol-  
ving social structure.  

® Geetanjali Singh teaches Indian civi-  

lization and literature at Gettysburg Col-  
lege, Pennsylvania.  

Summer 1989