Belles Lettres

11151 Captain’s Walk Ct.  
Gaithersburg, MD 20878  
301/294-0278  

%  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

¢  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR  

Andrea Dale Lapin  
ASSISTANT EDITOR  
o  
Dorothy Abbott  
Kamili Anderson  
Eleanor J. Bader  
Jane Bakerman  
Regina Barreca  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary K. Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Laura Hapke  
Joanne Jimason  
Susan Koppelman  
Shirley Geok-lin Lim  
Faye Moskowitz  
Leslie A. Moushey  
Deborah Price  
Roberta R. Rubenstein  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS  
Helaine Harris  
CONSULTING EDITOR  

¢  
Carmen Johnson  
Joyce Murdoch  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
*  

Karen Tucker Jenkins  
SUBSCRIPTION MANAGER  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957) is  
published four times a year in January,  
April, July, and October. Available by  
subscription and distributed by Inland  
Book Company, East Haven, CT;  
Small Changes, Seattle, WA; and  
Ubiquity Distribution, Brooklyn, NY.  
Member of the Coordinating Council of  
Literary Magazines. Indexed by Book  
Review Index and Women’s Studies Index  
(G.K. Hall). Available in University  
Microfilms Underground Press collection.  
Funded in part by the Virginia Com-  
mission for the Arts.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres reviews books written by  
women, published by trade, university,  
and independent presses in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, biography,  
and criticism. Regular columns feature  
reprints, mysteries, interviews, and  
publishing news. Belles Lettres exists to  
promote and celebrate literature by  
women and, in doing so, to inform and  
entertain. All views expressed herein  
are those of the individual authors.  

Correspondence  
Editorial correspondence and books for  
review should be sent to Janet Mullaney  
at 11151 Captain’s Walk Court,  
Gaithersburg, MD 20878, except for  
poetry books and queries (send to  
Michelle Tokarczyk, 601 N. Utah St.,  
#716, Baltimore, MD 21201) and  
mysteries (send to Jane Bakerman, RR  
23, Box 131, Terre Haute, IN 47802).  
Contributors should query first, send  
clips, and enclose SASE. Send sub-  
scription requests and inquiries to  
Karen T. Jenkins, 785 Verbenia Dr.,  
Satellite Beach, FL 32937. Sub-  
scription Rates: $40 for institutions;  
$20 for individuals; $15 for students  
with photocopy of ID; foreign +$9.  
Sample Issue: $3.  

Advertising  
Camera-ready display advertising (stats  
or veloxes) preferred. If other forms are  
accepted, appropriate charges will be  
made. Deadline for space reservations is  
two months preceding the month of is-  
sue. Write for rate card or call (301)  
294-0278.  

©1990 Belles Lettres Inc.  

‘Winter 1990  

Notes from  

the Editor  

Department of Maledictions  

We delivered our special Double Issue  
(Summer/Fall) to be mailed on October 23,  
expecting that it would get to subscribers in  
the next few weeks. When we began receiv-  
ing calls about missing issues toward the end  
of November, we feared trouble and called  
the mailer. After several weeks of non-  
returned calls, we made contact and found  
out the awful truth: The issues were still  
there. The company took no responsibility  
for the delay, and made up a host of cock-  
amamie excuses. The issues were finally  
mailed November 29. We apologize for the  
long wait for the issue, especially considering  
the fact that the last one was Spring. We are  
back on track now and hope we haven’t lost  
you. There’s lots of exciting news, so let’s  
move on to more pleasant matters!  

In the next issue, we have a wonderful  
interview with Marilynne Robinson, a Re-  
discovery of novelist Vina Delmar, a Retro-  
spective on Lois Gould, a special “Southern  
Hemisphere” section on African writers, and  
a spotlight on Ireland. Don’t miss Deborah  
Price’s “Patchwork” column either; in it she  
takes on the slanted world of book review  
assignments in the media, with some exclu-  
sive interviews.  

New Subscription Price  

As of this issue, we are raising our subscrip-  
tion price to $20 for individuals ($35 for two  
years) and $40 for institutions. Student sub-  
scriptions will be $15, and sample issues are  
$3.00. This is the first increase in rates since  
we founded the magazine in 1985. Dramatic  
increases in production and postal costs,  
among many other factors, force us to do so.  
Those of you who are currently receiving  
renewal notices may resubscribe at the old  
rates, so get your checks in quickly. Don’t  
forget that Belles Lettres is an all-volunteer  
organization, with no institutional affilia-  
tion. Please support our efforts to make a dif-  
ference for women’s writing by spreading the  
word about what we have to offer. Thanks!  

Debut of a New Section  

In this issue, we inaugurate a regular section,  
called “Southern Hemisphere,” which will  
appear in every issue henceforth. Although  
we have had comparable features in the past,  
“Southern Hemisphere” reflects our strong  
commitment to multicultural diversity. It  
will be edited in coordination with area spe-  
cialists and will cover the Pacific/Asian,  
African, and Latin/Caribbean regions, as  
well as dealing with expatriate writers.  

The books by women of color from devel-  
oping countries that make the pages of most  
book reviews is almost nil. Such writing by  
women is often produced by underfunded  
publishers who lack the resources for effec-  
tive publicity. Or it is published overseas,  
and we are unaware of it.  

Audre Lorde has spoken of the difficulty of  
publishing work by international women of  
color in the United States, including trans-  
lations. We intend to create an awareness of  
the voices we are missing — to foster a dis-  
cussion of and demand for them, both on the  
part of the reading public and the publishing  
community. To that end, we are working to  
cosponsor and raise funding for both a cash  
fiction prize for a published work by a third  
world woman writer and a manuscript prize,  
with the award being publication.  

All of the above is ambitious. We need  
funding to carry out and make people aware  
of these endeavors, the results of which will  
go beyond the immediate results of an in-  
crease in egalitarian publishing. Literature is  
an intimate window into the understanding  
of other cultures. It is a window that goes far  
beyond news of crisis or conflict in fostering a  
deep appreciation of the experience of oth-  
ers. We want to hear the experiences of  
women beyond the white, middle-class  
voices we are so used to hearing from. It is  
often difficult for people to cross the lines of  
sex, race, and class to understand each other  
better. Belles Lettres commits to engendering  
understanding through the intimate window  
of fiction. If you would like to join us in this  
effort, you can send us a donation, offer to  
write reviews in your area of specialty, help us  
find sponsors, and let us know about books  
and authors you think may have been over-  
looked. (The coordinating editor is Leslie A.  
Moushey. You can write to her at our ad-  
dress.) Don’t forget that if you send us a  
tax-deductible donation, anytime for any  
reason, we'll send you a lovely book from the  
genre of your choice.  

CONTENTS @  

VOLUME 5/NUMBER 2  

WOMEN’S AUTOBIOGRAPHY  
2 The Road from Coorain........0. 6.0 e cence eee eee by Jill Ker Conway  
Lost-in Translation ;...¢:0s26-c842es0eses ens oememea~ ens by Eva Hoffman  

Nettie Palmer: Her Private Journal “Fourteen Years,” Poems, Reviews and  

Literary Essays ......5.05-..004-  

seventeen e sees edited by Vivian Smith  

3 Telling Memories Among Southern Women: Domestic Workers and Their  

Employers in the Segregated South.  

bck eee n ene e eens by Susan Tucker  

Motherwit: An Alabama Midwife’s Story ............ by Onnie Lee Logan  

Even Mississippi ..............55  

AES CS ASA SODTAISOR by Melany Neilson  

4 The Female Autograph: Theory and Practice of Autobiography from the  

Tenth to the Twentieth Century ..  

AHA EOE AOE edited by Domna Stanton  

A Poetics of Women’s Autobiography: Marginality and the Fictions of Self-  

Representation  

Writing a Woman’s Life..........  

sovmerernemasttite dts § by Sidonie Smith  
fad ex ewsmaamene ee by Carolyn Heilbrun  

The Private Self: Theory and Practice of Women’s Autobiographical  

SUSU Ma oncmnainapc@ieas 9 ea0bes  

edited by Shari Benstock  

Life/Lines: Theorizing Women’s Autobiography  
eeVd Ab a mad RR ERO RE RES RE edited by Bella Brodzki and Celeste Schenck  
Interpreting Women’s Lives: Feminist Theory and Personal  

Narratives .........0.- cee eee eee  

edited by The Personal Narratives Group  

Black Women Writing Autobiography: A Tradition Within a Tradition  

VEE IE SEES CAFE FE by Joanne Braxton  

Autobiographical Voices: Race, Gender, Self-Portraiture  

sumamiwen obi d by Francoise Lionnet  

6 The Slave Narrative: Its Place in American History  

Leen ee ene eee by Marion Wilson Starling  
pceeres yeER ERS ay by Harriet A. Jacobs  

7 From That Time and Place, A Memoir 1938-1947 .. by Lucy S. Dawidowicz  

My Place:.3 visio caaasoneavece  
Sleeping Arrangements...........  

9 Reflections in a Jaundiced Eye  

Morning Breeze.........66 00000.  
Fragments of Stained Glass .......  

SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE  

16 The Ship of Fools .............5.  
The Line of the Sun.............  

17 Alfonsina Storni: Selected Poems. .  
Zones of Pain/Las Zonas del Dolor .  
The Wedding..............6..04.  

18 The Orchid House ..............  
Enclosed Garden...........-2..-.  
The Gold Mine ..........5250005  

Breakthrough  
REVIEWS  

10 Skins and Bones ...... beeen cena  
Modern Secrets...........000005  

Time’s Power  

The Waiting Room..............-  

by Sally Morgan  
by Laura Cunningham  

Rim SEALE RES AMS EME ME by Florence King  
SHON EO Ay OCU SOUTODOT OC by Fulang Lo  
Levee eee eee ee by Claire Nicholas White  

GATOS PE Amasemac by Cristina Peri Rossi  

by Judith Ortiz Cofer  

GnclaSc rE mon edited by Marion Freeman  
Leben ence eee eeeee by Marjorie Agosin  
Sys RERURLD ER ERS by Mary Helen Ponce  

bce e eee e eee by Phyllis Shand Allfrey  
ws bok Bok ite wk by Angelina Muñiz-Huberman  

by Barbara de la Cuesta  
by Mercedes Valdivieso  

by Paula Gunn Allen  

oo ERS Baw nam abd by Shirley Geok-lin Lim  
rer er ere by Adrienne Rich  
FAME ARE SH OEE noe by Mary Morris  

12 Making Waves: An Anthology of Writings By and About Asian American  

Without Ceremony..............  
All New People...............4-  

.. by Asian Women United of California  
.. by Asian Women United of New York  
ee eee eee by Anne Lamott  

With A Fly’s Eye, Whale’s Wit, and Woman’s Heart  
SERA C BARC U ROE TO crane edited by Theresa Corrigan and Stephanie Hoppe  

13. Men and Women: Dressing the Part  

SHG OSES Hanae neroncn edited by Claudia Brush Kidwell and Valerie Steele  
The Woman Who Was Not All There................200 by Paula Sharp  
Mary Heaton Vorse: The Life of an American Insurgent .. by Dee Garrison  

14 The Women Who Walk..........  
The Leader of the Band..........  
Charades  

21 The Blue Nature................  

COLUMNS  
8 Retrospective: George Sand  

11 Belles Lettres Interview: Mary Morris  

beeen eee by Nancy Huddleston Packer  

by Fay Weldon  

ETS O ERS by Janette Turner Hospital  

ere ster by Suzanne Hamilton Free  

15 Rediscovery: Claire Myers Spotswood (Owens)  

19 The Criminal Element + by Jane Bakerman  

20 Patchwork: by Deborah Price  

22 Impressions: Briefly Noted, Southern Hemisphere, Texts of Self  

Cover: Mardi Gras / New Orleans / 1930s  

from Eudora Welty: Photographs (University of Mississippi Press)  

%  

Mary McCarthy, 1912-1989  

Satiric, prolific, fierce, and formidable,  
Mary McCarthy left a pronounced stamp on  
American letters. For decades she was a force  
to be reckoned with — in a time that saw a  
great elbowing of women out of literary writ-  
ing and criticism. In 1984, she received the  
Edward MacDowell Medal for outstanding  
contributions to literature and the National  
Medal for Literature. Among her memoirs  

¢  

are Memories of a Catholic Girlhood (a work  
almost too painful at times to read) and How I  
Grew (1988; much less Dickensian). Her  
more infamous novels (either for their frank  
depiction of sexuality or a purported quality  
of roman à clef) include The Group (1963),  
The Man in the Brooks Brothers Shirt (1941)  
and The Groves of Academe (1952). She was a  
cultural historian of great erudition. Both her  
literary and public personas will be missed.  

Belles Lettres @ 1