THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN

Sometimes it seems that people

who love popular literature spend

as much time trying to define it as
they do reading it. As with most every
unanswerable question or perennially
indefinite definitions, the useful re-
sponse is typically simple and direct.
And frequently, it is a comment that has
been around for a while. That is the case
with Belle Rosenbaum’s analysis of pop-
ular literature; in the August 1937 issue
of Scribner’s Magazine, she identified a
piece of good popular fiction as a “tale
well told for the sake of its telling by a
teller who loves the tale and the art of
telling it. There has never been any
other secret to popular literature.”

In her astute comment, Rosenbaum
wisely ignores the wavering line between
popular and “serious” literature and
speaks solely of good writing. Moreover,
she takes into account an author's pleas-
ure and excitement in her work, whereas
people generally tend to stress the lone-
liness and rigor of the writing process.
Potent as these latter elements are in a
writer’s life, it is as simplistic to overlook
the gratification found in combining
thought and language into a satisfying
whole as it would be to overlook the dif-
ficulties. And finally, Rosenbaum is far
too sophisticated to be exclusive, to tell
us what popular literature is not. She
takes for granted writers’ thoughtfulness
and devotion to their craft, thereby ac-
knowledging the merit in doing good,
solid work and reminding us that there is
great pleasure in reading it.

Though readers’ and writers’ pleas-
ures are admittedly different, they are
also similar. Both groups enjoy language
skillfully employed, take delight in nar-
rative, and are intrigued by variations in
structure. As Rosenbaum implies, a
reader’s pleasure grows from the writer’s
pleasure, a quality that also accounts, I
suspect, for the vigor and energy evident
in so much good popular fiction. Sue
Grafton’s Kinsey Millhone novels are
some of the most high-energy products
on the current fiction market; they also
constitute one of the most popular series
going. In “F” is for Fugitive (Holt,
$15.95, 261 pp.), Grafton follows her
usual practice of reworking the tradi-
tional California hard-boiled private-
eye novel: Milhone is hired to investi-
gate the seventeen-year-old murder of a
young woman when unlikely complica-
tions bring bitter memories and contem-
porary passions into dangerous juxta-
position.

Originally convicted for Jean Tim-
berlake’s murder, Bailey Fowler soon
escaped and remained a fugitive for
years. His recent recapture prompts his
father to hire Milhone to clear Bailey’s
name. Not unexpectedly, both the Fow-
ler family and the closely allied commu-
nity of Floral Beach conceal numerous
secrets, some harmless, some fatal.
What gives this novel its special appeal
is its forthright, gutsy protagonist-
narrator, an intriguing combination of
loner and confessor who tells us about
her cases because formal reports leave
her unsatisfied. Sure of herself and com-
fortable with her spare, independent
existence, Milhone is as capable of
tough, decisive action as she is of the
sensitivity that inspires confidence and
confidences from her clients. Like its
predecessors, “F” is for Fugitive is a satis-
fying novel; still, it won’t sate Grafton’s
fans, eager to read their way through the
entire Kinsey Milhone alphabet.

A different but equally compelling
type of power energizes S. T. Haymon’s
crime fiction, which, like Grafton’s,
clearly belongs to a well-established cat-
egory — the nearly procedureless Eng-
lish police procedural — but remains
wholly individualized nevertheless. Al-
ways a strong and careful writer, Hay-

Winter 1990

mon reaches new heights in A Very
Particular Murder (St. Martin’s,
$16.95, 224 pp.). In it, Haymon ad-
dresses some of her most familiar
themes, stressing here the subject of
parenthood. She examines the gods we
make for ourselves — that is, the people
we choose to love and, in a sense,
choose to worship. She takes another
look at extremely gifted individuals,
their sense of themselves and their im-
pact upon others. In questioning the
nature of saints, semi-saints, and seem-
ing saints, she explores, as always, the
impact of sensuality upon lovers and
haters. These considerations are
smoothly, firmly interwoven with her
most dominant theme: the intersec-
tions, conflicts, and differences between
Christianity and Judaism. All this could
have made for a talky book; instead,
Haymon’s clever turns of phrase provide
us with a quickly paced yet thoughtful
analysis of what makes human beings
love and nurture, or kill.

A Loose Connection (Scribner's,
$16.95, 192 pp.) is, as M. R. D. Meek’s
fans have come to expect, a compelling
character study as well as an intriguing
mystery. Dorothea Copeland seems to
be an ordinary-looking suburban house-
wife of modest means, retiring personal-
ity, and unremarkable habits who stands
a bit in awe of her girlhood chum,
Amanda Egerton, twice married, twice
divorced, preoccupied with a successful
career and devoted to good times. Ac-
tually, Dorothea is all these things —
and more. Not only do she and her de-
cent, rather plodding husband share an
unsavory secret from their courting days,
but also Dorothea has personal secrets of
which Charles is unaware. When Am-
anda Egerton and others connected
with the Copelands’ youth die suddenly
in rapid succession, Lennox Kemp,
Charles’s superior and Meek’s ongoing
protagonist, takes a hand in straighten-
ing out the couple’s tangled lives. In
confronting her past, Dorothea en-
counters undiluted evil; as a conse-
quence, she is forever changed — or
perhaps forever more fully revealed to
herself and to Charles. Meek leaves her
readers satisfied with the solution of the
mystery, tantalized by the adjustments
Dorothea and Charles still face.

By the conclusion of Grace
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $16.95, 197
pp.), Maggie Gee’s various characters
have coped with a crazed, self-appointed
secret agent; dealt with pregnancy,
marriage, and birth; considered the
dangers of polluting this planet beyond
its endurance; and been battered by na-
tural disaster. Sounds sensationalized,
doesn’t it? Yet, Grace is a lyrical novel
whose thoughtful examination of late
twentieth-century civilization climaxes
with a clear, bracing affirmation of life,
despite the terrifying questions it raises.
Moreover, though Paula Timms and her
aged aunt, Grace, may rouse one’s im-
patience, they remain likable — and
memorable — characters because they
are capable of both introspection and
action and because they just won’t give
up. This mainstream novel uses crime
fiction devices very effectively to reaf-
firm the female perspective as a proper,
powerful stance from which to examine
the human condition.

Ellis Peters’s Brother Cadfael Chron-
icles command affection and respect
from legions of fans because of the at-
tractiveness of her hero, a former Cru-
sader, now a religious, and because
Peters makes twelfth-century Shrews-
bury and its environs come alive so viv-
idly. Images of those turbulent times
suggest that ours might be survivable,
and Peters’s blend of not-too-puzzling
mysteries and sweet romances offers
even further reassurance that all can,

indeed, be well. This fifteenth Chroni-
cle, The Confession of Brother Haluin
(Mysterious Press, $15.95, 164 pp.), is
perhaps the most forthright considera-
tion of faith and belief that the series has
yet produced. Brother Haluin, severely
injured, makes his last confession but
survives to undertake a pilgrimage dedi-
cated to expiating sins and quieting his
spirit. Aided by the wise, tolerant
Brother Cadfael, the penitent achieves
his goals despite murder, mendacity,
and villains past and present. Like
Grace, The Confession of Brother Haluin
is a celebration of life that eschews sim-
ple-minded answers. In their differing
ways, they derive their energy from their
heroes’ determination and hope.

Tantalizingly, she suggests that all
too often some of the same stimuli pro-
duce all of these effects. This realization
is brought home forcibly to her continu-
ing character, Inspector Ben Jurnet, as
he investigates the very public murder of
a very public figure — a Nobel Prize-
winning physicist poisoned during a gala
dinner before a large crowd of other
prominent scientists. The energy of this
novel comes not only from the suspense
involved in the murder case but also
from Haymon’s characterizations of Jur-
net, his lover Miriam, and his Chief
Superintendent (attractive, maddening
characters in their own rights). Haymon
allows neither her protagonist nor her
readers many illusions; instead, each
case is a mirror held up to nature in
which Jurnet and the readers see them-
selves reflected in victim and perpetrator
alike. And that makes for chilling but
superior work.

In This Way Out (Scribner’s,
$16.95, 221 pp.), Sheila Radley de-
liberately echoes Patricia Highsmith’s
Strangers on a Train and, perforce, the
Alfred Hitchcock film based on High-
smith’s novel. This Way Out explores
the depths to which a seemingly decent,
law-abiding citizen can fall when he is
controlled by someone devoid of con-
science and determined to achieve his
own criminal ends. True to her widely
admired practices, however, Radley
does not let her protagonist off lightly;
Derek Cartwright learns the difference
between love and self-indulgence and
between courage and cowardice. In
coming to know himself, he experiences
both self-loathing and despair. Cart-
wright and his wife, Christine, have
only recently lost their youngest child to
Down’s syndrome complications. In-
stead of being free to recover from their
loss and to rebuild their lives, the
Cartwrights become full-time caretakers
of Christine’s suddenly dependent
mother. Derek, who had hoped for
golden years during which he and Chris-
tine could concentrate on one another,
finds himself facing years of eldercare.
Outwardly courteous and civil, he
dreams nightly about throttling his
mother-in-law. When chance or fate
introduces him to an opportunist who
wants to “exchange” murders, Derek
Cartwright funks it. Himself something

of a manipulator, he is disastrously out-
matched and callously exploited. Rad-
ley’s continuing character, police officer
Douglas Quantrill, plays a rather sec-
ondary role in this gripping novel,
which rolls smoothly, inexorably to its
ironic conclusion.

Lee Martin is less well known than
the aforementioned authors, but not for
long. Hal’s Own Murder Case (St.
Martin’s, $14.95, 186 pp.) follows
Death Warmed Over, Murder at the Blue
Owl, A Conspiracy of Strangers, and Too
Sane a Murder in the adventures of Deb
Ralston, a Fort Worth police officer.
Eight-and-a-half-months pregnant, Deb
sets out to find her teenaged son, Hal,
who has taken off with Lori, his girl-
friend, for spring break. Kind, loving,
and well-meaning, Hal is also trouble-
prone, and he needs all his mother’s
cleverness and support when Lori disap-
pears and a corpse turns up at the kids’
campsite. Both character and place are
neatly developed in this unusual pro-
cedural as Deb investigates in alien ter-
ritory, working frantically against time
in many more ways than one.

A pair of second mysteries, Philly
Stakes by Gillian Roberts and Payment
in Blood by Elizabeth George, happily
fulfill the promises of their predecessors,
Caught Dead in Philadelphia and A Great
Deliverance. In Philly Stakes (Scribner's,
$17.95, 218 pp.), Amanda Pepper,
English teacher and amateur detective,
catapults herself into a murder investi-
gation when she tries to sensitize her
culturally illiterate, socially irresponsi-
ble students by organizing a dinner for
the homeless. An opportunistic, politi-
cally ambitious parent is just the first
complication, followed quickly by mur-
der, accusations, and extreme danger for
Amanda and two of her charges. Rob-
erts’s brisk, cheerful prose softens her
criminous subject matter, and this novel
both charms and entertains.

Upon first introduction, Scotland
Yard’s Inspector Thomas Lynley appears
to be more professionally in command of
himself than is his partner, the stub-
born, sharp-tongued Detective Sergeant
Barbara Havers. But in Payment in Blood
(Bantam, $16.95, 312 pp.), it is Havers
who must protect Lynley from profes-
sional disaster. George employs the tra-
ditional English country-house mystery
to excellent effect in recounting the
murder of Joy Sinclair, a promising but
controversial playwright. Among the
other guests at Westerbrae is Lady Helen
Clyde; it is Thomas Lynley’s preoccupa-
tion with Helen’s relationship to an al-
coholic actor struggling to make a come-
back that destroys his judgment. Lyn-
ley’s jealousy is but one example of the
complex, painful, and destructive emo-
tions haunting this ill-fated house party
made up of the cast and producers of Joy
Sinclair’s new play. Theatrical and sex-
ual tensions energize a complex but lucid
plot as various couples define and rede-
fine their allegiances to one another and
as bitter family histories distort current
relationships. Strong and absorbing,
Payment in Blood whets readers’ appetites
for George’s next effort.

@ Jane Bakerman is Belles Lettres’ resi-
dent Sister in Crime.

FICTION SOUGHT

Beginning with the next issue, Belles Lettres will
begin publishing fiction. Send short stories of no
more than 3,000 words to Suzanne Berne, 20
Carver Rd., Watertown MA 02172. Include SASE.

Belles Lettres @ 19