IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Not the Full Story

The Story of Yamada Waka: From Prostitute to Feminist Pioneer, by Tomoko Yamazaki.  
Kodansha International/USA Ltd., distributed by Harper & Row, 1985, $6.95, 159 pp.,  
photos.

Samurai and Silk: A Japanese and American Heritage, by Haru Matsukata Reischauer.  
Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1986, $20.00, 371 pp.,  
photos, prints.

by Diane Yen-Mei Wong

Two recently published books  
provide Western readers with  
an intriguing look at experi-  
ences of Japanese women in America  
and Japan. One focuses on a turn-of-the-  
century woman who goes from prostitute  
to women’s advocate. Another gives us  
a glimpse of the lives of aristocratic or  
well-to-do Japanese, some of whom are  
women. Though neither satisfies totally,  
each adds to a better understanding of  
the restrictions facing Japanese women.  
Tomoko Yamazaki pieces together a  
sympathetic yet incomplete portrait of  
Yamada Waka, a girl who came to  
America to earn money and help her  
family; instead, she ended up in a  
brothel. Eventually she escaped to San  
Francisco, where she began life anew  
and married scholar Yamada Kakichi,  
who became her mentor. There is no  
doubt that Yamada Waka led an unusual  
life, but the author appears very wary of  
casting doubt on the revered role  
Yamada has earned in Japan. For in-  
stance, Yamazaki hypothesizes that  
Kakichi’s careful control of his wife’s  
education and ideas stems from his devo-  
tion to the teachings of Lester Ward,  
who believed that women, given a  
chance to redevelop their minds, could  
eventually regain the status that men  
had taken away. Kakichi never allowed  
Yamada to say or do anything of which  
he did not approve; she could not even  
leave Tokyo without his permission!  
Yamazaki never confronts this irony of  
the strong women’s advocate whose own  
life is controlled by her spouse.

The book also fails to address another  
critical question. Throughout her life  
Yamada fought to overcome limits im-  
posed by society on women. She was  
outspoken, and she encouraged women  
to go to school and to find jobs in an  
age when women were taught to remain  
silent and to stay at home. At the same  
time, however, Yamada strongly advo-  
cated government benefits for pregnant  
women, arguing that motherhood was a  
boon to the state, not just to individual  
families. At one point, the militaristic  
Japanese government, bent on increas-  
ing the country’s population for the war  
effort, even used Yamada as the symbol  
of their campaign. In a society that al-  
ready places so many restrictions on  
what women can and should do,  
Yamada’s emphasis on motherhood can-  
not help but feed into the stereotypical

— continued on page 6

Bowing Beside Escalators

A Half Step Behind: Japanese Women of  
the ’80s, by Jane Condon. NY: Dodd Mead,  
1985, $16.95, 318 pp.

by Doris B. Gold

Because of Japan’s Westernization  
and its commercial superiority,  
Americans assume that women’s  
position there has been advanced. But,  
as journalist Jane Condon points out,  
although Japan has had an equal rights  
statute since 1946, which included  
women’s voting rights, Japan is still not  
an egalitarian society. Although more  
Japanese women than men consistently  
go to the polls, they are more than “a  
half step behind” European or American  
women. Many scholarly works have  
been written on the status of Japanese  
women; Condon’s journalistic treatment  
based on interviews with women in  
Japan (she has lived in Tokyo since  
1981, writing for People and Life) reveals  
the paradoxes and the archaic position  
of Japanese women in all spheres of life.  
She says, “There is no Gloria Steinem  
in Japan. The feminist movement is so  
limited that even the word feminist-o re-  
fers not to women but to men who say  
‘Ladies First.’ ”

The book is divided into four parts,  
covering family, education, work, and  
attitudes toward self-liberation. The in-  
terviews reveal that Japanese women’s  
lives are ruled by a family system in  
which men are work machines and  
women are nurturers and enablers; mar-  
riage is primary, either arranged or cho-  
sen (“old-fashioned” or “modern”); the  
first son’s family is responsible for  
lifetime care of the son’s parents; and  
the education of children, especially  
boys, is all-consuming. This fabled devo-  
tion of “education mamas” means that  
most women work only as part-time  
helpers in offices, factories, or small bus-  
inesses. It is a telling fact that two-thirds  
of the book is devoted to work, educa-  
tion, and family.

In the section on feminism, Condon  
presents views on sex and pornography,  
divorce, birth control, and abortion. We  
begin to realize that much of the lag in  
women’s liberation in Japan is the result  
of the perpetuation of the 6th-century  
Confucian view of women as being in-  
ferior, a view reinforced in the 17th and  
18th centuries (infanticide of girls was  
known until the 19th century). Even  
now Confucianism underlies societal  
views, especially of family and duty to  
others. But Japan is not without women  
leaders pushing for rights. In 1911 the  
Blue Stocking Society, a literary move-  
ment, encouraged writing about  
women’s issues. The 1920s and 1930s  
had its suffragists and birth control  
pioneers. (Shizue Kato, one of the “big  
three” women’s liberators of that period,  
was one of 39 women elected to the  
Japan House of Representatives after  
World War II.)

The interview/commentary format of  
this book has certain advantages. In her  
commentary, Condon provides perti-  
nent facts about the status of Japanese  
women. The interviews provide first-  
hand experiences. I found these  
women’s voices most potent when they  
spoke of their dilemmas concerning trad-  
itional values such as harmony, respect,  
modesty, and the subordination of indi-  
vidualism and of their wish to live more  
equitable, interesting lives in what is an  
intensely patriarchal society. Their de-  
sire to gain status in a society that is  
becoming increasingly more progressive  
and yet retain important cultural values  
seems to have brought Japanese women  
to a stalemate. Perhaps this idea is best  
summed up by a women’s leader in 1911:

Japanese women are hardly as restricted  
as the veiled women in Islamic so-  
cieties, at least to Western eyes. . .  
[but] the momentum is building. Mil-  
lions of underemployed and overedu-  
cated women are sitting at home,  
bowing beside the escalators, serving  
tea or greeting customers, just waiting  
for their talent to be tapped, ready to  
contribute to the next economic  
miracle.

Doris B. Gold is the founder and editor  
of Biblio Press, a Jewish women’s studies  
small press. Her book, Yesterday and  
Today: An American Jewish Teen Life,  
was published in Japan and is used for teach-  
ing English in Japanese schools.

Back From Hell On A Mission of Peace

The morning of August 6th was  
clear and beautiful and sunny. My  
girlfriend and I were walking to  
where we were supposed to work  
cleaning up the street that day, and  
along came a B-29 overhead. I  
looked up and pointed and said,  
“Oh, look, a B-29,” unafraid and  
pleased to recognize it, like a child.  
Then I saw something white drop  
from the plane. I had no idea what  
it was. I was remarking on it when  
the bomb exploded.

Everything was immediately red  
and black. The force of the ex-  
plosion knocked me over backward.  
I thought, like everybody else did,  
that it was just a regular bomb, but  
that it had dropped very close to me.  
Before we knew to call it an atomic  
bomb, we called it “Pika Dono,”  
which roughly translates as “flash  
of fire and booming sound.”

Shigeko Sasamori: After laying for 4 days post-  
Hiroshima without family, medical attention, or  
water, her voice was so soft it sounded to her  
mother like “the whine of a mosquito.”

Have you ever looked inside a furnace? It was like that all around me, all red  
with fire. . . . I was determined to stand up, and by the time I was standing all  
the redness was gone and everything was dark and gray. I looked for my friend  
but she was gone. I don’t know if she was conscious sooner than I was and had  
gone or if she had been blown away by the blast, but I never saw her again.  
The air was full of a kind of fog that was slowly clearing away. After a while it  
was clear enough so that I could see people moving. They were black with ashes  
and their clothes were torn and they were bleeding. Many of them had skin  
hanging from their bodies where it had been almost torn off. . . . I followed  
people away from the center of the city.

Suddenly I heard something — a baby screaming. Its mother was trying to  
get it to nurse at her breast, trying to comfort it, and both of them were burned  
and bleeding. Then I heard other people moaning and screaming and crying,  
but most of the people were silent, walking along like they were ghosts from hell.

After what had happened, the bombing was followed by four days with no  
food or water or medical care; with burns over a third of my body, there had  
to be some reason for me to have lived.

My mother had looked for me every day since the bombing. She had to walk  
along, turning over the bodies that looked like young girls to see if one of them  
was me. The fourth night my father told her not to go out anymore, but when  
it got late she sneaked out again to find me.

When my father and mother finally got to the auditorium they couldn’t see  
very well because of the darkness. There were hundreds of us lying in there on  
the ground, most of us too badly burned to recognize. My mother screamed out  
my name and I answered. She told me later that it sounded like the whine of  
a mosquito, my voice was so soft; but, she heard it. I can still hear her voice  
calling me.

My face was black and my hair was black, and in the darkness my parents  
couldn’t tell which side of my head my face was on. It was all puffed up with  
the burn and with infection so they couldn’t see my eyes or nose or mouth, and  
my eyebrows and eyelashes had been burned off.

My two older sisters were married, and I guess I had assumed that I would  
just get married someday too, although I didn’t think very much about it. At  
that time in Japan, matchmakers would introduce prospective brides to families  
with unmarried sons. My age was right for me to be betrothed, but the match-  
makers would just look at me, say nothing, and go home. I knew, of course, it  
was because my face was so disfigured that they didn’t want to introduce me to  
anybody. I had a sad, empty feeling for a while; I wasn’t angry or terribly upset  
about it, just empty.

Then I said to myself, even if I am not given just one person to love, I can  
still love many people. I can love babies and old people, men and women, and  
it won’t matter. I will love them and then they will love me. After the bombing  
I never went back to school, but I learned what I had to learn from observing  
nature. If a dog comes up to you wagging its tail, you can’t kick it. You pet it.  
If a dog comes at you growling, you yell at it to go away and throw something  
at it. That is a good lesson. If I smile you will smile. If I frown you will frown.  
What I decided to do was to make other people happy, and if they were happy  
they would care for me and love me and I would be happy, too.

I will not think about the possibility of nuclear war and of living through  
that kind of bombing again. I will not permit the possibility to enter my mind.  
It’s easy to be paralyzed by that kind of fear. Nuclear war must never happen,  
and so I stand here with my face to show and my experience to tell, on a mission  
of peace I came back from hell for.

— Excerpted from Women in War and Exile: Thirty Seven True Stories, edited  
by Sally Hayton-Keeva and published by City Lights (261 Columbus Ave., San  
Francisco, CA 94133, $18.95 HB, $9.95 PB, 286 pp).

May/June 1987