Belles Lettres Interview

“If there is any theme that interests me in literature, it is the
theme of dreams and longing. I feel fortunate that I have been
able to accomplish many of the important things I have
dreamed of and longed for,” Mary Morris tells interviewers
Suzanne Scott and Lynne M. Constantine. “I have been able
to make my opportunities work for me, and I have been lucky

in some ways, too.”

Mary Morris grew up in an
upper-middle class family
along the beautiful banks of

Lake Michigan, where she spent long,
happy hours sitting in a tree, nestled
against its sturdy trunk. There she stared
out over the lake and dreamed. “I re-
member looking across Lake Michigan
and having this vision of the world out
there — on the other side,” says Morris.

On other days, roaming the ravines
around the lake, pretending she was a
scout or an Indian, Morris would follow
the cryptic guidance of trees the Indians
had long ago bent back to mark their
trails, living out her fantasies through
imaginary travel.

The dreams and the longing for travel
that occupied the young Morris in the
Illinois lake terrain reflected a similar
though suppressed passion for travel she
felt in her mother. Her father, however,
was content not to go any farther than
the golf course or his club.

“I think if I had been brought up in a
family where neither of my parents
wanted to go anywhere or both of them
wanted to go places, I would have a dif-
ferent feeling about a woman moving in
the world,” she says. “There was always
tension about travel in my family.”

Echoing her own lines from Nothing to
Declare: Memoirs of a Woman Traveling
Alone, her widely acclaimed account of a
sojourn in Central America, Morris says
she became a traveler herself because her
mother did not. To Morris, travel be-
came a metaphor for moving through
the world. “Many people have misun-
derstood the metaphorical subtitle of
Nothing to Declare,” she says. “I don’t
mean literally that one should go to Tur-
key alone. I’m thinking more that
women who move about in the world are
more alone, more vulnerable,” she adds.

That vulnerability seems to enrich
her inner life and her writing. “It’s not
just a question of finding good locales for
stories,” she laughs. She traces the gen-
esis of The Waiting Room, her most re-
cent novel, to a chance meeting in Rome
in 1980, when an American couple told
her a remarkable story of how the hus-
band lost his hair during World War II.
“I knew then that I would write some-

thing about war,” she said. The poig-
nant reminiscence became an outward
sign of spiritual changes in the heroine’s
father after he returned from his wartime
assignment as an aerial reconnaissance
photographer.

Despite Morris’s passion for travel,
the women in The Waiting Room are, as
the title implies, largely engaged in
waiting — for a husband, a brother, a
son, a lover. The tension between wait-
ing and movement, entrapment and
escape is an important part of the rich,
complex texture reflected in Morris's
novel. That complexity stands out in
the portrait of Zoe’s mother, who makes
quilts for all the beds in the house while
waiting for her husband to emerge from
his self-imposed isolation. Though he
never truly rejoins her, her actions give
her power and dignity despite her inabil-
ity to control her husband’s behavior.

The quilting image in part reflects the
portrait in The Odyssey of Penelope,
who weaves during the day and unravels
her work at night to keep suitors at bay
until her husband’s return. Morris also
connects the image to her mother, a
gifted visual artist who in other circum-
stances might have been a fashion de-
signer but who instead used her talents at
home, sewing, painting, and upholster-
ing furniture in her basement workroom.

Although the complex psychology of
her family continues to provide Morris
with insight, today her understanding
ranges far beyond the fantasy landscape
of her childhood or the suburban neigh-
borhood in which she grew up. A fre-
quent theme in her writing, for exam-
ple, is the wall of isolation and misun-
derstanding that separates the privileged
from the underprivileged. Morris recalls
a powerful moment of recognition one
day as she watched poor women waiting
for a bus. Suddenly, waiting became a
much larger metaphor. “Waiting is not
just about waiting for a man to call; it’s
about how much power you have in your
life,” she says. “It’s not just some harm-
less little social custom we've been
taught; it’s a way of taking away much of
the power and self-determination in
women’s lives.”

In her process of self-creation as a
writer, Morris had to learn many lessons
about waiting, power, and self-deter-
mination. She started writing in high

school, and, like many other women
writers, kept her work in a drawer. Be-
cause of the biographies she had read,
she thought that to be a woman writer
meant she would be forced to live a hus-
bandless, childless, solitary life. “As a
girl from suburban Illinois, I wanted to
have a family and live a traditional life,
so I decided I couldn’t be a writer.”

By age twenty-three, after a college
romance failed to materialize into the
family she hoped for, she decided she

might as well go to New York and be-
come a writer. Enrolled in a graduate
program at Columbia and living at In-
ternational House, she continued to
stash her writing away. When a Pakis-
tani poet and journalist at Columbia
decided to organize a poetry reading, he
asked Morris to read. Stunned because
she had not told anyone she wrote po-
ems, Morris explained that she didn’t
have any poems. Undeterred by her re-
fusal, he said, “You've been an editor in
Boston, you're a student of literature at
Columbia and of course you have po-
ems.” As he left, he told her he would
stop by to see her later in the evening
after dinner and that she could show him
her poems.

When he arrived that evening,
Morris said, “Well, I do have a few
things” and opened a huge drawer over-
flowing with her writing. “He read for
quite a while and then announced that I
was a good third-rate poet.” When
Morris asked him exactly what that
meant, he said, “Well, I believe John
Donne and Anne Sexton are good third-
rate poets.” She read her poems at the
poetry reading.

Some time later Morris sent her po-
ems to the Columbia Review. After sev-
eral weeks of hearing nothing, she called
the editor. No sooner had she said,
“This is Mary Morris” than he immedi-
ately shouted to everyone in the office,
“Hey, guys, this is Mar-y Mor-ris!”
Morris thought the laughter in the back-
ground was surely heralding the end of
her short-lived literary career. Instead,
the editor explained that her poem had
elicited the widest range of comments —
from “really wonderful” to “disgusting” —
that the Review staff had ever seen.
“He ran the poem because it was so con-
troversial.”

Morris continued to write poetry
while working on an unpublished 400-
page novel. “I took the novel to a
writers’ conference, and a very nice man
told me very kindly that I had some lit-
erary talent but it would be best used in
another piece of work,” says Morris.

On the way home from the confer-
ence, she read a short story by Rosellen
Brown in Redbook and thought, “I might
not be able to write this novel, but I can
write a story.”

Soon after, she decided to give herself
permission to be a writer and asked her
father for a monthly subsidy so that she
could teach a little and write. His initial

response was, “Just because you throw a
ball doesn’t mean you’re going to be a
quarterback.” Morris admits to feeling a
little guilty about the money he’d paid
for earlier false starts, such as compara-
tive anatomy classes, but she replied,
“At this I think I can be a quarterback.”

Today those words seem prophetic.
The Waiting Room, her fifth book, was
preceded by Vanishing Animals (short
stories), Crossroads (a novel), The Bus of
Dreams (short stories), and Nothing to
Declare (travel memoir). But her success
did not arrive overnight. Morris’s first
commercial publication, a short story in
Redbook when she was in her mid-
twenties, was quickly followed by a sec-
ond for the same magazine. Elated, she
decided that writing was an easy way to
make a living after all. She thought, “I'll
send them a story every couple of
months and I’ll get a nice check.” That
assumption turned out to be a bit prema-
ture, since she sold no stories to the
commercial market for almost ten years.

Periodically in despair over her lack
of success, she would pull out law school
applications and begin thinking about
abandoning writing. During an espe-
cially gloomy stretch, a friend called to
say he was reading fiction for David
Godine and asked if she had a novel in
the works. Although she was working on
a novel, it was not far enough along to
show anyone. Instead she told her friend
that she had twenty-seven short stories
that no one in America was interested
in. He later called back to ask her
to send them, which she did.

Then on a snowy Sunday in February
in New York City when Morris was con-
sidering pulling out the law school ap-
plications again, she received a call tell-
ing her that she had been awarded an
NEA grant. The next day, Godine
called to say that he loved her short sto-
ries and wanted to publish them. She
used the grant money to go to Mexico to
write, and the Godine book became
Vanishing Animals (1979). Morris
worked on The Waiting Room for nine
years, a process protracted, in part, be-
cause she let the novel’s final shape
emerge through successive versions. “It
was a patchwork, with layers and lay-
ers,” she says, “before I had a clear idea
of what I wanted the whole piece to be.”
In addition to exploring the relation of
women — and men — to war, Morris
said she also wrote it as “a sister’s apology
to a brother.” And in the character of
Naomi, she found herself incorporating
the vivid personality and recollections of
her Russian grandmother. This process
resulted in one of the novel’s un-
forgettable images, that of children be-
ing hidden by their mother in tiny graves
to protect them from the Cossacks. “My
grandmother made up many wild tales,
but if this story isn’t true, I don’t want to
know it,” said Morris.

Morris is now working on a new travel
memoir that chronicles a trip she made
alone in 1986 from Beijing to Berlin by
rail six weeks after Chernobyl. During
the trip she discovered she was preg-
nant. “On the one hand, the memoir is
the story of China, Russia, and Germa-
ny and the external social reality of those
countries; on the other, it’s a compli-
cated personal story.”

Inner and outer landscapes woven
together create the tapestries of Morris’s
work. It is no wonder that the process of
writing is as important to her as the
product. Morris finds that she is en-
livened and enriched by journeys —
physical and psychological. Her readers
are as well.

@ Suzanne Scott and Lynne M. Con-
stantine are freelance writers and critics
who divide their time between Washington,
D.C., and Lost River, West Virginia.

Belles Lettres @ 11