Nonfiction Bookshelf

Rambling Gals/
Exploring the

by Leslie A. Moushey

Nineteenth-century women in a

wagon train rolling West, Vic-

torian women bitten by flies in
tropical forests, and contemporary women
canoeing to the wastes of the Arctic Circle
are heroines not only of their own epics
but of the saga of all women. These up-
starts have chosen to ride the edge and
seek Great Adventure. For too long,
when women journeyed into a new and
often perilous world, they were at best
called “travellers” and more likely over-
looked or obscured as footnotes to the
“real” adventurers or explorers, the “man-
ly men.” A tumult of new books breaks
down this misrepresentation and opens up
the lives of these women. Their stories are
gut-wrenching thrillers and fantastic dra-
mas, tempered by fine word-portraits of
nature and sensitive re-creations of re-
lationships on the road — bittersweet
adventures as only a woman can tell them.

The women who trekked north for the
Alaska gold rush are usually portrayed as
mere camp followers. In Klondike
Women: True Tales of the 1897-1898
Gold Rush, Melani J. Mayer (Ohio Uni-
versity Press/Swallow Press, 1989, 267
pp.) shows us through diaries, interviews,
letters, and photographs the women who
went after gold. Entrepreneurs, dreamers,
and last-chance women dared the wilder-
ness and the odds to find their fortunes.
Mayer guides the reader along the major
trails to the Klondike, piecing together
the accounts of scores of these women.
When they reach Dawson, Mayer details
vividly their short-lived, complex society.
A big part of this book’s appeal is the pro-
fusion of photographs (over 150) that re-
veal the harshness of the environment and
the determined hopefulness of the faces.

In One Woman’s West: Recollections
of the Oregon Trail and Settling the
Northwest Country by Martha Gay Mas-
terson, 1838-1916, edited by Lois Bar-
ton (Spencer Butte Press, 1986, 222 pp.,
PB) Masterson’s travels and life at the
Western frontier provide insights and
descriptions unique for their unsophisti-
cated, yet compelling language. Her na-
tural talent for observation and expression
and her authentic voice seat us next to a
fourteen-year-old girl crossing the plains
on a wagon train. We follow her through
the grit of life on the outskirts of civiliza-
tion and watch as she and the West grow.
Masterson wrote in her diary right up until
her death; the changes she experienced
and recorded were tremendous, but their
impact was calmly handled in her plain-
speaking complaints when the phone
doesn’t work, her counting of the autos
that drive by, or her explanation of her
final decision to stop travelling, “We had
enough time to pack up, consider our
move, and decide that this, at last, should
end our travelling. . . . It was a settled
fact and we prepared to go.”

Grace Gallatin Seton-Thompson
founded the Campfire Girls because she
loved that campfire life in the great out-
doors. A Woman Tenderfoot (Nick
Lyons Books, 1987, np., PB) is the jour-
nal of her turn-of-the-century travels
through the American West with her
husband, “Nimrod.” Seton-Thompson
began her travels as a “summer-
watering-place-and-Europe-flying-trip”
minded woman, but soon became an
experienced hand who could maneuver
around the demands of a rattlesnake or a

10 ® Belles Lettres

Scientific Method

horse with intelligence and humor. The
book, filled with marginal drawings by
S.N. Abbott from the original 1900 edi-
tion, provides hard-core details of the gear
needed for such a trip — all the little items
that make the difference for the “woman-
who-goes-hunting-with-her-husband.”
Then she hitches the reader onto her sad-
dle, riding through danger, disaster, and
derring-do until we are filled with her
contagious enthusiasm for “the charm of
the glorious freedom.”

Libby Beaman left high society
Washington, D.C., in 1879 to explore
Alaska’s Pribilof Islands. Libby: The
Alaskan Diaries and Letters of Libby
Beaman, 1879-1880, as Presented by
Her Granddaughter, Betty John (Hough-
ton Mifflin, 1989, 236 pp., PB) recounts
the year in which she stretched herself,
her definitions of womanhood, and her
marriage to the limits. Her sensual out-
look manifests itself through her passion-
ate responses to the people and nature she
encounters, and her rich descriptions in-
voke the reader to respond as well. “They
nosed each other all over ... she
slithered up and down beside him” is just
the beginning of her description of two
seals mating. Beaman was also a reflective
and deliberate woman. Although in the
end she dropped many of her ideas about
independence, she still tackled the prob-
lems that she could affect: “I intend to
encourage the village women, not the
men, to drop in for chai. Because women
are held in such low esteem, I plan to
make friends with them.”

Spinsters Abroad: Victorian Lady
Explorers by Dea Birkett (Basil Black-
well, 1989, 300 pp.), a kaleidoscope of
the adventures of more than twenty Vic-
torian women, arrays diaries, letters,
drawings, and photographs in unroman-
ticized realities. The author, having ac-
tually retraced the journeys of some of
these women through Africa, up the
Yangtze, and across North America, skill-
fully reconstructs their expeditions with
the sort of finesse that can only derive
from shared experience. A fine appendix
gives biographical details about each spin-
ster so that the reader need not lose sight
of a single individual in this dense collec-
tive biography. Birkett is refreshingly
iconoclastic in her thoughts about the
motivations behind these women’s tra-
vels, although she falters when she tries
too hard to see them through the lens of
modern feminism and tends to judge them
too harshly as solipsistic or limited: “The
women travellers followed invisible red
lines across a map into the unknown. But
the pot of gold they were chasing was not
the mountain, the source of the river, or
the oasis in the desert, but the long shad-
ows, cast by the tropical sunlight and
mountain glare, of themselves.”

Two books spotlight the lives of two
spinsters from Birkett’s bevy — Mary
Kingsley and Alexandra David-Neel. In
One Dry Season: In the Footsteps of

Actresses fording a river in 1897. From Klondike Women

Mary Kingsley (Knopf, 1990, 282 pp.),
Caroline Alexander parallels Kingsley’s
path in modern-day Gabon. Alexander’s
exploits along the route lend perspective
to Kingsley’s life and Gabon’s changes,
and her magnificent descriptions are bal-
anced with just enough historical context
to plunge the reader into full appreciation

for this perspective. Forbidden Journey:
The Life of Alexandra David-Neel by
Barbara and Michael Foster (Harper &
Row, 1987, 363 pp.) is the result of a de-
cade’s research and travel devoted to un-
covering the truth behind the legends sur-
rounding the life of David-Neel. Her story
only becomes better with this greater ex-
posure, and the authors do her justice in
telling it with drama and authority. Final-
ly, we see her as a complex woman whose
successes are balanced by failures.

Following the Milky Way: A Pilgrim-
age Across Spain (Iowa State University
Press, 1989, 307 pp.) is Ellen O. Fein-
burg’s chronicle of her 500-mile journey
along the pilgrimage road from the French
Pyrenees to Santiago de Compostela in
Spain. She is much more an academic
than a recorder, so her descriptions of
immediate events and emotions are some-
what awkward. However, Feinburg re-
counts well her knowledge of history and
anthropology. Time becomes fluid as she
tramps down this ancient road: She has
the remarkable ability to sift through the
dust from each footstep and tell us whose
breath shared it centuries ago. She tells us
why a landmark is significant and when a
town prospered, giving rare depth to each
vignette.

Illustration from Arctic Daughter

Bergamot Books has published a con-
densed version of Down the Wild River
North by Constance Helmericks (1989,
291 pp.) to coincide with Arctic Daugh-
ter: A Wilderness Journey, by Jean As-
pen (1988, 205 pp). These two books are
a wonderful team — the first was written
about a canoe trip to the Arctic Ocean
with the author’s two daughters, who
were only twelve and fourteen years old.
The second, written by Helmericks’s
older daughter, records her first year (of
four) living off the land in the wilds of
Alaska. Both women portray the nature
around them with striking realism. Their
relationships are clearly intimate and in-
tegral, and the reader is pulled into this
intimacy like a friend they are talking to
who is just outside the firelight. The two

books differ, however, in tone. Hel-
mericks maintains more distance from the
events around her, which gives her the
broader, protecting viewpoint needed by a
mother. Aspen has the luxury of being
able to jump feet first into her adventure,
so her writing is more visceral and naive.
Neither tone, though, detracts from the
feeling of joy in exploration and challenge
permeating these books. The strength and
feminism of the women in this family is
natural and unrestrained; these are not
journeys to prove a point or to escape.
They are journeys of discovery; they are
Great Adventures.

The influence of women is still only

faintly felt in most scientific fields.

We may work in these disciplines
(although we generally do not), but only
now are our ideas and constructs begin-
ning to shape the methods and theories.
The myth of genderless, objective science
should not lull women into avoiding our
responsibility to see and seize the impor-
tance of our roles. Otherwise we are going
to suffer not only the obvious losses such as
influence on reproductive policies, but
also the subtler loss of the profound con-
tribution that our perspective would lend
to the direction, establishment, and
maintenance of scientific knowledge.

Female-Friendly Science: Applying
Women’s Studies Methods and Theories
to Attract Students, by Sue V. Rosser
(Pergamon/Athene, 1990, 160 pp.) offers
more than theoretical complaints about
women’s absence from science; Rosser
establishes an analytical framework de-
lineating women’s ways of knowing and
contributes solid advice for more inclu-
sionary scientific methods. Practical
pedagogical application of her observa-
tions is encouraged through guidelines for
textbook selection, exercises to eliminate
sexism in the classroom, and an extensive
supplemental bibliography. Her book is
clearly written and easily accessible for
curriculum and course development.

The Mind Has No Sex? Women in
the Origins of Modern Science by Linda
Schiebinger (1989, Harvard University
Press, 355 pp.) dissects modern Euro-
pean science and exposes the women who
helped lay its foundation. Schiebinger
examines the institution of science
from the seventeenth century to the pre-
sent and identifies gender boundaries that
have excluded women along the way. She
cites specific women who were able to slip
into the sciences and explores how their
opportunities came to be. Although she
enumerates the scientific and cultural
explanations of gender differences that
have hampered the practice of equality,
she still challenges the notion of women
being distanced from the sciences through
her tracing of this historically forgotten
relationship. Schiebinger’s research is
exacting and broad-based. What little this
book loses in clarity is overwhelmingly
compensated for by her treasury of re-
discovered women and reexamined sci-
entific history.

A symposium on Feminism and Sci-
ence is presented by Nancy Tuana in a
recent book by Indiana University Press
(1989, 249 pp.); she compiled this an-
thology of essays from a spectrum of arti-
cles published in Hypatia: A Journal of
Feminist Philosophy. While most of these
essays confront the problem of gender bias
in science on general theoretical levels,
some address specific issues such as repro-
ductive theory and premenstrual syn-
drome studies. Ruth Hubbard discusses
the gender politics of science, Luce Iriga-
tay looks at the bias of language in sci-
ence, Sue Rosser expounds on the state of
feminist scholarship in the sciences, and
ten more women contribute thoughtful
critiques of the myriad issues between
women and science.

Feminism and Anthropology, by

Spring 1990