Caricatooning: Sharp Edges

There’s no place like home, drawings by Mary Leunig. Ringwood, Victoria, Australia:

Penguin Books, 1982, $6.95, 90 pp. (PB)

Lone Thoughts From a Broad, by Paula Youens. London: The Women’s Press, 1981,

$4.95, 97 pp. (PB)

by Denise M. Marshall

A woman stands inside a door
facing the void. On the outer
side a doormat reads “Go
Away”; and the world beckons from
space, a little hand sticks out, the fore-
finger motioning her to come out. Up in
the sky a massive nude woman sails
overhead, sniffing a flower and carrying
tools while below two women figures
gaze up. One says to the other: “It’s the
great myth.” There’s no place like home
and Lone Thoughts from a Broad con-
struct images of constrained interiors
and dynamic exterior spaces to puncture
the patriarchy with sharpened, lethal
funnybones. Their ambiguous images
mingle caricature, cartoon, whimsy,
savagery, bitter commentary, and irony.
Both collections perceive the world as a
carnival and as grotesque, laughable,
and painful but inescapably the source of
amusement and fun, whether light,

dark, or skewed.

Because such drawings have been an
almost exclusive male preserve, we
should take note when two collections of
women’s drawings appear, whenever
they do. Published about eight years
ago, these two slim volumes cover re-
markably similar territory. Freedom,
entrapment, sexuality, identity, invisi-
bility, and much more inhabit these
quirky pages. Every layer of meaning is
laughably contemporary. Caricatures
generally exaggerate the peculiarities of
human beings at their most characteris-
tic moments. These two artists take
stereotypes of women and exaggerate
them to ridicule cultural constructs.
This content is then rendered in the
lines and volumes usually associated
with the cartoon. Thus these drawings
employ devices of both cartoon and car-

A VERY SERIOUS THING Women’s Humor and American Culture

Nancy Walker

Walker explores the relationships between cultural realities—including expectations of
“true womanhood”—and women’s humorous response to those realities. This response
has been, she holds, a feminist critique of American culture and its attitudes toward
women. American Culture series $39.50 cloth; $14.95 paper

OPERA, OR THE UNDOING OF WOMEN

Catherine Clément

Translated by Betsy Wing. Foreword by Susan McClary

Sweeping away the glamorous sets, elegant costumes, and beautiful music, Clément
focuses on the librettos of operas—from Don Giovanni to Lulu—to show how opera, far
from being value-free, perpetuates the patriarchal social order by requiring the death
or domestication of the heroine/victim. $35.00 cloth; $13.95 paper.

“AM I THAT NAME?”

Feminism and the Category of ‘Women in History’

Denise Riley

To recognize fully the ambiguity of the category ‘women’ in Riley's view, is a condition
for an effective feminist political philosophy. “Denise Riley develops an original—and
often brilliant—approach to a major problem in contemporary feminist scholarship.”
—Nancy Fraser, Northwestern University $29.95 cloth; $12.95 paper

Emergent Literatures, a major new series of international scope, will include works
of fiction that manifest a difference from established models of literature.

THE PASSION ACCORDING TO G. H.
Clarice Lispector Translated by Ronald W. Sousa
Brazilian novelist Lispector has been called by The New York Times Book Review
“the premiere Latin American woman prose writer of this century.” This novel is a
meditation on the essence of being, a critique of dominant theories of psychology and

of language. $19.95 cloth; $8.95 paper

ADRIENNE KENNEDY IN ONE ACT

Adrienne Kennedy

This collection of eloquent, often lyrical, one-act plays by an Obie-winning playwright
displays Kennedy's ability to range widely across the terrain of minority experience. It
makes clear why her work has been central to both black and avant-garde theater

since the 1960s. $19.95 cloth; $8.95 paper

University of Minnesota Press

Farr 1988

Minneapolis MN 55414

and scruffy slippers, a woman’s right
hand ends in a cutting board, her left in
a knife. The woman artist is half angular
grinning cubist drawing, half female in
gartered stocking.

Leunig and Youens make us wince as
we laugh because humor infuses the
emotions that humor sets out to expose
and alleviate. Passion and hilarity
coexist here. One of the distinctions of

icature. Such a combination of tech-
nique and meaning is a mark of women’s
humor. Another technique they use is
literal visualization of cultural meta-
phors so that the absurdity of illusion
clashes visually with the grotesque real-
ity it encourages. The clash makes both
the image and the message more promi-
nent. When the grotesque is visualized
with humor and irony, the resulting
shock and surprise creates revelation.
Both artists play the gruesome against
the ordinary; the ideal against the real-
ity; male visions against female knowl-
edge. Both etch sketches of the literal
consequences of cultural double crazi-
ness in everyday lives.

Mary Leunig’s woman behind the
door in her initial drawing is trapped in
the savagery, the boredom, and the
sheer drudgery of family life and domes-

tic duties. Her caricatoons sketch people
on whose faces a shift of a single tiny dot
generates a whole new expression. In
Leunig’s domiciles all objects have life.
Lamps and brooms hold glasses of wine
in spindly t-shirt sleeved arms, a woman
speaks animatedly to a throng of en-
thralled objects — chairs, teapots, and
elf-like creatures from cereal boxes.
Bright crayon colors — pinks, greys,
reds, greens, and blues — and style echo
the dreamy world of Kate Greenaway or
Beatrix Potter. But, the juxtaposition of
the strange and the brightly familiar are
Leunig’s particular mark. Her rounded
forms create a cozy cuteness belied
laughingly by cats wearing triangular
black sunglasses and drinking martinis;
children gifting their mother with a
straitjacket. Humans and objects merge
—a table’s human legs wear baggy socks

boos)

women’s sense of the ridiculous is that it
gains perspective without throwing away
the emotion.

Youens’s black lines slash across the
page, sometimes heavily, sometimes
gracefully but always biting. She fre-
quently titles her drawings — “It’s the
great myth” is typical of their wry hu-
mor. She creates series with theme and
variations: shadows loom behind own-
ers, betray true feelings, and get ironed
out; claustrophobic rooms are cluttered
with domestic detritus and get sucked up
into sweepers. Youens reinvents cartoon
conventions as a visual technique of
objectifying meaning. In a series on
conversations she transforms the usual
cartoon speech balloon into an ani-
mated form with a life of its own: it
snakes around the human object, en-
cases another in a maze, or forms bubbles
of silence.

Her characters are angular ink
carvings whose sharp profiles and lumpy
bodies float in the undifferentiated space
of the page. Youens’s world is defined by
strong geometric forms: men point out
“the wife” — three tottering cubes la-
beled “top bit, middle bits, standing-up
bits”; a woman’s head is a crossword puz-
zle. Inky depths convey tension: There
is little grey area in a Youens’s image but

Cartoons by
Mary Leunig and
Paula Youens

much in its message. When a son draws
his mother — a series of blotches and
scraggles — the only clear things in it are
the two plates of food in her hands. The
humorous savor of Youens’s world is per-
haps best captured in her Museum of
Middle Age, where one woman asks
another “do you know the way out?”
Women in this world are often ambiva-
lent, but just as often ambiguous visions
of Atlas who as a Mrs. holds up the world
— and the men in it. Youens ends her
volume with a male Atlas figure, but on
top of this world is a woman on her
hands and knees, scrubbing.

These collections are too rich for
words alone or the short space of this
review. Leunig and Youens visualize our
common ground, challenge us, and pro-
vide us the energy of laughter. Their
humor breaks up our world, but is that
not just what we want?