Avant Garde Writers

Three From the Literary Vanguard

Lydia Davis

This essay is based on an informal interview
with Davis when she appeared at a reading
at The Detroit Institute of the Arts in
November 1986.

The dust jacket illustration of Lydia
Davis’s most recent short story collec-
tion, Break It Down, is a photograph of a
still life: a pink bristling thistle rests on a
mysterious mottled background entitled
“Thistle, 1982.” There is lettering, in a
French hand, of which only “Nicosia” is
legible. Fragments of punched plastic
are scattered around; a single strand of
lilac floss is stretched across three
straight pins and held taut by some un-
seen tension. Delicate and evocative,
the photograph frames and forever
freezes a random collection, or, it frames
and informs disparate and suggestive
elements. It is an apt visual metaphor
for Davis’s stories.

“Thistle, 1982” by Olivia Parker, was
chosen by Davis. That she was allowed
the choice is a clue to readers of her
small press publications (Living Hand,
The Figures) that Davis’s shift to a com-
mercial house has not altered her work.
Her belief in a writer’s right to partici-
pate in the publishing process is impor-
tant to her, and the switch to Farrar,
Straus & Giroux has been harmonious.
She acknowledges that it is the last of
the small, independent houses.

Those of us familiar with her pithy,
keen narratives will recognize a number
of stories. “Break It Down,” originally
published in the Paris Review, is an ap-
propriate title work. Its intimacy, de-
liberative pace, and obsessive insistence
are elements inherent in all of Davis’s
work. “Break It Down” is a reckoning of
a sexual relationship — breaking down
the brief, intense encounter into mi-
nutes and dollars, or into tangible
worth. Prodding anguished but ardent
memory, the narrator laments and
luxuriates in the affair’s details. The
story is familiar — a lover left exhila-
rated but bewildered. To this female
reader, the reclaiming by and clutching
to memory is hauntingly reminiscent.
Yet Davis says she made the narrator
male as a technical experiment, employ-
ing the device of role reversal to dis-
tance an actual event from the story it
initiated. In “Break It Down,” the
female truth turned into male fiction
has become male fact; men recognize
themselves in the narrator. For Davis,
“the response from them has been re-
vealing.” This interplay of the real with
fiction to create meta-truth is Davis’s
signature.

For Davis there are no distinctions
between truth and lies. She is a diligent
journal keeper, recording “true events
and stories.” These form the basis of all
her writings. The impetus of each story
may be “an unconscious intrigue,” its
life “an emotional source.” Although a
pattern — obsessive or rhythmic or
habitual — may catch her attention,
“emotion is the essential informer.” The
varied characters who emerge are all
creatures of the journal in which Davis
meticulously records her daily life. The
cross-dressing of narrators represents,
says Davis, “true states” of self; there are
times, for example, that she feels herself
to be an old man, or a young girl. It is
not playacting, or even storytelling, it
simply is. “What She Knew” (printed
here in its entirety) is precisely about
this:

People did not know what she knew,
that she was not really a woman but a
man, often a fat man, but more often,
probably, an old man. The fact that she
was an old man made it hard for her to

8 Belles Lettres

be a young woman. It was hard for her
to talk to a young man, for instance,
though the young man was clearly
interested in her. She had to ask
herself, Why is this young man flirting
with this old man?

This array of characters surfaces in
the process of writing. For Davis it is the
process not the product that is “imperative.” Form, too, finds its shape in the
act of writing. It is determined by
Davis’s need for “air, room to breathe.”
Her stories, therefore, are open-ended
and often fragments; by disregarding
closure, her stories stay “alive and ac-
tive.” An example of this is “Safe Love.”
This story of a woman in love with her
son’s pediatrician begins seriously but is
quickly reduced to the ridiculous. For
Davis, the conventional telling of this
story is impossible — it has already been
“exhausted.” (Coincidentally, Redbook
published another writer’s version of
this story at the same time a New York
Times reviewer was bemoaning Davis’s
minimalism and fragmentary treat-
ment.) In Davis’s story, the readers are
jolted by its reduction to absurdity of our
simple, base attractions to benevolent
authority, and the story’s fragmentary
form pulls us into its making.

Davis is fascinated by the blurring of
genres: as distinctions become less im-
portant, blending becomes an instru-
ment of invention, moving “Story into
poetry into biography into essay.” In her
own work, she mixes the revelatory na-
ture of poetry with the stripped language
of fiction; she releases fiction from its
narrative structures and, thereby,
stretches its function.

Critics have attempted to label
Davis’s writing as minimalist, to group
her with the language poets or as one of
the “new narrative” writers. But the elu-
sive stories in Break It Down defy
categorizing.

— Melinda Lewis-Matravers

Lydia Davis. Photo © Marion Ettlinger.

Candace Denning

Candace Denning’s first novel, Ad-
ventures With Julia, was published by
North Point Press in late 1986. Its un-
usual and appealing narrative structure
shows Julia in a succession of brief slice-
of-life situations — her “adventures.”
The following excerpt comes from the
chapter, “Julia Confides in Jennifer.”

eee

How do you tell someone you wish
she were dead without upsetting her?
Julia thought, soaping her face. She
looked in the mirror and watched her
fingers work the lather over skin. A
death wish was most likely a stray
thought that represented something

else. She could say it quickly, then
laugh. She put her hands up as if she
meant no harm, to see what it looked
like in the mirror.

Or she could admit to Jennifer that
she was ashamed of this thought. She
didn’t understand it in herself. Could
Jennifer make sense of it?

When Julia got downstairs, Jennifer
had already made coffee. She sat at the
kitchen table smoking and reading the
paper. Julia poured a cup and sat down.
She stared at Jennifer.

“Why are you staring?” said Jennifer.
She put down the paper.

“I was just thinking,” Julia said, “that
there are times when I wish you were
dead.”

Jennifer was silent.

“Don’t take it wrong,” said Julia.
“Right now I don’t wish you were dead.”

“Hurray,” said Jennifer.

“Haven’t you ever had a thought like
that?”

“No I have never had a sick, per-
verted thought like that. Sometimes,
Julia, I think you're crazy. I don’t want
to hear that you wish I were dead. It
hurts my feelings.”

“We are sisters, we have a common
background, and I assumed we would
have common thoughts. I guess we
don’t.” Julia raised her chin slightly.
She thought her lungs were on fire.

Michael came into the kitchen.

“Jesus Christ,” he said. “Are you two
at it already?”

Jennifer smiled brightly at him. Jen-
nifer always smiled brightly at men. She
acted as if it were her duty to light up the
whole room, Julia thought. She consi-
dered pointing this out to Jennifer, but
things were bad enough already.

“Whatever it is, I don’t want to hear
about it,” Michael said to Julia.

So. He was on Jennifer’s side.

+ # *

I heard Denning read from and talk
about her work, and I asked her to send
us some notes about it. She sent us the
following paragraphs.

My obsession with writing is to con-
vey as much as possible with the greatest
economy. I am fascinated by how much
can be left out because of the edge that
gives to what is then said. I rarely de-
scribe what a character is feeling, but try
instead to show feeling through gesture,
action, and dialogue. This keeps my
writing close to the surface of the story. I
don’t dig into the characters’ back-
grounds, unless some past event seems
irresistible or essential. I believe every
moment contains the past. Julia’s be-
havior implies the emotional experi-
ences that have brought her to the mo-
ment. Therefore in Adventures With
Julia, the characters act and react with-
out a lot of narrative explanation. The
dialogue is brief and the sentences are
short. The chapters are compressed.
The book is an accumulation of mo-
ments, episodes that convey more than
the space they occupy.

In my new book, I do dig into the
characters’ backgrounds. For starters,
there are more characters and more fam-
ily history to deal with. Family history in
Julia was implied, but in the new book it
plays a more active role. There are
great-aunts and a grandmother who are
major characters. The history gives the
book a different texture and creates
more levels for telling the story. I write
by intuition and listen all the time for
the sound of what I am writing, whether
the sound is true or false. I want to en-
rich the telling of the story within the
discipline of economy.

— Janet Mullaney

Candace Denning. Photo © 1986 Douglas
Goralski.

Kathy Acker

“I thought of my work in the begin-
ning as the writing equivalent to
abstract painting,” I experimental
novelist Kathy Acker told Roberta
Fineberg, who interviewed the writer in
London, where she now lives. Acker’s
latest work, a collage novel called Don
Quixote (Grove Press) was just about to
come out there. The following is an ex-
cerpt from the interview.

Your work strikes me as being very inti-
mate.

In The Childlike Life of the Black Taran-
tula, I had been very confused about the
word “I” and myself. Not wanting to
write well in the academic sense, but
wanting to do the book purely as a sci-
entific experiment, I had taken the word
“I” and set the writing into two parts. I
took these Victorian murderesses’ biog-
raphies and started copying them as if
they were about me. I became interested
in the use of other texts and plagiarism.
In parentheses, I did actual diary work.
There were two “I’s juxtaposed against
each other. I superimpose a fake narra-
tive on real stuff and see what happens
to it. You put fake next to real, or fiction
next to autobiography.

The writer of fiction is not so much
lying but creating identity. Writing is
trying to reconnect; it’s finding out what
my pleasure is. There is an absolute
primary joy in writing. You giggle when
something great happens. The worst
Greek tragedy, you giggle at the cathar-
sis.

Great Expectations appears to be a very
autobiographical work.

I don’t know what autobiographical
would mean these days. My life is mainly
writing. I think I did something to my
own identity. I think more and more
personal problems are political and so-
cial problems. . . What would I take as
an autobiographical problem?

Was it your family experience described in
Great Expectations?

My mother committing suicide keeps
coming through as a theme; that’s au-
tobiographical. Obviously obsessions in
me are coming through. I think when
people talk about women’s literature
they obsess about the autobiographical
qualities; as if you couldn’t write apart
from your own experiences. If I talk
about sensations, they’re not just mine,
they’re all of ours; love for the sensual
and for the sense of touch. If language
is allowed to breathe, taken away from
propaganda, it’s sensual.

Are you considered a woman’s writer?

— continued on page 10

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987