Finally, Jeanne Barker-Nunn percep-
tively compares the autobiographies of
Maxine Hong Kingston and Kim Cher-
nin, both of whom “are entrusted with
their immigrant mothers’ stories, a lega-
cy they experience as both empowering
and burdensome.” Barker-Nunn con-
ceives of these as being stories about
storytelling, about the necessary separa-
tion of daughter from mother, and about
their ultimate reconciliation.

Carolyn Heilbrun’s Writing a Wo-
man’s Life is an unorthodox book that
has been a bestseller in paperback.
Heilbrun says her goal is “to suggest new
ways of writing the lives of women, as
biographers, autobiographers, or, in the
anticipation of living new lives, as the
women themselves.” Cautioning us
against the “danger of refining the theo-
ry and scholarship at the expense of the
lives of the women who need to experi-
ence the fruits of research,” Heilbrun
announces her intention to focus on
women’s lives, rather than on the texts
of those lives.

Heilbrun’s critique of the tradition of
women’s autobiography echoes that of
Sidonie Smith. She believes that socie-

Marita Golden

ty’s image of the acceptable woman has
dictated her text. Women have histori-
cally been unable to express anger, ac-
knowledge pain, or describe themselves
as powerful (even when warranted).
Instead, they have portrayed themselves
as “intuitive, nurturing, passive.” To
illustrate, Heilbrun contrasts Eudora
Welty’s One Writer's Beginnings with
May Sarton’s Journal of a Solitude. She
criticizes the former for its romanticism
and nostalgia (“Nostalgia, particularly
for childhood, is likely to be a mask for
unrecognized anger”) and calls the latter
a watershed “because Sarton deliberately
retold the record of her anger.”
Heilbrun’s analysis thus confirms
Jelinek’s assertion that women auto-
biographers focus on the private sphere.
But, whereas Jelinek simply observes,
Heilbrun finds fault. “These women are
therefore unable to write exemplary
lives: they do not dare to offer them-
selves as models, but only as exceptions
chosen by destiny or chance.” Heil-
brun’s assumption that male models of
power are of value and therefore should
be depicted by women needs examina-
tion. Perhaps women focus on the pri-
vate life because the assertion of power,
even when accomplished, is less inter-
esting to them or of less enduring value
than mother/daughter relationships,
introspection, or personal development.
Each of the six chapters focuses on
one or more women writers — George
Sand, Dorothy Sayers, several poets
(including Adrienne Rich), Virginia
Woolf, Vera Brittain and Winifred
Holtby, and Amanda Cross (Heilbrun’s
pseudonym when she is writing her aca-
demic murder mysteries) — and on a
topic: women’s relationships to one
another, marriage, aging, telling the
truth, pseudonyms, and how depiction
of these topics is essential to allow
women the freedom of living outside

Winter 1990

male plots. These chapters are provoca-
tive. For example, Heilbrun asserts that
“The constraints on women’s writing
the truth about their lives were lifted
first by women poets” and that Adrienne
Rich has “done more than anyone else to
revolutionize women’s autobiography.”

This book is appropriately dedicated
to Nancy K. Miller, who has said “The
plots of women’s literature are not about
‘life. .. . They are about the plots of
literature itself, about the constraints

. of rendering a female life in fic-
tion.” Heilbrun insists on the connec-
tion between literature and life by saying
that, since we live through texts, female
plots are essential to give women per-
mission to live them.

Like Smith’s book, Shari Benstock’s
The Private Self is divided into sections
on theory and practice. But Benstock
puts this dichotomy under the magnify-
ing glass, showing it to be false and mis-
leading: “Practice always implies theory
of some kind (whether acknowledged or
articulated), and theory does not appear
in a vacuum — it cannot exist without
practice.” Again like Smith, Benstock
offers no comprehensive theory: “Wo-
men’s writings are as individual as
women themselves, and they often resist
easy classification, thus posing problems
for theory from the first.”

Benstock’s own essay, entitled “Au-
thorizing the Autobiographical,” uses
Freud, Lacan, and Woolf to discuss what
she terms “fissures of female discontinui-
ty.” Fissures — “gaps in memory, dis-
locations in time and space, insecuri-
ties, hesitations, and blind spots .. .
internal cracks and disjunctions, rifts
and ruptures” — were found in women’s
autobiography, but not in men’s until
the twentieth century and the advent of
modernism, according to Benstock. Her
analysis here provides a sophisticated
amplification of Jelinek’s comment on
the disconnected nature of women’s
autobiographies.

Susan Stanford Friedman’s “Wo-

process of women and minorities.” Fur-

ther, Friedman sees the emphasis on

individualism in critical theory of auto-
biography as “a reflection of privilege.”
Friedman uses most effectively the theo-
ries of Sheila Rowbotham (focusing on
“ideology and institutions”) and Nancy
Chodorow (focusing on “the psychology
of gender socialization within the fami-
ly”) to support her contention that re-
lationships and connections are central
to women’s experience of the world, and
hence, to their autobiographies. What
makes this theory so persuasive is the
remainder of the essay, in which Fried-

Maya Angelou. Photo by Ted Pontiflet

man traces its applicability to a variety of
writers.

Friedman’s theory, like Benstock’s,
can be read as an elaboration of one of
Jelinek’s claims: that women autobio-
graphers situate their texts in the private
sphere by choice. It also provides a posi-
tive interpretation of this focus, which
counters Heilbrun’s view. Yet another
positive interpretation of this locus is

Selected Reading List of Autobiographies by Women

CLASSICS

Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Harriet Jacobs (1861)
The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, Gertrude Stein (1931)
Margaret Sanger: An Autobiography, Margaret Sanger (1938)
Dust Tracks on a Road, Zora Neale Hurston (1942)

Killers of the Dream, Lillian Smith (1949)

Anne Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl, Anne Frank (1952)
Memories of a Catholic Girlhood, Mary McCarthy (1957)
Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter, Simone de Beauvoir (1958)

I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Maya Angelou (1970)
Blackberry Winter, Margaret Mead (1972)

Journal of a Solitude, May Sarton (1973)

The Woman Warrior, Maxine Hong Kingston (1976)

One Writer’s Beginnings, Eudora Welty (1984)

RECENTLY PUBLISHED OR REDISCOVERED

Letters of a Woman Homesteader, Elinore Pruitt Stewart (1914)
West With the Night, Beryl Markham (1942)

Mountain Wolf Woman, Mountain Wolf Woman (1961)

Child of the Dark, Carolina Maria deJesus (1962)

Farewell to Manzanar, Jean and James Houston (1973)

Nisa!, Marjorie Shostak (1981)

Bronx Primitive, Kate Simon (1982)

Migrations of the Heart, Marita Golden (1983)

Ivy Days: Making My Way Out East, Susan Toth (1984)
A Leak in the Heart, Faye Moskowitz (1985)

A Not Entirely Benign Procedure, Perri Klass (1987)

men’s Autobiographical Selves: Theory
and Practice” is one of the most promis-
ing essays in the volume for its potential
contribution to future theoretical un-
derstanding. She reviews the work of
Georges Gusdorf and others who posit
that autobiography sprung up as a result
of the rise of individualism in the
post-Renaissance West. Friedman sees
this generalization as fundamentally in-
applicable to the autobiographies of
women and minorities: “From both an
ideological and psychological perspec-
tive ... individualistic paradigms of
the self ignore the role of collective and
relational identities in the individuation

offered by Jane Marcus in “Invincible
Mediocrity: The Private Selves of Public
Women,” which claims that white,
privileged, turn-of-the-century women
intentionally moved from public to pri-
vate discourse in order to write:

Signing themselves into seeming insig-
nificance in the apron pocket of history,
they anticipated the present project of wo-
men’s history to study the signature of
the self. What seems significant is not the
female struggle to enter male public dis-
course, which feminist scholars have doc-
umented, but the recognition of the ina-
bility of that discourse to include their
voices in its history, the necessity of the
return to the personal.

Understanding women’s autobiogra-
phy as “radically relational” is the proj-
ect of the anthology by Bella Brodzki and
Celeste Schenck, Life/Lines: Theorizing
Women’s Autobiography. Under devel-
opment at the same time as the Benstock
anthology, these essays expand Fried-
man’s approach. The editors acknowl-
edge the groundbreaking work on wo-
men’s autobiography of Jelinek and
Stanton but recognize that the former
wrote only in the Anglo-American tra-
dition of theory and texts themselves,
and the latter deleted the bio in auto/
bio/graphy: The Female Autograph. “We
strongly believe that the duplicitous and
complicitous relationship of ‘life’ and
‘art’ in autobiographical modes is pre-
cisely the point. To elide it. . . is dan-
gerously to ignore the crucial refer-
entiality of class, race, and sexual ori-
entation; it is to beg serious political
questions.” The foreword by Germaine
Bree and the editors’ introduction pro-
vide a crisp and breathtaking summary of
critical trends about male autobiog-
raphy, their inapplicability to women’s
autobiography, and the manner in
which social science, linguistics, psy-
choanalysis, and feminism have com-
bined to make “[a]utobiographies, newly
prominent as ‘texts’ ... central in
wide-ranging critical and theoretical
debate on the status of self, the nature of
self-representation, of language.” Set-
ting such seemingly different texts of self
as Margaret Cavendish’s seventeenth-
century The True Relation and Gertrude
Stein’s twentieth-century The Autobiog-
raphy of Alice B. Toklas against the tradi-
tion represented by Augustine, Rous-
seau, Adams, Whitman, and Franklin,
the editors dramatically illustrate the
tradition of the relational in women’s
autobiography. Cavendish is purport-
edly writing a biography of her husband;
Stein is, of course, using ventriloquism
to have Toklas tell her (Stein’s) life
story: “Being between two covers with
somebody else ultimately replaces singu-
larity with alterity in a way that is dra-
matically female.”

The table of contents of Life/Lines
reads like the canon of theorists current-
ly writing on women’s autobiography.
The editors have been inclusive to a
fault: “We have invited theory ranging
from ethnographic to psychoanalytic,
from Marxist to formal, from generic to
cultural and historicist, as well as the
rich proliferation of French critical ap-
proaches.” Additionally, the seventeen
essays traverse the centuries from medi-
eval to present, the globe from the

f Mime

Anne Frank. A copiously annotated crit-
ical edition of her diaries has been publi-
shed by the Netherlands State Institute.
Illustrations include reproductions from her
original diary as well as photographs.
Available from Doubleday ($35).

Americas to Europe to Algeria, ethnici-
ties from Native American to Jewish.
The anthology, unlike the others, also
includes two essays on lesbian auto-

biographers.
—continued on next page
Belles Lettres @ 5