neatly combines qualities traditional to the California  
private eye (she lives a spare, hard life and can’t handle  
marriage) with some new traits (she works out regularly and  
is capable of conducting friendships). In "G" Is for Gum-  
shoe (Holt, 1990, $16.95, 261 pp.), Kinsey celebrates her  
thirty-third birthday, moves into her terrific new apartment,  
and shows up on someone’s hit list, a fact that not only  
endangers her life but also complicates her current investi-  
gation, the search for an elderly eccentric who lives in a  
desert shantytown, an intriguingly ominous setting. Tradi-  
tionally, the PI pays a price for solving her cases: She often  
suffers physically and frequently loses something or some-  
one dear to her. Here, loss may be softened by gain, for  
Grafton introduces Robert Dietz, a savvy bodyguard and a  
man mature enough, perhaps, to sustain a relationship.  
Sometimes perplexing, but professional and supportive,  
Dietz is himself a complication as Kinsey plays both stalked  
and stalker in her satisfying seventh adventure.  

In A Wreath for the Bride (Putnam, 1990, $18.95, 239  
pp.), Lillian O’Donnell introduces Gwenn Ramage, who  
does corporate investigations in New York City. Reluctantly  
undertaking a murder investigation as a favor to an old  
client, Gwenn stumbles onto an unlikely series of deaths and  
finds answers to present crimes in past misdeeds. Like  
O’Donnell’s established hero, Norah Mulcahaney, Gwenn  
Ramage has a detailed, interesting past, a promising future,  
and a stout heart.  

Warshawski, Millhone, and Ramage — three decent  
women — get along by means of exacting personal stan-  
dards, professional determination, a little help from their  
friends, and a lot of courage, despite the pervading irratio-  
nality of the mean streets. No mean accomplishment.  

The latest offerings by L.R. Wright and by Sharyn Mc-  
Crumb, both much admired, question basic human priori-  
ties. In A Chill Rain in January (Viking/Penguin, 1990,  
$17.95, 273 pp.), Wright compares the harsh interaction  
between a beautiful sociopath, Zoe Strachan, and her inef-  
fectual brother with the brief alliance between Ramona  
Orlitzki, a confused but courageously determined old wom-  
an, and the appealing youngster she befriends. While devel-  
oping these relationships, as well as the one between Cana-  

Heavenly Soles, cont’d from p. 35  

In fact, it was not until this century that shoe designers  
began to emerge from anonymity to achieve fame equalling  
that of the great clothes designers.  

One of the greatest masters of shoe design was Pietro  
Yantourny, a mysterious man of uncertain origin whose  
shop placard in Paris proclaimed him "The world’s most  
expensive custom shoemaker."  

Even in the early 1900s, Yantourny required his clients to  
leave a $1,000 deposit, delivering the first pair of shoes  

dian Mounted Police Officer Karl Alberg and his sometime  
lover, Cassandra Mitchell, Wright examines the need for  
personal autonomy in telling ways: Zoe exerts absolute  
control over every detail of her life in order to avoid crimi-  
nal prosecution; Ramona yearns for self-determination when  
age and illness erode her independence; Cassandra’s mother  
demands attention and attendance; and Karl, in the police  
officer’s constant dilemma, balances public good against  
individual need. At least, he tries. With its deft pacing and  
rich characterization, A Chill Rain in January is an absorb-  
ing novel.  

Suspense dominates If  
Ever I Return, Pretty  
Peggy-O (Scribners, 1990,  
$17.95, 312 pp.) rather  
than Sharyn McCrumb’s  
customary humor. But fans  
will relish the telling de-  
tails, here of Appalachian  
countryside and lifestyle,  
for which McCrumb is  
also praised. Folksinger  
Peggy Muryan buys a huge old house in Hamlin, Tennes-  
see, as a base from which to develop a new repertoire and  
to refurbish her faltering career. Emotional baggage from  
the Viet Nam era is brought into sharp focus for Peggy,  
Sheriff Spencer Arrowood and his deputy when a series of  
militaristic ritual crimes intimidate the singer and terrorize  
the community. McCrumb effectively balances repercussions  
of the war in IndoChina with various broken domestic  
dreams as the Class of 1966 plans a reunion. And the sur-  
prising climax demonstrates that distrust for the social  
structure and disillusionment with the system of justice run  
deep. Sharyn McCrumb resolves her mystery but creates a  
stunningly open ending.  

¢ Jane Bakerman, who sometimes misses Appalachia very  
much, applauds these authors for an unusually strong group  
of novels.  

only after two years or more. But his clients were only too  
happy to agree to these terms because the shoes fit, as one  
client said, like a "silk sock" of incomparable lightness and  
elegance. Before beginning work for a new client, Yan-  
tourny observed the person walking barefoot to see where  
she placed her weight and made a plaster cast after measur-  
ing every inch of the foot.  

Another heavily featured designer in Trasko’s book is  
Roger Vivier, the "darling" of Diana Vreeland, former  
Vogue editor and doyenne of fashion. Vreeland, who wore  
nothing but custom-made shoes, called Vivier’s shoes “per-  
fection." Using rich materials like silk, crystal beads, se-  
quins, and jewellike stones, Vivier launched a “golden era  
in shoe design" during the 1950s, when he collaborated with  
Christian Dior to create fashion underscored with shoes  
characterized by simple silhouettes overlaid with lavish  
materials.  

While Trasko concludes that during this century the  
quality of fine shoemaking has deteriorated in all but excep-  
tional cases, she manages to find consolation in the astound-  
ing variety of styles now available in footwear. Her book  
provides a delicious sample of some of the best of them.  

—Holly Hall