Seductive and Sinister

Supernatural Tales, by Vernon Lee. Dufour  
(Box 449, Chester Springs, PA 19425),  
$18.95, 222 pp.

by Viola G. Thomas

Great news. No longer will we  
have to haunt second-hand  
bookstores, like modern-day  

ghosts pricked by unseemly desires to feel  
the past impinge upon our present, if we  
want to read Vernon Lee. She has finally  
materialized among us, once again, in  
this reprint of a 1955 anthology of some  
of her best supernatural tales. And this is  
surely the place to get to the heart of her  
secrets, encoded as they are in the fan-  
tastic. Her contemporary, Edith Whar-  
ton, thought that Lee’s fiction was  
among her best writing, even if it did not  
receive the popular appreciation it de-  
served. Indeed, in her heyday, Vernon  
Lee (1856-1935) was a prolific author  
whose reputation rested mainly on her  
essays on art, criticism, biography, travel  
sketches, and political writings. Never-  
theless, in recent years, the happy few  
who have run across her have only done  
so in yellowed copies of her excursions  
into fantasy.

Lee wrote some 15 such stories, and  
the 6 presented here offer a fair sampling  
of her talent and versatility. Because she  
did not specialize professionally in the  
fantastic, Lee avoided many of the pit-  
falls of the genre, such as didacticism,  
clichés, and repetitions. All of these  
stories were written between 1881 and  
1913, at a time when the literature of the  
fantastic was at its peak. And when the  
fantastic came into contact with the de-  
cadent period in art, new forms were  
born, combining the aesthetics of conci-  
sion and concentration with satanic  
themes, morbid atmospheres, and the  

obsessive imagery of decomposition.

All 6 of these stories by Vernon Lee  
take place in Italy, but characteristically  
in Italies of the past, ranging from the  
medieval period to the 19th century,  
permitting her to explore different his-  
torical periods. One of her greatest tal-  
ents was to “feel herself into” or project  
herself through empathy into the remote  
past of her characters, something Henry  
James also noted when he remarked on  
her uncanny ability to resuscitate the  
warmth and smells of the Italian coun-  
tryside. But to these marvelous descrip-  
tions of such beauty and enchantment,  
she added the feelings of the macabre  
and the chills felt when the past sud-  
denly intrudes in the life of her pro-  
tagonists.

For example, in “A Wicked Voice,”  
an unfortunate Wagnerian modern com-  
poser, who hates vocalists of the past, is  
haunted by the voice and music of Zaf-  
firino, modeled after the 18th-century  
castrato singer Farinelli. This tale is a  
model of impressionistic study of the  
Venetian landscape and of the murky  
feelings it evokes. At times, Lee’s de-  
scriptions of the gilded salons of the old  
palazzi seem like Sargent paintings,  
seductively lit. But soon her Venice,  
floating “in the stagnant lagoon of the  
past,” yields more unsettling emotions,  
as she puts it, “as if there arose out of its  
shallow waters a miasma of long-dead  
melodies which sickened but intoxicated  
my soul.”

Vernon Lee was not interested in con-  
ventional Victorian ghosts. Her ghosts  
must be the products of one’s fancy and  
emotions, of snatches of memories of  

places accompanied by “the strange pet-  
fume of witchgarden flowers.” And these  
ghosts must lead us down the sometimes  
musty and damp but always penetrat-  
ingly sweet paths of exotic places, for in-  
deed, as she put it, “What use has it got if  
it lands us in Islington or Shepherd’s  
Bush?”

And the female protagonists who lead  
us down those paths are often beautiful  
but cruel. For example, Medea de Carpi  
in “Amour Dure” is a 16th-century Ital-  
ian princess, married against her will,  
who in Borgia fashion murders her first  
two husbands but is strangled by the  
third. She comes back to haunt all men  
who fall in love with her portrait and  
leads them to their death. Here is one of  
Lee’s characteristic portrayals of such  
pre-Raphaelite beauty: “The face is a  
perfect oval, the forehead somewhat  
over-round, with minute curls, like a  
fleece, of bright auburn hair” to which is  
added a vampire-like touch: “Tight  
eyelids and tight lips give a strange re-  

Vernon Lee. From a drawing by J.S. Sargent,  
1889, in the Ashmolean museum, Oxford.

finement, and, at the same time, an air  
of mystery, a somewhat sinister seduc-  
tiveness: they seem to take, but not to  
give.”

There is not always something sud-  
denly repulsive, dangerous, and perverse  
in Vernon Lee’s depictions of physical  
beauty, especially female beauty. Al-  
though all of her stories deal with impos-  
sible or fatal loves, not all of her women  
are predators instead of victims. It gets  
more complex than that, as illustrated by  
“Prince Alberic and the Snake Lady.”  
Here, it turns out that true love and de-  
votion can bring about the saving trans-  
formation of the snake lady into a beau-  
tiful, kind woman. However, every suc-  
ceeding generation of Alberics has be-  
trayed her, and she is discovered at the  
end of the story as a horribly mutilated  
corpse.

Of course, these creatures were born  
out of Lee’s fancies, affinities, and repul-  
sions. And it is all too facile to read these  
as manifestations of a displaced sexual  
intensity. But here her homosexual ten-  
dencies and personal difficulties seem to  
have found the perfect conscious and ar-  
tistic outlet in the subversive, antirealist  
form that the fantastic can be.

May this give a hint, if it cannot be a  
taste, of Vernon Lee’s kind of storytell-  
ing magic. I am sorry that this anthol-  
ogy, not put together by Lee herself but  
by the editors choosing from four sepa-  
rate volumes, does not include  
“Dionea,” a far superior tale to “The  
Wedding Chest,” nor Lee’s perhaps best-  
known ghost story, “The Phantom  
Lover.” However, it is still very good to  
have, and the introduction by Lee’s  
executrix, Irene Cooper Willis, provides  
a useful background to her life and opin-  
ions.

© Viola G. Thomas teaches at Tufts  
University and is working on a book on Ver-  
non Lee.

Literature Takes on Art

Sugar and Other Stories, by Antonia Byatt. New York: Scribner’s, 1987, $16.95, 248 pp.  
Still Life, by Antonia Byatt. New York: Scribner’s, $16.95, 384 pp.

by Barbara Griffith Furst

The stories and novels of  

Antonia Byatt, an English  

critic, BBC broadcaster, and,  
until recently, a teacher of literature,  
have arrived only relatively recently in  
this country. Such is her talent that her  
stories are reminiscent of other major  
British writers and, occasionally, the  
“gothic” Isak Dinesen. Although this is  
praise indeed, such comparison does  
Byatt a disservice, for her skill in a vari-  
ety of techniques and her wide range of  
subjects set her apart.

Her stories often unfold as literary or  
art criticism, and incidents in the lives of  
poets and artists serve as springboards,  
for many of them are packed with liter-  
ary, artistic, and philosophical allusions  
without, fortunately, being abstruse. In  
“Precipice-Encurled,” the aged Robert  
Browning at a remote Alpine hotel re-  
flects upon his life and a recent invita-  
tion to visit an English family on holiday  
in the Apennines. The household in-  
cludes a painter, and the story revolves  
around what happens to preclude  
Browning’s visit. In it there are allusions  
to Ruskin, Descartes, and Monet among  
others.

Some of the stories, on the other  
hand, are stark in the vein of William  
Trevor. “In the Air” is about an elderly  
woman who, while walking her dog in a  
London park, is approached by a menac-  
ing stranger and forced into conversa-  
tion with him. As a way out she takes  
him to tea at a blind friend’s apartment.  
“Loss of Face,” reminiscent of Margaret  
Drabble in style and content, is about a  
scholarly international conference in a  

“faceless” concrete hotel in a nameless  
country in the Far East. The forced  
friendliness and academic tolerance of  
the conference are shattered when an  
English don, having been on the best of  
terms with a Mr. Sun, addresses him as  
Mr. Moon. The most unusual story,  
“The Dried Witch,” is about an old  
Asian woman attempting to prevent  
“dryness” in herself through the magic of  
the local healer and who is condemned  
as a witch by the village for helping a  
young man deal with his young and  
seductive sister-in-law.

There are two very deft ghost stories in  
the collection. In “The Next Room” a  
middle-aged professional woman who  
had curtailed her career to care for a de-  
manding mother, though freed finally by  
her mother’s death, hears the sounds of  
her parents bickering through the walls  
no matter where she goes. In “The July  
Ghost” a boarder in a divorced woman’s  
house is visited repeatedly by the cheer-  
ful and friendly ghost of the woman’s  
dead 12-year-old son.

“Racine and the Tablecloth” concerns  
a genteel headmistress who refuses to  
recognize the exceptional intelligence of  
a scholarship student and who judges  
papers according to neatness of appear-  
ance rather than content. In “The Day  
E.M. Forster Died,” a woman writer  
leaving the London Library walks along  
Jermyn Street toward Piccadilly and  
meets a seedy and garrulous male ac-  
quaintance who takes her to lunch to  
boast about himself. In the style of Vir-  
ginia Woolf the woman stands outside  
herself and observes the streets, the  

man, and her own life, and, in catching  
sight of a newsstand banner announcing  
that E.M. Forster has died, remembers  
his admonition to “Only connect the  
prose and the passion.”

In “Sugar” an English woman realizes,  
from a conversation with her elderly  
father who is in a hospital in Amster-  
dam, how very far apart he and her  
mother were though they had lived to-  
gether for many years. In this Dutch city  
she is everywhere reminded of Van Gogh  
and how his paintings were not painted  
to entertain or to soothe but to portray  
reality — light and darkness, exhilara-  
tion and pain. In the same way, the  
events connected to various family ob-  
jects — a teapot, a horse trough, “real”  
apples and plums, two satin-dressed  
dolls, and spun sugar candy — were per-  
ceived from entirely opposite points of  
view by her mother and father.

The Van Gogh theme is ex-  

panded in the novel Still Life,  

a further exploration of how  
one sees and how such perceptions are  
intertwined with daily life. The paint-  
ings and letters of Van Gogh, especially  
in his last few frenzied and hyperproduc-  
tive years, are woven through the lives of  
Frederica Potter, a “liberated” Cam-  
bridge intellectual, and her older sister  
Stephanie, also educated at Cambridge.  
Frederica tends to fall in love with beau-  
tiful but distant men while Stephanie is  
married to Daniel Orton, a good and  
kind country parson from the working  
classes, and has two small children.  
Stephanie’s household also includes her  
withdrawn younger brother Marcus and  
her obese, lazy, and cantankerous  
mother-in-law. Stephanie adores her in-  
fant son Will and is taken up with baby  
food, dirty diapers, and the parish luna-  
tics while she yearns to use her mind  
again.

The stage is set in an excruciatingly,  
and therefore humorous, intellectual  
conversation among Frederica’s literary  
and artistic friends. It touches on Wit-  
tgenstein’s “mathematics of color”  
and a universal theory of color and the  
fact that “Van Gogh in his letters in  
French very rarely made his color adjec-  
tives agree with the nouns they qual-  
ified.”

The contrast between the lives of the  
upper middle and the working classes is  
the crux of Daniel Orton’s ministry, and  
the lives of Stephanie and Frederica are  
juxtaposed with that of their meek and  
“good” English mother, who in the end  
begins to rebel. The consequences of the  
Holocaust and its far-reaching and subtle  
effects upon its victims are exemplified  
in the poetry and personality of the  
monk-like Raphael Faber, the Cam-  
bridge don for whom Frederica develops  
a hopeless passion. Some of the absurd-  
ities of psychotherapy surface when the  
quiet but intelligent Marcus listens to his  
psychiatrist’s jargon and when he at-  
tends an encounter group of young  
people organized by a trendy clergyman  
with a yen for adolescent girls. In short,  
there is hardly an aspect of life in modern  
Britain that is not observed, presented,  
and dissected in the fine prose and vivid  
imagery of the nearly 400 pages of Still  
Life.

© Barbara Griffith Furst, who reviews  
frequently for Belles Lettres, is somewhat  
of an Anglophile.

March/April 1988