ET

Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

Ss  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  

¢  

Kamili Anderson  
Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  

%  

Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

Sd  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in  
September, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly subscrip-  
tions $2.00 an issue for classes of 10  
or more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, essays,  
biography, and criticism. Our pur-  
pose is to promote and celebrate  
writing by women and in doing so,  
to inform and entertain. For a more  
detailed editorial statement, send  
SASE for a copy of the Guidelines  
for Reviewers. All views expressed  
in Belles Lettres represent the views  
of the individual authors.  

Submissions  
Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Janet Mullaney or call 301-294-  
0278. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988  

Amazing Feats,  
Part 2  

In the July/August 1987 issue of Belles  
Lettres, we reported on “How To Perform  
Amazing Feats of Pecuniary Prestidigita-  
tion.” To wit, the Jenny McKean Moore  
Fund awarded Belles Lettres a matching  
grant of $2,500. Those who sent con-  
tributions, new subscriptions, gift sub-  
scriptions, and renewals for the latter  
part of 1987 enabled us to receive the  
matching grant. As a token of our ap-  
preciation, we have listed those whose  
orders and contributions resulted in our  
obtaining the matching funds.  

Because the Jenny Moore Fund is  
committed to helping Belles Lettres in-  
crease its subscription revenues, it has  
awarded a second matching grant of  
$2,500 for 1988. Any contributions,  
new subscriptions, gift subscriptions, or  
renewals that we receive specifically as  
a result of this solicitation will enable  
us to collect this second grant. So don’t  
wait until your subscription expires to  
renew (your expiration date appears on  
your mailing label)! Don’t wait to pur-  
chase those gift subscriptions you have  
been contemplating! If you have not  
subscribed yet, do so now! And con-  
tributions, always welcome, will double  
themselves if you send them now.  

Please note: It is essential that you in-  
dicate on your contribution or subscrip-  
tion order that you are responding to  
the matching grant. You may do so by  
writing, somewhere on your order,  
“Moore Fund.” And don’t forget, a sub-  
scription order placed by February 15  
makes you eligible to win a book in our  
subscriber’s drawing.  

Acknowledgments  

Belles Lettres acknowledges the following  
people for contributions and  
subscriptions that resulted in the award  
of a matching grant from the Jenny  

McKean Moore Fund.  

Nancy Arcuri, Swaantje Au, Elizabeth  
Baer, Susan Ballard, Catherine  
Bermon, Amanda Bozarth, William  
Brailsford, Joan Brenner, Judith Brown,  
Claire Buckingham, Ann Bunting,  
Dora Byse-Lee, Rachel Camm, Susan  
Carranza, Linda Carrillo, Beth Carter,  
Angeles Casabi, Kate Chard-Herring,  
Chinosole, Cathy Colman, Gloria  
Coodley, Bonnie Jean Cox, K. Crooks,  
Dawn Davey, Leona Davies, Alice  
DeLana, Julia Demmin, Kate Desatta,  
Josette Desfayes, Joan Dickenson,  
Jeanne Dosch, Kathryn Douglas,  
Shirley Duffy, Dora Esten, Abbie  
Fassnacht, Joyce Fine, Stel Fine,  
Angela Fiore, Carol Flechner, Rachel  
Gallagher, Dorothy Gatch, Doris Gold,  
Carolyn Greene, Gayle Greene, Carol  
Guddal, Mina Hamilton, Margaret  
Hanni, Rachel Haralambous, Jean  
Hardy, Gale Harris, Janet Hartley,  
Pamela Hildebran, Beverly Hitchins,  
Deborah Jo Hofmann, Margaret  
Houston, Jean Hudson, Nancy  
Humphreys, Linda Hunt, Leslie Hunt,  
Marilyn Jean, Carmen Johnson, Mary  
Etta Johnson, Sonia Johnson,  
Constance Joseph, Micheline Justman,  
Irene Kacandes, Arlene Kent, Deborah  
Lambert, Judith Lehman, Emily Leider,  
Jane Levin, Janet Levine, Laura Little,  
Sandy Louis, Margaret Lyell, Joanne  
Lyman, Dorothy Mack, Lourdes  
Marrero Blanco, Nadine Martin, Daire  
McCabe, Donna McDaniel, Susan  
McNamara, Bruce McPherson, Risa  
Mednick, Terry Moore, Mary Morell,  
Pauline Newcomer, Judith O'Keefe,  
Nancy Olsen, Gilda Outremont,  
Elizabeth Patton, Jill Paydon, Joyce  
Pettis, Real Comet Press, Elmer Reed,  
Melanie Reed, Betty Renshaw, Jean  
Reves, Emily Ring, Patricia Roth, Sula  
Rowe, Barbara Ruch, Richard Ruyle,  
Marjorie Ryan, Elizabeth Saunier,  
Dorothy Schmidt, Joan Schumack,  

CONTENTS #@  

VOLUME 3/NUMBER 3  

WOMEN AND WORK  

2  

Daughter of the Hills  
River of Light  

pm aman bird Simi mim aa ES by Myra Page  
by Brenda Peterson  

edited by Frederique Delacoste and Priscilla Alexander  

edited by Laurie Bell  
by Lois Phillips Hudson  

. edited by Jane Lecompte  

4 Sex Work: Writings by Women in the Sex Industry  
Good Girls/Bad Guys: Sex Trade Workers and Feminists Face to Face  
Bones of Plenty... 00.0000 cee e eevee  

5 Emily: The Diary of a Hard-Worked Woman  

6 Hard Times Cotton Mill Girls  

SMO MADR OGAmER CE by Victoria Byerly  
To Toil the Livelong Day: America’s Women at Work 1780-1980  

edited by Carol Gronerman and Mary Beth Norton  
The Weir and Spoonhandle by Ruth Moore  

MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS  

%  

REVIEWS  

10  

i  

12  

15  

3  
5  
13  

This issue of Belles Lettres was sponsored by the Kentucky  
Foundation for Women.  

Memory Board  

Picking Up  
COLUMNS  

Impressions: Working Class Issues, Briefly Noted (by Janet Mullaney)  

Mother Love  
To Have and To Hold  
The Goddess Letters  

Three Daughters  
Different Daughters: A Book by Mothers of Lesbians  

Doeomonocme na easaeonsg sas omonsas edited by Louise Rafkin  
AE MEME E PO Ee d SIRE ee PRES EPO by Enid Bagnold  

Of Woman Born: Motherhood as Experience and Institution  
Le eee by Adrienne Rich  
The Mother Knot by Jane Lazarre  
Every Mother’s Son by Judith Arcana  
Mothers on Trial: The Battle for Children and Custody . by Phyllis Chesler  
The Mother Machine: Reproductive Technologies from Artificial  
Insemination to Artificial Wombs by Gena Corea  
Raising a Baby the Government Way: Mother’s Letters to  

the Children’s Bureau, 1915-1932 by Molly Ladd-Taylor  
In the Family Way: Childbearing in the British Aristocracy, 1760-1860  

by Judith Schneid Lewis  
by Vivian Gornick  

nA DA BPA Sd NDA SOsesoOSouUs es by Candace Flynt  
Le eee by Deborah Moggach  
by Carol Orlock  

by Anna Mitgutsch  

Woman-Church: Theology and Practice and Womanguides: Readings  
Toward a Feminist Theology by Rosemary Radford Ruether  
Sophia: The Future of Feminist Spirituality  

pa bdnd StH ERS edited by Susan Cadey, Marian Ronan, and Hal Taussig  
Immaculate and Powerful: The Female in Sacred Image and Social Reality  
er re edited by Clarissa W. Atkinson, Constance H. Buchanan,  
and Margaret Miles  

Diving Deep and Surfacing: Women Writers on Spiritual Quest  

CREAR EMIRARER SHIM HERES METRE RET aD by Carol P. Christ  
The Hero Within: Six Archetypes We Live By by Carol Pearson  
The Women’s Spirituality Book and The Kwan Yin: Book of Changes  

PREM EMRA PEM YH EB EESEAEHES EE ERE TREE EH by Diane Stein  
The I Ching of the Goddess by Barbara G. Walker  
The Stories We Hold Secret: Tales of Women’s Spiritual Development  

edited by Carol Bryhac, Linda Hogan, and Judith McDaniel  
Hear the Silence: Stories by Women of Myth, Magic, and Renewal  
Ce ee eee edited by Irene Zahava  
Laughter of Aphrodite: Reflections on a Journey to the Goddess  

by Carol P. Christ  
The Great Cosmic Mother: Rediscovering the Religion of the Earth  

by Monica Sjöde and Barbara Mor  

by Alex Zwerdling  
by Jane Marcus  

Virginia Woolf and the Real World  
Virginia Woolf and the Languages of Patriarchy  
Virginia Woolf and Bloomsbury: A Centenary Celebration  

edited by Jane Marcus  
The Essays of Virginia Woolf: Volume One, 1904-1912  

edited by Andrew McNeillie  

Tending to Virginia 2... eee by Jill McCorkle  
Ellen Terry: Player in Her Time by Nina Auerbach  
Lucha by Constance Urdang  

ama mewnomemnmnmnamnwemk ma hin by Jane Rule  
Adios Mr. Moxley: Thirteen Stories by Josephine Jacobsen  
ROA SHU s Asam Aeeanmasomee by Lucy Honig  

Retrospective: Harriette Simpson Arnow  

Belles Lettres Interview: Chris Llewellyn  

On the Cover: Sharecropper’s Child, Reading. Southeast Missouri Farms, May 1938.  
Photograph by Russell Lee courtesy of Prints and Photograph Division, Library of Congress.  

Elizabeth Schwartz, Stephanie Selice,  
Hilda Shea, Monica Shinn, Rodie  
Siegler, Carol Sinavaiana, Michele  
Slung, Natalie Sluzar, Joy Smith,  
Maureen Snelgrove, Stephanie  
Strickland, Alison Sulloway, Deborah  
Swearingen, Ellen Terry, Sarah  

Thomson, Marian Todd, Anita  
Tiambeng, Michelle Urry, Dianne  
Uyehara, Anacleta Walters, Mollie  
Weeks, J.F.N. Welch, Wanda Wencel,  
Martha Wenger, Kathleene West,  
Frances Wyers, Kazuyo Yamane, Rita  
Yeasted, Fran Zaniello, J. Zerwekh.  

Belles Lettres 1|