Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

¥%

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
EDITOR/PUBLISHER  

Darcie Conner Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR  

Dorothy Abbott  
Kamili Anderson  
Carol Armbruster  
Jane Bakerman  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Faye Moskowitz  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Susan P. Willens  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  

Jeanne Casey  
Adele Gorelick  
Carmen Johnson  
Catherine McDermott  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

Hassana Haqq  
Karen Tucker Jenkins  
Elaine Sewell  
PRODUCTION ASSISTANCE  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in  
September, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Small Changes, Seattle, WA; In-  
land Book Company, East Haven,  
CT; and Ubiquity Distribution,  
Brooklyn, NY. Member of the  
Coordinating Council of Literary  
Magazines.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID; + $9 foreign, U.S.  
funds. Sample Issue: $1.00.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, poetry, essays,  
biography, and criticism. Our pur-  
pose is to promote and celebrate  
writing by women and in doing so,  
to inform and entertain. All views  
expressed in Belles Lettres represent  
the views of the individual authors.  

Correspondence  
All editorial correspondence and  
books for review should be sent to  
the editor at 11151 Captain’s Walk  
Ct., Gaithersburg, MD 20878,  
except for poetry books and queries,  
which should be sent to Michelle  
Tokarczyk, 130 W. 16th St., #61,  
NY, NY 10011, and mysteries,  
which should be sent to Jane Baker-  
man, RR 23, Box 131, Terre  
Haute, IN 47802. Contributors  
should query first, send clips, and  
enclose SASE.  

Advertising  
Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Copy should be camera-  
ready (stats or veloxes). If other  
forms are accepted (i.e., manu-  
script, negatives, photocopies, art  
boards), production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of is-  
sue. Please write for rate card or call  
(301) 294-0278.  

©Belles Lettres Inc.  

July/August 1988  

Letters  

I was delighted to open my March/April  
1988 issue of Belles Lettres and discover the  
painting of Vernon Lee on the cover, then to  
turn to a review by Viola Thomas and learn  
that Vernon Lee’s Supernatural Tales has  
been reprinted.  

In the review itself, however, I was trou-  
bled by one paragraph which contains a dan-  
gerously inaccurate reading of Lee’s life and  
work. After describing the women characters  
Lee created in her fictional world, Thomas  
writes: “Of course, these creatures were born  
out of Lee’s fancies, affinities, and re-  
pulsions. . . . But here her homosexual ten-  
dencies and personal difficulties seem to have  
found the perfect conscious and artistic out-  
let in the subversive, antirealist form that the  
fantastic can be.”  

The association of “homosexual tenden-  
cies” with unspecified “personal difficulties”  
not previously referred to is, in general,  
highly questionable; but, specifically, in  
Lee’s case, both biographical assumptions are  
false. First, Lee’s personal life during the  
time she was composing her supernatural fic-  
tion was not so beset by “personal difficulties”  
that she needed a “subversive” outlet in the  
“fantastic.” In truth, for at least ten years of  
this period, Lee shared an artistically pro-  
ductive, loving relationship with Clem-  
entina [Kit] Anstruther-Thomson, her col-  
laborator on the “aesthetics of empathy.” It  
was a relationship that Lee privately charac-  
terized as “New Love, New Life” and later  
paid tribute to in her introduction to  
Anstruther-Thomson’s Art and Man (1924),  
which Lee edited after Kit’s death.  

Next, with regard to “homosexual ten-  
dencies,” the plain fact is that Lee was a  
lesbian, as was Irene Cooper Willis, the edi-  
tor of this volume of tales and Lee’s literary  
executor. The extensive private cor-  
respondence that Lee left behind provides us  
with the evidence for a real-life tale of Lee’s  
lesbian relationships with other women both  
before and after Kit and of her active role in  
an extensive support network of women  
whose primary living relationships were with  
other women.  

I wholeheartedly commend Thomas for  
her enthusiasm for Lee’s fiction and her ob-  
vious knowledge of Lee’s work and worth,  
but I also implore her not to reduce an im-  
portant lesbian identity to “tendencies.” Lee  
was subjected to homophobic ridicule  
throughout her life by literary critics, politi-  
cal adversaries, and scholarly competitors, a  
ridicule that succeeded in silencing her and  
that led to the almost total neglect of her lit-  
erary productivity, nearly fifty books in a  
wide range of fields. Let us celebrate the re-  
turn to print of one volume by Lee, but at the  
same time, let us, at long last, free her from  
the closet.  

Phyllis F. Mannocchi  
Colby College, Waterville, Maine  

Viola G. Thomas replies:  

I would like to thank Professor Mannocchi  
for pointing out a possible misreading of the  
paragraph she quotes from.  

It never was my intention to re-closet the  
irrepressible Vernon Lee. Rather, I was  
groping toward the notion of a lesbian imagi-  
nation and what that might mean in terms of  
her fiction. In light of the recent debate over  
Sharon O'Brien’s biography of Willa Cather,  
a useful working definition has emerged to  
characterize the lesbian of the previous cen-  
tury, who may or may not have been clos-  
eted: a woman whose primary emotional and  
intellectual relationships were with women,  
regardless of the degree of physical intimacy.  
In that sense, Vernon Lee was certainly a  
lesbian. Although Irene Cooper Willis, her  
executor, is at pains to downplay the physical  
side of Vernon Lee’s friendships, in an un-  
published biographical essay she states: “She  
did fall in love with Kit . . . Victorian mo-  
rality deprived their love for one another of  
natural expression outside the bounds of re-  
spectable friendship . . . Vernon Lee’s ab-  
sorption in psychological aesthetics must  
have been some kind of sex sublimation.  

Furthermore, however sentimentally we  
may contemplate the intellectual collabora-  
tion between women, that of Vernon Lee  
and the un-intellectual Kit Anstruther-  
Thomson seems to have had its share of  
problems, not the least of which was a charge  
of plagiarism from Bernard Berenson. Ver-  
non Lee adds a more personal note in her  
preface to Art and Man when she fears “that  
all I did for the benefit of our joint essay may  
have been done at the expense of my collab-  
orator’s strained nerves.” She further char-  

CONTENTS  

VOLUME 3/NUMBER 6  

DOWN UNDER, PART TWO  
A Long Time Dying; Loving Daughters; The Home Girls  
The Three Miss Kings ...........  

The Well; Palomino; Woman in a Lampshade; Stories . .  
by Olga Masters  

by Jean Devanny  
by Ada Cambridge  

by Elizabeth Jolley  

I’m Dying Laughing; Ocean of Story: The Uncollected Stories of Christina  
Dancing on Coral ...............  

Love Child. sa:asazzeims saiwiaes  

Stories from the Warm Zone and Sydney Stories ....  
Circles of Faces. . .  
Dreamhouse..........  

Girl With a Monkey.............  
by Christina Stead  
by Glenda Adams  
by Jean Bedford  

by Jessica Anderson  

by Mary Dadswell  
by Kate Grenville  

by Thea Astley  

The Dream Sleepers and Other Stories; Waiariki; Mutuwhenua:  
The Moon Sleeps ...............  

Sister Ships ............  
Te Kaihau, The Windeater.......  

SHORT STORIES  

Spirit Seizures..................  
The Consolation of Nature .......  

The Age of Grief................  
Stalin in the Bronx ..............  

Family: Stories from the Interior  

In The Music Library............  
Lover’s Choice ...............  

REVIEWS  

Mama Day.............  
In Other Words: New Poems .....  
Unremembered Country .........  

by Patricia Grace  

by Joan London  
by Keri Hulme  

by Melissa Pritchard  
by Valerie Martin  

by Jane Smiley  
by Suzanne Ruta  
edited by Geri Giebel Chavis  

by Ellen Hunnicutt  
by Becky Birtha  

by Gloria Naylor  
by May Swenson  

The Queer of Swords... 0...  
by Judy Grahn  
Second Hand Coat: Poems New and Selected.............. by Ruth Stone  
Travelling with Coyotes, Poems & Diary .............. by Jennifer Moyer  

The Delicacy and Strength of Lace  
by Leslie Marmon Silko and James Wright  

American Indian Women Telling Their Lives  
edited by Gretchen M. Bataille and Kathleen Mullen Sands  

Lovingkindness..................  
A Restricted Country............  
Spence and Lila.................  

The Manzoni Family.............  
The Italian.  

by Anne Roiphe  
by Joan Nestle  
by Bobbie Ann Mason  

by Natalia Ginzburg  
by Anna Maria Ortese  

When I Am an Old Woman I Shall Wear Purple .... edited by Sandra Martz  

Nothing to Declare..............  
The Making of The African Queen  

COLUMNS  

by Mary Morris  
by Katherine Hepburn  

Belles Lettres Interview: Toni Morrison  

Retrospective: Margaret Drabble  
The Criminal Element  

Impressions: Related Reading: Australia and New Zealand, Paperback Picks,  
Toth and Koppelman Awards, Briefly Noted, Subscriber Profile.  

Belles Lettres Author and Subject Index, Volumes I-III  

On the Cover: Miles Franklin, author of My Brilliant Career and other novels.  
Photograph courtesy Australian Information Service.  

If you received a sample issue in the mail and like keeping up with the  
diversity in women’s writing, take this opportunity  
to have BELLES LETTRES arrive regularly: SUBSCRIBE TODAY!  

characterizes their joint work as that of “over-  
hasty discoverers.” Cooper Willis herself  
stresses the fact that it cost Lee some intel-  
lectual credibility when she attributes her  
failure to her absorption from the nineties  
onward in psychological aesthetics, a direc-  
tion in which not many of her readers were  
disposed to follow her.  

Finally, I think that although it no doubt  
played a large part, it is oversimplistic to sin-  
gle out her lesbianism as the reason for Lee’s  

failure to reach a wider and more sustained  
audience. Vernon Lee herself attributed it to  
her being an “alien” in a multifaceted way:  
not having clear ties to England, since she  
lived in Italy (and felt equally at home in  
France and Germany), or belonging to a  
specific social or professional class. She did  
not have the professorial connections of a  
Pater or a Ruskin, for example. She was just  
an individual. That she was such an individ-  
ual is, of course, what fascinates us today.  

Careful thanks are extended to  

The United States—New Zealand Council,  
whose funding assisted us in producing  
this special, larger-than-usual issue.  

Belles Lettres @ 1