Belles Lettres

P. O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

Y  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna Cook  
EDITORS  

°  

Darcie Johnston  
ASSOCIATE EDITOR  

°  

Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Susan Koppelman  
Claudia Tate  

CONSULTING EDITORS  
°  

Caryl Marsh  
ART ADVISOR  

©  

Carmen Johnson  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  
°  

Kathy Velis  
PRODUCTION ASSISTANCE  

¥  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ in-  
stitutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly sub-  
scriptions $2.00 an issue for classes  
of 10 or more. Send a request (one  
month before desired issue) on  
letterhead signed by the course in-  
structor. Sample Issue: $1.00.  
Make all checks payable to Belles  
Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  
Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose is  
to promote and celebrate writing by  
women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, request a copy  
of the Guidelines for Reviewers. All  
views expressed in Belles Lettres  
represent the views of the individual  
authors.  

Submissions  

Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney.  
Enclose SASE for return of  
materials.  

Advertising  

Only display advertising is  
accepted. Classified ads are  
accepted only as display ads. Copy  
should be camera-ready (stats or  
veloxes). Other forms will be  
accepted (i.e., manuscript,  
negatives, or photocopies); pro-  
duction charges will be assessed for  
typesetting or camera work. Dead-  
line for space reservations is the first  
of the month, two months preced-  
ing the month of issue. Address  
questions about reservations, di-  
mensions, and rates to Deanna  
Cook or call 703-524-7743. Belles  
Lettres reserves the right to reject  
advertising that is inappropriate to  
its stated editorial goals.  

July/August 1986  

Letters  

Thank you for the first women’s literary  
review which knows no boundaries:  
political, preferential, social, or national.  
The long piece on “Women in Theater” is  
a honey; the difficult evaluation of  
Marilyn French’s book is the first review  
I’ve read that makes it sound accessible to  
a nonacademic; and Diane Crowder’s  
review of Wittig’s two books does make  
me want to read the new translation and  
return to the French. And as for Sheila  
Fugard — you open up hearts with a desire  
to open books. Rare! Nancy Ryan  

Fieldbrook, CA  

A copy of Belles Lettres was passed around  
the office some months ago, but I held  
back because of what I perceived to be a  
tendency toward fluffy, insubstantial  
reviews. I am much more impressed by the  
March/April issue — I hope you continue  
your search for more reviews that discuss  
the issues in depth rather than merely  
summarizing the book and that do not  
hesitate to criticize as well as praise.  

But why the awful title? Belles Lettres is  
defined as “literature that is an end in itself  
and not practically or purely informative  
... light, entertaining, and often so-  
phisticated literature.” I hope this is not  
intended to describe either the review or  
the books that are discussed in it.  
Women’s writings are a means of com-  
munication and information —  
entertainment too, but not as an end in  
itself. Women have been seen for too long  
as frivolous playthings. Surely we ought  
not to devalue our work by discussing it  
under such a label. Sah lone  

New Haven, CT  

The meaning of the term belles-lettres has  
gone through several evolutions and does in-  
deed, in some circles, carry a connotation of  
frivolousness. We use the term in its original,  
literal sense: “fine letters.” We admit to bla-  
tant disregard of any negative connotations  
that still exist (literary history reveals that it  
was probably stuffy old men, most notably,  
an English literature teacher named L. Hunt  
[1855], who promulgated the term’s bad  
reputation), and we let the contents of Belles  
Lettres attest to the pure meaning. We  
published a statement about the title in our  
preview issue (May, 1985), which is  
reprinted in this issue. — the Editors  

According to C. Hugh Holman in  

A Handbook of Literature, belles  

lettres is “literature, more es-  
pecially that body of writing comprising  
drama, poetry, fiction, criticism, and es-  
says, which lives because of inherent im-  
aginative and artistic rather than scientif-  
ic, philosophical, or intellectual  
qualities.” Belles Lettres (pronounced  
bel-letruh) does indeed encompass  
reviews of and news about that especial  
body of writing. We mean to include  
nonfiction also. For, although nonfiction  
is engendered by science, philosophy, or  
intellect, we believe that it too has “in-  
herent imaginative and artistic qualities.”  
When it does not appear so, it is the fault  
of the exposition. We chose the name  
Belles Lettres also for its beauty.  

Announcements  

¥ A special thanks to Melinda  
Lewis-Matravers, who, despite an  
impending wedding and move,  
donated a great deal of her time to  
helping with the July issue.  

Due to a slip of the x-acto knife,  
several crucial words were omitted  
from the quote that introduced  
Eileen Lotozo’s review of Russian and  
Polish Women’s Fiction (May/June  
1986). The correct text is as follows,  
with omitted words in italics: “We  
are new women, we have an obliga-  
tion to introduce a new morality in  
place of the morality of loving slaves  
... We want a full life.”  

CONTENTS #  

VOLUME 1/NUMBER 6  

REVIEWS  
3 This Way Daybreak Comes: Women’s Values  
and the Futures by Annie Cheatham and Mary Clare Powell  
Swastika Night by Katharine Burdekin  
Ay Hester by Mrs. Oliphant  
Marcellas by Mrs. Humphry Ward  
Red Pottage by Mary Cholmondeley  
Poor Caroline by Winifred Holtby  
5 Mad Puppetstown, Two Days in Aragon, The Rising Tide,  
Time After Time by M. J. Farrell (Molly Keane)  
Plays: One by Caryl Churchill  
The Bobby-Soxer by Hortense Calisher  
11 The Dora Russell Reader: 57 Years of Writing and  
Journalism, 1925-1982 foreword by Dale Spender  
The Religion of the Machine Age by Dora Russell  
Outside the Magic Circle: The Autobiography of  
Virginia Foster Durr edited by Hollinger F. Barnard  
12 Women Making Music: The Western Art Tradition,  
edited by Jane Bowers and Judith Tick  

14 Short Reviews: The Conversations of Cow, by Suniti Namjoshi; The Graywolf  
Annual Two: Short Stories by Women, edited by Scott Walker; Playing the  
Changes, by Thulani Davis; Two Women in One, by Nawal el-Saadawi  

COLUMNS  

9 Belles Lettres Interview: Susan Allen Toth  
13 Impressions: Three Continents Press, Briefly Noted  

FEATURES  

2 Women of Mystery  
5 Introducing Virago Press  

7 Firsts in Fiction: A review of Transactions in a Foreign Currency, by Deborah  
Eisenberg; Collaborators, by Janet Kauffman; Face, by Cecile Pineda; Available  
Light, by Ellen Currie  

10 Rediscovery: Anzia Yezierska  

On the Cover: Drawing of Anzia Yezierska by Willi Pagany, courtesy of the Yivo Institute  
Archives. From the cover of Hungry Hearts and Other Stories (Persea Books).  

“Too much of a good thing  
can be wonderful.”  
— Mae West  

Our readers must agree — Belles Lettres begins its second year of publication  
with the next issue. We believe, too, that variety is a wonderful thing. In  
upcoming issues we will print special features on women writers of Australia,  
New Zealand, Ireland, and South America. We will continue to present  
you with rediscoveries, and we will share with you more conversations with  
writers of every ilk.  

We want to thank our charter subscribers. Thanks are given traditionally  
to those who have “made it possible,” but Belles Lettres was made possible  
simply because so few existing publications have devoted their pages to  
women writers and reviewers. History, politics, and economics have made  
Belles Lettres possible, and for that, there is little reason to give thanks. Our  
thanks to you, then, charter subscribers, are for being inquisitive and caring  
about books, for being adventurous enough to subscribe. Belles Lettres was  
already possible — you made it happen!  

Someone once likened publishing Belles Lettres to having a baby every two  
months. We are fond of this idea and have come to think of you as its  
godparents. We invite you to continue in supporting the baby’s nurturance  
and growth by renewing your subscriptions, sharing Belles Lettres with others,  
and writing to us with your ideas and feedback. A year’s subscription is now  
only $15.00, or $12.50 each if you buy two or more (either two years for  
yourself or a one-year subscription for yourself and someone else). And as a  
special thanks to charter subscribers, we will add a free issue to your subscrip-  
tion for each renewal or gift subscription. Each time you give, you give to  
yourself.  

— the Editors  

Belles Lettres @ 1