Recent Lesbian Fiction

Something Shady, by Sarah Dreher. Norwich, VT: New Victorian Publishers, 1986, $8.95,

264 pp. (PB)

Charleyhorse, by Cecil Dawkins. New York: Penguin Books, 1986, $6.95, 250 pp. (PB)  
Home in Your Hands, by Lee Lynch. Naiad Press (P.O. Box 10543, Tallahassee, FL 32302),

1986, $7.95, 222 pp. (PB)

The Love of Good Women, by Isabel Miller. Naiad Press, 1986, $8.95, 224 pp. (PB)  
Tender Warriors, by Rachel Guido DeVries. Firebrand Books (141 The Commons, Ithaca, NY

14850), 1986, $7.95, 188 pp. (PB)

Good Enough to Eat, by Leslea Newman. Firebrand Books, 1986, $8.95, 269 pp. (PB)  
Leave a Light on for Me, by Jean Swallow. Spinsters/Aunt Lute (P.O. Box 410687, San Fran-

cisco, CA 94141), 1986, $8.95, 292 pp. (PB)

Girls, Visions, and Everything, by Sara Schulman. The Seal Press (3131 Western Ave., Suite  
410, Seattle, WA 98121), 1986, $8.95, 178 pp. (PB)  
Sisters of the Road, by Barbara Wilson. The Seal Press, 1986, $8.95, 202 pp. (PB)

by Patricia Roth Schwartz

Time was when a woman looking

for a lesbian novel had two

choices: slink into a sleazy  
drugstore attired in a raincoat and dark  
glasses to peruse the racks for pulp paper-  
backs designed to titillate men, or check  
The Well of Loneliness out once again  
(this choice presumes a liberal local li-  
brary) to read about how wretched it  
was to be an “invert” named “Stephen”  
in the 1920s in Britain. The second wave  
of feminism changed all that. Standing  
before the fiction shelves at a good  
women’s bookstore, a prospective reader  
can easily be overwhelmed by the  
choices.

As the list of books reviewed here  
shows, more than a few feminist presses  
publish lesbian material; mainstream  
publishers occasionally take a risk with  
lesbian material, too (e.g., Penguin’s  
Charleyhorse). Not only can readers find  
novels with lesbian themes and charac-  
ters, they can also choose their genre.  
The lesbian mystery/detective story is  
alive and well; for some time the science  
fiction/fantasy field has featured charac-  
ters of varying affectional preferences;  
occasionally even a gay historical or  
gothic romance or a western can be  
found.

Such abundance at last is certainly  
thrilling—unless one requires, along  
with characters and themes that reveal  
a lesbian reality, some measure of  
quality. I continue to be amazed at how  
a movement that has produced some of  
the most transcendent poets in the lan-  
guage (Lorde, Rich, Hacker) can fall flat  
when it comes to creating fictions of  
people’s lives. Admittedly, writers such  
as Jane Rule (Outlander and Desert of the  
Heart, Naiad), Andrea Freud Lowenstein  
(This Place, Pandora Press), Alice  
Bloch (The Law of Return, Alyson), and  
Jan Clausen (Mother, Sister, Daughter,  
Lover and Sinking, Stealing, The Crossing  
Press) stand as gratifying exceptions.  
Barbara Wilson, Judith McDaniel, and  
Valerie Miner have also published well-  
crafted works of fiction with lesbian  
themes, and excellent novels with  
women-loving-women characters exist  
by writers such as Alice Walker and  
Marge Piercy, who are not lesbian and  
who publish in the mainstream. A great  
deal of the rest is forgettable.

This year’s new clutch of lesbian  
novels contains a few good eggs amidst  
the bad. A favorite of mine, the eagerly  
awaited sequel to her first volume, Stoner  
McTavish, is Something Shady by Sarah  
Dreher. Billed as mystery/adventure, the  
two volumes featuring Dreher’s lovable,  
bumbling, slightly shy, vulnerable travel  
agent cum detective, the Stoner of the  
title, are pure entertainment. Even so,  
Dreher’s writing is deft enough to satisfy  
those of us who need to experience co-  
herent characterization and structure,  
and a bit of grace to the language in  
order to be convinced that we are really  
reading fiction.

Something Shady does not measure up  
to Stoner McTavish in romantic inten-  
sity, partly because a seedy small town  
in down east Maine in the drear dead  
of winter cannot match the Grand Te-

March/April 1987

tons. Yet this book made me laugh out  
loud, even more than Stoner did.  
Humor, with a touch of irony, is Dre-  
her’s strong point; she seems to have  
invented a new genre, the comic mys-  
tery. The love story that continues  
through the two novels waxes a bit  
idealistic—but Stoner deserves it, and I  
forgive Dreher.

Charleyhorse by Cecil Dawkins is a  
novel that seems more like the film De-  
sert Hearts than does Jane Rule’s novel  
from which the film was adapted, Deserts  
of the Heart. It is that tried and true tale  
of the schoolmarm and the cowpoke,  
except in this case the cowpoke is a  
girl. Charley, the daughter of a  
domineering alcoholic mother, runs  
their huge Kansas ranch now that her  
brother is dead. She both comes out and  
comes into her own when Juna, a  
teacher, comes to board. Charley is as  
wild as the broncos she has tried to bust;  
love tames but does not break her. This  
novel is light but sensitive, full of wry  
wit and tender moments.

Home in Your Hands, a collection of  
short stories by Lee Lynch, is the au-  
thor’s fourth fiction publication with  
Naiad Press. Lynch’s strength lies in her  
depiction of lesbian lives that have been  
rarely chronicled: She writes about old-  
timey butches and femmes in the days  
before Stonewall (and now), women  
who know the streets and the bars as  
much as the inside of a women’s center,  
who drive cabs and work in factories,  
who exist on the fringe of society because  
of sexual preference, economics, and  
class. Lynch successfully uses the device  
of having the same characters reappear,  
at different times of their lives, in diffe-  
rent stories, with characters from one  
piece sometimes meeting up with those  
from another.

Lynch is less successful in her narra-  
tive style; she does too much telling and  
not enough showing, she too often forces  
an issue rather than letting it emerge.  
The seams of these stories show too  
much: the pins and the basting are left  
in. The reader is left feeling that “this  
story was about alcoholism” or “senior  
citizens too can be dykes.” As a result,  
Lynch’s narrative ultimately did not  
hold my attention, and her Polly-  
annaism was intolerable: The federal  
government does not give grants for re-  
novating lesbian bars in Greenwich Vil-  
lage, no matter how much one wishes  
they did. Lovers who meet in a bookstore  
only to find themselves in bed a half an  
hour later virtually never develop a long-  
term, stable partnership. I am not look-  
ing to tumble down a well of loneliness  
anymore, but I would rather leave fan-  
tasyland to Disney.

The real tragedy among recent lesbian  
titles is The Love of Good Women by  
Isabel Miller, who is also the author of  
the contemporary classic Patience and  
Sarah, a lyric tale of two women in 18th-  
century New England who escape the  
wrath of the patriarchy to travel and  
homestead together. Many lesbian read-  
ers cut their teeth on this book and on  
Rita Mae Brown’s Rubyfruit Jungle.  
Patience and Sarah is one of the few novels

I truly treasure. The Love of Good  
Women—and it really hurts to have to  
say this—should have remained another  
year or two on the drafting board. Since  
Miller has not published for 15 years, I  
can see the reluctance of author and pub-  
lisher to require this. Still, the work  
meanders through a plethora of unim-  
portant details so that the reader cannot  
begin to focus in from one sentence to  
the next, much less begin to know and  
care about the characters. And the  
characters—“Rosie the Riveter” workers  
in the World War II defense industry,  
who struggle with family, sexuality, and  
work—are so centered on their relation-  
ships to men that most lesbian readers  
will lose interest. I would really love to  
read a book about women in such jobs  
in such an era. The Love of Good Women  
is not it.

Firebrand Books has issued some fine  
nonfiction and poetry. The press’s two  
novels—Tender Warriors by Rachel  
Guido DeVries and Good Enough to Eat  
by Leslea Newman—seem to be its  
weakest links. Tender Warriors is an ex-  
ception to the average lesbian novel.

Vesta Tilley

Vesta Tilley  
by Sara Maitland

London: Virago Press, 1986, $6.95,  
148 pp. (PB)

Vesta Tilley was the most popular enter-  
tainer in Britain in the 1880s, the high-  
est earning woman in her day. Why is  
it that her name is wholly unfamiliar to  
us when that of her contemporary, the  
actress Ellen Terry, is comparatively well  
known? For one thing, Sara Maitland  
tells us in this succinct, compelling  
biographical essay, Terry was a serious  
actress, while Tilley was just a music  
hall singer. Class differences play a part,  
of course, as does the penchant of mid-  
dle-class historians to take notice of  
those forms of entertainment that appeal  
to their own tastes.

More important, however, in doom-  
ing Vesta Tilley to oblivion was her most  
obvious talent: She made her name as  
what Maitland calls “the greatest of the  
gender-benders.” Throughout Tilley’s  
career she appeared as a male imper-  
sonator, singing sentimental songs in the  
dress and mannerisms of a number of  
male characters she created and por-  
trayed. Although the music hall goers  
found Tilley’s impersonations delightful,  
historians and students of the British  
theater, Maitland implies, simply did  
not know what to do with Vesta Tilley.  
She was not personally scandalous; she  
left the stage in 1919 to live full-time  

DeVries’s narrative is woven through a  
critical period in the lives of three pro-  
tagonists—one straight, one male, one  
lesbian. The three DeMarco siblings, all  
still reeling from a childhood under a  
tyrannical father and a sweet mother  
who has recently died, exist outside of  
society’s norms. One sister is a lesbian,  
the other is a recovering junkie married  
to a Black man, and their brother is a  
socially inept, overweight young man  
with a serious health problem.

How these three, along with their  
father, find some measure of healing and  
peace, as well as a way to salvage their  
broken family, makes up the heart of  
this book. What I applaud in DeVries’s  
effort is her including lesbianism in a  
healthy slice of life rather than artifi-  
cially setting up gay characters, as so  
many of the pulp releases do, as the  
center of an unreal world. What I found  
distracting in the novel is a shifting and  
often confusing sense of point of view  
and a prose style that could use a lot  
more lift. Crisper editing would have  
helped this book.

—continued on page 6

Vesta Tilley in costume

with her husband, a conservative  
member of Parliament, and to devote  
herself to a variety of philanthropic  
projects. She was not, to anyone’s know-  
ledge, sexually licentious or even sexu-  
ally ambiguous, as were other cross-dres-  
sing performers such as Colette. She was  
not even sympathetic to feminism or to  
the reform movements that would have  
bettered the lot of the women who so  
faithfully came to hear her sing. So with-  
out an easy explanation for her vast ap-  
peal to audiences and without a scandal  
on which to ride into history, good old  
Vesta, cheered by thousands of working  
women who enjoyed her light voice and  
devastatingly accurate physical charac-  
terizations of men, was simply allowed  
to pass from memory.

Maitland, a journalist and novelist,  
has done a wonderful job of recreating  
Tilley’s milieu and life story. But  
Maitland is able to go only so far in  
understanding why Tilley became a male  
impersonator and how she appealed to  
her audiences. Maitland half-heartedly  
proposes a quasi-Freudian explanation,  
suggesting that Vesta’s desire to please  
her father was the motivating force in  
her life and art. But in the end, Maitland  
says, the answer to Tilley’s appeal is  
probably a very simple one: Whatever  
deeper meaning Tilley’s male imper-  
sonations may have had for her audi-  
ences, above all they probably found her  
impersonations humorous, touching,  
and just plain good fun.

—Lynne M. Constantine

Belles Lettres 3