King for a Day

King of the World, by Merrill Joan
Gerber. Wainscott, NY: Pushcart Press,
1990, $16.95, 276 pp.

by Charlotte Zoé Walker

Readers who are familiar with

some of Merrill Joan Gerber’s

gentler prose may be shocked by
this novel. If, like me, they sometimes
pick up a copy of Redbook only to see if
one of her beautifully rendered stories
about family life happens to be included,
they will have an adjustment to make as
they enter the world of this novel.
Readers who know Gerber’s splendid,
tougher works, such as the short story
collection Honeymoon, may be better
prepared for the uneasy experience of
reading this powerful, relentlessly hon-
est book about an abusive marriage.

Having read the jacket copy, I began
King of the World expecting to encounter
the point of view of an abused wife. The
riveting first chapter confirms that ex-
pectation with horrifying irony and in-
tensity. It also makes clear that Gerber is
not interested in a case study approach,
often used in popular writing about so-
cial problems. Her characters are uni-
quely, insistently themselves, as char-
acters in literature should be. Even
though Ginny is not subjected to the
extreme physical violence many women
face, her psychological readiness to be
victimized, her desperate passion for a
disturbed man, and her blindness to the
extent of his sickness are frighteningly
portrayed: “His mind was different from
everyone else’s — sometimes his wild
blue eyes rolled in his head, vibrating
with an intensity that alarmed her. But
her vague tinge of doubt was nothing to
the excitement she felt in his presence.”
In a swift sketch early in the novel, we
are given many of the reasons for Gin-
ny’s vulnerability: her spinal deformity,
which has made her feel ugly and un-
desirable; her feeling that she is dull; her
disaffection, after her father’s death,
with her own Jewish background and her
parents’ values.

In Part Two, we receive a new shock:
This novel is not going to be about the
abused wife alone. Her husband is eq-
ually its protagonist. In this lies its ex-
traordinary power. We enter, unwil-
lingly, but with troubled fascination,
the mind of Ginny’s husband Michael,
an unemployed, unemployable psychot-
ic, himself an abused child who is also an
aging, oversexed flower child. His
dreams, his obsessions, his language, are
unflinchingly rendered. One method
Gerber uses to lure us inside Michael’s
mind and persuade us to linger long
enough for her novel to do its work is a
bitter, faintly humorous form of irony.
The disastrous episode of Michael’s one
day as a traveling snack vendor is an ear-
ly example: Every step he takes leads
him deeper into absurd disaster, until
the moment that he has to take all the
spoiling burritos, sandwiches, and
doughnuts home and stuff them into his
refrigerator. When Ginny opens the re-
frigerator door, the avalanche of junk
food brilliantly suggests the truth about
her marriage.

King of the World moves frequently
between the minds of these two troubled
people. Ginny appears almost as dis-

turbed as Michael when she undertakes
the deception necessary to adopt a baby
while married to a man who would ap-
pear immediately unacceptable to any
social worker. After she has managed
the adoption and bonded with her new
baby, the disaster of the situation grows
more apparent to her.

One of the most ambiguous charac-
ters in the novel is Annie, the therapist
Ginny is sent to when she finally seeks
help. At first Annie struck me as a cari-
cature, until I remembered that my own
daughter, trying to find a therapist an
unemployed student could afford, met
up with far stranger and less competent
practitioners than Annie. In Ger-
ber’s presentation of Annie, one feels
again the presence of the stringent hu-
mor that occasionally surfaces to relieve
the sadness of the novel. Annie is a
wildly overweight Jewish therapist who
eats during her therapy sessions and yet
uses her food addiction professionally to
help her clients. Is she a good therapist
in spite of all her oddities (she does
eventually help Ginny), or is she far less
competent than she might have been if
she had greater control over her own
problems? I wanted more of Annie’s
contradictions, her grotesqueness, her
wisecracking intelligence.

King of the World does not content
itself with a searing examination of a
“co-dependent” relationship. It indicts
society as well for the twisted values and
false opportunities with which strug-
gling, marginal individuals are met.
Ginny’s desperate longing to submerge
herself in Michael’s sensuousness and
wild imagination is shown in the context
of a society that insists on beauty as nec-
essary to a woman’s value and self-
esteem and on surrender to male superi-
ority (however illusory) as a necessary
component of “romantic” well-being.
Michael’s grandiose dreams are a pa-
thetic hunger to live up to the culturally
imposed ideals of masculinity. As “King
of the World,” he will claim his Queen
— even if only with a broken starfish.

Fraudulent mail-order promises of
easy success feed off poor, desperate, and
deranged characters like Michael —
whose vulnerability makes the reader
ache even for him, the abusive husband.
Gerber makes clear that the Michaels in
our society are victims themselves, but
that Ginny’s first obligation, nonethe-
less, must be to save herself and her child
from his victimization. The boldness of
the ending is one of the novel’s most
aesthetically and psychologically inter-
esting features. This is a harsh and pain-
ful book to read, but its rewards are
great. That it took Gerber so long to find
a publisher is one more sign of how the
published literature of our time is limited
by patriarchal, self-interested pub-
lishers. And it helps to explain why we
have so few serious novels dealing with
the issue of domestic violence (with the
rare exception of Susan Brownmiller’s
Waverly Place, based on a headline
story) and why Alice Walker’s much
gentler treatment of wife-beating in The
Color Purple was met with such contro-
versy. How many important books on
this topic have simply been suppressed?

@ Charlotte Zoé Walker is the author
(as Charlotte Mendez) of Condor and
Hummingbird, which endured over forty
rejections before Alice Walker rescued it
with Wild Trees Press. Her second novel,
Touching Earth, is forthcoming.

“This is the work of a well-travelled feminist
mulling over the inequalities of the postmodern world. . . . Enloe

Bananas, Beaches
and Bases

Making Feminist Sense of
International Politics
by CYNTHIA ENLOE

persuasively argues that gender
is key to the workings of
international relations.”

—Aihwa Ong, University of

California, Berkeley

$35.00 cloth, $10.95 paper at book-
stores or order toll-free 1-800-822-6657.
Visa/ MasterCard only.
University of California
Press • Berkeley 94720

Spring 1990

44 # literary treasure chest...

“Here is not just one voice, but many—
all lifted in a collective song of work, commitment,
and exhortation to pass it on.”

—The Women’s Review of Books

CENTURY BLACK WOMEN WRITERS series, under

THE SCHOMBURG LIBRARY OF NINETEENTH-

the general editorship of Henry Louis Gates, Jr., has
rescued the voice of an entire segment of the African-American
literary tradition by offering volumes of compelling and rare
works of fiction, poetry, autobiography, biography, essays, and
journalism, written by nineteenth-century black women.

“Extraordinary... This magnificent project will dramatically
change the landscape of [African-American] cultural history.”
—Eric J. Sundquist, The New York Times Book Review

“What an astonishing gift...this collection is!" —Alice Walker

Announcing the first eight volumes
from the series to appear in paperback:

A Voice From the South
ANNA JULIA COOPER
Introduction by

Mary Helen Washington
368 pp. paper $9.95

The Journals of
Charlotte Forten Grimké
CHARLOTTE L. FORTEN
GRIMKÉ

Edited by Brenda Stevenson
672 pp. paper $10.95

Iola Leroy, or
Shadows Uplifted
FRANCES E.W. HARPER
Introduction by Frances
Smith Foster

336 pp. paper $9.95

The Magazine Novels of
Pauline Hopkins
PAULINE HOPKINS
Introduction by

Hazel V. Carby

672 pp. paper $10.95

At better bookstores or directly from

OXFORD PAPERBACKS

Behind the Scenes
Or, Thirty Years a Slave,
and Four Years in the
White House
ELIZABETH KECKLEY
Introduction by

James Olney

432 pp. paper $9.95

The Work of the
Afro-American Woman
MRS. N.F. MOSSELL
Introduction by Joanne
Braxton

224 pp. paper $9.95

Six Women’s
Slave Narratives
Introduction by
William L. Andrews
384 pp. paper $9.95

The Collected Works
of Phillis Wheatley
PHILLIS WHEATLEY
Edited by John C. Shields
384 pp. paper $9.95

Oxford University Press • 200 Madison Avenue • New York, NY 10016

Belles Lettres • 19