Hispanic Women

Letting Their Hair Down

Reclaiming Medusa: Short Stories by Contemporary Puerto Rican Women, edited and
translated by Diana Vélez. Spinsters/Aunt Lute (P.O. Box 410687, San Francisco, CA

94141), 1988, $8.95, 161 pp. (PB)

by Eileen McClay

Any readers who still visualize

the Latin American woman as

either the cloistered daughter
of aristocracy or the sturdy peasant
bound to the soil in quasi-mystical com-
munion will find it difficult to cling to
such stereotypes after reading these thir-
teen stories by five contemporary Puerto
Rican women writers.

In Reclaiming Medusa, we are intro-
duced to female protagonists like
Rosario Ferré’s frustrated ballerina,
trapped by the constraints of social,
familial, and religious conventions. We
encounter Carmen Lugo Filippi’s hair-
dresser, whose independence is in dan-
ger of metamorphosing into a kind of
patriarchal subjugation by a new young
client. We see Carmen Valle’s deluded
widow, seemingly freed from the
demands of a macho husband, but on
the verge of sliding once again into de-
pendency, this time on her son.

Not only do they come from varied
backgrounds, these women also speak to
us in diverse tones, sometimes quiet,
sometimes brassy. And the authors
clearly expect readers to collaborate
with them in getting to the heart of the

La Lucha Continua

stories. Editor-translator Diana Vélez, in
the long and useful introduction, says as
much: "The stories," she writes, "...resist
traditional closure by leaving the syn-
thesis and interpretation squarely on the

Compañeras: Latina Lesbians (An Anthology), edited by Juanita Ramos. Latina Lesbian™ a

History Project (c/o Latina Women’s Educational Resources, PO Box 627, Peter Stuyvesant
Station, NY, NY 10009), 1987, $8.95, 265 pp. (PB)

by Tania Ramalho

Juanita Ramos’s anthology of writings

by Latina lesbians represents an act

of affirmation in today’s conservative

political climate. The narratives,
portraying complex personal and social
realities, fill a void in Latin American,
lesbian, and women’s studies literature.
The book will become a friend of many
Latinas who wish to learn more about
their sisters in struggle and their own
heritage.

Forty-seven women have contributed
oral histories, poems, fictional pieces,
and artwork to the anthology. They are
Cubanas, Puertorriqueñas, Chicanas, and
Mexicanas. They came from Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Peru. Some were born in
the United States; some immigrated
with their families; others came on their
own. The result is a good mix of women
whom Anglo bureaucracy calls "Hispan-
ics" and "Black Hispanics."

The idea of the book originated in
Ramos’s search for identity, inspired by
the successful example of Black lesbian
activism. Juanita decided to contact
other Latina lesbians to share stories and
create their own collective memory.

For the next seven years there were
inter-ethnic volunteer work brigades,
fund-raising concerts and dances, coali-
tion and dissension because of differen-
ces in perspectives. Finally, the Latina
Lesbian History Project (LLHP) was
founded to publish and distribute the
book when presses failed to show com-
mitment to the project.

Mariana Romo-Carmona’s introduc-
tory remarks summarize each section
and highlight the contributors’ shared
experiences. She sketches a theory of
Latina lesbian existence: "As Latina les-
bians, sometimes we live in a suspended

2 © Belles Lettres

state without a name, finding no reflec-
tion of ourselves. Other times, names
have been given to us that distort who
we are." She contends that this central
quest for self-definition takes a more
complex course for the Latina lesbian:
"For many of us the process of acquiring
an identity as a lesbian is closely tied to
coming to terms with our racial and cul-
tural identity."

Gloria Evangelina Anzaldúa’s poem
"Del otro lado" ("The Other Side")
dramatizes the war inside the woman
who confronts her marginal status as a
Latina and as a lesbian, the theme of the
anthology’s first section:

Always pushed toward the other side.

In all lands alien, nowhere citizen.
Away, she went away

but each place she went

pushed her to the other side, al otro lado.

The tales from this other side are often
painful, and the authors experience sev-
eral forms of oppression. For example,
Teresita Bosch remembers her father
telling her mother "that she could not
speak Spanish on the street, in the
neighborhood or in our home because
people did not like her or her language.
My mother was not even allowed to
cook with garlic, an ingredient essential
to Puerto Rican cooking." Figuring out
her color and ethnicity as she is told by
Puerto Ricans that she is Black and by
Blacks that she is Puerto Rican, Julia
Perez affirms: "The more I thought about
it, the more I said, ‘This is who I am, a
Black Puerto Rican woman. If people
don’t accept me this way, then they
don’t accept me this way. I am happy
with myself.’ But it was very, very pain-
ful."

In the "Coming Out/Saliendo del
Closet" section, Avotcja tells of her in-

reader, who must supply a meaning or
meanings in the act of reading."

Whatever the similarities of their
styles or approaches, these writers are
not to be mistaken for each other. A
woman poisoned in her youth by the
sting of a prawn calmly bides her time
to take an ironically "sweet" revenge on
the medical profession that has vic-
timized her, illustrating Rosario Ferré’s
affiliation with the genre of the fairy
tale. Hers are not, however, the kind of
fairy tales one reads to children at bed-
time. Carmen Lugo Filippi experiments
with point of view; the narrator’s voice
may suddenly be interrupted by that of
another (her conscience?) Ana Lydia
Vega’s irreverent, sometimes bawdy, use
of language and imagery is immediately
evident in the satiric "case file" of a
woman trying desperately to rid herself
of a diabolically "perfect" husband.
Mayra Montero makes insect and ani-
mal imagery an essential part of her
narrative fabric. In her first story, ter-
mites invade an unhappy woman’s
home during their yearly transformation
from winged creatures into worms. In
her second, the image of the hooded,
shelled creature is central to the strug-
gle of a woman trying to come to grips
with fear.

None of these stories is, nor is meant
to be, a comfortable read. Unmistakably,
the writers locate their work in a
feminist and realist tradition, although
by now it must be clear we ought to
redefine the term "realist" when we ap-
ply it to Latin American writers. At the

internment in a mental institution to be
cured of her lesbianism, and Zulma
Duran recalls what it meant to be a les-
bian in the fifties. Gina Anderson’s
"Carta a una compañera" ("Letter to a
Companion") affirms her lesbianism and
seeks others like her: “Although it’s
taken several years .. . to grow to accept
me for what I am, a black, Nicaraguan
lesbian, today I love myself. But I would
like to know, are there any more out
there? Am I the only one?"

"Lovers and Friends/Amantes y ami-
gas," the third section, is a collection of
fictional and nonfictional accounts of
lesbian relationships. "For Maria," by
Cindy Madron, describes marriage and
geographic barriers between lovers, and
other writings explore lesbian eroticism.

Relationships with mothers, fathers,
sisters, husbands, daughters, and sons is
the topic of "Families/Familias"; for ex-
ample, Mirtha Quintanales and Marta
write about the father/lesbian daughter
relationship. Niki de la Mar sends a
"Letter to a Brother," and Tiana Arruda
questions "How Can I Live a Life of
Lies?" as she is out to some members of
her family but not to others because of
the fear of being alienated from the
children she loves. Issues concerning
children are also discussed, such as
Mariana Romo-Carmona’s description of
her struggle for the legal right to par-
ticipate in the raising of her son in the
father’s custody.

"The Struggle Continues/La lucha
continua" closes the anthology and
leaves the reader with a feeling that
Compañeras is really a starting point in
the community-building of Latina les-
bians. Many of the themes reappear in
these final selections, which call for
change and for clarity in action. Juana
Maria Paz explains, "How dramatic that
I am a womyn with no home, no place,
no culture. I mock so easily the absurdity
of life and self and yet, underneath, I
have always felt the need to go home."

For others like Cristina from Argen-
tina and Lucrecia from Peru, the fight
for liberation makes more sense in their
native countries. They will return home.

same time, however, they ask us to see
these stories in the broader context of
all contemporary Puerto Rican litera-
ture.

Referring to the title Reclaiming
Medusa, Vélez asks us to recall the com-
mon image of "the ugly monster whose
severed head, a mass of writhing ser-
pents, hangs from the hand of Perseus ...
Why are we always pushed ... into
an identification with the hero who ap-
propriated Medusa’s power?" She then
asks us to imagine what Medusa’s desire
might be and answers, "Probably
revenge." Each of these stories, then,
"unmasks patriarchy .... in a way that
avenges at least some of the wrongs
done to women in its name."

Vélez herself points out that no myth
consists of a single version. One fairly
consistent version of the Medusa story,
however, reminds us how the formerly
beautiful Gorgon found herself in such
a fix in the first place. Poseidon fell in
love with her and bedded her in one of
Athena’s temples. Enraged, the goddess
turned Medusa into a winged monster
whose gaze turned men to stone. Some
say that Athena’s aegis was Medusa’s
own skin, flayed from her by the god-
dess after Perseus finally decapitated the
powerless creature. Now, there’s
revenge!

@ Eileen McClay teaches American
Literature at The George Washington
University. She recently completed a study
of images of Latin America in contem-
porary U.S. literature.

Lucrecia says: "The change may be hard,
but I think I prefer to go there and deal
with my culture and my people, main-
taining my position of lesbian of the left,
rather than to live a vegetative life
here."

The choice of final essay, Alecticia
Tijerina’s "Notes on Oppression and
Violence," is excellent. Tijerina, part
Chicana and part Native American, is a
powerful writer. She points out the
enemy inside self-hatred, "Knowing I am
oppressed, I must also know that I par-
ticipate in this oppression. I must realize
that I and all my darker sisters take the
instruments of oppression and use them
on ourselves. Our tools come in many
forms. We take from the oppressor the
instrument of hatred and sharpen it in
our bodies and souls."

As it is made clear from the topics
around which sections were organized
("coming out," "friends and lovers,"
etc.), Compañeras generally focuses on
personal lesbian experience. This
obscures a bit the fact that the battles
against oppression on every front have
something to do with each other. It is
important to realize that for lesbianism
to be fully actualized, womyn need peace
and just economic development. Thus,
for example, if political-militaristic
reasons maintain the U.S. war against
Nicaragua, our lesbian sisters in that
country will have to fight twice as hard
for the right to exist independently from
men and patriarchy. Likewise, issues of
class do not receive much consideration
concerning lesbian identity informa-
tion. The experience of a middle-class
Latina lesbian born in the United States,
with all privileges accruing to that class,
cannot compare with the experience of,
for example, poor working-class im-
migrant Latina lesbians of color. But for
those of us who like to think in terms of
where patterns of events fit in a larger
picture of human life, the experiences of
Latina lesbians represent vast material to
be explored.

@ Tania Ramalho is a feminist teacher
and scholar who lives in Columbus, Ohio.

Winter 1989