A panel by Diane Noomin from Wimmen’s  
Comix no. 9, 1984.  

Nancy Drew was an early role  
model for four decades of ado-  
lescent American girls. She had  

all the attributes essential to teenage  
happiness: she was pretty (and con-  
sequently popular), she had a handsome  
steady boyfriend who never tried to un-  
button her blouse. Instead of a mother  
who would insist that she keep her room  
tidy and be home by eleven, independent  
Nancy had housekeeper Hannah Gruen  
to pick up after her and take phoned-in  
messages for her conveniently widowed  
lawyer father, Carson Drew. Nancy had  
her own car as well as two loyal girlfriends  
who were perfect foils for her smart Breck  
Girl looks: pudgy, timid Beth and  
tomboyish, headstrong George.  

But while Nancy epitomized the physi-  
cal and social ideals we read about in  
Seventeen and Ingenue, she also subverted  
stereotypical ideas about feminine  
behavior. She was exceptionally com-  
petent as a detective and a driver. She not  
only had adventures, but she had them in  
the company of women she cared about.  
In short, she showed that a girl could be  
liked for her intelligence and courage as  
much as for her appearance. And, per-  
haps more importantly, she suggested a  
psychologically integrated alternative to  
the totally male-identified female char-  
acter of teenage romances.  

Many of us who consumed the Nancy  
Drew novels as bored and unlovely  
adolescents continue to take pleasure in  
contemporary detective novels that  
portray competent women solving puzzles  
and catching criminals. A new generation  
of American writers has shown what in-  
teresting things can happen when girl  
sleuths are grownup women. These  
writers often incorporate feminist con-  
cerns and perspectives as integral to char-  
acter and plot.  

Fictional detectives are either pro-  
fessionals (police officers or private in-  
vestigators) or gifted amateurs. Until  
affirmative action made equal opportunity  
in the investigative professions a real  
possibility, most fictional female de-  
tectives were of the gifted amateur persua-  
sion. Often literate and literary,  
traditional gifted amateurs comprised an  
aristocracy of talent and rational virtue.  
Even when they were in rather straitened  
financial circumstances, they had the  
conservatives’ inherent interest in restor-  
ing a community disrupted by crime to  
order. Naturally, a fair number of the  
most gifted amateurs were scholars whose  
intelligence, training, and eclectic inter-  
ests (to say nothing of flexible schedules  
and negligible teaching duties) enabled  
them to cut through the Gordian knots of  
crime that confounded those outside the  
ivory tower.  

In 1967 feminist scholar Carolyn  
Heilbrun (author of Toward a Recognition  
of Androgyny and Reinventing Womanhood)  
began publishing the Kate Fansler series  
under the pseudonym Amanda Cross.  
While scrupulously observing the  

2 ® Belles Lettres  

Women of Mystery  

Solving Crimes, Dissolving Stereotypes:  
The Series Character in Detective Fiction  

by Patrice Clark Koelsch  

traditional literary conventions of the  
academic murder mystery, the Kate  
Fansler books expanded this gentlemanly  
genre in a decidedly feminist direction.  
Professor Fansler’s academic specialty is  
Victorian literature, but she is also an  
astute student of contemporary life. Dur-  
ing the course of The James Joyce Murder,  
The Question of Max, The Theban  
Mysteries, Poetic Justice, In the Last Anal-  
ysis, Death in a Tenured Position, and Sweet  
Death, Kind Death, Kate demonstrates  
that accidental death is premeditated  
homicide, murder is suicide, and suicide is  
murder. Although the novels show how  
misogyny, professional jealousy, and  
overweening ambition can permeate the  
scholar’s sanctum, the critique of the  
academy is from someone who believes  
in the essential worthiness of its ideal. Men  
and male-dominated institutions are  
flawed but not damned.  

Although Kate’s cases portray women’s  
struggles for equity in academia, she  
remains very much in the beautiful  
WASP mold fashioned by Nancy Drew.  
Kate is no radical — at times she seems  
surprisingly naive (for example in the  
recent Sweet Death, Kind Death she is  
skeptical of the need for women’s colleges  
in the 1980s). Kate’s life is the fantasy of  
many an overworked, underappreciated  
junior faculty member: a marriage of true  
minds with district attorney Reed  
Amhearst and the perfect domestic  
arrangements that a very substantial in-  
come allows. A new book, No Word from  
Winifred, is expected this summer.  

Like Kate Fansler, Rosamund Howard  
also teaches English literature and solves  
murders. And like “Amanda Cross,” au-  
thor Susan Kenney holds a faculty posi-  
tion and has published in other, non-  
mystery genres. (Kenney wrote the  
award-winning novel In Another Country  
— an astonishing portrayal of loss and  
grief and strength.) Although Roz How-  
ard’s debut in A Garden of Malice was not  
very auspicious (the setting was a gothic  
exaggeration of Vita Sackville-West’s  
Sissinghurst and the heroine's precarious  
situation was boilerplate romance),  
Kenney's second Roz Howard adventure,  
Graves in Academe, shows considerable  
improvement. Roz parts from her  
Scottish lover to accept a temporary po-  
sition at a small college in Maine. She dis-  
covers a perverse literary logic to a bizarre  
series of “accidents” and is (once again)  
nearly murdered for her efforts. Despite  
the flaws and contrivances — our heroine  
tends to be rendered unconscious at  
crucial plot junctures — Roz Howard is a  
promising addition to the female faculty in  
the department of academic murder.  

Most of the new feminist series  
characters in the gifted amateur category  
do not breathe the rarefied air of the ivory  
tower. Although they share a propensity  
toward literary allusions with their schol-  
arly sisters, they are generally more  
humorous, more complex, and conse-  
quently more engaging than the rather  
predictable professors. The female gifted  
amateurs of the last 10 years have departed  
from Miss Marple’s observant spinster  
mold. They are women with careers and  
friends, husbands or lovers or children.  
They are aware of contemporary social  
issues and get involved with politics.  

Lucille Kallen’s Maggie Rome plays a  
perspicacious Watson to C. B. Green-  
field’s irascible Holmes in Introducing  
C. B. Greenfield, The Tanglewood  
Murder, No Lady in the House, and The  
Piano Bird. Maggie is the intrepid reporter  
for Greenfield’s weekly Westchester new-  
spaper and the Ravel-worshiping pianist  

in Greenfield’s chamber music trio. She is  
ingenious but no ingenue — a happily  
married suburbanite with two sons in col-  
lege and a mother with a condo in Florida.  
Although Greenfield usually makes the  
ultimate crime-cracking deduction,  
Maggie’s impersonations and improvi-  
sations garner the clues. The relationship  
between Maggie and C. B. is a mixture of  
sarcasm and affection — the stuff of  
sitcom marriages. But if this is a marriage,  
it is one of true minds. While husband  
Elliot’s engineering consultancy keeps  
him a little too conveniently off stage for  
credibility, Maggie’s fondness and fidelity  
are never in question. The fifth book in  
the series is imminent: A Little Madness  
will deal with women activists protesting  
the storage of nuclear missiles in upstate  
New York.  

Ellie Gordon is the 38-year-old brain-  
child of Karin Berne (the nom de plume of  
Sue Bernell and Michela Karni). Bare  
Acquaintances begins with the aftermath  
of Ellie’s recent and unhappy divorce. Her  
18-year-old son has a summer job in  
L.A., and she has gained 30 pounds by  
sitting around her Southern California  
suburban tri-level gorging on jamoca  
almond fudge and whodunits when her  
long-time friend Betsey bullies her into an  
aerobics class and applying for a job. Ellie  
becomes the office manager at a high-  
powered law firm, finds the corpse of the  
firm’s feminist attorney, fights flab, solves  
the murder, and has an affair. In Shock  
Value she has acquired a condo and a new  
lover who courts her with deep-dish pizza.  
The murder victim is the chauvinistic  
public relations director at a nuclear power  
plant; the chief suspect is his exploited  
assistant — and a fellow sufferer in Ellie  
and Betsey’s exercise class. The chaste  
WASP teen queen has been supplanted by  
a funny, sexy yenta who has a quote from  
Shakespeare for every situation.  

Because Jane Dentinger’s Jocelyn  
O'Rourke is an actress, director, and  
drama coach, she too has a professional's  
stock of great lines from great plays. And  
like Ellie Gordon, Jocelyn is not part of  
midwestern Protestant culture. She is the  
product of early parochial education and  
has the street smarts of New York's finest.  
As Jocelyn extricates herself from suspic-  
ion of homicide in Murder on Cue (she is  
the understudy of the bludgeoned leading  
lady and has both motive and opportu-  
nity), she becomes romantically en-  
tangled with Detective-Sergeant Phillip  
Gerrard. In the sequel, First Hit of the  
Season, a rather vicious theater critic sniffs  
strychnine instead of cocaine at the open-  
ing night party of Hedda Gabler. Josh and  
Phillip are part of the death scene au-  
dience. Both begin investigations, but  
professional ethics and personal integrity  
soon put an end to their exchanges. The  
struggle for dual careers and an egalitarian  
relationship is pure Hepburn and Tracy;  
behind-the-scenes the plot is equally  
dramatic.  

In Marcia Muller’s The Tree of Death  
and The Legend of the Slain Soldiers, Elena  
Oliverez becomes curator of the Museum  
of Mexican Art and a mediator between  
the Hispanic and Anglo communities of  
Santa Barbara, California. Elena explains  
Hispanic culture and investigates labor  
history in order to solve murders. As a  
result, the novels are entertainingly di-  
dactic. Elena’s widowed mother Gabriela  
cleaned other people’s houses so that her  
two daughters could aspire to more inter-  
esting and lucrative work. Gabriela now  
lives in a hive of activity called Leisure  
Village Mobile Home Park. Elena’s  
pragmatic self-reliance and her easy dis-  

missal of machismo are de facto arguments  
for matriarchy. Nancy and Carson Drew  
literally pale to oblivion beside the vibrant  
Elena and Gabriela Oliverez.  

The professional of the “hardboiled”  
detective novel tends to be a little more  
rigid in form and characterization than the  
gifted amateur. Professional investigators  
choose to get involved with crime and  
corruption to earn a living — and one of  
the conceits of the genre is their struggle to  
keep from getting entangled in their  
clients’ lives (and deaths). Fictional  
private and police investigators have  
typically been loners without families.  
Guns and violence are essential to the  
profession and the plot. But the mean  
streets are no longer an entirely male pre-  
serve. The inclusion of women in the pro-  
fession (at least in fiction) calls into ques-  
tion the genre’s implicit assumptions  
about gender-specific virtues.  

Sara Paretsky's Chicago-based private  
investigator, V. I. (Victoria Iphigenia)  
Warshawski, is a divorced former lawyer  
whose father was a cop and whose  
mother was an immigrant orphan.  
Although her parents are now dead, her  
memory of them (particularly of her  
mother) is very much with her. Working  
out of a shabby building near the Loop,  
she investigates very complicated, very  
contemporary crimes. Indemnity Only  
involves an insurance scam, Deadlock is  
about grain shipping on the Great Lakes,  
and the recent Killing Orders hinges on  
missing securities and a militant right-  
wing Catholic organization. Because  
Paretsky builds authorial credibility by  
meticulous attention to geographic detail  
and business technicalities, the reader is  
almost ready to suspend a natural disbelief  
for the amount of violence Vic endures.  
And for all of Vic’s physical toughness,  
there is genuine tenderness. Although  
Vic’s own sexual preferences are hetero-  
sexual, Paretsky portrays a lesbian  
relationship between a successful  
stockbroker and a university professor  
with sympathy and dignity, and she makes  
Vic’s closest friend an older woman  
physician, once a refugee, who works with  
poor and abused women.  

Sue Grafton. Photo by Steven Humphrey  

Sue Grafton’s private eye is Kinsey  
Millhone, a twice divorced loner who  
lives in a 15 by 15 converted garage 100  
miles north of Los Angeles. Kinsey's life is  
that of a confirmed and contented  
Spartan. She likes people who hang in  
and hang on — especially feisty octo-  
genarians. Each novel is in the form of a  
lengthy first person report: “A” is for Alibi,  
“B” is for Burglar, “C” is for Corpse.  
Although she tries to remain emotionally