eae EEE Eee

ng.

Down Under, Part Two

An Australian Tillie Olsen?

The Home Girls, Loving Daughters, and A Long Time Dying, by Olga Masters. All
are paperbacks published in New York by the University of Queensland Press: 1982,
$8.50, 194 pp.; 1984, $8.95, 319 pp.; and 1985, $8.95, 330 pp., respectively.

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Olga Masters began her writing

career with a rural newspaper at

the age of seventeen, married,
raised seven children, and only started
producing fiction in her fifties. This
unpromising background led, incredi-
bly, to the two award-winning collec-
tions of short stories The Home Girls and
A Long Time Dying and her impressive
first novel Loving Daughters, an artistic
and commercial success. Her death in
1986 after this brief, intense, late period
of creativity and the American publica-
tion from Norton later this year of two
posthumous works, Amy’s Children and
The Rose Fancier, make this moment
especially apt for an examination of
Masters’ work.

In pondering her unusual apprentice-
ship for literature, one is reminded inev-
itably of our own Tillie Olsen, who at-
tended a similar school of hard knocks.
Then in reading the short stories, which
generally concern the lives of the hope-
lessly poor in hopelessly backward areas
during the Depression or a little earlier,
the comparison becomes even more
striking. This, too, is Olsen’s territory.
The subject matter of these two out-
standing women writers of the working
class is so similar, yet their approaches
could not be more different.

In Olsen’s stories, the institution of
poverty crushes people of both sexes and
leaves them no consolation but what-
ever loving, forgiving relationships they
can muster and a little awareness of the
world’s beauty. In Masters’s stories, it is
not poverty so much as patriarchy that
crushes women and usually leaves them
only the dubious consolations of mad-
ness, despair, or early death. Masters’s
grittier vision and starker style leads us
into a universe where the men, generally
ineffectual and over-indulged, spend
money needed for food on selfish little
pleasures like tobacco, the women en-
counter only heavy labor and a succes-
sion of dead ends to hope, and the chil-
dren look on, terrified or prematurely
freighted with responsibility. Masters’s
view, then, is usually more relentless,
more ferocious, though it softens some-
what towards the end of her all-too-short
writing career.

The overriding theme in Masters’s
powerful short stories concerns the daily
skirmishes between the sexes that re-

main after men and circumstance have

already trapped the women. The most
memorable stories in The Home Girls, for
example, are those that dramatize the
plight of children whose overwhelmed
mothers occasionally erupt into bouts of
violence or insanity. The frenzied, lo-
cally notorious woman in “The Rages of
Mrs. Torrens” throws her mill hand hus-
band’s inadequate paycheck into the
creek, madly drives the car and children
across an unfinished bridge, walks defi-
antly atop the mill owners’ fence when
her husband’s hand is severed in an acci-
dent, and finally roars off with her family
for an anonymous city, where she subsi-
des quietly into tranquilizers and less
colorful forms of despair. Similarly, the
tense-faced but beautiful mother of two
skimpily dressed little girls in “On the
Train” refuses the conversational gam-
bits of a fellow passenger until she de-
cides suddenly to get off and confides,
Medea-like, “I’m going to kill them.”
The little schoolgirl of “Call Me Pinkie”
tries heroically to care for the family’s
toddlers while her mother, incapaci-
tated by depression, watches with

2 Belles Lettres

Olga Masters: “We are all home girls at
heart, I think.”

yearning as cars pass the house. When
her adored father comes home, Pinkie
does not receive the praise she had
hoped for but a rebuke for letting the fire
go out. In “The Snake and Bad Tom,”
the frightened children of an abusive
father and their abject mother learn the
ugly lesson of diverting the man’s strap
from themselves by scapegoating the
slowest brother, Tom. Clearly, in the
family battlegrounds of this collection
nobody wins, but the children sustain
the heaviest losses.

A Long Time Dying is a collection of
linked stories that could almost be called
a novel. It focuses on the class struggle
inherent in the courtship by a prosperous
farmer’s son (a Rossmore) of a poor ten-
ant’s daughter (a Jessup). Their fami-
lies, neighbors, and the whole dreary
town of Cobargo become involved in
this social and sexual drama. “Scones
Every Day” begins the tale, with the
exchange of information between two
admiring little schoolgirls, one a Jessup,
that the hard-pressed Mrs. Jessup some-
how manages to make scones as a treat
for her husband and brood of ten every
day. On this day, however, she doesn’t;
she simply says to the father as he returns
from milking, “I feel crook, Joe,” and
lies down to die. Other characters are
similarly used up. “In Cobargo Now”
features another poor, large family, this
time with a dreamy, vain, likeable,
completely shiftless father. The imagi-
native mother of these children tries to
preserve some dignity for them by perpe-
tual little strategies such as expressing
enthusiastic gratitude for the ceiling
(they had formerly lived among aborig-
ines in a campground), even getting
them to count the number of boards in it
with proud delight. Her life seems to
require both strategy and fantasy as she
connives small pleasures for the children
by working around the constant obstacle
of their father. In contrast to Masters’s
earlier collection, these stories present
mothers who tend to be more sane and
try to be loving: the families in Cobargo
are somewhat more stable, but the one
problem that lingers on, seemingly in
every household, is a man, whether in-
capable or tyrannical, who does not pull
his weight.

This theme of the imbalance of power
between the sexes carries over into
Loving Daughters, Masters’s remarkably
well-crafted first novel. The only differ-
ence here is one of class; the central
characters Enid and Una, marriageable
daughters of a rich farmer, and the newly
arrived young minister Edwards endure
no great economic burden. However, as
the resonantly ironic title implies, the
sisters do suffer the various forms of
warped, obsessive, misplaced, or un-
fulfilling love — as does the suitor over

whom they become rivals. (In fact, all
the characters in this novel are grotesque
and stunted in their modes of loving.)

Loving Daughters has been appropri-
ately described as Lawrentian because of
the young people’s blossoming sexual-
ity, lyrically evoked. But if so, it is Law-
rence with a wry, feminist twist. The
men here all need mothering; Edwards,
for example, is hopeless at getting fires
started for his tea and seems constantly
occupied with writing letters to his
mother in England about his smug in-
decision over the two sisters he is court-
ing, mostly for the domestic comforts he
thinks marriage would bring into his life.
The women, meanwhile, find their lit-
tle arenas of power by working on such
male dependencies, whether it involves
baking a favorite tea-cake or relieving
these clumsy creatures of the mysteries of
diapering. Enid and Una hone their
manipulative skills with their sentimen-
tal, unconsciously incestuous, widowed
father and their loutish adult brothers,
who all take their sisters’ exhausting
housekeeping services for granted.

The girls have grown up with the
example before them of their highly
competent but furious Aunt Violet, wife
of a near-lunatic veteran of World War I
who cannot even kill himself properly by
accidental fire-setting (he always sur-
vives, to everyone’s regret — especially
Violet’s). This tragicomic novel con-
centrates on the many ways in which
lack of opportunity for self-expression
twists women: Enid becomes the em-
bodiment of domesticity run amok, all
starched curtains and prize preserves;
Una, the “flibbertigibbet” who wins the
doubtful victory of Edwards’s hand,
takes dangerous, daring swims until
tamed by pregnancy; Aunt Violet lusts
to expand her savage practice of mid-

wifery.

The men remain befuddled by all the
emotional storms surrounding them,
forever inept at managing anything from
fire to sex. The women continue to pro-
vide them with coddling and comforts.
In fact, Edwards is almost loved to death
by the two “loving daughters,” one
whom he marries without gaining the
satisfactions he expected and the other
who deserts the side of her possessive
father to supply the ego massage lacking
in the marriage. In the story of this
twisted, frustrating triangle, as in Mas-
ters’s other fiction, there can be no real
winners. One would have to seek far for
a more compelling implicit argument in
favor of a healthier, more egalitarian
social system. Wouldn't it be nice, Mas-
ters seems to be asking, if both sexes
were allowed the scope to be fully adult,
fully human?

Loving Daughters is now being made
into a film: With decent casting, it
should be superb. We can also look for-
ward to the publication by Norton later
this year of Amy’s Children, now a
bestseller in Australia, and The Rose
Fancier, the last collection of stories
from Masters’s amazing ten years of cre-
ativity. (The University of Queensland
Press paperback editions of her earlier
works may still be found in some book-
stores; Norton will be publishing them
in hardback also.) One wishes there
were fewer “silences,” as Olsen would
have termed the unproductive years in
this artist’s career, but at least we now
have this rich legacy.

© Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger is
chair of the English Department at Man-
hattanville College, where she teaches
courses in Commonwealth literature and
British women writers of the twentieth cen-

tury.

Some Were

Ladies

The Three Miss Kings, by Ada
Cambridge. New York: Penguin/Virago,
1987/1891, $6.95, 314 pp. (PB)

Cindie, by Jean Devanny. New York:
Penguin/Virago, 1986/1949, 332 pp. (PB)

by Laura Hapke

Late-Victorian novelist Ada Cam-
bridge, though British-born,
lived in Australia for more than
forty years. Among the most durable of
her eighteen novels is The Three Miss
Kings, an entertaining story of three
newly orphaned sisters, young women
from the Provinces who resolve to settle
in Melbourne. Within the limits of the
ladylike behavior on which their crea-
tor, a clergyman’s wife, insisted, they
“learn life, and love, and trouble, and
etiquette amongst city folks.”
Propriety notwithstanding, Cam-
bridge knew how to spin a tale: The nar-
rative includes elements of the then-
still-fashionable sensation novel, with
its shocking family secrets, missing
wills, and eleventh-hour triumphs of
justice. Stately Elizabeth, irrepressible
Patty, and pretty, vacuous Eleanor “as
Miss Kings only,” Cambridge gravely
assures us, “would doubtless have had
brilliant career[s] and never been made
to feel the want of either pedigree or for-
tune.” But the added attraction of this
chronicle of their assault on Melbourne
society is that when the young women
win their longed-for suitors by charm,
they need not be dependent on it. Be-
neath the fairy tale is a sage observation
on wedlock among the well-to-do. As
Audrey Tate succinctly observes in her
introduction, “marriage and money are
inseparable in Cambridge’s novels.”

For the modern reader, particularly
one unacquainted with Australian social
history, reading The Three Miss Kings
whets the appetite for more. The passing
references to the immensely popular
Great Exhibition of 1880, the glittering
Cup Race (still run today), and the bush
outlaw Ned Kelly, a hero to many, pro-
voke a curiosity about turn-of-the-
century life and class divisions that
Cambridge does not fully satisfy. Anx-
ious to argue that Melbourne lacked the
“elaborate snobbishness” of London, she
directs her attention not to the dis-
enfranchised in the slums of Melbourne
trying to survive but to the upwardly
mobile who so quickly succeed.

Sixty years later, the Australian left-
ist Jean Devanny, writing about
Queensland in the late 1890s and early
1900s, creates in Cindie Comstock a
young woman who might well have sent
the three Miss Kings reeling. Cindie is a
servant in the employ of Blanche Bid-
dow, an elitist who has reluctantly
agreed to leave Sydney to help her hus-
band build up his sugar plantation. Cin-
die, burning to learn everything from
harvesting cane to dealing with the con-
scripted Kanakas who work the fields,
sees Blanche as one “brought up to do
nothing useful.” The developing young
woman “even felt sorry, at times, for the
poverty of a mind that could remain
impenetrable to the uplift, the exalta-
tion to be found in serving, struggling,
in bringing under control the natural
riches of the soil.”

Cindie dons men’s clothing, works in
the fields, and is drawn into combat with
Blanche, who flaunts her pampered lei-
sure in lace dresses. The women engage
in a kind of class war, which becomes
more complex the more power Cindie
acquires.

continued on page 21

JULY/AUGUST 1988