The People I Know

Stories by Nancy Zafris  
Winner of the Flannery O’Connor  
Award for Short Fiction  

“Frequently funny, these tales are threaded  
with a dark despair. Zafris has a keen ear  
for a great variety of voices” — Publishers  
Weekly.  

“These stories surprise with their tenderness  
and wit. Zafris transforms ordinary  
encounters into extraordinary, revelatory  
moments. Her characters cope, limp along,  
collide; and then, in unpretentious and  
precise language, Zafris enables them — and  
us — to experience what might be called  
grace” — Robin Becker. $16.95  

Desire in L.A.  

Poems by Martha Clare Ronk  

Desire in L.A. confronts limitless longing in  
a city that is itself without limits. In these  
poems, the object of desire is decidedly  
missing, whether that object be love or  
beauty or the past. Moving from thwarted  
examples of family and place to language  
and its corruptions, from classical  
Japanese love poems to failed love in  
the southwestern desert, the book ends  
with a series focused on the slipperiness  
of all categories. $14.95 cloth, $7.95 paper  

At better bookstores or from  

The Expendables  

Stories by Antonya Nelson  

Winner of the Flannery O’Connor  
Award for Short Fiction  

“There is not a weak story here. Nelson swiftly  
brings her characters to life, allowing the  
reader to feel their heartache and vulnerability,  
their desperate longing for whatever  
their lives lack. Highly recommended”  

— W.P. Kinsella, Vancouver Sun.  

“A fine collection of stories. With unsentimental  
eye and honed passion, Nelson  
leads us through the dissonant tumult of  
contemporary society, where ‘fragility and  
durability are equal,’ and faith in love’s  
transformative power prevails over persistent  
irony and contradiction” — Chicago Tribune.  
$15.95  

Daughters of Time  

Creating Woman's Voice  
in Southern Story  

Lucinda H. Mackethan  

Drawing upon letters, autobiographies, and  
novels, Daughters of Time examines the  
strategies that seven southern women  
writers - Catherine Hammond, Harriet  
Jacobs, Ellen Glasgow, Zora Neale Hurston,  
Eudora Welty, Lee Smith, and Alice Walker  
— have used to create their own “voice,”  
their own unique expression of mind and  
selfhood. $18.00  

The University of GEORGIA Press Athens Georgia 30602  

BULK RATE  
U.S. POSTAGE  
PAID  
PERMIT NO. 3070  
WASHINGTON, D.C.