Thrills, Spills, and Refills

Everything in the World, by Lynda Barry. New York: Harper & Row, 1986, $7.95, 96 pp. (PB)  
The Whole Enchilada, by Nicole Hollander. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1986, $11.95, 224 pp. (PB)

by Mary Lynn Skutley

Comic strips, from their first ap-  
pearance in late 19th-century  
publications to the present time, have long given voice to the wisdom of commoners. In 1884, Ally Sloper was presented as a working-class anti-hero whose gin-sharpened version of reality provoked readers with the thrill of recognition. Lynda Barry and Nicole Hollander provide this same thrill in collections of their comic strips that blast through appearances to mine a high-octane blend of humor and insight.

In fact, Barry’s Everything in the World careens like a hellbound convertible between the innocent savvy of childhood and the fondest delusions of adulthood. The book is divided into four sections. In each, Barry’s thick-lipped, homely characters, with their velvet bows and pompadours and rakishly hung cigarette butts, express a touching range of emotion and vulnerability: They are fools rushing in.

Often, Barry’s monikers set the tone. In the first section, “The World of Endless Love,” Sister Lynda warns us of “the sin of lust.” “It will get a hypnotism on your mind which turns all things into a burning pleasure station in your drawers,” she writes. The corresponding panel shows red-hot devils leaping from the groins of two unfortunate victims to spar.

Lynda Barry. Photo by Rob Lewine.

In the next section, “The World of Growing Up,” Barry draws on her background in the working-class neighborhoods of Seattle to create a fertile mix of characters. Barry’s version of childhood is truthful, not schmaltzy or prettified. Her children are trying to be cool and are aching for love as they struggle to get a grip on surface rules in an indecipherable world. The characters are, perhaps, most expressive in this section: In one panel two 7th-graders at their first coed party bow their heads in a painful show of shyness and self-abnegation.

“The World of Relationships” explores the maintenance of love, from a strip that parodies how-to advice (including voodoo rituals for snagging a man) to another that cuts to the depths of need when an unemployed man woos his wife with baroque phrases that break under the weight of his desperation. Here, as in the rest of the book, Barry’s talent lies in her ability to illuminate universal experiences with humor and compassion.

In the final section, “The World of Problems,” Barry’s characters jostle with the rules and values of adulthood. Their imaginative compromises are often hilarious. A bad complexion? Voila! A semipermanent mask of chewing gum and shellac. A too-big behind? But, of course. The self-help book, My Behind, Myself. Such logic is irresistibly fetching.

Nicole Hollander is also adept at playing with faulty logic. In The Whole Enchilada, her main character, Sylvia, expresses the wisdom of the commoner in wry asides. Sylvia acknowledges the madness of the world with aplomb, nestled amid the comforts of home with unflappable confidence in the healing powers of a hot bath and a pepperoni pizza.

Hollander’s presentation is polished and whimsical. Her female characters, especially, are drawn with an enviable stash of wild get-ups: patterned prints, cinema hairdos, lounging slippers, even lamps for every occasion. And the book comes with a clip-out color section for the refrigerator door. “Don’t throw that old diaphragm away!” one panel admonishes, offering alternate uses as a doorknob cover, a bathtub stopper, a cat rain hat, a small frisbee.

Hollander’s book is divided into twelve sections, and her characters, including Gernif the alien, Harry the bartender, and Patty Murphy the TV anchorwoman, are talkers. They nurse manhattans at the bar, tea at the cafe, as they discuss politics and men and irksome realities. Hollander’s waitresses are particularly articulate. “What’s good?” a customer asks in one strip. Ruby the blonde keeps her eyes on her order pad and cracks, “Puppies, little children laughing, old movies, walking in the rain.” And another strip toys with cosmic justice to speculate, “What if waitresses were bosses in heaven?”

Cats join waitresses on this elevated plane. In fact, a full section, “My Cats Tried to Drive Me Insane,” is devoted to their languid mystery and smugness. Hollander’s cats are allowed to smoke, to pick vacation spots, to eat only Popeye’s fried chicken. Not since the reign of the pharaohs have cats been so honored and indulged.

But Sylvia, of course, is the star of Hollander’s show. Hollander notes in the introduction that, in her neighborhood, “women had all the best lines.” Sylvia’s wit quietly empowers, and quietly devastates the foes who would keep her down. When asked to imagine a world without men, she quips, “No crime, and lots of fat, happy women.”

Barry and Hollander complement each other nicely. Barry’s characters rush through life like dancing fools; Hollander’s lean back to comment on the action. Together, they express a common wisdom that is rare, welcome, and true to the genre.

@ Mary Lynn Skutley is a character from the Midwest, land of everything in the world.

Cartoon by Nicole Hollander, from The Whole Enchilada.

Reel Women

Films for Women, edited by Charlotte Brunsdon. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1986, $13.95, 236 pp. (PB)  
[Originally published in 1986 by the British Film Institute, London]:

by Pat Dowell

Like a frustrated dieter, feminist film criticism has plateaued at a certain level and refuses to budge, as this new British collection of articles from both sides of the Atlantic demonstrates. Actually, it is new in name only, since all but 3 of the 23 pieces on documentary, Hollywood, art cinema, woman-centered exhibition, and distribution have appeared in journals and magazines and half of those at least five years ago.

The introductions by editor Brunsdon to the book as a whole and to each of the four sections are new, and she states the issues so concisely that the articles that follow sometimes seem anticlimactic. The question is the classic one, “What does/should a feminist film look like?” Brunsdon explores the key debates of realism, the avant-garde, positive images, and the display of the female body. She takes up the efficacy and honesty of documentary and art cinema, whether Hollywood films such as Julia present positive images, and more significantly, whether the notion of positive images itself is a dead end, the wrong goal, one that overlooks the deeper way in which the language of Hollywood and film in general structure the pleasure we derive from movies and determine who is addressed by a particular film.

With all this talk about the nature of pleasure in film, I am sad to report that the pleasures of the texts themselves are few. Brunsdon chose articles that “condense the key debates,” but unfortunately these are not always the best available. The experimental documentary Daughter Rite, discussed here by Jane Feuer, and to my mind a film more enjoyable to read about than see, has been analyzed with more lucidity and less gush by Ruby Rich (who is represented by a scathing, persuasive attack on the avowedly antiporn documentary Not a Love Story). Chantal Akerman, the subject of more feminist debate than any other woman director of the last decade, deserves (and has gotten) better than Angela Martin’s dim defense.

On the other hand, Julia Lesage nimbly lays out the stakes in the early debate over documentary, and Michelle Citron writes a sharp-witted account of the virtues and vicissitudes of Jan Oxenberg’s bold lesbian revue, A Comedy in Six Unnatural Acts. The lone man in the bunch, Richard Dyer, makes very clear how the Diana Ross vehicle Mahogany tries to be all things to all people, and fails—and Dyer does it with wit, surely no critical sin. Also interesting, if dated, are the accounts by women distributors and exhibitors of their experiences.

The question I have about this book is just who Films for Women is for. Brunsdon says, “I have tried to choose articles that are relatively accessible to the non-specialist.” That’s relatively true, but are they interesting to the nonspecialist? And are the films themselves accessible? Brunsdon assiduously notes that the female audience addressed by films is often more specific than the address acknowledges. Her book might well be titled “Films for British Feminist Film Theorists.” Brunsdon is interested in criticism primarily as it illuminates film theory, those assumptions about how and why film works on the spectator. Film theory is the growth stock of academic film studies, and too many of the articles in Films for Women reflect the hermetic prose style of the French and English professors who set the pace in current scholarly work.

Non-film-types and nonfeminists (who have a pressing need to know, after all) are not likely to view such stiff writing as an invitation, and even eager American feminists are not likely to get a chance to see such rarities as The Song of the Shirt, Maeve, or Burning an Illusion. Especially since the perfunctory filmography does not bother to list 16-mm or videocassette distributors, it seems little to ask of the publishers of this American edition to include that much-needed information. Such an omission is just plain sloppy, like some of the assemblage of this book, which features misspelled names and missing or mutilated footnotes—little things, but annoying to a reader, like the lack of an up-to-date bibliography that could lead us to some of the more recent work on these topics. Films for Women does provide a summary of the issues where they have stopped in their tracks. Much feminist film criticism of the last five years continues in the vein of these articles, which may be why Brunsdon has selected so little that is new, although frankly I think that is not a good enough reason. Why not include discussions of new developments behind and before the camera, like the pillar-of-virtue heroines of the new Hollywood, the rise in feature documentaries about cultural history, the attempts by women to feminize Hollywood genres? If such articles do not exist, commission them. That is what the best anthologies are for.

@ Pat Dowell reviews movies for The Washingtonian magazine and for WETA-FEM in Washington, DC.

Supergirl. From Films for Women.

March/April 1987