Briefly Noted

Like Labrador, reviewed in this is-

sue, Ursula Perrin’s Ghosts

(Harper & Row, $7.95, 235 pp.
PB) deals poetically with coming of age
in the 1950s and the relationship be-
tween two sisters. In the following pas-
sage, the younger sister retires for the
night:

I went upstairs but instead of going
to sleep put on my bedside light to
read. From the kitchen I heard the
rattle of the dishpan and the rush of
water in the pipes. Then it was
quiet. Occasionally, small bugs
plopped against the screen. Occa-
sionally, I stopped at turning a page
to listen. For years, reading illegal-
ly, too late, I had listened for my
sister’s heave upon the springs. Her
breath, rising from her window to
descend into mine had, with its
heavy, even, sealike soughing, pro-
voked my word-botched hours. Now
her breath mingled with her hus-
band’s and I was left alone, to cope
with and absorb the problems of this
household. Now there were no small
noises, only the heavy stillness of a
warm June night. I could not sleep
and so I read and the light of the
bedside lamp seemed to make a
white hourglass through which, lit-
tle by little, the darkest hours of the
night were sifted.

Susan P. Willens reports in on a
new Monika Maron novel, The Defec-
tor (Readers International, $16.95, 163
pp.) as follows:

In her earlier novel, Flight of Ashes,
Monika Maron’s protagonist was a
journalist who discovers murderous
pollution in an industrial town in
East Germany. Forbidden to report
what she sees, she finally leaves her
magazine, losing status, lover, and
friends all at one blow.

This new novel locks the reader
into the apartment of a new hero-
ine, Rosalind, who also cannot go
to work. Immobilized by despair,
she sits on bed or rug or chair: “She
hadn’t slept for fifty-four hours and
she wasn’t tired now either.” She
feels no bodily needs; her legs have
lost all feeling. This illness gives her
freedom from everyday obligation
and boredom.

Impressions

Monika Maron

To fill the empty time come
memories and imaginary scenes of
talking figures whom she summons
at will. Old friends and family join
invading abstractions like “the man
with the bloody nose” and “the
woman with the high voice” to ar-
gue in front of Rosalind as if she
were the producer and the audience
of an absurdist play. In the life of
her mind, Rosalind finds some
amusement, but more often it an-
noys and saddens her. The novel
ends with her in the apartment,
alone and still.

This is a daring and inventive
book. Part an expressionist drama,
part surreal fiction, it crosses
Strindberg with Kafka, creating a
new shape to dramatize the malaise
of a citizen deprived of personal
freedom.

Susan Koppelman’s latest anthol-
ogy is a book of fifteen occasional stories
called “May Your Days Be Merry and
Bright” and Other Christmas Stories
by Women from Wayne State Univer-
sity Press. This is a MUST for holiday
gift giving and for perusing anytime.
The title story, by Wilma Shore, focuses
on a group of elderly widows who live
comfortably in a residential hotel and
compete for evidence of their children’s
love. It ends with a sense of hope that
their facades will crack and that they will
make more of a life with each other.

In “Merry Christmas, Marge” (by

The Winner Is. . .

Susan Burns of East Quogue, New

York, is the recipient of One

Hundred Flowers by Georgia
O'Keeffe, the pièce de résistance in our
new and renewing subscribers drawing
from the May issue (generously donated
by Daedalus Books). Prizes for this issue
are as follows: Frustration, cartoons by
Claire Brétécher (Grove Press);
Sometimes When It Rains: Writing by
South African Women, edited by Ann
Oosthuizen (Pandora Press); A State of
Fear, a novel of South Africa by Ménan
du Plessis (Pandora); The Twilight

Years, a novel by Sawako Ariyoshi (Ko-
dansha); Dessa Rose, by Sherley Anne
Williams, who is writing a screenplay
from her novel for a major producer
(Berkeley); An Olive Schreiner
Reader: Writing on Women and South
Africa, edited by Carol Barash
(Pandora); The New Yorkers, a novel
by Hortense Calisher (Weidenfeld &
Nicholson); and Segu, a novel by
Maryse Condé. Winners will be an-
nounced in January. Keep those sub-
scriptions and renewals coming! Tax-
deductible contributions will be grate-
fully accepted and applied toward our
Jenny Moore Fund matching grant.

Cartoons and drawings on pages 2-7 by Claire Bretécher from Frustration (Grove Press).

22 @ Belles Lettres

Alice Childress from her collection of
dramatic monologues Like One of the
Family, a Black maid eloquently defines
what peace on earth and goodwill to-
ward all people would really mean in a
world committed to social justice. In
Edna Ferber’s devastating “No Room at
the Inn,” written in 1939, a middle-aged
Jewish man and his young wife are ex-
pecting their first child. They are forced
into boxcars by the Nazis, and when the
train stops at the “no man’s land” be-
tween two countries, the woman has her
baby in a ditch. The story was published
in the Christmas issue of a magazine (as
were all but two of the others).

The collection is framed by what
Koppelman sees as two versions of the
same story. “The March Christmas”
comes from that beloved book Little
Women by Louisa May Alcott, and
“Christmas for Sassafras, Cypress, and
Indigo” later became part of a novel by
Ntozake Shange. Although Shange’s
characters live in a more sophisticated
world, still prevailing are the personal
and loving gift giving and the unifying
reenactment of holiday rituals between
mothers and daughters.

In contrast to this comfort and to-
getherness is the alienation and invisi-
bility of people for whom Christmas is
not their holiday. It is a time, Koppel-

At the Feminist
Book Fair

With something like
seventy-four sessions over six
days to choose from, no two

women out of the thousands who at-
tended the Third International Feminist
Book Fair in Montreal last June could
possibly have worked out the same itin-
erary; yet many undoubtedly shared the
experience of having been challenged,
exhilarated, and exhausted. 

As Dagmar Schultz (West Germany)
said, events such as this help “convince
women authors that they are in the right
place by coming to women’s presses —
they find that their work is better off
because it receives more attention,
rather than disappearing in the long lists
of a mainstream publishing house.”
Feminist gatherings of this magnitude
also remind us “of our own successes,”
noted Dale Spender (Australia), “one
measure of which is that so many main-
stream publishers are now trying to capi-
talize on the huge market that now exists
for women’s writing.

In a session on women in the 1930s
and 1940s, Barbara Brooks (Australia)
spoke of how feminism has repeatedly
been erased from history and has had to
regain its ground. She is the co-author
with Judith Clark of an upcoming biog-
raphy of Eleanor Dark, some of whose
works have recently become available in
Virago Classics. Colonialist attitudes of
the time ensured that only writers who
became expatriates and proved them-
selves in the United Kingdom were
taken seriously in Australia. Although
Dark’s novels were translated into five
European languages and she gained re-
nown for her support of civil liberty
movements, many of her essays and
plays remained unpublished and she was
persecuted for her political views. Her
home, Varuna, is currently being turned
into a national museum and writers’
center.

Daysi Zamora (Nicaragua) told of the
efforts of peasant women of Latin
America to get rid of the “ideology of
machismo which we inherit in our cul-
ture.” Nicaraguan women have been
preparing intensively for the exercise of
political power in a participatory de-
mocracy and have made great strides in
their economic campaigns and health

by Janet Palmer Mullaney

man says in her introduction, at which
people are often tempted to sacrifice
their own culture to fit into a larger
group. “The Loudest Voice” by Grace
Paley explores the gamut of reactions —
from shame to bemusement to horror —
when all Jewish children are chosen for
parts in a school Christmas pageant.
The Fanny Hurst story “The Nth Com-
mandment” is an “evocative, moving
portrayal of humble conditions in a sea-
son of great joy and abundance.” It de-
picts the plight of women in department
stores — long hours, swollen feet, vari-
cose veins, brutal customers, and sexual
harassment by bosses. How the married
heroine outwits one of them to nurture
her family is painful and triumphant.

In addition, Koppelman re-presents
stories by Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, Sarah
Orne Jewett, Mary Wilkins Freeman,
Dorothy Canfield Fisher, Willa Cather,
Edna Ferber, Pearl S. Buck, Frances
Gray Patton, and Zona Gale. All of
these authors wrote for a cherished
“nonprofessional reader” who likes to
read and chooses to spend hard-earned
money and time doing so. This anthol-
ogy is well worth both; it is also a testa-
ment to the transformative power of fic-
tion. May we be blessed with more
scholars who connect us to life and to
each other, rather than separating us.

Audre Lorde (in white) with writers and
teachers Marion Kraft, Helen Eunde, and
Katharina Oguntoy at the Feminist Book Fair

brigades.

Another instance of a feminist take-
over was presented by a delegation of
North American native writers, includ-
ing poets Chrystos (California), Joy
Harjo (Colorado), and Lee Maracle
(British Columbia). Jeannette Arm-
strong talked about how her novel Slash
depicts the damage to her people’s male
population of deeply entrenched racism.
“I made my male protagonist in the end
the way I want Indian men to be.” All
appealed to audience and readers to boy-
cott nonnative writers writing about
native people and to support native
writers all over the world who are writing
about themselves.

Audre Lorde (U.S.A.) also ad-
dressed the issue of “white skin privilege”
and called for white women to become
accountable for suppressing the writing
of their sisters of color. As Donna Smyth
(Nova Scotia) stated when talking about
ethics and aesthetics, we should also
avoid the “power trip of claiming ‘I am
more oppressed than you.’ As it becomes
increasingly clear that we must learn to
share our global resources equitably, we
realize that we must find our commonal-
ity or we’re done for.”

If, as natives, immigrants, and
women of color all stated, there are lim-
itations on the ways in which we can
express support for one another as femi-
nists, then Nemiroff is probably correct
in her summation that we try simply to
be as “diverse as our own cultural and
psychological experience will allow,”
and at the same time continue to listen,
share, and learn from one another’s
writing.

—Sylvia M. Brown

Fall 1988