Pilgrim and Autobiographer

Mystic and Pilgrim: The Book and the  
World of Margery Kempe by Clarissa W.  
Atkinson. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University  
Press, 1983, $25.00 (HB), $8.95 (PB),  
241 pp.

by Mary S. Parisoe

Who was Margery Kempe?  
This is a question that has  
produced considerable de-  
bate since her Book of Margery Kempe  
(completed in 1438) was rediscovered  
in 1934. Kempe’s account of her life as  
a mystic was the first autobiography writ-  
ten in English. She has been dismissed  
by some as “quite mad — an incurable  
hysteric with a large paranoid trend”; by  
others as merely “an aberration in the  
history of English piety.” Yet, as was the  
case during her lifetime, she has gained  
a following of those who define her as  
a true mystic. Among them is Clarissa  
W. Atkinson, whose book Mystic and  
Pilgrim: The Book and the World of  
Margery Kempe is written not to con-  
vince us of the authenticity of Margery’s  
visions, but rather to put her in histor-  
ical, social, and religious contexts and  
to introduce her to both religious scho-  
lars and general readers interested in the  
history and experience of women.  
Kempe was born in 1373, the daugh-  
ter of the mayor of her town of King’s  
Lynn in England. Her Book begins with  
her first vision of Christ soon after the  
difficult birth of her first child. This vi-  
sion brought an end to a period of self-  
destructive depression. She resumed her  
household responsibilities and even  

Margery Kempe has been dismissed by some as “quite mad  
— an incurable hysteric with a large paranoid trend”; by  
others as merely “an aberration in the history of English  
piety.” Yet she has gained a following of those who define  

her as a true mystic.

began her own businesses, a brewery and  
a mill, but both failed. She concluded  
that God did not approve of such worldly  
affairs, so she began to adopt strict asce-  
tic habits. She went through a turbulent  
time of visions, extramarital tempta-  
tions, and experiences of hearing  
“heavenly music.” She sought a sexually  
chaste marriage with her husband, but  
he had other ideas — in their 20 years  
together, she bore him 14 children! Fi-  
nally he agreed to go with her to the  
bishop to take a vow of chastity. Soon  
after, she won his consent and that of  
the Church to live apart from her hus-  
band and children, and to go wherever  
she believed herself to be sent by God.  
Money inherited from her father proba-  
bly enabled her to support herself. (In  
her Book, Kempe never mentions what  
became of her 14 children, except for  
one son who was probably one of her  
scribes. In a time when most women of  
her social standing were able to read and  
write, she, oddly enough, was illiterate.  

She dictated her Book.)

During the next 25 years, she went  
on several pilgrimages to shrines  
throughout the Holy Land, Spain, Ger-  
many, and England. Her vocation was  
to weep and pray for the souls of her  
fellow Christians, to always wear white,  
and to continue her pilgrimages. In the  
Holy Land she received the “gift of  
tears,” a rather inconvenient gift that  
made her sob and wail uncontrollably  
whenever reminded of Christ’s Passion.  
She was often ridiculed, excluded from  
groups of fellow pilgrims, and arrested  
and imprisoned for suspicion of heresy,  
though she was never convicted. To-  
ward the end of her life, her visions in-  
structed her to return to live with and  
care for her husband who had become  
paralyzed from a fall. During this time  
she completed her Book and died soon  
after, about 1438.

Kempe’s piety, called affective or ec-  
static piety, was a religious tradition that  
had existed for four centuries. It is based  
on a passionate attachment to the  
human Christ and the Holy Family.  

One’s senses, emotions, and imagina-  
tion were tapped to assist one in partici-  
pation in the Gospel stories. Weeping  
was a respected response and central  
component of affective piety. Although  
14th- and early 15th-century England  
did not really share in this tradition,  
Kempe had several continental pre-  
decessors whose stories were known to  
her: Birgitta of Sweden, Dorothea of  
Montau, and Marie d’Oignies, among  
others. When seen in context with her  
predecessors, Kempe does not seem so  
unusual; though I am not convinced, as  
Atkinson is, that she was a true mystic.

In her well-documented and very  
readable study, Atkinson examines  
Kempe’s immediate social environment  
as well as historical and religious ele-  
ments that touched her life: mystic trad-  
itions, the history of pilgrimage, the  
Church in her era, and so forth. I ques-  
tion this book only in its treatment of  
psychological data. Atkinson is willing  
to discuss Kempe’s “postpartum  
psychosis” and admits that her vision of  
priests exposing themselves is “better  
suited to the couch than the confes-  
sional,” yet she allows the erotic imagery  
of, for example, Christ thanking Kempe  
“for all the times that thou hast har-  
boured Me and My Blessed Mother in  
thy bed” to remain under the surface of  
her text. Atkinson feels that  
psychoanalytic analysis “has serious  
limitations” because we know so little  
of Kempe’s childhood. Still, I would  
argue that some psychic structures could  
be identified and analyzed — perhaps in  
another study of this very interesting  
character.

® Mary S. Parisoe is a PhD candidate in  
French Literature at Northwestern Univer-  
sity and an apprentice playwright.

— Puzzle, continued from page 2

Selections are organized by historical  
periods from “Women of the Early  
Church” (the second through the fourth  
centuries) to “Individual and Collective  
Reformation at the End of the Middle  
Ages.” Each section begins with critical  
commentary and a historical overview.  
Like Wilson, Petroff chooses whenever  
possible to use complete works or self-  
contained chapters from texts too long  
to include in their entirety.

In addition to profiling the women  
who were visionaries, Petroff’s introduc-  
tion contains an excellent outline and  
description of stages in the visionary life.  
Rather than dividing the mystical life  
into the three stages of purgation, illumi-  
nation, and unity, Petroff believes the  
written descriptions of the visions point  
to seven: purgative, psychic, doctrinal,  
devotional, participatory, unitive or ero-  
tic, and cosmic ordering. The final  
stage, according to Petroff’s reading, pre-  
sents the feminine as the universal order-  
ing principle, with the visionary’s wit-  
ness of absolute equality in heaven of  
men and women. Such visions allowed  
women to exert an influence unavailable  
to most other women. They gave women  
authority to criticize society and prac-  
tices of the church. Perhaps more impor-  
tant to the modern reader, however, is  
Petroff’s observation that “visions al-  
lowed the medieval woman to be an ar-  
tist, composing and refining her most  
profound experiences into a form that  
she could create and recreate for herself  
throughout her entire life.”

Developing a different facet of the  
emerging profile of women in the Middle  
Ages, Daichman considers portrayals of  
women presented in two 14th-century  
works and the historical and literary  
traditions from which they descended.  
Daichman’s book examines an aspect of  
women’s religious houses that neither  
Petroff nor Wilson discusses and Lar-  
barge touches only briefly — miscon-  
duct in the convent. Larbarge points out  

July/August 1987

that, because many women found them-  
selves in religious orders through no  
choice of their own, they often resisted  
the discipline imposed upon them.  
Clearly agreeing with this generaliza-  
tion, Daichman examines wills that  
show how pervasive was the practice of  
forcing women into nunneries. She goes  
a step further than Labarge, however,  
arguing that ecclesiastical records from  
as early as the 12th century contain evi-  
dence of immorality in convents. The  
examples she cites give overwhelming  
support for at least the perception of  
abuses.

In addition to the church documents,  
Daichman examines works of medieval  
moral and satirical writers who de-  
nounce or parody the behavior of these  
dissolute women. She also cites evidence  
from the medieval chanson de none, songs  
in which nuns lament their imposed  
confinement and often long for the arms  
of a lover, and the fabliau or ribald tale,  
in which wayward nuns sometimes  
played a role. Daichman then concludes  
that, because the stereotyped figure of  
the wayward nun was firmly established  
by the 14th century, Juan Ruiz, arch-  
priest of Hita, and Geoffrey Chaucer  
were able to exploit the characteristics  
associated with the stereotype in their  
portraits of the fascinating, complex,  
and flawed Dona Garoza and Madame  
Eglentyne.

These four books indicate a continu-  
ing interest in the place of women in  
medieval society. No longer considered  
merely a fad, the study of women’s role  
is vital as scholars continue to explore  
records and literature to find out more  
about what and how women wrote, how  
they were perceived, and how they or-  
dered their lives. Books such as the four  
reviewed here make such findings avail-  
able to a wider reading audience.

® Ann Dobyns is an assistant professor  
of English at Ohio State University.

The Aesthetics of Power

The Poetry of Adrienne Rich  
Claire Keyes

“A critical look at an idea underlying the  
work of a major American poet, The  
Aesthetics of Power traces Adrienne Rich’s  
development from a gifted young poet to  
a prophetic feminist writer” —Philadelphia  
Inquirer.

“Keyes reconstructs the fragments of  
Rich’s personal story into the stages of a  
heroic life” —Belles Lettres. $22.50

Lui

A View of Him

Louise Colet

Translated by Marilyn Gaddis Rose

This is the first English translation of Lui,  
Louise Colet’s 1859 roman à clef detailing  
her affair with Gustave Flaubert and  
friendship with the poet Alfred de  
Musset.

“Read it one must, for the added light  
it throws on the master and far more in-  
triguingly for the insight it gives us into  
the woman Flaubert fell in love with” —  
Edna O’Brien, New York Times Book  
Review. $24.95

Women Writers of the  
Renaissance and  
Reformation

Edited by Katharina M. Wilson

Presenting a selection of poetry and  
prose never before available in English,  
this anthology reveals in the work of  
women writers of the Renaissance and  
Reformation a distinctive voice—one  
that carries the echoes of a male aesthetic  
while boldly declaring battle against it.  
$40.00 cloth; $19.95 paper

Becoming a Feminist  
The Social Origins of “First  
Wave” Feminism

Olive Banks

A composite portrait of the leaders of  
Britain’s “first wave” of feminism,  
Becoming a Feminist analyzes the personal  
backgrounds and convictions of the  
activists who struggled to bring social,  
political, and economic equality to  
women. $24.00

The University

of Georgia Press  
Athens, Georgia 30602

Belles Lettres @ 3