IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Trying Hard to Be a Mensch

These Things Happen, by Marian Thurm. New York: Poseidon Press, 1988, $15.95, 173 pp.  
Walking Distance, by Marian Thurm. New York: Random House, 1987, $16.95, 270 pp.  
Floating, by Marian Thurm. New York: Penguin Books, 1988, $6.95, 210 pp. (PB)  

by Lorraine E. McCormack  

At first when Marian Thurm tells  

you These Things Happen in her  

newest collection of short  
stories, you can’t quite believe it. After  
all, there is the wedding where the bride  
kicks her father in the shins, and the  
funeral where the deceased is excoriated  
instead of eulogized, and the bar  
mitzvah where the ex-wife and male  
lover sneak off to strike an under-  
standing that neither of them can share  
with the man they both love. However  
charmed or cursed, her characters ac-  
tually spend their days like you and me,  
living with our choices and struggling to  
salvage some dignity from our peccadil-  
los — sometimes dealing with the pain  
of loving the wrong people too much  
and the guilt of loving the right people  
too little, and shamelessly savoring the  
moments when we believe we have  
finally got it right.  

Thurm’s characters have a generosity  
about them as they stand in for us at  
some of contemporary life’s less noble  
moments. Even in their unceremonial  
encounters they comfort us with our  
own rituals, like making angels in the  
snow or celebrating over pizzas. The  
stories in These Things Happen are  
peopled by a more ingenuous and hope-  
ful bunch than those in Thurm’s earlier  
short story collection, and for all their  
trials, they are less horror-struck and  
cynical than the families in her novel.  

“The bad news is your wife has a lover;  
the good news is he’s dying of cancer.”  
This ghastly joke holds the sickening  
irony in the love affair between Laura, a  
young Manhattanite, and David, her  
stricken neighbor. In Walking Distance,  
her first novel, Thurm presents her  
characters with life’s foremost challenge:  
people who are capable of love have a  
responsibility to give it and a right to its  
attendant dilemmas. The less intrepid  
among them are afraid this really means  
no good deed goes unpunished, and that  
the punishment will fit the crime: the  
more you love the more you hurt.  

Incapacitated by illness and its treat-  
ment and shunned by his terrified wife,  
David spends his good days on a lawn  
chair under the canopy of his apartment  
building, watching the world slip away  
from him. The sight of Laura walking  
her daughter to school each day is the  
single delight in his months of despair.  
Soon after they meet, Laura is drawn  

into an inexorably sad and curiously  
satisfying test of love.  

A few miles away in Brooklyn, Laura’s  
grandmother, Sophie, faces the chal-  
lenge of love with her octogenarian  
bridegroom, Monroe Silverstein. At the  
first sign of trouble in their brief mar-  
riage, Sophie throws Monroe’s honey-  
moon pajamas in the trash bin and  
moves in with Laura, now pregnant, and  
her husband, Zachary. So the union  
shouldn’t be a complete loss, David, a  
professional marriage counselor before  
his illness, reconciles the elderly couple  
in spite of his maladroit technique:  
“Everyone’s needs are different .... I  
mean, everyone’s needs are the same.”  
“Is this professional advice you’re giving  
us?” Silverstein says. “I could get better  
advice from a drunk on a park bench.”  

Marian Thurm. Photo by Thomas Victor.  

As she does in her short stories,  
Thurm sets Laura and David and their  
spouses in the comfortable arena of  
young urban professionals to confront  
their dilemmas, and she endows them  
with the armaments of the eighties:  
financial independence and an ex-  
panded consciousness. These people  
give each other space and expect the  
other to meet life responsibly. Zachary  
lets us know he is too good to be jealous  
of a dying man. David is too professional  
to take it personally when his wife  
rejects him. David’s wife finally comes  
to terms with her feelings about his ill-  
ness in the middle of a Jane Fonda  
Workout tape. Meanwhile, Sophie and  
Silverstein battle birth and death in  
Brooklyn with a frenetic energy that in-  
vigorates the plot, churning some bub-  

bles into the otherwise dreamlike flow of  
the lives of Laura and David. “Funny  
what people are proud of today.” Sophie  
observes, “Stomachs like stone, eating to  
win, well organized closets .... What  
ever happened to just trying hard to be a  
mensch?”  

Thurm’s characters meet the task of  
being a mensch, a human being, with  
varying degrees of proficiency in her col-  
lection entitled Floating. These aptly  
titled tales tell of people who drift  
through life, pulled noiselessly down-  
stream until one day they hear the star-  
tling sound of rapids around the bend.  
Their struggles with the current show us  
how the vagaries of life play havoc with  
even the most solid among us, how the  
violence of illness intrudes upon even  
those who are determinedly at peace  
with the world, and how love has a way  
of sustaining even those of us who do not  
know how to use it.  

In “Starlight,” Elaine faces a reunion  
with her young sons who stunned her  
months before by choosing to live with  
their father after the divorce. “She  
couldn’t explain why her children had  
done what they had. ... Her parents  
kept wanting to know what she had  
done .... In the dark she told herself  
who she was: a grown woman scared to  
death of two little boys.” Her sons’ tales  
of preteen life do not answer the ques-  
tion she is afraid to ask. Do they still  
love her? Or is four months enough time  
to break the mother-son bond?  

Thurm is a masterly writer about  
relationships between parents and  

children, and she has a special gift for  
the voices of different generations. In  
Walking Distance, Laura’s daughter, Mia,  
is the omnipotent four-year-old with the  
Neil Simon lines; David’s son, Ethan, is  
the sixteen-year-old who can express  
pain only by causing pain. In “Califor-  
nia,” the conversations between Jack,  
the retiree, and Margo, his college stu-  
dent lover, are particularly moving, as  
lovers who are generations apart explore  
the limits of their love.  

All of Thurm’s favorite themes con-  
verge in the suburban Boston home of  
“Grace,” where the title character sails  
through life, her course fixed by the stars  
as the crew presents her with one change  
of course after another. Her mother slips  
further into senility each day. Her preg-  
nant daughter must be comforted in the  
absence of the baby’s father. Her hus-  
band, recovering from a stroke, leaves  
her for a new life. You can almost hear  
Grace humming “What Is This Thing  
Called Love?” as she scuttles between  
Scylla and Charybdis.  

Careful navigation between opposing  
dangers requires intense concentration,  
which is a mark of Thurm’s style. Her  
short stories are seamless examinations  
of contemporary life; her novel is daring  
in its exploration of the territory be-  
tween the uncompromising values of  
youth and the sense of doom that can be  
the unwelcome byproduct of experience.  

@ Lorraine E. McCormack is a writer  
and a native of Washington, D.C.  

Mary Shelley: Her Life,  
Her Fiction, Her Monsters  

by Anne K. Mellor  

New York and London: Routledge,  
Chapman & Hall, 1988, $25, 276 pp.  

Anne Mellor’s Mary Shelley sparkles.  
Fascinating, well written, carefully re-  
searched, this study of Mary  
Wollstonecraft Shelley — the only  
English Romantic whose literary crea-  
tion (Frankenstein’s monster) threatens  
to live forever — lives up to literary  
criticism’s highest standards.  

Only nineteen when she began  
Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus,  
Mary blended her fears, dreams, and  
philosophies with her own experience,  
common sense, and the physical realities  
of nineteenth-century womanhood into  
a ferment that erupted as startlingly  
original. The work exposes the reality  
behind what Mellor calls “a very  
dangerous fantasy” or the “romantic at-  

Women and Love  
by Shere Hite  

New York: Knopf, 1987, $24.95, 922 pp.  

In 1973, I visited the People’s Republic  
of China on a student tour. At the end  
of our group’s month-long stay, we bid  
tearful farewell to our Chinese guides  
and interpreters, one of whom said to  
me, “You know, Donna, in making  
revolution, seizing state power is only  
the first step, and not necessarily the  
hardest one at that. The really difficult  
and drawn-out struggle is in changing  
people’s hearts and minds.” In the inter-  
vening years, I have often pondered his  
statement. Never has it been brought  
back to me more powerfully than while  
reading Shere Hite’s Women and Love:  
A Cultural Revolution in Progress.  
Ironically, a revolution is being car-  
ried out by women who, for the most  
part, do not perceive themselves as part  
of a political movement. Perhaps all  
they need do to realize their part is to  
read their own statements, collected  
here in great numbers for the first time.  

This, the third report in Hite’s series,  
is the kind of book that makes you see  
in new ways. About being single, for ex-  
ample, Hite writes,  

The majority of women over fifteen in the  
United States are single: 20% have never  
been married; 33% are divorced or  
widowed. If the majority, 53%, of women  
(and men) are single, why is this presented  
then, as “abnormal”?  

She also asks why there is no language  
describing male behavior patterns in  
relationships, when there is a large (and  
derogatory) vocabulary for female be-  
havior? One respondent begins the  
naming process when she observes,  
“Male ‘nagging’ is . . . silent sulking.”  

These stories draw one in as women’s  
diaries do, and their lessons are then  
quantified and summarized by a skilled  
and sympathetic social historian. The  
statistics drawn from this huge database  
(4,500 women returned Hite’s question-  
naire) are staggering.  

I have been studying and struggling  
with many of the issues raised in this  
book for some time. Lately, I have felt a  
deep and growing sense of connection  
to my female friends, a dawning realiza-  

tion that they are the most intimate and  
enduring relationships in my life. Read-  
ing Women and Love, I discovered not  
only that I am right in line with 95% of  
all Hite’s unmarried respondents (and  
87% of the married ones), I also came to  
understand why I am.  

Here are just a few of the other topics  
Hite and her respondents discuss:  
Should women deal with unequal emo-  
tional relationships by becoming more  
like men (i.e., “independent,” less  
loving and nurturing) or insist that men  
learn how to love differently? Is  
women’s anger neurotic or rational? Is  
“real” love sexual passion or caring com-  
panionship? Is it even possible to  
change men’s behavior, or should  
women just learn to live without men  
and get on with their lives?  

Not all the women agree with each  
other, nor does Hite agree with all of  
them. But I believe the questions the  
respondents raise are crucial to under-  
standing male/female relationships.  
Their testimony concerning the current  
state of affairs is profound and moving.  

—Donna LeGrand  

attempt to marry opposites, to unite the  
mortal and the immortal to a transcen-  
dental dialectic, to create the human  
form divine.”  

Mary, however, saw that instead of  
first practicing such noble philosophies  
at home, her father, William Godwin,  
and husband, Percy, neglected their  
families. Mary’s father praised the  
theories of education for women of his  
wife, Mary Wollstonecraft. But after she  
died at the girl’s birth, he abandoned  
them when educating Mary. When  
asked why, he answered that such  
“household” matters were best left to his  
second wife. Percy Shelley himself was  
little better. He left his first wife to run  
off with Mary. During their marriage his  
fidelity was suspect. Mary was pregnant  
or nursing throughout her brief married  
life; out of five pregnancies, only one  
child survived past age three. As Mellor  
makes clear, Mary resented Percy’s insis-  
tence that she and the children traipse  
about Europe with him, even when the  
babies were sick or when she was preg-  
nant.  

Despite this, Mary managed to write  
Frankenstein, a novel whose success so  
startled the public that some declared  
Percy must have written it. A valuable  
part of Mellor’s book is her analysis of  
the changes Percy made. Some stylistic  
changes do show the hand of a master,  
but the ideas and the theses remained  
Mary’s. She resisted changes that sug-  
gested that Victor Frankenstein was  
anything but a negligent parent and  
responsible for all subsequent disasters.  
As Mellor writes:  

However much she shared her husband’s  
desire for a better world, Mary Shelley  
conveyed in Frankenstein her conviction  
that it could not be achieved by simply  
ignoring or destroying past pain.  
Instead one must take full and lasting  
responsibility for all one’s offspring and  
continue to care for the family one  
engenders.  

I have dwelt at length on Frankenstein  
because it is Mary’s best work. Mellor  
considers much more in her study:  
feminism, patriarchy, capitalism, hierar-  
chical power systems, the family, gender  
— but the book’s most valuable parts  
reveal Mary’s life and how her talent  
transformed it into myth.  

—Laura Kennelly  

Winter 1989