With Clipped Wings

Hidden Hands: An Anthology of American Women Writers, 1790-1870, edited by  
Lucy M. Freibert and Barbara A. White. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,  
1985, $30.00 (HB), $14.00 (PB), 409 pp., photos.

Provisions: A Reader from 19th-Century American Women, edited with an  
introduction and critical commentary by Judith Fetterley. Bloomington: Indiana  
University Press, 1985, $35.00 (HB), $12.95 (PB), 467 pp.

by Joyce Kitcho

of Orr’s Island, 7-year-old Mara

imagines herself to be the brave male  
hero Quintus Curtius in the Roman  
history she is reading; Roman women,  
she is told, “did not get their lives  
written.” Those of us who received a  
traditional education in 19th-century  
American literature found our choice of  
heroes similarly limited: In The Last of  
the Mohicans, women are little more  
than cardboard cut-outs; in Huckleberry  
Finn, they are the life-squelching  
representatives of “sivilization,” from  
which the hero is trying to escape; in  
Moby Dick, they are absent altogether.  
We did not know about, much less read,  
Harriet Prescott Spofford’s “Circum-  
stance,” in which the heroine, alone in  
the wilderness, keeps a panther at bay  
for an entire night; or Harriet Jacobs's  
autobiographical Incidents in the Life of a  
Slave Girl, in which Linda Brent, after  
escaping from a lascivious master, sur-  
vives for 7 years in a tiny garret before  
making her way North; or E.D.E.N.  
Southworth’s The Hidden Hand, in  
which the child Capitola survives on the  
streets by disguising herself as a boy.  
Nineteenth-century American women  
wrote their own lives, and today  
students have the chance to read about  
them, thanks to efforts such as Freibert  
and White’s Hidden Hands and  
Fetterley’s Provisions.

The works in these two anthologies  
expand our view of the human condition  
by allowing us access to worlds that were  
as foreign to most 19th-century men as  
the whaling voyage was to most 19th-  
century women, as well as offering us  
new perspectives on worlds that men  
and women shared. In Catharine  
Sedgwick’s “Cacoethes Scribendi,” the  
existence of a self-sufficient community  
of women who are, “incredible as it may  
be,” happy without men, suggests that  
perhaps the “sivilizers” were in some  
cases as content to be rid of the heroes as  
the heroes were anxious to escape. In A  
New Home — Who'll Follow?, Caroline  

] n Harriet Beecher Stowe’s The Pearl  

— Feminist Classic, continued  

much like Elizabeth Janeway’s 1980  
affirmation that the most important  
power is the power to decide what is  
important. Judith Sargent Murray’s  
1790 assertion that housework is mind-  
less, and that a woman confined to such  
“feels a void, which the employments  
allotted to her are by no means capable  
of filling” predates Betty Friedan’s  
“seminal” study by nearly two centuries.  
Matilda Joslyn Gage’s Woman, Church,  
and State (1873), in which she affirms  
that witch hunting is the logical exten-  
sion of existing Christian belief reminds  
one of Mary Daly’s Gyn/Ecology and pre-  
dates it by more than 100 years.

It is, as I wrote, a maddening, enrag-  
ing, hopeful experience reading this  
book. One cannot use traditional  
encomiums to describe it: It is certainly  
(and ironically) not “original,” nor,  
fortunately, is it “exhaustive,” nor is it  
“definitive.” Rather, it is a sourcebook  
that helped me locate myself, to place  
myself within my tradition, one that  
gave me the hope that by exposing that  
tradition, we have the power to change  
it.

@ Susan E. Osborn is a writer,  
reviewer, and teacher of writing at Rutgers  
University.

May/June 1986

Kirkland reveals that women and men  
often had different reasons for moving  
West and that once there they faced dif-  
ferent challenges and experienced dif-  
ferent social environments: “In this  
newly-formed world, the earlier settler  
has a feeling of hostess-ship toward the  
newcomer. I speak only of women —  
men look upon each one, newly arrived,  
merely as an additional business-  
automaton.”

Although the worlds depicted by  
19th-century women are well worth  
exploring, present-day readers may find  
some of them difficult to enter. Many of  
these writers — most of whom were  
White, middle-class Christians — ex-  
tolled the virtues of domestic life,  
advocated submission to the authority of  
God and man, and criticized con-  
temporary feminists. To sympathize  
with them, one must understand that  
their views were shaped by a society very  
different from our own and that they  
worked within severe restrictions im-  
posed by the male community. Some  
writers espoused the accepted feminine  
values because they viewed women as  
morally superior to men and were  
motivated by a sincere sense of responsi-  
bility to improve society through their  
writing; others were forced by economic  
necessity to write what would sell. Few  
complained outright about the formid-  
able obstacles that all women, and par-  
ticularly women of intellect, faced in a  
patriarchal society; the obstacles are  
evident, however, throughout their  
works.

In The Pearl of Orr’s Island Stowe  
reveals the insidious social forces that  
begin working against women very early  
in life. Girls are introduced to the world  
of adult work by being forced to spend  
afternoons of “perfect torture” perform-  
ing the mind-deadening task of stitching  
seemingly unending straight seams in  
sheets; a boy’s first fishing voyage aboard  
the “Brilliant” is, in contrast, an excit-  
ing adventure described in mythic  
terms. Although little Mara’s aptitude  
for intellectual pursuits is much greater  
than that of her adopted brother Moses,  
their elders initially encourage Moses’s  
education only. Their tutor laments that  
“she’s a woman ... and they are all  
alike. We can’t do much for them, but  
let them come up as they will and make  
the best of it.” These differences in  
socialization have drastic effects:  
Moses’s self-esteem and disparagement  
of Mara contrast markedly with her  
self-abnegation and admiration of him.

In adulthood, those women who  
managed to receive an education and to  
retain enough self-confidence and in-  
tellectual curiosity to pursue their stud-  
ies often faced even greater obstacles,  
particularly if they were married. Mrs.  
James, the heroine in Elizabeth Stuart  
Phelps’s The Angel Over the Right  
Shoulder, has an “understanding”  
husband who designs a system to afford  
her some time for reading and study, free  
from the intrusion of domestic re-  
sponsibilities. The system does not  
work, however, and Mrs. James,  
trapped by those responsibilities, finds  
herself suffering from what Betty Friedan  
would identify a century later as “the  
problem that has no name”:

She had accomplished nothing,  
that she could see, but to keep her  
house in order. . . . Unsatisfied  
longings for something which she  
had not attained, often clouded  
what, otherwise, would have been a  
bright day to her; and yet the causes  
of these feelings seemed to lie in a  
dim and misty region, which her  
eye could not penetrate.

Frustrated and weary, she experiences a  
revelation and decides to devote herself  
wholeheartedly to her household and  
family. Mrs. James’s enthusiasm is not  
convincing; it is, however, one way of  
coping with an impossible situation.  
Fortunately, the writers represented  
in these anthologies found other ways of  
coping. They managed to write and to  
publish, and they struggled, with vary-  
ing degrees of success, against the resis-  
tance and condescension described by  
Mary E. Bryan in her 1860 essay “How  
Should Women Write?”: “Men, after  
much demur and hesitation, have given  
women liberty to write; but they cannot  
yet consent to allow them full freedom.

the “benighted race” entrusted to his  
care. I also found the style of some of the  

With “the possible exception of the  
novel of seduction,” Freibert and White  
do not consider any genre to be superior  
or inferior. They decided, however, for  
the sake of “immediate intelligibility,”  
to organize the works into the standard  
categories and to identify these cate-  
gories with the standard, sometimes  
negatively charged, labels. Attempting  
to infuse the old, negative labels with  
new, positive meanings is one way of  
trying to legitimize this writing, which  
has often been dismissed by being con-  
signed to categories defined as in-  
herently minor. However, by using the  

Shall woman dream on violet banks, while this great work of  
reformation is needing her talents and her energies? Shall she prate  
prettily of moonlight, music, love, and flowers, while the world of stern,  
staring, pressing realities of wrong and woe, of shame and toil,  

surrounds her? . . . Women are. . .  
and that. . .  
learning that genius has no sex,  
it matters not whether the pen is wielded by a masculine  
or a female hand. The active, earnest, fearless spirit of the age . .  
will flow out through their pens, and give color to the pictures they delineate,  
to the principles they affirm . . . . How should a woman write? I  
answer, as men, as all should write to whom the power of expression  
has been given — honestly and without fear. Let them write what they  
feel and think, even if there be errors in the thought and feeling.  

— from “How Should Women Write?” by Mary E. Bryan (The Hidden Hands)

They may flutter out of the cage, but it  
must be with clipped wings; they may  
hop about the smooth-shaven lawn, but  
must, on no account, fly.” And, having  
severely restricted the substance and  
style of women’s writing, “men are the  
first to condemn her efforts as tame and  
commonplace, because they lack  
earnestness and strength.” Writers who,  
like Sara Willis Parton, ignored the  
strictures and exhibited unacceptable  
qualities like anger or ambition or pride  
were denounced for their lack of  
feminine delicacy.

Despite this no-win situation, many  
women writers accomplished important  
and enormously influential work.  
Women wrote best sellers, they con-  
tributed significantly to social change,  
they were pioneers in the craft of writ-  
ing, they enjoyed critical acclaim.  
Works by Susanna Rowson, Augusta  
Evans Wilson, and E.D.E.N. South-  
worth sold by the hundreds of  
thousands; Susan Warner’s The Wide,  
Wide World was the first American novel  
to sell a million copies. The abolitionist  
cause was fueled by writers such as Lydia  
Maria Child and, of course, Harriet  
Beecher Stowe. Women like Sara  
Josepha Hale and Caroline Kirkland  
consciously strove for realistic effects  
long before realism was a literary  
movement. Catharine Sedgwick was  
considered a major American author by  
critics of her day. To allow these ne-  
glected American authors a wide  
readership once again was the impetus  
for these two anthologies.

Hidden Hands is a collection of ex-  
cerpts from 20 novels chosen to provide  
a broad representation of women’s writ-  
ing during the period 1790 to 1870. The  
book was designed specifically for use in  
women’s studies, American studies,  
literature, and history courses, and in-  
structors should find it a valuable source  
for an important and otherwise unavail-  
able body of work. General readers in-  
terested in women’s history, literary  
history, or 19th-century American  
culture may also be interested in Hidden  
Hands. Those looking simply for enjoy-  
able fiction may be disappointed by  
these excerpts — which are, like all ex-  
cerpts, ultimately unsatisfying — and  
may be put off by some of the more con-  
servative works. For example, although  
I believe that to understand the Civil  
War period one must know what was  
written on both sides of the slavery ques-  
tion, I did not enjoy reading Caroline  
Lee Hentz’s The Planter’s Northern Bride,  
a pro-slavery novel in which the main  
character is finally convinced by her  
slave-owning husband that it is the  
White man’s moral duty to take care of  

old labels at all, one risks contributing to  
that process of dismissal. It was weeks  
before this former literature student,  
admittedly prejudiced by a traditional  
curriculum, could bring herself to begin  
reading this collection, which opens  
with “Early Didacticism” followed by  
“Melodrama.”

Provisions contains 16 works from the  
period 1830 to 1865. Unlike Freibert  
and White, who argue that the novel  
was “for women the genre most adapt-  
able to their experience,” Fetterley  
believes that women writers in the 19th  
century did their best work in the shorter  
forms — short stories, articles, essays,  
sketches — and partly for this reason she  
chose to exclude the novel from her an-  
thology. Having read the two col-  
lections, and knowing that it is not fair  
to judge a novel that one hasn’t read in  
its entirety, I am inclined to agree with  
her. In general, the quality of the works  
in Provisions seems superior, and the  
voices of the writers more sincere.

Included are Rebecca Harding  
Davis’s “Life in the Iron Mills,” a power-  
ful indictment of class restrictions that  
focuses on the thwarted artistic impulses  
of an iron worker; Mary Abigail Dodge’s  
wonderfully ironic and humorous “My  
Garden,” in which the narrator, an  
inept gardener who starts out with illusions  
of bestowing bountiful harvests on her  
friends, ends up offering them sour  
cherries and gleefully watching their  
discomfort; Eliza Leslie’s “Mrs. Wash-  
ington Potts,” a funny and painful ex-  
amination of pretentiousness and social  
ambition in the middle class; and Sara  
Willis Parton’s “The Invalid Wife,” a  
startlingly honest interior monologue in  
which a woman, confined to bed after  
childbirth, expresses resentment at her  
powerlessness. Those reading solely for  
pleasure should enjoy this collection,  
and instructors will find it an excellent  
reader for classroom use.

The publication of books like Pro-  
visions and Hidden Hands is the important  
first step in reversing the gender bias that  
has excluded women writers from the  
canon of American literature. Now that  
women’s works are being made avail-  
able, they can be discussed and  
evaluated by a large community of  
readers, leading us perhaps to reexamine  
our criteria for determining literary  
worth and to revise our theories about  
American literature. The editors of both  
books are to be commended for helping  
us to regain a valuable and neglected  
part of our American literary heritage.

@ Joyce Kitcho has an MA in English  
and will soon begin a career as a computer  
systems analyst.

Belles Lettres @ 5