Stand-Ins for the Rest of Us

In the Music Library, by Ellen  
Hunnicutt. Pittsburgh: University of Pitts-  
burgh Press, 1987, $15.95, 147 pp.  

by Faye Moskowitz  

Winner of the 1987 Drue  

Heinz Literature Prize for  

Short Fiction, Ellen  
Hunnicutt’s collection In the Music Li-  
brary stands together like a shelf of slim  
testaments to human survival. In spare  
yet incandescent prose, these ten short  
stories and a novella map the painful  
limits of adversity and deposit us finally,  
reader and characters, on the road  
pointed toward recovery.  

For Hunnicutt’s protagonists, the  
present is always in perilous equilibrium  
with a past where loss shimmers, reveal-  
ing and concealing itself by a trick of the  
eye or the mind. Opal Franklin in the  
first story, “At St. Theresa’s College for  
Women,” has lost all of her babies.  
“One, two, three, four, five. Like little  
Indians.” Death for her is no longer a  
lesson to be learned but a sorrowful mel-  
ody she knows by heart.  

As if she were putting together a jig-  
saw puzzle, Hunnicutt often goes for the  
edge pieces first, finishing the bare out-  

Chavis’s work as a psychotherapist is  
evident in the brief introductions she  
provides to each section. She focuses on  
family relationships, rather than on the  
literary aspects of the stories; her ap-  
proach is largely Freudian. Many of her  
observations are hackneyed and, one  
hopes, outmoded. “Mothers . . . seek  
to fulfill their unrealized dreams through  
their daughters’ opportunities,” she as-  
serts. Or, “Since a father is usually not as  
involved as a mother in childcare and  
domestic activities, he tends to be a  
more distant figure on his daughter’s  
horizon.” And again, “Spending so  
much of their time and energy outside  
the home, fathers are often seen by their  
sons as inaccessible strangers.” The  
implication of these observations about  
the family is that the prevailing image is  
still the reality: mother, at home with  
2.5 children, cannot realize her dreams;  
father, at work, is distant from his chil-  
dren. But in a world where seventy-eight  
percent of the mothers are working out-  
side the home, some must be realizing  
their own dreams, and some must be as  
distant from their children as their hus-  
bands are.  

Finally, I wonder how useful this an-  
thology will be for the intended audi-  
ence. If the general reader comes to it to  
find out “what makes families tick,” will  
he or she come away with an under-  
standing of the workings of a contempo-  
rary family? If a teacher uses it in the  
classroom, will it help students confront  
the reality that they have probably ex-  
perienced growing up in the 1980s and  
will certainly experience as adults in the  
twenty-first century? If a health profes-  
sional uses it with patients, will it pro-  
vide the kind of stories that ring true?  
Seeing one’s experience mirrored in lit-  
erature is of critical importance. As  
Carol Christ says in Diving Deep and Sur-  
facing: Women Writers on Spiritual Quest,  
“In a very real sense, there is no experi-  
ence without stories . . . Women have  
lived in the interstices between their  
own vaguely understood experience and  
the shapings given to experience by the  
stories of men.”  

@ Elizabeth R. Baer is provost and pro-  
fessor of English at Washington College in  
Chestertown, Maryland. She has published  
essays on Margaret Atwood, Jean Rhys,  
women’s autobiography, and children’s lit-  
erature. She reviews for Booklist, Choice,  
and Tulsa Studies in Women’s Literature.  

July/August 1988  

Ellen Hunnicutt.  

line before she begins to assemble  
snatches of the center: miscarriage, ac-  
cidental death, divorce, rape, and war.  
In her story “All Kinds of Flowers,” a  
woman serves tea to a German war  
bride. Throbbing just under the surface  
of the hospitable ritual are her own  
memories of life in Nazi-occupied Hol-  
land during World War II. Hunnicutt  
can gather horror in a small kerchief. Of  
the desperate search for food in wartime,  
her narrator says, “When my brother  
was beaten, five of his teeth were  
knocked out. My mother wept over the  
lost teeth, almost silently. ‘He is an old  

To Choose and  
to Change  

Lover’s Choice, by Becky Birtha. Seat-  
tle, Washington: The Seal Press, 1987,  
$8.95, 152 pp. (PB)  

by Patricia Roth Schwartz  

Becky Birtha’s second volume of  

short stories extends her range  

and reveals an increased capacity  
to capture a character’s true voice. More  
varied than her first collection (For  
Nights Like This: Stories of Loving  
Women), which focused primarily on  
youngish lesbians, Black and white, in  
or out of love, Lover’s Choice gives us a  
multiplicity of women: little girls, ado-  
lescents, young adults, a woman in mid-  
dle age, a woman approaching old age.  
Some are defined as lesbians, others are  
not specified as such; some are Black,  
some are white. What they hold in com-  
mon is that each finds herself, as her  
story unfolds, at a pivotal life point of  
change and choice.  

In “Johnieruth,” a fourteen-year-old  
tomboy and misfit encounters two adult  
women obviously “in the life” of loving  
women who show her herself in the mir-  
ror of her future. In “Babytown,” little  
Mimi and Mindy teeter on the brink of a  
lost innocence; growing up will mean  
leaving the safety of an insular Black  
community as integration enters their  
lives. In “Past Halfway,” Jo-Ellen, a  
lesbian ending an overly dependent re-  
lationship, realizes halfway through a  
cross-country trip that she will have to  
go on alone, and that she will; Sahara, a  
childless lesbian in mid-life whose  
dreams are full of babies, learns while  
camping out on the Pacific Headlands  
with a young drifter that she will always  
find a way to mother, maybe even by  
beginning to mother herself.  

As a Black lesbian/feminist writer,  
Birtha deserves praise for her courage in  
writing about interracial relationships,  
about white women from a Black  
woman’s perspective and about Black  
lesbians. As one of her stories is titled,  

man at fourteen’ she said softly. ‘Perma-  
nent teeth will not grow back.’ ”  

A sudden surprising, absolutely tell-  
ing detail can summon up ineluctable  
loss. In the story “A Hidden Thing,”  
the narrator describes her wonderful  
Aunt Bonnie, dead at nineteen, “years  
ago,” of a ravaging cancer. “When Bon-  
nie put on lipstick in a restaurant she  
picked up a table knife and used the side  
of the shiny blade as a mirror.” Reflected  
forever in the glint of that makeshift  
glass is the child, now woman, who  
seeks in the present succor from her past  
grief.  

Hunnicutt’s characters, intro-  
spectives all, often consider themselves  
stand-ins for the rest of us (as of course  
they are meant to be). In “Bringing the  
News,” Sarah, a rape victim, asks,  

Why has this thing happened to  

me and not to another person? Does  
it serve some purpose I cannot dis-  
cern? Will my phone ring some  
morning and a voice say, “We are  
so pleased with what you are doing,  
Sarah, for all our sakes?” I have  
held this experience in my hand and  
turned it every way, like a gemstone  
that catches the light with each  
facet and reflects at a hundred dif-  
ferent angles, searching for resolu-  
tion, and there is none. I do not  
know if it is possible to live in an  
unsafe world.  

Death for her is no  
longer a lesson to be learned  
but a sorrowful melody  
she knows by heart.  

Becky Birtha,  

quoting Yeats, her work takes us into  
“the deep heart’s core.” Here, things are  
as they are: Truth, which is the fiction  
writer’s duty to tell, does not bend to  
how we think it ought to be but rather  
explains itself. In “Ice Castle,” Maurie,  
a young woman on the verge of being  
able to seize her own identity as Black as  
well as lesbian, agonizes in an unac-  
countable crush over Gail, a rich white  
teenager. The story is uncomfortable  
because we want Maurie not to love  
someone like this. This piece succeeds,  
and without offending, because it cap-  
tures so achingly the emotions of un-  
healthy attachment we have all had  
sometime, someplace. A story about  
Maurie five years later will show her (the  
reader can well believe) seeking a  
woman equal to herself: This excruciat-  
ing piece of her journey has to come first.  

Similarly, in “Her Ex-Lover,” Ernes-  
tine’s attachment to Lisa, her white  
ex-lover, seems inexplicable — yet ob-  
sessions usually are. Ernestine’s ability,  
at the end of the story, to cut loose and  
let Lisa go allows her to open up more  
fully to her Black lover in the present. In  
creating these plots, Birtha has not set-  
tled for the pat, the easy, the rhetorically  
correct.  

In the story “Both Ways,” another as-  
pect of obsession is examined as the  
main character, Corey, struggles against  
temptation at a women’s festival when a  

And the world these characters in-  
habit, like ours, is unsafe: Treachery has  
unsheathed its claws long before most of  
the stories open, yet Amos, widower  
and title character of Hunnicutt's nov-  
ella, can foreshadow his own ultimate  
healing from tragic loss with this vision:  

On street corners, people were  
buying newspapers. Amos fantasized  
that they might all turn to the same  
page at the same time and discover  
a marvelous news item, some joy-  
ous, outrageous thing, and that the  
whole city might suddenly smile, so  
that the tired houses and littered  
streets would recede back like an  
enemy routed, and color would flow  
back into the gray November faces  
of the people.  

A musician herself, Hunnicutt ex-  
plores the nature of art as she plumbs the  
mysteries of survival. She ends her final  
story, “The Bengal Tiger,” with a review  
of a character’s performance: “Seldom  
since Ysaye has this music been played  
with such diabolical splendor. Palmer is  
fired by machinery as rich and un-  
compromising as sin itself.” “Perhaps,”  
says the narrator, “that is how fine music  
is made.”  

Individually and together, Ellen  
Hunnicutt’s stories oppress like the heft  
of Emily Dickinson’s “Cathedral  
Tunes,” but finally they are paeans to  
the resurrection of the human spirit.  

@ Faye Moskowitz, author of the mem-  
oirs “A Leak in the Heart,” has a new book  
of short stories called “Whoever Finds This:  
I Love You.”  

young lesbian, Patty Sarachild (the  
touch of naming here is perfect), tries to  
worm into her heart and her sleeping  
bag. Corey must decide whether she can  
risk the long-term partnership she has at  
home with her lover, Maria. Aside from  
the central theme, this story evokes  
beautifully a sense of lesbian feminist  
culture, reminiscent of recent work by  
Cathy Cockerell and Maureen Brady.  

“Route 23. . .” and “The Saints and  
Sinners Run” both take us, through the  
device of interior monologue, into the  
minds of two similar Black women who  
ride the city buses. Leona May Moses, a  
single mother whose landlord has re-  
fused to supply heat, must bundle up her  
kids and take them on an all-night ride  
to keep them from freezing. Cecily  
Banks, also a mother as well as a bus  
driver, can hardly keep her mind on her  
work for worrying about her kids at  
home; on her Sunday morning run,  
while all the little old Baptist ladies in  
their good dresses and Bibles crowd her  
bus, she learns several surprising, im-  
portant things. Birtha has an excellent  
ear for the rhythms of everyday speech:  
In these stories, the poetry of Black ex-  
pression is beautifully reproduced with-  
out strain.  

“In the Life,” the book’s final piece,  
rounds out Birtha’s satisfying offerings  
with another monologue, this one from  
Jinx, whose life-time partner, Grace,  
has died. As the story makes abundantly  
clear, Jinx remains very much with her.  
The glimpse into the Black lesbian cul-  
ture of the past is important, as is the  
validation of the spirit that guides one  
aging woman to confront rather than  
succumb to her loss.  

Jinx, as well as Johnieruth, Ernes-  
tine, Sahara, and all of their cousins and  
sisters and lovers, evoke for us their sto-  
ries through Becky Birtha’s craft, stories  
that our culture has too long rendered  
unspeakable. These tender, strong,  
enduring women let us know that, as  
Leona May Moses insists as she takes her  
kids on their all-night ride, “We ain’t  
getting off. This trip ain’t over yet.”  

% Patricia Roth Schwartz has a book of  
short stories coming out from New Victoria  
Press.  

Belles Lettres @ 15