Beauty Queen or Poster Child?

Women and I

Until the last decade, women
with disabilities have been lar-
gely ignored as subjects of

serious study. Researchers interested in
disability have focused almost exclusive-
ly on men, apparently assuming that be-
cause disability was the central issue,
women would feel the same way about it
as men. Nor have feminist scholars in-
cluded women with disabilities in their
research.

Now, Adrienne Asch, a psychothe-
rapist in New York City, and Michelle
Fine, a professor of psychology at the
University of Pennsylvania, have as-
sembled in one volume writers from a
wide variety of disciplines to illuminate
the lives of women with many types of
disabilities. As feminists who are also
disabled, the editors are uniquely qual-
ified to present this overview of the con-
nections and divisions between nondis-
abled and disabled women. Viewing the
position of women with disabilities from
a socialist feminist perspective, they em-
phasize that there can be no true equali-
ty of rights and opportunity without
honest appreciation by the majority of
the physical and emotional differences
of those who have grown up on the frin-
ges of society.

Grouped into three main sections,
"Bodies and Images," "Relationships,"
and "Policies and Politics,” the various
writers explore the effects on our self-es-
teem of "rolelessness" in a culture ob-
sessed with beauty and athleticism, our
relationships when one member is
devalued, and the economic impact of
governmental and institutional policies
that are doubly discriminatory.

The Miracle Hater

by Shulamith Hareven

North Point Press,

Of all Biblical stories, few capture the
imagination like the flight of the
Hebrews from Egypt. For hundreds of
years, in poem and song, Passover Seder
and church sermon, the great scene of
Moses leading out his slave people has
stirred the Western memory. In this
short novel, a noted Israeli writer
recreates that compelling event. Her
conception is realistic and simple. She
depicts the Exodus from the point of
view of the ordinary people, specifically
Eshkar, a shepherd who is a loner travel-
ing among the exiled tribes.

Hareven recasts the familiar scenes:
Moses forces water from the rock, the
people worship the Golden Calf in his
absence, God gives commandments on
the mountain, scouts explore the fruitful
Promised Land. Each event becomes
plausibly earthy, secular, growing
naturally from the thirst, wandering, and
unrest of the tribes who follow a remote
Moses.

Overwhelming all is the desert. Empty,
shocking, mountainous, it shakes all

belief:

There, way, way up, not a shrub or even a
lichen could be seen, and the silence was
unbroken by a single bird’s call. Sometimes a
cloud covered the mountaintop; then the
valley beneath it was darkened by shadow
and its dwellers paused mutely for an instant.
Throughout their stay in the high mountains
they felt like suffered transients, sojourners
who did not really belong. The horizontal
face of Egypt, supine in the sun, was very far
away.

Eshkar is "the miracle hater" of the
book’s title. He is angry that Moses and

18 @ Belles Lettres

essays in Psychology, Culture and Politics, edited by Adrienne
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1988, $34.95, 347 pp.

Underscoring the previously untapped
strengths of women who live outside the
mainstream is a study of a group not or-
dinarily regarded as "disabled" — fifty
elderly, never-married women — con-
ducted by Barbara Levy Simon, professor
of social work at Columbia University.
Having lived their adult lives as "out-
siders" in a marriage-oriented society,
most coped with the disabilities inherent
in old age better than did their married,
widowed, or divorced counterparts, she
found, because they had been autono-
mous most of their adult lives and had
developed support systems of friends
who helped in times of need. Ironically,
they joined the majority in old age, for,
by that time, most women have lost
their mates.

An important difference in perspective
of many nondisabled and disabled
women is illustrated in this dialogue be-
tween two proponents of the feminist
and disability rights movements from
the "Introduction: Beyond Pedestals":

Letty Cotton Pogrebin: "The concerns about
sexual harassment affect all women."

Judy Heumann: "You know, I use a
wheelchair, and when I go down the street I
do not get to be sexually harassed. I hear
nondisabled women complaining about it,
but I don’t even get treated as a sexual
object."

Shulamith Hareven.
Photo by Yael Avi-Yona.

the elders make the tribes wander for
years toward a land that is really only a
short walk away. Eshkar would not tarry
to weld the slaves into a people; he
would simply get out of the desert to the
Promised Land. Eshkar is meant to rep-
resent the ordinary Hebrew, but he is so
dour and alienated from the throng of
exiles that he provides little insight into
their travail. Nor does he reflect the ex-
citement of the journey from Egypt into
the future.

Still this modern story of the Exodus
builds to its great moment. The new
land flames before the weary wanderers.

Far to their right stood a city, a place of
many date palms splashed with the luxuriant
red flowers of a tree they failed to recognize...
Their senses swooned before the sudden
shock of oleander and flame trees, bees and
turtledoves, the strong odors and the
barking of dogs. Some of them looked
covetously at the inhabited city. Yet none
dared reach out to pluck a single flower or
fruit. There were butterflies. There were
low-flying birds plummeting among the fruit
trees. The people looked and looked,
dumbstruck, and still they could not look
enough.

At this tipping-point of history, when
the Hebrew people became Israelis,
Shulamith Hareven ends her powerfully
imagined novella. It makes the old Ex-
odus story as current as this morning’s
headlines.

—Susan P. Willens

"Smashing Icons: Disabled Women
and the Disability and Women’s Move-
ment" examines the roots of these view-
points in the beauty queen and the
poster child. Although all women are
diminished by the swimsuit pageant
image, those with disabilities (8.5 per-
cent of all U.S. working-age women) are
damaged by both stereotypes. Although
the beauty queen ideal is difficult to
identify with, the asexual, dependent
image of the poster child is an equally
unsatisfactory role model. So accus-
tomed to being treated according to this
image, however, many women with dis-
abilities still aspire to the very roles
feminists have been trying to shed.

Fine and Asch discuss the major con-
flict separating disabled and nondisabled
women — women’s rights to abortion
versus disabled newborns’ rights to
medical treatment in "Shared Dreams:
A Left Perspective on Disability Rights
and Reproductive Rights." "Just as we
would not advocate the ‘tragedy of the
female fetus’ as a legitimate reason for
an abortion... activists cannot con-
tinue to exploit the disabled fetus as a
good or compelling reason to keep abor-
tion safe, legal, and funded." This ex-
ploitation is based on the assumptions
that (a) life with a disability is not worth
living, refuted by numerous disabled per-
sons who lead satisfying, productive
lives; (b) if a disabled child’s quality of
life is inferior to that of a nondisabled

Ann Petry

The Narrows
by Ann Petry

Boston: Beacon, 1988, $10.95, 428 pp.

Ann Petry’s The Narrows is a rich and
haunting novel about love, learning,
and loss within the hostile world of a
small New England town in the 1950s.
First published in 1953, The Narrows of-
fers a compelling view of the racial con-
flicts as well as the gender roles tragical-
ly circumscribing and constricting the
lives of the characters. The central
events are simple and recognizable: A
young Black man (Link) falls in love
with a rich, young white woman
(Camilo). But the reverberations in
both the Black and white communities
are complicated.

Petry’s vision of the world and its in-
tricacies is never simple; the intertwined
stories of people in a community that is
disordered by prejudice and injustice are
detailed in their complexity. As Nellie
McKay notes in the introduction to this
edition, Petry’s work encompasses the
multiple dimensions and effects of op-
pression; "Her focus is on the physical
and psychological havoc that lies at the
intersection of capitalism and patriar-
chy, where the most vulnerable are
Black people (people of color) and all
women."

Women writers often describe the en-
tanglements of relationships and strong
familial bonds. Petry’s novel is dense

peer, the reason is the disability rather
than society’s preference for the beauti-
ful and gifted; (c) maintaining a child
with a disability is too expensive for
either the family or society; and (d)
caring for a disabled child is yet another
way to keep women enslaved at home.
Designating birth as the line that
separates the right of a disabled baby to
treatment from the right of a woman to
control her own body, Asch and Fine
argue that it is possible, even necessary,
for feminists and disability rights ac-
tivists to work together.
Underrepresentation of women of
color, institutionalized women, and
those from poorer educational and
socioeconomic groups flaw many of the
studies, as the editors acknowledge in
the epilogue. Nonetheless, the book is
important reading for feminists, who
should welcome both women with dis-
abilities, whose skills and abilities have
often not been hampered by sex-role
stereotyping, and their mothers, whose
advocacy skills have been honed in
fighting for their children’s rights to
quality education and treatment.

@ Yvonne Duffy is a freelance writer and
speaker on issues of women and dis-
ability. Differently abled as a result of
polio, she is the author of All Things Are
Possible, a study of the sexuality and life-
styles of seventy-seven women with dis-
abilities.

with the interrelatedness of the charac-
ters’ lives, representing not only in-
dividual relationships but the collective
history of those in the Black community
as well. Shifting points of view and
times add to the layering of reality and
our understanding of each character
within the context of the community.

Petry’s characters are usually seen in a
triad, with the third member often an
absent but influential ally or threat.
When this configuration is violated,
tragic events follow. We are first intro-
duced to Link Williams, the protagonist,
through his adoptive mother Abby
Crunch. She, the conservative force in
Link’s life, continually measures herself
and her family against the standards set
by her late husband. Later, Abby’s
closest friend assumes the role of the
second parent or third member of the
group.

A parallel triad can be seen in Link’s
relationship to Bill Hod and his friend.
The two males at one point in the novel
care for Link and educate him in the
harsher realities of the world beyond his
family. Another central trinity is evi-
dent in the relationship of Mamie and
Malcolm Powther, the upstairs boarders
in Abby’s home. Powther is well aware
of his wife’s affairs and is resigned to
paying that price to keep his beautiful
wife. Link and his lover Camilo, how-
ever, violate the triadic configuration as
well as the taboo against interracial
romance. The consequences of the
relationship between Link and Camilo
that disrupt the values of both com-
munities finally lead to the destruction
of those involved.

The centrality of the Black com-
munity and the consequences of an in-
dividual member acting independently
of that community locate Petry’s work
strongly within the tradition of litera-
ture of Afro-American women. The Nar-
rows is also a novel about the power of
story and the telling of one’s story as a
recreative act that gives substance to
one’s experience — the powerful theme
of women characters authoring their
own lives. Abby says, "We tell each
other the same stories, over and over
again. We've influenced each other in
the telling. Shared experience... Tell
it and retell it. And finally act on it."
Ann Petry’s novel is a significant and
impressive work — richly deserving of
its republication and retelling.

—Kathleen McInerney

Winter 1989