nickname, Kotka, being called in my sleep. This had hap-
pened only once before, on a New Year’s Eve four years
back. I heard my name, and then, over bells and shrieks
that sounded like the noon whistle at the mill down the
street, I heard my mother say, "It’s 1946!" She told me that
I said, "Oh," and rolled across the bed, never really wak-
ing. This time, though, she didn’t allow me to fall asleep
again. Instead, she stood me upright beside the bed and
switched on the overhead light. I started to snivel and she
handed me a pile of clothes.

"No, don’t cry," she sat on the bed and began unbutton-
ing my pajama top. "You must get dressed," she told me.
"Your aunt has seen the Virgin." Then she shouted down
the stairs, telling my father, in Polish, that he’d better
hurry.

My mother spoke to my grandmother in Polish. To my
father and to my aunt, she spoke English, except when she
said something that I was not supposed to know. Now she
had had this relapse. She turned to me and said something
still in the mother tongue.

"It’s still night," I whined, gesturing at the blackness
through the window, but she ignored me. She went into the
bathroom, came out with a wet washcloth, and began rub-
bing it across my face.

By the time she finished, I realized what had happened.
The Virgin had come to Polish Hill.

My father opened the front door and I was startled to see
the street filled with people, all hurrying toward the hospi-
tal. I had never seen so many people, not even during the
day. At night it was unthinkable. I could remember waking
at night and going in the darkness to the window. It would
be stone quiet and no one was ever out. Now it looked as
though all of Sunday’s masses had let out at once.

I called to the many children I knew as they were hurried
along. Loretta Mozdien waved to me and her mother
smacked her. Maryann Wrobleska walked as though she
were about to take communion, her hands folded in prayer,
eyes uplifted. I am reminded of that night now when I see
movies involving the evacuation of villages, war movies,
science fiction movies.

We walked up the hill as quickly as we could without
leaving my grandmother behind. She began to recite the
rosary out loud, those sweet, chirping phrases. My parents
joined in and the people behind us joined in and soon the
street was a moving, murmuring mass of people praying.
Then someone began singing the May Day hymn, and the
May procession was enacted there on the hill, but with no
need now of the plaster statue and the banners.

"Aunt Clara saw her?" I asked my mother when we
stopped to let my grandmother catch her breath.

My mother whispered, as if speech were forbidden. "I
would have seen her, but I left before Clara did. I won a
cookie jar. That was the Virgin’s way of appearing to me."

"A cookie jar?" But we were on the move again and my
skeptical question was lost in the singing, louder now as we
neared the hospital.

There must have been a thousand people at the top of the
hill. Some of the men wore sweaters over pajama tops and
trousers. Women were there in housecoats and pincurls, and
some of the children still wore their pajamas entire with a
shawl or coat thrown over them. Though it was June, it was
cool and a wind had been lifting the dust in the streets, as
though it might storm. The wind had died now, or perhaps
it had been trampled in the crowd, but it was chill.

We sang and stared up into the night sky. Now and then
a voice would break through and shout, "I see her!" in
Polish or "There she is!," and all of the people would clap
their hands and sing louder and faster and then make the
Sign of the Cross. I looked for our priests, expecting to see
one of them in the crowd, his trouser legs peeping out from
under a hastily donned cassock.

Inside the hospital, people were silhouetted against the
windows. We could see nurses in white, standing with the
crowd for a time, but usually they would go back inside, I
guess so others could come on out. The children who came
to taunt the crazy people, they were there, but they were
neither laughing nor afraid.

"Maybe," I said to my mother, "one of the crazy people
got out up there." Suddenly my grandmother’s arm darted
out and grabbed my own. She shook me, shook me until
my mother made her turn me loose. Even then, she gave
me an evil look and spat upon the ground before crossing
herself with great indignation and resuming her song.

"Well, maybe one of them did," I said, and my mother
led me away from my grandmother, who was now beating
on her breast to beg forgiveness for her errant grandchild.

I looked up beyond the building, trying to find my first
star. I could find none to wish on. No, I told myself, I
must gaze upon the Virgin the way Maryann Wrobleska
might.

I tried to focus on the building, but saw the building
only, with people black against the light within, people on
every floor, even the top.

Perhaps I was possessed by the devil. The nuns had told
us of such people and of others as well. Of those who
turned to stone for eating meat on Friday, or those who
swallowed their own tongues for taking communion in a
state of mortal sin. Perhaps I was in a state of mortal sin.
Perhaps the Virgin had come to all but me.

I sang louder and louder, raised my voice until it grew
thick in my throat, but still did not see her.

A fire engine appeared. It came slowly, as fire trucks are
driven in parades, but with its headlights on, the fire bell
clanging. A man called through a megaphone, "Go home,
go home. There is nothing here to see." And someone from
among us shouted, "Protestant!"