an  
Down Under  

Boiled Up  
With People  

Foxybaby, by Elizabeth Jolley. New York:  
Viking, 1985, $14.95, 261 pp.  

Milk and Honey, by Elizabeth Jolley.  
New York: Persea Books, 1986, $8.95,  
185 pp. (PB)  

by Molly Hite  

66 the writer needs to be boiled  
up, as it were, with people,”  
observes Meridian Viggars,  

the middle-aged, vigorous woman who  
emerges as the muse of Foxybaby. Her  
remark might serve as the premise of this  
extraordinary novel, at once a metafic-  
tion, a Kunstlerroman (portrait of the artist  
as aging woman), and a romantic comedy  
of the Shakespearean variety, in which  
assorted unlike and unlikely characters are  
flung together to form a transient commu-  
nity that transforms them. Viggars’s  
characteristic (and characteristically  
Australian) metaphor of the writer “boiled  
up” with other people is both homey and  
distinctly odd. It recalls the institutional  
tea that is served throughout the novel  
that is not really tea, being made from a  
weed that “used to be known locally...  
as one of the stinkworts” but that with  
familiarity becomes one of the main  
objects of desire. Jolley’s own brew has a  
similar effect. The novel seems to be one  
kind of thing — a comedy of manners or a  
satire — but then it begins to produce a  
peculiar aftertaste. Only after a period of  
disorientation do you realize that this is  
something original, perhaps an altogether  
new kind of writing. Foxybaby is the third  
of Jolley’s novels to be published in this  
country; it ought to establish her as one of  
the most important experimental  
novelists working.  

and the Sea  

In the two previous novels that have  
appeared in America, Mr. Scobie’s Riddle  
and Miss Peabody’s Inheritance, Jolley  
claimed as her special province random  
communities made up of people who are  
neither blood relations nor especially  
drawn to one another. Foxybaby deals  
with another such community as the di-  
lapidated premises of Trinity College in  
the backwater of Cheatham East (“cheat  
‘em’ is the operative principle) are turned  
over to the lucrative business of losing  
weight during summer vacation. An  
assortment of mostly female clients of  
varying sexual preferences and practices is  
attracted. (One of the most engaging  
features of Jolley’s fictional universes is  
that homosexualities in them are common  
and unremarkable.) Alma Porch, novelist  
and sometime teacher, arrives after a  
wonderful epistolary battle with the direc-  
tor, Miss Peycroft, to teach drama to a  
class that is to be given food for thought as  
recompense for very little actual food.  
After being marooned by a crash that  
seems to have been engineered, she  
encounters a series of self-preoccupied  
characters who invite her to orgies (“If,  
however, you feel rested later and change  
your mind, slip into something comfort-  
able and pop along”), confide the distress-  
ing secrets of their private lives at awkward  
moments, and generally rework her own  
concerns to fit their needs. In the back-  
ground, figures like the loutish satyr Mr.  
Miles, who pursues the female help with  
cries of “Get yor knickers orf sweetheart,”  
and the featureless, pubic-hairless Miss  
Rennett suggest a nod in the direction of  
Stella Gibbons’s Laurencian satire Cold  
Comfort Farm.  

y i  

Elizabeth Jolley. Photo by Roger Garwood.  

But Foxybaby is more than a screwball  
comedy from the point of view of a  
spinsterish innocent who must be in-  
itiated into other people’s pre-  
conceptions, for within this setting Miss  
Porch is producing her own disturbingly  
Oedipal fiction, also called Foxybaby.  
This work, which the clients of the  
weight-loss program act out in in-  
stallments, is made up of a bleak series of  
scenes in which a father is faced with his  
inability to help his daughter-lover and  
her baby, both of whom suffer from drug  
addiction and some unnamed but desolat-  
ing illness. Miss Peycroft volunteers with  
unerring banality — and accuracy — that  

a  

The novel seems to be... a comedy of manners or a satire  

— but then it begins to produce a peculiar aftertaste. Only  
after a period of disorientation do you realize that this is  
something original, perhaps an altogether new kind of writing.  

Magnolias, Eucalyptus,  

Women’s Work: Contemporary Short  
Stories by New Zealand Women, chosen  
by Marion McLeod and Lydia Wevers.  
New York: Oxford University Press, 1985,  
267 pp. (PB)  

by Susan Osborn  

On the cover of this collection is a  
reproduction of a droll painting  
by Jaqueline Fahey entitled “Dé  
jeuner sur l’herbe.” As in Manet’s paint-  
ing of the same name, it shows a picnic  
scene, but in Fahey’s version two com-  
pletely clothed women — not men — are  
surrounded by two naked men. One man  
sits in the foreground, his bent right leg  
discreetly hiding his genitals. The other,  
in the background, is only incompletely  
sketched. He is stepping, rather  
awkwardly, either out of or into his pants.  
This radical departure from traditional  
iconography led me to expect a similarly  
disruptive treatment of gender in these  
stories. But that does not happen. As the  
editors point out, their selection was con-  
sciously guided not as much by politics as  
by personal taste. They have chosen 31  
stories by 28 non-European women, and  
although many are written from a female  
point of view, some are not. Most were  
first published during the past 20 years,  
and most take place in New Zealand.  
The collection is refreshing for two  
reasons. First, although many of the  
stories are about love, few center on erotic  
heterosexual love. Rather, the authors  
concentrate on love between girls, love  

| 2 % Belles Lettres  

for self, love of friends, nonerotic hetero-  
sexual love, and most commonly, love of  
the natural environment, especially of  
trees and flowers. Second, the stories tell  
us as much about the hopes, aspirations,  
and lives of contemporary New Zealand  
women as they do about women’s  
traditional closeness to nature. The in-  
timacy between the women and some of  
the men in these stories and the natural  
environment is a given: The stories exude  
the scent of eucalyptus, chestnuts carried  
in hands, elders, citrus, and especially the  
sea. People treasure plants and animals;  
they nurture them; they understand them;  
they are able to receive and appreciate the  

The stories exude the scent of  
eucalyptus, chestnuts carried in  
hands, elders, citrus, and  
especially the sea.  

profound pleasure that only living natural  
things can provide. And their symbolic  
significance is enormous. When a tree or  
flower is trampled or chopped down, hope  
is blighted; necrophilic energy triumphs  
over biophilic energy.  

For example, in “Flower Man” by Fiona  
Kidman (a story that does run counter to  
traditional ideas of gender in that it  
portrays a nurturing man who is identified  
by the “elegantly cool perfume” of the  
magnolia blossoms he carries), Magog and  

her friends prepare for their university  
exams under the tutelage of an  
emotionally niggardly cynic, Rad Barclay.  
Rad derides their camaraderie with Danny  
Ferry, the flower man who has occupied  
his life primarily with the maintenance of  
a public magnolia tree. Danny is also  
proctor of the exam; just prior to its com-  
mencement, he traditionally places a bar  
of chocolate and a magnolia blossom on  
each student’s desk. A few days before the  
exam, Danny encounters the children  
and Rad and offers each a blossom. The  
children accept while Rad peremptorily  
dismisses him. Magog’s defense of Danny  
(“He’s kind and good, and he’s never  
done us harm”) infuriates Rad: “You're  
just a great wet flabby emotional mess.  
Why don’t you try to grow up?” he  
hollers. Well, the children do “grow up”:  
The night before the exam, they fell the  
magnolia tree.  

But this defeat is only temporary. The  
editors skillfully steer us back to stories  
that tell of the infinitely comforting and  
barely perceptible choreography involving  
people and the natural environment. As  
such, this collection provides more a sense  
of peace than of disruption.  

My only disappointment is that the  
editors have included no stories about love  
between adults of the same sex and too few  
about older women. However, the col-  
lection does offer many subtle pleasures  
and helps to document the recent wave of  
exciting artistic production by the women  

of the world.  

® Susan Osborn is a writer, teacher, and  
student of writing at Rutgers University. Her  
particular interest is in the relationship  
between gender and rhetorical forms.  

the story is about “the appalling loneliness  
of the individual,” and indeed appalling  
loneliness is one of Jolley’s constant  
themes. In Foxybaby, however, the in-  
dividual is embedded in an ultimately  
supportive, if slapdash, community, just  
as the eponymous fiction is embedded in a  
narrative about how fiction changes lives.  

“This is how a story is made, from little  
scenes and the thoughts and feelings of  
people, their ideas and their wishes,” Miss  
Porch explains to her group at one point.  
Foxybaby itself is made up of such  
fragments, often offered as bits of writing:  
not only passages from the novel in prog-  
ress, but also letters, notes, and snatches  
on-target or horrifically off-target of “lit  
crit” elicited from the participants by the  
indefatigable Miss Peycroft. The most  
productive critic turns out to be Mrs.  
Viggars, who because of her wealth has  
been cast in the lead role of the father.  
Paradoxically, the experience of im-  
aginatively crossing genders “ennobles”  
Viggars and provokes her to seek maternal  
responsibilities. “My part as Steadman has  
given me the wish to cherish and to  
nurture,” she reports gruffly to Miss  
Porch. She then goes on to urge the writer  
to accept her own characters, who,  
although they are superficially very alien,  
may be unacknowledged aspects of the  
self: “... one walking towards oneself.  
Either the child towards the adult or the  
other way round.”  

The meditation on the  
transformative power of fiction  
seems to have important im-  

plications for Milk and Honey, the most  
recent of Jolley’s novels released here.  
This novel is a version of the embedded  
Foxybaby story, a first-person narrative by  
a man who has discovered “the appalling  
loneliness of the individual” in his desire  
to undo the consequences of his behavior.  
Jacob tells in retrospect the story of his  
long sojourn in the predominately female  
household of the Viennese refugees who  
teach him music and entice him into a  
community that is both shelter and  
prison. In his struggle to disentangle  
himself and draw in the surrounding  
world, he enters into a dialectic of con-  
striction and manipulation in which he  
pits the daughter of the family (his wife)  
against a local woman (his lover), an op-  
position that ends up destroying both  
women.  

Against the backdrop of the previous  
fictions-within-fictions, Milk and Honey  
looks particularly austere, a sort of Aus-  
tralo-Viennese gothic with a problematic  
protagonist who sees his situation as a  
conflict between Old and New World  
values. But Jacob, like his biblical pro-  
totype, and especially like Mrs. Viggars, is  
finally ennobled and in rather the same  
ways. He acknowledges that this struggle  
as “the individual” has taken place within  
a context of female labor and poverty.  
Learning finally from the experience of  
masculine alienation to cherish and  
nurture, he turns to the strangely exalted  
alternative community that has been the  
context of the whole story, an asylum for  
the mentally disabled. He becomes a  
nurse, joining the profession that engaged  
the Viennese-born Jolley for much of her  
own life. The parallels suggest a  
biographical story within which Milk and  
Honey is embedded and a sense that Jolley  
herself is using the novel to “be walking  
toward oneself.” The feat is a risky one,  
and I think she brings it off. Jolley is in her  
early 60s, an age that her novels imply is  
appropriate for risk-taking, and her im-  
pressive career as a novelist has led her to  
more and more innovative fictional forms.  

® Molly Hite teaches English at Cornell  
University and is writing a book-length study  

of contemporary feminist narrative.  

SrrTemBer/Ocroser 1986