Male Maladies, Female Victims

The Female Malady: Women, Madness, and English Culture, 1830-1980, by Elaine Showalter. New York: Penguin, 1987, $8.95, 336 pp. (PB)

A Dark Science: Women, Sexuality, and Psychiatry in the Nineteenth Century, by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson. Translations from German and French by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson and Marianne Loring. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1986, $15.95, 199 pp.

by Patricia Roth Schwartz

Elaine Showalter takes us in mea-

sured, restrained, factual prose,

from the “Psychiatric Victor-

ianism” of the latter part of the 19th
century into the “Psychiatric Dar-

winism” of the decades preceding the
turn of the century. We begin during
“Victorianism,” when mental illness was
seen as moral and spiritual distress that
humane and kindly treatment could
ameliorate. We conclude in “Dar-
winism” when the mandate of “selection
and survival” caused the insane to be
seen as congenitally tainted and dis-
eased and thus worthy of barbarous and
invasive scientific scrutiny and of
brutal, corrective measures.

Thus the Victorian obsession with
the presentation of harmonious surfaces
that essentially lie about reality (the in-
sane at “Lunatics’ Balls,” madwomen
like Ophelia with flowers in their hair)
gives way to a more contemporary
strategy of the creation of a scientific
“doublespeak” to rename and thus con-
trol what those in power wish to con-
trol. What never changes is the status of
women classified as insane: In the Vic-
torian era they were seen as morally
weaker, more corrupting and corruptible
than men. From the 1860s into the 20th
century, women were simply labeled as
being of more polluted stock, more rid-

dled than men with intractable vices
that fueled their basic hereditary, or-
ganic taint. While Victorian madwomen
sat in ruffled caps, did needlework,
sorted colored beans, and worked in the
laundry, the “New Woman” of the early
20th century (who was often labeled in-
sane because of her desire for equality)
was often subjected to enforced rest
cures (no pen and paper), opiates, and
mutilating surgery. Male medical prac-
titioners then, as many do now, seemed
to assign the source of evil to what they
themselves did not possess: the female
reproductive system and its functions.

Women we know about — Alice
James, Florence Nightingale, Virginia
Woolf, “Anna O.,” “Dora,” Charlotte
Perkins Gilman — are found in these
pages, and so are their (our) maladies:
agoraphobia, anorexia, postpartum de-
pression, and the effects of childhood
sexual abuse, labeled instead with
names such as melancholia, neuras-
thenia, and hysteria. The doctor, as
ever, looms large, the father/lover
whose abuses we have, of course, only
“fantasized.”

Treatments change as the years pass:
the “scold’s bridle,” leeches, and ener-
vating baths give way to insulin shock
“therapy,” courses of electro-convulsive
shock, lobotomies, and psychoanalysis.
We know these things. Showalter’s es-
sential contribution, beyond that of a

fine and thorough historian, is that she
reminds us that none of this emerged
fully formed from the mind of Freud; his
theories only took root in already fertile
soil. Furthermore, she does not let us
forget the truth: that those who create
the language, define the terms and the
norms, often wield enormous power
over the lives of others.

Jeffrey Masson has put together a vol-
ume with a focus that is smaller yet even
more unflinching — and therefore al-
most unbearable. A Dark Science con-
tains the gleanings of his exhaustive
search for articles in medical journals
from France and Germany from 1865 to
1900 that present evidence of a delu-
sional pathology in which male, sexual
perversion masquerades as scientific
theory, medical mandate, and even as a
course of humane treatment for condi-
tions that supposedly distressed women’s
lives.

Graphic yet matter-of-fact accounts
appear in these journal articles of the
castration (removal of ovaries) of “hys-
terical” women, of the cauterization by
red-hot irons of the clitorises, labia, but-
tocks, and thighs of girls as young as
eight (for “excessive masturbation”),
and of clitoral and labial amputation for
vaginismus. Even more mind-numbing
and soul-scarring is the notation by the
doctor, again and again, that the pa-
tient (read victim) asked for, even beg-
ged or pleaded for, the treatment she re-
ceived. Where have we heard this be-
fore? Masson’s work brings to light lost
and significant historical documents,
yet its primary usefulness stretches
further. His work helps us to define how
far, in our struggle for personal free-
doms, we have not come.

— continued on page 15

Whining, Pining Charlotte

Charlotte Temple, by Susanna Rowson. Edited with an introduction by Cathy N. Davidson. $7.95, 120 pp. Originally published 1791

The Coquette, by Mrs. Hannah W. Foster. Edited with an introduction by Cathy N. Davidson. $7.95, 169 pp. Originally published 1797

Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel in America, by Cathy N. Davidson. $22.95, 322 pp.

—all published by Oxford University Press, NY, 1986

by Laura Hapke

Readers of these two newly reis-

sued, early American best sel-

lers, Charlotte Temple and The
Coquette, will be interested to find in
these books the predecessors of those
unfortunate anti-heroines — considered
errant in both senses of the word — who
walked the mean streets of Victorian lit-
erature. Treated by their seducers in the
same emotionally brutal way as Hardy’s
Tess and Mrs. Gaskell’s Ruth, these
poignant, 18th-century fallen women
bear witness to an ideology, which, as
Cathy N. Davidson points out, insisted
on woman’s passivity only to castigate
her when she was seduced.

Charlotte Temple was astoundingly
popular. Women continued to read and
weep over it through 200 editions and
one full century, and it still has much to
recommend it. Its success moved critic
Leslie Fiedler to anger: Why should “the
first book by an American to move
American readers . . . in its essential
form the myth or archetype of seduction
as adapted to. . . the American female
audience,” have so succeeded? Had
Fiedler and the masculine critical estab-
lishment suppressed their irritation at
the female audience, they would have
found the answer. What woman would
not have recognized a familiar conflict
in Charlotte Temple, the ingenuous,
impressionable girl caught between de-
sire and conformity? The series of mis-
fortunes that befall Charlotte when she
listens to the serpent’s voice and
“elopes” to America, placing herself
under her lover Montraville’s dubious
protection, is a stark lesson in the allied
perils of seduction and economic depen-
dence. Pregnant, isolated, and guiltily
confused, Charlotte is cast off by Mon-
traville, who has listened to slander
about her and tired of this “whining,
pining Charlotte.” Reduced from well-
bred Englishwoman to expatriate wan-
derer of New York streets to a worse
fate, the “ruined Charlotte Temple” is a
frightening and timely emblem of
feminine gullibility.

So too was Eliza Wharton, a thinly
disguised Elizabeth Whitman, a well-
born woman who had rejected her unin-
spiring, clerical suitor. Wharton entered
into an affair with a free-wheeling mili-
tary man and died in exile giving birth
to his illegitimate child and a raging
period scandal. Mrs. Foster sympathizes
with coquettish but easily led Eliza, who
was manipulated by a type described in
modern speech as a sociopath. The
amoral Captain Sanford, who pursued
Eliza and then disappeared, returns a

married man, yet proceeds to reconquer
Eliza. In a letter to a friend, Sanford re-
veals his weariness with victory, and
Rowson, her considerable skill in
characterization: “I confess that the idea
of [marrying] a woman whom I have
been able to dishonor would be rather
hard to surmount. It would hurt even
my delicacy, little as you think me to
possess, to have a wife whom I know to
be seducible.”

Such ideology cries out for interpreta-
tion. Cathy N. Davidson, who edited
and wrote introductions for both seduc-
tion novels, has also written an exten-
sive scholarly work, Revolution and the
Word: The Rise of the Novel in America,
providing revisionist readings of these
and other period fictions. She stresses
that novels existed as “junctures of
ideas, controversies, and tensions”
within post-Revolutionary society.
Davidson contends that novelists such
as Rowson and Foster offered a subver-
sive message by providing their female
audience with a mirror of the unjust so-
cial reality. The seduction novel al-
lowed readers to vicariously test life al-
ternatives — marriage to the clergyman
or the rake. It also offered an intensely
realistic assessment of the injuries of the
double standard.

Davidson’s defense of the veri-
similitude of the so-called sentimental
novel is only part of this ambitious
study, which places the early American
novel within the context of its “un-
privileged” female and lower-class
readership. These disenfranchised but
newly literate readers received powerful
messages from “socially and morally sus-
pect” novels, works that were the ob-
jects of suspicion by a ruling class wary
of the threat to political and religious
authority.

Davidson treats a variety of topics,
from the economics of 18th-century
publishing to gender and class assump-
tions of sentimental, Gothic, and
Picaresque fiction. She employs a
number of approaches — structuralist,
feminist, and sociological. Perhaps the
book is to be studied as much as read.
Popular fictions of seduction and be-
trayal may seem a long way from the
brilliant rigors of Davidson’s book.
However, one has only to consider her
contention that the writing of seduction
fiction critical of male privilege was a
“female crime” to understand the impor-
tance of this new reading of 18th-cen-
tury texts.

@ Laura Hapke writes frequently about
“the fallen woman” and is at work on a
study of prostitutes in 19th-century Ameri-
can fiction.

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987