Lesson in Survival

The Little School: Tales of Disappearance and Survival in Argentina, by Alicia  
Partnoy. Cleis Press (Cleis East, P.O. Box 8933, Pittsburgh, PA 15221; Cleis West,  
P.O. Box 14684, San Francisco, CA 94114), $15.95 (HB), $7.95 (PB), 110 pp., illus.  

by Julia Alvarez  

Each chapter of this book is in-  

troduced by a picture of a blind-  

folded woman, her hands barely  
lifting the flap of her kerchief. To prevent  
prisoners from communicating with and  
knowing each other, and more im-  
portantly, their captors, inmates are kept  
blindfolded at all times in the “Little  
School,” which is a grim euphemism for  
the prison camp where the disappeared are  
tortured and await their fates. These gauze  
blindfolds are continually slipping, and  
the prisoners are required to summon the  
guard on duty to tighten them on pain of  
being beaten or worse if the blindfold is  
discovered to be loose.  

Alicia Partnoy spent more than three  
months in the Little School before she was  
transferred to a state prison, where she  
stayed for more than two years. The  
readers of her fictionalized account can be  
thankful that she, like the logo-woman of  
her chapter headings, learned to peep,  
glimpse, see, and, because such seeing  
involves the imagination, to envision the  
veiled world around her. What is amaz-  
ing, given the brutal and terrifying nature  
of that world, is that Partnoy could notice  
the details of its grace and durability. From  
the true heart of darkness come these  
tales, recorded in 20 epiphanies of sight  
and insight.  

Captured and blindfolded, “disap-  
peared,” Partnoy’s revenge on her captors  
is to see, in minute detail, the ignored  
little particulars that mark her place in the  
Little School. It is as if she were leaving  
a trail behind her, one the reader cannot  
help but follow. Vividly, we experience  
Partnoy’s world and that of her co-  
prisoners. We see the absurd plastic daisy  
on the slippers she is wearing when  
captured. We feel the importance of the  
false tooth she keeps in a little treasure  
chest of a matchbox, a tooth knocked out  
by a guard, which Partnoy periodically  
sneaks into her mouth in a ritual that  
reminds her that she is still whole. We  
watch as she rolls her ration of bread into  
25 little balls rather than eating it, desper-  
ate to create something, anything, in an  
environment where everything is being  
destroyed. We stare with her at her own  
reflection in a bathroom mirror, lost in  
the first human eyes she has seen in years.  
This is her only unhooded moment in the  

Despite some drawbacks, Dalsimer’s  
book is a success, especially in her goal to  
refute earlier psychoanalytic notions that  
female adolescents are repulsed by, or at-  
tempt to deny, their emerging sexual  
urges. In her analysis, she offers many  
examples arguing against this idea: Anne  
Frank’s description of her first menstrua-  
tion as a “sweet secret,” Miss Brodie’s girls  
puzzling over the nature of “the urge,” and  
Juliet’s joyous anticipation of her wedding  
night. Reading Female Adolescence will  
encourage readers to go back and reread  
the originals with a new or renewed  
appreciation.  

Kate Simon’s wry and cool auto-  

biographical account of her  

teenage years, A Wider World,  
nicely complements Dalsimer’s work.  
Simon’s adolescence exemplifies all of  
Dalsimer’s stages: close friendships with  
other girls, crushes on older women,  
rejection of parents, and establishment of  
sexual relationships. In her earlier Bronx  
Primitive, set in the New York City of the  
1920s, Simon wrote about her immigrant  
childhood. In this book, she picks up  
where the other left off, with her ultimate  

September/October 1986  

Alicia Partnoy. Photo by Mike Bugbee.  

book, when she is sent to the bathroom to  
shave her legs — for “a beauty treatment,”  
she quips grimly — which can mean either  
her release or murder.  

Finally, we endure the most anguishing  
moment of the book: her husband’s tor-  
ture. As he is being interrogated, he  
recites a popular nursery rhyme about a  
little frog no one could find, a lullaby he  
used to sing to his daughter whenever the  
child was afraid: “Rib-bit rib-bit/ Nobody  
knows where he hides/ Nobody’s seen him  
at home/ but we hear him all the time.”  

The chapter also shows Partnoy’s skill  
as a poet and writer and her translators’  
(Lois Athey and Sandra Braunstein)  
sensitivity to nuance and rhythm across  
languages. Movingly, Partnoy weaves in  
lines of this ironically apt nursery rhyme  
with stream-of-consciousness thoughts as  
the torturers demand to know, “Where is  
he?” — “he” being a subversive to them,  
but to Partnoy and her husband, the little  
frog no one can find. It is lost on the  
captors, the message of the poem. No one  
can find the little frog, no one can kill the  
song of the human heart.  

As these examples show, the book is  
compelling precisely because torture,  
political repression, and inhumanity are  
brought home to us in vivid, felt  
particulars that shatter our indifference.  
The ethical drone that puts even the most  

committed and politically aware to sleep is  
absent. Instead the impact of Partnoy’s  
message springs solely from the details of  
the story, in much the same way that the  
news of Imelda’s 800 pairs of shoes  
brought home to many the corruption of  
the Marcos regime. This is how the best  
writing — and the best political writing —  
work.  

In fact, Partnoy might have made the  
chapters less brief, sustained each situa-  
tion a little more, and developed the  
characters of the guards and prisoners who  
are brought in randomly throughout the  
book. Such development would have  
involved the reader even more in the  
world of the Little School. As it is,  
Partnoy is more generous to us than her  
captors were to her, letting us off before  
our hearts break. Perhaps she realizes that  
humankind cannot tolerate much reality,  
and she keeps us engaged for as long as she  
thinks we can bear it.  

Perhaps, too, this is all that this brave  
and talented woman can bring herself to  
put down. The dedication to her brother  

“poems,” William Carlos Williams once  
noted, “but men die daily for lack of what  
is found there.” Once, in fact, when new  
prisoners arrive, Partnoy took the oppor-  
tunity of the guards’ leaving the room for a  
moment to recite snippets of her poems to  
the inmates to comfort them. Later, she  
feels bad that she has not used that time to  
give them needed information about the  
rules, the guards, and the ways to get  
around them both. But it is precisely such  
courage and imagination that can lift the  
human spirit above efforts to destroy it.  
One wishes only that more legislators vot-  
ing on Central American aid, more  
guardias stepping out into the hall for  
cigarillos, more readers, would listen to  
Partnoy’s song of freedom.  

The book is hauntingly illustrated by  
the author’s mother, Raquel Partnoy.  
The drawings show women prisoners,  
many blindfolded but with their eyes  
showing through, large figures cramped in  
the rectangle of the paper as if in cells.  
These women are taking up the only arms  

they have: They touch and hold each  

Drawing by Raquel Partnoy, 1985.  

other in their arms. They represent a force  
that cannot be made to disappear.  
Solidarity and vision and poetry show us  
the way to survive the horror by leaving  
tiny markers of humanity — Gretel’s  
bread crumbs, Ariadne’s thread,  
Partnoy’s tales.  

© Julia Alvarez is the author of  
Homecoming, a collection of poetry. She  
also writes fiction and is Assistant Professor of  
Creative Writing at the University of Illinois.  

sentimental view that she denies much of  
the poignancy, even anguish, inherent in  
her ordeals. Not until the final chapter in  
the description of her mother’s death does  
she abandon the bravado of her adolescent  
voice and expose all her failings, vul-  
nerabilities, and pain.  

There was nothing I could do with  
my pity. I could not relieve her anger  
and her fear, nor take the smallest  
part of them as my own burdens, a  
frustration as cruel as loss and death.  
When I began to leave her. . . I,  
too, felt old and exhausted, angry  
and despairing. Almost, I was my  
mother and like her an intimate of  
death, no longer the invulnerable  
girl, responsible to no one and for no  
one.  

A Wider World offers, besides accounts  
of Simon’s youthful trials and triumphs,  
rich, detailed, and loving descriptions of  
New York that reveal a woman who  
clearly adores the city and thrives in it.  
This memoir will inspire readers to go  
back and take a look at her travel writings.  

@ Elizabeth Stark is a writer and editor for  
Psychology Today who has thankfully left  
her adolescence 10 years behind her.  

Belles Lettres @ 9 |