“Like me, my women characters use humor instead of  
anger,” fiction writer Francine Prose tells interviewer Alison  
Carb. “Like me, the individuals in my stories are looking for  
some overall meaning or connections, be it personal, religious,  

or even superstitious.”  

Born in Brooklyn, schooled at  

Radcliffe and Harvard, Francine  

Prose lives in upstate New York  
with her husband and sons. She is the  
author of seven novels, including Bigfoot  
Dreams, and a story collection, Women  
and Children First, both available from  
Pantheon Books. (The stories are  
scheduled for publication in paperback  
by Ivy Books in 1989.) Prose has also  
co-translated from Polish A Scrap of  
Time, a compilation of Holocaust tales  
by Ida Fink. She has an M.A. in Eng-  
lish from Harvard and has taught fiction  
there, as well as at the University of  
Utah and the University of Iowa.  

What sparked the ideas for the stories in  
Women and Children First?  

I started with two or three separate  
images, things I saw happen, that stuck  
in my mind over a period of time. I tried  
to find a way to connect them while  
writing the stories. Towards the end of  
the collection’s first story, “Tibetan  
Time,” about Buddhists from Manhat-  
tan at a meditation retreat, I thought of  
a way to finish it.  

I suddenly remembered a tour I had  
taken at the Kitt Peak Observatory in  
Tucson, where I watched a tour guide  
help a tourist see the sun through a solar  
telescope. The guide said that he could  
tell exactly when the tourist got the tel-  
escope to focus because he was able to  
look into that person’s eyes and see a  
reflection of the sun. When I heard that  
I thought, “Amazing!” I filed it away in  
the image bank in my head, thinking  
that I would use it in my fiction.  

Five or six years later, I used this im-  
age in “Tibetan Time.” Originally, the  
husband wasn’t an astronomer, but I  
made him one so everything would fit  
together. In the completed version, the  
husband of the main character at the  
retreat, Ceci, is an astronomer who  
leaves her to take a job at an observatory  
in Arizona.  

Sometimes I decide how a story is  
going to end at the moment a real-life  
incident occurs. For instance, I was  
unable to find the redemptive ending I  
wanted for “Tomatoes,” a story about a  
college professor who is attracted to the  
physical therapist caring for his dying  
father, until real life brought it to me.  

While I was struggling with this story,  
my husband, Howie, came into my  
study. He told me that while driving our  
youngest son, Leon, to nursery school,  
he had seen a giant bird with a huge fish  
in its claws, approaching the car from  
the reservoir. The bird, an eagle or an  
osprey, dropped the fish by a telephone  
pole. Howie turned the car around,  
went back for it, and brought it home. I  
stared at the seven-pound bass he was  
holding and thought, “Here’s the end of  
my story.”  

How would you describe your writing style  
in these stories?  

The method I use in my stories, even  
the voice, is very associative. I had al-  
ways thought my stories moved in linear  
progression from start to finish, but re-  
cently I realized this is not so. The char-  
acters associate everything that happens  
to them with something else. Still, al-  
though they are highly conscious peo-  
ple, almost painfully so, they’re not  
always aware of exactly what they’re  

doing until they do it.  

I also feel that my stories are contem-  
porary because I take a hard, detailed,  
and often irreverent look at the way  
people live their lives in the eighties.  
The stories are funny too. In “Tibetan  
Time,” for instance, Ceci’s astronomer  
husband breaks up with her in an up-  
town Manhattan sushi bar, while eating  
cucumber salmon-skin rolls. Rather  
than existing as discrete little entities,  
the stories are often connected to one  
another.  

The connections I make in stories  
aren’t visible or predictable at the out-  
set. I don’t start off by trying to establish  
symbolic meanings. Instead, I concen-  
trate on telling the story, on creating  
images and characters and thoughts. I  
use whatever images pop into my mind.  
After the story is done, I see what the  
connections are.  

I thought that I might leave in an extra  
word or even worse, an inaccurate one.  

I try not to tell lies about the experi-  
ences that the characters are undergo-  
ing. I try to avoid or eliminate lies of  
prejudice or distortion, such as writing  
that implies that all women are dumb or  
all men are aggressive.  

Would you describe any of your characters  
in Women and Children First as feminist?  

I consider all of them to be feminist  
even though they are more acted upon  
than active. True, awful things have  
happened to many of them — domestic  
traumas, break-ups, abandonment —  
but they manage to preserve the integri-  
ty of their inner lives. None are sub-  
servient, including those who have been  
abandoned.  

Like me, my women characters use  
humor instead of anger. For many de-  
serted wives, the object of their anger is  
no longer there. Others are so busy try-  
ing to cope with their lives that they  
don’t have time for anger.  

In what ways do your characters reflect  
your concerns and those of people in the  
eighties?  

Francine Prose. Photo by Paul Fraughton.  

What elements make a good story?  

A story has to exist as a story before  
anything else. It has to make the reader  
want to find out what happens next.  
When I write a story I ask myself, “Is it  
entertaining?” “Is it emotionally mov-  
ing?” “Does it sound right?” If I answer  
“yes” to these questions, then perhaps  
what I’ve written will entertain, move,  
and sound right to someone else. I often  
read stories aloud to myself and listen to  
the narrative voice, rhythm, cadence,  
and tone.  

I think I’ve found a succession of dif-  
ferent voices. Each story and novel has  
its own voice. The material in them de-  
termines what kind of voice should be  
used. In “Tibetan Time,” for instance, I  
knew that Ceci, who seeks spiritual  
comfort at the Buddhist retreat, would  
associate the temple gong with an enor-  
mous Q-tip stroking the length of a  
spine.  

Do you go by rules for writing fiction?  

I’m compulsive about rewriting. I go  
through my work line by line and ask  
myself, “What would happen if this sen-  
tence was the only one that people  
would read and judge me by?” I believe  
each story in Women and Children First  
went through anywhere from twenty to  
thirty drafts.  

The stories also wound up being one-  
third shorter than they were when I  
started them. I couldn’t bear the  

Like many of my characters, I am  
concerned with domesticity. I am inter-  
ested in the connections between  
women and children, between women  
and men, between women and women.  
Like me, the individuals in my stories  
are looking for some overall meaning or  
connection, be it personal, religious, or  
even superstitious, which will help them  
to make sense out of the mysteries and  
contradictions in their lives, as well as  
their relationship to the universe at  
large.  

I believe, as they do, that solitude is a  
basic human condition, whether a per-  
son has a companion or not. The women  
characters in my stories feel alone be-  
cause they are alone, in the same way  
that most women are. It’s impossible to  
be alive in the eighties and fail to notice  
how often women and children make up  
the social unit in our society. Despite  
our gallant traditions of putting women  
and children first, they are often still  
treated as second-class citizens.  

Is there any writer whose work has influ-  
enced yours?  

The writer from whom I learned the  
most is Isak Dinesen. Much of my early  
writing was influenced by hers, with its  
narrative turns and surprises. Unfortu-  
nately, there are things in her work  
which now irritate me no end, things  
which I didn’t see when I first read it.  

While Out of Africa is a wonderful book  
of memoirs, it is also a wretched one, full  
of Dinesen’s unquestioned aristocratic  
assumptions and incessant references to  
“natives.”  

I have learned from other writers too.  
Isaac Babel, for instance. A year and a  
half ago, when I was writing “Creature  
Comforts,” a story from my collection  
about a housewife who doesn’t like her  
husband's brother living on their prop-  
erty, I discovered that I couldn’t end the  
tale in the way I wanted. I knew I  
wanted to create a moment of horrible  
violence. But I had never attempted a  
violent scene in any of my stories and  
was unsure how to go about it.  

While teaching a class on Babel to  
students at the University of Utah I no-  
ticed that in his stories violent episodes  
always came right after extremely lyrical  
passages. Suddenly, everything clicked  
for me. I resumed writing “Creature  
Comforts.” I inserted a moment where  
the housewife is washing dishes and sees  
the moon and thinks it looks like a giant  
cookie, just before her husband’s  
brother goes up in flames after leaving a  
gasoline can near the heater. Putting  
these descriptions side by side made the  
story effective.  

Did you go through any hard times in your  
life and career?  

I had a rough time of it financially  
before I realized I could teach. After us-  
ing up the thousand-dollar advance I  
had received for my first novel, I slept on  
friends’ couches and moved from city to  
city, trying to earn enough money to  
keep on writing.  

In the early seventies, I sold a story to  
Mademoiselle and lived for six months on  
the eight hundred bucks I received.  
While working on subsequent novels, I  
got small grants.  

After finishing my fifth novel,  
Household Saints, and giving birth to my  
second son, Leon, in 1982, I decided I  
would try to teach. So I asked an ac-  
quaintance how to go about it. This per-  
son told me to obtain the Modern Lan-  
guage Association’s list of jobs in English  
and Comparative Literature at colleges  
and universities. I did and applied to the  
University of Arizona and Western  
Washington University.  

The University of Arizona called me  
first. So we went and I taught fiction  
there for two years. After that, things  
got a lot easier for us.  

What are your future plans?  

I will be teaching fiction at the Uni-  
versity of Utah this winter. I also have  
been nominated for a Fulbright Scholar-  
ship in Yugoslavia this spring.  

As for my writing, I’ve just begun  
working on a new novel about a family  
living in the fifties. It deals, in part,  
with social mobility in this country —  
what it means in certain circles to go to  
college, among other things.  

In addition, I have been writing short  
stories. I have written enough for  
another collection but I want to com-  
plete a novel before getting them pub-  
lished. I would like to have the stories  
and novel come out at the same time.  

I find writing stories easier than writ-  
ing novels lately. One has to be certain  
of some kind of resolution in a novel. In  
these times of Iran—contra hearings, ter-  
rorism, racial violence, and ecological  
destruction, I’m not sure I believe in  
resolutions anymore. With stories I  
don’t need a resolution. A simple reve-  
lation is sufficient.  

© Alison Carb is a critic who lives in  
New York City. She last interviewed  
Bharati Mukherjee for Belles Lettres.  

Belles Lettres @ 5