Marguerite Yourcenar,

1903-1987

With Open Eyes (Conversations with Matthieu Galey), translated by Arthur Gold-
hammer. Boston: Beacon Press, 1984, $10.95, 271 pp. (PB)  
A Coin in Nine Hands, translated by Dori Katz. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux,  
1987, $11.95, 174 pp.  

Two Lives and a Dream, translated by Walter Kaiser. New York: Farrar, Straus &  
Giroux, 1987, $16.95, 245 pp.  

by Joanne Schmidt  

The date March 6, 1980, was  
memorable for French women  
writers. On that day, Marguerite  
Yourcenar became the first and so far  
only woman ever elected to the presti-  
gious 345-year-old body of French  
writers, the French Academy. How-  
ever, as she recounts in With Open Eyes,  
the informative series of conversations  
she had with French literary critic Mat-  
thieu Galey, she herself was publicly  
indifferent to membership in the acade-  
my of “Immortals.”  

For two contradictory reasons, Your-  
cenar remains an enigma to many femi-  
nists. First, she was not interested in  
striking a victory for women by becom-  
ing a member of the Academy, and sec-  
ond, she was, above all other contem-  
porary French women writers, extremely  
acceptable to the French male literary  
establishment. At the core of any at-  
tempt by a feminist to understand Your-  
cenar’s acceptability to that establish-  
ment, both in France and abroad, is the  
essential fact found in her biography that  
the only parent she ever knew was her  
father, since her mother died only days  
after her birth in 1903 in Brussels.  

In With Open Eyes, Yourcenar sums  
up the father/daughter relationship in  
two succinct yet revealing statements:  
“We helped each other” and “We  
thought of each other as equals.” Her  
father, Michel Crayencourt (Yourcenar  
is an anagram of her family name, which  
her father helped her invent), was a  
French aristocrat who welcomed his  
daughter into the world of male privi-  
lege. Early in her childhood, her ambi-  
tion was to write something important  
and make an impression on people  
through her pen. Because of her father,  
she grew to believe that being female  
would never be a tremendous obstacle.  
She also shared the feeling with him that  
she was destined for something great. “I  
had a strange certainty that I was  
somebody.”  

Yourcenar was twenty-four years old  
when her father died. Their bond had  
been loving, respectful, and meaning-  
ful. He was the one who told her many  
stories about her mother, a highly intel-  
ligent Belgian aristocrat who read  
avidly, loved the classics, and, in the  
1890s despite her family’s disapproval,  
arranged to learn Greek and Latin with  
tutors. One can easily see how the seeds  
of Yourcenar’s life were present in her  
mother’s life and why loss and separation  
would be recurring themes in her works.  

The void of never having known her  
mother was filled by her companion  
Grace Frick, an American academic  
whom Yourcenar met while in her early  
twenties. After her father’s death, she  
found solace in their friendship and the  
deep bond they shared. Frick invited  
Marguerite to move to New York City in  
1939 during an obviously troubled time  
in Europe, helped find their future home  
in 1949 on Mount Desert Island off the  
coast of Maine, and translated her mon-  
umental novel The Memoirs of Hadrian  
into English. In total, Frick and Your-  
cenar spent almost forty years together.  

Besides the many details of Your-  
cenar’s personal life, With Open Eyes  
reveals her political opinions and her  
views on love, racism, and feminism.  
She was suspicious of labels and never  
called herself a feminist, viewing femi-  
nism as “particularism” or a type of “ra-  
cism in reverse,” which is not difficult to  
understand from the point of view of a  

8 @ Belles Lettres  

European who witnessed fascism first-  
hand. Yet she told each woman to reject  
the “artificial image” that society “re-  
flects back to her” and encouraged  
women to be full human beings who are  
also women (“un être humain femme”).  
Furthermore, she was always in the van-  
guard of many issues important to femi-  
nists: the fight against nuclear power  
and weapons, pollution, and cruelty to  
animals, and the belief in ecology. She  
frequently sent telegrams to public offi-  
cials and government agencies to sup-  
port these causes: her way to be engaged  
in direct activism. To her, all living  
things were part of a greater whole, a  
view that was also present in her novels.  
Although Yourcenar never embraced  
feminism, she exemplified part of the  
diversity of female responses and experi-  
ences under patriarchal rule.  

Marguerite Yourcenar.  
Photo by Carlos Freire.  

Attentive readers of Yourcenar  
find that she has added im-  
mensely to women’s writing  
about being caught in a double bind.  
She also started her literary career ad-  
dressing taboo topics such as homo-  
sexuality (“a word I find annoying”),  
bisexuality, and incest. She demon-  
strated great courage in these themes.  
Through development of them by her  
and by her protagonists of both sexes,  
she successfully analyzed and exposed  
the social structure or deconstructed the  
patriarchy, in current feminist termi-  
nology. She chose bisexuality and sexual  
“inversion” (a seventeenth-century  
French literary device still used in Your-  
cenar’s time, in which females are en-  
dowed with some “male” qualities and  
males are endowed with some “female”  
qualities) as means to a solution for deal-  
ing with the reality of the human condi-  
tion for both men and women in a patri-  
archal society. The implicit subtext in  
her novels sets out to solve the sexual  
problem, which for her was an admitted  
inability “to see why anyone would want  
to make a distinction between homo-  
sexual love and love in general.” For the  
rest of her life, she swam against the tide  
in her pursuit of bisexuality as a topic of  
interest because she saw men as they  
were and did not assume that their mas-  
culinity was total and exclusive. She  
made the same supposition concerning  
femininity.  

A Coin in Nine Hands was written in  
the 1930s while Yourcenar was living in  
Italy. This carefully constructed novel  
set in fascist Italy examines the world of  
male power gone mad. The presence of  
the dictator Mussolini looms above the  
lives of the characters like Big Brother in  
1984. Yourcenar connected the major  
characters through the device of a coin  
passed from one to the next. This novel,  
begun in 1934, was revised and rewrit-  
ten in 1958-59 because the author felt  
that the first version was too stylized and  
not reflective of the real and tangible  
misery of the period.  

The antifascist hero in this novel,  
Carlo Stevo, never appears directly.  
Marcella, the proletarian heroine and  
one of Stevo’s followers, holds political  
views diametrically opposed to those of  
her husband, Dr. Alessandro Sarte, a  
doctor for fascists. The couple have been  
estranged from the beginning of the  
novel. Her husband delivers the news of  
Stevo’s death, and at first she does not  
believe him but later finds out it is true.  
Marcella then reveals her plan to kill  
Mussolini. She even tells him that she  
will use his gun, for which she exchanges  
some coins as a token payment.  
Alessandro does not believe her plan  
and thinks she is crazy. At this point,  
coins begin to forebode doom by being  
linked to the coins found in Judas Iscari-  
ot’s pocket.  

“How alone I am,” she thought.  
Yourcenar purposely pointed out the  
extreme isolation of women in acts of  
courage such as the one Marcella com-  
mits: Marcella saw her target, then  
“fired and missed.” She will be killed by  
the mob. Only the character Mother  
Dida validates her act: “She must have  
had courage to do a thing like that.” The  
novel ends with images of darkness and  
all characters sleeping.  

Unlike authors of the past, Yourcenar  
left ample explanations of her work. In  
A Coin in Nine Hands, she furnished her  
readers with an afterword, in which she  
explained why she revised this novel af-  
ter being distanced from it over time.  
She was proud of the book because “it  
was one of the first French novels  
(maybe the very first) to confront the  
hollow reality behind the bloated facade  
of Fascism.”  

Two Lives and a Dream (1987) is a  
collection of three novellas. Nathaniel,  
the protagonist in An Obscure Man, is a  
highly sympathetic character with  
strong similarities to Voltaire’s Candide  
and to Félicité in Flaubert’s A Simple  
Heart. The novella, set in Amsterdam,  
opens with a flashback before  
Nathaniel’s death. He wanders through  
life in an “ebb and flow” as a gentle, loy-  
al, and sensitive man with some educa-  
tion in English and Latin. A picaro type  
of character, he flees to the New World  
after thinking he has killed a man in  
self-defense.  

Sexual inversion and role reversal are  
used throughout. Nathaniel is thought  
“effeminate” because he cannot kill an  
animal without being ill. In the same  
way, Foy, one of the female characters,  
is characterized as working “like a man.”  

For Nathaniel, every living organism  
is connected. He becomes ill and is ex-  
iled on an island, where he faces death  
alone, surrounded by the sounds and  
wonders of nature. He has lived in har-  
mony with nature, and he seeks his fa-  
vorite place on the island to die. Some  
time before death, he reflects on his  
sense of self and identity. In summing up  
his character, Yourcenar notes, “nor did  
he particularly consider himself male in  
contrast with the gentle order of  
women.”  

The second novella, A Lovely Morn-  
ing, is also set in Amsterdam. Lazarus,  
Nathaniel’s twelve-year-old son from a  
disintegrated marriage, is the protagon-  
ist. Like his father, he is sensitive and  
kind. He knows about his mother’s  
death but not his father’s, and he lives in  
his grandmother’s house, where a visitor  
teaches him to read, and, eventually, to  
act parts in plays. Lazarus is content to  
play different roles, both male and fe-  
male, and is convincing in the latter.  
His life is filled with infinite possibilities  
through acting. The novella ends on a  
positive note with one of Lazarus’s the-  
atrical performances.  

“Anna, Soror,” the most in-  
triguing of the three novellas, focuses on Your-  
cenar’s most taboo topic: incest. The  
setting is Naples in 1575. As in The  
Memoirs of Hadrian, Yourcenar used a  
French neoclassical practice of distanc-  
ing herself from her own period in order  
to gain perspective on her characters.  

The aristocrat Don Alvaro and his  
beautiful wife, Valentina, have two  
children, Anna and Miguel, who are  
mirror images. “One could have been  
mistaken for the other.” Valentina con-  
tracts malaria, and as her illness  
worsens, an attraction builds between  
her children. At her deathbed, Anna  
and Miguel reveal their true feelings  
claiming, “We love each other.” And  
Valentina replies, “I know.”  

Eventually they consummate their  
love, keeping it a secret. But Miguel dies  
in a naval battle, and Anna tries to deny  
to herself that incest ever occurred. Yet  
Miguel’s memory lives on in her mind.  
Years later, on her own deathbed, she  
utters, “Mi amado” (“My lover”). But  
the nuns in the convent where she dies  
assume the predictable. “They thought  
she was speaking to God. Perhaps she  
was.”  

Throughout her career as a writer,  
Marguerite Yourcenar championed one  
taboo topic after another in her oeuvre.  
Among her many accomplishments  
were eight novels, four books of essays,  
three books of autobiography, four vol-  
umes of plays, four books of poetry and  
prose poems, and six translations, the  
most notable being Virginia Woolf's The  
Waves. Yourcenar was thus a poet, nov-  
elist, playwright, essayist, critic, trans-  
lator, activist, ecologist, and citizen of  
the world. She was remarkable because  
she never ceased working. Before her  
death at age eighty-four in a Maine hos-  
pital, she was in the process of finishing  
the last volume of her autobiography,  
entitled Quoi? l’Éternité, or What? Eter-  
nity. That word, eternity, is her final  
message. Her opus will assure her place  
in literature as a true “Immortal.”  

@ Joanne Schmidt teaches French,  
Spanish, and Women’s Studies at Califor-  
nia State University at Bakersfield.  

LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION Centers Within  
Women’s Studies Research Centers  

by Grace Jackson-Brown  

This report discusses the roles of libraries and information  
centers that conduct women’s studies research. These  
information centers form a powerful information network that  
provides institutional resources for research by, for, and  
about women. Chapters include an overview and a directory  
of women’s studies research centers.  

$7.00 34 pp.  

(softcover) ISBN 0-87111-333-3  

Order from Special Libraries Association, Order Dept., Box  
CM, 1700 18th St. NW, Washington, DC 20009.  

Ask for our 1988 Publications Catalog.