The Right Sorts

The Swimming Pool Summer, by Rose Tremain. New York: Holt, 1986, $7.95, 274 pp. (PB)

Harnessing Peacocks, by Mary Wesley. New York: Scribner's, 1986, $16.95, 288 pp.

by Barbara Griffith Furst

An old adage decrees that there are only a few stories to be told but each author tells them in a different way. Similarly, a few basic themes in contemporary English fiction are presented in these two books in different tones but with the same wry humor. Those themes are an abiding concern with class, the frank sexuality of English women, and the anger and confusion of English men.

In The Swimming Pool Summer we get to know a handful of characters in Pomerac, a village in southwest France, where an English couple in their fifties has retired, the husband Larry to lick his wounds from a failed swimming pool business and the wife Miriam to paint in preparation for an art show. Their cottage adjoins a working farm where the wife, Gervaise, is the mainstay of the household, which includes Klaus, a German baker who shares Gervaise’s bed and her farm tasks under the helpless and benign eye of Gervaise’s city-loving husband.

The tension is provided when Miriam abandons Larry to return to Oxford to be with her powerful but dying mother, Leni, whom Larry hates. It seems that Leni, a sharp-tongued English beauty, in her day had slept with half the men of the “right sort” in Oxford. She never approved of Larry because he was not good enough for her daughter, and she continues to belittle him. In his turn, Larry does not understand their son, Thomas, who adores his grandmother Leni. Thomas and Leni are two of a kind, as is shown by her delight in the obscene lamp he brings to her hospital room as a gift.

Mary Wesley. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

Meanwhile, in Pomerac, Larry has designed and is building a fantastic swimming pool for Miriam, a pool inspired by the garish Byzantine cathedral in a nearby town. He gives full rein to his imagination and, with the help of Klaus, whose baker’s hands lovingly pat the tiles into the mortar, he creates a pool to end all pools; its fate provides the book’s climax.

Other characters in Pomerac include a lonely, aristocratic doctor in his 200-year-old house, a haughty chatelaine, and a wonderful Polish woman whose French husband is in a distant mental hospital. Her incessant chatter, as she consoles Larry, in hilariously fractured English, is the book’s chorus. Nadia articulates everyone’s loneliness and fear, including her own, and she shows bravery over her greatly reduced circumstances and mad husband.

Blurbs on the jacket credit this book with warmth and wit, and they are both there, but the story is really about loss, mourning, resignation, and the pain of growing up, to use a current cliché. Another cliché is Gervaise: She is the earthy, fulfilled peasant woman, a symbol of stability, mother love, mother earth. The use of the present tense throughout the book, especially in descriptive passages, is jarring. However, the author can be forgiven because of the richness of her characters and her sense of place.

In Harnessing Peacocks, the beautiful Hebe, “cup bearer to the gods,” is a nearsighted 30-year-old from a family of the right sort who supports herself and her 12-year-old illegitimate son, Silas, through cooking and prostitution. It is a tongue-in-cheek modern fable that opens with the pregnant girl fleeing from her oppressive family to a drab Cornish village, where she settles, raises her son, and works so he can attend the right sort of expensive boarding school. When Hebe’s efforts never to mix her “cooking commitments with tarting” fail, things begin to come apart through chance meetings and other coincidences involving Lucy Duff and Louisa Fox, two elderly upper-middle-class ladies for whom Hebe cooks several weeks a year; an eccentric old antique dealer who had an affair with each of the old ladies years before; and Hebe’s lovers, members of the Syndicate, including a Black transvestite, a French chef (who taught her everything she knows about both her vocations), and Lucy Duff's angry, randy, married middle-aged son who wants Hebe all to himself. Although the action takes place in southwest England, Hebe’s lovers can contact her only through a post office box in London.

Despite her phantomlike character, Hebe becomes real when she panics at the sight of two young, pregnant women; they bring back memories of her family’s inquisition when she herself was pregnant. She becomes real again when her son, newly arrived from school, tells her he has been invited to spend the holidays with a school chum and she experiences the painful wrench that comes from the realization that she is no longer the center of his universe.

During Silas’s holiday his hosts do all the right things, like wear old clothes and Wellington boots, sail in filthy weather, eat monotonous stews made by the charwoman, drink too much, and bicker. Poor Silas meets his denouement by getting seasick and throwing up in his borrowed wellies. When he decamps for home his mother has gone on one of her cooking gigs without leaving a forwarding address. From there, the chance meetings and coincidences multiply at a brisk pace and build to a very funny and happy ending.

@ Barbara Griffith Furst is a writer and editor in the international health field who lives in Washington, DC.

A Winter’s Tale

The Injured Party, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1986, $16.95, 309 pp.

by Nan Nowik

When a reader of Susan Fromberg Schaeffer’s latest novel recommended it to me, she called it a dark comedy, a kind of winter's tale. Perhaps I took her too literally: Her remark sent me back to Shakespeare’s The Winter's Tale, to parallels she probably never intended. Yet Schaeffer’s brooding tone and the dominance of the winter landscape, both in Iris Otway’s heart and in the world outside her window, are suggestive of Shakespeare’s play. Both works are dark comedies and extravagant romances, tales of reconciliation after estrangement, meditations on death.

A writer in her early forties is hospitalized with a mysterious fever related to her anger over a negative review of her last novel. She almost dies, and back home, though seemingly cured, she lies in her room unwilling to talk, unable to resume her life. Then, after what her frightened husband Mike calls the twenty-second day of her captivity, her first lover and former fiancé arrives at their house. John Stone wants to collect on Iris’s promise that he could come to her if he ever needed anything. The victim of a terminal degenerative muscle disease, he needs a place to die.

The baroque plot of The Injured Party deals with failure, the failure of Iris’s last novel and the long-ago failure of the relationship with John, who had failed to love her. Now, thinks Iris, “he was her great luck, her chance to right past wrongs.” As John and Iris explore this chance, normal life is suspended—husband and children stand in the wings.

Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

Like Shakespeare’s Leontes, Mike is a victim of jealousy, but because John may be the wild card that will bring his wife back to health, Mike controls himself. Meanwhile, Iris and John compulsively excavate the past. She keeps notebooks; John writes poetry and autobiography on the personal computer in the upstairs study; Mike surreptitiously reads what both have written. In time the teenage children begin to intrude, creating their own intimate relations with John.

Sheila Ballantyne’s New York Times review of this book dwelled on its relation to two of Schaeffer’s earlier novels, which treat the same people, themes, and incidents, often in the same language (Falling, 1973, and Mainland, 1985). It is true that the repetitions are damaging, because they suggest that Schaeffer is less creative and original than she is. But to see the three novels as sequels might be useful. After all, John did tell Iris he had come back “to finish things,” and The Injured Party has a satisfactory sense of closure.

What disturbs me more than the recycling of people and incidents, however, is the novel’s inactivity. Its three sections are entitled “The Room,” “The House,” and “Outside,” a structuring that should have ensured that we move beyond the claustrophobic but beautifully written and controlled first section, in which Iris is confined to her bedroom, to a more expansive world in the later sections. But this does not happen. “All writers try to stop time, to prevent the erosion of memory,” Iris thinks, but this novel suffers as the outside world stops while the chief actors cerebrate in their rooms. Yet when she does occasionally move beyond the obsessive interior world of her characters, Schaeffer knows how to create a sense of place: the Hyde Park of the University of Chicago, for example, where John and Iris were students, or the Vermont weekend house, or the excellently drawn Bruce Springsteen concert.

The author is also effective in her use of language. “Metaphors are equations. You do all your work with equations,” Iris reminds herself, and we are reminded that Schaeffer is poet as well as novelist. Her prose has a rich texture, achieved through recurring dreams and dream states, tales within the narrative, and gorgeous descriptions, especially of the masses of things, the accumulated possessions of Iris’s life.

This brooding novel may find an audience. In the hospital Iris had “decided the world was an untrustworthy place.” Her subsequent reflections on the relation of the past to the present, on love and death and the fragility of our hold on life are important ones. As Iris and John explore what they call their twin souls, he can die and she can come back from near death to life, restored like Hermione to her family, complexly aware that she had not been the only injured party.

@ Nan Nowik, on sabbatical from Dennison University, lives in Hyde Park, is a Visiting Scholar at the University of Chicago, and is writing essays on Alice James and Caroline Healey Dall.

March/April 1987