of 1914: for women’s suffrage, for modern art, and for  
the trenches, while Laura Stempel Mumford analyzes May  
Sinclair, who participated in all three battles and wrote  
about it in The Tree of Heaven. Jane Marcus’s essay, "Cor-  
pus/Corps/Corpse" is especially noteworthy for a reading of  
previously unknown feminine texts of the First World War.  
She reads Helen Zenna Smith’s Not So Quiet (1930) in  
conjunction with Erich Maria Remarque’s All Quiet on the Western  
Front, a text that explores a female corps of volunteer  
ambulance drivers and the pieces of men’s bodies that they  
have to deal with. "Like a company of Wagnerian Valkyries  
... the ambulance drivers resembled Amazon goddesses,  
carrying slain soldiers from the battlefield to glory in Val-  
halla or to hospitals where they could recover to fight  
again." She also examines Mary Borden’s The Forbidden  
Zone (1929), Enid Bagnold’s A Diary Without Dates (1918),  
and Irene Rathbone’s We That Were Young (1932), and  
concludes that women’s literature of World War I runs the  
gamut from patriotic propaganda to pacifist protest. "Like  
all the essayists, Marcus examines the corruption of lan-  
guage as the first casualty of war with its subsequent expo-  
sure of the myth of war.  

Sara Friedrichsmeyer’s piece on Kathe Kollwitz’s diaries  

Miss You: The World War II Letters  

of Barbara Wooddall Taylor  

and Charles E. Taylor  

Edited by Judy Barrett Litoff and David C. Smith  

Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 1990, $24.95, 372 pp.  

When the classic work on the history of women comes to be  
written, the biggest force for change in their lives will turn  
out to have been war. Curiously, war produces more dislo-  
cations in the lives of women who stay at home than of men  
who go off to fight. —Max Lerner, Public Journal:  
Marginal Notes on Wartime America  

The publication this Memorial Day of Miss You: The World  
War II Letters of Barbara Wooddall Taylor and Charles E.  
Taylor is an extraordinary event, not only for its commemo-  
ration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Second World War,  
but for its preservation of the war’s distinctly female, Amer-  
ican voice. Most letters written to soldiers from women  
were destroyed by the exigencies of war. Charles Taylor not  
only answered his wife’s letters daily, but he often mailed  
hers back to her for safekeeping or answered them on the  
backs of the letters themselves, thus creating a dialogue. “In  
total, this treasure trove amounts to about four thousand  
typed, double-spaced pages." Editors Litoff and Smith are  
to be highly praised for their meticulous editing work and  
for their prose passages linking together the letters, which  
create a kind of “ur-novel." The uniqueness of Miss You  
cannot be overstated, for with its presentation of both the  
male and female voice we read the counter-narrative text,  
uncensored, that is Barbara’s story. Thus, within the pages  
of the text (between and “behind the lines") we read of  
prototypical young American lives during the war years.  

These letters describe the ... stresses created by the war on  
each partner. Like thousands of other young people in  

explores her “evolution from political revolutionary to  
pacifist." The diary, by its very nature, is fragmentary and  
ellipsis-filled, like the battlefield it mentally encapsulates.  
Other essays of particular note, although it is extraordinarily  
difficult to make such judgments, include Jane F. Schults’s  
"Mute Fury," which analyzes William Tecumseh Sherman,  
the "first general in American history to declare war on a  
civilian population." Schults explores the myth of the south-  
ern woman, “quintessentially protected," who learned that  
the Federal soldiers were a danger and not a source of  
protection. Gender roles were upended, although as Schultz  
records, it took a long time.  

Arms and the Woman is to be applauded for its breadth of  
scholarship. The essays on Kollwitz and Mitsuye Yamada in  
particular help us reconsider serious gaps in previous war  
scholarship. In essays by Carol J. Adams, we can reconsid-  
er more familiar texts in a new light. Her article on modern  
vegetarianism and its link with pacifism is compelling.  

Mary Anne Schofield, Visiting Professor of English and  
Women’s Studies at the University of Tulsa, is a scholar of  
the novel; she focuses on forgotten women, specifically those  
of the eighteenth century and of World War II.  

similar circumstances, Barbara and Charles Taylor were  
forced to conduct their courtship by mail and experienced a  
wartime marriage on the move. Through their correspon-  
dence they shared her life on the home front and his experi-  
ences on the western front.  

Miss You bridges the gap between civilian and mili-  

tary history. As Margaret Higonnet so aptly observes in  
Arms and the Woman, “In the literature of ... war, it is  
virtually a rule that the external conflict, which serves as a  
catalyst of social change and narrative sequence, also be-  
comes a metaphor for inner conflicts and the experience of  
inner emigration."  

From a woman’s point of view, the book is most impor-  
tant because it chronicles just this inner emigration: the  
growing up of blond, vivacious, eighteen-year-old Barbara  
Wooddall into efficient, confident, mature Barbara Taylor,  
who, at the war’s end was "not half as sensitive as I once  
was. I can almost laugh instead of pout or cry now. Really  
it’s wonderful what one can really accomplish, if one tries  
hard enough .... I feel sure that when you come home, I  
can take over my duties as a wife and handle the job consid-  
erably better than I did before."  

From their first date in August 1941 until their secret  
marriage on 5 April 1942, the couple saw each other only  
four weekends (in fact, they saw each other only once be-  
tween October and their marriage). Their letters were the  
means they used to develop and nurture their love; in fact,  
the letters defined their entire life. As Barbara writes:  

"Your letters mean a great deal to me and my outlook on  
life. They make my day happy or sad. If I don’t hear from  
you I’m bad! All inside I mean. I suppose you’ve just  
spoiled me in that respect." Their correspondence even  
extends to sending the engagement ring by mail! Miss You is  
a celebration of the epistolary form and a validation of the  
life-autobiography.  

— Mary Anne Schofield