Our Lady of the Footnotes

Nora: The Real Life of Molly Bloom, by  
Brenda Maddox. Boston: Houghton  
Mifflin, 1988, $24.95, 472 pp., photos  

by Susan Swartzlander  

Brenda Maddox dubbed Nora  

Barnacle Joyce “Our Lady of the  

Footnotes,” for only in the notes  
to Richard Ellmann’s monumental bi-  
ography, James Joyce, could a reader  
catch a glimpse of her: “She says some-  
thing funny, it’s down in the footnotes.”  
After reading about the arrogant Irish  
writer, Maddox realized that there was  
much more to be said about Nora, who  
for thirty-seven years remained Joyce’s  
closest friend. When he learned whom  
his son took up with, John Joyce quipped  
that with a name like Barnacle, “she'll  
never leave him.” However, as Mad-  
dox’s lively biography shows, it was  
Joyce who depended utterly on Nora.  
She was the inspiration for many of his  
female characters, she provided for  
Joyce the toehold in real life that the all-  
too-intellectual Stephen Dedalus lacks  
in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man,  
and, most important, she was the only  
person with the strength to tell Joyce  
exactly what she thought.  

Ellmann was originally skeptical that  
there was a story about Nora to be un-  
covered: He noted that because the Joy-  
ces were so seldom apart there were few  
letters; their friends were no longer alive  
to be interviewed; and “there was not  
even material, he ventured, for a femi-  
nist treatise.” However, he did not real-  
ize until later that, in Maddox, Nora  
had a clever, resourceful, and persistent  
biographer who used nontraditional  
sources. With pictures of Nora and her  
family in hand, Maddox consulted a  
fashion historian. When published  
memoirs of Paris in the 1920s and 1930s  
yielded little material about Nora, Mad-  
dox turned to notes and early drafts of  
those works: “Nora was often there,  
sometimes in material discarded by au-  
thors and editors concentrating (and  
why not?) on her husband.”  

This “work of excavation” could serve  
as a primer on how to overcome the pit-  
falls and special challenges feminist re-  
searchers face. Through Maddox's ef-  
forts, Nora emerges from the shadows,  
not as literary legend would have her,  
the illiterate chambermaid who had lit-  
tle in common with her spouse the gen-  
ius, but as a remarkably strong woman  
Joyce admired for her honesty, humor,  
and passion.  

Far from being “a barefoot peasant  
from the moorland” of Galway, Nora  
Barnacle grew up as “a city girl, street-  
smart, with a ribbon in her hair, a sharp  
tongue in her head, and an uncle in the  
civil service.” Sent to live with her  
grandmother at the age of two, Nora  
spent little of her childhood with her  
mother, Annie Barnacle. Annie’s  
brother, Tom Healy, was most often  
responsible for disciplining the rebel-  
lious adolescent. Despite the threats of  
her Uncle Tommy’s blackthorn stick,  
the teenager would not be stifled. Mad-  
dox describes Nora and her best friend  
dressing in men’s clothing to explore the  
streets of Galway at night: “Once they  
even spotted the dreaded Uncle  
Tommy; Mary said ‘Good evening’ in a  
deep false voice and got away with it.”  
Always careful to explain the signifi-  
cance of her information in its cultural  
contexts, Maddox emphasizes the bold-  
ness of their cross-dressing not only as a  
rebellion against the authoritarian un-  
cle, but also as a defiance of laws that  
prohibited women from wearing men’s  
clothes.  

Throughout the biography, Nora  

Fair 1988  

Nora Barnacle Joyce  

appears as a frank, down-to-earth, and  
earthy woman about whom Maddox  
proclaims, “self-reproach was not her  
habit.” Nora was indeed a free spirit:  
She left Galway for Dublin in 1904  
(without regrets or even goodbyes), and  
on October 8th of the same year she left  
Dublin for the Continent with a man  
who made no promises of marriage.  
Maddox relies heavily on the contro-  
versial 1909 “dirty letters” for informa-  
tion about Nora’s enthusiasm for free-  
spirited lovemaking. On one of the rare  
occasions in his life when Joyce was away  
from Nora, the couple maintained an  
explicitly sexual correspondence, in-  
tended to be letters to masturbate by for  
both of them. Although Nora’s letters  
have disappeared (they are rumored to  
be in a sealed trunk to be opened in  
1991), Joyce’s side of the correspon-  
dence reveals as much about her sexual-  
ity as it does about his own proclivities.  
Not all Joyceans agree as to whether  
scholarship or voyeurism has been  
served by making such private letters  
public. However, the letters speak vol-  
umes about the Joyces — not as public  
figures, but as human beings with the  
same need for intimacy and passion that  
we all share. The letters also show a cou-  
ple who were able to reveal to each other  
their most secret desires. A reader of the  
1909 letters cannot help but be fasci-  
nated by, and pleased to see, the Nora  

Out of the  
Milk Jug  

Katherine Mansfield: A Secret Life,  
by Claire Tomalin. New York: Knopf,  
1988, $22.95, 292 pp., illus.  

by Anne L. McLaughlin  

Katherine Mansfield, who vir-  

tually created the modern short  

story in English, once wrote that  
she felt “like a fly who has been dropped  
into the milk jug.” After her death in  
1923 at the age of thirty-four, Mans-  
field’s husband, John Middleton Murry,  
dropped her reputation into a milk jug of  
sentimentality through his criticism and  
editing of her work. In the last eight  
years, three major biographies have  
struggled to fish Mansfield’s reputation  
out. The most recent, Claire Tomalin’s  
Katherine Mansfield: A Secret Life,  
presents this elusive life story with a  
compassion and clarity that avoids the  
milk jug entirely.  

Building on earlier biographies by  
Antony Alpers and Jeffrey Meyers,  
Tomalin describes Mansfield’s New  
Zealand childhood; her father, a self-  
made banker; her mother, an aloof hy-  
pochondriac; and the matriarchal  
household in which she grew up as a fat,  
bespectacled, third daughter with three  
sisters and a brother. Feeling trapped in  
colonial Wellington, Mansfield per-  

Women’s Lives  

they reveal, a woman who was so  
obviously comfortable with her own sex-  
uality and who could so easily communi-  
cate her fantasies to another.  

Because Nora Barnacle’s candor is  
matched by that of Joyce’s fictional cre-  
ation Molly Bloom, one of the key ques-  
tions Maddox asks is to what extent  
Joyce modeled Molly on Nora. The  
myth of the illiterate, uncultured Nora  
was fueled by her response to Ulysses.  
When she was given one of the first co-  
pies at a dinner in Joyce’s honor, she  
weighed the hefty volume in her hand  
and asked Arthur Power how much  
money he would offer for it. Maddox  
shows that such teasing was part of a  
continuous banter between Joyce and  
Nora. Nora has also been criticized be-  
cause she never read Ulysses (in a letter,  
Joyce reported that she had gotten as far  
as page twenty-seven, “counting the  
cover”). Maddox puts this into perspec-  
tive: “It is her best-known fault, al-  
though she shares it with most of the  
human race.” Maddox speculates that  
perhaps Nora’s revulsion to the book was  
the shock of recognition.  

Maddox points out the many parallels  
between Nora and Molly, ranging from  
important dates and events in their lives  
to a distinctive voice, characterized by  
vivid, uninhibited expression (without  
so much as a punctuation mark of re-  
straint). Maddox is fair in her assess-  
ment of the character whose soliloquy  
ends Ulysses. She admits that “Molly  
possesses all the qualities of the male’s  
fantasy woman. She is lethargic, illogi-  
cal, unreasonable, vain, self-  
preoccupied, passive, and always in  
bed.” However, Maddox also sees a bit  
of the radical feminist in Molly; among  
other things, "She thinks the male sex  
may be superfluous. She fondles herself  
and has homosexual fantasies.” Maddox  

Katherine Mansfield  

persuaded her father to allow her to sail for  
London before her twentieth birthday.  
In 1908, London was full of radical so-  
cial change, which Mansfield embodied  
heroically, as Tomalin points out. She  
became pregnant by one man, married  
another, left him the first night, and  
went to Bavaria to have an illegitimate  
child. She miscarried, wrote a series of  
stories, and had an affair with Floryan  
Sobieniowski, a Polish writer.  

Here Tomalin contributes new and  
important material to Mansfield’s story.  
Using medical records and interviews,  
she presents evidence that Mansfield  
contracted gonorrhea from Sobieniowski,  
a disease that afflicted her with gonor-  
rheal arthritis and made her par-  
ticularly susceptible to tuberculosis.  
Tomalin believes that Sobieniowski  
knew that Mansfield had freely adapted  
a Chekhov story and had published it as  
her own, since he blackmailed her years  
later. Tomalin sees this affair as the start  
of a terrible chain of events for Mans-  
field, as a curse that shadowed the rest of  
her life.  

Maddox sees a dichotomy between passivity and  
outspokenness as central to Molly’s  
character, and to Nora’s:  

Molly is at the same time a carica-  

ture, a revolutionary and a goddess,  

a fat, lazy housewife and a testi-  

mony to the superiority of the fe-  

male view of the universe. The  

contradiction in Molly’s character  

— life-affirming but male-dependent  

— was present in Nora’s. How  

could a strong woman be so pas-  

sive? The answer lies in the char-  

acter of . . . tradition-bound women  

everywhere: they use their strength  

to bear their fate, not to shape it.  

The book’s subtitle, “The Real Life of  
Molly Bloom,” is rather troublesome. It  
implies that the focus of the biography  
will be on Nora not only as an extension  
of her man, but, even worse, as a man-  
ifestation of one of his fictional crea-  
tions. However, the triumph of this bi-  
ography is that it is exactly what Maddox  
says she hoped it would be, a woman’s  
story. That included the difficult James  
Joyce with his hard drinking and debili-  
tating eye problems, but it also included  
much more: childbirth without friends  
and family in a country where she could  
not even speak the native language,  
friendships with literary women of the  
Left Bank in the 1920s and 1930s, two  
operations for uterine cancer and a sub-  
sequent depression, displacement from  
her home and belongings during two  
world wars, a schizophrenic daughter  
who spent most of her years insti-  
tutionalized, a son who married his  
mother’s friend (a woman eleven years  
his senior), and a daughter-in-law who  
also was hospitalized for mental illness.  

In Finnegans Wake, Anna Livia  
Plurabelle “dies” and merges with the  
sea, saying, “I'll slip away before they’re  
up. They'll neither see. Nor know. Nor  
miss me.” Thanks to Brenda Maddox for  
seeing Nora Barnacle Joyce among the  
footnotes, for Nora’s story is not one to  
be missed.  

© Susan Swartzlander is a visiting assist-  
ant professor of English at Bucknell Uni-  
versity. She is working on a project on the  
Irish writer Norah Hoult, whom she will  
“rediscover” in our spring issue.  

Mansfield returned to London, where  
she began to publish her stories and met  
John Middleton Murry, the young critic  
and editor, who became her boarder,  
her lover, and finally her husband in  
1918. By then the couple were frequent-  
ly separated, for Mansfield was seriously  
ill with tuberculosis and had embarked  
on a restless search for the perfect cli-  
mate or cure — a search that took her  
finally to the Gurdjieff Institute in  
Fontainebleau, where she died.  

Tomalin discusses the strong impres-  
sions Mansfield made on the works of  
such writer friends as Virginia Woolf and  

D.H. Lawrence. Woolf confessed that  
Mansfield’s work was the only writing  
she had ever been jealous of and felt that  
“probably we had something in common  
which I shall never find in anyone else.”  
Tomalin explains that although Murry  
was in love with a myth of Mansfield,  
she was equally in love with a myth of  
him; neither knew the other realistically,  
and neither could tolerate deviations  
from the myths they had devised. The  
domestic peace for which Mansfield  
longed kept eluding her: Murry was fre-  
quently remote, physically or psychical-  
ly; they lived in a succession of tempo-  
rary flats and houses; and Mansfield was  
unable to bear a child. The terrible  
waste that Mansfield’s illness made of  
her talent is saddening, yet her enor-  
mous courage and commitment inspire.  
Unfortunately, Tomalin does not  
speculate on the implications that her  
—continued on page 19  

Belles Lettres @ 17