Belles Lettres Interview

“I’m actually an amateur,” novelist Linda Ty-Casper tells interviewers Suzanne Scott and Lynne M. Constantine, “writing

the way my grandmother told me stories . . .

. . She came through

the revolution [of 1899].” Ty-Casper’s next two novels will chronicle that revolution in the Philippines, as well as the most recent one, because “nobody is writing about [them], so I guess

I’ll have to.”

Because of their unflinching depiction of the brutality of the Marcos government under martial law, neither of the two most recent novels by Filipino novelist Linda Ty-Casper could be published in her homeland (Awaiting Trespass [A Pasion] and Wings of Stone). With great patience, Ty-Casper, author of five earlier novels and two collections of short stories, sought and found a publisher for her work: the British and American-based Readers International, a nonprofit publishing venture dedicated to making available in English the best recent works by writers outside the developed West. Although the recent astonishing changes in the Philippines should make Ty-Casper’s perspective interesting to American readers, it is the beauty and clarity of her style that will hold readers spellbound and propel them through each of these brief, painful, poignant novels. Awaiting Trespass takes place in Manila and chronicles the wake of Don Severino Gil, who died suddenly and was sent home to his family in a closed casket. A mysterious female voice on the telephone discourages the family from opening the casket; they correctly deduce that Don Severino has been the victim of a brutal, politically motivated slaying. Wings of Stone also takes place in Ty-Casper’s homeland, this time following the arrival and repatriation of a Filipino who has lived for years in the United States and who now must make sense of his much-changed country and of the corruption and brutality that has invaded even his own family.

In a telephone interview in December 1986, Ty-Casper talked about her way of writing, her two recent novels, and her plans for a new novel about the “Yellow Revolution” led by Cory Aquino in February 1986.

When did you first start writing?

I started writing so long ago. I had always wanted to be a writer, but my parents didn’t think that was the thing to do. My father thought I should take up law, and my mother thought there should be a doctor in the family. Since I can’t stand the sight of blood, I figured law was the better one. I did study law, and I thought I liked it enough to stay with it. But while waiting for the bar results (I took the bar exam in August and didn’t get the results until the next year), I started writing short stories. That was 1956.

Then I went to Harvard Law School for a year. When I started reading the works in the library there, I saw some things about the Philippines that weren’t quite fair. I decided to answer some of those books and correct the perceptions of my country through fiction. So I wrote a book, The Peninsulas, which didn’t come out for another 8 years. I thought I would just write that book, and no more.

What influence do you think your legal studies have had on your writing?

I can’t really tell. My husband says I write by case study. I never took a course in writing, and I try not to read other writers because I’m afraid I’ll pick up their voices. I’m actually an amateur.

You may not read other writers, but other writers could learn something from your clarity and precision and from the musical sound of your sentences. If not other writers, then, did anyone in your family influence your writing?

I’m actually writing the way my grandmother told me stories. She was a strong influence on my development because she came through the revolution [of 1899]. That was a time when there was no insurance. If your house burned or if it was broken into, you had to start all over again. You had to be strong to survive. She would tell me stories and say, “You write this about my life.” I probably sound like her when I write.

How did you decide on the form of the novel Awaiting Trespass?

Awaiting Trespass is based on the Holy Week lament, but I didn’t think about it until I was well into the book. That’s true of almost everything I write. I’m not thinking of a story consciously, although the story may be going on in my mind unconsciously. I’m actually thinking of people. I don’t work it all out in advance. When people ask me to share about my work, and I tell them I can’t, they think I don’t want people to steal my ideas. I explain that if I think it all out first, I won’t feel like writing. That may be nervousness. Maybe if I set it all out and said, “This is what I’m going to do,” I’d feel frustrated and like a failure if I couldn’t do it.

When I started Awaiting Trespass, I didn’t know it was going to be about a wake. I had the idea for the body, and little by little the rest occurred to me. I had this body and I didn’t know what to do with it. Then, I thought, “What if it’s a closed casket?” Then, “Why is it a closed casket?” “What is a wake like, how many days does it take, what really happens during a wake?” Writing a novel is as much a process of discovery for me as for my characters. If I didn’t write that way, I probably would never write.

Where did your first idea come from for Awaiting Trespass?

Awaiting Trespass came to me as a first sentence, “On Azcarraga, which is now Recto but was Iris at the turn of the century when the gray house was built, wreaths started arriving before the body of Don Severino Gil.” There really was a gray house which I used to pass. At the time I was thinking of the way the names of the streets in the Philippines keep changing — for political reasons. Too late for the book, I learned that one of the streets they pass has been renamed Gil, the surname of two people in the book.

Was the manuscript accepted as it was?

I went through many different things with the Awaiting Trespass manuscript. I sent it out, and I didn’t hear anything for a long time. When I inquired, I found that it had been lost. I had no copies, so I had to go back to my first draft and rewrite. One editor read it and said he wanted to take my works, put them all together and sell me. I got very frightened. All I could think of was being packaged. I told my husband I really wanted an agent but that agents frightened me. Another editor asked me to revise and lengthen it because it was too short. By then I wasn’t interested in Telly [one of the central characters] anymore, and I couldn’t think of anything else to say. It was over. Then I met Sherman Carroll at Readers International, who read the book in one sitting and wanted to publish it. I was sure they’d think it over and decide the manuscript was all wrong. If not, I figured they’d fold up.

Where did you get your ideas for Wings of Stone?

After my mother died, I decided I should try to go back to the Philippines every year. Until then I went back every four or five years. I can never write in the Philippines because of the distractions, but I hold what’s happening there in the back of my mind.

I was there about the time of the 1984 elections, and I said to myself, “I really have to write about this.” There were many brutalities going on. A priest was killed while I was there. Someone asked me if I wanted to read the details of that killing, but I didn’t want to. While it’s a very interesting subject for the book, I can’t know too much. I feel frightened by knowing too much.

Why did Johnny, the Filipino expatriate who goes home in Wings of Stone, appeal to you as a character?

I wasn’t sure about Johnny at first. That first chapter was with me for a long time — over a year — but I wasn’t adding anything. I think what appealed to me about Johnny was that he was in this country but he didn’t know whether he wanted to be here or not. Then he goes back to the Philippines, but he doesn’t belong there either: He doesn’t have the protective instincts to survive. From his long years in the United States, he’s like a hothouse plant. Here you don’t have to have the instincts for survival in the same way you do in the Philippines because you’re more protected.

The final scene, in which a priest is brutally murdered, is quite vivid but without gruesome detail. In particular, I recall the line just after the murder: “Above them was a pale and ordinary sky.” What did you have in mind there?

Sometimes that kind of line comes to me when I’m working, and I don’t know where it comes from. I’m not in a hurry. I can take all morning if I need to. My writing is very much a process of waiting. If I rush it, I know it’s not going to be what I had in mind. Sometimes I’m amazed at what I’ve written. Sometimes I can’t remember what I’ve written or why. But that ordinary sky I remember because I was thinking, oh, what could it look like — I was thinking about the fact that the landscape was secondary to what was happening with the characters. By happy coincidence, the word ordinary came to my mind.

Your style is so clear and musical. Do you write poetry?

No, I don’t write poetry. In fact, I try to cut out everything poetic in my writing. But I hate to throw it away, so I just set it aside. Then, when I was writing Awaiting Trespass, it occurred to me at some point to make Telly a poet. So I put some of what I had cut out and set aside into Telly’s mouth. And the funny thing is, a friend from California who was teaching the book told me that one of her students asked her whether Telly had written any more poems. I said to her, “I don’t think so.”

I use a lot of simple, clear imagery in my work. Philippine writing in general has a lot of metaphors. The national language is very metaphoric because we have had to mask what we felt, both for political reasons and so as not to offend. When I use an image, it’s usually one that I’ve taken from life. For example, the scene of the bird caught in the web which I used in Wings of Stone actually happened. There was a very big mango tree outside, and I thought I saw a leaf moving in a strange way. When I asked my cousin George to look at that leaf, he discovered it was a little sparrow caught in a big spider web. When I write, I remember things like that.

Where did you get the idea for the title of Wings of Stone?

From thinking about futile flight. I think I used it in Awaiting Trespass first, and then of course it appears in the final scene in Wings of Stone. I often try to use a phrase from a previous book in the next book. In fact, now that I’m in the process of writing a third book, I can’t yet find anything in Wings of Stone with which to start it.

What is the new book about?

I’m trying to write a novel about the revolution: I really didn’t intend to write about the revolution, but nobody else is, so I guess I’ll have to. The working title is Dream Eden, and it will be set in a slum. I’ve been trying since the early part of this year to get a voice. In November I finally got it. I wait for the first sentence. If it feels right, then I go. Sometimes there’s just one way to do something: You have to wait and wait until you stumble on it.

Do you think American audiences are more ready to read your fiction now that they've read so much coverage of the downfall of Marcos?

I don’t know. My publisher is wondering why the newspapers here in Boston haven’t reviewed my work yet. I think Americans are more interested in nonfiction. They would read a book about the revolution as a text but not as fiction. Fiction is the way I want to write about it, though. I’m trying to find out what kind of life lives through the important moments in a country’s history, moments like the revolution or the elections. When I think of a moment, the characters come.

— continued on page 15

Belles Lettres © 5