Betrayed  
by Amalie Skram  

New York: Pandora Press, 1986, $7.95,  
131 pp. (PB) Translated by Aileen Hennes.  

More grim and truth-speaking than the  
dramatizations of marital unhappiness by  
Henrik Ibsen, Amalie Skram’s contem-  
porary, Betrayed relentlessly portrays its  
author’s belief in the inevitable destruc-  
tive effects of the Victorian double stan-  
dard. At times almost sordid, it is a bleak  
and disturbing novel.  

Behind this stern social criticism lie  
Skram’s own struggles as a woman writer  
in 19th-century Norwegian society.  
Born Amalie Alver in Bergen, Norway,  
in 1846, she was married to an older  
Danish sea captain when she was 17.  
The marriage lasted 13 unhappy years,  
mostly lived on board ship. Of her first  
four novels, all depicting the conflicts  
of men and women confined in mar-  
riage, Betrayed, published in 1892, is the  
most autobiographical. Skram remarried  
but did not find happiness. Working on  
her great achievement, The People from  
Hellemyr (a four-volume epic of a  
Norwegian family), she suffered painful  
conflicts between the demands of writ-  
ing and family life. Seeking rest, she  
entered a hospital for a few weeks, only  
to find herself committed against her  
will: After consulting only with her hus-  
band, a doctor declared her insane. Al-  
though Skram was eventually released,  
after being transferred to an asylum for  
the incurably insane, she was debilitated  
by her fear and confinement and died  
in 1905 at the age of 59.  

The world of Betrayed is bleak, re-  
stricted, even ugly. Still a child, Aurora  
Ingstad is wed by her parents’ consent  
to Captain Riber, an older, physically  
dominating man. Painfully innocent  
and horrified by Riber’s sexual desires,  
Aurora attempts to flee on the marriage  
night, but she is overtaken and yields  
when her husband points out that she  
has nowhere to go. She is entirely depen-  
dent economically and physically: “Riber  
was in the seat of power. Revolt  
would be futile.” Aurora spends the first  
weeks of her marriage confined in dirty  
hotel rooms, enduring an unhealthy in-  
activity, while her husband arranges his  
next sea voyage. Unable to reconcile  
the standards of her Victorian upbring-  
ing with the fact of sexuality, she broods  
obsessively, filled with disgust. However,  
when she learns of her husband’s exten-  
sive sexual experience, her repulsion  
slowly changes into a perverse,  
masochistic fascination; she demands  
that he repeatedly recount in detail each  
sordid encounter:  

She would die if she couldn’t know it  
all. Yes, she would examine and cross-  
examine him, make him tell her every-  
thing from beginning to end. It would  
be ghastly, but she would spare no  
effort, show no mercy for herself by  
leaving any stone unturned. She would  
go down, deep down into the filth and  
wallow in it too. A searing pang ripped  
into her and she felt relief only at the  
thought of the anguish she would  
endure.  

Awed by his young wife’s purity and  
stern moral condemnation, Riber com-  
plies; although her fascination horrifies  
him, he soon sinks deep into guilt and  
self-disgust. Riber’s self-hatred and Au-  
rora’s obsession intensify when the two  
are confined in his small ship. The final  
pages of the novel are terrifying and  
claustrophobic as the two characters —  
each other’s victims — seek some kind  
of release.  

Without a ray of light, indeed without  
any appealing characters or incidents,  
Betrayed is a difficult novel to like. How-  
ever, as a 19th-century depiction of the  
distortions of personality created by a re-  
pressive morality, it is powerful and amaz-  
ingly explicit, and it deserves reading.  

— Mary Titus  

Condor and Hummingbird  
by Charlotte Mendez  

Wild Trees Press (Box 378, Navarro, CA  
95463), 1986, $8.95, 137 pp. (PB)  

La Violencia, the struggle for power be-  
tween the Liberal and Conservative  
political parties in Colombia that  
claimed 200,000 lives from 1948 to 1953  
and continues today in the guise of  
guerilla warfare and urban mayhem, is  
at the heart of Condor and Hummingbird,  
a first novel by Charlotte Mendez. Her  
Colombia is a country of brutality and  
beauty, of insanity and martyrdom.  

Into this world steps Laura, a young  
American who, in her days as a radical  
student in Chicago, longed for the ex-  
citement of political fervor and impul-  
sively thought she had found it in  
Andres, a Colombian student who pic-  
tured himself a future political hero.  
Now married with a child, they travel  
to Bogotá to visit his family. Warned by  
“automatic writing” (involuntary and  
uncontrollable written messages) that  
this trip will be dangerous, Laura feels  
she must accompany her husband as a  
last attempt to understand him better.  
“She hopes in his country they will find  
something central, some core of mean-  
ing for their being together.” The insta-  
bility of their marriage mirrors the insta-  
bility they encounter in Colombia and  
within Andres’ family.  

Her relationship with his family, par-  
ticularly his sister, Francisca, who is at  
once abusive and loving, and her horror  
at the violence of the city around her  
all combine to confuse and panic Laura.  
She is painfully isolated as a foreigner,  
yet drawn to the rich fabric of the Col-  
ombian culture. To illustrate this rich-  
ness, Mendez interjects “myth forms”  
throughout the novel, based on South  
American Indian myths. Unfortunately,  
these myths tend to obscure rather than  
to illuminate. It might have been more  

Charlotte Mendez. Photo by Deanna Leong.  

effective to weave them integrally into  
the narrative. As it is, they seem stuck  
in, fragments and bits of other stories.  
Another difficulty with the novel is  
its occasional, inexplicable lapses into  
the first person. It is never clear who  
suddenly takes the helm when this hap-  
pens, because “I” may refer to Laura,  
Andres, or Francisca (and the author  
herself?) at any given time. Yet, Men-  
dez’s Colombia is a fascinating country  
of powerful contrasts. Despite its weak-  
nesses, Condor and Hummingbird is a sig-  
nificant first novel, ambitiously con-  
cerning itself with politics, tradition,  
dualities, and, of course, how all of these  

work upon the human heart.  
— Suzanne Berne  

Green Mansions. Oh blessed escape!  
Conjunction of our dreams. Didn’t I  
expect to be some grand combination  
of Rima the bird girl and Evita Perón?  
Weekends I would spend in the jungle,  
in “that immense aerial palace hung  
with dim drapery” of leaves, friend of  
all the forest creatures, enchantress of  
my vagabond love. (He might or might  
not resemble Andrés.) Weekdays, I  
would return to the city, assisting my  
husband, the great Revolutionist, in  
his work of liberating the masses.  
(They would adore me.)  

New from Princeton University Press  

<)  

i  
)  

SG) |  

July/August 1987  

\) The Splendor of  
Longing in the  
Tale of Genji  

Norma Field  

Foremost among Japanese literary  

classics and one of the world’s earliest novels,  
the Tale of Genji was written around the year A.D.  
1000 by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman from a declining  
aristocratic family. For sophistication and insight,  
Western prose fiction was to wait centuries to rival  
her work. Norma Field explores the shifting con-  
figurations of the Tale, showing how the hero Genji  
is made and unmade by a series of heroines. In-  
cluded are discussions of the social, psychological,  
and political dimensions of the aesthetics of this  
novel, with emphasis on the crucial relationship  

of erotic and political concerns to prose fiction.  

“In highly informed yet sympathetic and per-  
suasive terms, Norma Field delineates the  
characters of a number of the most important  
women who figure in the Tale of Genji in  
order to show the way in which their lives  
mirror and ultimately explicate the vast struc-  
ture of this most wonderful of Japanese  
novels. This is Genji as read and loved by a  
person of a truly contemporary sensibility.”  
—J. Thomas Rimer, University of Maryland  
Paper: $12.50. Cloth: $45.00  

Brocade River Poems  
Selected Works of the Tang Dynasty  
Courtesan Xue Tao  

Translated by Jeanne Larsen  

Xue Tao (A.D. 768-831) was well known as a poet in  
an age when all men of learning were poets—and  
almost all women were illiterate. As an entertainer  
and official government hostess, she met, and im-  
pressed, many of the most talented and powerful  
figures of her day. As a maker of beautiful paper and  
a Taoist churchwoman, she maintained a life of in-  
dependence and aesthetic sensibility. As a writer, she  
created a body of work that is by turns deeply mov-  
ing, amusing, and thought-provoking. Drawing  
knowledgeably on a rich literary tradition, she  
created images that here live again for the contem-  
porary reader of English.  

Lockert Library of Poetry in Translation  

Paper: $9.50. Cloth: $20.00  

Willow Floss  

Early March: willow catkins  
light and fancy-free.  

The spring breeze makes them weave  
and waver  
and tease at people's clothes.  

The girls in that house?  

they are, at root,  

unfeeling things.  

Once committed to flying south,  
they're off and flying—  

north.  

At your bookstore or  

Princeton University Press  
41 William Street, Princeton, NJ 08540  

Belles Lettres © 7