Five Faces of Willa Cather

Willa Cather: A Pictorial Memoir, by Lucia Woods and Bernice Slote. Lincoln: University of

Nebraska Press, 1986/1972, $27.95, 134 pp., photos.  
Willa Cather: The Emerging Voice, by Sharon O’Brien. New York: Oxford University Press,

1986, $24.95, 544 pp.  

Willa Cather: A Literary Life, by James Woodress. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,

1987, $35.  

The Voyage Perilous: Willa Cather’s Romanticism, by Susan J. Rosowski. Lincoln: Univer-

sity of Nebraska Press, 1986, $22.95, 288 pp.  

Willa Cather in Person: Interviews, Speeches, and Letters, edited by L. Brent Bohlke. Lin-  
coln: University of Nebraska Press, 1986, $17.95.  

by Mary Titus  
That five new books about Willa  
Cather exist is not remarkable:  
Cather’s reputation, always  

substantial, continues to grow. What is  
remarkable is that each book presents a  
different image of Cather. “All bio-  
graphers employ principles of selection,”  
Sharon O’Brien notes in her introduc-  
tion to Willa Cather: The Emerging  
Voice. “All biographers write at a par-  
ticular moment in history and read their  
subjects through the conceptual frame-  
works available to them.” Every reader  
recreates a writer.  

Although a different portrait of  
Cather emerges in each of these studies,  
the face is the same. Whether smiling,  
in shadow, or framed by an extravagant  
hat, certain features remain constant.  
With Cather the most notable must be  
her chin — solid and stubborn, suggest-  
ing the quality every biographer notes:  
determination. Determination led  
Cather from Red Cloud, Nebraska, to  
the State University at Lincoln, where  
she hung up a map of Rome, plunged  
into Greek, joined the staffs of the pre-  
dominantly male student publications,  
and became a renowned “meat-axe”  
theater critic for the Lincoln news-  
papers. Determination drove her from  
Pittsburgh to New York where she be-  
came managing editor of McClure’s  
Magazine, one of the most powerful and  
respected national periodicals at the be-  
ginning of this century. And certainly  
the same determination sustained her  
when she set aside journalism and de-  
voted her pen to fiction.  

Perhaps the portrait of Cather that  
readers know best is the “middy blouse”  
study by Edward Steichen. Forthright,  
pudgy-cheeked, unpretentious — this is  
Cather the American writer. Bernice  
Slote’s Pictorial Memoir presents this  
traditional image. In this beautifully ar-  
ranged book, in which photographs al-  
ternate with gracefully written text,  
Cather is linked to the American land-  
scape: Nebraska prairie, Southwest can-  
yon; rocky Northeastern shore. The es-  
sential facts of Cather’s life are here as  
well, including photographs of the  
homes and people to whom she gave her  
loyalty and love.  

Landscape remains significant in Sha-  
ron O’Brien’s outstanding book, Willa  
Cather: The Emerging Voice; however  
O’Brien weaves it into a larger theme,  
that of the complex interrelations of  
Cather’s gender identity and her literary  
achievement. Rich in biographical de-  
tail, The Emerging Voice explores  
Cather’s life and early writing, up to O  
Pioneers!, through the lens of contem-  
porary feminist theory. In her teens and  
early twenties Cather wholeheartedly  
embraced the association of masculine  
force with creative power and au-  
thority. She praised writers like Kip-  
ling, tying the power of poetry to “brute  
instinct” and denigrating the achieve-  
ments of women: “If I see a novel by a  
woman, I confess I take one by a man  
instead; I prefer to take no chances  
when I read.” Identifying writing as a  
masculine pursuit, Cather essentially  
excluded herself. Her solution was to  
adopt a masculine identity. She had her  
hair cropped short and wore severely tai-  
lored clothing. Rejecting the limited  
and confining definitions of women av-  
ailable in her culture, she sought free-  
dom by creating a male persona.  

Willa Cather. Photo by Anne Dupont, courtesy  
of Mrs. Emmeline Ruddy.  

Over the ten years in which she re-  
searched and wrote the biography,  
O’Brien became convinced that Cather  
should be viewed not just as a woman  
writer but also as a lesbian. Her position  
rests on Cather’s ardent letters to Louise  
Pound, a college companion, and even  
more on contemporary redefinitions of  
lesbianism. As O’Brien argues, to define  
a lesbian as a woman who shares “genital  
sexual experience with women” is to  
create a term that is difficult to verify  
and unnecessarily restrictive. It excludes  
women who may have adopted their  
culture’s position that homosexual love  
is unnatural, but who yet, like Cather,  
find their identity and happiness in  
women-centered experience. Cather’s  
correspondence with Pound reveals an  
awareness of conflicts between cultural  
condemnation and private desire, for  
she laments the fact that “feminine  
friendship should be unnatural.”  
Perhaps it was Cather’s strong desire for  
privacy as well as her enduring sense of  
public propriety, noted by all of her  
biographers, that led her to destroy  
much of her private correspondence.  

According to O’Brien, Cather could  
not reach her fullest achievement until  
she had overcome the cultural assump-  
tions that excluded women from literary  
greatness, “for as long as Cather denied  
her womanhood she was unable to speak  
authentically and powerfully as a wri-  
ter.” O’Brien traces a struggle through  
the early stories, noting a recurring  
theme of alienated or thwarted creativ-  
ity. Here too the rich context surround-  
ing the discussion reveals the range and  
inclusiveness of O’Brien’s study.  
Cather’s efforts to find her own voice are  
set in the context of the turn-of-the-  
century literary scene and then illumi-  
nated by contemporary psychoanalytic  
discussions of the mother-daughter  
bond.  

The Emerging Voice ends with a dis-  
cussion of O Pioneers! Cather’s novel  
celebrating the ordering, life-giving  
powers of Alexandra Bergson and the  
fertile world she builds around her. For  
Cather to achieve this lyric vision of  
female creativity and power much had  
to change, and O’Brien identifies sev-  
eral experiences as especially signific-  
ant. Among them are Cather’s brief but  
influential friendship with the New En-  
gland writer Sarah Orne Jewett, whose  
own woman-centered life stood as an  

example, and who gladly took on the  
role of mentor. But even more signific-  
ant was Cather’s trip to the Southwest  
in 1912; here she found the catalysts for  
a vision unifying the feminine and the  
creative. In Cather’s imagination, the  
Southwestern landscape, particularly  
the canyons of the cliff-dwellers, re-  
flected the forms of the female body, as  
did the decorated pottery of the Indian  
women, uniting beauty with a nurturing  
function. Like the throat of the opera  
singer — an image that recurs in The  
Song of the Lark, Cather’s later novel  
about a young woman’s discovery of her  
creative powers — the pots represent art  
that is “profoundly female, integrating  
procreative and creative powers.”  

It is difficult to imagine how O’Brien  
would approach later novels such as The  
Professor’s House or Death Comes for the  
Archbishop, which focus on male figures  
solidly entrenched in the patriarchal au-  
thority of church or academic scholar-  
ship. Yet by stopping at Cather’s first  
great success, O’Brien follows the wri-  
ter’s own advice from the preface to The  
Song of the Lark: “The life of a successful  
artist in the full tide of achievement is  
not so interesting as the life of a talented  
young girl ‘fighting her way.’ Success is  
never so interesting as struggle.”  
Perhaps this explains in part the occa-  
sional lack of vitality in James Wood-  
ress’s full-length biography, Willa Cather:  
A Literary Life.  

With Cather the most notable  
feature must be her chin —  
solid and stubborn, suggesting  
the quality every biographer  
notes: determination.  

For the reader seeking facts, Wood-  
ress’s book is invaluable. A revision of  
his Willa Cather: Her Life and Art  
(1970), the new volume benefits from  
extensive material gathered by Bernice  
Slote. It is full of small, often fascinating  
details that inform us not only of  
Cather’s experience but of other women  
in the early part of this century as well.  
We learn that Cather enjoyed racing  
the electric cars in Pittsburgh on her  
bicycle, or that she once endured a two-  
month bout of blood poisoning after  
pricking herself with a hat pin. Wood-  
ress’s portrait balances O’Brien’s well.  
The intellectual and feminist energy in-  
fusing her images of Cather’s youth finds  
a counterweight in his closing chapters,  
which present Cather’s final years with  
sympathy and elegiac dignity. Yet at  
times the full-length biography seems  
mechanical, and the narrative of  
Cather’s life marches past, somewhat  
overladen with quotation and undi-  
gested plot summary.  

The image of Cather that Woodress  
presents is a conservative one: On the  
book’s cover is a portrait by Nikolai  
Fechin in which Cather looks away from  
the viewer, unsmiling, somewhat for-  
mal, private. She represents that mys-  
terious being, the artist. And the theme  
that unites the biography is her dedica-  
tion to writing. Woodress devotes a  
separate chapter to each of her books,  
describing its genesis, the conditions  
under which it was written, and the  
public’s response. Early on he quotes a  
college essay she wrote on Thomas Car-  
lyle, “Art of every kind is an exacting  
master, more so than even Jehovah. He  
says only, ‘Thou shalt have no other  
gods before me.’”  

Although A Literary Life does  
acknowledge recent feminist or  
psychoanalytic approaches to Cather, it  
tends toward dissent, and generally  
avoids questions of gender. Woodress’s  
attention remains directed toward ques-  
tions of what, where, and when Cather  
wrote — not why. He acknowledges that  
her “primary emotional attachments  
[were] to other women,” and thus that  
she might be defined as a lesbian. Yet  

his conservative image of her rejects any  
impropriety: “Her high regard for tradi-  
tional values, her strong sense of de-  
corum, and her close ties to family would  
have been strong deterrents to anything  
she regarded as deviant behavior.” One  
senses relief accompanying this conclu-  
sion, and setting aside the possibility  
that Cather had sexual relations with  
women, Woodress also sets aside the far  
more significant issue: the fact that her  
emotional life centered on women and  
the implications this held for her art.  

Susan Rosowski’s The Voyage Perilous  
is a scholarly, critical study, not a biog-  
raphy, yet it too creates an image:  
Cather the romantic, inheritor of 19th-  
century English romanticism with its  
exaltation of the individual imagina-  
tion. The book describes each of  
Cather’s works as representing stages in  
a lifelong intellectual exploration of the  
power of the imagination; the “voyage  
perilous” is the artist’s effort to transfer  
an ecstatic moment of perception from  
the mind to the page. Photographs of  
Cather in the early sections of the book  
present her half smiling, looking out  
and beyond the viewer tenderly, as if she  
apprehends something joyous, lovely,  
and mysterious.  

Cather’s earliest essays, especially  
from her college years, do exalt the artis-  
tic imagination, although they rely on  
American as well as English romanticism.  
Yet to read her entire achievement in  
the light of her youthful enthusiasms  
seems at times restrictive. The Voyage  
Perilous tends to perceive and praise  
Cather’s work through analogies to  
other writers. Thus “The Song of the Lark  
is Willa Cather’s Prelude”; O Pioneers! is  
a Nebraskan “Eve of St. Agnes.” Cather  
is described as being “like Wordsworth,”  
“like Carlyle,” “like Yeats.” Yet when  
Rosowski sets aside analogies, her read-  
ings of Cather’s novels are insightful and  
gracefully presented. Her discussion of  
the security and healing that domestic  

ritual and storytelling provide in  
Shadows on the Rack illuminates that  

novel, highlighting Cather’s recurring  
celebration of women’s daily labor:  
“These coppers, big and little, these  
brooms and clouts and brushes, were  
tools; and with them one made, not  
shoes or cabinet-work, but life itself.”  

Cather’s own voice is presented in L.  
Brent Bohlke’s Willa Cather in Person.  
Bohlke researched and collected public  
accounts of Cather’s speeches, her  
numerous interviews, and published let-  
ters. Although the book includes 34 in-  
terviews, only a few are substantial;  
most are third-person accounts of brief  
meetings or conversations. Similarly, of  
Cather’s six public speeches, we have  
the actual texts of only two. Reading  
through these one realizes how impor-  
tant this scanty material has been for  
Cather’s biographers. After quitting her  
career as a journalist, Cather made few  
public statements, choosing to speak  
only through her fiction. She destroyed  
as much of her private correspondence  
as she could, and in her will forbade  
publication of what remained.  

Yet Willa Cather in Person is enjoyable  
reading for another reason: It records  
not only what Cather had to say, but  
also what it was like to meet her. Again  
and again her contemporaries mention  
their delight in her presence, her fresh-  
ness and vigor. They notice the bright  
colors Cather enjoyed wearing: “She has  
the extraordinary courage to wear at the  
same time salmon and green, and she  
does it with complete success.” And  
they quote her forthright statements on  
the things she considered right and val-  
uable: “good cookery; cottages that are  
homes, not playthings; gardens; repose.”  
No single image of Cather is privileged  
in these interviews, speeches, and let-  
ters. Instead, fleetingly, one feels an  

energetic, determined presence —  
Willa Cather herself.  
@ Mary Titus teaches English at  

Georgetown University.  

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987