The Strongest  
of Beings  

Lilian’s Story, by Kate Grenville. New  
York: Viking Penguin, 1986, $16.95,  
227 pp.  

by Lesley Jane Nonkin  

From the moment Lilian Singer is  

born, we are aware that there has  

been a supernatural, almost  
mystical, disturbance in the universe. Pigs  
take to the sky as fantasy becomes reality.  
Figs sprout thorns as nature is corrupted.  
And Albion, her exceedingly chauvinistic —  
and sometimes mad — father, must  
adjust to the unexpected. Not to the male  
child he had obviously hoped for but, as  
he puts it, to “A girl?” Her pale, in-  
effectual mother, shattered by a delivery  
pain she did not anticipate and transfixed  
by postpartum delirium, lets baby Lil slide  
off her breast onto the floor.  

So the stage is set: for the struggle of a  
bold, unprotected female spirit that fits  
none of the conventional feminine  
stereotypes (Lil is fat, immodest, sexually  
alert) against the inevitability of death.  
Or in her terms, against the forces of life  
that threaten to make her “invisible” — by  
stripping her of her dignity, by  
homogenizing her uniqueness into con-  
ventionality, by crushing her enthusiasm  
for life in the dynamics of a distorted  

father-daughter relationship. For to Lil,  
being invisible is as good as being dead.  

Lil’s only desire in life is to be someone  
who matters, and Lilian’s Story is an  
against-the-odds tale of that struggle. Her  
struggle begins with the meanness of the  
childhood playground where she is per-  
secuted by peers and a retiring brother,  
John, who tell her that she cannot be a  
courageous or heroic figure; moves  
through a frighteningly lucid middle-age  
madness precipitated by Albion, who first  
rapes her and then commits her to the  
“loony-bin”; and winds into a peculiarly  
independent and contented old age in  
which she finds love with an old college  
flame. Lil triumphs in the end of this  
humorous but often distressing story,  
because she has managed to weave herself  
— or more accurately, the impact of her  
eccentric escapades (such as jumping into  
taxis with complete strangers!) — into the  
fabric of other people’s lives. In her small  
way, Lil becomes famous, a part of  
history. And such immortality is the only  
antidote to what author Kate Grenville  
says “is the story of our lives. . . the story  
forward to death, although each of us  
might hope to be the exception.”  

The strength of Lilian’s Story,  
however, is not just Grenville’s detailed  
portrait of growing up in an exotic Aus-  
tralian Garden of Eden filled with “tink-  
ling” banana leaves and giggling  
kookaburra birds. It also comes from crisp  
evocation of some of the most painful and  
joyous sights, sounds, and smells of uni-  

versal childhood. Here are the stringy  
balls of spit squeezed from the ends of  
sucked braids, the terrifying spiders lurk-  
ing beneath the girls’ john, the  
embarrassing discovery of armpit hair on a  
strange neighborhood woman, which we  
as adults all try to forget. Here is the  
excruciatingly whimsical do-si-do of  
young relationships and the tyranny of  
“skinny boys smelling like socks.”  

Even stronger is Grenville’s ability to  
reach in and excise the overwhelming,  
often conflicting, ingredients of a daugh-  
ter’s infatuation with the father figure.  
Each time Lil submits to Albion’s  
whippings, it is with the mystified  
resignation that many children feel in the  
face of omnipotent paternal power. When  
left alone in the house for the first time,  
Lil’s desire to “penetrate” her father’s  

forbidden study — the place where he  
compiles his books of facts — is every girl’s  
secret desire to possess that untouchable,  
unknowable part of the reserved man.  
And the half-torn photograph she finds of  
herself in one of his jacket pockets is the  
ambiguous symbol of love and nonlove  
that many men are forced by society to  
send their children; it is a message that  
binds by its confusion. And it becomes  
Lil’s Achilles’ heel, the almost fatal flaw  
that when touched off can plunge her  
from healthy sensibility into helpless  
childlike behavior.  

Well after her father dies, Lil notes that  
his mere likeness — on a street, in a car —  
can cause her anguish: “In the face of that  
silence I stopped being a woman of in-  
dependent means and fighting spirit, and  
became that weakest of beings, a mere  
daughter.” (Ironically, it is only her  
mother and brother whom this father truly  
manages to destroy.)  

Although Lilian’s Story is certainly not  
a quick read, it moves along with the con-  
fident clip of a diary, filled with small  
entries, punctuated by large and often  
amusing headlines. Getting to know  
Lilian Singer, and new novelist Kate  
Grenville, who won the Australian/Vogel  
award in 1984 for this book, is a treat few  
would want to miss.  

@ Lesley Jane Nonkin is a writer at  
Vogue magazine and author of a nonfiction  
book for teens and their parents, I Wish My  
Parents Understood (Penguin).  

The Web of  
Family Life  

The Only Daughter, by Jessica  
Anderson. New York: Penguin, 1986,  
$5.95, 252 pp. (PB)  

by Suzanne Scott  

When it was first published in  
1980, The Only Daughter won  
Australia’s most prestigious  

literary prize, The Miles Franklin Literary  
Award. The reason is clear. Jessica An-  
derson’s novel is rich, satisfying fiction, a  
comedy of manners with the irony,  
humor, and attention to detail we might  
expect from a 20th-century Jane Austen.  
The pleasure is not in what happens but in  
how it happens — how we reveal  
ourselves in every word, every gesture,  
and every opinion.  

As in other novels of manners, the plot  
in this one is slight and turns on questions  
of love, loyalty, life, and death. A spite-  
ful, bitter patriarch named Jack Cornock  
lies dying, while his former and current  
wives and his children by both marriages  
sort out their relationships to him, each  
other, and their own spouses and  
children. At the same time, everyone  
speculates about who will get Jack’s  
fortune.  

As a touchstone for this involuted,  
emotionally charged family novel, An-  
derson uses a character who is both an in-  
sider and an outsider — Sylvia Foley, a  
divorcee who has been away from her  
home in Sydney for 20 years and who is  
one of Jack’s children by his first wife. Her  
return is sudden, unplanned. To the  
others, it looks suspiciously like a play for  
Jack’s sympathy and money. No one  
believes that she has come without know-  
ing that her father was mortally ill after a  
stroke.  

For Sylvia, however, the issue is not  
money but connection — how she fits  
into the tapestry of the two families united  
through a single man, her father. For  
Sylvia, connection is problematic. As a  
child, her connections with her estranged  
parents were those of a possession fought  
over by two children, neither of whom  
cared as much for the possession as for  
winning the struggle. As a result, Sylvia  
developed a child’s elaborate rituals of  
pleasing, rituals that come back to haunt  
the adult. As she visits her mother Molly  

6 ® Belles Lettres  

for the first time during her visit, Sylvia's  
lifetime of trying to please is ironically  
summed up by a simple exchange over a  
bottle of champagne.  

“Have a drop more, Syl.”  

“You have it, mum.”  

“No, you.”  

“Just a bit, then. Here, let me  
pour it.”  
The champagne had helped. Molly  
held out her glass like a child, and  
oh, standing to pour, felt slightly  
filial.  

Anderson often stands back un-  
obtrusively, allowing the complexities of  
interpersonal relations to emerge in con-  
versations over tea and in discussions  
about wallpaper and children’s T-shirts.  
Typically she shows her authorial hand  
only to heighten the effect with a spare,  
well-placed ironic phrase like “slightly  
filial.” Yet the authorial presence is  
strongly felt. Through the web of observa-  
tion that Anderson creates, we inevitably  
see how the fine, sticky strands of connec-  
tion hamper movement for everyone.  
Because Sylvia is both outsider and in-  
sider, she is more aware than the others of  
how behavior is less chosen than com-  
pulsory in the presence of those to whom  
one is tied. Even the most mundane ac-  
tion, such as whether or not to follow a  
family custom and throw the tea leaves  
into the garden, reveals to Sylvia reasons  
why she left Australia and home in the  
first place. “Taking the teapot away,  
Sylvia again felt betrayed by herself,  
belittled, all the gains of her maturity gone  
for nothing.”  

And yet, like other characters in the  
book, Sylvia wants connection. She is  
hurt that her mother is distracted when  
she talks to her over the phone when she  
first returns to town. Her father, too, does  
not talk to her, in his case because the  
stroke has robbed him of speech. But  
Sylvia talks to both of them, nonetheless,  
and this is the affirmation at the heart of  
the novel. By its end, everyone has gotten  
something of Jack’s and something from  
each other — perhaps not what they  
wanted, but enough. Some of their lives  
even change for the better.  

The Only Daughter rewards with many  
small pleasures, and all it asks is con-  
centration. Anderson achieves the effect  

of a slow piling up of detail by quickly pac-  
ing each scene and by frequent scene  
shifting. (Keeping the family straight can  
be a challenge unless you read the first 75  
pages at one sitting.) The effect is not  
unlike the soap operas that Molly watches  
relentlessly, even with the sound down  
when she has company or is talking on the  
telephone. Each scene is a little drama, a  
microcosm of the complex play of  
emotions that characterize the web of  
family life.  

® Suzanne Scott is a freelance writer and  
critic in Washington, DC.  

Ties That Do Not Bind  

A Boatload of Home Folk, 1983, 218 pp., and An Item From the Late News, 1984,  
200 pp. — by Thea Astley. New York: Penguin Books, $4.95 (PB)  

by Lynne M. Constantine  

Thea Astley’s novels are not for the  

faint-hearted. With a fierce energy and a  
prose style as sharp as a razor, Astley, an acclaimed Australian novelist who is now reaching a wider au-  
dience in Britain and the United States through these Penguin editions, disabuses  
us of illusion and strips us naked to the  
bitter, brutal parts of human nature. Her  
aim is not to brutalize, however, but to  
cleanse and to reveal just how dis-  
illusionment, greed, lust, and pain grow  
from the mix of human desire and human  
frailty.  

At the heart of both A Boatload of  
Home Folk and An Item From the Late  
News are failed attempts at human com-  
munity, set in a sparse landscape that  
cannot support the women and men who  
hang on there. The central events in both  
novels take place in December, an apt  
metaphor for the winding-down world  
depicted in each. In A Boatload of Home  
Folk, a steamer sets its party of inhabitants  
and vacationers ashore on a tropical island  
hours before a hurricane arrives. Each of  
the people is tied to all the others through  
the mystery of coincidence and the  
novelist’s deeper perception of a common  
secret at the heart of all of them. Each of  
them, Astley shows us, has reached for  
love and found ashes: Stevenson, the  
bureaucrat/poet who spends an obsessive  
love on a woman who urges “passivity in  

crises” and who no longer feels much of  
anything; Kathleen Seabrook, who  
struggles to make a break with her  
philandering, fatuous husband Gerald;  
Miss Paradise and Miss Trumper, two  
aging companions who irritate each other  
with their mutual need. At the heart of  
the novel is Father Lake, an island priest  
who some months before had reached for  
one of the native boys working at the rec-  
tory and had been caught at it, and on the  
day of the hurricane was preparing to leave  
the island forever.  

As in all disaster stories — and both of  
these books are structured like disaster  
stories — separate plots are joined  
together by a single force that sweeps up  
all characters into an elemental struggle  
for survival. Once the hurricane begins,  
the individual desperations begin to touch  
and merge. The boy whom Lake had  
fondled, who is now without a job, robs  
Miss Trumper, who is found half-dead by  
Stevenson and brought to the inn where  
Lake sits drinking until his plane arrives.  
Lake completes the circle by refusing, in a  
rush of drunken purism, to give Miss  
Trumper the last sacraments, believing  
himself to be sparing her from the  
ministrations of a defiled priest but realiz-  
ing later that he had failed in an ultimate  
act of love and “sent an unshriven soul to  
the next world.” The greatest irony of all  
is the final Mass of thanksgiving and  
sorrow offered by the island’s bishop after  

— continued on page 14  

September/October 1986