Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

©  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  

®  

Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Rosemary Curb  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  

Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarczyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  

e  

Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

o  

Celia McEnaney  
ADVERTISING REPRESENTATIVE  

%  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ institu-  
tions; $15.00/ individuals; $12.50/  
students with photocopy of student  
ID. Classroom Discount: Indi-  
vidual issues or yearly subscriptions  
$2.00 an issue for classes of 10 or  
more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose  
is to promote and celebrate writing  
by women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, send SASE for  
a copy of the Guidelines for Review-  
ers. All views expressed in Belles  
Lettres represent the views of the  
individual authors.  

Submissions  

Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  

Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Deanna D’Errico or call 703-524-  
7743. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

May/June 1987  

State of the Union  

Because we wish to devote every possible  
inch of space to books, we have not com-  
municated with you directly as often as we  
would wish. But, having passed the marker  
of our first year of publishing, we now want  
to devote some space to inform you of some  
of our goals, to share with you the inner  
workings of the magazine, and, most impor-  
tant, to convey to you how truly consequen-  
tial your support of Belles Lettres is.  

First, I feel that I must shatter some of  
your illusions. It has become apparent  
through much-welcomed feedback that be-  
cause of the magazine’s good looks and qual-  
ity content, many of you think of us as being  
so prosperous that your support is of little  
consequence. We are prosperous in an  
aesthetic sense: We have successfully main-  
tained high quality and, more important, we  
are filling the great need for publicizing  
women writers that prompted the creation  
of Belles Lettres. But our brand of prosperity  
is not the kind that supports plush carpet-  
ing — or even salaries: So let me begin this  
“state of the union” address by revealing why  
we have to smile a little when people ask,  
“Where is the headquarters of Belles Lettres?”  
“How many staff people do you have?”  

The bald truth is that the “headquarters”  
are located in a basement and an attic (and  
at various desktops of volunteers). The staff  
numbers two: Janet Palmer Mullaney and  
Deanna D’Errico. Neither we, nor our re-  
viewers, nor our volunteers are paid.  

Janet and I both have “real” jobs; we pro-  
duce Belles Lettres in our “free” time — and  
purely out of love for books. Between the  
two of us, we do virtually everything that  
needs doing: keeping abreast of what is and  
has been published; soliciting books and re-  
viewers; writing, editing, and proofreading;  
selling and placing ads; promoting the  
magazine in print and in person; maintaining  
databases; fulfilling subscription orders;  
sending gift announcements; negotiating  
with suppliers; xeroxing, waxing, laying out,  
dummying, pasting up; accounting — and  
the myriad other details that are required to  
keep a business running. Belles Lettres has  
become a dirty word to some of our loved  
ones who have come to feel that we are ob-  
sessed and that they are being neglected.  

Everything is done with extreme economy.  
Janet works on a computer whose use is do-  
nated by a loving friend; I use a computer  
purchased by my husband. Most of our  
supplies are acquired at yard sales. I have  
done paste up on a rickety card table with a  
mini-light table borrowed (rather perma-  
nently it seems) from Kathy Velis (a friend  
whom I must name — she shot all our photos  
and pasted up the entire first volume free of  
charge in what little free time she had left  
after her full-time newspaper job). A great  
deal of our time is spent running errands or  
doing menial chores such as picking up type  
and licking envelopes, because doing it our-  
selves means saving money.  

We have had help along the way from  
devoted friends and altruistic souls, all of  
whom we have acknowledged in print before.  
Without these contributions of time, skill,  
and money, we truly do not know how we  
could have come this far. All help not-  
withstanding, Janet and I still sometimes feel  
a bit like little red hens. Do you know the  
story? The hen finds some grains of wheat.  
She plants it, cuts it, takes it to the mill,  
and then bakes bread. At each step of the  
way she asks “Who will help?” Each time  
the answer is the same: “Not I,” say the  
duck, the mouse, and the pig. But when she  
asks who will help eat the bread, the answer  
is unanimous: “I will.”  

Do not think that these little red hens are  
complaining. We do get weary from our  
planting and milling, but the enrichment we  
reap from doing something that we truly love  
and doing something that contributes to the  
world makes the weariness unspeakably  
worthwhile. No, I bare the facts of how we  
work so that you will know how significant  
your support is — every subscription, every  
donation of time or money is one more “I  
will” — and what impact it has on the  
magazine and the world of publishing.  

If you still do not believe that your support  
can mean so much, consider the chain of  
action that you set off by buying one subscrip-  
tion. The income helps pay for producing  
and mailing the magazine; greater income  
allows higher quality, growth of coverage,  
and wider distribution. Increased subscrip-  

CONTENTS @  

ASIAN WOMEN WRITERS  

VOLUME 2/NUMBER 5  

2 The Tale of an Old Geisha and Other Stories ........ by Kanoko Okamoto  

A Woman Called En ................6  

by Tomie Ohara  

Rabbits, Crabs, Etc.: Stories by Japanese  

VOTED cesristem mas voce vnron caso worse Yt Sainte HE translated by Phyllis Birnbaum  

The Mother of Dreams and Other Stories: Portrayals  

of Women in Modern Japanese Fiction .............. edited by Makoto Ueda  
3 The Making of an Anthology ..0:..00sc0s seis cos sens scons sens sae cesvoes ess [essay]  

Chinese Women of America: A Pictorial History ............. by Judy Yung  
4 The Story of Yamada Waka: From Prostitute to  

Feminist Pioneer os acs vvesayi sens vue seis oains veancns cana enaees by Tomoko Yamazaki  

Samurai and Silk: A Japanese and American  

Heritage ......... ce cccceeeeeesceeceeeteeesaeeeees by Haru Matsukata Reischauer  

A Half Step Behind: Japanese Women of the ’80s ........ by Jane Condon  
6 Thousand Pieces of Gold: An Autobiographical  

1 a a by Ruthanne Lum McCunn  

NATIVE AMERICAN WRITERS  

7 The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American Indian  

"Traditions 25s covenes veod ven ses vers  

wir tige Wa Se wm ne Hm by Paula Gunn Allen  

Furious Light «2.02.00... cece Se ee tae ae ene eee by Joy Harjo  

Seeing Through the Sun .............  
The Halfbreed Chronicles and Other Poems ..  
Storyteller 2.0.00... cee ceeceee seen ee  

.. by Linda Hogan  
54 mUe oa by Wendy Rose  

SeaUCE ES nea by Leslie Marmon Silko  

9 During My Time: Florence Edenshaw Davidson,  

A Haida Woman ..........:.:ecceseee ee  
Hobomok and Other Writers on Indians ...  
Oglala Women: Myth, Ritual, and Reality ...  

Ways of Indian Magic  

The Sun Is Not Merciful ............  

REVIEWS  
10 Madeleine: An Autobiography  

The Tribe of Dina: A Jewish Women’s  

s.AGie Nae SA Sa by Margaret B. Blackman  

«++. by Lydia Maria Child  
keseee by Marla N. Powers  
retold by Theresa VanEtten  

CEE ICIESIRCR by Anna Lee Walters  

Anthology ............. edited by Melanie Kaye/Kantrowitz and Irena Klepfisz  

12 Dessa Rose .......cccccseesseceeeeneeenee  
9 Plays by Black Women ............  

14 You May Plow Here: The Narrative of  
Sala BROOKS 6 ace wee pay caw pauowges eurans  
Heartbreak Hotel .............0.000006  

COLUMNS  

SCE Ee eC by Sherley Ann Williams  
5 ASR bn edited by Margaret B. Wilkerson  

oIRENECSERTAC edited by Thordis Simonsen  
ce teceeeeeeecteceeetenee by Gabrielle Burton  

5 Belles Lettres Interview: Linda Ty-Casper  

11 Rediscovery: Lorine Niedecker  

13 Impressions: A Biography Boom, New Books by Belles Lettres Editors,  
Briefly Noted, Alternative Publishing (by Janet Mullaney)  

On the Cover: Illustration by Michelle Reiko Kumata, a fourth generation Japanese  
American and student of the School of Visual Arts in New York (write: 2706 33rd So.,  

Seattle, WA 98144).  

tion numbers, higher quality, and wider  
coverage raise the interest of potential adver-  
tisers (predominantly publishers). Advertis-  
ing income, like subscription income, allows  
the magazine to grow in quality and in size.  
When advertisers publicize books by women,  
the magazine’s goal of promoting and celeb-  
rating women’s writing is doubly met. Fur-  
thermore, the exposure that reviews and ad-  
vertising give women writers speaks plainly  
to the publishing world. The success of Belles  
Lettres says “Here are thousands of readers  
and buyers of books who are interested in  
the writing of women.” Only when interest  
in women’s writing is borne out by sales fi-  
gures will publishers be convinced to publish  
and support greater numbers of women writ-  
ers. Your subscription could mean that one  
less woman writer will have to be a waitress  
(credit for the allusion goes to Fay Weldon).  
Now that you know what you mean to us,  
I'd like to share some of our current and  
future goals. First, I am happy to announce  
that with the March/April 1987 issue, the  
typesetting has been placed in the capable  
hands of Dan Johnson at the Writer’s Center  
in Bethesda, Maryland. Formerly I did the  
typesetting myself via computer and modem.  
I enjoyed learning to typeset, and I saved a  
great deal of money. But the task demands  
a lot of time, and I’m not a very nice person  
on 4 hours of sleep. Because the Center can  
offer us a very affordable price and because  
Dan is so competent, I will now be able to  
spend more time on other goals. [Dan’s com-  
ment: “As one of the former editors of Win-  
dow, a Washington literary magazine that  
sputtered along for about five years in the  
late 1970s, I appreciate the difficulty posed  

by the diverse demands of editing, promo-  
tion, and production. I enjoy my role of con-  
tributing as I can to the growth of Belles  
Lettres. And I’m pleased when doing the  
Center’s business leads me into such good  
reading!”]  

Obviously, one of our primary goals is to  
increase our visibility and our revenue. We  
plan to double our publicity efforts both to  
potential subscribers and to advertisers. We  
have applied for nonprofit, tax-exempt  
status, which will enable us to apply for  
grants. Until our status is granted, the Coor-  
dinating Council of Literary Magazines  
(CCLM) is acting as our fiscal agent (this  
arrangement does not in any way imply  
CCLM’s sponsorship). Until status is  
granted, you may make contributions to  
Belles Lettres by making your check payable  
to CCLM. Our plans for using income above  
operating costs include paying reviewers and  
establishing a central workplace where we  
can offer publishing internships. We plan to  
continue our focus on special groups of writ-  
ers and to broaden the scope of our coverage.  
To the latter end, for example, we are prepar-  
ing columns on reference works and young  
adult and children’s books.  

The state of the union, in summary, is  
poor but blissful. We are happy to be alive;  
we feel we have accomplished much in al-  
most 2 years. We know that it takes many  
years to establish a magazine of high caliber,  
and we are not disheartened in the least by  
the prospects. We thank you for being with  
us and behind us. Keep those letters, sub-  
scriptions, and donations coming!  

— Deanna D’Errico  

Belles Lettres © 1