Working-Class Issues

Academic women from working-
class or impoverished families
have so far received little atten-

tion. Yet there are many provocative
questions about their situation. How do
people marginalized by their gender and
class (and often by race) manage to be-
come academics? To explore some of
these issues, the Women’s Caucus of the
Modern Language Association spon-
sored a session about working-class
women in academia at the recent 1987
convention. Papers were given on the
formation of women intellectuals from
the working class, the situation of
graduate students from the working
class, and working-class women of color
in academia, as well as a report on inter-
views with working-class writers. The
session was proposed and moderated by
Michelle M. Tokarczyk, consulting
editor to Belles Lettres and a member of
the English Department at Rutgers Uni-
versity. Michelle will report on the ses-
sion in an upcoming issue.

University press authors have been
looking at women and work for quite a
while now. University of Minnesota
Press offers Victorian Writing and Working
Women by Julia Swindells (1985, $35/
$14.95, 236 pp.). Swindells says that her
“purpose is to set some readings of Vic-
torian fiction, particularly of canonical
texts or that which has been selected
from Victorian fiction as special (and
which continues to reproduce cultural
influence), alongside some readings of
working women’s autobiographies.” In
1986 University of Illinois Press pub-
lished Counter Cultures: Saleswomen,
Managers, and Customers in American
Department Stores 1890-1940 by Susan
Porter Benson. (University press titles
are becoming increasingly more rococo!)
Barbara A. Hanawalt edited Women and
Work in Preindustrial Europe (Indiana
University Press, 1986, $32.50/$10.50,
233 pp.). Basil Blackwell, not a univer-
sity publisher but a scholarly one, pub-
lished A Woman’s Place: An Oral History
of Working-Class Women 1890-1940
(1986, $12.95, 246 pp.) by Elizabeth
Roberts; only British women are fea-
tured. Work is a primary topic covered
in Foreign and Female: Immigrant Women
in America, 1840-1930 by Doris Weather-
ford (Schocken, 1986, $18.95, 288
pp.). Every major ethnic group that
came over during the immigration era is
represented, often through excerpts
from diaries and letters.

Virago Press says that it publishes its
Modern Classics “sometimes for their
importance in literary history; some-
times because they illuminate particular
aspects of women’s lives, both personal
and public.” I cannot vouch for the liter-
ary importance of Bobbin Up by Dorothy
Hewitt (Penguin/Virago, 1987, $6.95,
204 pp.), because I have not yet read
it, but it certainly fits the latter criteria.
The author was a renowned Australian
playwright; her novel of working-class
life was out of print for many years and
is soon to be made into a film.

Madelyn Arnold sent in this “snap
review” of Adirondack Portraits: A Piece
of Time by Jeanne Robert Foster (Syra-
cuse University Press, 1986, $35/
$14.95, 224 pp.): “Adirondack Portraits
is a compilation of prose, manuscript ex-
cerpts, poems, and photographs, ar-
ranged chronologically as the life of its
author, a socialite, literary figure, and
pioneering social worker. The many
photographs, principally taken by her
cousin, capture the harsh, 19th-century
Adirondacks with penetrating realism.
The book is interesting and worthwhile,
although the poetry is mainly of histor-
ical interest.”

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988

Briefly Noted

@ Add to the reading list of mother—
daughter works a new novel by Marilyn
French, Her Mother’s Daughter (Summit,
1987, $19.95, 683 pp.). Like Anna
Mitgusch’s Three Daughters (reviewed in
this issue), the novel looks at what gets
passed down from generation to genera-
tion. And Dell/Delacorte has published
a tenth anniversary edition of Nancy
Friday’s seven-million seller, My Mother/
My Self (1987, $17.95 HB, 448 pp.;
$4.95 PB, 480 pp.), with a new intro-
duction by the author.

Marilyn French. Photo by Jerry Bauer.

@ In Terrible Perfection: Women and
Russian Literature (Indiana University
Press, 1987, $19.50, 174 pp.) Barbara
Heldt says that in Russian writing “the
strongest expression of [women’s]
perspective took place in modes of
writing in which the feminine had not
yet been defined by men, in autobio-
graphical and lyric rather than in fic-
tional modes.” Her study first analyzes
the heroines created by male writers,
then explores women’s autobiography
and poetry — “virtually undiscussed
female traditions.” One of the poets
Heldt discusses is Anna Akhmatova,
whose poems translated by D.M.
Thomas are available from Ohio Univer-
sity Press in You Will Hear Thunder
(1985, $22/$11, 146 pp.).

® Knopf celebrated the centennial of
artist Georgia O'Keeffe last October
with a sumptuous book, Georgia
O'Keeffe: One Hundred Flowers (Knopf/
Callaway, 1987, $100). Most of the
paintings, which are sized relative to
each other at 44 percent of life size, have
never been reproduced before because
they are in private collections. The re-
sults are breathtaking.

@ The September/October 1986 issue
of Belles Lettres featured a retrospective
article on British novelist Penelope Mor-
timer by Roberta Rubenstein. In a book
of criticism from the University of
Illinois Press, Roberta focuses on
Mortimer in addition to five other stellar
writers: Margaret Atwood, Toni Morri-
son, Maxine Hong Kingston, Leslie
Marmon Silko, and Marilynne Robin-
son. The book is called Boundaries of the
Self: Gender, Culture, Fiction ($24.95,
256 pp.). I was delighted when Roberta,
who is Director of Women’s Studies at
American University, told me she was
teaching Robinson’s Housekeeping, a
book of great power and artistry. Ac-
cording to Robinson’s publisher, she is
working on a long-anticipated second
novel, and a film of Housekeeping by
Scottish director Bill Forsyth is forth-
coming.

@ To mark the 25th anniversary of Lor-
raine Hansberry’s play A Raisin in the
Sun, that play and The Sign in Sidney
Brustein’s Window have been reissued by

Plume/NAL (1987, $12.50, 340 pp.).
The text of Raisin features many restored
scenes and lines that were cut against
Hansberry’s wishes, the importance and
power of which Amiri Baraka points out
in one of the essays included in the book.

® Marita Golden’s autobiographical
work, Migrations of the Heart, has come
out in a Ballantine paperback ($3.50).
“While much of the book details my
marriage to a Nigerian and my life in
Nigeria for four years,” says the author,
“at its heart, Migrations of the Heart is a
story about how women love their
families and learn if they are lucky, to
love themselves as well.”

Marita Golden

@ Interested in Bloomsburyana? Read
Angelica Garnett’s touching autobio-
graphy, Deceived With Kindness, now
available in paperback (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $6.95, 181 pp.). Virginia
Woolf was Angelica’s aunt, Vanessa Bell
her mother; the other relationships she
delineates are a good deal more “rich
and strange.”

@ Virginia Woolf's mother, the “angel
in the house,” was rarely able to exercise
her literary bent — as those familiar with
the portrait of her in To the Lighthouse
will understand. Diane F. Gillespie and
Elizabeth Steele, the editors of Julia
Duckworth Stephen: Stories for Children,
Essays for Adults (Syracuse University
Press, 1987, $24.95, 277 pp.), have
created another kind of portrait of
Stephen in this critical edition of her
writings — heretofore unpublished. The
children’s stories are illustrated by her
husband, Leslie Stephen, and by her
daughter, Vanessa Bell. The editors
have included many striking portraits of
Stephen, including several by her aunt,
Julia Margaret Cameron, who is herself
the subject of an essay done for The
Dictionary of National Biography. This at-
tractive volume will appeal to general
readers as well as to scholars.

® Highly satisfying reading often re-
sults when a fiction writer writes about
a kindred spirit. Such is the case with
the critical biography of Mary Shelley
by Muriel Spark (Dutton, $18.95, 248
pp.). Originally called Child of Light at
the time of its first English publication
in 1951, the book was published here in
a pirated edition, which undoubtedly
prompted this updated volume.

® The University of Illinois Press has
published a second edition of The Curse:
A Cultural History of Menstruation
($29.95/$10.95, 304 pp.) by Janice De-
launey, Mary Jane Lupton, and Emily
Toth. The book’s new material focuses
on PMS, toxic shock, and tampon
safety, and its wit was much enlivened,
I suspect, by the contributions of Emily
Toth, who reviews for Belles Lettres when
she can take time away from teaching
and writing a biography of Kate Chopin.
At last word Emily was about to kill Kate
off, so we hope we will be featuring Emily
again ere long.

® New, affordable paperback editions
of Edith Wharton titles are available

from Scribners (The Custom of the Coun-
try, Hudson River Bracketed, and The
Mother’s Recompense) and Macmillan
(Colliers Twentieth Century Classics:
The Age of Innocence, The House of
Mirth, Madame de Treymes and Three
Novellas, The Reef, Roman Fever and
Other Stories, and Summer).

Watch out — the Beans of Egypt,
Maine, may soon be mucking about on
your television screen. American
Playhouse has optioned the bestseller by
Carolyn Chute, published by Ticknor &
Fields. And it won’t be soon enough for
me until the film of Christine Bell’s
novel, Saint (also a first novel), graces
the screens of movie theaters. Pineapple
Press recently sold the movie rights to
this fantastical funny novel set in South
America. A mass market paperback is
available from Washington Square Press
($6.95, 272 pp.).

@ How many of you had Barbie dolls?
(Not I, but then I was faithful to my
one doll, who looked like Shirley
Temple and whom I quaintly called
“Captain” after the Japanese officer who
lived next door.) However many Barbies
you had or even played with, you could
never top fashion designer Billy Boy’s
Collection of 11,000 dolls and acces-
sories, many of which are shown in Bar-
bie: Her Life & Times (Crown, $25). As
a window into our culture the book is
interesting, but are we really supposed
to swallow the author’s assertion that
Barbie was not a harmful role model?
Quick, over to the nearest comic book
store for the latest copy of Wimmen’s
Comix, a “Fashion Confidential” issue
that contains Kathryn LeMieux’s wicked
update, “Barbie at 30+.” The original
Barbie is kicked out of Mattel because
of “rumors of cellulite”; in truth, the
bosses have brought in another, even
more anatomically incorrect Barbie.
After getting pregnant and being left by
Ken, she works her way through law
school and eventually starts a rehab
center for recovering Barbies (“Re-
member, a two-inch waist is not nor-
mal”) and founds NOB, the National
Organization of Barbies.

Subscriber’s Drawing

The following individuals are winners of
our recent book drawing for subscribing
or renewing by October 1: Elizabeth Zog-
raphos, Sunnyvale, CA; Cathleen
Schurr, Bethesda, MD; Hinda Barlaz,
Bronx, NY; Jackie Atkins, W.
Lafayette, IN; and Kristin May, Chester
Springs, PA.

Subscribe, renew, or buy a gift sub-
scription by February 15 and be eligible
to win one of the following books. Re-
member to write “Moore Fund” on your
order, and Belles Lettres will receive
funds matching your payment.

@ The Dollmaker, Hunter’s Horn, and
Mountain Path by Harriette Arnow —
in a beautiful boxed edition from the
University Press of Kentucky.

® Passionate Politics by Charlotte

Bunch (signed by the author)
® Less Than Angels by Barbara Pym
® Enchantment by Daphne Merkin

® Migrations of the Heart by Marita Gol-
den

® The Coquette by Mrs. Hannah W.
Foster

® Charlotte Temple by Susanna Rowson

® Lady Oracle and Surfacing by Mar-
garet Atwood

® Her Mother’s Daughter by Marilyn

French
Belles Lettres 13