Belles Lettres Interview

“Life is absolutely brimming with terror,” poet Josephine Jacobsen tells interviewer Betty Parry. “We live from minute to minute, from hour to hour with our friends, our loves, our lives at risk. We are hostages to fortune.” It is our good fortune to have Jacobsen’s reflections on the place of poets — especially women poets — in society, as well as her thoughts on the state of the art today and her particular place within it.

Kneel at the window.  
Wait under the thorntree  
for the sun. Go away  
carrying your difference, you  
cannot leave it.  
Say, Not God  
himself would dare to lay it  
on you without  
relief.  
Tell your secret bones: Wait.  
— Josephine Jacobsen  
from “Short Views of Africa”

BP: You once told a fascinating story  
about Japanese artists who, after they  
became famous, changed their names and  
started fresh. Where is this from?

JJ: A book by Matisse called Jazz. He  
writes that an artist should never be a pris-  
oner of a style, of reputation, or of success.  
He describes Japanese artists who, in an  
earlier age, had become oppressed by the  
accumulation of responsibility, the fear of  
self-repetition, the terrible weight of ex-  
pectancy. They wanted, like snakes, to  
shed their skins and start fresh. So they  
moved to a new identity, stripped of  
everything except a paintbrush in order to  
protect their freedom. J’aime ça, because I  
came to this profession so late and in such  
a curious way, and as it closes in around  
me, I feel its tremendous weight. I get an  
enormous amount of requests for jacket  
comments, for recommendations — all  
the peripheral part that is so important.  
When young poets are starting, they des-  
perately need this kind of help. I have  
never been able to withhold it, and it  
doesn’t seem proper to do so. When you  
try to separate the profession from the  
poems, it’s like Mae West peeling a grape.  
When you try to get the grape from the  
peelings, you realize the profession of  
poetry has overgrown you like ivy. You  
have an overwhelming desire to go  
somewhere and wake up in the morning  
with a completely different identity.

BP: Your stories and poems deal with  
the “instant of knowing,” sudden self-  
discovery, terror in the commonplace. Is  
your world like that?

JJ: Yes, life is absolutely brimming  
with terror. I can’t conceive how you can  
live in the world today and not be aware of  
it — particularly anyone who feels  
passionately. A line I wrote at an early age  
speaks of “the tissue paper between the  
foot and the plunge.” I think we live from  
minute to minute, from hour to hour with  
our friends, our loves, our lives at risk. We  
are hostages to fortune.

BP: Like that wonderful line you found  
years ago on a tombstone in a New  
Hampshire cemetery.

JJ: “It is a fearful thing to love/ what  
death can touch.”

BP: How do you feel about daring,  
taking artistic risks?

JJ: That’s a difficult question, because  
my daring has been a kind of reverse dar-  
ing. All of us who are not young have  
moved through various poetic climates.  
There have been many periods when the  
stream flowed toward certain types of  
poetry — political, social consciousness,  
structurally innovative — which I  
approved of and thought absolutely  
necessary but which were not what I felt I  
could or should do at the moment. I think  
you have the double weight of not only  
feeling that you must take risks but also  
the compulsion that however strongly you  
feel about issues and wish you could write  
poetry that was more politically oriented,  
this may not be what you have to offer. It’s  
just as hard to swim against the stream of  
the current as it is to be innovative in the  
technical sense. What I have tried to do is  
develop my poetry naturally and not be  
coerced by any topical trend. That is as  
daring as I have wanted to be.

BP: What are the changes that you see  
in your work through the years?

JJ: I think that there have been mani-  
fest differences in terms of technique —  
approaching and retreating from con-  
ventional forms, continually investigating  
what should be done in and out of specific  
forms. If you cut into a tree, you can tell  
its age and check its growth by the number  
of rings. I would hope that if my books  
were compared, the work would show a  
steady development in depth, perception,  
and control.

I was chosen to be the Poetry Consultant.  
[Jacobsen was the first woman chosen  
since Elizabeth Bishop, who served  
1949-1950.] While I was at the Library,  
Doubleday took The Shade-Seller. It was  
nominated for the National Book  
Award. I was in my 60s, so to say I came  
late to the game is putting it mildly.

BP: I gather that although you had  
almost no formal education — less than 4  
years in all — that your mother  
encouraged you to read extensively.

JJ: I didn’t go to school, and either  
there were no truant officers in those days  
or they never caught up with us. Mother  
had great intellectual curiosity and the  
greatest disregard for schools. She was  
very restless. After father died, when I was  
5, we traveled constantly. I never stayed  
long enough to develop any friends, but I  
was not conscious of any deprivation. I  
read a tremendous amount.

BP: What poets influenced your work?

JJ: The three poets who influenced me  
most at the formative stage were Auden,  
Yeats, and Archie Ammons. Yeats and  
Auden influenced me directly into the  
stream of poetry, and Ammons influenced  

(I have seen a lioness trot like a cat,  
light, light, with the tail’s tip up,  

I have seen the lizard’s eighth cousin  
rise on its alligator joints, onto tippy-toes  
and run fast as a dog.) But those were  
in places strange to me. Here,  

we cohabit.  

The cat trots, the lizard climbs  
to the wall,  

the frog slits the silence. Close,  

close, distance makes me dizzy  

with its sumptuous refusals.  

Galaxies are simpler. There is an  

awful grace  
in such mystery. To have such disguises  
as we circle each other: on a path,  
on pink stucco. In the crotch of green.  

— from “Presences I”  

Note: Complete poem will appear in  
Poetry Magazine.

Josephine Jacobsen

BP: I gather that in recent years you  
have received many accolades, and de-  
mand for your work has increased.

JJ: Yes, the picture has changed a great  
deal. I have work in seven current and  
future anthologies. Two books will be out  
in the fall of 1986: Adios Mr. Moxley, my  
second collection of stories, and The  
Sisters, a chapbook. Three critical es-  
timates of my work will come out next  
year. I have published a great deal but I  
haven’t had much written on my work.  
This is a whole new phase.

BP: Do you feel that it is overdue?

JJ: All my friends tell me it is. William  
Meredith made the most wonderful re-  
mark a few years ago. He said, “Josephine,  
you hear a lot about people who are preco-  
cious, but all I can say about you is that  
you are postcocious.” This cheered me up  
to no end. I came into poetry in such a  
strange way — no academic or pro-  
fessional connections, no input of any  
kind. I just dropped my poems in the  
mailbox.

BP: So recognition came late. How  
did it happen?

JJ: I don’t understand how it  
happened. I kept writing and just after I  
was married [she and Eric celebrated their  
50th anniversary in 1982] I sent some  
poems to Poetry (which I later learned got  
about 60,000 poems a year when Harriet  
Monroe was editor), and she took some of  
them. This absolutely stunned me. Then  
for a long time I was very busy — poetry  
was the peripheral part of my life. The first  
thing that made me feel that I was a pro-  
fessional was the success of The Testament  
of Samuel Beckett, which William Mueller  
and I wrote. I was fascinated with  
Beckett, who was practically unknown at  
the time. I felt that sections of his work  
were pure poetry. In 1971, to my surprise,  
the Library of Congress called and asked  

my whole conception of what poetry  
could mean to a person.

BP: What did you learn from Auden  
and Yeats? They are so very different.

JJ: They couldn’t be more opposite.  
From Auden, I got wit and humor, con-  
temporary language, and that ordinary  
objects play a part in poetry. From Yeats, I  
learned not to be afraid of grandeur: that  
myth and tradition and a word that is so  
dubious that I hardly dare use it —  
romance — were still part of poetry.

BP: An evaluation of your work in The  
Hollins Critic quotes you as thinking of  
poetry as a “solitary and dangerous  
encounter.”

JJ: I do. I don’t know whether my own  
poetry has been so solitary because I had  
no connections with any movements or  
whether it is a temperamental thing. My  
poetry is very slow in the writing, very  
personal, though oddly enough it has  
never been personally centered. I’ve  
never written what is known as con-  
fessional poetry.

BP: What do you mean by dangerous?

JJ: I think you take enormous risks in  
poetry. So much poetry is contrived  
according to demand, is aimed at certain  
kinds of publications, or is done to  
enhance an individual reputation. For  
me, it’s like Jacob wrestling with the an-  
gel. In every encounter with a poem there  
is a possibility of an abysmal failure. It’s  
like the difficulty of trying to climb a  
mountain: The chances that you are going  
to fall are very steep, and the sense of  
triumph if you get there is very strong.

BP: You have a natural gift for elegant  
language or style, but your work shows an  
even greater concern for total creative  
process.

JJ: I have always been baffled by hav-  
ing been praised so often for style, yet I  
never thought of it consciously apart from  
the work. I am much more interested in  
other elements, so that whatever style I  
developed came out of the work rather  
than being imposed on it.

BP: Have you ever experimented with  
different styles? 

JJ: I started conservatively with lyric  
and rhymed poetry and then wrote  
nothing in the way of rhymed poetry for  
the next 20 to 30 years. A few years ago I  
went through a period of immense con-  
traction — the desire for compression —  
and wrote a great many short poems,  
poems with a very impounded vocab-  
ulary. “The Monosyllable” and “Finally”  
from The Chinese Insomniacs are good  
examples.

BP: Of late you have also become a  
critically acclaimed short story writer.

JJ: I love short stories. I always felt the  
form was for me. I think the training in  
poetry, the fact that every single word has  
a vital importance, carries over into fic-  
tion. Most of my poems are poems of  
movement, of action. Something is  
happening within the poem, which is a  
minute story. I admire descriptive poetry  
but I write almost none. My primary in-  
terest is always people and situations that  
affect people.

BP: Do you have a particular method  
of writing?

JJ: It is unbelievable how little time I  
spend writing. Almost all of it has been  
done in two months a year. For a long  
time I tried to hew out an hour here or  
there but I found it destructive to my  
work. It’s like a pool: If you keep chucking  
stones in it, you can’t get any reflection. I  
know people who can sit down and write  
at the kitchen table. Alas, I have to have  
protective leisure. I can’t start unless I  
know that nothing is going to interrupt  
until I finish.

BP: How do you feel about past dis-  
crimination and its effect on women  
poets?

JJ: I feel very strongly. The first lecture  
I gave at the Library of Congress, “From  
Anne to Marianne,” dealt with that issue.  
Nobody in their senses can regard as a  
coincidence that in the last 25 years there  
were an extraordinary number of excellent  
women poets, whereas from Anne Brad-  
street to Elinor Wylie and Edna St.  
Vincent Millay, there was hardly a  
woman in the history of America who  
wrote any kind of good poetry. Emily  
Dickinson was the outstanding excep-  
tion. Women haven’t changed that  
much. Life hasn’t changed that much.  
What has happened is because of the  
assumptions that women had no intel-  
lectual capacity and that there was  
nowhere for them to go if they had. God  
knows how many silent poets went to  
the grave because being a poet was not a  
practical, emotional, or mental option.

BP: You talked about Edna St. Vin-  
cent Millay’s refusal to be pigeon-holed.

JJ: She was really the original feminist.  
Emotionally she had the guts and spirit to  
relate person to person, not woman to  
man. She wrote some of the most beauti-  
ful love sonnets in the English language.

BP: What about the accusation that  
most women are emotional, confessional  
poets like Anne Sexton and Sylvia Plath?

JJ: I think both Sexton and Plath were  
good enough to overcome the element  
and write some very fine poetry. I don’t  
feel that the circumstantially personal in  
their poetry helped. I’m not sure that it is  
a strictly feminine trait. I think it is true  
that men and women react slightly dif-  
ferently emotionally. Some of my more  
militant feminist friends would say that is a  
sexist remark, but I see it as a difference in  
emphasis, not as an advantage or dis-  
advantage. Louise Bogan and Elizabeth  
Bishop have a scope and control that  
many fine men poets lack. And if you