Black Literature

Conversations with Maya Angelou, edited by Jeffrey M. Elliot (University Press of Mississippi, $25.95 HB, $12.95 PB, 246 pp.) is a compendium of interviews with this multifaceted writer that have appeared in various venues; for example, Angelou talks with a host of newspaper reporters, literary scholar Claudia Tate, and sister writer/friend Rosa Guy. The following exchange comes from the latter interview (also published in Writing Lives: Conversations Between Women Writers (Virago Press):

R.G. We were demeaned yet always had to aspire to freedom — the heights. Our ambition was nurtured by the Western society — the same society which said that you’re female. You’re Black. You can’t climb here. That probably made us strong.

M.A. Using the canvas of contradiction, I’d like us to talk about deciding to be literary, a part of the literature which, in Western society, has been, and probably will be, dominated by white men. When people talk about American literature, they really mean Hemingway, Faulkner and Poe and when they do include women it’s Emily Dickinson and Edna St. Vincent Millay. To decide to take that on and say, “I will speak and be heard” — that takes a lot of guts.

R.G. Historically the Black American woman has been forced into this position. There had to be a certain period in the history of Black folks when the woman had to say, “Look, this is what’s happening.” Literature is an emotional history of what is happening at a specific time, at a specific place. And so our literature is as meaningful as any. Perhaps even more because of a changing world. The world is so small. . . . We are the tools of the progression of people’s understanding. We're saying we are here, and we are.

® Harlem Renaissance and Beyond: Literary Biographies of 100 Black Women Writers, 1900-1945 (G.K. Hall, $45, 413 pp.). Photographs, career summaries, and select bibliographies round out this browsable resource volume. The price may seem hefty, but the book, which is printed on acid-free paper, contains a wealth of fascinating rediscoveries as well as information on familiar authors such as Zora Neale Hurston, Ann Petry, and Alice Dunbar-Nelson.

Pages from the 1893 letter to a little boy that was the basis of the beloved “Tale of Peter Rabbit.” From “Beatrix Potter’s Letters”

GEA
ad i f ‘

a

Kad breed to mbhe end, Haokboousa fe Supper.
toh b Londen rool Aassday |S

J dope I ell see frm jane
— bby dD unessce, dear Neel,

mm Wem ts is Pte

J tm

; Ai fe bite 7h. r
ft bi $u fang op ow

Mere c teankerow, & fr;
a

oven tokecg tamed], He
ad endl yen him 6 lene of temomal fe,

* CLASSIFIEDS °

Call for Papers: NWSA Mid-Atlantic Region Conference. Crossing Borders/Tearing Down Walls, Oct. 19-21, 1990. Not only physical barriers, but also philosophical, aesthetic, psychological, spiritual, artistic, scientific, literary, technological, sociological, and pedagogical. Five copies of a 250-word abstract by June 1 to Myrna Goldenberg, Dept. English, Montgomery Coll., Rockville MD 20850.

The Harriette Simpson Arnow Prizes will be awarded by The American Voice: $1,000 each for the best short story, poem, and essay published in 1990 in the magazine; manuscript deadline July 1, 1990. All submissions are automatically considered. Write 332 W. Broadway, Ste. 1215, Louisville, KY 40202. Severed Ties: Lesbians Losing Family, Losing Friends is an anthology being edited by Lynne D’Orsay. Send submissions (tapes OK) to PO Box 332, Portsmouth, NH 03801.

Female Genital Mutilations. Funds are needed for educational campaigns to halt this brutal practice. Send donations by check, bank draft, banknote, or international money order to Hannah Edemikpong, Women’s Centre, c/o Box 185, Eket, Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria, West Africa.

International Women Writers Guild Summer Conference: “Writing and Higher Values” will take place at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY, July 27-August 5. Write PO Box 810, Gracie Station, NY, NY 10028 for more information.

Arf Women’s Land Community, Endangered Species. Beautiful, isolated refuge near Santa Fe offers short or long-term housing for women short of funds, in crisis, in healing or in search of new women friends. The land will be lost unless $153,000 is raised soon. Inquiries or donations to Arf NM Women’s Land Trust, PO Box 707, Tesuque, NM 87574.

The Watchdog Research Network has important and timely publications for you. Defusing High Pressure Tactics scrutinizes twenty insider strategies used by home salespeople to manipulate you. Beat the “Sales Rep Rap”! New Home Buyer’s Education Manual examines building terms, blueprints, site plans, construction, radon, and more. The Manual of Style is a general sourcebook for written communication. Major sections cover editorial style (including outlines and tables), proofreading and editing marks, speeds and standards for keyboarding and revisions, guides to WordPerfect, and a look at the snags and pitfalls of grammar and word usage. Great for home offices too. $10 per title ($8 each if more than one is ordered; includes postage and handling. DC residents add sales tax) to 228 10th St. NE, Suite 25, Washington, DC 20002. BELLES LETTRES CLASSIFIED RATES: .50 per word; prepayment is required. Telephone and box numbers count as two words. Abbreviations, initials, and zip codes count as one word each. CLOSING DATE for July issue is June 1; for October issue, August 15.

Maya Angelou. Photo by Leonard L. White

@ In 1973, Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (one of this country’s preeminent scholars of Black literature) was a twenty-two-year-old Time magazine correspondent in Paris. Having gotten the go-ahead for a story on Black American expatriates, he succeeded in setting up interviews with a legend — Josephine Baker — and his literary idol — James Baldwin. “I learned to love written literature, of any sort, through the language of James Baldwin,” says Gates in the introduction to the remarkable dual interview that transpired, which is collected in Afro-American Writing Today: An Anniversary Issue of The Southern Review, edited by James Olney (Louisiana State University Press). Time rejected the finished essay, saying that “Baldwin is passé, and Baker a memory of the thirties and forties.” Gates was “so angered by the idiocy of that decision” that he chucked journalism and got a Ph.D. in English.

Gates describes Baker as “so very thoughtful, so intellectual, and so learned of the sort of experience that, perhaps, takes six decades or so to ferment.” Here is part of her response to his question about why she left the United States:

One day I realized I was living in a country where I was afraid to be black. It was only a country for white people, not black, so I left. I had been suffocating in the United States. I can’t live anywhere that I can’t breathe freedom. I must be free. Haven’t I that right? I was created free. No chains did I wear when I came here. . . . I felt liberated in Paris. People didn’t stare at me. But when I heard an American accent in the streets of Paris, I became afraid. I would tremble in my stomach. I was afraid they’d humiliate me.

I was afraid to go into prominent restaurants in Paris. Once, I dined in a certain restaurant with friends. An American lady looked at our table and called the waiter. “Tell her to get out,” the lady said. “In my country, she is belonging only in the kitchen.” The French management asked the American lady to leave.

Gates asked Baldwin if life abroad gave him “any particular insight into American society,” and the writer replied,

I realized that the truth of American history was not and had never been in the White House. The truth is what had happened to black people, since slavery. . . . America has only been around for less than four hundred years; that’s not a long time, really. Apparently it takes more than that to realize that a human being is a human being. Europeans are more basic. They see colors of the skin as colors of nature, like the flowers, for example.

Other writers found in this volume include Rita Dove, Margaret Walker, and Pinkie Gordon Lane.

The Inveterate Reader

® For months I have saved this classic piece of yuppiedom to share with you very lucky readers. It appeared in a special section of the Washington Post classifieds on Valentine’s Day:

Kate,

Your beauty & intellect overwhelm your stand-offishness — when you let them. Let’s carefully build trust & friendship & maybe MORE. Paul.

Don’t get too carried away, Paul!

® A coda to Deb Price’s Patchwork article on newspaper book review sections is the disjunction between one male and two female reviewers’ opinions of Germaine Greer’s book about unearthing her father’s true past, Daddy, We Hardly Knew You (Knopf, $19.95, 311 pp.). Jonathan Yardley in the Washington Post allowed that it was a “fetching [!?] subject” but claimed that “For all her efforts to imbue the book with longing and passion, it has the feeling of having been written to order rather than from the heart, with the result that it never manages to engage the reader emotionally in Greer’s protracted search. ... [Greer] never manages to make the connections that are necessary if autobiographical writing is to touch those outside the author’s own circle. It’s wonderful for Greer that she learned so much about herself, but she fails to make it matter to anyone else.” The uninitiated might not know that Yardley (a Pulitzer-Prize-winning critic) has a longstanding antipathy to women’s stories. In a previous round-up of novels by younger women, he said they belong to “a genre that means to tell us women’s lives are both interesting and important, yet manages to present them as neither. . . . their dominant characteristic is that they demand our interest and sympathy without doing anything to earn either. . . . [They] seem grounded in the assumption that the writer need only present herself and her characters to us, that she need do little or nothing else to make us interested in them.” Etcetera. (One of the books he is discussing is Labrador, which I and our reviewer thought was wonderful.) A fed-up reader named Christine Rogers wrote to the Post,

I have no requirement that Yardley like — or even read — what I like. But I think he is the last person in the world who should be given the job of reviewing such books. It is a waste of everyone’s time to let him repeat the same old spiel over and over again, every time a new book of the genre he despises is published. The authors and readers of women’s fiction would be better served were your newspaper to remain silent. .

Kennedy Fraser, writing in The New Yorker, found Daddy “a jolting, poetic, broken-winged, exhilarating sort of thing.” She praises Greer for her courage in writing about the family and what it means: “Women must set aside the bowl they have used to beg for approval and praise.” Jill Johnston’s review in the New York Times called the book a “significant allegorical tale of a daughter’s search for identity.”

@ Who knows how much work by women was present in what the editors culled for the Paris Review Anthology (Norton, 1990, $25, 686 pp.), but we counted up “our” side of the final selections to be fifteen percent. Among the women writers editor George Plimpton championed are Mona Simpson, Joy Williams, and Mary Lee Settle (several stories by Cynthia Ozick were rejected).

® For those of you who wonder how and why we pick books to review, here is a sample evaluation from contributing editor Eleanor Bader:

I read Pirate Jenny by April Bernard. What a bizarre book. It is about a seventeen-year-old sociopath who literally begs, borrows, and steals her way into people’s hearts and minds, only to tear them to shreds. While it is engrossing and well written, Jenny (the “heroine” of this misadventure) is given so little depth that you read it wondering why she turned out so badly. No cause is given. Could it have been a lousy childhood? A rotten dad? A cruel mom? A missing gene? One never finds out, leaving it to fill the category of vacuous, unsettling, provocative but pointless literature. Need I say more?

Spring 1990 Belles Lettres @ 31