— Survival, continued

This prayer for beauty continues in  
Harjo’s work, but is contrasted against  
the continuous violence of the world — a  
violence that when borne out of war and  
competition is destructive, but when  
enacted by those who wish to break  
through those barriers that separate the  
world into false boundaries, can result  
in the creation of a new vision. The  
poems on the tape from She Had Some  
Horses and What Moon Drove Me To  
This are concerned with this transforma-  
tion.

“Vision,” a poem that introduces the  
theme of horses as representatives of all  
the colors of life and of the racial differ-  
ences that have been used to disunify  
society is followed by a beautifully ren-  
dered version of the song “Icarus,”  
which leads into the strong political  
poems, “For Alva Benson and For Those  
Who Have Learned To Speak,” “An-  
chorage,” and “Crossing The Border  
Into Canada.” The pain, beauty, and  
ultimate survival that fills these poems  
spills over into a plea for oneness, for  
the cessation of violence against those  
who test the limits of this neatly formed,  
comfortable society. Harjo’s words ba-  
lance on the sharp edge of moments of  
transition. She ties together history with  
the present and gracefully pulls the  
shadows from silent contradictions:  
“Any liquor or firearms?” a border guard  
asks of a carful of Indians in “Crossing  
The Border Into Canada.” Harjo’s poe-  
tic and perspicacious reply: “He should  
have asked that years ago/ and we can’t  
help but laugh.”

The new poems introduced on “Furi-  
ous Light” have a more personal tone to  
them, but this intimate quality does not  
fail to extend to the collective, and espe-  
cially to feminist ideals. As Paula Gunn  
Allen writes in The Sacred Hoop, “Harjo  
believes that the view she describes as  
the inside being the outside has come  
to her from American feminists.” Allen  
notes that “this understanding is inhe-  
rent to certain of the tribes, her [Harjo’s]  
people the Creek among them.” The  
source of Harjo’s work is multifaceted.  
She takes in feminism, personal herit-  
age, and nonoppression of all people in  
one breath and releases a storm of images  
that strike with compassion, insight, and  
unwillingness to accept subservience to  
any dictated expectation. The tape ends  
with a final prayer that seeks to give  
back old fears and old patterns in ex-  
change for a healthier vision. “I Give  
You Back” is a voice we have all dreamed  
against our own weaknesses:

I take myself back, fear

You are not my shadow any longer

I won’t hold you in my hands

You can’t live in my eyes, my ears,  
my voice

my belly, or in my heart my heart

my heart my heart

But come here, fear  
I am alive and you are so afraid  
of dying

The images and symbols used by  

Linda Hogan in Seeing Through  

The Sun are impeccable. Her  
writings are persistent in their careful  
inversion of what is commonly accepted  
as truth. Her poetry successfully and sub-  
tly undermines the foundation of the  
patriarchal system. She reconstructs lan-  
guage and symbols in a powerful, gentle,  
and transformative way.

Whereas the sun usually symbolizes a  
positive male force that illuminates truth  
and justice (as in the Greek sun gods  
Helios and later, Apollo) Hogan’s in-  
terpretation of this light is not so em-  
powering. The title of this collection  

8 @ Belles Lettres  

implies that the sun is obstructive. In  
the opening poem of the same name  
Hogan reveals the sun to be dishonest,  
forceful, and discompassionate: “In that  
country of light/ there is no supper.”  
The country of light lacks compassion  
toward its inhabitants, yet they remain  
“polite because [the sun] has hit the walls  
with such force.” The sun is not a bene-  
ficent power in Hogan’s worldview.  
“Folksong” names the split between  
masculine and feminine that is alluded  
to in preceding poems. The scene opens  
with the men gathered in assembly. By  

Linda Hogan. Photo by Richard Feldman.  

voicing a single “yes” or “no” these men  
have the power to “change the living to  
the dead.” But the narrator of the poem  
finds this formation of words into politics  
and science and the definition of our  
human hearts as equal to “the size of  
fists” limiting, even maddening. She is  
frustrated with this limited language:  
“This poem is written in the language/  
the presidents speak./ That is another  
reason to learn a new tongue.”

“Heartland” continues Hogan’s  
search for a more fully expressive lan-  
guage, and points out that this would  
not only benefit women, but also “the  
brotherly beggars” who are oppressed by  
the patriarchal system. “We are all the  
least of these,” she says, “beggars,  
almsmen,/ listening to the underground  
language/ of the wrist.” The under-  
ground language of the wrist surfaces  
from the heart. It brings one closer to  
hearing “the heart of the soil,” “the  
voice of our gods beneath concrete.” But  
this language is “underground” — sub-  
versive to the system. This language  
originates in the heart, and therefore is  
not accepted by the politicians or the  
ruling class. It is difficult to hold fast to  
the language of truth in the light of  
everyday surface communication.

Although Hogan asserts that there is  
a definite need to separate from the op-  
pressors and the colonizers, the ultimate  
desire in her poetry is reunification  
under different terms:

May all walls be like those of the jungle,  
filled with animals

singing into the ears of night.

Let them be

made of the mysteries further in

in the heart, joined with the lives of all,  
all bridges of flesh,

all singing

all covering the wounded land  
showing again, again

that boundaries are all lies.

Hogan’s poetry leaves the reader with  
a sense that a new language, and a re-  
formed world, are possible if only we can  
strip away the destructive ways of the  
male-dominated system. Her poetry  
suggests that a new form of power (not  
domination) is on the horizon and allows  
a ray of hope that a full and honest lan-  
guage will rise out of the darkness.

Wendy Rose’s The Halfbreed  

Chronicles is her strongest  

work to date. Her intense  
compassion is backed by her commit-  
ment to change. The poems personify  
the earth, give it voice, and let it speak  
for all those who have survived unseen  
by “Pahana”/ “Whitemen,” which, as  
Rose notes, “refers to a way of life, a set  
of institutions, rather than to men of  
European ancestry. It is her belief that  
all of us, including men, are victims of  
the “whiteman.”

The book opens with “Sipapu,” a  
poem depicting something gentle emerg-  
ing out of something that is not named  
but from which it is difficult to emerge.

Hand by hand  
bone by bone  
dancing  
on the ladder  
like mosquitoes  
climbing foot  
by foot  
heels hanging  
impressions  
of spruce  
cut  
into flesh  
thumbs wrapped  
in daylight  
we emerge  
we emerge  

The Halfbreed Chronicles opens into a  
vast terrain that is fertile and promises  
new growth from “those moist songs/  
that follow rain/ around the earth.”  
Rose’s voice “shakes and groans under  
pressure/ of old bones,” and the voice  
of the earth breaks through in anger. In  
“Nuke Devils: The Indian Women Lis-  
ten” Rose approaches the threat of nuc-  
lear power directly, and the plea for the  
termination of the “Nuke Devils” comes  
from the Earth herself. The feminine  
voice, which is sometimes portrayed by  
Rose as the spiritual voice of the earth,  
sometimes as the collective voice of the  
women’s movement, and sometimes as  
the voice of an individual’s perceptions,  
is always assertive and unallayed. The  
Earth in Rose’s work is conscious of the  

THE END OF  
BEAUTY  

JORIE GRAHAM  

injustices that have torn Her asunder.  
She chooses to protect only those who  
have tried to protect Her from destruc-  

tion. The others meet with Her fury in  
the end:

for pulling at the stakes, I am angry  
at the cross and nails, the air they  
harvest  
from my hungry head. And if you  
are reluctant  
I will deny  
that you are my daughter.

The form as well as the spirit of these  
poems succeeds in recovering lost stories  
and traditions. Rose’s use of repetition,  
circular motion, and mythmaking create  
a rhythm that is hauntingly indelible.  
These poems have a heartbeat. Ghosts,  
rebirth, the elements, and the animals  
are the textual patterns woven gracefully  
together as the background voice of  
these poems. This creates a feeling of  
memory throughout the work — it is  
vague enough to sound distant, yet vivid  
enough to carry a strong effect on the  
specifics of each piece.

The last section, “The Halfbreed  
Chronicles,” is perhaps the most power-  
ful. It is the story of misplaced individu-  
als who have stood on both sides of an  
uncrossable line and thus have expanded  
their perceptions. Because of this, they  
have survived, but they have also been  
judged by others for being, in some cases  
too bold for comfort, in some places,  
too unaware.

The writings of Wendy Rose, Linda  
Hogan, Joy Harjo, and Paula Gunn  
Allen are transformative and powerful.  
All four hold on to their own heritage  
as well as extending their voice to others  
who are working for change. Survival  
alone is not enough. They ask, and their  
poetry offers the strength, for survival  
and subsequent transformation of op-  
pression and patriarchal intolerances  
into something more accepting, perhaps  
more feminine. Their poetry hopes for  
a new language with which to communi-  
cate and to cooperate in this world.

© Barbara Loren is a freelance fiction  
writer and essayist living in New Mexico.

—————————————————

THE END OF BEAUTY  

JORIE GRAHAM  

PLEASE WRITE FOR THE COMPLETE ECCO CATALOGUE  

THE END OF BEAUTY  
POEMS BY JORIE GRAHAM  

$16.50 cloth  

The Ecco Press  
26 West 17th Street  
New York/10011  

May/June 1987