To Tell the Truth

Deceits of Time, by Isabel Colegate. New York: Viking, 1988, $17.95, 216 pp.  
The Truth About Lorin Jones, by Alison Lurie. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988, $18.95, 328 pp.

by Barbara Griffith Furst

Both of these novels use the writ-

ing of a biography to tell a story;

in each case the search for “the
truth” about the dead subjects is self-re-
vealing for the biographers. Each book
has all the twists and turns of good de-
tective work, bringing to the surface
subtle and sometimes not-so-subtle
agendas of the subjects, the biographers,
and the informants.

In Isabel Colegate’s Deceits of Time,
Catherine Hillery, widow, mother of
two adult sons, and professional biog-
rapher, has been commissioned by the
family of Neil Campion to write his bio-
graphy. Campion was a traveller, avia-
tor, and Member of Parliament in the
1930s. Catherine assumes that she was
chosen because she was what her dead
husband called “sound.”

As she prepares for her task, she rumi-
nates that “You had to be able to believe
that as far as daily life was concerned
there was a kind of norm which was
pleasant. You didn’t expect to be always,
or even perhaps very often at that norm
yourself, but it was when you began to
believe that the norm was disagreeable
that the trouble started.” For her the
norm has mostly been pleasant, even

though she wonders “to what extent re-
membering wrong meant being alto-
gether wrong, being false in your notion
of yourself, as well as of everything else.”
Clearly the theme is illusion versus real-
ity.

Campion’s widow, Effie, a once very
beautiful and glamorous debutante, is
still impeccably dressed and coiffed—her

aged face a mask of cosmetics. She lives
in Mayfair, drives a fast car, and is
guardian of her adolescent grandson,
Sam. Sam is at the boarding school his
grandfather founded with the help of a
German headmaster before World War
II. Campion’s sister, Eleanor, is very
loyal to her dead brother and a no-non-
sense nursing sister. Doddering brother
Hugh sees the world filled with rather
pleasant chaps. From the available infor-
mation it would appear that Campion’s
life was unremarkable, if not dull, and
Catherine begins to wonder why she has
been asked to write about it.

In the rural town where Campion’s
father was the vicar during World War I,
Catherine learns that the Campions
were looked down on by those in the big
house. Neil’s two older brothers were
killed in the War. Apparently the rest-
less, idealistic Neil yearned for a world
of love and brotherhood. A pioneer avi-
ator in East Africa, he returns to Eng-
land to stand for Parliament and at-
tempts to achieve the ideal through a
new social order rooted in Germanic
myth and culture and “progressive” edu-
cation. An elderly eccentric titled
couple, once members of the 1930s Ger-
man-sympathizing Cliveden set along
with the Campions, fondly reminisce
about their (to them) harmless enthusi-
asms and recall the events surrounding
Neil’s sad and seemingly accidental
death.

Grandson Sam, whom Catherine visits
with Effie, is obviously high on drugs
and alcohol most of the time—as are the
rest of his schoolmates—and indulges in
group sex on the roof of the school, with
the tacit consent of the masters. As she
observes this set of characters, young
and old, Catherine is forced to confront
the flaws in her husband, her marriage,
her sons, and their wives, one of whom
is friends with Alfred Madden, a ruthless
journalist and an angry victim of the
Holocaust who is also interested in
Campion. On reflection Catherine says,
“Most people are wrong about most
things most of the time.”

Beautifully written and low keyed, the
story moves on inexorably. Beliefs and
behavior are held up to the light, and
ideals and illusions crumble. Out of the
wreckage, however, and with the sup-
port of Sam, Catherine finds a new im-
petus to finish her task.

In the same vein but in an entirely
different tone, Polly Alter in Alison
Lurie’s The Truth About Lorin Jones is an
angry contemporary woman living in
New York—thirty-nine years old,
divorced, and the mother of twelve-
year-old Stevie, whom she adores. Polly
works in an art gallery and is writing the
biography of Lorin Jones, a woman
painter who was working in the 1950s
and 60s and who died of pneumonia in

Key West in 1969. As Polly searches for
the truth about Jones, Jones becomes a
martyr and a role model.

While Stevie is on an extended visit
to his father, Polly allows her best friend
Jeanne, a lesbian, to move in tem-
porarily. Polly accepts Jeanne’s sexual
advances and finds comfort and refuge
from the crass world in Jeanne’s arms.
Jeanne the housekeeper, cook, and
general caretaker becomes Jeanne the
coy manipulator who takes over Polly’s
apartment—rearranging Stevie’s room
to accommodate herself and a former
lover—and who nurtures Polly’s growing
distrust of men.

Polly suspects all of her male inform-
ants and any female informants who are
critical of Lorin. These include a gossipy
gay art dealer, Lorin’s first husband, who
gets drunk and tries to seduce Polly;
Lorin’s half brother, stepmother, niece,
and sister-in-law; a female art collector
who owns one of Jones’ major paintings;
and a mysterious younger lover with
whom Lorin eloped to Key West. At the
same time that she is gathering informa-
tion about Jones, Polly is remembering
her very pleasant former husband and
the Sunday afternoon childhood excur-
sions with her divorced, charming, and
irresponsible father—both of whom re-
inforce her negative attitudes about
men.

At the same time, from the conflicting
information both about Lorin and about
the informants, the real Jones remains
elusive—beautiful/grubby, talented/neu-
rotic, difficult/thoughtful, weak/strong,
selfish/generous. Polly is in the end
forced to face facts—to let the chip slide
off her shoulder and to deal with her
subject, warts and all, and, happily, with
herself as an intelligent, vulnerable, and
loving woman.

The Truth About Lorin Jones is the
usual snappy Lurie commentary on
trendy contemporary life, and the char-
acters are virtually all exaggerated and
self-serving. The book will no doubt
annoy some feminists. However, Lurie is
describing a journey many women make
from traditional wives and mothers to
angry, aggressive, and lonely career
women, followed by a mellowing and
appreciation of their own femaleness
and the vulnerability of men.

There is a certain irony in reviewing
these two books together, for we leave
the older conservative Englishwoman
committed to seeing what had begun as
a routine and rather dull biography
through to perhaps a scandalous end.
The younger American woman, on the
other hand, always spoiling for a fight,
pulls the loose ends of her life together
in a conventional happy ending.

— Barbara Griffith Furst
frequently for Belles Lettres.

reviews

Grace Had an English
Heart: The Story of Grace
Darling, Heroine and
Victorian Superstar

by Jessica Mitford

New York: Dutton, 1989, $18.95, 176
pp., illus.

Events behind “Grace’s deed,” like those
in most legends, are meager and often
reveal the unexpected. On September 7,
1838, twenty-two-year-old Grace Dar-
ling helped her father, a lighthouse
keeper, rescue nine people from a steam-
ship that had sunk off England’s north-
ern coast. Jessica Mitford informs us,
however, that the nine people saved
themselves by walking at low tide from
the sinking vessel to an island nearby.
Grace and her father merely rowed out
to the island once the storm had abated,
following a protected route along the
shore. Nevertheless, Grace became the
center of lavish public attention. Mitford
tells us, for instance, about the verses

written to celebrate “Grace’s Deed,” in-
cluding a wretched poem by Words-
worth. As the years passed, potters mass-
produced pictorial representations of the
rescue on jugs, mugs, plates, and trays.
Books and magazines for girls used Grace
to illustrate the rewards of virtue.

Mitford does more than discuss the
growth of a modern-day legend. For ex-
ample, in explaining the press’s role,
Mitford introduces us to the penny-a-
liner, what she labels a “subspecies of the
genus newspaperman,” that devised lurid
openings and embellishments to sell sto-
ries. Mitford also takes a moment to tell
us about the American Idawalley Zorada
Lewis, virtually unknown today, who
conducted at least eighteen rescue mis-
sions during her lifetime.

Grace Had an English Heart is a delight-
fully written, informative study. Readers
can look forward to Mitford’s description
of the Grace Darling Museum in Bam-
burgh as well as her insightful account of
the most recent developments in the
legend.

— Nikki Lee Manos

Spring 1989