Growing Up Female in Brooklyn

Caught, by Jane Schwartz. New York:  
Ballantine Books, 1987, $3.50, 244 pp. (PB)

by Enid Dame

A little girl called Louie is caught stealing pigeons. She is committing this crime to please her teenage brother and his best friend, Michael Corsini. At ten, Louie (Louise) Sands is tough, imaginative, dissatisfied. She dislikes being a girl; she worries about being crazy: "I suppose something was the matter with me, but I didn’t have a name for it." She is often alone; her recently remarried mother works long hours, and her only school friend, a Black girl, has moved down South. She misses her dead father, a heroic fireman; resents her narrow-minded stepfather; and idolizes her brother and his buddy: "What I really wanted was just to be them." In Louie’s working-class, Italian-Irish neighborhood, there seems to be no place for her — no place she wants to be.

Louie’s life is transformed when she meets Casey, a legendary neighborhood pigeon flyer — a red-bearded man of thirty-eight — who will become her protector, teacher, father-figure, and friend. Sensing that he can trust her, he offers her a job as his "chaser" or assistant, a job usually reserved for boys. He teaches her everything he knows about the sport of pigeon flying in which flocks of birds are set free to catch and bring back strays from other flyers’ flocks. He introduces her to his philosophy — once pigeons are lost, their loss must be accepted: "Don’t ever let me hear you crying for something you lost, okay? Whatever you lose here is gone forever ... That’s the only way I play the game." More important, by letting her share his rooftop (the highest in Williamsburg) and huge flock of birds, he provides her with an alternate vision, a life apart from the dangerous, constricting streets.

First published in 1985, Jane Schwartz’s remarkable first novel is a quiet, powerful study of an unusual friendship and an exploration of what it is like to grow up female in an urban blue-collar neighborhood, a world in which most women are wives, mothers, or mistresses. On the roof, Casey and Louie are able to play many roles with each other. Sometimes he is an older brother, playfully catching her in the pigeon’s net or threatening to turn the hose on her. Sometimes he is an adult, answering her questions about grown-up sexual arrangements. Sometimes she is his confidante, listening to his thoughts on pigeon flying or to secrets from his emotional life. "I swear to God, Louie," Casey remarks, "I talk to you more than anybody else. It’s unbelievable." Sometimes she nags him about his laziness or his beer drinking, and he complains that she sounds like his wife.

Casey is an enigmatic figure. In the tight, white, male world of pigeon flying, he is something of a maverick, as signified by his beard (the first Louie has seen) and his apparent ability to open himself to other, dissimilar people: Louie herself, and Hector, a Puerto Rican teenager. Yet he confesses to Louie, "I ain’t hardly got close to nobody my whole life, not really." He neglects his own children and is unfaithful to his wife, careless with his birds, constantly in debt, and involved on the fringes of a criminal scene. His bad judgment inadvertently helps bring about Hector’s death. His commitment to the rooftop world represents both a need to be free of spirit-deadening limitations and a wish to escape responsibility. At the end of the novel, when Louie must unwillingly leave Casey and "the game," she is forced to recognize his failures, even while concluding that he has been a "good teacher. Better than he knew."

In Williamsburg, Brooklyn, in 1958, a

Winter 1989

Pencil and wash by Gwen John.

There is a certain built-in poignancy in the situation and structure of this novel, for the reader knows early on that the unconventional friendship cannot continue on its own terms. Louie’s adolescence will undoubtedly end it, for women and men, in this world, are only allowed to connect to each other sexually. (Casey’s attitudes toward mature women — his wife and his girlfriend, Arlene — are quite traditional.) On the other hand, an older Louie might well dismiss Casey as a sad, irresponsible loser. While the ending seems rather engineered by the author (Louie’s parents buy a house on Long Island), one feels it is good that Louie and Casey part while their friendship is still alive.

The novel’s second theme is more subtly handled. Throughout the book, Louie has fought against the narrow conceptions of womanhood imposed by her family, teachers, and neighborhood. (At one point, she physically fights her brother for the right to go out alone at night — and loses. Even the police take his side.) Pigeon flying has been one way of being a girl without relinquishing her sense of self. In her last meeting with Casey, she exhibits considerable insight and maturity. The reader is led to hope that she will find an equivalent to pigeon flying on Long Island, a way of being her own woman in her new world.

Enid Dame is a poet and writer living in Brooklyn. Her latest book of poems is Lilith and her Demons. She teaches at Rutgers University and Lehman College and is working on a novel.

Unholy Alliances  
Edited by Louise Rafkin

Pittsburgh/San Francisco: Cleis Press, 1988, $9.95, 160 pp.

Do not let this title put you off. It may smack of Stephen King’s horror stories, but that is not what you are going to get when you open this cover. What you will find are oblique slices of lives which make you think more acutely about your own life. The stories are as diverse as the epigraphs that open this anthology: Emily Dickinson’s "I’m Nobody!," haiku by Chiyo, a brief excerpt from Keri Hulme’s The Bone People. The collection is, as the excerpt Rafkin has chosen states, "something perilous and new, something strange and growing and great."

In these stories, alliances are forged willingly, as in Carla Tomaso’s "Tattoo," or forced, as in Winn Gilmore’s "Rev’ren Peach," but most often the alliances are ones we all know well, ones none of us ever asked for, alliances that just happen. They are unholy in the way child abuse, abandonment, AIDS, and injustice are unholy. But unholy is not the only way I would describe them. I was by turns unsettled, exultant, revolted, and delighted when I finished these stories. They made me feel the way my own alliances often make me feel, and not one of the stories left me unmoved.

The stories range from those that emphasize what is literally ‘unholy’ (i.e., destructive) in a particular alliance, to those that focus more on a relationship than its unholiness. On one end of the scale is Winn Gilmore’s "Rev’ren Peach," the most unholy of all the alliances in the book. Like Alice Walker’s Celie in The Color Purple, the narrator of "Rev’ren Peach" was sexually abused as a child, by a man who was neither a real reverend nor a "peach." But unlike Celie in her younger days, this narrator is only toughened and remains uncowed, with a strong voice of her own.

When I drop my baby, they twist their faces into something what’s supposed to be a smile, and they ask, "Wacha gone name him, honey?" All smiling in my face, hoping I ain’t gone accuse them. Hope I’m a forgive them like they Jesus supposed to. But I spit at them and say, "He name Rev’ren Peach." . . . I say, "He name Rev’ren Peach. Like his pappy. Like yo baby pappy! Like my pappy!"

And though everything goes against her, she remains a strong, determined, righteous woman who tells her story in a wonderfully distinctive voice.

Virginia Walcott Beauchamp has done a fine service in bringing us this volume. Her focus is insistently on public as well as personal history; in her discussion of William Preston, for instance, Beauchamp blends professional and private events to offer a sensitive examination of his changing, perhaps newly abusive, relationship with Madge. To similar effect, she highlights the aching disparity and ironic mergings in Madge’s public and private life by juxtaposing her letters (mostly to her daughter, May) with concurrent diary entries.

One of the captivating aspects of this collection is Beauchamp’s decision to focus on Madge’s "private war," in contrast to the public Civil War raging at the time — both outgrowths of patriarchal society. In the alternating diary entries and letters, we glimpse Madge’s personal struggle to maintain social rectitude in the face of her disintegrating relationship with her disturbed husband. Beauchamp is very generous (perhaps overly) to William Preston, and her insight that Mr. Preston’s violence may be the flip side to Mrs. Preston’s writing is provocative: Beauchamp speculates that both resorting to violence and keeping a diary offer the actor some "illusion of control." Her suggestive comments are worth extending and pursuing: "Preston’s violence, Madge’s diary. Were they two sides to the same discomfort in a changing world? Perhaps in the nineteenth century these were the male and the female paradigms."

Madge Preston’s story during these years is not solely one of abuse and a tormented conjugal relationship. It is as well a moving testament to the bond between mother and daughter. During the years of this volume, May leaves home for the first time to attend her mother’s alma mater, St. Joseph’s Academy. Their letters chronicle May’s growth, Madge’s loneliness and pride, and their maturing relationship. The diary entries and letters also credit the network of women friends who offer emotional support to Madge, even without knowing her innermost difficulties.

A Private War will be important to historians and herstorians alike. Beauchamp’s introduction is sensitive and informative, and given the exigencies of managing and forming such materials into a volume, it is perhaps unfair to wish for more. Yet, and perhaps purposely, there is much left to be considered in Madge Preston’s writings. While Beauchamp shows William’s physical abuse of Madge, she does not fully address his pervading psychological abuse. (For instance, he literally courts Madge’s sister’s daughters, keeps them in the Preston residence, favors them openly over her, and invites them to take sides against her.) Further, while Beauchamp discusses the dynamics of Madge’s relationship with May and the Catholic nuns that run May’s school, she does not focus much on Madge’s other very interesting relationships with her nieces or the local women, nor does she examine in any significant detail Madge’s association with Black women in and outside of her household.

A Private War invites deeper analysis in these areas and more. It is our good fortune today to be able to study such private writings for their poignancy as well as their public relevance.

—Dana Nelson Salvino

"Rev’ren Peach" is the most enraging story, in addition to being well written, but there are a number of other gems too. Each story in this collection has a gift of its own to offer, whether it is an insight, the beautiful language, the warmth of a relationship, or characters who find strength and courage in each other or themselves. For instance, Joan Tollifson describes the handicapped writer, Stan, in her story "Watering the Plants" this way: "I move like abstract art," he thought to himself .... "Losing my balance and regaining it again, I give myself to the void," he wrote, his long untameable fingers flying over the keys like drunken hummingbirds. Stan has a joy in himself that, coupled with Tollifson’s sense of language, puts this story at the opposite end of the emotional spectrum from "Rev’ren Peach."

This collection itself is an unholy alliance of characters and situations, a landscape peopled by vengeful mothers, abandoned children, handicapped women and men, immigrants, strippers, lesbians, peace activists, the drifting undecided, maddening bureaucrats and their victims. They are at once ordinary and extraordinary as individuals. They are Emily Dickinson’s Nobodies. But, as in the epigraph from The Bone People, "Together, all together, they are the instruments of change."

—Ann Kottner

Belles Lettres @ 19