amusing illustrations were prepared — but not ultimately  
used — for a big fundraiser. For example, in "Herman  
Melville: Stuck," the writer, in a room filled with whale  
art, is depicted scratching through possible openings for  
Moby Dick: "Call me Harry." "Call me Lucas." "Call me  
Charlie." The responses by Review editors to the illustra-  
tions are equally amusing. They rejected the Moby Dick  
illustration, concluding it would be "too confusing to revel-  
ers and party crashers unaware of the first line."  

Novelist Elaine Dundy, quoted in the anthology, recalls  
parties at the Paris Review as a "sometimes near-fatal mix-  
ture of novelists, critics, editors and publishers stewing  
together in the pressure-cooker." This anthology gives the  
reader a sense of that brilliant mixture responsible for sus-  
taining such a formidable literary magazine.  

Sd  

Interested in meeting a few racy lesbians? Plan a visit to  
turn-of-the-century Germany.  

Literary historian Lillian Faderman and translator Brigitte  
Eriksson describe what you would find:  

In Berlin there were  
about sixty spots where  
lesbians could go to  
talk, dance, play, and  
meet other women ....  
There was even an  
exclusively lesbian  
newspaper, The Girl-  
friend: Weekly for the  
Ideal Friendship, spon-  
sored by the Federation  
for Human Rights (a  
homosexual organiza-  
tion which, in the  
1920s, boasted a mem-  
bership of 48,000)  
where lesbian nightspots  
were openly advertised  
and where individual  
women could place their own ads about their desire to meet  
other lesbians. Such freedom and openness failed to take  
root anywhere else in the world again for almost half a  
century.  

Roz Chast storyboard  

It is into this world that Faderman and Eriksson plunge in  
Lesbians in Germany: 1890s to 1920s (Naiad Press, 1990,  
$8.95 PB, 99 pp.). Through a selection of essays, poetry,  
and novels by ten very intense women, the editors reveal a  
climate of passionate curiosity and understanding of same-  
sex love. The collection is at times seductive and outra-  
geous, reflective and lusty. But always, the writing is pro-  
vocative, illustrating a deep commitment by women to  
trying to understand same-sex love and its ramifications.  

The works by Faderman and Eriksson are notable more  
for historical than literary value and reflect both intellectual  
and erotic exploration of love between women.  

By the turn of the century, Germany had become the  
intellectual hub for sexologists developing the in-vogue  
theory of the Third Sex. The theory premised congenital  
homosexuals’ “abnormality" was not chosen and therefore  
not to be punished. The lesbian had a man’s mind trapped  
inside a woman’s body, similar to Radclyffe Hall’s Stephen  
Gordon in The Well of Loneliness (1928). Or the lesbian  
was the product of twisted parenting, à la Sigmund Freud.  
But amid this hubbub, a lesbian network bustled, accompa-  

nied by a raft of ideas about patriarchy and the value of  
same-sex love.  

Anna Rueling, for example, argues that lesbians’ exis-  
tence could be a boon to heterosexuals. Speaking in 1904 of  
the need for the women’s movement to embrace the homo-  
sexual-rights movement, she asked listeners "to remember  
that if homosexuals would remain single and without dam-  
age to their social status, there would be more husbands  
available for those women whose natural inclinations are  
satisfied by the role of wife, housekeeper, and mother."  
With such titles as "Are These Women?" and “A Girl From  
a Nice Family," the work in the collection reflects a dramat-  
ically different mindset from current lesbian writing.  

The confessional magazine flavor abounds in the erotic  
writing. Maria Janitschek, for example, depicting lesbianism  
as the product of an unhealthy upbringing in "The New  
Eve," ends her story with a young girl begging her mother,  
"It is you who has driven me into the arms of my friend.  
Leave her to me now." In what the editors describe as one  
of the earliest lesbian lovemaking scenes written by a wom-  
an, Anna E. Weirauch, in her three-volume novel The  
Scorpion (1919-1921), writes, "Their bodies reared up  
against each other like wild animals shaking the bars of their  
cages. Nails dug into smooth skin, and teeth bit into taut  
muscles." Poet Marie-Madeleine, influenced by Baudelaire,  
creates haunting images of lesbianism in her "Crucifixa": "I  
saw you tortured on a stake,/high on a dark cross I saw you  
tied./The marks of my sinful kisses/glowed on your white  
flesh like purple wounds."  

Originally published in 1980, Lesbians in Germany is  
being reissued amid a boom in gay studies and publication,  
and Faderman has been one of its best known and respected  
scholars. She is the author of the ground-breaking Surpassing  
the Love of Men: Romantic Friendship and Love Between  
Women From the Renaissance to the Present and Scotch  
Verdict, a fascinating reconstruction of the libel trial of two  
teachers accused of lesbianism. (The story was made fa-  
mous by Lillian Hellman’s squeamish play, The Children’s  
Hour.) Naiad founder Barbara Grier says she hopes the  
book will remind readers that "America didn’t invent the  
wheel." Lesbians in Germany succeeds not only in that, but  
also in highlighting the fascination and strength in each  
spoke making up the history of human sexuality.  

Sd  
Nobody raises a curtain like Shirley Jackson. Take, for  
example, the opening of The Haunting of Hill House, proba-  
bly her most famous novel:  

No live organism can continue for long to exist sanely under  
conditions of absolute reality. Even larks and katydids are  
supposed, by some, to dream. Hill House, not sane, stood  
by itself against its hills, holding darkness within, it had  
stood so for eighty years and might stand eighty more.  
Within, walls continued upright, bricks met neatly, floors  
were firm, and doors were sensibly shut; silence lay steadily  
against the wood and stone of Hill House, and whatever  
walked there, walked alone.  

Hers was the genius of compression. Here the eeriness is  
achieved by careful, sparse word selection and economic  
sentence construction.  

Jackson also had the knack of telling much through the  
eyes of someone, often a woman, who by appearances  
might seem to be of little importance. We Have Always  
Lived in the Castle, for instance, opens with deceptive  
simplicity, temporarily lulling the reader to heighten the