IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:
Anti-Woman, Anti-Rushdie,

Anti-Individual?

Meatless Days, by Sara Suleri. The University of Chicago Press, 1989, $18.95, 186 pp.  
The Blindfold Horse: Memories of a Persian Childhood, by Shusha Guppy. Boston:  
Beacon Press, 1988, $17.95, 246 pp.  

Sultana’s Dream and Selections from The Secluded Ones, by Rokeya Sakhawat  
Hossain. Translated by Roushan Jahan. The Feminist Press at CUNY, 1988, $6.95,  
88 pp. (PB)  

by Leslie A. Moushey  

One group of women we know  
least about outside Western  
culture is Muslims. Their voice  
is rarely public; they are often among the  
world’s poorest, consequently suffering a  
high rate of illiteracy. Many live within  
purdah — a system of rules governing  
when and how a woman must be hidden  
or covered, what can be known about  
her and by whom — which can certainly  
hamper publishing opportunities. Mus-  
lim women not stifled by these tethers  
are all too often removed from the  
everyday realities of their sisters and  
unable to communicate effectively or  
convincingly about them.  

It is easy to think of Islam as a rigid,  
monolithic system that is anti-woman,  
anti-Rushdie, anti-individual. But as  
with most things in life, Islam is more  
complex than that. The Muslim experi-  
ence varies from community to commu-  
nity, family to family, and woman to  
woman. Three recently released books  
by women raised in the Muslim tradition  
shed light on the wide range of lifestyles  
experienced by the women of Islam.  

Meatless Days is a swirling autobiog-  
raphy interweaving metaphor, contra-  
diction, and earthy emotions with his-  
tory, language, and sexual politics. The  
author, Sara Suleri, mourns. She  
grieves for her Welsh mother, who has  
somehow given sustenance to her chil-  
dren while denying them emotional  
energy with the simple statement  
“Child, I will not grip.” Suleri mourns  
the separation from her Pakistani father,  
a well-known journalist, that resulted  
from her moving to the United States  
and slipping out from under the yoke of  
his life. Meatless Days is an elegy as well  
to her irascible grandmother Dadi, who  
brought high drama to commonplace  
events, and to her lovely sister Ifat,  
whose violent emotional commitments  
impelled her actions.  

“If anyone hurts you, Sara,” Ifat said to  
me on the day I turned nineteen, “make  
sure you tell me who it is, so that I can  
kill them, slowly. . . I’ll do a Dadi, chop  
up their livers into little bits and feed  
them to the crows.”  

Although Suleri focuses primarily on  
reliving poignant moments and recon-  
ciling with many people now lost to her,  
this intellectually sensual work is out-  
standing as it resonates with the strength  
and depth of Muslim women. The  
reader is welcomed to this world of  
strong personalities and focused lives —  
and will find it a world where women are  
the heart, even though men control the  
pulse. The women in Suleri’s family  
never succumb to the male domination  
supported by their society; they main-  
tain a grounded woman’s perspective of  
emotional realities that circumvents the  
truths recognized by men.  

This grounding underlies Suleri’s  
thoughts and gives the reader a valuable  
context for the political realities of  
Pakistan. Her intense emotions com-  
bine with empathic knowledge to offer  
unparalleled descriptions, such as this  
one of Pakistan after Britain’s break in  
1947:  

Today I often regret that [father] was not  
in Pakistan at the time of the partition, to  
witness those bewildered streams of people  
pouring over one brand-new border into  
another, hurting as they ran. It was ex-  
travagant, history’s wrenching price.  

L Summer 1989  

Suleri’s writing is somehow more awk-  
ward when her focus is on the men in her  
life, as it is when she describes her home  
in the United States. America, like  
those men, does not center her, nor does  
it provide a refuge from the chthonic  
forces rooting her to Pakistan. “Leaving  
Pakistan was tantamount to giving up  
the company of women.”  

In contrast to the vitality of Meatless  
Days, The Blindfold Horse opens only the  
world of Shusha Guppy to us. Guppy,  
brought up in Iran, is the daughter of  
one of Iran’s preeminent philosophers, a  
social advantage that gave her unique  
perspectives and protected her from  
many of Iran’s harsher realities both be-  
fore and after the oil boom and the de-  
mise of the Shah.  

The Blindfold Horse is Guppy’s  
well-written memoir of Iran before she  
left to attend school in Europe. It con-  
tains a variety of concise, interesting  
stories (and a few haunting friezes); yet  
insights about herself, her culture, and  
Muslim women are few. Guppy de-  
scribes people and settings in detail, but  
these stories are rarely intimate or emo-  
tive; they are more like the anecdotes  
one would expect to hear at a cosmopol-  
itan cocktail party: entertaining — even  
impressive — but forgettable.  

The book begins with great promise,  
left unfulfilled. A distinctly Persian way  
of connecting one story to the next slips  
to the side as the author seems to lose  
energy for the form. The promise of an-  
cient wisdom to come hinted at by the  
title story is never followed through. In  
the end, I felt anemic from watching  
Guppy skim the surface of her life and  
her culture with a mere nod toward the  
experience of most Persians — that of  
“humble folk” and “ordinary people.”  

Sultana’s Dream by Rokeya Sakhawat  
Hossain is a wonderful, imaginative  
short story, accompanied by vignettes  
illustrating purdah’s effects on women’s  
lives. First published in Calcutta in  
1905, it was written by a Bengali woman  
who personally suffered purdah’s op-  
pressive regulation of her life. Hossain  
evokes a feminist utopia that transports  
the reader to Ladyland, where women  
are happily free, liberated from male  
domination.  

Hossain’s story draws on the tradi-  
tions of Muslim society to reinterpret  
them from a feminist perspective.  
Purdah is reversed and men are subject  
to the seclusion from society that they  
inflict on women.  

“Now, dear Sultana, will you sit here or  
come to my parlor?” she asked me.  

“Your kitchen is not inferior to a queen’s  
boudoir!” I replied with a pleasant smile,  
“but we must leave it for now; for the  
gentlemen may be cursing me for keeping  
them away from their duties in the  
kitchen for so long.” We both laughed  
heartily.  

In Ladyland women handily replace  
men in all aspects of commerce, and do  
so with such efficiency that their work is  
finished within a few hours and they are  
free to devote their time to their inter-  
ests. Under enlightened rule, beauty is  
the order of the day, and the town is  
transformed into a delightful garden.  
Hossain’s prediction of the technologi-  
cal progress liberated women would pro-  
mote is impressive — especially given  
the year of this tale’s original publication —  
for in Ladyland there is solar power to  
heat and cook, running water for all,  
and climate control.  

The reader travels through this utopia  
with Sultana, who is accustomed to the  
constrictions of purdah, and shares her  
amazement at what she sees. Here  
Hossain masterfully wields a double-  
edged sword, as the suffering and isola-  
tion of purdah lurks in the background,  
like Caliban’s face in a mirror. Every fic-  
tional beauty is a mask for the ugliness of  
reality, and the splendor of Hossain’s  
imagination is clouded with her regret.  

Selections from The Secluded Ones is a  
series of graphic, terrible, often sardonic  
reports of misfortunes women have suf-  
fered under purdah: A woman chooses  
to burn to death when her house catches  
on fire rather than to save herself by  
fleeing and violating purdah by allowing  
strangers to see her; another woman is  
struck by a train because she cannot al-  
low herself to be touched by the men  
who could pull her out of its path. These  
are rounded out with essays on Hossain  
and purdah by contributing writers.  

The only problem with Sultana’s  
Dream and Selections from The Secluded  
Ones is that the reader does not get  
enough of the writing of this remarkable  
author.  

® Leslie A. Moushey has a special in-  
terest in cross-cultural conflict resolution.  
She is developing a new section for Belles  
Lettres called “Southern Hemisphere,” to  
present works by women from developing  
countries.  

realities of Transcendental Internation-  
alism — a Fourth World held together  
by cheap sex, drugs, smuggling, and  
violence. The book is not without hu-  
mor, as in the knowing sketches of In-  
dian politicians and the wry descriptions  
of the lecherous Babaji, the decrepit  
leader of a defunct world movement.  
Nor are all the characters confused. The  
priest, Tom, penetrates TI’s sham, and  
ebullient Sonya, the twins’ tarot-toting,  
Russian stepgrandmother, grounds her  
life in love. Nonetheless, the novel’s  
import is grim. It powerfully dramatizes  
American innocents abroad as Harriet  
and Michael confront the ruin they have  
brought on themselves in their wedding  
with evil. It also exposes a contemporary  
wound — the dissolution of family and  
values. Aliens adrift, the novel’s main  
characters are the wreckage of broken  
marriages and sordid liaisons, of tradi-  
tions muddled and gone awry. They are  
eerie warnings of how destructive lone-  
liness and desperation can be. Only at  
the end, when she sits in the Rawul’s  
crumbling palace in the Thar desert and  
is coaxed by the murderous Crishi into  
forging a suicide note, does Harriet be-  
gin to claw her way back to her own  
identity.  

Jhabvala, who won the Booker Prize  
in 1975 for Heat and Dust and an Acade-  
my Award in 1987 for the screenplay of  
A Room with a View, has her own history  
of wanderings. A Polish Jew born in  
Germany, she studied in England, mar-  
ried an Indian, and now shifts between  
New York and Delhi. In the introduc-  
tion to her short story collection, Out of  
India, she speaks movingly of her own  
tangled ties to profoundly different cul-  
tures. Ironically, when she writes about  
displacement, she has come home.  

—Kathleen Collins Beyer  

Belles Lettres @ 3