Mountain Climbing

Women, Culture and Politics, by Angela Y. Davis. New York: Random House, 1989,

$17.95, 238 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

A truism in community organiz-

ing is that both personal and

political empowerment are es-
sential for social change. For long-time
activist Angela Davis, empowerment
has particular resonance, harkening
back to the turn of the century, when
the National Association of Colored
Women’s Clubs created the motto “lifting
as we climb” to indicate the respon-
sibility of group members toward others.

Now, as then, there are many to lift.
As our sisterhood joins hands with peo-
ple around the globe who are challeng-
ing racism, sexism, homophobia, and
imperialism, we are linked one to
another, learning as well as teaching,
lifting as well as being lifted. And that,
says Davis, is the only way for barriers to
be broken and communication en-
hanced.

Davis is partisan. An unabashed
communist, she sides with the dis-
enfranchised, the “wretched refuse”
struggling to survive in a hostile world.
Whether on behalf of the functionally
illiterate, the homeless, or the jobless,
Davis’s commitment is passionate and
vigorous; her anger at misguided politi-
cal priorities is palpable as she rails at a
Pentagon budget that she says wastes
$41 million an hour, or $700,000 a
minute.

In the eighteen essays that make up
Women, Culture and Politics, Davis ar-
gues for a new social order—a socialist
one. But she also addresses the difficult
issues of racism and classism that have
kept North American social movements
from being as inclusive as they could be.
She hammers away at the elitism that
has strained relationships with women

in and from the Third World and raises

important questions about the uninten-
tional exclusion of women in low-
income communities from much of our
local work. Her analysis is concrete and
pointed.

One particularly instructive chapter
describes a trip to Egypt that she made
prior to the United Nations Decade for
Women Conference in Nairobi. The
focus of feminists from the United States
on the practice of clitoridectomy as evi-
dence of abysmal conditions of Arab

Angela Y. Davis. Photo by Gregory Kent

women has, Davis says, inadvertently
caused rifts between the two groups and
contributed to racist stereotyping.
“Even if it were possible to envision the
success of an isolated campaign targeting
female bodily mutilation, the fact that
Egyptian women represent barely 10
percent of the labor force would remain
unchanged. That 71 percent of the fe-
male population suffers from illiteracy
would be unaltered. The personal status
of women with respect to polygamy,
divorce and guardianship would remain
one of socially enforced powerlessness.”
Which is not to say that we need be si-
lent on genital mutilation. Instead,

Davis and the Egyptian women she met
argue for evaluation of the whole of
women’s oppression before jumping to
conclusions about something that seems
odious to those schooled in Western
mores.

As right as she is, however, some-
thing is missing from Women, Culture
and Politics. And it is troubling. Al-
though most of Davis’s arguments are
supported with irrefutable information
and figures, her conclusions are often
glib and somewhat weak. While racism
and classism are thoroughly examined,
neither socialism nor communism comes
in for the same kind of scrutiny. As a
result, many of the essays seem to con-
clude with a facile, formulaic, “socialism
is the answer” simplicity.

Now changes in the Soviet Union are
rocking the world progressive move-
ment, and discussion is under way
among progressives of all stripes on
everything from the Soviet economy to
Third World socialism, domestic re-
lationships, abortion, and birth control
in the republics of the USSR. The fact
that none of these issues is even men-
tioned is, at the very least, disappoint-
ing. Davis indicts capitalism successful-
ly, using the power of numbers to con-
vince us of the casualties resulting from
the actions of a callous, reactionary gov-
ernment. Yet the book does not con-
vince us that socialism is, in fact, better
suited to meeting human needs.

I believe, as she does, that it is imper-
ative that the United States thoroughly
rearrange the economy and eliminate
the forces of market manipulation that
now reign. But it is not because of Davis
that I believe this. And that is too bad;
for in the end, convincing us is the re-
sponsibility of a political theorist and
writer, part of the process of lifting as she
climbs.

® Eleanor J. Bader is the news editor of
New Directions for Women. She writes for
the Guardian Newsweekly and other pro-
gressive publications.

—Nora Hoult, continued

that it was meant for her. When she tries
to open the bag, she is shocked to find it
locked.

It was then with her at that moment as if
she had run her head against a brick wall
of astonishing solidity. It was as if she had
been knocked out, finished and done
with, very neatly and very efficiently, in
the most imperceptible fraction of time.
There was nothing more to be done.
Nothing remained to her. No way of es-
cape. Nothing at all.

As she prepares a face to meet her
cousin’s family at the dinner table, Miss
Jocelyn asks God for the courage to carry
on with the knowledge that “henceforth
her own life was over.”

Throughout her career, Hoult de-
picted women struggling to maintain a
sense of self when outside forces robbed
them of dignity, control, and empower-
ment. In There Were No Windows, she
writes about Claire Temple as

a woman who had once been beautiful
and witty, a talented novelist whose hus-
band and lover were long dead. . . . Her
mind is a wild scramble of the past and
the present so that the German bombers
overhead become the futile Zeppelins of
the First World War and her stream of
conversation has an unendurably timeless
quality in which the dead take the place
of the living and a vision of yesterday
blurs the reality of today.

A reviewer noted that Hoult’s novels
“contain some of the most realistic and
at the same time poetic writing” to come
out of Ireland, observing that those cou-
rageous enough to read There Were No
Windows will discover “one of today’s
most brilliant novels.”

Hoult was also praised for her novels
dealing with family life. Time, Gentle-
men, Time! is an exquisitely crafted work

20 Belles Lettres

that illustrates the disintegration of a
family as the father becomes more and
more devoted to drink. William David
Carmichael thinks of the wife he once
loved as “proud as Lucifer and cold as a
sepulchre”; Edna Carmichael is driven
to think that “it would be a real pleasure
if she could pour scalding water over her
husband.” William, a solicitor who has
neglected his business, is a misogynist
whose comments about women range
from his observation that one is “a nice
comfortable piece of goods to handle” to
his philosophy that a man should “give a
woman who doesn’t behave a good
whipping.”

Other works about the family include
Hoult’s two novels set in Ireland, Holy
Ireland (first published in 1936 and re-
cently reissued by Ireland’s feminist
press, Arlen House), and Coming from
the Fair (1938). Holy Ireland is about a
daughter who defies her domineering
father by marrying a Protestant turned
Theosophist. Benedict Kiely calls the
book “one of the strongest statements
yet made anywhere about the lot and
plight of women doomed to child-
bearing and the kitchen.” Coming from
the Fair continues the story from 1903 to
1933. The two volumes make clear why
Hoult was praised as “one of the most
interesting of the contemporary novel-
ists to come out of Ireland, a school of
chroniclers of universal life in terms of
Dublin life, who carry on from the early
work of Joyce.” The Joycean parallels
were further developed by reviewers who
commented on Hoult’s ability to capture
Dublin life in language:

It is the portrait of a soul, the soul of
Dublin in the first quarter of the present
century. . . . Here is the Dublin of the
pubs and streets, cattle-buying and drink,
Catholic Dublin, lower middle-class Dub-

lin, Dublin of endless bawdy anecdotes,
unconscious poetry and easy quotation
from poets, Dublin of political prejudice
and religious blasphemy.

Kiely sees Holy Ireland as “a picture of
the Dublin topographical and intellec-
tual [life that] can stand beside and act as
a commentary on Ulysses and the
Portrait.”

Although Hoult, like many of her
contemporaries, disavowed feminism,
her works, even those written in the
twenties, thirties, and forties, most
often address issues that concern modern
feminists: love, independence, aging,
economics, prostitution, domestic vio-
lence, the family. A common note
sounded in all of her works is empower-
ment for society’s most vulnerable.
According to her lifelong friend Mona
Tenanty, Hoult “championed a
woman’s right for self-esteem especially
in talent.” Throughout her long career,
Hoult explored — with wry humor, psy-
chological insight, and vibrant language
— the lives of a variety of women, the
victims and the survivors, the self-
deluded and the self-reliant.

Despite Hoult’s considerable contri-
bution to modern British literature, only
one novel (Holy Ireland) is currently in
print, and no critical work has appeared
with the exception of a 1970 dissertation
by Jessamine Daggett. In Four Women
Grow Up, Joan McComb’s “love of the
printed word” is described as “a love
generous enough to include even works
destined to remain unprinted and un-
heard.” Norah Hoult’s works are, I
hope, destined to be reclaimed.

@ Susan Swartzlander last wrote on
Nora Joyce for Belles Lettres. She would
like to thank Mona Tenanty for providing
information and encouragement.

Prime Number
17 Stories from Illinois
Short Fiction
Edited by Ann Lowry Weir
With an introduction by
George Core

A compendium of the series, and an
appetizer for those who wish to sample
its more than 50 volumes. “The editors of
this series can feel proud of their part in
the preservation of the strength of the
genre.” — Alan Cheuse, Los Angeles
Times Book Review. Cloth, $19.95; paper,
$8.95.

Water into Wine
Stories by Helen Norris

“Wonderfully written. . . . Norris’s
enchanting narrative voice transmutes
ordinary, undramatic events and lives
into the magical, rich and strange.”
— Publishers Weekly. “Helen Norris is a
marvel. Her stories are both lucid and
surprising, and she seems to have come
into possession of a magical key, with
which she quietly, expertly unlocks the
secrets of the most private heart.”
— Beverly Lowry, author of The Perfect
Sonya. Cloth, $11.95.

Playing with
Shadows
Stories by Gloria Whelan

“Always capable, varyingly light of step,
and with a small number of achievements
that are exquisite.” — Kirkus Reviews.
“These 14 rounded stories expose the
heart pumping away beneath even the
smoothest surfaces. ... Humor, wit and
polish distinguish this satisfying
collection.” — Publishers Weekly.
Cloth, $11.95.

NEW PAPERBACKS

The Christmas Wife
Stories by Helen Norris

An HBO film starring Jason Robards and
Julie Harris is based upon the title story.
“Norris’s people feel. Her scenes are
beautifully economical and suspenseful;
comments, glances, gestures — every-
thing triggers associations which grow,
piece by piece, into studies of behavior.”
— Laurie Stone, Village Voice Literary
Supplement. $7.95.

Pilgrimage
Volume 1: Pointed
Roofs/Backwater/

Honeycomb

Dorothy Richardson

With an introduction by

Gillian E. Hanscombe
With Pointed Roofs, the first volume of
the Pilgrimage sequence, Dorothy
Richardson became the first exponent of
the stream-of-consciousness technique
in English, predating both James Joyce
and Virginia Woolf. “A miracle of
performance.” — Rebecca West. $9.95.

Invisible Poets
Afro-Americans of the
Nineteenth Century
Second Edition
Joan R. Sherman

“Sherman’s work of literary resurrection
is a signal achievement, combining deft
historical detective work with a subtle
critical sensibility.” — Henry Louis
Gates, Jr. Illus. $9.95.

A Life Distilled
Gwendolyn Brooks,
Her Poetry and Fiction
Edited by Maria K. Mootry and
Gary Smith
“This intellectually exciting collection
presents a variety of views that consti-
tute a solid critical assessment and serve

as a source for future study.” — Choice.
$10.95.

Order toll free 800/666-2211, or from

University of Illinois Press
c/o CUP Services • P. O. Box 6525
at Ithaca, NY 14851

Summer 1989