Firsts in Fiction

Taking Leave, by Janet Shaw. New York: Viking, 1987, 294 pp.  
Concertina, by M. J. Fitzgerald. New York: Random House, 1987, 132 pp.  
Fading, My Parmacheene Belle, by Joanna Scott. New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1987, $17.95, 262 pp.  

Mama, by Terry McMillan. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987, $16.95, 260 pp.  
Due East, by Valerie Sayers. New York: Doubleday/Dolphin, 1987, $15.95, 257 pp.  
Ellen Foster, by Kaye Gibbons. Algonquin Books (P.O. Box 2225, Chapel Hill, NC 27515), 1987, $11.95, 146 pp.  

Sense and Sensuality, by Rosalind Brackenbury. New York: Taplinger, 1987, $14.95, 255 pp.  

“Don’t ask for the true story

.... The true story lies  
among the other stories,  
a mess of colours, like jumbled clothing”  
warns Margaret Atwood in her poem  
“True Stories.” Readers of first novels  
by Janet Shaw and M. J. Fitzgerald would  
do well to heed Atwood’s warning as  
they embark upon two distinctly differ-  
ent but engaging efforts to deal with the  
same subjects: power and control,  
chance versus choice, anorexia, love,  
fear, waiting, self-denial, and self-defin-  
ition.  

At a climactic moment of Shaw’s Tak-  
ing Leave, Will Brenner wonders, “God  
where was the truth? How could you  
ever, ever know?” Will’s words articulate  
the central question in a novel where  
the form and content cojoin. Shaw tells  
the story through the alternating view-  
points of Will, Laura, Jo, and Trawick.  
As each chapter offers a personal ac-  
count of the same events, Shaw reveals  
her characters’ diverse views of their  
painful pasts, their present relationships  
with each other, their failed fantasies,  
and their small and suffocating middle-  
class life.  

When Will, a surgeon, his wife Laura,  
and her 18-year-old sister Jo return from  
a European vacation to their Chicago  
home, a stranger they met in Austria  
enters their lives like a chemical  
catalyst, generating chaos in their overly  
ordered family world. Thomas Trawick,  
a cynical freelance writer who is obsessed  
by Jo’s youth, beauty, and innocence, is  
determined to engage her in a relation-  
ship as a last-ditch effort to save himself.  
Laura, an anorexic full of resentment  
about her mother’s death and her father’s  
suicide, feels imprisoned by her past and  
powerless in her present marriage. Iden-  
tifying with Trawick’s feelings of empti-  
ness, alienation, and despair, she im-  
agines herself, rather than her sister, as  
his soulmate and savior. Acting on her  
belief, she pursues him and snaps the  
taut thread holding her fragile self in-  
tact. Waiting first for her father to save  
her, then for her hero/husband/doctor  
to heal her, and finally for Trawick to  
love her, Laura is consistently disap-  
pointed. Devoid of all feelings, she self-  
destructs, starving her body as the only  
means of controlling her pain.  

Will, a self-termed good man who is  
hell bent on healing others, fails to under-  
stand or heal either his wife or himself.  
Driven by deeply buried rage and jeal-  
ousy over Jo (for whom he hides an erotic  
desire), he finds himself anxious and  
out-of-control. Needing always to be  
“where life was predictable and...  
the way he liked it,” Will superimposes  
his map of reality on both Laura and Jo  
under the guise of protecting them.  
Shortly before her death, Laura describes  
Will’s way of keeping order: “His feelings  
were on a map and he could plant paper  
flags on important positions: here he was  
sorry; here was sad; here was worried;  
here confused.” Too inexperienced to see  
Will’s shortcomings, Jo repeats her sis-  
ter’s pattern, a traditional pattern for  
women of waiting and dependence.  
“You make me exist, William,” she  
muses, believing that she needs Will’s  
love to define herself.  

To Shaw’s credit, her novel ends with  
no easy answers. In clear and driving  
prose she captures well the painful pat-  
terns of family life built upon private  
hurt and public pretense; the tensions  
and distances structured into traditional  
marriages where “there was so much it  
was important not to ask”; and the com-  
pulsions humans manifest when they are  
confronted by choice but are trapped by  
circumstances beyond their control.  
Shaw shows how the “true story” lies  
“among the other stories,” but finally  
she undercuts the power of her prose by  
not empowering her characters. All of  
Shaw’s characters seem strangely static  
and dated; neither exciting nor endear-  
ing, they live or end their lives alone in  
quiet desperation. Shaw understands  
that their plight is the same old story;  
that they are “locked into the social fic-  
tions of the Western world.” Sadly, how-  
ever, she offers no hope or alternative  
vision.  

In Concertina, M. J. Fitzgerald tells  
the story differently, challenging cul-  
tural concepts in a narrative of connec-  
tion, as the protagonist, moving back-  
ward and forward in time, searches for  
the “true story” of her splintered self.  
Coriola also waits: “for William her  
lover, the death of her mother, the birth  
of her daughter.” Her waiting, however,  
is not a dependence or denial, but an  
ability to move with the natural tides  
and appreciate their rhythms. At 40,  
Coriola “remembers and records,” trying  
to determine the meaning of the ele-  
ments of her own character, her past,  
and her future. As she slaps “labels onto  
experience that eludes definition,” she  
embodies the female writer struggling to  
name herself and the world in a new  
way.  

A curious and irrepressible child  
whose favorite word is why, Coriola  
swiftly learns “not to do things” deemed  
inappropriate, especially for girls. Ob-  
serving at an early age that cultural im-  
peratives — must, should, and ought —  
are “the mortar” that people use “to con-  
struct a conventional world,” she stifles  
her spontaneity and represses her pleas-  
ure. At 10 she stops disrobing on hot  
summer days, touching herself “there,”  
smiling at strangers, and saying “I love  
to touch you” to her best friend Melissa.  
Tired of hearing “Don’t do that,” in de-  
spair at discovering “nothing is as it  
seems,” and despondent over being  
abandoned by the riding instructress  
whom she “loved with a love that was to  
have no parallel in intensity,” at 15  
Coriola stops telling her mother about  
her feelings, stops telling the truth to  
the riding instructress or anyone else,  
and stops eating. Fighting to die from  
her teens through her mid-twenties,  
Coriola also stops wanting “to know  
more,” because she does not want to  
align herself with her mother or grand-  
mother; she does not want “to know  
herself as another example of a kind,”  
that is, as a woman.  

Pregnant at 41, Coriola regains her  
spirit of wonder and love. Pulling to-  
gether the pieces of her past, she sees  
her anorexia and the sexual lust she  
lived out in her 30s as “two sides of the  
same coin,” as an intense hatred for her  
body. She now knows, having learned  
from William and her friends, the  
“necessity to be body” and “the habit of  
happiness.” Thus empowered, she re-  
connects parts of herself into a whole  
and reconstructs the puzzle of a family of  
women, identifying generational inter-  
connections — the links among grand-  
mother, mother, and daughter that  
helped her to shape her present self. She  
sees, for example, that she “did not  
allow her mother to remember any day  
before her birth, because she would  
have to forgive if she had known that  
her mother suffered through her child-  
hood as she herself did.” The truth, she  
understands, lies somewhere “in the  
act, in the art of looking,” and on the  
morning of her death at 75, “in the sight  
of the completion of all stories,” Coriola  
experiences an epiphanic moment of il-  
lumination and wholeness.  

Like the concertina she chooses as her  
operative metaphor, Fitzgerald’s ideas  
fold in upon themselves and expand to  
full volume. She plays with words and  
invents new meanings: “a spring touch,  
a weeping willow touch, a beech touch.”  
She plays with linear time arching past  
into present and present into future. She  
weaves women’s fantasy, memory, emo-  
tion, passion, thought, and action into  
a rich tapestry of self where body and  
soul unite, where love and death merge,  
and where interior life comes to include  
and transcend the external, historical  
world. In beautiful and swiftly moving  
prose, Fitzgerald implies that despite a  
legacy of division and denial, women  
can embrace their sexuality and experi-  
ence a sense of wholeness and joy.  
Coriola’s quest for self-definition places  
Fitzgerald in the tradition of female writ-  
ers whose protagonists embody women’s  
struggle to invent and articulate their  
own true stories.  

— Elaine R. Ognibene  

Janet Shaw. Photo © by Lewis Koch.  

Rosalind Brackenbury’s first  

North American publication  

presents, in nonlinear fashion,  
a portrait of the poet as a young girl and  
woman, canvassing an Edwardian child-  
hood reminiscent of Maggie Tulliver’s  
in The Mill on the Floss. From the age of  
6, the protagonist dreams of being a writ-  
er, yet she soon learns that “to be a poet  
meant to be male.” With poetic sensitiv-  
ity Alice records her dismay at finding  
more useless, needless little brothers  
coming into the world: “Brothers, boys,  
men: everywhere the insistent beauty of  
the male form .... All around her,  
forever, the imprint of masculinity, sign  
of the norm.” Her existence becomes a  
search for that acceptable otherness,  
perhaps a mate or the male inside her,  
the Artemis—Apollo dichotomy warring  
within the creative personality. Alien-  
ated from her brothers, she is conscious  
of the differences between female and  
male: “Beneath the convenient dis-  
guise, she grew, different from them, dis-  
turbed and segregated by this differ-  
ence.”  

This internalized lesson of inferiority  
is abetted by her public school experi-  
ence, where girlish enthusiasm and sex-  
ual energy are suppressed by means of  
uniforms and paramilitary routine. In a  
world in which passion, feeling, beauty,  
sensuality, and individuality are neu-  
tralized, there are however some break-  
throughs of desire among the seniors,  
prefects, and younger girls, who have  
illicit love affairs and become surrogate  
mothers for each other. Though checked  
by a post-war British upbringing, the  
longing for “the twin, the perfect other,  
the male counterpart” still surfaces in  
Alice’s memory: “The red, the gold of  
life, where was it: that glow, that had  
lit experience from within, long ago?”  

Despite a liberal university education  
Alice still cannot shake the feminine  
mystique of the period, for even there  
she learned that “surely it was the chal-  
lenge of all women to ease the pain of  
men, to understand.” In her pathetic  
attempts to introduce a bacchanalian  
element to her life Alice tries to imitate  
her bohemian friends but ends up failing  
architecture, where she had always felt  
hopelessly female and was ignored and  
excluded by her male classmates and  
teachers. As might be expected, she  
becomes obsessed with the need to lose  
her virginity and later enters Freudian  
psychoanalysis, convinced that she has  
become a neurotic housewife. Her writ-  
ing is seen as a sublimation of desire  
rather than an expression of self, and  
she almost comes to accept the denial  
expected of women in the early sixties  
as the norm, leaving her “clean as a  
picked bone, all hard edges... all that  
was hot, pulsating, liquid, menacing:  
boiled, quite simply boiled away...  
ecstasies, whether of orgasm or poetry,  
would be banished forever.”  

Miraculously, somehow she experi-  
ences a resurgence of “the banished  
words... from a long-ago childhood,  
words that raged and flowered like sun-  
sets,” by retreating to the attic to write  
in the early dawn. And eventually she  
succeeds in becoming a teacher and es-  
tablished poet, giving readings to literary  
groups around the country. The novel  
moves skillfully between these two poles  
of austerity and luxury, the sensible and  
the sensual, resurrecting the value of ple-  
asure in a way that recent French  
feminist critics would think significant.  
Yet the book is marred by the boring  
repetitiveness of male condescension,  
the exhibitionism of adolescent existen-  
tialists, the rich observations not tied  
thematically to anything in the book,  
and a cold distancing effect in the  
characters’ dialogue. Brackenbury is al-  
most Pinteresque in the scene that por-  
trays Alice confiding her life story to a  
total stranger on the night train from  
London to Edinburgh, a moment out of  
time that attempts to give some meaning  
to rather irrelevant portions of the book.  
But perhaps this is a slice of a writer's  
consciousness, the observer stance of the  
reporter always on the outside of experi-  
ence. Brackenbury’s great skill in por-  
traying the child’s wonderment about  
time, mortality, change, and memory  
survives this later turgidness and remains  
for us, as writing does for Alice, a rebel-  
lion against the stifling prescriptions of  
womanhood.  

— Sylvia M. Brown  

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987