side; the patriarchal hegemony has created the exilic voice.  
No longer. Marginalized women writers who are “on the  
cultural rim" (such as Gertrude Stein) become the focus of a  
new language and text.  

Sylvia Townsend Warner by Joy Finzi  

Mary Lynn Broe continues to investigate the cultural rim  
in "My Ast Belongs to Daddy," an essay examining books  
with incest content as a major form of exile literature. In  
her opening collage of excerpts from Djuna Barnes, Emily  
Coleman, and Antonia White, Broe offers a “radical inter-  
ruption of the sexual/textual order," the interrupted texts  
reflecting the incest that interrupted their lives.  

Susan Stanford Friedman provides another examination of  
exile as she explores H.D.’s expatriatism and nationalism.  
For H.D., conflict is necessary, and expatriatism becomes a  
living symbol of her marginality. Absence becomes a posi-  
tive symbol in her work; where she was not could be more  
important symbolically than where she was.  

This presence of absence not only pervades H.D.’s poems  
but also forms a background for Isak Dinesen as well.  
Susan Hardy Aiken provides a fresh reading of this Danish  
expatriate who lived in Kenya as she explores "the figure of  
dreaming, with all it implies of discontinuity and displace-  
ment" in an early novella, “The Dreamers." Aiken traces  
the many voices to be found in Dinesen’s narratives. "By  
writing her English texts ‘as a man,’ in effect displacing  
herself from herself, Dinesen made the male signature the  
sign of alienation, inscribing her own difference from patri-  
archal traditions even as she appeared to enact her erasure  
within them." But this signature becomes an ironic instru-  
ment as she turns subservience into subversiveness.  

Rhys, Stead, and Lessing, peripheral members of the  
British Empire, provide the focus of an essay by Judith  
Kegan Gardiner. These authors move, in the course of their  
lives and careers, from periphery to cultural center. This  
movement is rarely viewed as exilic, yet for Rhys, Stead,  
and Lessing “neither place is home; each is alternately  
desirable and oppressive." "For each writer, the universal  
story of growing up and leaving home acquires political  
reverberations; the psychological drama of breaking from an  
idealized imaginary mother-daughter symbiosis into hetero-  
sexual adulthood gets conflated with this story of exile, with  
longing for freedom and yearnings for a maternal home ...  
their writing provides their home, a safe arena from which  
they can both criticize nostalgia and use their own nostalgia  
in the service of social criticism."  

Exile need not include relocation from periphery to center  
geographically. Trudier Harris examines the theological  
exile of Black female writers and debunks the “myth of  
sanctuary," which leads, ultimately, to the Black women’s  
rejection of the masculine God, who views them only as  
sinners; instead, they forge for themselves a new religion  
and a new communion. Self-fulfillment is a major theme in  
the works of Toni Morrison, Alice Walker, Paule Marshall,  
Ntozake Shange, and Gloria Naylor, who give up the het-  
erosexual community for a community of women; yet,  
Harris warns, these communities are themselves in danger  
of becoming exiled from the larger Black community.  

The essays of the second section ("The Canons of Exile:  
[Dis]Placement and Difference") examine specific communi-  
ties of readers, publishers, and writers. Here groups of  
writers who are excluded even by their own sex are exam-  
ined and placed in a revised feminist canon. For example,  
Sonia Saldivar-Hull explores “women in the periphery of the  
power structure; working-class women, Chicanas, Afro-  
American women, women of the Third World" and places  
them within the mainstream feminist canon.  

Questions of the exile canon, of course, are the focus of  
the entire collection. Bradford Mudge examines Virginia  
Woolf examining Sara Coleridge, and can only conclude  
with Woolf that Coleridge must remain in the minor ranks.  
But it is the process that is important: "To revise Virginia  
Woolf revising Sara Coleridge is to extend the act of surviv-  
al." Survival necessitates a reevaluation of the female mod-  
ernist poet, "her simultaneous exile from and to poetic  
form," concludes Celeste Scheck in exploring the politics of  
making the poetic canon.  

Legitimacy depends on voice. Jane Marcus argues that  
women’s voices in exile are not double-voiced, but instead  
offer a third level at which to read the story, one that finds  
the woman already using the exilic, male language and  
further complicating this voice by whatever other patterns of  
exile are imposed. She takes issue with a recent Elaine  
Showalter article that “warns us not to exaggerate the im-  
portance of women’s culture” and forcefully explores "the  
ethics of appropriation" that govern how and what we read  
in our isolated communities (as well as pointing to the  
"elsewhereness" of women’s writing).  

The third section, "The Politics of Exile: Ideologies and  
Isolation," specifically places this "elsewhere" in the politi-  
cal arena. The "British in India during British rule felt  
themselves to be in exile," Rebecca Saunders notes in ex-  
ploring this particular kind of isolation as it is related to the  
memsahibs in early twentieth-century literature. Territorial  
exile extended to women of the First World War. Investigat-  
ing works such as Mrs. Alec Tweedie’s 1917 Women and  
Soldiers and Ellen La Motte’s 1916 The Backwash of War,  
Angela Ingram explores the jingoism that sees “women pass  
on the human ammunition" in their “wombs for war."  

Sylvia Townsend Warner opposed fascism and oppression  
— of the poor, minorities, and women. Barbara Brothers  
investigates Warner’s Spanish Civil War literature and  
concludes: “Women who, like Warner, are or were radical  
in their politics suffer from double jeopardy. Not only are  
they writing against the grain (writing left), but they are  
also writing on a subject about which the general public  
thinks they are ignorant (writing politics)." We must thank  
Broe and Ingram for uncovering these exiled spaces and  
must vow to remember, in Annette Kolodny’s words, "there  
are always people who are ‘too something.’"