Triumph of the Finer Mind

Emily Dickinson, by Cynthia Griffin Wolff. New York: Knopf, 1986, $25, 641 pp.  
Emily Dickinson: A Poet’s Grammar, by Cristanne Miller. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987, $20, 212 pp.  

Dickinson: Strategies of Limitation, by Jane Donahue Eberwein. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1985, $25 (HB), $10.95 (PB)  

by Judith Farr  

There’s Triumph of the Finer Mind  
When Truth — affronted long  
Advance unmoved — to her Supreme —  
Her God — Her only Throng —  

#455 from The Complete Poems  

The centennial of her death in  

1886 has prompted the publi-  

cation of many books on Emily  
Dickinson, whose mysterious life and  
complex poetry have always aroused  
every sort of fascination. That they con-  
tinue to do so might have pleased, dis-  
mayed, and surprised her. She spent her  
quiet days largely in secret, probably to  
achieve the great poems we attempt to  
read rightly. “Rightly” involves a  
number of questions: scholarly discre-  
tion; faithfulness to Dickinson’s known  
life as it may be distinguished from  
legend; acknowledgment and study of  
all her 1,775 recorded poems; awareness  
of the placement of some poems in the  
fascicles, or improvised, handwritten  
scrapbooks discovered in the legendary  
cedar chest and published by R.W.  
Franklin; acquaintance with her cul-  
tural, literary, and traumatic psycholog-  
ical background; and — possibly most  
important — curtailment of fancy that,  
in studies of Dickinson as in studies of  
Shakespeare, feeds on the greatness, re-  
serve, and enigma of the artist. The  
three books reviewed here address this  
challenge in different ways and with  
varying degrees of success.  

Cynthia Griffin Wolff's critical biog-  
raphy, Emily Dickinson, is a seductive  
book. It is lengthy, vibrant with infor-  
mation about 19th-century New Eng-  

land life, and bristling with iconoclastic  
theory about Dickinson’s attitude toward  
God, art, and herself. Even the foot-  
notes are colorfully and interestingly  
written. Its last chapters about Dickin-  
son’s decline and death are both poign-  
ant and as informative as earlier chap-  
ters about Dickinson’s family, worries,  
and satisfactions.  

Wolff argues several theses. First,  
Dickinson’s life in art was a partial re-  
pudiation of women’s traditional tasks —  
caring for the sick, cooking, writing  
letters — tasks that she performed with  
grace, although rejecting the duty to  
marry and bear children that embittered  
her sister-in-law, killed friends, and  
frightened her into writing several  
poems and letters that declare her  
characteristic theme, self-denial. Sec-  
ond, she may have elected a poet’s life  
and a poetry full of visual metaphors and  
emblems of desire and deprivation be-  
cause of a “Fall into Language” oc-  
casioned by early separation from her  
depressed mother and the consequent  
loss of “eye/face dialogue” necessary to a  
child’s security. Third, Dickinson “reck-  
oned all human life as severed by the  
God who had withdrawn from us to  
prowl behind the veil of the visible  
world.” She wrestled for “dominion”  
with this malign being, competing with  
his invisibility by her reclusion, creating  
through her poetry a rival universe.  
And, finally, through her poetry Dickin-  
son attempted to supplant her brother  
Austin as heir to her failed grandfather  
and indifferent father.  

Although the first two of its bio-  
graphical theories seem partly just, and  
although there are elements of truth in  
everything Wolff says, her study is un-  
sound because of its frequent misin-  
terpretation or omission of certain cru-  
cial poems in the Dickinson canon.  
Wolff argues that in the 1860s Dickin-  
son envisioned God as a ghoulish, inde-  

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987  

cent, mercantile, envious sadist — a  
bodice-ripper who pleasured in deflow-  
ering trees and female poets. He is indis-  
tinguishable from Death, even in #622  
wherein the speaker joins a suitor who is  
not God and is clearly kind. Conve-  
niently, Wolff does not mention poems  
such as “Tie the Strings to my Life, My  
Lord (#279),” in which the speaker’s  
desire and God’s are one. Misleadingly,  
she quotes #455 only until its penulti-  
mate quatrain, defining the poem itself  
as a quest for “victory” in the “renuncia-  
tion” of God. But read to its close, this  
poem equates God with Truth and im-  
agines its speaker (if not without fierce  
desire and anxiety) being “Acquitted”  
by “Jehovah’s Countenance” — scarcely  
renunciatory.  

Wolff tells us that #861, “Split the  
Lark — and you'll find the Music,” is a  
poem about “the Lord’s vindictiveness  
towards poets.” Wolff's rhetoric sud-  
denly becomes overindulged, conveying  
the vision of God as “doltish farm boy,”  
splitting apart lark and Dickinson out of  
envy of their superior creativity. But  
nothing in this poem itself (addressed to  
anyone who attempts to pinion an artist  
by analysis) or in the fascicle in which it  
appears supports such a reading. Simi-  
larly, there is no reason to interpret  
“Doom” in #475 as an ugly Heaven.  
“Doom is the House without the Door”  
is simply another of Dickinson’s “nam-  
ing,” abstract-definition poems. A great  
many more examples of such  
impressionism can be cited. Finally,  
Wolff tells us that Dickinson is not a re-  
ligious poet since she never assented to  
God’s “dominion.” But everything,  
even in her own book, proves the oppo-  
site. What makes a religious poet, if it  
be not wrangling fear of, and love for,  
God? Wolff denies the love; but her  
willful vision in this book is pervasively  
selective.  

Cristanne Miller’s Emily Dickinson: A  
Poet’s Grammar is a dependable study.  
And, in chapters like “Reading the  
Poems” and “The Consent of Language  
and the Woman Poet,” Miller — not a  
brilliant but rather a thoughtful writer —  
causes in the reader that delicate ex-  
citement that comes from acknowledg-  
ing measure in scholarly judgment. Mil-  
ler is interested, as are all who teach  
Dickinson, in how inaccessible some of  
the poems are. She uses rhetorical and  
structural linguistic analysis to explain  
Dickinson’s strategies, particularly that  
of syntactical omission. Miller is right to  
say that “the fascination of reading Dic-  
kinson’s poetry” and its power lie “at  
least partly in their (and her) ability to  
give more than the reader can entirely  
understand.” Analyzing the poet’s  
“grammar,” she argues convincingly  
that American “plain style,” Emerson,  
the Bible, and other women’s (inferior)  
verses offered Dickinson rhetorical mod-  
els from which she learned and departed  
in developing her own art. Miller’s best  
chapter is, I think, the third, wherein  
her sensible feminism supports interest-  
ing analyses of poems like “He fumbles  
at your Soul” or “This was a Poet.”  

Both Wolff and Miller may have prof-  
ited from reading Jane Donahue Eber-  
wein’s previously published Dickinson:  
Strategies of Limitation. In it, for in-  
stance, Eberwein asserts that Dickinson  
“identified with Jacob” — a central  
thesis of Wolff — and argues that the  
“distillation” and compressed “minimal”  
forms of Dickinson's poetry were biog-  
raphically determined, as Miller avers,  
by a heightened technical vocabulary.  
Eberwein is interested in how “the de-  
sign of Dickinson’s life was a process of  

movement from her smallness, a haunt-  
ing sense of primal inadequacy, to cir-  
cumference” through art. She declares  
that “it is futile to treat Dickinson as  
other than a religious poet,” and she is  
far more responsible than Wolff in ob-  
serving that Dickinson focused “intense  
spiritual passion on the intimate en-  
counter between herself and God” but  
that it was loving as well as terrible.  
Analyzing Dickinson’s use of “circle”  
imagery, she states that the poet recog-  
nized that her satisfactions “lay outside  
any human circle” and thus narrowed  
her circle of acquaintance, so that she  
might be “pierced over and over by  
God’s painful but liberating diameters.”  
Eberwein’s volume is praiseworthy for  
considering poems in their fascicle ar-  
rangement and for making commonsens-  

ical hypotheses, for example, that Dic-  
kinson might have been grateful as a  
spinster-artist to be funded all her life by  
her father’s wealth.  

In poem #110 Emily Dickinson ob-  
served, “Artists wrestled here!” But crit-  
ics will always be forced to wrestle with  
her, recognizing with greater or lesser ac-  
curacy the “Truth” recorded by her  
“finer Mind.”  

® Judith Farr is Associate Professor of  
English at Georgetown University. She has  
written articles on Emily Dickinson, D.H.  
Lawrence, and Edna St. Vincent Millay  
and a critical biography, The Life and Art  
of Elinor Wylie. She is now completing  
Emily Dickinson: The Real and The  
Imagined Face.  

Miller is right to say that “the fascination of reading Dickinson’s  
poetry” and its power lie “at least partly in their ability to give  
more than the reader can entirely understand.” Analyzing the  
poet’s “grammar,” she argues convincingly that American “plain  
style,” Emerson, the Bible, and other women’s (inferior) verses  
offered Dickinson rhetorical models from which she learned and  
departed in developing her own art.  

R U T G E R S  

The Douglass Series on Women’s Lives and the Meaning of Gender —  

Uneasy Careers and Intimate Lives: Women in Science, 1789-1979  
Pnina Abir-Am and Dorinda Outram, eds.  
400 pp. Illustrated. Cloth, $35.00; Paper, $12.00.  
“Simply an excellent piece of work ... the essays are uniformly well written and each  
deals with the social conditions under which science is done”  

Ruth Schwartz Cowan, SUNY—Stony Brook  

Women, Households, and the Economy  

Lourdes Benería and Catharine Stimpson, eds.  

272 pp. Cloth, $32.00; Paper, $12.00.  

The contributors analyze the relationships between changes in the economy and  
those in women’s lives, focusing on the implications of these profound changes for  
the role of women in the labor force, the structure of families, and the sexual divi-  
sion of labor.  

Words on Fire: The Life and Writing of Elizabeth Gurley Flynn  

Rosalyn Fraad Baxandall  

320 pp. Illustrated. Cloth, $35.00; Paper, $15.00.  

Baxandall contributes a long biographical introduction and conclusion to this first  
collection of Flynn’s writings on women.  

American Women Writers Series  

Clovernook Sketches and Other Stories  

Alice Cary  

Judith Fetterley, ed.  

314 pp. Cloth, $30.00; Paper, $10.00.  

This collection of stories provides a historical overview of the career of Cary (1820-  
1871), an early realist and regionalist (Ohio) writer.  

Alternative Alcott  

Louisa May Alcott  

Elaine Showalter, ed.  

400 pp. Cloth, $30.00; Paper, $9.00.  

Includes Alcott’s journalistic, satiric, feminist writings, and her dramatic and lurid  
sensation texts, many never before reprinted.  

Madwives: Schizophrenic Women in the 1950s  

Carol A.B. Warren  

300 pp. Cloth, $30.00.  

Warren examines how gender roles were related to the definition and treatment of  
mental illness in women during the late 1950s.  

Inheritance in America: From Colonial Times to the Present  

Carole Shammas, Marylynn Salmon and Michel Dahlin  

288 pp. Cloth, $32.00; Paper, $12.00.  

This is the first study of how Americans over three centuries—1700s to the 1980s—  
have distributed inheritance, highlighting the improved position of women as heirs.  

Landscape for a Good Woman: A Story of Two Lives  
Carolyn Kay Steedman  
166 pp. Cloth, $22.00; Paper, $10.00.  
“Provocative and quite dazzling in its intellectual ambitions. An experiment in his-  
torical narrative, it combines social history, autobiography, and biography to explore  
the meaning and possibility of a different kind of working-class history”  

Judith Walkowitz, Rutgers University  

A Hunger for Home: Louisa May Alcott’s Place in American Culture  
Sarah Elbert  

310 pp. Illustrated. Paper, $12.00.  

Hailed as “an important contribution to the ... study of the American feminist tradi-  
tion” (JAH), nearly a third of the material in this new paperback edition is new.  

Rutgers University Press  
109 Church Street  
New Brunswick, NJ 08901  

Belles Lettres @ 5