Steel Chrysanthemums

Confessions of Love, by Uno Chiyo. Translated by Phyllis Birnbaum. Honolulu: Uni-
versity of Hawaii Press, 1989 (Originally published as Iro Zange, 1935), $12.95,

168 pp. (PB)

The End of Summer, by Harumi Setouchi. Translated by Janine Beichman, in collabo-
ration with Alan Brender. Tokyo and New York: Kodansha International, 1989 (First
published under the title Natsu no owari, 1966), $17.95, 152 pp. (PB)

Picture Bride, by Yoshiko Uchida. New York: Simon and Schuster/Fireside, 1988,

$6.95, 216 pp. (PB)

by Cathie Brettschneider

Women have written the majority of

Japan’s literary classics. Even today
women continue to hold a prominent
place among the authors of modern
Japanese literature. The three books
reviewed here are as different from one
another as one could imagine. What the
differences suggest is a range in style and
in content that affords the reader who is
unfamiliar with Japanese literature a
variety of works to sample—a variety
that happily thwarts any tendency to
lump “Japanese women writers” into a
singular category.

Narrated from a male point of view,
Uno Chiyo’s Confessions of Love chron-
icles the amorous adventures of a
well-known painter, Yuasa Joji, who has
recently returned to Tokyo after seven
years abroad and resumed estranged do-
mestic relations with his child and his
wife (who is given a name—Matsuyo
—only after ninety-six pages and at a
point in the story when the two have
divorced). His reminiscences begin with
the first of a series of encounters, from
the initial tryst with the precocious
Komaki Takao, who is little more than
half his age yet who calls him to question
the wisdom of his greater years; to the
fateful meeting of Takao’s friend, the
beautiful, young Saiji Tsuyuko, with
whom he will share the self-inflicted
wounds of both pleasure and pain; and
the ambivalent entanglement with an
ailing schoolgirl, Tomoko, whose par-

ents eventually press the two into mar-
riage.

For all the activity related in the nar-
rative, Yuasa Joji is essentially a passive
protagonist, through whose eyes nearly
all the other characters are objectified
and rendered lifeless. The narrative’s
lack of nuance, poetry, or depth flattens
the story into a prosaic tale, prosaically
told. The only figure to resist this treat-
ment is Matsuyo, whose insistent self-
definition defies and undercuts the very
means by which her (ex-)husband (the
narrator) tries to confine her. This re-
fusal to be so defined reminds the reader
of the hand at work in shaping the nar-
rator and in awarding Matsuyo the vic-
tory of standing outside the circle of the
protagonist’s influence and, not coin-
cidentally, his affection.

Although one tires of the narrator’s
passivity and of the frequent complicity
of his female companions, the women in
the novel are youthful challengers of
1920s social conventions. One suspects
that the author—one of Japan’s literary
grandes dames—has cleverly orches-
trated the novel so that one’s reactions
to the narrative itself are in fact a series
of judgments on the narrator.

The End of Summer comprises a nov-
ella of the same title and a short story,
“The Pheasant,” and belongs to that
introspective genre of Japanese litera-
ture known as “I-novels.” Reversing the
ratio of conscious reflection to external
activity in Confessions of Love, the young
female protagonist in Harumi Setouchi’s
novella is anything but passive or shallow in her awareness and analysis of her
experiences, however slight the accu-
mulation of outward events in the story.
Tomoko, a successful fabric dyer, de-
signer, and decorator, is the lover of two
men: the married Shingo, a little-
recognized novelist with whom she has

lived part-time for the past eight years,
sharing him with his wife when Shingo
was needed for the role of husband dur-
ing holidays and on family occasions;
and a former lover, Ryota, who—since
his affair with Tomoko many years ago
that broke up her marriage at the time—
has himself married and divorced and
now returned to Tokyo, where he has an
advertising company. A reunion be-
tween Tomoko and Ryota after the long
interval, and their subsequent meetings
when Shingo is with his wife, becomes
the catalyst for some intensive soul-
searching in Tomoko’s struggle to come
to know herself and sort out her feelings
for both men.

Although this brief description
sketches the scenario of the story, the
real drama is an internal one, enhanced
by prose that is as elegant as it is evoca-
tive. The strands of the psyche that form
this tale—whose author is now a Bud-
dhist nun—are woven in paradox: sex-
ual fulfillment and affectionate devo-
tion, excitement and serenity, pull
Tomoko in opposing directions. The
bonds of affection, guilt, deception, and
jealousy among the four lovers and loved
ones are deftly conveyed. Throughout,
Setouchi refines the distinctions be-
tween love and habit, desire and inti-
macy, arousal and compassion, and in-
vites the reader into an interior world in
which nothing—when viewed beyond
the surface of convention—is as it
seems.

Dixie Church
Interstate Blues
by Ingrid Hill

New York: Viking, $17.95, 228 pp.

This first collection of short stories es-
tablishes Ingrid Hill as an astute observer
of daily life and human emotion with the
range of a virtuoso. By meticulously ren-
dering simple events—from childhood
experiences in the deep south where
“gnats are big as pebbles” to a jazz festival
where jazz matrons wear diamond rings
that “look like corporate headquarters
for insurance conglomerates”—Hill
allows us to experience the internal
drama in the characters’ lives. Her style
is distinctive yet comfortingly familiar,
as genuine as a girlfriend sitting in the
kitchen as she reels off hilarious, bitter-
sweet tales with more or less happy
endings and just a hint of loss.

Hill deftly manipulates the interplay
between emotions and mundane daily
events to create humor and anticipation
without ever being obtrusive. These
stories are deceptively simple, though in
no way hurried or sparse. With a sculp-
tor’s skill, she cuts away everything in-
essential to the story, shapes the precise
nuances of locale and pulls in the famil-
ial and other entanglements that make
the stories familiar to all.

Hill’s distinctive voice is the one ele-
ment common throughout the collec-
tion. Some of the stories are told in the
first person, some in the third; some
protagonists are female, others male;
some narrators are adults, others are
children. “Baptism of Desire,” the mid-
dle story in the collection, is a good ex-
ample of Hill’s tempering of painfully
serious subjects with a worldly-wise
humor that lends perspective and a sense
of proportion to events.

In the story, Fletcher Breen returns
from graduate school at Harvard to his
home in New Orleans for the funeral of
his sister’s father-in-law. An exception-
ally bright young man, he is thought of
by the family as a rather “queer bird.”
Fletcher’s re-entry forces him to discover
that he is as much a part of this family
and of the South as the deep-rooted trees
that dot the landscape, yet at the same
time he is as alien to it all as a New
England boiled dinner.

The funny, all-too-typical family
drama underscores the tension between
the lure of new and exciting horizons
and the pull of history and heritage. Hill
encapsulates Fletcher’s dilemma in the
story’s final moments: Fletcher sits in his
mother’s kitchen, where pots of soft
things always seem to be cooking. Look-
ing down at his sister’s baby, he dreams
of a Cambridge girl he has not yet met
“who would bear his name, like a
weight, like a talisman.”

Hill’s stories touch nerves. They feel
real. She is definitely a writer to watch.

—Suzanne Scott

Spring 1990