La Guerre N’Est Pas Finie

Not So Quiet ... Stepdaughters of War, by Helen Zenna Smith. New York: The Feminist

Press, 1988, $26.95 (HB), $9.95 (PB), 300 pp.

Women on War: Essential Voices for the Nuclear Age from a Brilliant International
Assembly, edited by Daniela Gioseffi. New York: Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, 1988,

$10.95, 391 pp. (PB)

by Eleanor J. Bader

A declaration of war should be a kind of popular
festival with entrance tickets and bands, like a
bullfight. Then, in the arena the ministers and
generals of the two countries, dressed in bathing
drawers and armed with clubs, can have it out
among themselves. Whoever survives, his
country wins. That would be much simpler and
more just than this arrangement, where the
wrong people do the fighting.

— Erich Maria Remarque,
Quiet on
the Western Front

It is 1918. World War I is blazing full

force, and six young women, volun-

teers from Britain, are stationed in
France. Their job is to drive ambulance
loads of wounded men to hospitals, ne-
gotiating perilous, unlit roads at night.
The Ambulance Corps is the elite.
These upper-class, well-educated women
paid their own way to be England’s
“Splendid Daughters” and do their bit
for the “dear old flag.”

But things did not turn out as they had
dreamed. Patriotism at the front proved
far different from patriotism in the cities,
where recruiting meetings stirred up
xenophobic jingoism. Suddenly, long-fa-
miliar words about loyalty and duty fly
in the face of real wartime experience.
Just days after signing up, recruits realize
that “doing their bit” involves sleep dep-
rivation, meals of spoiled, inedible food,
exposure to illness, agony, and death,
and abusive, arbitrary military discipline.
And there is no easy way out, no way to
be a hero if they walk away from the ex-
perience.

Misery runs through Helen Zenna
Smith’s 1930 antiwar novel, Not So
Quiet, reissued by the Feminist Press, as
does anger at a system that allows young
people to be cannon fodder for govern-
ment fancy. “I don’t know what we’re
fighting for,” says one of the ambulance
drivers, “who does? But it isn’t for world
freedom. Nothing so pretty.”

Smithy, the main protagonist of the
book, is clear that this is not “a war to
end all wars.” “In 20 years it will repeat
itself,” she postulates. “And 20 years
after that.” Again and again, the world
will face war, she argues, unless we rid it
of mindless nationalism, racism, and dis-
information.

TFISH, RED:

cicey fal
CIETY a

Cover art from Not So Quiet. . .

How to do that? How to live in peace
and guarantee justice to every person on
earth? Smithy and her colleagues
grapple with these questions day and
night, week after endless week. Honesty,
they conclude, is key—telling the truth
about the stench of war, about watching,
helpless, as young men bleed to death,
about being unable to hate someone
who is not responsible for his nation’s
deeds. As women, they will bear witness.

But even this has its irony. The ability
to bear witness to war, says Jane Marcus
in her afterword, is a direct result of the
British suffrage campaign. This effort,

the fact that the war has given them
their first mattresses, puts the needs of
economically disenfranchised enlistees
into political focus. And the book also
shows what can happen when women
settle for what men have, rather than a
social order based on equality and re-
spect for human dignity. Women, says
the novel, can be just as vicious as men,
just as petty, corrupt, and hateful.
Knowing this, we need to develop ways
to work together to stop the warmonger-
ing that is set to destroy the universe—
without getting pulled into the system.
It is a delicate balance, argues Smith, an
outsider/insider dichotomy that is still,
fifty-nine years after the publication of
Not So Quiet, being debated.

Nowhere is this clearer than in Carol
Cohn’s incisive essay, “Sex and Death
and the Rational World of Defense In-
tellectuals,” in Women on War. After a
summer-long workshop on nuclear
weapons, strategic doctrine, and arms
control for college teachers, Cohn dis-
covered that the use of highly tech-
nocratic language can be fun. “The
words are quick, clean, light. They trip
off the tongue. Lecturers, students,
hawks, doves, men and women took
pleasure in using the words. Part of the
appeal was the thrill of being able to
manipulate an arcane language, the
power of entering the secret kingdom....
Learning the language gives a sense of
control, a feeling of mastery over tech-
nology that is finally not controllable,
but powerful beyond human comprehen-
sion.” Only after careful deconstruction
of the language of war, did Cohn realize
that the word peace was nowhere to be
found in the discourse.

There are several hundred entries in
Women on War, written by women from

“I don’t know what we’re fighting for, who does?
But it isn’t for world freedom. Nothing so pretty.”

she writes, served as the training ground
for ambulance drivers and nurses during
the War. “Bravery, physical courage,
chivalry, group solidarity, strategic plan-
ning, honor—women learned these
skills in the streets and gaols of London,
the first ‘forbidden zone’ they entered.”
If this is true, and her arguments are
convincing, then Not So Quiet can serve
several purposes. It is outstanding an-
tiwar propaganda. Class differences are
dealt with clearly. The juxtaposition of
the upper-crust Ambulance Corps and
the lower/working-class Women’s Army
Auxiliary Corps, where recruits revel in

paula Sarre

Available in April at fine bookstores.

16 @ Belles Lettres

every part of the globe. Some pieces are
contemporary; others go as far back as
Sappho. All argue—whether in essays,
poetry, or fiction—for an end to war and
the funding of human needs. Some, like
Daniela Gioseffi, are pragmatic. The
Council for Economic Priorities in the
United States, she writes, has proved
that it costs the same amount to arm
and train one soldier as it does to edu-
cate eighty children. The amount ex-
pended on the latest nuclear submarine
could build 450,000 homes for the
homeless. Furthermore, she says, there
are more than fifty tons of TNT in nu-

clear weapons for every human on the
globe. Others, like Natalia Ginzburg, an
Italian whose resistance fighter husband
was killed by the Nazis during World
War II, write from personal experience.
“We shall never get over this war. It is
useless to try. We shall never be people
who go peacefully about their business,
who think and study and manage their
lives quietly. Something has happened
to us. We shall never be at peace again.”
Still others, like playwright Karen
Malpede, address the secondary impact
of war. In what is perhaps the most
moving piece in the anthology, Malpede
pays tribute to her friend Karl, a Viet-
nam veteran who, “having renounced
the role of murderer, knew no choice
but to become his own last victim.” Sim-
ilarly, poet Carolyn Forché reminds us
that there is no peace without justice.
To teach oral rehydration to every
mother in the Third World, she writes,
“would cost what my (U.S.) countrymen
spend on pet food in any given year.”

Almost without exception the con-
tributions to Women on War are superb,
a poignant mix of concrete data and
emotionally charged imagery. Yet, some-
thing is wrong when a volume of this
size fails to offer strategic arguments to
move the movements for peace and so-
cial justice forward. Key questions
around pacifism versus armed struggle
and about women working autono-
mously versus in groups with men are
conspicuously absent. So are answers to
the questions Helen Zenna Smith posed
more than fifty years ago, questions
about women’s complicity in nationalist,
racist oppression. Although different
people posit different answers to these
dilemmas, a more coherent, less eclectic
range would have made this a more
politically useful tool...and a more
politically satisfying read.

Still, Women on War is well worth
taking a look at, for it is wide ranging—
providing the reader with an introduc-
tion to many of the spirited, intelligent
women around the world who are lead-
ing their nation’s calls to action.

“We are quite literally a nation which
is in the process of committing suicide
in the hope that then the Russians will
not be able to murder it,” said Dorothy
Day about the United States. Now, in
the spirit of glasnost and perestroika, it is
time for all the people of the world to
grasp the olive branch and move toward
survival.

Eleanor J. Bader is the news editor of
New Directions for Women. Her work also
appears in the Guardian and other progres-
sive publications.

epiphany: An appearance, manifestation. Also, a moment of striking
intuitive understanding; a memory, feeling, sound, touch that triggers the

flash of insight.

An emotional tangle of grief and loss is transformed into an arabesque of
peace and inspiration in Saffire’s powerful narrative, Tender Miscarriage:

An Epiphany.

Giving voice to the tragedy experienced by millions of silent women,
Saffire tells a tale that is both intimately revealing and socially cloaked.
Tender Miscarriage is a deeply moving account of the author’s first year as
an elementary school teacher—a year marred by workplace politics, family
transition and an overwhelming emotional tragedy.

Transcendent and courageous, Saffire’s story is an epiphany for everywoman.

Harbinger House

3131 N. Country Club, Suite 106,

Paper $9.95

Tucson, AZ 85716

Spring 1989