Women of the Arts

Owl-Artists, Insect-Geologists,  
and Crazed Botanists  

Unexpected Journeys: The Art and Life of Remedios Varo, by Janet A. Kaplan.  

New York: Abbeville Press, 1988, $35, 286 pp.  

by Mary G. Berg  

This beautifully written and illustrated book, full of wonders, is a joy to read and behold. With luminous concision, Janet Kaplan examines the interrelationship between the extraordinary paintings by the Spanish surrealist Remedios Varo (1908-1963) and her life circumstances. Over two hundred reproductions (fifty in color) of paintings, drawings, and photographs are adroitly arranged to illustrate Varo’s development as an artist from her childhood in Spain through her most productive years in Mexico. Varo was very successful as a painter during her lifetime, and her importance has been further recognized by international exhibitions and by three major exhibits in Mexico since her death. Because most of Varo’s paintings are in private collections, loaned only occasionally to museum shows, it is especially important to have books that allow a body of her work to be considered. Kaplan’s analysis of Varo’s paintings and their complex symbols makes it evident why Varo's images are so compelling:  

Remedios Varo was part of many worlds: the old-fashioned worlds of the Catholic convent school and the art academy, the vanguard worlds of Republican Barcelona and Surrealist Paris, the terrifying worlds of the civil war in Spain and the Nazi occupation in France, and the welcoming world of Mexico, where she found refuge and where she created meticulously rendered paintings that met with resounding critical and popular success. In these works Varo presented yet another world, the world of her imagination. Obeying other laws and following other patterns, this world is a reality apart in which the properties of the organic and the inorganic, the animal and the vegetable, the natural and the technological overlap and merge. It is peopled by owl-artists, insect-geologists, crazed botanists, and magical astronomers who overturn our arbitrary assumptions about how things ought to work. The familiar becomes extraordinary here, and within the recognizable lurks the unexpected. Chair backs open to reveal human faces, hands reach through walls, tabletops peel back to expose living roots. The inanimate springs to life, bodies and their shadows become interchangeable.  

Remedios Varo was born near Barcelona in 1908 and was encouraged in her love of drawing by her father, a hydraulic engineer who had her copy his diagrams, interesting her in perspective and precision. Her later paintings would depict aspects of her convent schooling and its restrictions, as well as the individual’s ability to escape by imaginative means. Kaplan interweaves chronological story and a retrospective analysis of how events affected Varo’s art; both these narrative lines are remarkably suspenseful, as the reader wonders constantly what will happen next and how it will be transformed into images by Varo’s imagination.  

The idiosyncratic quality of a fantastic yet plausible universe is heightened by the extraordinary refinement of Varo’s distinctive style. Working with delicate precision based on years of rigorous training, she combined a miniaturist’s attention to detail with great technical finesse in glazing and varnishing to produce jewel-like compositions. Small in size but monumental in scale, these powerful works seem magically charged.  

Varo's training at the Academia de San Fernando in Madrid in the 1920s was rigorous and traditional; she looked  

Fatt 1989  

to surrealism for more adventurous and personal possibilities for expression. She and her first husband, Gerardo Lizárraga, spent a year in Paris and then were involved in the avant-garde art world in Barcelona in the early 1930s. Kaplan documents and describes Varo's participation in surrealist art games and her gradual development of a style recognizably her own. In 1937, at the height of the chaos of the Spanish civil war, Varo moved to Paris with French surrealist poet Benjamin Péret, who later became her second husband, and continued her experiments with surrealism. She and Péret fled from occupied France and arrived in Mexico City at the end of 1941. During her difficult early years there, Varo continued to write and paint, design costumes, and create advertising posters, and she developed important friendships with Leonora Carrington and others with whom she shared images and enthusiasms. Not  

Remedios Varo  

until 1949, however, sustained by a stable marriage to Walter Gruen, was she able to begin a period of mature, sustained work.  

The chapters that describe Varo's most important paintings are divided thematically. It is fascinating to see permutations of her wonder at the multiplicity of imaginative possibilities inherent in voyages of discovery, in scientific investigation, or in logical pondering. Varo’s paintings explore the unknown, reveal the fears and excitements of adventures, and express human desire to control inner and outer circumstances. The paintings seem all the more magical as Kaplan suggests interpretations and points out details (unfortunately not always easy to see in the reproductions, although they are beautifully printed). Kaplan’s descriptions are concise and perceptive. She relates the paintings to each other, pointing out Varo's recurrent images and themes. Her discussions of the work of painters with whom Varo shared ideas and techniques are illuminating and provide a vivid appreciation of Varo’s unique images. This journey through the art and life of Remedios Varo with Janet Kaplan as guide is art history and art criticism at its best.  

® Mary G. Berg is a fellow at the Harvard University Center for Literary and Cultural Studies and is writing about nineteenth- and twentieth-century Latin American fiction by women.  

At Fox Literature’s Soke...  
és. epitomized in the Belles Lettres t-shirt (feature in this issue).  

M  

aking Sense of  

Those Strokes and Blobs  

Frankenthaler: Works on Paper, 1949-1984, by Karen Wilkin. New York: Braziller and the International Exhibitions Foundation, 1989, $20, 128 pp. (PB)  

by Mary Garvey Verrill  

Rarely does a monograph take its place among the definitive texts of art history, especially when it concerns lesser-known works of a contemporary artist such as Helen Frankenthaler. Its function of cataloging an exhibition usually vanishes once the crates are packed (in this instance, 1984). But the popularity of Karen Wilkin’s Frankenthaler: Works on Paper, 1949-1984 has prompted reprinting of this monograph. Never before has interest in Frankenthaler’s art been so intense; for instance, the Museum of Modern Art recently featured a major retrospective of her works on canvas. The timelessness of this book also stems from Frankenthaler’s generous collaboration in its production and its definitive insights into her colorful abstracts.  

Art lovers automatically switch to a higher plane of thought when encountering Frankenthaler. Her dynamic and disturbing art demands close scrutiny. Even then, one cannot always be sure of all of the connotations. What binds these works together, besides the fact that they were done on paper, is a high pursuit of beauty.  

I start out as a spacemaker on a flat thing with four corners. But color is the first message on the picture plane. From there, it takes its place as scale and drawing. Color is also extremely important to my “process.” It’s born out of idea, mood, luck, imagination, risk, into what might even be ugly; then I let it tell me what might/should be used next, until I get the light and order that satisfies to perfection. The result is color and space and, I hope, a beautiful message.  

Further explication and analyses of particular works help the reader get a grip on this thing called abstract art, and suddenly those brush strokes and blobs start making sense.  

Helen Frankenthaler.  
Photo by Cora Kelley Ward  

Frankenthaler has long been recognized as the pioneer of the “soak-stain” style of abstract painting (placing a sheet of raw canvas on the floor and soaking it with diluted oil paint). But more important, she is thus the link between the abstract expressionists who preceded her and the 1960s “color-field” abstractionists, which she promulgated. In Frankenthaler, we learn what influenced her work and contributed to her making it her own. For example, a painting of a goldfinch by the seventeenth-century Dutch master Carel Fabritius is the source for “Fabritius Bird” (1960).  

Wilkin’s balance of revelation regarding aspects of Frankenthaler’s works is wise. We are told of Frankenthaler’s “private” images but not their meaning; of her spontaneity but not in specific instances; of her Cubist training and esteem for Miró, Gorky, Kandinsky, and de Kooning, but only of her departure from Pollock. The result is a quick education in the complex art of Frankenthaler without dry lists of comparisons. One could liken her art to the writing of Joyce: Both use universal and personal symbols and intentional ambiguities, create their own worlds as points of reference, and do not make it necessary to grasp every detail in order to comprehend the whole. Chronology is deceptive because any work could have a relationship to any other, backward or forward in time.  

The works on paper have special significance because of their relationship to Frankenthaler’s larger works on canvas, yet they also stand on their own. In Wilkin’s words,  

On the intimate scale of the paper works, the floating line is clearly the product of the hand, not the result of a large body gesture; it is a record of a delicate stroke, not a visual metaphor for motion. The fineness of the line makes us aware of the slow, controlled quality of the gesture, so that the act of drawing itself becomes as much the subject of the picture as the position of the lines and their associations.  

If this excellently written book has any fault, it is the repetition of the adjectives “intimate” and “spontaneous.” Those qualities are self-evident and inherent to Frankenthaler’s works on paper. Wilkin does meander into discussions of works on canvas, but she knows her readers are craving this, and the temptation is strong.  

Wilkin never sinks into rote biography (e.g., whether they had cocktails at Frankenthaler’s first one-woman show at the Tibor de Nagy Gallery in 1951), but she does present the facts that relate to the art Frankenthaler made at the time (e.g., a trip to Nova Scotia in 1952 inspired the innovative “Mountains and Sea”). The constant attention to the art keeps this book focused and makes it definitive. Given the volume and complexity of Frankenthaler’s works, this was not an easy task. This study will no doubt be useful for understanding Frankenthaler’s works yet to come.  

® Mary Garvey Verrill is a freelance writer who works as a production editor of college textbooks at West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minnesota. She has an ongoing interest in contemporary fine arts.  

Belles Lettres @ 25  
a |