Character Revelation  
and Zingy One Liners  

The Age of Grief, Stories and a Novella, by Jane Smiley. New York: Knopf,  

1987, $15.95, 213 pp.  

Stalin in the Bronx and Other Stories, by Suzanne Ruta. New York: Grove Press,  

1987, $16.95, 154 pp.  
by Paula Bonnell  

Two collections of contemporary  

short fiction more different in  

setting and approach than these  
would be hard to find. Jane Smiley’s five  
stories have middle-class American set-  
tings: unnamed university towns, a bed-  
room that could be anywhere in modern  
urban America, a large suburban house  
in Minneapolis where the younger  
brother of a successful man recalls his  
year in Japan, a Missouri farm where a  
leftist bomber is years into her life under  
an assumed identity. The novella that  
crowns her book (and provides the title)  
concerns a husband and wife who are  
also dental partners and parents of three  
small daughters; they live in a  
medium-sized town, probably midwest-  
ern. In all six stories, crises of love and  
loyalty prevail — between spouses, old  
friends, new friends, lovers, love ob-  
jects, parents, children, would-be par-  
ents, and siblings.  

Smiley gives rich minutiae of relevant  
domestic and economic detail, whether  
the characters are washing dishes after  
Christmas Eve dinner or keeping an all-  
night vigil with a sick child. The prose is  
unpretentious (though occasionally  
overheated in the novella) and full of  
character revelation. For example, of  
two brothers, “Kirby knows of near  
misses that Harold has never dared to  
describe to anyone besides him, because  

Spring Issue  
on “Nature”  

Woman of Power is an inspiring  
international quarterly which brings  
you 96 pages of exceptional quality  
women’s literary and artistic works.  
Each issue explores a theme central to  
an emerging planetary woman's  
consciousness in a format of interviews,  
fiction, poetry, photography, art, and  
profiles of women of power.  

A magazine of  
feminism,  
spirituality,  
and politics.  

In this issue on “Nature,” Woman of  
Power explores ecofeminism,  
animal rights, the Green  
Movement, the power of nature  
and much more! Contributors  
include Alice Walker, Andree  
Collard, Rachel Bagby, Brooke  
Medicine Eagle, Charlene Spretnak  
and many others.  

To receive your copy of this  
important issue, fill out the coupon  
and send $7 (includes postage) to  
Woman of Power, P.O. Box 827,  
Cambridge, MA 02238. Or if you'd  
like to subscribe, send $22 for your  
first 4 issues.  

Name  

Address  

City  

State Zip  
Woman P.O. Box 827  

of Cambridge, MA.  

02238  

Jane Smiley. Photo by Stephen Mortensen.  

They show a pure stupidity that even  
Harold has the sense to be ashamed of.”  
Or this bit of dialogue between a pair of  
lovers: “ ‘Are we having a fight? You  
know I hate fighting.’ ‘I don’t think  
we're having anything as promising as a  
fight.’ ”  

Suzanne Ruta’s stories take place in a  
world of exile: German Jews in New  
York; Americans in Mexico, Belize,  
Guatemala, nameless third-world  
countries. Her characters’ connections  
to places and people seem arbitrary, ten-  
uous, changeable. Irony and zingy one  
liners are her approach: “A small vain  
man, capable of self-deprecation  
whether or not it was sincere.” “A man  
in my position requires very few ideas  
and after a certain age, no new ideas at  
all.” Ruta’s stories (or sketches —  
eleven are collected in this short book)  
are the kind of satire on human folly  
whose literary ancestry includes Gogol’s  

BOOKS BY  
WOMEN  

NEW! SPRING 1988  
THE FORBIDDEN  
STITCH  

AN ASIAN-AMERICAN WOMEN’S  
ANTHOLOGY  

edited by Shirley Geok-lin Lim &  
Mayumi Tsutakawa  

Anthology, 252 pages, $12 sc, $24.95 he.  

FLORILEGIA  

A RETROSPECTIVE OF CALYX,  
1976-1986  

edited by the Calyx Editorial Collective  
Anthology, 256 pages, $12 sc, $24.95 he.  
“..dense, intense, rich." Tee Corinne,  
Lambda Rising Book Report  

THE RIVERHOUSE  
STORIES  

by Andrea Carlisle  

144 pages, $7.95 sc, $15.95 he.  

“A book of the heart.” Lee Lynch, San  
Francisco Chronicle  

THE WHITE JUNK OF  
LOVE, AGAIN  

by Sibyl James  

75 pages, $6.95 sc, $13.95 he.  
“Witchness, jive and rhythms of the  
Blues.” What’s Happening  
WOMEN AND AGING  
edited by the Calyx Editorial Collective  
Anthology, 262 pages, $12 sc, $24.95 he.  
“Don't miss any of Women and Aging!”  
Sojourner  

P.O. BOX B CORVALLIS, OREGON 97339  

Dead Souls. Her clever phrasemaking  
and sardonic view of human nature keep  
the reader at an unsympathetic distance  
from the characters. The wry response  
Gogol and Ruta provoke is not enough; I  
miss the rich anguish and pleasure that  
Smiley’s close-ups afford.  

Here is a further sampling of Ruta’s  
smart, jaded observations: “San Martin  
. . . brought all the excitement of a rev-  
olution and none of the danger. . . but  
. . . he was just as glad. . . not to con-  
front, just yet, with so much important  
research unpublished, the question of  
whether he were a coward.” And, “[If  
the truth becomes known ... those  
who for years have addressed one  
another only in print . .. and in the  
form of invective, will have to find a  
whole new set of enemies.”  

These excerpts can be contrasted  
with some from Smiley's novella about a  
man who loves his wife and is desperate-  
ly trying to ride out her infatuation with  
another man: “We dropped without  
pause from the drama of Dana’s four-  
point grade average into the drama of a  
$2,500 mortgage payment in a town  
where we knew no one and that already  
had four dental clinics.” “Headlights  
flared across the porch and she drove up  
with a resolute crunch of gravel. The car  

door opened. . . I saw her. . . the look  
on her face. . . she was a soul desperate  
to divulge information. ... I said my  

prayer, which was, ‘Lord, don’t let her  
tell me about it.’” “There are many  

moments in every marriage that are so  
alike that they seem to be the same  
moment.” “Marriage is a small con-  
tainer, after all, barely large enough to  
hold some children. Two inner lives  
. . . burst out of it and out of it.”  

Smiley is not without irony, but her  
viewpoint is so much richer, her toler-  
ance of and interest in human nature so  
much greater than Ruta’s sour and clever  
barbs that The Age of Grief is a much  
more rewarding book. Every story in  
Smiley's book engages the reader’s emo-  
tional as well as intellectual attention, a  
claim that can’t be made for Ruta’s sto-  
ries in which the sprinkling of multi-  
lingual phrases and literary references  
lends an air of smug superiority to the  
fiction.  

Both writers cover fascinating terri-  
tory: Smiley, the anguishes of the mid-  
dle class — including a woman who  
wants a child and is creating an unwit-  
ting father, a father who works part-time  
so that he can be involved with the chil-  
dren; and Ruta, the displaced post-  
World-War-II generation unhappy with  
world politics. As Elizabeth Hardwick  
has said, every life is full of material.  
Smiley has done a lot with hers; Ruta has  
not worked hers as richly. But this is  
Ruta’s first book of fiction and Smiley’s  
fourth. Both leave us hoping for their  
next, greater work.  

® Paula Bonnell is a freelance writer  
who lives in Boston.  

“A Woman’s Place Is.. .”  

Family: Stories from the Interior, edited by Geri Giebel Chavis. St. Paul: Graywolf  
Press (P.O. Box 75006, St. Paul, MN 55175), 1987, $9.50, 352 pp. (PB)  

by Elizabeth R. Baer  

The image of the family that still  

prevails in American society is  

that of the nuclear family:  
Daddy at work, Mommy at home with  
2.5 children. Much of American life  
still is predicated on this image: School-  
children are sent home at 3:00 p.m. to a  
supposed Mommy waiting with cookies;  
most orthodontists are not open on Sat-  
urday mornings. But if that is the pre-  
vailing image of the family, the reality is  
startlingly different: only five of one-  
hundred American families take that  
configuration. Consider the exceptions:  
families where both parents work, mar-  
ried couples without children, gay coup-  
les with children, single-parent families,  
unmarried couples. In Montgomery  
County, Maryland, a suburb of  
Washington, D.C., only twelve per-  
cent of mothers of school-age children  
are home making beef stew; seventy-  
eight percent of these mothers work out-  
side the home.  

As a working mother, I looked for-  
ward to reading an anthology of stories  
on that topic, which has become an ide-  
ological battleground in our country. I  
carefully eked out time between a col-  
lege trustees’ meeting, a trip to see  
Hamlet with my daughter, and my son’s  
weekly soccer game to savor the  
twenty-five stories. I must admit to some  
disappointment. Although the book  
achieves remarkable diversity in depic-  
tion of class, ethnicity, generations, and  
regions, the single greatest revolution in  
twentieth-century family life — the en-  
try of mothers into the workplace — is  
reflected with only mixed success.  

The stories are neatly divided into six  
categories: husbands and wives, mothers  
and daughters, fathers and daughters,  
fathers and sons, mothers and sons, and  
siblings. Geri Giebel Chavis, editor,  
psychotherapist, and associate professor  
of English, states her purpose in the in-  
troduction: “This collection is designed  
primarily for those who enjoy reading  
short fiction and who want to learn more  
about what makes families tick.” She  
also envisions the anthology as useful for  

educators and health professionals.  

The anthology opens, appropriately,  
with the story of a newlywed couple,  
Janet Beeler Shaw’s “The Trail to the  
Ledge.” Both husband and wife work in  
a summer camp, he coaching tennis, she  
drama. The story depicts their efforts —  
some well-intentioned, some misguided —  
to deal with the closeness and lack of  
privacy inherent in the first months of  
marriage. The other four stories in this  
section, portraying marriages at various  
stages, also deal with the themes of “am-  
bivalence and the ebb and flow of merg-  
ing and separateness,” as Chavis states  
in her introduction. Gwendolyn  
Brooks’s rather devastating two-page  
“The Young Couple at Home” touches  
lightly on reading habits as foreboding  
differences to come. Stories by Hortense  
Calisher, Elaine Marcus Starkman, and  
Willa Cather depict seasoned marriages  
where such differences have become ar-  
ticulated, rigid, and of central concern.  
In each, the wife, in the traditional role  
of helpmate, chafes against her hus-  
band’s authority, philandering, or re-  
strictions.  

The heart of the anthology is the four  
sections dealing with parent-child re-  
lationships. These stories range from an  
excerpt of Colette’s autobiography to a  
finely wrought account by Marcia Port-  
noy of the transformation in a mother  
and daughter relationship when the  
daughter in turn becomes a mother;  
from John Updike’s waspish “Man and  
Daughter in the Cold” to Ernest J.  
Gaines’s “The Sky Is Gray,” a young  
Black boy’s poignant rendering of a trip  
with his mother to a Baton Rouge den-  
tist, a trip that provides a first and baf-  
fling encounter with racism. Other sto-  
ries, Wallace Stegner’s “The Blue-  
Winged Teal” and Flannery O’Connor’s  
incomparable “Everything that Rises  
Must Converge,” explore the tensions of  
the single-parent family; still others,  
Sherwood Anderson’s “Unlighted  
Lamps” and John Cheever’s “The Na-  
tional Pastime,” confront starkly the  
death of a parent.  

July/August 1988