eae  
Firsts in Fiction  

212 pp.  

by Leslie Carper  

It is heartwarming to note that in  

trying to characterize four first works  

of fiction by women authors, the  
search for a discernible unifying thread  
leaves one empty-handed. No common  
focus fuses them; only two depict strong  
female protagonists, for example.  
Stylistically they range from writing so  
sparse it would not survive testing for  
anemia to prose so rich it melts, spilling  
into poetry. Each book sports an un-  
broken seal of freshness, each one brings  
us an unheralded voice telling untold  
stories in distinctive rhythms. It does  
the heart good. We are reminded again of  
the wide range that language can probe.  
Recognition that we continue to be  
multifarious pleasantly surprises us; we  
spring from our reading rut. That the  
publishing industry will still haul out its  
fiscal dice and take a chance on an in-  
experienced but very good writer is some-  
thing to celebrate.  

Deborah Eisenberg speaks exclu-  

sively in the first person, as var-  

ious young women who are  
bewildered by life. They confess, from the  
depths of their confusion, events about  
which they decline to either attempt or  
reveal a lucid understanding. Like some  
of the best cub reporters of contemporary  
literature, Eisenberg deals primarily in  
facts, refusing to editorialize, declining  
to conclude. Four of the seven stories in  
Transactions in a Foreign Currency have  
appeared in The New Yorker, journal of  
open-ended fiction, and this does not  
surprise. Although the narrative may  
follow a labyrinthine path through the  
inexplicable, braking at the muddled,  
the writing exhibits distinction and  
skill: “My heart fluttered high up against  
my chest like a routed moth:” “My  
mother had been ill for so long that all  
time had flowed toward her death, and I  
feared that all time would flow backward  
to it as well.”  

Her fearful female protagonists are so  
passive that it is easy to become im-  
patient with them. Indeed Eisenberg  
appears not only to share our failure of  
sympathy, but to encourage it. At the  
end of “Flotsam,” Cinder, the daft  
roommate of inert, rejected Charlotte,  
accurately accuses her of being “Like one  
of those things that hang upside down  
from trees pretending to be dead so no  
one will shoot it!” Later, with belong-  
ings packed but no destination,  
Charlotte finally disavows her abusive  
former boyfriend and, seated astride her  
suitcase, exults in being “thrown wide of  
some mortal danger.” The reader's pa-  
tience has been worn to a nub, though;  
we are unable to share her small  
triumph.  

In the collection’s premier piece,  
“What It Was Like, Seeing Chris,” the  
tremulousness of Laurel invites the read-  
er’s extended patience rather than ex-  
asperation, precisely because Laurel is a  
floundering adolescent and her confu-  
sion is natural to her status. Monthly  
excursions into the city for treatment of  
an eye malady leave Laurel tantalizingly  
on her own. Before meeting her prettier  
sister at ballet class, she wanders into a  
bar near the optometrist’s office and  
there meets older, more worldly Chris.  
Eisenberg captures, with brittle clarity,  
the painful loneliness of a girl discover-  
ing herself sexually for the first time.  
Laurel is both more intelligent and less  
insightful than we might expect, a con-  

Jury/August 1986  

Transactions in a Foreign Currency, by Deborah Eisenberg. New York: Knopf, $15.95,  

Collaborators, by Janet Kauffman. New York: Knopf, $13.95, 134 pp.  
Face, by Cecile Pineda. New York: Viking Penguin, $14.95 (HB), $5.95 (PB), 194 pp.  
Available Light, by Ellen Currie. New York: Summit Books, $16.95, 297 pp.  

vincing and genuine character. She  
cries easily, blushes painfully, and  
bravely comes to the sad recognition  
that is the bridge between childhood and  
adulthood — that we are all, ultimately,  
alone in the world.  

Eisenberg deftly couples Laurel’s de-  
teriorating vision with her expanding  
scope when Chris introduces Laurel to  
another man: “ ‘Hello, Laurel,’ Joel  
said. He seemed to think there was  
something funny about my name, and  
he looked at me the way I’ve noticed  
grown men often do, as if I couldn’t see  
them back perfectly well.”  

Eisenberg’s painstaking realism pre-  
sents the reader with a focus so tight that  
it seems like tunnel vision; she offers the  
reader no release with a glance away.  
She is able to convey the darkness from  
the souls of her characters and display  
the nearly unbearable misery inherent  
in life’s most ordinary moments. Yet her  
scope is narrow. Like Beattie and Carver,  
she elects to present the thinnest slice of  
life, and as a result her stories fail to ripple  
with resounding aftereffects.  

Deborah Eisenberg. Photo © by Diana  
Michener.  

In Janet Kauffman’s Collaborators,  

the young narrator is obsessed about  

her mother. Trained as a poet,  
Kauffman is the author of the well-  
received 1983 story collection, Places in  
the World a Woman Could Walk. Both  
genres, poetry and the short story, are in  
strong evidence in her first novel, with  
cadences reminiscent of a prose poem  
and chapters that could double for com-  
plete stories.  

A piece in the earlier collection, “My  
Mother Has Me Surrounded,” provides  
the opening frame and controlling image  
for the novel. Twelve-year-old Andrea  
Doria, named for the sunken ship, lies  
on the beach in her mother’s shadow  
and absorbs every minute detail of the  
woman’s sensual rapport with the water.  
Tasting salt on her mother’s proffered  
arm, Andrea Doria thinks, “I feel on the  
tip of my tongue the trace of the hairs of  
her arm, a print of her sea-swimming  
arm. And I lick my own arm, which is a  
lifeless arm, not my own at all, not any-  
one’s. I have nothing that isn’t hers.”  

Andrea Doria is the repository of her  
mother’s intense memories and dreams,  
and as such is both privileged and  
burdened. Her journey is toward in-  
dependence from a love so overpowering  
it threatens to render her invisible; her  
torment is in trying to claim her selfhood  

while not sacrificing that love. Kauff-  
man delineates the process of separation  
from the mother that is the prerequisite  
to living.  

Janet Kauffman  

The mother, never referred to by  
name, irreverent of the constraints of  
their Pennsylvania Mennonite farming  
community, divulges her sexually in-  
formed past and brazen theories to her  
daughter. “God is a numbers player and  
cares nothing about justice. He never  
was anybody’s lover.” When her mother  
suffers a debilitating stroke, she loses her  
robust, womanly health and the power  
to determine events, the qualities that  
define their relationship. For the first  
time her mother is not in control, is  
helpless, and the slow separation begins  
as her mother’s fragile recovery starts.  

Kauffman composes her prose in  
arresting and lyrical sentences; each one  
is pure pleasure. Likewise, the imagery  
she places before us is ripe and luscious,  
but this is precisely why the novel bogs  
down. The reader tires of writing that  
tries vainly to impress by flexing its  
literary muscle. One longs for greater  
substance — in the characters, their  
story, and where it takes them.  

And yet she can dazzle. Kauffman  
achieves haunting effects in her  
beautifully detailed description of the  
violent shooting of a groundhog:  

I saw the smoke puff, and I  

followed the bullet, miraculous,  
with my eyes, tracing its mathe-  
matical arc, the slow rise and the  
slower fall, its wedged entry into the  
brown shoulder fur of the animal in  
the center of the garden, just where  
my mother wanted it, and there,  
inside the animal, next to the  
muscled heart, the bullet stopped. It  
held its warmth there, the way  
blood does, although its chilling also  
began when the body first buckled  
and slipped downward. On its side,  
the groundhog moved its legs several  
times, but then its head flattened  
against the ground.  

Readers of Cecile Pineda’s ex-  

perimental novel, Face  

(nominated for an American  
Book Award), will be reminded of the  
elegant, elegiac tales of Kafka, Borges,  
and Kobo Abe. Pineda’s novel shares  
with them more than a thematic view of  
life as distilled allegory; Face evidences  
tremendous skill and sophistication as  
well. Borrowing a true incident in Brazil  
in which a man’s face was disfigured  
beyond repair or recognition by an  
accident, Pineda has infused bare facts  
with a potent imagination to write a  
searing story of the role that destruction  
plays in creation.  

The signposts of identity, the calling  
cards we display to the world as identi-  
fiably us, include the unique maps of our  
faces and our distinctive names. Indeed,  

we are our faces and names; we learn to  
inhabit them; ultimately we become  
them. The irony is that a face is  
everchanging throughout life, and we  
humans, persistent seekers of self-  
knowledge, continue our internal  
metamorphosis along with all exterior  
transformations.  

In Face, Helio’s name is not revealed  
until well into the novel, and his face is  
never described. He is a barber by trade,  
a shaver of others’ faces. His tragic  
accident, the result of a bicycle out of  
control on a rainy incline, destroys all  
achievements, all plans. The surgery  
needed to restore his face is classified as  
cosmetic, and therefore elective, by the  
state. Helio’s requests are refused by one  
bureaucrat after another; his poverty  
forbids a private surgeon. Discarding an  
official but painful plastic mask for a  
white handkerchief, Helio, in one  
Kafkaesque scene, is unable to register at  
the bureau of rehabilitation because of  
his unofficial status. The clerk points  
out that the mask comforts not the  
wearer but the viewer.  

Pineda is so skilled in prodding our  
awareness that seemingly innocuous  
phrases like “He stands facing his boss  
now” and “She makes a face” take on  
added irony. When Helio asks his form-  
er boss for a letter stating that his dis-  
missal was a direct result of his  
appearance, the boss’s only concern is  
for himself, and again the precise phras-  
ing is perfectly tuned to ironic effect:  
“How'd you think that makes me look,  
eh?”  

Cecile Pineda  

When Helio is systematically turned  
away by the slum community that tries  
to torch his shack, by his employer, and  
by his girlfriend, his accident takes on  
the qualities of a crime. A victim of  
caprice and chaos, he is then victimized  
by others, and like a fugitive he seeks the  
mask of darkness. Helio’s expression of  
overweening desire for his girlfriend Lula  
prompts her to exclaim, “I can’t make  
love to a monster!” He rapes and beats  
her, giving rise to the question, do we  
become what others perceive us to be?  

Finally the bureaucracy gives way and  
his case is taken up by a sympathetic  
doctor. But economic circumstances  
cause Helio to be sent away, and, unable  
to continue treatment, he performs  
reconstruction of his own face.  

It is a face; it is not particularly  
striking, certainly not attractive or  
handsome. It evokes neither origins  
nor class. It is unremarkable — like  
anyone else’s. But no. Not like  
anyone. It is his, his alone. He has  
built it, alone. It has not been  
given casually by birth, but made by  
him, by the wearer of it.  

— continued on page 8  

Belles Lettres ® 7