SSS eeeeeee——————E——————E—E—EE—————E—EEEeESSESE

mula (the primary comment in letters of
rejection), I haven’t been able to pub-
lish it. It has been suggested that I have
the sisters “attain their destiny” (I as-
sume one should become head of Rev-
lon, one a famous trial lawyer, and one a
great dress designer). That would be
telling it the way it’s nice to have it, not
the way it is. That’s not what writing is
for.

Do you read as a reader or a writer?

I read as a reader until I find some-
thing so wonderful that I have to stop
and ask how it happened. Then I look at
the work as a writer, for the building
blocks, seams, and joints — to see how
this marvelous thing was made.

Which of your novels and stories do you
think should be made into movies?

I’ve always felt that Now Molly
Knows, a novel about a girl growing up
in the fifties, would make a wonderful
movie if not made as a “poodle skirt and
be-bop” film. Molly is a girl who comes
to knowledge about sexuality in a time of
great dishonesty and repression. She
constantly comes up against the idea
that “they tell me it’s this way, but I see
it’s that way.” This theme is strong in
most of my work, I think, because it’s
been the puzzle of my life.

Do reviews and reviewers matter to you?
Who do you think of as your important re-
viewers? Your best friends? Your faithful
readers? The unknown people who read
periodicals? Do you trust the motivation of
reviewers?

As I get older, I care less about re-
viewers and their agendas, editors and
theirs. As I told one of my daughters
recently, “I just keep staying on my
horse,” to which she replied, “You mean
on your mule.” I have been stubborn. I
have not capitulated to popular taste
(even if I wanted to, I couldn’t possibly
figure out what it is). Certain elements
do seem essential to me in fiction. (The
primary point I teach in my classes is us-
ing a consistent, authentic point of
view.) I can’t, as my former agent once
advised me, “put a little sunshine in your
typewriter.”

What is the compositional history of King of
the World? Did it start with a short story or
with the idea for the whole novel? From
what you have told me, I know that trying to
get it published was a long and discouraging
process that reminds me of the publishing
history of “The Yellow Wallpaper.” In her
afterword to the Feminist Press reprint of the
story, Elaine Hedges writes,

It wasn’t easy for Charlotte Perkins Gil-
man to get her story published. She sent
it first to William Dean Howells, and he,
responding to at least some of its power
and authenticity, recommended it to
Horace Scudder, editor of The Atlantic
Monthly, then the most prestigious maga-
zine in the United States. Scudder re-
jected the story, according to Gilman’s
account in her autobiography, with a curt
note: “Dear Madam, Mr. Howells has
handed me this story. I could not forgive
myself if I made others as miserable as I
have made myself! Sincerely yours, H.E.
Scudder.” The story was finally published,
in May 1892, in The New England Mag-
azine, where it was greeted with strong but
mixed feelings. Gilman was warned that
such stories were “perilous stuff,” which
should not be printed because of the
threat they posed to the relatives of such
“deranged” persons as the heroine.

In 1983 I was in a computer store
when I sat down and wrote what were to
be the opening lines of King of the World.
Then I told my husband we had to buy a
computer — I had a big job ahead of me.
Those lines are now on page twenty-six
of the novel:

Bang! With a single stroke, Michael blew
up the world. His head, thrust into the
dark hooded recesses of the video game,
trembled with ecstasy. This was as it
should be. The cataclysm was destined, he
was only expediting it, giving it his ap-
proval, his energy, his blessing. It had to
be. The world was not working, any fool
could see that. It was beyond help out
there.

At that moment, I entered Michael’s

Spring 1990

consciousness and found the voice with
which I essentially wrote the novel.
Later I added Ginny’s voice.

I finished the first draft in about three
months, working night and day. I
thought it was my best work, like noth-
ing else I had ever seen or read. I was
excited by the power I felt in it, by the
rhythm of the language, by the certainty
of knowing Michael and Ginny’s inner
states. I was also frightened by the lan-
guage I found myself using, by the char-
acters’ way of thinking and talking that
was nothing like the usual state of my
mind. Mike Curtis, who had chosen a
related story “ ‘I Don’t Believe This’ ”
for the Atlantic, was the first editor to
whom the finished manuscript was
shown. He thought it “stunning” but
had to have agreement to publish from
his colleagues.

to regret that we aren’t publishing this.
Please stay in touch.”

The final rejection came after an-
other six-month waiting period, from
an editor who had championed the book
and got it past several readers, but finally
wrote me that the editor-in-chief
thought it was too “downbeat” to market
effectively. “It’s a reaction that is ironi-
cally close to what people feel about bat-
tering . . . Sometimes I think there is
something so viscerally threatening
about this subject, something so pain-
fully revealing about our lives that no
matter how great the novel, it’s too sen-
sitive a topic for some people. I feel
strongly that this is a brilliant novel and
I’m not alone here in that feeling. Surely
another publisher will see this in a com-
pletely different light and understand
both the beauty of the writing and the

It never occurred to me not to describe what it was like to be
alive. Writing, in fact, was the only place one could be totally
honest; in all other areas of life the opposite was required.
This put a great strain on me; it was an acrobatic feat always
to have to say the correct (untrue) thing. I wrote to be

honest, to be alone, to be understood.

It took five months for the verdict to
come back. During that time, I was una-
ble to leave the house in case there
might be a phone call. I only went out
after the editorial offices in the east
closed for the day. I got interim reports:
“The book is now with Editor B, soon to
be with Editor C.” Finally, the news was
in. They wouldn’t take it. One editor
had written “I think we had better let
this go, wonderful writing, but un-
satisfying to the reader.”

The book was sent to twenty-six ma-
jor publishing houses in a period of five
years. Some comments from editors:

Merrill Joan Gerber must be a whiz at
creating characters because she’s created a
whale of a hateful one in Michael. To be
frank, if I were Ginny, I’d rather spend a
year in a body cast than five minutes with
that guy — she should have known better
as soon as he drowned the dog.

I’m sorry to say I won’t be making an
offer. This is all harrowingly well-
described, so well that we immediately
despise Michael. The trouble is that we
immediately despise Ginny, and are ex-
asperated with her as she allows Michael’s
abuse and continually allows more.

To be quite honest with you, I had read
2/3 of the book and couldn’t bear to finish
it at one go. It is a very strong book —
strong in the way that slightly high meat
is strong. I didn’t like the main male
character AT ALL, and as much sympathy
as I had for Ginny, I felt exasperated by
her.

King of the World has now had three
readings here. It has the suspense of a
horror story and yet goes far deeper as a
psychological study of a battered woman
and a hateful man. It’s a riveting book
and I know I will never forget Michael
Fisher. However, we feel this would be a
stronger novel if we could see the story as
something good that went bad, rather
than something that was bad from the
beginning. The fact that Ginny stays with
Michael is not believable.

This publisher asked for revisions,
which took a month. They were turned
back with this comment: “What this
book needs goes deeper than a revised
beginning. To counteract the craziness
and hysteria going on through much of
the book, there needs to be a clear solid
framework, a plot that advances step by
step. One way to do this would be to
make it a suspense novel — but I suspect
that isn’t what you want to do with this.
I’m afraid I can’t tell you how to give the
book a more formal plot, but I would be
pleased to see what you decide to do if
you have the inclination to get
reinvested in this book . . . I continue

importance of the story itself.”

But I decided there would be no more
publishers; I took to my bed for several
days and began to doubt if I should go on
writing. My judgment was severely
shaken: the work I felt was my best
work, in which I had taken the greatest
risks of my life, had proven to be worth-
less. Who was crazy? They or I? I
thought it had to be me and went into
such a deep depression that I had to seek
professional help.

My blessings to Cynthia Ozick, who
nominated the book to Bill Henderson
of Pushcart Press and who — without
numerous committees and votes —

chose it for the Editors’ Book Award.

What about luck? In Alice Brown’s won-
derful story “The Way of Peace” (1898),
she writes about one of the characters,

Next morning came brother Ezra, and
Lucy Ann hurried to meet him with an
exaggerated welcome. Life was never very
friendly to Ezra, and those who belonged
to him had to be doubly kind. They could
not change his luck, but they might
sweeten it. They said the world had not
gone well with him; though sometimes it
was hinted that Ezra, being out of gear,
could not go with the world. All the riv-
ers ran away from him, and went to turn
some other mill. He was ungrudging of
John’s prosperity, but still he looked at it
with some disparagement, and shook his
head.

Do you think of Michael as a
“schlamazel?” I’ve never read Rabbi Ku-
shner’s When Bad Things Happen to Good
People, but from interviews I have seen it
seems he is saying that some people have
good luck and some people have bad and that
you shouldn’t take your luck personally.
What happens to you has nothing to do with
God or your own deservingness. What's
important is how you deal with it. Michael
was not the type of guy to make lemonade
when gifted with a lemon, was he?

And I remember all the old Jewish jokes
about beggars who through no fault of their
own are unable to earn a living or maintain
a home. Nevertheless, they are not shamed.
They have a certain pride in being there to
provide those with mazel [luck] with the
opportunity to perform mitzvot [blessings].

Poor Michael had no tradition for finding
meaning in his “shlamazeldik.”

One of the strongest aspects of
Michael’s nature is his bafflement about
how others get successful (get rich,
mainly, but also how they get wonderful
wives, good friends, good jobs, and live
the good life.) I’ve decided that one of
the reasons readers say they find him so

unattractive is that he taps into the same
questions they ask themselves. Yet they
don’t want to— can’t bear to— identify
with him.

When Michael gets the job bartend-
ing at the party, he wishes he could be
seen now, “in this wonderful bedroom,
with soft lights, in a roomful of modern
expensive furniture. . . . He wondered
how an ordinary man got a wife like
that, a house like this, a party for all
those friends pouring in downstairs.
Where had he learned about that kind of
thing? Had his mother and father taught
him how to be rich and lucky? Had it
come as the grace of God? He could
never figure it.”

Where is your Jewishness? Here is what
seems to be Ginny’s:

What do you do in your head, Michael? she
wanted to ask. He was no more under-
standable than a plank from a shipwreck,
floating there on top of the waterbed.

What goes on in your mind? Her mind
seemed so simple compared to his. It just
sat there, doing ordinary things, and only
sometimes got a little depressed, or a little
happy. Mainly it had lists of things laid
out in it, things to do to keep life run-
ning. She liked to keep busy and not
think of serious, dangerous things. It was
as if there were two places she could be in
her mind, and they were separated by a
big curtain. In front of the curtain, in a
well-lit place, were the ordinary things she
had to do, wash the diapers, go to the
store, play with the baby, cook dinner, go
back to her job at the hospital. Beyond
the curtain, way in the dark beyond, were
the other things she couldn’t understand
— why she was born, why she had to die,
what was the meaning of all this work and
learning and suffering she had to do, what
happened before she was born, and what
would happen after she died. Ginny didn’t
want to peek around the edge of that cur-
tain very much — it was better that it just
hung there, heavy and thick, like a wall.
Michael, though, was always playing
games with it, running from one side of it
to another, shouting back to her things he
said he saw, what he thought would hap-
pen in the next life, what God was like.
Ginny didn’t believe in God; Jews didn’t
make a big deal about God, talking to
him, begging him for private things —
they felt it was a waste of time. There
were better things to do with your imagi-
nation, as far as the Jews were concerned.
And with your time. Life was here and
now. If you wanted happiness, you’d bet-
ter get some here, for yourself, and for
others, too. You didn’t have to be afraid
of hell to do good, and you didn’t have to
do good because you hoped you'd go to
heaven and get your rewards.

What about you?

It’s everywhere. It’s my early life in
Brooklyn. It is in the food I cook, and in
my sense of humor and irony and wistful
sorrow. It’s in my certainty that doom is
just around the corner, that even if life is
great, it’s best to say how cold it is out,
how threatening the sky looks (don’t let
the evil eye find you). At bottom, it’s
the feeling that someone should have
done better in figuring out this world
before they turned it on and set it loose.
Klezmer music breaks my heart. Jackie
Mason talking about Jews always asking
each other “Didja eat yet?” sends me
into hysterics. A religious Jew I’m not.
A political Jew I’m not. A Jewish
mother and daughter I am.

Movie stars are always asked if they want
their children to “go into the business.” Do
you want that for your children?

My children are already writers. They
are doomed and blessed. I don’t want
them to have this life of rejection, to
work forever on speculation and be de-
fined by the judgment of others, but if
they are drawn to it, what other life will
serve them?

Moving? You must send a
change-of-address to Belles

Lettres — the post office does
not forward bulk mail.

Belles Lettres @ 17