Bitterness and Truth

Different Kinds of Love, by Leland Bardwell. Dublin: Attic Press, 1987, $7.95, 121 pp.

121 pp. (PB)

My Head is Opening, by Evelyn Conlon. Dublin: Attic Press, 1987, $7.95, 123 pp.

123 pp. (PB)

Changelings, by Melissa Murray. Dublin: Attic Press, 1987, $9.95, 140 pp. (PB)  
Blood and Water, by Eilis Ni Dhuibhne. Dublin: Attic Press, 1988, $9.95, 148 pp. (PB)

by Patricia Roth Schwartz

The popular story about Saint

Patrick driving the snakes from

Ireland is really a history of the  
patriarchal takeover of ancient women’s  
religions (the serpent being a symbol of  
The Goddess). Perhaps now, at long  
last, the serpents have begun to turn.  
Attic Press, 44 East Essex Street, Dub-  
lin, publishes an impressive list of titles,  
both fiction and nonfiction, by Irish  
women writers, including several vol-  
umes of “fairy tales for feminists,” as well  
as books on women’s health and other  
vital contemporary issues.

These four volumes represent the  
heart of Attic’s fiction list. Each writer  
represents a unique style and a particular  
set of voices, yet all traverse the same  
terrain, not an Emerald Isle populated  
by leprechauns and apple-cheeked farm  
girls, but rather a landscape, as often  
urban as rural, haunted with blighted  
hopes, withered hearts, and searing  
anger. This is a perspective that is fully  
female at long last, one in which the  
Irish woman is no longer an object of  
stereotype or fantasy.

Leland Bardwell, a much-published  
novelist and poet, turns for the first time  
to the form of short fiction in Different  
Kinds of Love. Her facility is impressive.  
In “The Dove of Peace,” she captures  
the wry, acerbic voice of an aging at-  
thritic woman: “There’s a hole in my  
memory. I’ve had other holes — unim-  
portant ones — but this one nags, some  
days almost to torture level.” We find  
that this creature whom society would  
discard has left behind a legacy: her art  
form, boxes which she has created from  
fine woods and gems that now exist all  
over the world. This deft combination of  
metaphor and voice permeates all of the  
tales in this book, as women deal with  
the small and large betrayals of the body  
and the heart — birth, battering, in-  
cest, illness — in a world they must live  
in but did not make.

Eilis Ni Dhuibhne is a folklorist and  
women’s studies teacher as well as an  
award-winning writer. She dedicates  

to interview women from every imagi-  
nable walk of life and of every political  
persuasion. The wife of the U.S. am-  
bassador to the Republic of Ireland dur-  
ing the Carter administration, Shannon  
reflects a moderate, liberal, pro-peace  
position. Although members and sym-  
pathizers of the Irish Republican Army  
and Sinn Féin are interviewed, Shan-  
non makes no bones of her intolerance  
for their “extremist” ideology. None-  
theless, she allows their voices to come  
through, juxtaposing them with others.

I Am of Ireland does not explicitly  
look at the development of feminist  
thought in Northern Ireland. Instead, it  
views women’s position through the lens  
of a country at war. Women are pre-  
sented as the central players in strife  
they did not create and do not want their  
offspring to be part of. For rare, indeed,  
is the woman who passively accepts hav-  
ing lost a mate or a child to the conflict.

Shannon interviews women on both  
sides who have been incarcerated for  
their positions, and she discusses in de-  
tail the punitive measures governing  
their imprisonment. Strip searches of  
IRA supporters, solitary confinement  
and psychological torture are laid bare  
and soundly condemned.

Activists still working in the commu-  
nity are also interviewed, as are women  
who have unwittingly become ensnarled  

in the bigotry that regulates everyday  
life. Take Annie, a Belfast-born Catho-  
lic who returned to Northern Ireland  
after a love affair abroad ended. She  
found a “lovely little house” in Ballylittle  
and proceeded, with the help of a friend,  
to fix it up. Within days of moving in,  
graffiti appeared on her front door: Taigs  
(slang for Catholics) Out! Windows  
were broken. The front door was kicked  
in. “I'll tell you, it’s bloody frightening  
to be in a big house alone at night and  
have someone kick in your front door. I  
would be terrified and phone the police,  
and they would come round, but of  
course no one would be there. I finally  
barricaded the front door and went in  
and out the back. And then the first July  
12th (a Protestant holiday) that I was  
there, they smashed the bottom win-  
dows and daubed more slogans. Then  
they stood outside and banged their  
lambeg drum at half-four in the morn-  
ing.” Such harassment continued until a  
neighbor threw a petrol bomb into the  
house. Annie responded by installing  
bulletproof windows. Then a letter  
came, saying that “the next time they  
would be sure I was at home because they  
didn’t want any Fenian (Catholic)  
bitches in Ballylittle. . . . So that was  
it. I sold the house and left.”

The impact of such atrocities on chil-  
dren — the national pathology — is dis-  

cussed by Shannon, as is the tremendous  
hatred facing the Catholic population.  
“I found that most of the Protestants I  
spoke with really do fear and/or dislike  
Catholicism, and not all are willing to  
put on a public face of tolerance. When  
pressed, they'll tell you that what they  
dislike is the Pope; the control over its  
people that the Catholic church exer-  
cises; the pomp and ceremony of Catho-  
lic rituals and the liturgy; and the  
‘goings-on,’ (sex) between priests and  
nuns, priests and parishioners, priests  
and priests, and priests and possibly the  
devil. . . . They say ‘We have nothing  
against Catholics. It’s just that we don’t  
want their religion inflicted on us.’ ”

So what’s the solution? Many of the  
people told Shannon they want nothing  
more than peace, but most are equally  
adamant that the country must rectify its  
economic situation before peace can be  
won. “Jobs would go such a long way to  
solve our problems,” said Angela Heg-  
arty, head of the women’s group of the  
Social Democratic and Labour Party.  
“Young married men want to work, want  
to have a job to go to and a house to  
come back to. They want to work in the  
garden, go to the pub for a couple of  
pints, go home. Irish people really like  
to own their own wee home and have  

their own wee garden. As it is, what do  
the young men here do? They have no  
jobs, no self-respect, so they hang out on  
street corners all day.” Others advocate  
an end to segregated housing develop-  
ments and schools. Such efforts would  
go a long way, they argue, in making  
progress — just getting the two groups to  
interact could help break down barriers  
and ideological walls.

As to women in the North, Shannon  
is eloquent and direct. “Many women in  
Northern Ireland think the ‘national  
problem’ far outweighs the women’s is-  
sue. But because of the national prob-  
lem, women are being forced to take on  
a huge burden, which leaves very little  
time or space for themselves. The ulti-  
mate feminist goal in Northern Ireland  
should be to create unity among the  
women there and a common voice that  
refutes terrorism as a way of life. Until  
that voice is heard, men will recite those  
ancient wounds with monotonous regu-  
larity to a world grown tired of lis-  
tening. ... Most wounds heal with  
time. Time is running out for Northern  
Ireland.”

Eleanor J. Bader is an editor and free-  
lance writer whose work frequently appears  
in the Guardian, New Directions for  
Women, On the Issues, and other progres-  
sive, feminist publications.

Belles Lettres @ 3