Belles Lettres Interview

Whether recreating turn-of-the-century coal camps or more contemporary epochs, novelist Denise Giardina brings Appalachia to life with humor and compassion. Talking with Susan Koppelman and Janet Mullaney, she intertwines her own history with that of the region.

Do you see yourself as coming out of a tradition of Appalachian writers?

There is a strong oral tradition. In the late nineteenth century, people came and collected old folk songs that had died out in England and had been preserved in the mountains. They were passed on from family to family (before the days of radio obviously). Indigenous stories and songs were also handed down. When I was little, my grandfather would take me on his knee and tell me stories.

In one of them, a man is out in his potato patch when he finds an enormous potato. He takes it home and cooks it up in his soup. After eating, he goes to bed. Lying there he hears a voice outside saying, “I want my big toe.” It is the boogerman, who is a figure in Appalachian folklore. This little kid is on your lap and the guy is coming into the house saying, “I want my big toe” louder and louder. All of the sudden you grab the kid and yell “gotcha,” and the kid jumps ten feet in the air.

In my new book, I use the big toe as a metaphor for coal, which is down in the ground until we bring it out and turn this boogerman loose on our whole culture and environment.

Do you have a sense of European roots?

There’s a lot of variety in Appalachia. Some parts are homogeneous, with mostly people from the British Isles and some from Germany. Whereas about one-third of the population in the county where I grew up were Black and about a third immigrant, mostly Italian. Sometimes it felt like Europe to me. I went to school with Polish kids — but they all talk like me.

My dad’s family came over from Sicily to work in the mines. My mom’s hillbilly. She’s from eastern Kentucky, so she’s more from the British side. She faced prejudice from her family in marrying my father.

Do you feel indebted to your mother for her spirit?

Yes. Carrie in my book is a lot like my mom. I asked myself what she would do in a particular situation. She was a strong person who raised us almost singlehandedly. My dad was gone a lot and never took a hand in the childraising.

How did you decide to become a writer?

I didn’t know I was one until about halfway through my first novel, when I said, “I’m really going to finish this.” About the same time, I started getting a sense that I could trust my instincts. That meant taking risks when I was using metaphors that made my work unique or original, even though it may have seemed weird.

I thought about writing a lot when I was a kid. When I was four, I told my mother I was going to be a “poemer.” I remember telling stories to myself and not writing them down. I guess I thought writers had to come from New York. In college I wrote a couple of things that ended up being early chapters of later books. I really started when I was about twenty-eight.

The only reason I wrote my first book [Good King Harry] was Appalachian paranoia. I thought nobody would want to publish an Appalachian book. So I would publish this one first then sneak the other one in after it. I had heard a lot of horror stories about publishing, and I thought, well, I will make my mistakes on the first book because it doesn’t involve me emotionally like Appalachia does. The Color Purple helped me realize I could write a book in dialect. I wanted to do it, but I didn’t think anybody would publish it. I thought, if she can do it, I can too. So I did.

Incidentally, one publisher rejected Storming Heaven by saying “Mary Lee Settle and Breece Pancake wrote about West Virginia; it’s an overdone subject.” You encounter a layer of bigotry when you tell people you’re from Appalachia. A woman from New York once told me, “Your accent makes my skin crawl.” I said “Why?” “It’s so racist,” she said. I think I expect it, and sometimes I overreact.

When you left Appalachian culture to go to an academic setting, did you feel isolated?

I experienced that in stages. I moved from the coal fields when I was thirteen. My dad lost his job, and we moved to Charleston. I showed up at school with dresses down to here [calf length] and hair in pincurls. This was 1964. Everybody else was wearing swoopy hairdos and skirts up to here [midthigh]. Talk about feeling like a little country girl! It happened again in college, which was a church-related private school. Two-thirds of the students were from out of state, because it was so expensive, and they were contemptuous of West Virginia; they were always making fun of us.

Did you hear any stories while growing up about the unions and the coal companies?

Most of that I heard later. My county was the stronghold of the coal companies and under their thumb. In fact, when the companies wanted to knock off two guys who were leading the miners, they trumped up charges, had them tried, and shot them on the steps of our courthouse because they knew they could do it there. Then during the Roosevelt administration, the unions came in all at once.

What is a coal camp like?

When I was a kid, the company still owned the houses and the land. Every house in a row was alike. Now people own the houses, although the company still owns the land. Where I lived was a small lot — about ten houses and a company store.

It was real open. People would walk into your house without knocking. (My mother was always unsettled by that.) The houses were close together, so you could hear people yelling at each other.

Environmentally it was weird. The creeks were full of sewage and mine acid so that they were black, with the rocks in them stained a metallic orange. It was strong smelling too. We went in the creek sometimes, although we weren’t allowed because it was full of glass and filthy. If you drank it you could get typhoid. One mean thing we did to a kid we didn’t like was to give him Kool-Aid made from creek water. It was rough — not exactly a suburban situation.

And there was always the potential for something tragic. My next-door neighbor pointed a gun at me one time. We were violent little kids. We'd pick up chunks of “red dog” and throw them at each other, and I got hit in the glasses once. Red dog is slate that has been picked out of coal and discarded. By internal combustion it catches on fire and burns, which turns it orange. It was used to fill in holes in the road. One thing I learned early was not to fall down. If you did, you ripped your knees open. You were scared of throwing your body around because there was no grassy space; it was all red dog.

The coal companies were the authority, so there was no sense of local government. There was community, but no police standing on the corner. You had to work out relationships on your own. If somebody didn’t like your dog and was going to poison him, you couldn’t go to the animal shelter and get a warrant sworn out.

The lack of infrastructure continues to the present day. Garbage is everywhere because there’s no collection. When the creeks rise, you see it floating. If you needed plumbing or electric work on your house after the companies pulled out, you had to rely on yourself because you just could not get anybody to do it.

Some people attribute the Appalachian individualism and skepticism about authority to the legacy of the coal camps.

It is a mix. I’ve heard people from outside say, “I’d be afraid to go up that holler by myself.” And I don’t feel afraid at all. I feel safer than anywhere else, yet there is the possibility of violence. Usually violence breaks out in families, unfortunately. People are friendly to visitors. Even though they have been taken advantage of, they are still pretty open people.

I can remember in the sixties when Appalachia was the focus of attention. We had so many problems, yet the coverage was so patronizing and so negative that people denied them.

And everybody who has come in has done some damage. You had missionaries and journalists in the late 1800s trying to civilize the mountain people. They did some good, but they did a lot of harm too. And then the coal companies came in and took over the land. Everybody thinks they are going to improve things, and they always end up messing it up even more. I tend to get defensive about it.

And Appalachia is the stepchild of the state of Kentucky. There is a tax on coal to make up for the damage it does. The money has gone to build the Kentucky Center for the Arts in Louisville when people here don’t even have sewage systems and water.

What were people’s reactions to Storming Heaven where you come from?

Positive. Lots of miners came up to me at book signings and so forth and said they enjoyed it. They can’t believe somebody finally wrote about them.

It gets complicated, though. The novel I’m working on is more contemporary and humorous than Storming Heaven, and I worry about offending people. I want them to realize I’m laughing with them, not at them.

Tell us more about your new book.

It starts in the 1960s and may end in the 1970s. It is an autobiographical novel about growing up in a coal town. Some of the characters are grandchildren of people in Storming Heaven. It’s similar to a lot of novels about coming of age in the 1960s — the Vietnam War and all of that — but the Appalachian point of view skews it a little. It has a bitter humor.

Do you feel an ambivalence as a chronicler of your culture, having lived away from it for periods?

Many people are bicultural. Like children of immigrants, you keep the two in tension. But sometimes I don’t feel like I belong anywhere. When I visit people out of the area, I feel real hillbilly, and when I come back I feel like an outsider sometimes, which is painful. It’s a strange situation. Yet you need distance to analyze the culture.

One of my father’s favorite sayings was “You can’t get above your raisings.” I went through a period of rebelling against that, making fun of the country and gospel music he liked. We’d be driving and he’d say, “I would love to live in a town like this.” I’d say, “I want to get away to the city. I don’t want to be a hillbilly.”

I love mountain music now. And here I am living in a little coal camp instead of a big city! I love it intensely, yet sometimes I just despise it. It used to be all beautiful, and now there is so much ugliness. There’s such a stark contrast. The strip mines and coal operations are just filth, black gunk all over the place. They are evil parasites. There is not a clear stream in the whole region.

There hasn’t been much reclamation.

Strip mining devastates more than the land. There are fewer and fewer deep mines and more and more strip mines. And coal is the only industry. So you have a lot of people who can stay in the area only if they work in strip mines. They don’t want to leave the mountains, yet the only way they can stay is to tear them up. The psychic toll is painful.

I’ve got a strip mine near me. I'll be sitting in my living room, and I’ll hear a boom. The house shakes, and I think, “there goes another mountain.” On the road leading up to another mine is a guard shack with a big German shepherd in a cage. I’d be afraid to stop there.

I’ve been assaulted by coal company people before. Once I was taking pictures for photography class of a big pond and some black scum, which you would find here at almost any mining facility. I was on a county road standing by my car and this guy came out of a thicket saying, “What’s your business — get out of here.” I tried to explain I was taking pictures for a class. “Sure,” he says. “Tell me what group you’re with.”

What are your rights on your own land?

In Eastern Kentucky, mineral rights have been severed from the surface land. If you own a farm there, you own six inches of topsoil, and the company owns the minerals. They can show up on your doorstep. They can destroy your crops. They can ruin your water supply. They can strip the whole mountain behind your house.

—continued on page 21

Belles Lettres @ 11