Impressions

Weaving Women’s Colors

The National Women’s Studies

Association celebrated its

tenth anniversary at its annual
conference, which took place this year
at Spellman College, a historical Black
women’s college in Atlanta. The theme
was “Weaving Women’s Colors: A
Decade of Empowerment,” and the
programs of presentations, readings, and
cultural events, as well as a bird’s eye
view of the 1,500 women participating,
attested to the multiplicity of the
women who are working with and
through NWSA.

A well-attended, emotionally
charged session entitled “When White
Women Professors Interpret Black
Women Writers” featured Donna
Hollenberg, Linda Myers, and Minrose
Gwin, with Sondra O’Neale responding
to the papers. Hollenberg spoke about
the relationship between Meridian and
Lynn in Alice Walker’s novel Meridian
as reflecting (I think in O’Neale’s coin-
age) “sexual racism”; that is, the erosion
of self-respect that the Black woman
may feel when the WASP woman is
held up as the ideal and preferred by
Black men. Hollenberg had been
bothered by what she felt to be Lynn’s
internalized anti-Semitism. She had felt
that there was a potent unresolved issue
in the narrative: the conjunction of
anti-Semitism and racism. She has
come, however, to embrace a
philosophy of rising above our differ-
ences, above our subjective, “half-
formed expectations” of each other.

Linda Myers told of her personal in-
volvement with texts by Toni Morrison,
ranging from wholehearted identifica-
tion without regard to race to an acute
awareness that she was reading a passage
as a White woman. She was afraid that
her readings of Morrison would contain
“subtle and not-so-subtle” misinterpre-
tations and that she would be guilty of
racial solipsism, remembering Adrienne
Rich’s statement that color blindness is
not the opposite of racism. Aware of the
“damage done by false universals,” she
still came to realize that race, class, and
sex do not determine all thought and
feeling. In Morrison’s case, for example,
race is not the single most important
thing about her writing: There are her
“complex moral vision and gift of
language.” Reading and writing about
literature of people other than the self is
“enriching, not threatening to the de-
fined self,” said Myers. “If you can’t see
yourself as other in fiction, then you
can’t do it in politics.”

Minrose Gwin, who writes about bi-
racial relationships in narratives, says
“we [White women] can only read Black
women writers when we allow them to
‘read’ us. And we must read with pain
and fear and grief our complicity in the
grand narrative of patriarchy. We must
navigate a space between the ‘we’ of
White women and the ‘we’ of White and
Black women.” Otherwise white women
become “inhibiting midwives of Black
women’s literature.” At the heart of the
biracial narratives she has studied, Gwin
has found “a heavily imprinted pattern
of otherness,” of distrust arising from the
Black woman’s experience of the White
woman as a “breaker of promises.”

Sondra O’Neale responded to the pre-
sentations by saying, in part, that there
is “much that cannot be appreciated
without the contributions of Black
women scholars, experiential things
that cannot be understood without their
communal understanding.” In the dis-
cussion that followed, Papusa Molina, a
Latina, commented on the overintellec-
tual approach to the lives of women of
color and asked “Have you approached
us in ways other than through literature?

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 1987

It is crucial that you release your power.
Don’t try to control. Don’t try to put the
same structures onto us that White men
have put on you and make them fit. It is
important that you feel uncomfortable.
Don’t try to avoid it.”

Susan Koppelman and Judith Arcana
copresented a session on gossip and bio-
graphy. Koppelman has been recovering
short stories by women writers since
1972, which she continues to an-
thologize (upcoming are volumes deal-
ing with interracial friendships and a
book of Fannie Hurst stories), and in the
10,000 she has read has found that cer-
tain themes emerge over and over. In re-
searching biographies of often obscure
writers for her headnotes, Koppelman
has come up against the issue of “kosher
and nonkosher” evidence. She has
found that male scholars consider gossip
legitimate only when it “validates their
wishes and perceptions” about their sub-
ject, “when its presumptions are used to
support the status quo.”

Judith Arcana is working on a book
about “the life and work of Grace
Paley,” which will be her doctoral dis-
sertation (for which it is rare to have a
biography of a living writer accepted). It
is not a biography per se, because Paley
feels uncomfortable with that term;
hence the “working genre” mentioned
above. Paley first said no to the project,
but she agreed after Arcana explained
her intention, which was not to “ag-
grandize or glorify” Paley, but to present
her as one example (as political or-
ganizer, as writer, as mother) of a
woman from whose life other women
could learn. She wanted to “write about
Paley by knowing her personally, by
learning as much about her as possible,
and by interviewing people who have
known her for a long time.” Arcana re-
ferred to a heated dispute at an academic
conference about women inserting their
personal reactions into biographical
considerations of women writers, and
asked why “a situation of mutual nutur-
ance should invalidate the scholarly
quality of a project.” Koppelman and
Arcana suggested that men in academia
operate on a personal level with their
subjects but they are dishonest about it
by creating “the appearance of disin-
terest and the illusion of objectivity.”

Reviewer Kamili Anderson, who assisted
Belles Lettres at the NWSA exhibit, filed
the following report on some of the sessions

she attended.

The title of one session, “Border-
lands,” was taken from Gloria Anzaldua’s
latest book Borderlands/La Frontera: The
New Mestiza (Spinsters/Aunt Lute).
Anzaldua (co-editor of This Bridge Called
My Back), Papusa Molina, Chela Sandova,
and Cherrie Muhanzi were co-panelists.
The session drew a large audience of
about 50, mostly Anglo women.

Via the insights of the panelists, the
attendees visited what Anzaldua describes
in her book as the “psychic terrain” of
the Tex-Mex border territories and
other areas where Hispanic, Native
American, and Anglo cultures merge
and clash. They shared keen percep-
tions of Chicana women’s efforts to con-
ceptualize the dynamics of this cultural
transition, tension, and alienation
(“otherness”). From such bold words —
those of Latinas speaking directly for
themselves, to themselves, and to
others — it also became evident that
Latinas have acquired a sense of empow-
erment as a result of their struggles to re-
define their realities, their histories, and
their sexualities. The tension of the dis-
cussion was often uncomfortable, yet, ul-
timately, the session proved to be a valu-
able, consciousness-raising one.

Faces at the NWSA Conference

Renaissance (Indiana University Press)

_ Picuneate

a

Barbara Smith, Black women’s literature scholar
and publisher, at the Kitchen Table: Women of
Color Press booth

Sonia Sanchez, who read from her new book
Under a Soprano Sky (Africa World Press)

I also found a session on the status of
women’s publications to be stimulating
and informative. Primary panelists were
Leah Creque-Harris and Beverly Guy-
Sheftall of Sage (the scholarly journal of
Black women’s studies), Carmen Elijah
of Minorities and Women in Business
magazine, Linda Gardiner of The
Women’s Review of Books, and Susan
McHenry of Ms. magazine. Much of the
discussion centered on the technical as-
pects of economic and editorial survival
for women’s publications. The panelists
shared a number of thoughts on circula-
tion, advertising, and marketing prob-
lems and tactics on how to deal with
them.

The success to date of most of the
publications is due in large part to per-
sonal and professional networking, to
“overextending” by the women in-
volved, and to volunteer help.
McHenry shared Ms.’s history of
pingponging between profit and non-
profit status in order to make the
magazine viable, in addition to walking
a tightrope between attracting advertis-

ers and maintaining editorial autonomy.
The Sage representatives spoke about
their mission to make the journal more
accessible to the Black community, par-
ticularly to nonacademic women. They
and other publishers present agreed that
theme issues, although valuable, should
be balanced by diversity, especially for
magazines publishing infrequently.

Another notable session was an in-
formal one called “White Feminist Pub-
lishers Publishing Women of Color.”
Present were publishers Nancy Bereano
(Firebrand Books), Joan Pinkvoss
(Spinsters/Aunt Lute), Faith Conlon
(Seal Press); and Barbara Smith
(Kitchen Table: Women of Color
Press). The status of the market for
works by women of color was discussed.
Criticisms were passed along — that
White feminist publishers are not reach-
ing out enough to women authors and
audiences of color; that White feminist
publishers need to confront their own
racism and to examine their own con-
tributions to racial and cultural discrimi-
nation; that these presses are capitaliz-
ing on and benefiting from the profita-
bility of books by women of color, yet
are not responding readily to the unique
and pressing demands for broader pub-
lishing programs for women of color.
Despite the challenges, the feminist
presses were commended for the prog-
ress they have made, often with limited
and overextended resources, compared
to “mainstream” presses. Both previ-
ously published women of color and po-
tential new authors felt that these pres-
ses address the serious void in the dis-
semination of women’s words and that
they have made many valuable con-
tributions. Sessions such as this are im-
portant opportunities for authors and
publishers (and feminists of all colors) to
share viewpoints and become more
visible to each other.

More on Jewish Women

In 1969, Ilona Karmel’s second
novel, An Estate of Memory, was
published. Her first novel, Scephania,
appeared in 1953 and prefigures con-
temporary fictions about “enforced com-
munity” (Ruth Angress’s phrase) such as
The Women’s Decameron by Irina Voz-
nesenskaya, Winter’s Child by Dea Trier
Merch (both set in maternity wards),
and My Companions in the Bleak House
by Eva Kanturkova (set in a Czech
women’s prison). The Feminist Press
has recently reissued Estate, which is a
long, psychologically complex novel
about four Jewish women’s experiences
in a concentration camp in Poland. In
the novel’s focal episode, three of the
women collaborate to help the fourth
give birth and smuggle the baby out of
the forced labor camp. Ruth Angress
wrote the excellent afterword, in which
she says that the book’s “basic assump-
tion” is that “human beings live by
bonding and not in isolation. While
Karmel does describe hardship and terror
with uncompromising severity, the book
is largely about friendship, about women
bonding .... In simpler terms, the
book raises the question how and why
we love. It is a question that can be
tested better at the limits of endurance
than in typical situations.”

Susan Willens — who besides review-
ing for us does other fascinating things,
including a traveling “stand-up book re-
view” lecture called “Read Any Good
Books Lately?” — gave us book reports
on three current titles by Jewish women:
The Birthmark by Dorothea Straus

— continued on page 14

Belles Lettres @ 13