In Their Own Words

The Slave Narrative: Its Place in American History, by Marion Wilson Starling.  
Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1988, $12.95, 375 pp. (PB)

Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, by Harriet A. Jacobs. Edited by Lydia Maria  
Child. Edited and with an introduction by Jean Fagan Yellin. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-  

versity Press, 1989, $9.95, 306 pp. (PB)

by Katharine M. Rogers

A historian declared in 1939 that  
we cannot know what it was  
like to be a slave, because the  
slaves were probably incapable of the  
necessary self-analysis and certainly  
never set down their feelings in writing.  
And yet there were over 6,000 slave  
narratives extant, some of which had  
been bestsellers in the 1840s and 1850s.  
Decades before such writings were con-  
sidered worthy of study, Marion Wilson  
Starling, granddaughter of a slave,  
wrote her groundbreaking dissertation,  
The Slave Narrative: Its Place in American  
History. Completed in 1946, it re-  
mained unpublished until 1981. It has  
now been reissued in paperback.  
Working in a largely uncharted field,  
Starling combed libraries, church and  
court records, and the files of abolition-  
ist periodicals. As she pursued her me-  
ticulous research, she felt increasing  
pride: “Through me, these narratives  
would be reborn. The lives of these  
slaves would live, in their own words.”  
And so they do. We feel the meanness  
and the cruelty of the slaveholders, the  
slaves’ avid yearning for freedom, and  
their struggles to escape. The earlier  
slave narrators presented themselves  
more as individuals seeking personal  
freedom than as members of an op-  
pressed group. Later writers, responding  
to the rise of the radical abolitionist  
movement in the 1830s, were more class  
conscious and denounced the institution  
of slavery. By the 1850s, twelve aboli-  
tionist journals were avid for slave nar-  

“Day’s end/Jackson 1930s” by Eudora Welty

ratives; and the narrators, mostly suc-  
cessful fugitives, wrote to expose social  
wrongs.

It is difficult to select the most mov-  
ing among the harrowing experiences  
that Starling evokes from her material.  
James Curry (1840) had to watch his  
mother being beaten by her master’s  
daughter, whom she had brought up  
from infancy. In addition to cooking for  
thirty people, doing all the housework  
and laundry, milking fourteen cows, and  
caring for both the master’s and the field  
hands’ children, this woman tenderly  
raised her own seven children and three  
orphans. She is last seen being whipped  
for letting her son keep a small piece of a  
pig he had raised; his master had given  
him the animal as worthless, but seized it  

back as soon as James had fattened it.

Uncle Tom Jones (1854), forbidden,  
like all slaves, to learn to read, seized  
moments in the back room of his mas-  
ter’s store to study a spelling book. His  
master surprised him one morning and  
saw him hide something but could not  
tell what it was. Resolved to keep his  
book at all costs, for it represented his  
only hope for improvement, Tom in-  
sisted that he had not hidden anything.  
After beating Tom until even he was  
ashamed, the master gave up without  
getting the book. William and Ellen  
Craft escaped in 1848 by capitalizing on  
her Anglo-Saxon appearance: She mas-  
queraded as an invalid Southern gentle-  
man traveling North for treatment, with  
her husband acting as her faithful slave.  
Since both were illiterate, she tied up  
her right arm in a sling so she would not  
be expected to sign her name.

These narratives have been chal-  
lenged, in their own time and since, as  
abolitionist propaganda rather than as  
authentic records. Starling demon-  
strates their trustworthiness by showing  
their consistency with court records and  
with oral accounts collected from ex-  
slaves by the Federal Writers Project in  
the 1930s. Although the fugitives may  
have unconsciously selected their mate-  
rial to meet the expectations of the abo-  
litionists who encouraged them, there is  
no reason to doubt their tales’ essential  
accuracy. Thus, Starling establishes the  
value of these narratives as historical  
documents that significantly revise tra-  
ditional views of the Old South.

She makes more modest claims for  
their literary value than we would today,  
finding it only in the narratives of  
Frederick Douglass (1845) and Olaudah  
Equiano (1789). Surely Harriet A. Ja-  
cobs’s Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl  
should be added. It is so polished that  
some have suspected that Lydia Maria  
Child actually wrote it, but both Star-  
ling and Jean Fagan Yellin persuasively  

support Child’s assertion that she did no  
more than edit Jacobs’s manuscript. The  
genteel style and narrative persona seem  
to be Jacobs’s own. Calling herself Linda  
Brent, Jacobs describes her master’s ef-  
forts to seduce her and her fears that her  
two children will be taken from her; she  
tells how she spent seven years hiding in  
a crawl space in her free grandmother's  
home and finally escaped to the North.  
Her lengthy account of her master’s se-  
duction campaign and her successful  
resistance suggests a sentimental ro-  
mance, in which the main issue is  
whether the heroine can preserve her  
chastity and her main problem is shocks  
to her delicacy. Jacobs’s normally direct  
language becomes euphemistic and in-  
flated as she narrates her sexual trials.  
Although constant and inescapable sex-  
ual harassment (“vile epithets” and pro-  
positions, but not rape) was un-  
doubtedly unpleasant, she overdra-  
matizes when she classes it with horrors  
such as tearing children from their  
mothers or driving half-starved workers  
to exhaustion.

Jacobs is far more effective when she  
coolly describes white boors ransacking  
Black homes after Nat Turner’s in-  
surrection, explains how taking a white  
neighbor as a lover gave her a feeling of  
freedom and self-respect and a small tri-  

umph over her master, or repeats an ab-  
surdly simple-minded sermon preaching  
that Christian virtue for slaves began  
and ended in devotedly serving their  
masters. Incidents is a fascinating record  
of a thoughtful woman’s experience  
under slavery. It does illustrate the in-  
fluence of literary conventions upon  
autobiographical narrative, but Jacobs  
points to an essential difference: “My  
story ends with freedom; not in the usual  
way, with marriage.”  
@ Katharine M. Rogers, a research  
professor at American University, is com-  
piling an anthology of early American  
women writers.

—Texts of Self, cont.

Brodzki and Schenck are wary of  
comprehensive theories. Their effort to  
be diverse made it “impossible to gener-  
alize about female experience,” yet they  
have also endeavored to avoid “privileg-  
ing an increasingly hegemonic French  
critical practice.” They conclude that  
“The establishment of a separatist fe-  
male tradition, even feminist critics  
have warned, carries the danger of re-  
verse reification.” The diversity of this  
anthology and the acute critical sen-  
sitivity of its editors make it one of the  
most valuable published thus far.

The most distinctive aspect of In-  
terpreting Women’s Lives is its publication  
process. The Personal Narratives  
Group, the “editor” of this text, defines  
itself as a research group affiliated with  
the Center for Advanced Feminist Stu-  
dies at the University of Minnesota. Its  
members represent a rich cross section of  
disciplines: American Studies, English,  
German, Women’s Studies, Anthro-  
pology, History, Film Studies, Afro-  
American Studies, African Studies, and  
Development Studies. That group, after  
a series of discussions, held a conference  
in 1986 on women’s autobiography and  
biography; the book that resulted is in-  
terdisciplinary, and its essays are more  
interrelated than is usual.

The theoretical introduction notes  
that “Traditional explorations of social  
dynamics have tended to emphasize ei-  
ther the constraints of social structure or  
the power of individual agency. Only  
recently have social theorists begun to  
undermine this polarity.” The Personal  
Narratives Group aims to integrate both  
kinds of analysis, thus producing what  
they term “counter-hegemonic in-  
sights.” The editors have divided the  
essays into three sections that provide  

6 ® Belles Lettres

varying interpretive frameworks: “Con-  
text,” “Narrative Forms,” and “Nar-  
rator-Interpreter Relations.”

“Feminist thinking has expanded its  
initial theoretical stance that em-  
phasized the commonality of all women  
by reason of gender to incorporate a  
greater recognition and appreciation of  
differences among women,” the editors  
state. No comprehensive theory of  
autobiography is offered. Rather, the  
editors demonstrate consciousness-  
raising sensitivity to these differences.  
For example, they note that though the  
dominant society might define Black,  
lesbian, or Third World women as  
“marginal,” the Personal Narratives  
Group’s work with these women dem-  
onstrated that they did not necessarily  
experience themselves as marginal (an  
intriguing contradiction to Sidonie  
Smith’s theories).

Hence, the significance of the sec-  
tion on context is clarified, which the  
editors define as literally meaning “to  
weave together, to twine, to connect.”  
Similarly, because half of the essays in  
the book are devoted to what the editors  
call “life histories” (oral histories), the  
section on narrative forms goes to some  
length to understand the relationship of  
narrative structure to purpose, audi-  
ence, meaning, culture, history, gen-  
der, and available models. Finally, the  
section on “Narrator-Interpreter Rela-  
tions” asks “Whose Voice?” do we hear  
when the production of a life history has  
involved two parties: the teller of the  
tale and the interpreter. Issues of power  
and authority are explored, with an es-  
pecially provocative piece offered by  
Marjorie Shostak, the interpreter of  
Nisa — The Life of a !Kung Woman.

The anthology also focuses on Af-  
rican and German women, two groups  
often neglected in anthologies that focus  

“Reading Time” is one of the intricate and  
gloriously colorful autobiographical paintings in  
Mattie Lou O’Kelley: Folk Artist (Bulfinch  
Press, 1989, $40, 84 pp.)

on the Anglo-American tradition. It  
includes a timely essay by Faye Ginsburg  
on oral histories of activists on both sides  
of the abortion issue and the definition  
of what the editors came to call “The  
Arthur Munby Problem.” Munby, a  
nineteenth-century British man of let-  
ters, encouraged a scullery maid, Han-  
nah Cullwick, to keep a faithful account  
of her “dirty work.” The sexual relation-  
ship between the two raises questions  
about the form and content of Cull-  
wick’s diary; similarly, the Personal  
Narratives Group raises questions about  
the context and narrator-interpreter re-  
lationship of contemporary feminist  
scholars.

Joanne Braxton’s essay in Benstock’s  
The Private Self whets the appetite for her  
full book, recently published by Temple  
University Press. In the same fashion in  

which she opened that essay on Char-  
lotte Forten Grimké by talking about  
her own initial resistance to Grimké, so  
she introduces Black Women Writing  
Autobiography with an autobiographical  
account of how she first became inter-  
ested in autobiography by listening to  
her grandmother’s stories. (Interestingly,  
Margaret Walker wrote her novel  
Jubilee as a result of the stories her grand-  
mother told her, against her parents’  
wishes, about slavery.) “My conscious-  
ness was ready shaped for the study of the  
slave narrative,” Braxton comments. “I  
had learned to listen.” In this introduc-  
tion, Braxton clearly establishes her  
terms: coining the term Afra-American  
to describe “the distinctively feminine  
aspects of black American literature and  
culture,” Braxton sees the tradition of  
Black women’s autobiography as “an  
attempt to regain that sense of place in  
the New World” lost in the middle pas-  
sage from Africa to America. It is an oral  
as well as a literary tradition, grounded  
in the antecedents of blueswomen and  
evangelists. “Like the blues, most auto-  
biographies by black Americans, male  
and female, tend to have a dominant  
internal strategy of action rather than  
contemplation. And, like the blues  
singer, the autobiographer incorporates  
communal values into the performance  
of the autobiographical act.”

The three sections of the study trace  
the tradition of Black women’s auto-  
biography. “Making a Way Out of No  
Way” has chapters on Harriet Jacobs and  
on several fugitive slave narratives, in-  
cluding those of Elizabeth Keckley,  
Harriet Tubman, and Sojourner Truth;  
“Emerging from Obscurity” has chapters  
on Charlotte Forten Grimké, and Ida B.  
Wells; and “Claiming the Afra-Amer-  

—continued on p. 21

Winter 1990