Doing It Right

American Women Writing Fiction: Memory, Identity, Family, Space, edited by Mickey Pearlman. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1989, $10, 236 pp. (PB)

by Deborah Price

As I was reading American Women Writing Fiction, I had an insight about my undergraduate years: My creative instructors habitually turned to women writers to illustrate how to do something right. I vividly remember our class reading aloud Jayne Anne Phillips’s “Gemcrack,” a short story told from the point of view of a serial killer. Phillips was our springboard into a discussion on voice and language. Unlike in my standard literature courses, women were frequently held up as models for aspiring writers.

American Women Writing Fiction conveys that same appreciation of women in the trenches, so to speak, probing how they capture and transform experience into memorable fiction. In examining ten contemporary writers, editor Mickey Pearlman and nine other scholars yield a collection of essays that lives up to the back cover’s boast of geographic and ethnic diversity and jargon-free writing. This is not a book you will likely read from cover to cover. I picked out the essays on authors I know best — Phillips, Joyce Carol Oates, and Joan Didion — and later paced my way through the impressive remaining group — Mary Gordon, Louise Erdrich, Alison Lurie, Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, Toni Cade Bambara, Gail Godwin, and Mary Lee Settle.

Pearlman’s introduction is a spirited overview of a feminist approach to literature. Yet the essays that follow are anything but single-minded, never forcing a prearranged theme or perspective on these diverse writers. The collection is a treasure house of original, provocative, and accessible criticism of ten of the most prodigious women writing today in America.

None of these writers has been more prolific than Joyce Carol Oates, visionary of the macabre. As of 1987, she had published nineteen novels and thirteen volumes of collected short stories. Then, of course, there are her poems, plays, book reviews, and essays. Who could more fully embody Benjamin Franklin’s dictum, “There will be sleeping enough in the Grave”?

In his insightful essay, Frank R. Cunningham takes on the challenge of assessing Oates’s early short stories, ninety-five in fact, published in five collections from By the North Gate (1963) through The Goddess and Other Women (1974). In looking at these often violent and grim tales, Cunningham explores the recurring sense of entrapment and enclosure. He touches on a surprisingly large number of stories but it is his more detailed analysis of “Happy Onion” that stands out. In this gruesome story, a young rock star of the Happy Onion band dies shortly before he is to marry Maryliz, a chameleon who, like so many of Oates’s characters, is thoroughly empty inside. Dressed in widow’s black, Maryliz attends the rock star’s autopsy, watching as he is peeled apart like an onion. “The scope of [Oates’s] attempt to portray the diminishment of self across a wide sweep of representative Americans is an impressive one,” Cunningham writes. But he concludes that Oates’s greatest failure as a writer of fiction is [the] frequent moral enclosure in her attitude toward her characters, her abdication of the necessity of struggle that alone can lift us from the unconsciously animalistic toward some measure of the human. Her completely circumscribed characters can be liberated only through accident or random violence, and that is no true liberation at all.

The struggle for identity and the devastating possibility that something has gone so terribly wrong in the modern world that no one can achieve a lasting liberation of self pervade the work of many of these writers. “Most American women do not write of open spaces and open roads, rife with potential and possibilities, or of successful escapes from multiple and various enemies,” Pearlman notes in the introduction. “They write, from Edith Wharton to Sue Miller, of the usually imprisoning psychological and actual spaces of American women, of being trapped, submerged, overwhelmed.” Love and shelter, two principal themes in the work of Mary Gordon, have often been sought after as antidotes for a fractured self. But essayist John W. Mahon, who examines Final Payments, The Company of Women, and Men and Angels, notes that Gordon “dramatizes forcefully the dilemma of our culture, which has left God and Church behind but not yet found a satisfactory substitute — the best it can offer is a foster family.”

Disruption, isolation, and fragmentation — and the yearning to connect with others — fill the world of Jayne Anne Phillips’s Machine Dreams. Essayist Phyllis Lassner, focusing on this highly praised first novel, explores the empowering influence of storytelling on Phillips’s female characters. “Characters in all of Phillips’s fiction experience losses of loved ones, of family homes, of a sense of the past, or of options for the future,” Lassner writes. “That men cannot transform their losses into narrative fictions leads to their becoming weak or even disappearing.” Transformation is also critical in the short stories of Toni Cade Bambara. But it is through community, essayist Martha M. Vertreace notes, that Bambara’s characters achieve it. “Her female characters become as strong as they do... because of lessons women learn from communal interaction. Identity is achieved, not bestowed,” Vertreace writes.

Taken together, these essays suggest not only the brilliance of the selected ten authors’ writing but the breadth of their thinking as well. Hawthorne once complained of “that damned mob of scribbling women.” These essays remind us why the “mob” of American women writing fiction continues to inspire and infuriate.

@ Deborah Price is a Washington, D.C., journalist.

Humor in the Mundane

Failure to Zigzag, by Jane Vandenburgh. San Francisco: North Point Press, 1989, $16.95, 329 pp.

by Leslie Hunt

Although the meaning of the title “Failure to Zigzag” is explained early in this novel, its significance grows more apt and full as the novel progresses. The novel also contains layers of meaning, which are constructed from Jane Vandenburgh’s adroit manipulation of language and her acute renderings of speech.

The novel centers around Katrinka, a widowed ventriloquist and clinically diagnosed schizophrenic who refers to herself as a “mental patient,” and her teenaged daughter Charlotte, who is both fatherless and — for all practical purposes — motherless. Katrinka is purportedly lousy at mothering, having grown up with a mentally impaired mother herself. Katrinka’s tendency to careen (zigzag) from one conversational track to another infuriates and alienates Charlotte, who is embarrassed by her mother’s flagrantly psychotherapeutic jargon and her preoccupation with sexual themes. But Katrinka’s observations are hardly delusional; they reveal surprising insights, accompanied by a large dose of humor.

“Do you want me to think I’m the Virgin Mary, Charlotte? Would that seem more normal to you? That would make us Jewish, you realize? Don’t you think we have quite enough problems with persecution all our very own without adding that to it?”

In fact, Katrinka’s salvation lies, if not in the alcohol she consumes constantly, in her sense of humor. Her ability to find humor in the mundane keeps despair at bay, at least for a time. She even finds food amusing — in one of her rare “wifey” moments, she serves up a dinner of French bread stuffed with an ear of corn and surrounded by cling peaches.

Vandenburgh conveys Charlotte’s ambivalence toward her mother with great skill and sensitivity. Although Charlotte frequently tunes out her mother’s fragmented speech, she yearns to be loved by her. Conversation between them is filled with those wide, familiar gulfs that separate mothers and daughters. But the dialogue never becomes predictable because Vandenburgh has created such an engaging pair. Both characters are capable of evoking empathy and irritation. Vandenburgh is adept at showing how Katrinka’s illness both complicates and illuminates her relationship with Charlotte.

Charlotte's father also figures prominently in the novel, although he died before she was born. According to Katrinka, he too suffered mentally — from the effort to succeed as an architect in his father’s firm. One of his most enduring legacies to Katrinka is his idea that their lives were written by Emile Zola.

In part because of Katrinka’s vague responses to Charlotte’s questions, Charlotte is obsessed with the effort to understand her father’s death. She learns from official records that his ship sank when, after delivering the uranium used for the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, it failed “to zigzag in anticipation of moonbeams.”

While Charlotte’s attempts to picture this scene send her to history books in search of the facts, Katrinka’s jagged, peripatetic existence supplies living proof that survival depends on changing course. At the same time, zigzagging implies movement according to a prescribed pattern; Charlotte herself recognizes that Katrinka also has failed to zigzag, having been rendered “rudderless [and] powerless” under the peculiar despotism of her father, Lionel.

While this image of zigzagging exemplifies Vandenburgh’s skill with metaphor, it also shows an ease with language that is apparent throughout the novel. To her, language is funny and is meant to be treated irreverently, as Katrinka does. Characters are shaped by their own uniquely distorted speech. Much of the humor comes from plays on words. One neighborhood is called “Verdugo Woodlands”; Charlotte's brand of deodorant is O-Dor-O-No. Katrinka is a master of multiple and hidden meanings. For example, she calls one of her ventriloquist dummies “Ogamer,” a scrambled version of “Grandmother,” and she uses the initials “M.P.” behind her name to stand for “mental patient.” When she temporarily abandons Charlotte, she leaves her a message in code composed of Scrabble pieces.

The novel is composed largely of dialogue, but Vandenburgh’s descriptive passages, such as the following, are equally rich and affecting:

“Charlotte had come forth from the two of them with a dark shape clutched in either hand. She pressed her eyes until her brain hurt, then she understood it: she was their poem, the only future her parents had ever had. She might, she knew, fly out one day, off from a silver ledge and into a dark night where fire danced on water or bodies were shaped by the weightlessness of sand. She might fly out to be true to them. She knew this: she was their own true daughter, not by accident, but through the sheer force of her own will.”

You will find Vandenburgh’s writing comical, imaginative, and excruciatingly observant. As you read this book, you uncover another layer of meaning — that writers, too, hear voices. Jane Vandenburgh listens well.

@ Leslie Hunt is a former composition instructor who enjoys writing book reviews and listening to the voice of her ten-month-old son, Matthew.

Belles Lettres @ 21