A Peck of Viragos

Heroines

at Odds

Hester, by Mrs. Oliphant, 1984, 495 pp.  
Marcella, by Mrs. Humphry Ward, 1985,  
560 pp. — New York: Viking Penguin/  
Virago, $7.95 (PB)

by Laura Hapke

Mrs. Oliphant and Mrs.  
Humphry Ward were Victor-  
ian women of impressive  

achievement. A writer whose energy  
was prodigious, Oliphant carved a  
reputation (and supported her large  
family) by producing nearly 100 popular  
novels, in addition to literary criticism,  
magazine articles, travel books, and  
biographies. Ward, niece of Matthew  
Arnold and wife of the London Times art  
critic, was a celebrated novelist and an  
influential essayist, philanthropist, and  
social reformer.

Yet both women believed in the  
Victorian ideology of a separate  
feminine sphere and were opposed to the  
suffrage movement. Their newly re-  
issued novels, Hester (1883) and  
Marcella (1894), are fascinating drama-  
tizations of these contradictions in their  
authors’ lives. The protagonists con-  
front their feminine dependence on  
others — Hester’s on an autocratic  
female relative, Marcella’s on an elitist  
fiancé — and learn both the possibilities  
and limitations of their lives as women.

Hester actually concerns two women  
of ability, Hester Vernon and her  
equally strong-willed cousin Catherine.  
Years before, Catherine had rescued the  
family bank from the incompetence of  
Hester’s father. When the disgraced  
man died, Hester and her childlike  
mother had to live on Catherine’s char-  
ity. The novel offers a powerful portrait  
of the promising but resentful young  
woman whose own lover Edward, also a  

handsome, aristocratic young  
man slumps in the corner of a  
hansom cab, on the way to a  

formal reception. Hugh Scarlatt’s face  
shows boredom and irritation: He has  

decided that his liaison with a married  
society woman, the hostess of the party  
he is going to, must end — not because  
of his conscience but because he is weary  
of the relationship.

The idea of vocation was not the laughable matter that had  
caused influential mid-century novelist Anthony Trollope to  
answer his question “What should a woman do with her life?”  
with: “Fall in love, marry, have two children, and live happy  

ever after.”

relative of Catherine Vernon, is afraid  
to be seen with her lest he invoke  
Catherine’s wrath. Oliphant mirrors the  
lot of many Victorian women forced to  
suppress their frustration at a circum-  
scribed lot. Yet through the struggles  
between the two women, Oliphant ul-  
timately demonstrates that neither is  
Hester so powerless nor is Catherine so  
powerful as each imagines.

As a novel of provincial manners,  
Hester is richly satirical. The masculine  
obsession with financial supremacy is  
paralleled by the feminine idée fixe of  
financial security. There is also a revela-  
tion of prevailing attitudes in Cath-  
erine’s conviction that as a lady she must  
disguise her interest in work. She claims  
that she has no choice but to administer  
— despite the fact that hungry young  
men, including Hester’s lover, long to  
take her place at the bank. Clearly  
Catherine is a type her creator under-  
stood — Oliphant herself always  
covered her professionalism with the  
argument that she only wrote from  
financial need.

Humphry Ward gives her heroine  
Marcella Boyce possibly more room than  
Catherine or Hester has in which to  
realize her ambitions. Marcella sees her  
father’s accession to the family fortune  
and estate as an opportunity to do a kind  
of social work among the country poor.  
Just as she plans to run a woman’s  
piecework cooperative, she receives an  
offer of marriage from Aldous Raeburn,  
a neighboring heir who disapproves of  
Marcella’s idealistic socialism and her  
plans “to put the public good before  
property.” After Raeburn sentences a  
local poacher to death for killing his  

gamekeeper, Marcella, who is a stout  
opponent of the game laws, breaks the  
engagement to follow the ideas of the  
Radical candidate Wharton, with whom  
she thinks she is in love. But the conflict  
between vocation and devotion to her  
own social class does not abate.

Mrs. Oliphant

Oliphant found Marcella spoiled, an  
understandable opinion of a young  
woman who vacillates between a world  
of aristocratic balls and Lady Bountiful  
visits to cramped workers’ cottages.  
Nonetheless, Marcella has strong views  
and an independent mind, and her scorn  
for the excesses of the landowners and  
sympathy for the workers set her apart  
from the stereotypically demure fictional  
heroines of 20 years before.

By the time of Oliphant and Ward,  

women were playing significant roles in  

professionalizing the fields of social  
work, teaching, and nursing. The idea  
of vocation was not the laughable matter  
that had caused influential mid-century  
novelist Anthony Trollope to answer his  
question “What should a woman do with  
her life?” with: “Fall in love, marry,  
have two children, and live happy ever  
after.” Yet the portraits of Hester and  
Marcella suggest that the idea of femi-  
nine vocation was still problematic.  
Oliphant makes it clear that should  
Hester succeed her cousin Catherine at  
the bank it would only be to fill the  
power vacuum left by the defaulting men  

Mrs. Humphry Ward

of the family. Ward emphasizes that  
Marcella, for all her missionary zeal,  
cannot act unless she looks to a man to  
finish her political education. These  
novels remain, however, eloquent  
tributes to the struggles of their  
characters — and their creators — to  
lead lives of meaning and integrity in an  
era when concepts of proper feminine  
behavior were undergoing such im-  
portant changes.

Laura Hapke is an assistant professor  
of English at Pace University.

Unmarried, Uneducated — Unfulfilled?

At the reception he has two en-  
counters that change the direction and  
meaning of his life. He sees a tall young  
woman in a green dress; she is not beau-  
tiful, but she has a serene and open face.  
Something in her demeanor, in her  
bearing, moves him so intensely that he  
feels that she is his salvation from an  
aimless, selfish life and determines that  
she must be his wife — all this without  
their having exchanged a single word.

But as he is about to leave the recep-  
tion, his host invites him into the study  
where, below an array of pistols, he  
points out two paper lighters (matches)  
and says:

They have been waiting on the  
mantle-shelf for the last month, till  
I had the opportunity of drawing  
your attention to them. I am sure  
we perfectly understand each other.  
No name need be mentioned. All  
scandal is avoided. I feel confident  
you will not hesitate to make me  
the only reparation one man can  
make another in the somewhat  
hackneyed circumstances in which  
we find ourselves. I hold the lighters  
thus, and you draw. Whoever draws  
or keeps the short one is pledged to  
leave this world within four short  
months, or shall we say five, on  
account of the pheasant shooting?

Although he is stunned and horrified,  
Hugh feels compelled to draw. When  
the two men compare the matches by  
the light of the table lamp, Lord New-  
haven laughs and Scarlatt turns and  
leaves, his face ashen. So the novel, Red  
Pottage, begins. Considered witty and  
daring, even a scandal, when it was first  

published in London in 1899, it was  
soon selling at the rate of 1,500 copies a  
day.

Despite the drama of the opening, it  
is not a melodramatic story of adultery  
and revenge. It could be a mystery. Lady  
Newhaven, who has lingered at the  
study door, has heard the conversation,  
but does not know which man must take  
his own life within five months, nor does  
the reader know, and neither will find  
out until the end of the book. But the  
story line and the suspense are secondary  
to the satiric quality of the book; it is  
actually a comic view of the foibles and  
mores of middle-class British society and  
family life.

Of special interest to modern readers  
is an underlying thread in the story, the  
lifelong friendship between two women.  
Rachel West (the woman in the green  
gown) has inherited a fortune after years  
of living in poverty. Hester Gresley was  
raised by her aunt in ease and luxury, but  
after her aunt’s death she is forced to live  
with her clergyman brother and his  
family like an unpaid servant.

The daughter of a country parson  
herself and the oldest daughter in a  
family of eight, Mary Cholmondeley  
paints a caustic portrait of the self-  
righteous, narrow-minded clergyman  
brother. Mary’s formal education ended  
at the age of 13 when her governess  
married and was not replaced, and at 16  
she became the surrogate mother to the  
younger children in the family. (In the  
style of many Victorian women, her  
mother had chosen the role of family  

invalid.) Until her father’s death, when  
she was 52, Mary was the unpaid, un-  
married family drudge.

Writing was her escape from the  
frustration and boredom of her life,  
and, incredibly, her work is upbeat and  
amusing. Her characters may be shallow  
and have their pretensions, but they are  
not vicious. For example, Violet, Lady  
Newhaven, envisions herself at the  
spotlighted center of dramatic tableaux  
— during her confirmation she saw  
herself ethereal and angelic in a white  
dress and veil, the bishop and his  
attendants vague shadows hovering on  
the edge of the picture. After she realizes  
that her husband knows of her infidelity,  
she sees herself assume a madonna-like  
pose, all wounded dignity and wronged  
innocence “in a white dressing gown and  
pink ribbons in a stereotyped attitude of  
despair on a divan.” She is indignant  
that her husband (also a shadowy figure  
on the fringe of her self-portrait) has put  
her in the position where she may lose  
her reputation — never mind that he  
may lose his life.

Another example: When the book  
that Hester wrote during the late night  
hours is returned from the publisher for  
corrections, her brother burns it (re-  
member that this is in the days before  
photocopiers), believing that he is sav-  
ing her from the embarrassment and  
ridicule that he is sure would follow its  
publication. He is truly perplexed when  
Hester is devastated and becomes des-  

— continued on page 6

Jury/August 1986