Latina Sisters

Octavio Paz’s vast, complex biog-

raphy of seventeenth century

poet Sor Juana was published
last year by Harvard University Press
($29.95, 547 pp.), along with a com-
panion volume, A Sor Juana Anthol-
ogy, translated by Alan S. Trueblood.
Sor Juana entered the order of St.
Jerome in Mexico prompted by a disin-
clination to marry and a compulsion to
apply her brilliant mind to learning.
There in her limited free time she pas-
sionately exercised her gifts for poetry
and other intellectual pursuits, winning
great renown. Reactions to her female
hubris eventually set in. Two years
before her death at age forty-six, she
seems to have been convinced to
renounce secular learning. The Sor Juana
Anthology contains a lengthy reply to an
“admonishment” by another learned nun
that conveys something of Sor Juana’s
intellect and personality.

One instance involved a very holy and
very ingenuous prelate who thought
studying was something for the Inquisition
and ordered me to cease. I obeyed her... as
regarded not taking a book in hand, but as to
ceasing study altogether, it not being in my
power, I could not carry it out. For, although
I did not study from books, I did from
everything God has created... Two little
girls were playing with a top in my presence.
The moment I saw its movement and form I
began, in my crazy way, to consider the easy
motion of the spherical form, and how, the
impulse once given, it continued
independently of its course, since at a
distance from the girl’s hand, which

Correspondence

Two of our regular reviewers have

written recently concerning book

projects. Just back from a scholar-
ly trip to Italy, Helen Barolini reports as
follows:

I met interesting women writers and took on
a translation of one writer for a forthcoming
anthology entitled Italian Women Writing
Today. I met some young women who have
set out to translate The Dream Book (her
anthology of Italian-American women’s
writing) and another who wants to use it as
the basis for a projected conference that will
finally open a dialogue between Italian
women and Italian Americans.

@ Nancy Schaumburger, along with
Marcia Brinton, is the author of Finding,
Loving and Marrying Your Lifetime
Partner (Tudor Publishers, Inc., PO Box
3443, Greensboro NC 27402), and she
invites you to purchase the book to help
send three worthy children to college —
hers.

@ Elizabeth Arthur is a writer whose
books seem to irk some reviewers. She
thought we might be more receptive to
her latest novel and so wrote about the
issues she faces.

My novel Binding Spell, published this
September, has had the (perhaps not so
curious) experience of being praised and
understood by the women — such as Frances
Taliaferro, Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, and
Wendy Smith — who have reviewed it in
the Washington Post, Chicago Sun-Times,
and Newsday, while it’s been trivialized and
misunderstood by some male reviewers, most
recently in the New York Times Book Review.
I don’t think I’m being paranoid in believing
that this misunderstanding has more than a
tinge of misogyny... While Binding Spell is
a literary novel, it couldn’t be more different
from most of the fiction being published
today. A topical novel set in America’s
heartland, it’s about the interconnectedness
of all living things, about our urgent need to
reject a model of domination in favor of a
model of partnering. It addresses the goddess
religion ("witchcraft"), the Gaia hypothesis,
the need for a world order, the dangers of
Christian fundamentalism — issues endemic
to the patriarchal order. It is the only novel I
know that attempts to take on the large
philosophic and historical issues treated in
important nonfiction books such as The
Spiral Dance and The Chalice and the Blade.
Yet Binding Spell is a comedy and a romance;
it is hopeful, funny, and has a deep respect
and affection for its characters, both female
and male.

This is not the first time I’ve found myself

Winter 1989:

originated the motion, the top went on.
dancing. Nor was this enough for me. I had
flour brought and sifted, so as to tell, when
the top danced over it, whether the circles
its motion described were perfect or not. I
discovered that they were simply spirals
which moved farther and farther from the
circular in proportion as the impulse wore
down... What could I not tell you, my
Lady, of the secrets of Nature which I have
discovered in cooking!... And I am always
saying, when I observe these small details: If
Aristotle had been a cook, he would have
written much more.

@ In the past the people of Guamani used
to be proud of their town and of their valley.
From the red-ochered cliffs that pour their
blood upon the valley every day at three
o'clock, when the inevitable afternoon
showers burst upon it, we loved to behold
our town nestled on the silvery arms of
Ensenada Honda bay. Having finished the
day’s chores, we liked to drive up to Hawk
Nest’s Point and sit there awhile, admiring
its sparkling clean streets, its houses
spreading their balconied verandahs upon
the slopes like a debutante’s brightly colored
skirts, its bright-yellow cathedral, with the
shimmering plume of its belfry and the
red-tiled crest of its dome, preening like a
bird of paradise in their midst, and the
townspeople running frantically to and fro,
as they took cover from the pelting, gaily
pealing rain that fell from the scudding
dove-breasted clouds.

So begins Rosario Ferré’s translation of
her novel and three stories of life in
Puerto Rico, Sweet Diamond Dust
(Maldito Amor, first published in Mexico
1986; Available Press, $5.95, 197 pp.
PB). Ferré is the former editor of a Puer-
to Rican literary magazine who writes in
many genres.

@ Suppressed during the Franco

manhandled as a writer. I’m the author of
two other novels (Beyond the Mountain,
about a woman mountaineer, and Bad Guys,
about a camp for juvenile delinquents in
Alaska) as well as a memoir about my years
in the Canadian wilderness, and the
combination of my feminist concerns and
“masculine” subject matter has alienated a
good number of male reviewers and baffled
some female ones as well.

@ Many of you wrote in saying how
much you liked our last “Down Under”
issue. Antipodes, the journal of the
American Association of Australian
Literary Studies, will be publishing a spe-
cial women’s issue this spring and a mul-
ticultural issue this fall (address inquiries
to 190 Sixth Ave., Brooklyn NY 11217).
The editor, Robert Ross, writes that
when he met Thea Astley last year, she
was “lively, charming, erratic as ever at
age 62 or so. I firmly believe that when
everything is sorted out in the future
concerning Australian literature that she
will find a secure place in spite of the
past negative criticism of her work by
Australian critics. Interestingly, now
that she’s getting international atten-
tion, they are changing their views.”

@ Speaking of authors not getting
their due, Susan Koppelman wrote in
with kudos for The New Woman’s
Broken Heart by Andrea Dworkin,
which was published a while ago by Frog
in the Well, a women’s press. She
bought it at a conference and says of the
book,

I am loving it, although that hardly seems an
appropriate response to a book so filled with
grief and agony and rage. I am moved by the
tone, the attitude towards life of “Bertha
Schneider,” Dworkin’s central character?
heroine? shero? alter ego? fictional persona?
The attitude embodied by that tone moves
me, evokes my admiration, stimulates me to
reread the book and to recommend it to
others because, of course, it mirrors my own
attitude. Or so I like to think. I like to think
that my emotional/intellectual life is that
multi-layered, that rich, that intense, that
complex, that appropriately responsive to
reality, understanding that reality includes
all of history.

I want to quote something from Dworkin’s
fourth story, “some awful facts, recounted by
Bertha Schneider (for J.S.):”

Bertha had what was, from her point of
view, a reliable common-sense:
perspective. All loss was measured against

years, Catalan writers are experiencing a
marked resurgence in Spain. The
University of Nebraska Press has pub-
lished a collection of short stories,
edited by Kathleen McNerney, called
On Our Own Behalf: Women’s Tales
from Catalonia ($24.95, 234 pp.). Some
of the themes of the collection are
women’s sexuality, women’s friendships
with each other, and violence against
women.

@ Would that the U.S. reading
public had the taste (or consciousness)
of the British. Alicia Partnoy’s book
based on her experiences in an Argen-
tinian concentration camp (The Little
School, Cleis Press) hit the bestseller
lists in London last year. Her new an-
thology is reviewed in this issue, and she
has become an editor for Cleis, specializ-
ing in Hispanic writing.

@ Doris Meyer and Irene Matthews
have translated two works of Mexican
writer Nellie Campobello, Cartucho
and My Mother’s Hands, for the
University of Texas Press ($7.95, 128
pp., PB). Told from a child’s point of
view, the novellas give a first-person ac-
count of life during the Revolution.
Also from Texas comes A Rosario Cas-
tellanos Reader ($29.95 HB, $14.95 PB,
378 pp.), a substantial sampling of the
work of this important modern Mexican
writer, edited and with a critical intro-
duction by Maureen Ahern.

@ Obviously capitalizing on the
popularity of South American writers,
Fawcett has reissued Contemporary
Latin American Short Stories in a mass
market paperback ($4.95). But don’t

atrocity. She was poor but bones she was
not. Her gums were getting soft and
squooshy from malnutrition but live she
would. She had no chair to sit in which
led to constant backache and she slept
on the floor which led to constant colds
in her bladder. But she wasn’t pressed up
straight shitting in her pants in a cattle
car on the way to Dachau. She had been
raped and was still haunted by fear and
humiliation but she had not also had
cholera at the same time. She had fucked
for money, been destitute on street
corners underdressed in freezing winter,
but hunger had not reduced her to
eating rats. She had endured and
continued to endure real hardship but
she would probably live long enough —
one more month — to turn 31.

This was not stupid of Bertha. In Amerika
such measuring was called paranoia or,
by liberal psychiatrists, survivor's quilt,
but Bertha, with her European
sensibility, knew that she was a realist
with a very cogent sense of
history. She didn't imagine that she
could survive atrocity but she prepared
for it by constant concentration of what
it would require of her. Unlike her

Belles Lettres
Subscriptions

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216

Check the subscription rate that applies:

1-year individual subscription @ $15.00/
year

2-year individual rate (2 years, one per-

son, or two 1-year subscriptions, two people)

@$25.00

[ ] 1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year

1-year student rate (photocopy of stu-
dent ID required) @ $12.50/year

Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription

A tax-deductible contribution of

is enclosed. (Individuals who
contribute $25 or more automatically
receive an editor’s choice book. Select
category below.)

Please enter me in your subscriber's
book drawing. My preferred genre are:

fiction biography criticism
poetry mystery travel non-
fiction

: 1-year subscription[s] or
_____ 2-year subscriptions beginning with
the Spring/Summer/Winter/Fall issue
(circle one). Enclosed is a check or money
order in the amount of payable to
Belles Lettres, along with this completed

subscription form, a photocopy, or hand-
written copy.

Name
Street
City
State

Zip.

Send gift card to:
Name
Street
City
State

Zip

* Please tell us how you found out about
Belles Lettres:

Belles Lettres @ 23

University of Mas- |
sachusetts Press will publish Breaking |
Boundaries: Latina Writing and Criti- |

|