Full Horizons:

Women's Humor in America

Redressing the Balance: American Women’s Literary Humor from Colonial Times to
the 1980s, edited by Nancy Walker and Zita Dresner. Jackson and London: University
Press of Mississippi, Nov. 1988, $35.00 (HB), $17.95 (PB), 450 pp.

by Denise M. Marshall

This new anthology affords mani-
fold delights; for it includes
names that must be included in
any anthology of women’s humor as well
as unexpected choices. Walker and
Dresner achieve a twofold redressing by
providing the missing part of American
culture that is women’s humor and by
recovering the lost and overlooked
humor of American women writers
whose work has been treated with senti-
mental deference and solemnity. Listing
the contents of this comprehensive vol-
ume is not possible, but its range can be
suggested. Marietta Holley, Frances
Whitcher, Fanny Fern (Sara Willis Par-
ton), Betty MacDonald, Dorothy
Parker, Jean Kerr, and Erma Bombeck
share space with Emily Dickinson,
Anne Bradstreet, Louisa May Alcott,
Gertrude Stein, Charlotte Perkins Gil-
man, Nikki Giovanni, Harriet Beecher
Stowe, and Zora Neale Hurston. The
number of writers included necessarily
reduces the number of selections for
each one, but selections are well cho-
sen. Choices have been made with at-
tention to diversity of form, content,
and style. Sarah Kemble Knight’s hu-
morous commentary on her travels in
eighteenth-century America is balanced
by Anne Bradstreet’s subtle irony about
Puritan New England, the acerbic bite
of Dorothy Parker by the punchy jabs of
Zora Neale Hurston. The anthology
lives up to its editors’ ideal to be “the
varied threads that make up the tapestry
of American women’s literary humor.”
The editors’ introduction coordinates
the diversity of the collection with a
historical and theoretical survey on
women’s humor and its status in
America in particular. Walker and
Dresner believe that “the humorous
writing of American women reveals a
great deal about their lives, their per-
ceptions, and their roles in American
culture, especially as these have
changed over time,” but they are
“equally aware of what has not changed.”

From Anne Bradstreet . . . to Gail
Sausser . . . these writers remind us
that women are the caregivers, the
providers of food and nurturance,
even when they have professional
aspirations. The fundamental con-
dition their humor addresses is
women’s subordinate status and
treatment in American culture,
even as their talent for satire, wit,
and comedy reveals their important
contribution to that culture.

The dual angle on culture and contri-
bution mirrors the editors’ assessment of
their material. Women’s humor has suf-
fered by neglect because women wrote
it, and because humor has generally
been judged the ephemera of any culture
— or at least not significant enough to
merit serious critical attention. The
consequent double whammy has re-
sulted in repetitious loss of women’s
humorous material. Walker and Dresner
point out that theirs is not the first an-
thology of women’s humor — four oth-
ers have surfaced, but each has been
swiftly swamped.

Kate Sanborn in The Wit of
Women (1885) set out to prove
that women possessed the ca-
pacity for wit and humor, demonstrating
also that women were actively interested
in political and social concerns. In
Laughing Their Way: Women’s Humor in
America (1934), Martha Bruere and
Mary Beard felt no need to prove women
had humor, but wished to correct
America’s masculinist bias in humor,

Farr 1988

NESS SS z
Jane Curry, as Samantha, pondering
women’s “spear.” Curry edited a collection of
Marietta Holley’s work entitled Samantha
Rastles the Woman Question (University of
Illinois Press).

showing that women had created a tra-
dition. Forty-two years elapsed before
another anthology collected women’s
humorous writing. Titters (1976)
showed by its subtitle that women’s
humor had again been swallowed by
time and bias — its editors Beatts and
Stillman billed it as The First Collection of
Humor By Women. Once again they
were providing evidence that women did
indeed have a sense of humor. Had ac-
cess to earlier women’s humor been cut
off, or had women’s humor been so ob-
scured and devalued in that forty-odd
years that its identification was difficult?
By 1980 when Gloria Kaufman and
Mary Kay Blakely edited Pulling Our
Own Strings: Feminist Humor and Satire,
collecting was clearly preservation of
humor likely to be lost, ignored because
it was by feminists. Kaufman and Blake-
ly attempted to counter charges of hu-
morlessness in the women’s movement
and to explode limitations attributed to
women’s humor. Walker and Dresner
recover the knowledge of these volumes
for readers, even though they are still
scarce and difficult to find. The editors
address the limitations of these earlier
texts well in their collection. Fragmen-
tary at best, focused on a particular peri-
od or type of humor, none provides the
useful sources the current text does. Its
introduction, headnotes, and an exten-
sive critical and primary source bibliog-
raphy are invaluable.

Perhaps what is most telling about
this endeavor is that it has taken six
years to complete. Those six years (and
probably more) have been spent in
tracking down material that was out of
print and out of consideration as
American humor. Much of women’s
humor appears in the obscure small
printings of other women’s writing that
soon disappear from the cultural pub-
lishing mills. Walker and Dresner have
tracked down these texts and attempted
to restore them “to their rightful place in
the history of American women’s hu-
mor.” That restoration should be per-
manent, but if even the brief history of
four, and now thankfully five, antholo-
gies is anything to go by, rightful place
has no claim on memory or longevity. In
the last decade women’s humor has
gained space in our culture, both as a
creative activity and a critical task. That
space needs expansion.

Redressing the Balance forbids the neat
containment of women’s humor into
any narrow simplistic box and makes it
impossible for readers to be “largely una-
ware of the rich tradition of women’s
humor.” It manages in fact what every
anthology aspires to. It teases; it creates
the desire for more; it causes its audience
to wonder what else is available. It sets
up, by its very existence, the demand for
more critical work, more historical in-
vestigation, and best of all, complete
works of the individual authors. If first
steps are the beginnings of healthy walk-
ing, then Walker and Dresner have set
us upon a long road of pleasant trips.

© Denise Marshall is an assistant pro-
fessor at Heidelberg College in Tiffin,
Ohio. Some of her interests are women’s
concepts of space and women and comedy.

The Sounds of Angry Laughter

Last Laughs, edited by Regina Barreca. New York: Gordon & Breach, 1988, $29 (HB),
$14 (PB), 220 pp.

by Ruth Haber

Women are not funny: That’s
right, we’re just not funny.
So says the folk wisdom that
inspired Last Laughs, an anthology of
feminist literary criticism designed not
only to refute that worn-out lie but, as its
inspiration and editor, Regina Barreca,
tells it, to “work towards establishing a
number of pathways into the uncharted
regions where women laugh their hearts
out.” More specifically, as Barreca says,
the book is intended “to examine the
crucial roles of comedy paired with anger
as shaping forces and feminist tools” in
women’s comic writing.

To any woman who has sat with her
friends and laughed until her sides ached
over a lost lover, a lost job, a failed mar-
riage, or an encounter with any of the
numerous imperfections of the world,
the link between anger and laughter —
the wisecrack as rebellion and subver-
sion — is old news, a fact of life. But
Barreca’s introduction clearly estab-
lishes, often infuriatingly, that the liter-
ary establishment needs to hear this.
Last Laughs begins with an overview of
and assault on traditional male attitudes
toward humorous writing by women that
is a comic classic in itself. That the
eighteenth-century playwright William
Congreve noted women’s lack of humor
and was torn between attributing it to
our “too powerful Passions” or our “Na-
tural Coldness” is bad enough; when in
1959 Reginald Blythe sadly concluded,
“The truth is. . . that women have not
only no humour in themselves but are
the cause of the extinction of it in oth-
ers,” and when, only twelve years ago,
J. B. Priestley still dismissed women’s
humor as, at best, “soft laughter and
smiles,” we have to laugh. Our other
options for response carry jail terms.

Attributing the traditional dismissal
of women’s comedy to the traditional
dismissal of women in general, with
women humorists seen as “the unofficial
discussing the insignificant,” Barreca
presents the need to see women’s comic
writing for what it really is: part of the
need to re-value women. A collection of
essays not for English majors only, Last
Laughs argues that women’s literary
laughter is often gunfire across the gen-
der lines. Whereas traditional male
humor “has often been linked to man’s
[sic] ability to transcend his oppression
by laughing at his chains [and] to suggest
changes for his society,” Barreca asserts,
the traditional reconciliation and re-
generation at the end merely reinforce
old social patterns and conditions:
“often women write without happy
endings. . . . They use comedy not as a
safety valve but as an inflammatory de-
vice, seeking . . . not to purge desire
and frustration but to transform it into
action.”

So much for what the book sets out to
do. Does it succeed? Although all of the
essays were written expressly for this
anthology, they do not all follow the
same pattern or even fit the description
given in the introduction. Last Laughs is
an eclectic mix of writings, almost all
lively and interesting, ranging from ex-
actly what the introduction promises
(feminist literary theory concerning the
pairing of anger and laughter in writing
by women) to a general review of femi-
nist literary theory to a magazine-style
interview with Wendy Wasserstein on
her life in the theater and her views as a
writer of comedy. Whether they fit the
book’s stated purpose or not, the essays
make interesting reading, and they cer-
tainly encourage the reader to respond
with outrage and amusement. Cathy
Gallagher’s “Who Was That Masked
Woman? The Prostitute and the Play-
wright in the Comedies of Aphra
Behn,” which analyzes Behn’s spirited
response to the eighteenth-century ste-
reotype of published woman as public
woman (i.e., like a prostitute, her wit
reserved not for one man but sold and
sold again), shows how Behn combined
humor and anger to play a slander into a
professional victory. Much more inter-
esting than its title, Kay Rogers’s “De-
flation of Male Pretensions in Fanny
Burney’s Cecilia” shows how Burney
used ridiculous male characters to ridi-
cule the patriarchy itself. What Patricia
Spacks says about “Austen’s Laughter”
provides insight into our own.

I am glad that Carol Hanbury
MacKay’s discussion of Anne Thackeray
Ritchie is part of an ongoing study; the
only problem with Janet Todd’s article
on the fascinating Délarivigre Manley,
with Regina Gagnier’s analysis of middle
and lower class women’s humor as re-
vealed in nineteenth- and early twen-
tieth-century autobiographies, and with
Barreca’s exploration of how metaphor
and cliché generate narrative in novels
by Elizabeth Bowen, Margaret Atwood,
Fay Weldon, and Muriel Spark is that
they should be full-length books. You
don’t have to like all the authors to en-
joy the essays: I can’t read Virginia
Woolf except under duress, and yet I
enjoyed the three essays that tried to tell
me I was wrong about her. “Daughters of
Anger,” Jane Marcus’s survey of feminist
theory, does its mother proud. The only
essay in the book that a nonacademic
would find rough going, it is also a good
starting place for any newcomers to the-
ory who want some idea of the issues,
controversies, and personalities in-
volved. If this paragraph is beginning to
sound like a fourteen-countries-in-
eight-days tour of Europe, it is only be-
cause the essays were so interesting that I
hate to leave any out. Even those that
space prevents me from mentioning
were informative as well as being highly
quotable opening statements in what
should turn into a fascinating discussion
of women’s humor in other books and
journals.

@ Ruth Haber teaches English at the
University of California, Santa Barbara.

Belles Lettres @ 3