Among Eagles and Lizards

Open Door: Stories, by Luisa Valenzuela; translated by Hortense Carpentier, Jorge Castillo,  
Helen Lane, Christopher Leland, Margaret Sayers Peden, and David Unger. Berkeley: North  

Point Press, 1988, $12.95, 224 pp. (PB)  

The Lizard’s Tail, by Luisa Valenzuela, translated by Gregory Rabassa. New York: Farrar,  

Straus & Giroux, 1983, $16.50, 280 pp.  

by Denise M. Marshall  

You'll find what I tell you hard to believe, for  

who knows anything, nowadays, about life in  

the country? . . . to tell each other about the  
improbable images they’ve been envisioning.  
They sit in a circle in the dark on the dirt floor  
of their communal hut and concentrate on  
making the vision appear. One day, out of  
nothing, they materialized a tapestry of  
non-existent colors and ineffable design . . .  

Valenzuela’s tapestries are cap-  

tured for us in Open Door in  

these thirty-two stories, fourteen  
of them published in English for the first  
time. One of the chief pleasures of read-  
ing Valenzuela is her improbable images,  
fantastic colors, and ineffable design.  
The title of the collection, Open Door, is  
apt, for it swings wide a portal on the  
fictional worlds of a writer from whom  
English readers have been shut away.  
While Valenzuela’s other stories have  
been published in English, they are now  
quite difficult to find. Open Door in-  
cludes selections from them all — it  
serves as overview, introduction, and  
perhaps an impetus for reissuing her  
other collections. In the magnificent  
variety of these short stories, Valenzuela  
has put together a kaleidoscopic vision  
where each facet opens a new vista onto  
the strange, the odd, the familiar, and  
the human.  

Valenzuela’s narratives swirl around  
fantastic realities where color and shape  
hold sway over the mind; language forms  
that landscape’s tints and habitations,  
whether of human structure or natural  
coruscations. Language forms the mind-  
scapes of her characters, as their words  
take shape from and give form to their  
environments. In the mindscape,  
thought, action and word fuse reality  
and imagination into what happens.  
And that transcends other reality or im-  
agination. The territory melds familiar  
with strange, emotional with detached,  
imagination with reason, lyrical with  
grotesque. "The step from watching over  
the bread [money] to watching over the  
flower isn’t that great if you're liberal  
with your puns," muses the security guard  
for a financial corporation. Fond of the  
building plants, he fantasizes caring for  
them, and this small desire triggers a  
transformation "as if someone had given  
him the famous kiss on his sleeping  
forehead, as if he had awakened, il-  
luminated."  

A liberality with puns leads easily into  
the plastic quality these stories invest in  
language. One of Valenzuela’s greatest  
talents is her remarkable ability to sculpt  
words and sentences. Puns here are both  
play with words and words playing inside  
the field of language. "The senses and  
gods intersect in this part of the world,  
assuming these parts are of the world  
and not strung over the Andes, just  
beyond arm’s reach." This playfulness of  
language creates a humor intrinsic to the  
point of view and expressed fluidly  
throughout. "They survive, growing  
wise, and for that very reason, nobody  
wants to listen to them." But the  
double-edged humor often points to  
hard-earned wisdom, little appreciated  
truths, and unexpected disaster. "The  
things now floating downriver, unset-  
tling everyone, are subtle, anchored to  
the huge water lilies, almost like words.  
That is, they are messages; they are dis-  
asters." The language as it yields up this  
play and this humor is sinuous and  
surprising. In the kaleidoscope of Valen-  
zuela, surprise is the flash in the facets.  

Surprise informs the narrative tech-  
nique as well. The delighted reader can-  
not predict the outcome of language,  
plot, or character. Perhaps the only pre-  

Winter 1989  

dictability is the sureness of the author's  
touch, and in that we are content.  
Surprise occurs in the familiar wander-  
ing through these pages under strange  
new names. Celery munchers are possib-  
ly doing it "as a sign of nonconformity . .  
or perhaps they’re doing it out of a  
sense of superiority ..." Walls are built  
to keep out nature but a thistle foils the  
plan. Another part of the surprise of  
these stories is the transformations with  
which Valenzuela is fascinated, from  
transformations of thought to fantastical  
transformation of one being into an-  
other. She pursues these transformations  
to their sources and imagines the process  
as emblematic. Thus, the faceted spaces  
inside her kaleidoscope are interrelated  
in such a way that the sense of a net-  
work of connection is an inescapable  
part of reading any of these stories.  
What we don’t know is which facet is  
going to flash next, and that is the joy of  
discovery and recognition that is the  
Open Door.  

Without a doubt, Valenzuela is a vir-  
tuoso of the short story, yet the very ex-  
cellence of Open Door creates a hunger  
for a novel, a more substantial stay in  
Valenzuela’s delirious prose. The Lizard’s  
Tail fulfills that desire. One of Valen-  
zuela’s persistent themes grows out of  
the political events that have racked Ar-  
gentina in the past thirty years, in par-  
ticular the events surrounding the reign  
of the generals who tortured, murdered,  
"disappeared," and suppressed in the  
name of patriotism. Valenzuela is fas-  
cinated with webs and interlaces. She  
investigates the connections among the  
generals, trying to imagine the thoughts  
that formed their network of under-  
standing. Her narrative mimics the  
labyrinths she envisions as the generals’  
minds. In Lizard’s Tail she reaches back  
to López Rega as a centrifugal connec-  
tor. He served as Isabel Perón’s Minister  
of Social Well-Being and ruled Argen-  

Luisa Valenzuela. Photo by Jerry Bauer.  

tina literally through sorcery. Valenzuela  
dubs her figure "the Sorcerer" and  
entwines him in a labyrinth from which  
he has a magical access to the centers of  
power in Buenos Aires. It is not neces-  
sary to know the details of Argentina’s  
political history to read this mesmerizing  
novel, a portrait of self-deluded evil  
whose sense of self is so strong that it  
compels belief.  

The novel’s power lies in the breath-  
able paranoia with which Valenzuela  
surrounds her characters. The paranoia  

Alicia Partnoy. Photo by Monte Kruse.  

Awake, They Dream and Write  

You Can’t Drown the Fire: Latin American Women Writing in Exile, edited by Alicia  
Partnoy. Cleis Press (P.O. Box 8933, Pittsburgh, PA 15221), 1988, $9.95, 259 pp. (PB)  
Women’s Fiction from Latin America: Selections from Twelve Contemporary Authors,  
edited with translations by Evelyn Picon Garfield. Detroit: Wayne State University Press,  

1988, 355 pp. (PB)  

by Denise M. Marshall  

This is the whirlwind  

which does not let us sleep,  

the reason why asleep, we keep watch,  
and awake, we dream.  

—Julia Esquivel, Guatemala  

A single verse from Julia Esquivel’s  
poem "They Have Threatened  
Us with Resurrection" captures  
the tone of these women’s voices from  
Latin America, where political crises are  
the stuff of private anguish. You Can’t  
Drown the Fire recreates the multiplicity  
of exiles imposed, created, or discovered  
over the last few decades as South  
American countries have struggled  
through governmental and societal  
crises. That struggle has more often than  
not been perpetuated by a strong-man  
government backed by military and  
police forces, overt and covert.  

Editor Alicia Partnoy, exiled from Ar-  
gentina, captures the nuances and dis-  
tressing ambiguity of exile in this collec-  
tion of letters, stories, testimony, and  
poetry. The "whirlwind" of exile is  

relentless and all-absorbing. These  
strong voices speak their experience in  
bitterness, anger, irony, and faith.  

What captures the reader is the  
honest, open revelation of self and in-  
timate experience. Women in this  
volume know that speaking is a primary  
political and personal act against the ag-  
gressors in their respective countries  
who have tried to compel silence within  
their countries’ borders.  

Exile is the stark disparity between the  
common-sense life expectations these  
thirty-five women may once have held  
and the stunning actualities with which  
they now live. Testifying to the radical  
reshaping of the unimaginable into the  
familiar, each tells her particular story  
unsparingly. Each has survived a sur-  
realist world in which violence, disrup-  
tion, and disappearance have deter-  
mined how they conduct their lives,  
lives in which the ordinary act con-  
demns and dooms. The poignant tes-  
timony of these mothers, daughters,  
sisters, and friends tells the events of  

built by the Sorcerer has infected the  
whole country; it is in the very air all  
the characters breathe. Valenzuela here  
uses language as the labyrinth of truth,  
half-truth, and rumor through which all  
of the characters must thread their way.  
Meanwhile, the Sorcerer envisions him-  
self as the center of power, a center  
where he has both a floating island and  
a castle underground, for he fantasizes  
himself as the versatile "Master of all  
landscapes." His ambition and vision,  
compounded of magic and megalo-  
mania, incorporates power and sexuality  
and madness. For much of the book this  
figure is the narrator, and Valenzuela’s  
use of his point of view is a tour de force.  
As abhorrent as this creature is, his con-  
sciousness is fascinating; for Valenzuela  
approaches the question of his mind as a  
cloak of many colors to unravel and  
thereby defeat.  

The shifts in narration are a tour de  
force as well. Without giving the novel  
away, I must say that these shifts swing  
us into the minds of those in opposition  
to, in thrall to, or in puzzlement over the  
Sorcerer. Readers are positioned in the  
center of the labyrinth, whose intricacy  
we perceive but whose blind alleys we  
cannot identify. Valenzuela has said that  
for her the literary act centers on  
neither "the marionette nor on the hand  
which moves it," but on "the elusive  
threads which go from one to the other."  
In The Lizard’s Tail, the reader's posi-  
tion in the maze permits a squint at  
those threads, and an opportunity to  
guess which thread will jerk, how it will  
jerk, and to what purpose — as well as  
to watch the struggle among opposing  
forces for the puppeteer’s place.  

I am tempted to words like "brilliant"  
when I write about Valenzuela. One  
thing I do know is that reading her is a  

constant source of pleasure — of the  
imagination, of language, of image,  
sound, color. I find myself exclaiming  
over her work, buttonholing people who  
aren’t in the know, recommending in no  
uncertain terms that they read her.  
While I am in thrall to Valenzuela, I  
must praise the translators. I rave about  
the use of language, but the language is  
available to me through the wondrous  
talents of these experts, who render an  
artist’s work into another language so  

that it flows with a beauty akin to its  
original.  

their imprisonment, torture, searches for  
the desaparecidos ("the disappeared"),  
and their newly found activism in world  
forums and courts on behalf of human  
rights.  

Representative of these mothers and  
daughters are Guatemalan Rigoberta  
Menchú and her mother, who searched  
for Rigoberta’s sixteen-year-old brother  
and later “walked for one day and almost  
the whole night" to see him displayed as  
a guerilla in a neighboring village.  
Neither woman had any hope of com-  
municating with him or rescuing him.  
Indeed, Rigoberta’s mother "almost gave  
herself away, but we had to calm her  
down, telling her that if she gave herself  
away she was going to die right there for  
being family of a guerilla." Almost all  
the women in this book experience  
political exile. Like the mothers in  
Argentina’s Plaza de Mayo, they do not  
know what has happened to their  
children, friends, or husbands. If, like  
the Menchús, they do know, they still  
cannot participate in death or burial  
rituals. Many do not know where, or  
even if, their dead have been interred.  

Being cut off from the customs and  
traditions of a society means exile from  
that society’s human center. Such exile  
is more visible when its victims are made  
to leave their countries, but it can be  

—continued on next page  

Belles Lettres @ 3