Southern Cone

Alfonsina Storni: Selected Poems, edited by Marion Freeman. Translated by Marion
Freeman, Mary Crow, Jim Normington, and Kay Short. White Pine Press (76 Center
St., Fredonia, NY 14063), 1987, $8, 65 pp. (PB)

Zones of Pain/Las Zonas del Dolor, by Marjorie Agosin. Translated by Cola Franzen.

White Pine Press, 1988, $9, 72 pp. (PB)

by Zoé Anglesey

When English-speaking wri-
ters meet writers or lovers of
literature from Central or

South America, they are invariably
asked whether they are familiar with the
poetry of Alfonsina Storni. For years,
translations of her poems have appeared
in feminist and bilingual literary publi-
cations, but it is only now that we have
her poetry collected in English, with
selections from her eight volumes and
including uncollected poems. The col-
laboration among the four translators of
Selected Poems brings us a plainspeaking
poetry verging on the surreal. Storni’s
“Head and Sea” and “Dog and Sea” ap-
proach Georgia O’Keeffe’s power of ob-
servation, transforming an image to a
shimmering logo quite beyond the para-
meters of casual vision.

The head

in its interior

spaces moves

impalpable pulleys,

and there is neither shadow nor light
which the sea reflects

that is not tied

inside to the finest

of its numerical

wheels.

Alfonsina Storni’s life looms legendary
from beginning to end. She was born in
Switzerland in 1892. When her family
returned to San Juan, Argentina, in
1885, they faced poverty, abandonment
by an alcoholic father, and finally his
death in 1906. Storni’s mother relo-
cated the three children to Rosario,
where she took in sewing and directed a
school. Storni received little education
apart from what her mother provided
and began to work in a factory at the age
of thirteen; when she was fourteen, she
joined a theatrical company that passed
through Rosario, touring with them for a
year. In 1909 she began a two-year
course required for rural teaching — fi-
nanced by working in a theatre chorus
whose patrons were all male. Fortunate-
ly, this job did not result in scandal until
she had received her diploma. Storni’s
coup de théâtre left an audience of gos-
sipers reading a suicide note as she em-
barked on the next stage of her life.
Arriving in Buenos Aires with an in-
fant son in 1912, Storni worked at odd
jobs until she attained some level of fi-
nancial stability in an import business.
By this time, her first poems began to
appear in the city’s literary magazines,
culminating in a first book, The Restless-
ness of the Rosebush (La inquietud del ro-
sal) (1916). Her renowned poem “The
She-Wolf” appears in this volume. In
declamatory style, she announces:

I am like the she-wolf. I travel alone and
I laugh

At the flock. I exist on my wages and
they’re mine

Wherever I decide to go, for I have
hands

That know what work is and my mind is
sound.

It is for this diction, this sense of dignity
in spite of hardship, that she earned her
heroic reputation as woman and poet.
Because of this book, she was
promptly inducted into the previously
all-male intellectual circles of Buenos
Aires. She was heralded for her dramatic
readings and her distinctive poetry. Her
new colleagues secured positions for her
at a children’s theatre and the Normal
School of Modern Languages. She
worked dedicatedly while publishing
three more books of poetry between
1918 and 1920. In these poems, she
positions herself as a woman tangentially

Winter 1990

relating to the traditional female—male
love relationship. Ultimately her
themes come to terms with the reality
that a woman’s future, a woman’s most
profound feelings do not depend on ide-
alized affection for or from a man. In
“Little Bitty Man,” she writes, “Little
bitty man, I love you half an hour. / Ask
no more of me.” In “Forgetfulness,” her
skepticism full bloom, she questions
“Lydia Rosa: . . . Five o’clock. You fell
into his arms at that hour, / And maybe
he remembers you.” Powerfully, she
exorcises herself and her writing from
any remnant of romanticism in “Eros”:

I disemboweled your stomach like a doll’s
and examined your deceitful wheels,

and deeply hidden in your golden pulleys
I found a trap door that said: sex.

Another departure from tradition
marks a poem dedicated to Gabriela
Mistral, “Litany for a Dead Earth.” With
the desecration of women or female
principles comes the desecration of life
itself and that of the planet:

(Like a mother who goes on even though

she has
the poison of dead children in her womb)

No city will be standing . . . the earth
will support
Ruins and rubbish on her dead shoulders.

It will try to make
the moon another mausoleum.

It is the likes of this litany that makes
her a “committed” poet, part of an un-
deniable tradition in the Americas.

In 1935 Storni learned she had breast
cancer; even after surgery, the disease
progressed. She ended her life by walk-
ing into the sea.

In Zones of Pain/Las Zonas del Dolor,

nominated for the Los Angeles Book
Award in poetry, Marjorie Agosin com-
mits her word to the living and the dead
women of Chile who have suffered as a
result of the 1973 coup and the subse-
quent repression meted out by the Pino-
chet military regime. Many of the poems
reflect how victims of this “holocaust”
disappear anonymously, as in a series
titled “Disappeared Woman I”:

call me

Woodcut by Rini Templeton

KK as

=)
end Yo

Turned on by Pachucos

The Wedding, by Mary Helen Ponce. Houston: Arte Publico Press, 1989, $8.50, 199

pp. (PB)

by Charlotte Zoe Walker

This novel’s simple plot depicts

the preparations for a Chicano

wedding in the San Fernando
Valley in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
Events are seen mainly through the eyes
of the novel’s endearing protagonist,
Blanca Muñoz, who has to work extra
hours at her turkey-plucking job to pay
for her wedding. Her mother can’t help
out, and the groom, Sammy-the-Crick-
et Lopez, is too cheap and self-centered
to contribute beyond the barest mini-
mum, even though he wants a big wed-
ding as a form of social acceptance.

Cricket felt it his sacred duty to have his
best friends, in tuxedos, riding in low-
slung cars with loud pipes that kept the
cops writing out tickets. Secretly, Cricket
wanted it said that his wedding had been
the best in Taconos . . . he began to
think of raising his status among the
pachucos of San Cristobal Valley by get-
ting hitched to his chick in a wedding
that would outclass all others.

Blanca’s need is similar — to have a
church wedding that will make her fam-
ily respectable. Worrying about how she
will pay for it, she lets her officious maid
of honor take her to a bridal shop in Los
Angeles:

“I shoulda eloped,” groaned Blanca,
pulling the petticoat over her head. “I’m
tired of killing myself just to pay for a
wedding dress. I shoulda got a dress made
of sacks, with some of them birds and

butterflies. But I gotta make my Ma
proud. Shucks! And I still gotta buy me
some shoes and. . .”

“Shoes? Why my dear, we have a spe-
cial selection of satin slippers right here,”
gushed Mrs. Solomon as she thrust her
hand underneath the curtain. “Why just
look at these!” She held up a tiny satin
shoe, and handed it to Blanca, who took
one look at the shoe and in an embar-
rassed voice said, “I wear 9, double D.”

Ponce tells this tale with affectionate
humor. In the hands of a different narra-
tor, some of the events and situations
might appear condescending, and she
takes risks in her attempt to render the
barrio dialect of the 1940s. But it works.
Ponce has a rare combination of hones-
ty, love, and lightheartedness that gives
us delicious pleasure while enlightening
us. Laughter and suspense build: Will
there be a fight at the wedding or dance
afterwards? Yet Ponce also conveys the
injustice her characters have to live with
— the humiliation of being denied de-
cent jobs out of prejudice, the “good
luck” of Blanca’s turkey plucking job,
and the physical disgust she must over-
come to do it.

Ponce grew up in a barrio like the fic-
tional Taconos. Her own family, she
says, was upwardly mobile, “but I
wanted to write about a lower class wed-
ding. When I was growing up, most
people were turned off by the pachucos
[zoot suiters]. What they did occurred

to give me back
name,

sounds,

a covering of skin
by naming me.

In “Disappeared Woman III,” Agosin
summons outright herself and us to

Find her.

Feel her breath.

Imagine her.

Far from funerals and infernos.

Agosin wants her poems to gather us in,
change our role from observer to that of
friend or loved one who will accompany
these women, named and unnamed,
living and dead.

Fully aware of the dangers in re-
creating the interiors of minds who have
suffered within the confines of torture
chambers, aware of possible excess in
the re-enactment of violence, Agosin
wants us to feel our mouths stuffed with
rags and gagged, to smart under the
blindfold, only hearing the omnipotent
voices in control, taunting beyond our
sight. These poems could not have been
written without some deeply committed
involvement with victims. Indeed, Ag-
osin has worked with family members of
the disappeared, with women who have
been imprisoned and tortured in Chile.
Her poems place us between the inno-
cent victim and the forces that would
keep us separate and out of view of their
carnage.

Drawings by Roser Bru appear
throughout the text, almost as dia-
phanously as do some of the women who
appear in these poems. Translations by
Cola Franzen convey the literal text so
strongly, I think, because of the forth-
right clarity and diction of the poems.
Likewise, Agosin has taken the transfix-
ing elements from testimony to shape
her poems with the same unswerving
syntax that truthtelling requires.

@ Zoé Anglesey, author of Something
More Than Force: Poems for Guatemala,
1971-1982, edited Ixok Amar.Go: Cen-
tral American Women’s Poetry for Peace
and By the River, a bilingual anthology of
contemporary U.S. women’s poetry.

somewhere in the dark, but not with
us.” She never saw serious gang fights,
she says, only scrimmages. Part of her
inspiration for the novel came from a
wedding she went to once “where there
were two ambulances, one for the groom
and one for the bride.”

One of the most interesting aspects of
the book is the portrayal of the two most
self-centered characters, the groom and
the maid of honor. Although they are
often unappealing, Ponce portrays them
without judgment.

My only caveat regards the clumsy
editing and proofreading. Curious about
this and other aspects of the book, I
called Ponce, who told me that she was
distressed by the errors and other mis-
handling by the publisher. Arte Publico
removed about fifty pages; in the process
they butchered her final chapter — even
inserting the editor’s own writing in the
patch-up job. “When you come to some
extremely choppy sections, that’s not
me — that’s my editor.”

Ponce, who teaches women’s studies
at the University of New Mexico, thinks
this is a problem Latina writers in partic-
ular have to deal with. “We have to go
with whoever will take us — and some-
times they are very arrogant. ‘You want
to get published or not?’ is their atti-
tude. Male editors sometimes feel that
they know best how women should
write, and that’s the bottom line of this
argument.”

@ Charlotte Zoe Walker is the author,
as Charlotte Mendez, of Condor and Hum-
mingbird. She co-edits the new SUNY
Women’s Studies journal, Phoebe.

Belles Lettres @ 17