Woman as Lizard and

Letter Writer

The Iguana, by Anna Maria Ortese, translated by Henry Martin. McPherson &
Company (P.O. Box 1126, Kingston, New York 12401), 1987, $14.95, 198 pp.
The Manzoni Family, by Natalia Ginzburg, translated by Marie Evans. New York:

Seaver Books, 1987, $19.95, 358 pp.

by Rita Signorelli-Pappas

When Anna Maria Ortese’s
collection of stories Il mare
non bagna Napoli (The Bay Is

Not Naples) first appeared in Italy in
1953, the book met with instant critical
success, garnering the important Via-
reggio Prize. Although writers had often
thapsodized about the beauty and charm
of Neapolitan life, none had so inven-
tively clarified the reality of its slums: In
one of Ortese’s most arresting sketches
from the book, a virtually blind Neapol-
itan girl confronts the shocking squalor
of her surroundings for the first time
when she puts on a pair of glasses. The
Iguana, Ortese’s first full-length novel,
which followed twelve years later, re-
veals the same unblinking poet’s eye,
the author’s deft ability to convert her
clear observation of modern life into
metaphor.

The story that is the centerpiece of
this novel is a complex, haunting swirl
of realism and magic. A Milanese count
goes on a cruise to a Portuguese island in
a mode of weary disenchantment, and,
once there, he falls in love with a mys-
teriously ingenuous iguana named Es-
trellita. Like a real iguana, Estrellita is
tame despite her ferocious appearance.
She responds with girlish appreciation to
the count’s deepening ardor and only
waxes sullen when given commands by
her captors, a marquis and his brothers.

What in this childlike beast has cap-
tured the count’s imagination? Perhaps
it is a response similar to Prospero’s in
The Tempest when he undertakes the
education of Caliban: the simple human
need to instruct innocence. During
moments of leisure, the count cannot
resist imagining Estrellita civilized and
elegantly ensconced in his mansion in
Milan. But the girl-iguana eludes his
longing to improve her life. After the
count dies trying to save her, she lapses
into helpless enslavement.

To decode meaning in this poetic
fable is not an easy matter. Its intricate
plot turns, paragraph-long sentences,
abrupt forays into satire, and un-
announced shifts from third- to
second-person narrative make strong
demands on the reader. Henry Martin
has eased these difficulties admirably by
translating with resourceful clarity the
often labyrinthine Italian original. Still,
meeting and resolving the challenges of
the text have rewards, for this tale of the
endurance of class and sexual oppression
— metaphorized in the subjugation of

the iguana — and its dreamy island at-
mosphere intensifies the reader’s imagi-
nation.

Easily as imaginative as Ortese’s
novel, though more balanced in the
crafting of an experimental form, is
Natalia Ginzburg’s The Manzoni Family,
first published five years ago in Italy.
Drawing on her skills as translator, nov-
elist, playwright, and autobiographer,
Ginzburg inventively chronicles the
family life of Alessandro Manzoni, au-
thor of the first modern Italian novel, I
promessi sposi (The Betrothed). Manzoni

was venerated not only as the writer

Anna Maria Ortese.
Photo circa 1982 by Paola Agosti.

whose style and language set the nation-
al literary standard for nineteenth-
century Italy but also as a sort of spiritual
father figure for a nation struggling to
achieve political unification during a
period known as the Risorgimento.

Manzoni casts a shadow as long as
Dante’s for the student of Italian litera-
ture. It is therefore startling to pick up a
biography of his family only to discover
that the central figure — Manzoni him-
self — is scarcely visible. Apparently
while Manzoni was sealed in his study,
the women in his family were writing
themselves: his mother, Giulia
Beccaria; his second wife, Teresa Borri;
and three of his six daughters were im-
passioned and eloquent letter writers.
Translating from the French into Ital-
ian, Ginzburg has nimbly snipped and
stitched primarily from their cor-
respondence to create no ordinary biog-
raphy, but an epistolary collage that has
the look and feel of a novel.

To achieve this novelistic effect,

Ginzburg has skillfully fused the forms of

NOT VANISHING

by Chrystos

Strong, true, unapologetic, and challenging... if you read no other
poetry, READ THIS. It isn't a kindly trip down the beads ‘n' feathers trail,
this is the distillation of a lifetime reality.

— Anne Cameron

Chrystos’ work is a give-away of the deepest sort. She offers us her love,
her fears, her anger... She is a true jewel among poets.

— Beth Brant

The honesty and fierceness in Chrystos’ poems is, in her own words, a

thunder that clears the air.

ISBN 0-88974-015-1
Paper, $9.50

— Audre Lorde

Available to bookstores through Inland or Bookpeople in the U.S.

Press Gang Publishers, 603 Powell St., Vancouver, B.C. V6A 1H2

18 @ Belles Lettres

fiction and letters into that of drama.
She preserves the illusion of a single nar-
rator by downshifting into her own
characteristically dry, understated voice
as she connects long intervals between
letters and by keeping the transitions
among correspondents swift. Here, her
experience as a dramatist has served her
well. To change speakers, she simply
introduces a new surname punctuated
with a colon, as if she were creating the
script for a play. Tone is also carefully
controlled and modulated; whenever an
emotionally intense letter excerpt ends,
it is followed by a lighter, more playful
one to give the reader relief.

Like most family stories, this one sur-
prises, amuses, disenchants, and even
horrifies. Manzoni lived to see eight of
his ten children die, as well as his first
wife, his parents, and a number of
friends. Although there were times of
family unity and celebration over the
years, more often there were periods of
isolation and despair.

Critics sometimes suggest that none
of Manzoni’s children inherited his ge-
nius, but the letters of his daughters
suggest otherwise. The oldest, Giuliet-
ta, was her father’s chief secretary and
correspondent, even writing for him to
Fauriel, the cherished literary mentor of
his youth. Vittoria wrote a moving
memoir after her father’s death. And the
youngest, Matilde, who died of tu-
berculosis, sent home letters that reveal
a striking gift for description: “Several
people said the opals were the same col-
our as my eyes: that means eyes with no
brightness, used to looking at dead
things.”

Marie Evans’s translation can be rec-
ommended for its smooth accuracy with
words but not for its preservation of the
rapid-fire rhythm of the original. The
shorter Italian sentences merge here into
longer, more balletic units that tend to
mute the explosive, cryptic force of
Ginzburg’s distinctive style. Neverthe-
less, the story that these remarkable let-
ters tell is so absorbing and the choir of
female voices so vibrant that this book
deserves an abundance of readers.

@ Rita Signorelli-Pappas is a poet, fic-
tion writer, and critic who lives in
Valparaiso, Indiana.

New Paperbacks
of Basic Importance

“This important book encourages one to think in new
ways about what constitutes knowledge and therefore
about the aims of education for both men and women.”

WOMEN’S

Jill Mattack Tarule

1987 Distinguished Publication Award
Association of Women in Psychology

—CAROL GILLIGAN

“A wonderful book that succeeds in
demystifying the alienation and mis-
trust that so many women feel in re-
lation to the world of words, abstract
ideas, and logic.”
—EVELYN FOX KELLER
“Like a hot pepper, the bite in this
book comes after it has been con-
sumed... A framework for future
research on women, knowledge, and
identity.” —SARA NEUSTADT,
New York Times Book Review
Despite the progress of the women’s
movement, many women still feel
stifled in their families and schools.
Based on in-depth interviews with
135 women, this moving and insight-
ful book explains why this feeling
persists.

“A lucid survey of women’s exodus from the home over
the last 150 years and their status in the work force

today .... Compelling.”

ECONOMIC
EMERGENCE

Basic Books, Inc.
10 East 53rd Street

— WENDY KAMINER,
New York Times Book Review

“Now at last, a trained economist
has weighed in heavily on the fem-
inists’ side. ... The author argues per-
suasively that women are occupation-
ally segregated and major victims of

job discrimination.”
—DAVID R. HENDERSON
Fortune

“Pointedly describes what has hap-
pened, what is happening, and what
will have to happen if women are ever
to be full participants in the American
economy.

—LESTER C. THUROW, MIT
This is the first comprehensive as-
sessment of the greatest economic
revolution of our time—the transfor-
mation of women from housewives
to wage earners. The author, a lead-
ing economist, explores the origins
and consequences of this transforma-
tion and proposes a detailed policy
agenda for further change.

Both now available in paperback, $10.95. At your
bookstore or directly from the publisher. Call toll-free
New York, NY 10022 800-638-3030.

Major credit cards accepted.

July/August 1988