Harriette Simpson Arnow

by Linda Pannill

Harriette Simpson Arnow came

of Kentucky hill people. Some

in each generation left for the
cities, as the mountains cannot keep all,
even those who want to stay. Some re-
mained on the steep farms of rural
Wayne County, where Arnow was born
in 1908. She would recall her mother
as a cross, ill woman who thought she
had too many daughters and could not
decide whether to live in country or
town. When Harriette was 4 the
Simpsons moved to Burnside, where
there was a job in the lumber mill for
the father and a graded school for the
children. Later they moved onto a hill-
side above town.

Young Harriette, one of those chil-
dren who liked school better than home,
was ambitious. But Mrs. Simpson ex-
pected her daughters to attend normal
school and teach until marriage, as she
had done. The memoir Old Burnside
(1977), Arnow’s last book, begins with
a return in 1953 to visit her widowed
mother. As soon as Burnside is reached,
though, the account moves backward in
time, and the author never gets back to
the mother’s house. Instead the book
ends with the memory of a young girl’s
resolve; she had watched the riverboats
and the trains and knew she would leave
the mountains. Leaving seemed neces-
sary to being a writer.

But first she got sent to Berea College
for two years and then, at the age of 18,
went, somewhat unwillingly, to teach
in a one-room school in a remote valley.
She was touched by the lives of the
women and children, many of whom had
never been to the county seat, separated
from them by miles without road and
“two hundred years of time.” Her ap-
prentice novel, Mountain Path (1936),
would be based on the experience of liv-
ing with a local family, the protagonist’s
name, Louisa, being a version of her
own middle name, Louise.

Corie Calhoun, mother of the family
with whom Louisa boards, is inventive
and cheerful, ready to give thanks even
for ground frozen hard, because then the
children cannot wet their feet walking
to school. She is also, Louisa thinks, too
resigned to her husband’s whiskey mak-
ing and fighting, which are among the
matters that the women do not speak
about to the men, who make the deci-
sions. In a few years Corie’s daughter
Rie will be “almost sixteen — married
in all probability — preparing for the
birth of a child without doctor or nurse,”
while Louisa returns to college, disap-
pointing the children, who hoped
Teacher would stay. Although the novel
has a conventional love plot, the true
subject is Louisa’s relationship with the
mountain girls and women. Later the
author would move them to the centers
of her novels.

Like Louisa, Harriette left. She
worked her way through two more years
of college, taught a while, then moved
to Cincinnati, living on her own, taking
odd jobs and writing fiction. Mountain
Path was followed by the disappointment
of an unpublished novel, still in manus-
cript. In 1939 she married Harold
Arnow, a newspaper reporter from
Chicago, and moved back to Kentucky
with him, to a log house on Little Indian
Creek. Trying to live by subsistence
farming was, she later claimed, his idea.
The author gathered material from their
neighbors for the next book but found
little time to write. After five years and
the birth of a child, the Arnows left for
Detroit, where the novel was finally
completed.

JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1988

Harriette Arnow. Photo by Lee F. Redman.

Hunter’s Horn (1949) and The
Dollmaker (1954), the second and third
books in the mountain trilogy, represent
Arnow’s best writing. The dialect is
more readable than in Mountain Path,
and the characters are allowed to talk
more. The narrative voice, more col-
loquial, is closer to the mountain charac-
ters’ voices, so the perspective is not an
outsider’s. The setting is Little Smokey
Creek just before Pearl Harbor, when
some are leaving for the cities. Nunnelly
Ballew has come back to the family farm,
meaning to rebuild the place, but spends
more time and money than he should
hunting a fox called King Devil.

He sells his wife’s cow to buy pedi-
greed pups, while cash needed for chil-
dren’s shoes pays for special dog food.
Not a bad person, Nunn is more aware
of the injustice done his family than they
are. Milly, his long-suffering wife, ad-
mires him, as do the children. Only the
red-haired oldest finally protests when
she cannot go to high school on the new
gravel road. By the time the fox is killed
Sue has been caught like other girls.
As Preacher John had warned, Nunn
changed his ways “too late.”

The protagonist is male, but female
characters dominate the novel. Nunn is
not even present when the fox is caught,
in a place he never looked, but Milly
and Sue Annie, the midwife, are there.
With her “baby-catching” apron and
hard words for husbands, the latter is an
instance of what Arnow, in Flowering of
the Cumberland (1963), calls the old time
“Mother Goose” women of the hills,
“self-reliant females, entirely different
from those of Grimm.” Sue Annie, like
other characters from Hunter’s Horn,
spills over into the next novel, in which
a mountain woman is protagonist.

In a wartime Detroit housing project,
in conditions crowded and noisy, with
two small children, Arnow began The
Dollmaker (1954). Her most important

novel depicts the Great Migration of the
1940s, from Appalachia to the North,
of not just men looking for work this
time but whole families as well. The
heroine, Gertie Nevels, is a giant
woman who lifts 100-pound sacks of feed
and saves money to buy the Tipton
Place, “a good place — old, a log house
— big and built good like they built in
the old days.” The farm is never bought
because her husband, Clovis, wants
them to move to Detroit. Gertie’s
mother, a “weakly” and conventional
woman, insists that a wife’s duty is to
follow.

In the fictional housing project,
Merry Hills, Gertie suffers from the in-
ability to protect her children, whom
she thinks she has betrayed, like Judas,
condemning them to a worse way of life.
All of Arnow’s children are portraits,
and each reacts differently. The oldest
son runs away, back to Kentucky, while
a younger “adjusts” all too well, learning
to laugh at “hillbillies” in the funny pa-
pers. The youngest girl, Cassie Marie,
imaginative like her mother, cannot ad-
just and gets hurt most.

Gertie is allowed more anger and more
self-awareness than are the mountain
women in the earlier novels. The author
would have found it harder attributing
stoicism to a character into which she
had stepped so deeply, a character who
was a long novel’s center of conscious-
ness. Gertie is not Arnow, of course.
One was huge, the other small and de-
licate-looking, as well as differently edu-
cated and better-off. They are alter egos,
however, in the sense that both are ar-
tists.

“Dissolution” had been the working
title of the novel. After The Dollmaker
Arnow did not write again about con-
temporary Appalachia or its people, say-
ing a way of life had ended. Families had
indeed migrated. Farms disappeared into
national forests or were cut up by high-

ways and strip mines. Half of Burnside
was under Lake Cumberland. But the
best explanation for the author’s desert-
ing her material is that she herself had
left, this time for good. After the war
the family settled outside Detroit, where
Harold Arnow worked. A small farm
near Ann Arbor was home until her
death in 1986.

Arnow always felt a conflict, it seems,
between staying in the mountains and
leaving. The people and talk that made
up her best work were there, but so was
a life that she had found hard on women
and inimical to writing. Mountain Path
was written only after she, like Louisa,
had left the mountains. In a novel begun
in Kentucky, Hunter’s Horn, Sue’s
tragedy is not being able to leave, as she
dreams of doing. In The Dollmaker,
Arnow depicts for the first time a female
protagonist in every way equal to life in
the hills, and makes hers the tragedy of
not staying.

Arnow later turned to the past of her
region in well-researched social histories
of the settlement period, Seedtime on the
Cumberland (1960) and Flowering of the
Cumberland (1963). Sometimes the de-
tails overwhelm, as they would in her
historical novel, Kentucky Trace (1974).
Other times the past comes at first hand,
as when she recalls the garden at Little
Indian Creek, the hoe turning up flint
arrowheads, buttons made of bone,
“square nails, fragments of broken dolls

and dishes.”

Working from the particulars, she re-
jects stereotypes, among them that the
mountains are a bit of 18th-century Eng-
land stopped in time. The borderers were
adaptable people, the region always
changing. Yet she seems to find no hope
here for present-day Appalachia (which
is hardly mentioned), instead contrast-
ing the mountain past with the urban
present. As Wilma Dykeman says in a
foreword to the University Press of Ken-
tucky edition of Flowering of the Cumber-
land, Arnow deplored jargon about the
“normal” and all pressure to conform.

Her last important novel, The Weed-
killer’s Daughter (1970), has just this sub-
ject. The setting is a wealthy Detroit
suburb in the 1960s, the protagonist a
bright young girl persecuted by adults,
virtually all monsters. Bitterness and
blaming mar the book. Susie’s father is
bigoted, her mother (the “Popsicle
Queen”) cold, her brother psychopathic.
White carpets and electronic gadgets
furnish their house. The thesis, the
placelessness of suburbs like “Eden
Hills,” is proven in an unfortunate way,
and the novel fails to convince us that
such a place exists.

The good part of The Weedkiller’s
Daughter is the brief reappearance of
“Mrs. Nevels,” an old woman called
“The Primitive” living on a small farm
near Eden Hills. Gertie never returned
to Kentucky either, settling for “little
hills if I can’t have big hills.” She has a
gun now instead of a knife and takes
potshots at road crews knocking down
her fences. A mythic figure too large to
stay in one book, Gertie, like her author,
never really adjusted at all.

@ Linda Pannill wrote about The
Dollmaker as a television film for The Ken-
tucky Review (Winter 1986). She teaches
at Transylvania University in Lexington,

KY.

Note: Harriette Simpson Arnow’s
works are available in uniform editions
from the University Press of Kentucky:
Mountain Path, with an introduction by
the author (374 pp.), Hunter’s Horn
(412 pp.), The Dollmaker (560 pp.) —
each $24.00; Seedtime on the Cumberland
(449 pp.) and Flowering of the Cumber-
land (441 pp.) — $28.00, $13.00 (PB).
The Dollmaker and Hunter’s Horn are also
available in Avon paperback editions.

Belles Lettres 3