Short Stories

Patchwork, Piecework,  
Bedtime Stories, and Gossip  

Feeding the Eagles, by Paulette Bates Alden. Saint Paul, MN: Graywolf Press, 1988, $16.00,  

174 pp.  

Trash, by Dorothy Allison. Ithaca: Firebrand Books, 1988, $8.95, 174 pp. (PB)  
Sans Souci and Other Stories, by Dionne Brand. Canada: Williams-Wallace, 1988, 150 pp.  

(PB)  

The Book of Seeing With One’s Own Eyes, by Sharon Doubiago. Saint Paul, MN: Graywolf  

Press, 1988, $7.50, 335 pp. (PB)  

Love, Struggle, and Change: Stories by Women, edited by Irene Zahava. Freedom, CA: The  

Crossing Press, 1988, $8.95, 183 pp. (PB)  

Through Others’ Eyes: Animal Stories by Women, edited by Irene Zahava. Freedom, CA:  

The Crossing Press, 1988, $8.95, 188 pp. (PB)  

Margaret of the Imperfections, by Lynda Sexson. New York: Persea Books, 1988, $16.95,  

211 pp.  

by Patricia Roth Schwartz  

Reading short stories used to be a  

boring homework assignment:  

“The Last Leaf” or “The Gift of  
the Magi.” No more. Publishers Weekly  
has cited the burgeoning publication of  
works of short fiction. University presses  
put out series devoted to the genre.  
Trade publishers like Penguin and inde-  
pendent presses like Graywolf issue as  
many short fiction collections as novels.  
Even the feminist presses have broken  
away from the de rigueur lesbian novel  
to put out in recent years collections of  
stories by such lesbian/feminist writers as  
Maureen Brady, Barbara Wilson, Becky  
Birtha, and Cathy Cockerell.  

Paulette Bates Alden’s collection Feed-  
ing the Eagles presents a consistent series  
of gentle stories, quiet in tone, about  
Miriam Batson, a young Southerner  
transplanted to the Midwest by marriage.  
The stories vary a bit in style (some first  
person, some third) and appear in the  
text out of chronological order as to a  
timeline of Miriam’s life. And a certain  
lack of flash exists in Alden’s flat, almost  
matter-of-fact narrative. I might not  
have liked all of the parts as much as I  
do the whole, yet the montage of one  
woman’s journey through the losses of  
young adulthood—in some ways more  
devastating than the predictable ones of  
later life—has impact.  

Noteworthy is “Legacies,” in which  
three generations of women come to  
terms with how time moves; Alden’s  
buildup in this piece to her amazing last  
line makes the price of the whole book  
worthwhile. In “Two Women,” Miriam  
and her friend Anna cope, through a  
maze of rationalizations, with sharing  
the same man. I admire Alden’s work  
stylistically, especially her way with tone  
and sense of place. Ultimately, though, I  
failed to feel really moved by Miriam  
Batson, whose life has been so defined  
by her connection to men and whose  
salvation seems to come through immer-  
sion into a lucky marriage, within which  
she can remain as vague and unformed  
as she started out.  

Dorothy Allison also writes of the  
South—yet her world of poor whites lies  
as far from the genteel middle-class of  
the Batson family as another part of the  
galaxy. Allison’s lesbian-feminist orien-  
tation creates an unnamed young  
woman character, who is, as far as I  
could tell, the protagonist of virtually all  
of the stories. In Trash, unlike Feeding  
the Eagles, almost all of the book is told  
in the first person; the timeline remains  
chronological. Works like these two  
begin to create a new genre: not a col-  
lection of discrete pieces, yet not quite a  
novel. I find fiction like this exciting;  
there is a dead accuracy about the form’s  
ability to replicate the way mind and  
memory work to bring us a life.  

Allison’s ability as a craftswoman of  
short fiction is exceptional. Rarely have  
I read such unsparing narrative, dense  
and gritty with realism, crackling with  
anger, pulsing with uncompromised sex-  

18 @ Belles Lettres  

uality. Her vision may be uncomfortable  
for readers more used to a Lee Smith  
view of the South—quaint, lovable ec-  
centrics—than one rife with O’Con-  
norish overtones. Yet Allison writes  
with the authority of having been there,  
honing in on the core of violence and  
hatred, and the legacy of generations of  
shame and oppression that dominate her  
characters’ lives.  

Trash has to struggle to find the pride,  
hope, and redemption that has  
nevertheless managed to flower in small  
patches in the midst of this blighted  
landscape. Family is the constant theme,  
both blood kin and the kin that lesbians  
create from a web of ex-lovers, lovers,  
and friends. Anger and identification  
with women are what make the differ-  
ence, although women can be as cruel  
and destructive as men (as the story  
“The Meanest Woman Ever Left Ten-  
nessee” amply illustrates). The woman’s  
angry voice, the voice that will not be  
silenced, finally guarantees survival: “I’ll  
curse you to the seventh generation in  
my mama’s voice,” Allison says, and we  
hear her.  

The only distressing aspect of Allison’s  
work is her allegation (mostly in her  

Paulette Bates Alden  

preface and in the story “River of  
Names”) that child sexual abuse, family  
violence, and emotional neglect do not  
happen in middle- and upper-class fami-  
lies. From my work as a psychotherapist,  
I know otherwise. Allison’s power lies in  
her ability to tell her particular searing  
truth about what she has come from, not  
in denying that other versions of the  
same can happen in other worlds.  

Some of the most challenging and  
soul-stretching of all fiction comes from  
writers of mixed ancestry and/or those  
who live transplanted on alien ground.  
Certainly Alden’s collection has some of  
this flavor (like the early work of Alice  
Adams in which disoriented South-  
erners find themselves living in San  
Francisco). Writers like Paula Gunn  
Allen (Native American-Lebanese) and  
Michelle Cliff (Creole) are others, the  
vitality of whose work comes from an al-  
most alchemic process of transforming  
diverse elements into a new and magical  
whole. Dionne Brand, a Black woman  
born in the Caribbean who has lived for  
the past eighteen years in Toronto, now  
joins their ranks. A much-published  
poet, Brand brings a lyric touch and a  

Dorothy Allison.  
Photo by Myra Fourwinds  

gift for vivid sensory detail to her fic-  
tion. In addition, she has a born story-  
teller’s flair for the yeasty character, the  
juicy tale (“Madame Alaird’s Breasts” is  
a perfect example). Yet her work has  
nothing to do with the mere presenta-  
tion of grotesques and exotics for the  
consumption of the bored, middle-class  
white reader; a feminist vision informs  
these stories, letting us know that ra-  
cism, woman-hating, and capitalist im-  
perialist policies hurt flesh-and-blood  
people, with whom in these pages we  
laugh and cry. Whether the stories take  
place in the Islands or far up North, the  
cadence of the Caribbean comes  
through in the language and in the voice  
of characters like Blossom, the Priestess  
of Oya. All of Brand’s work has the un-  
derlying feel of oral tradition. Although  
in “Photograph,” Brand says, “My grand-  
mother left no trace,” that is actually not  
true. Stories like these, passed down  
from grandmother to granddaughter to  
us, are heirlooms.  

Sharon Doubiago, in The Book of  
Seeing With One’s Own Eyes, has pro-  
duced a lengthy work, dense as a dwarf  
star, compelling as a black hole, that  
chronicles the years from adolescence  
into full adulthood of a young woman of  
the 1960s. Doubiago takes a caustic,  
feminist look straight through a flower-  
child façade to the real, seamy underside  
of an era in which the “greening of  
America” often meant the exploitation  
of women. She lets us know how the  
chicks and old ladies of the countercul-  
ture really felt; she shows as well, with a  
mother’s emotion, the poignant losses,  
the wasting, in all senses of the word, of  
young men, as in the section “Jonah.”  

Doubiago often sacrifices a highly  
polished style to achieve a powerful nar-  
rative sweep almost epic in scope, defy-  
ing the mandate that women writers  
must be Austens, never Thackerays. The  
author’s own voice, despite her use of  
the first person, seems to be filling us in,  
speeding up over details, and urging us  
to the next place she wants us to be.  
Such a style intrudes at times, pre-  
venting the protagonist from speaking  
fully for herself. The book—which I re-  
ally consider to be a novel despite the  
cover billing as stories—is divided, first,  
into four titled parts, and then, further,  
into additional sections, which are the  
stories themselves. The overwhelming  
effect is not of separately carved minia-  
tures; instead it is a sprawling mural of  
blurred and blending colors and forms.  
She also experiments with a fascinating  
technique of mixing real and fictional  
characters; people like Raquel Welch  
and Joan Kennedy surface as cameos.  
Literary personas as well come to life in  
these pages: The story “The Whore” re-  
volves around an obsession with John  

Fowles’s The Magus. In the story entitled  
“Joyce,” Doubiago rewrites in full Joy-  
cean style Molly Bloom’s soliloquy as her  
protagonist would have delivered it.  

In this way, the author evokes the era  
of the sixties with special accuracy, that  
time of obsession with icons (whether  
presidents or rock stars) as substitutes for  
self. Doubiago and her protagonists  
range as well through an entire history of  
visionary consciousness (section title  
pages are headed by quotes from such  
sources as Valéry, Rilke, Blake, Aris-  
totle, and the Song of Songs), careening  
desperately along on that same odyssey  
of identity. The book ends with “Vets,”  
about the aftermath of Vietnam; Doubi-  
ago’s characters never emerge into the  
consciousness of the seventies, a time  
when women could at least feel some  
support for shucking sexual obses-  
sion/oppression. No matter how hard  
Doubiago’s narrator, her lovers, and  
friends search outside themselves for im-  
ages of whom to be—through esoteric  
philosophies and cultish belief systems or  
inside, through psychedelic drugs—they  
seem always doomed to fail. The Book of  
Seeing With One’s Own Eyes is a difficult,  
demanding, unsettling, yet essential  
work, a woman’s answer to the male war  
novel (especially of Vietnam). Women  
on the home front sustain heavy fire and  
high casualty rates every day.  

Irene Zahava, a feminist bookstore  
owner, has a knack for compiling inter-  
esting and varied collections of short  
stories. Her Womansleuth Anthology of  
feminist detective stories and Hear the  
Silence: Stories of Magic, Myth, and Re-  
newal are both well done and popular.  
Zahava’s two new books are equally  
pleasing. Love, Struggle and Change: Sto-  
ries by Women explores women on the  
edge of major life change as perceived by  
writers who range from the illustrious  
(Margaret Atwood) to the newly pub-  
lished (Carolina Mancuso). Black,  
white, Japanese-American, older, young-  
er, lesbian, and heterosexual writers are  
represented. Especially noteworthy is  
Harriet Malinowitz’s story “Water Ski-  
ing,” whose rendition of a falling-apart  
lesbian relationship documents a famil-  
iar experience with authenticity. Jane  
Lazarre’s “Penetrations” is haunting: A  
middle-aged New York City wife and  
mother, a teacher, a poet who does not  
write, begins to realize how much a vi-  
olent and unjust world has corroded her  
ability to love and keep her family from  
harm. I did not care for Atwood’s piece,  
about a young woman giving birth who  
reacts to the whole experience with  
emotional flatness, but the beauty of a  
collection like this is that we learn that  
the greats are not necessarily always the  
freshest or the best.  

Through Others’ Eyes: Animal Stories by  
Women did not fully live up to my ex-  
pectations of a volume concerning deep  
spiritual connection between women  
and other species. My own beliefs about  
the existence of such a connection, as  
well as the cover illustration by Susan  
Seddon Boulet of a wise woman flanked  
by her familiars—owl, wolf, saber-  
toothed tiger—had led me to expect  
more mystical tales. Nevertheless, these  
varied narratives, culled from previously  
published works by mostly well-known  
feminist authors—Alice Walker, Ursula  
LeGuin, Toni Cade Bambara—explore  
the ways that animals can be part of  
people’s lives. I especially liked the true-  
life narratives (some of the pieces are  
autobiographical rather than strictly fic-  
tion) of Annie Dillard and Beryl Mark-  
ham; stalking a muskrat or a lion can be  
much the same. A special inclusion, also  
autobiographical, is a section from Goril-  
las in the Mist, by the late Dian Fossey.  

—continued on next page  

Spring 1989