lish, it was said in Polish. In any language, the words  
would have been indistinguishable. When the priest had  
hurried through his part of the prayer, the tired, soft,  
hiss-chirp would begin, all at once, dwindling slowly, with  
each of the women praying at a different pace. Wrinkled  
and sad, most of them fat and dressed in dark colors, they  
huddled over their beads down at the small side altar. My  
grandmother was one of them.  

The only occasion in church that I enjoyed (although I  
managed to look every bit as put upon as my friends) fell on  
the Saturday before Easter. The girls would come in ba-  
bushkas and light jackets carrying baskets of food to be  
blessed for the Easter morning meal. We would kneel close  
to the center aisle with the baskets on the floor beside the  
pews. Filled with the sweet smell of Polish sausage and  
home-baked raisin bread, the church seemed less forbidding;  
perhaps, too, because the agonies of Lent had passed and  
we no longer had to spend each Friday afternoon making  
Stations of the Cross and because the purple shrouds that  
covered all of the statuary had at last been taken up. Ab-  
sent, too, was the regiment of nuns, so that we could sit or  
slouch as we chose.  

It was, in fact, the Virgin’s  
only appearance in  
Western Pennsylvania.  

And then the priest would appear, heralded by two altar  
boys waving censers, filling the air with the familiar in-  
cense, covering, temporarily, the warm and alien kitchen  
smells. We would kneel as straight as if the nuns were yet  
behind us, and up the aisle the priest would walk, swinging  
a silver shaker, splashing the baskets and the company with  
tepid holy water. We would regain ourselves, shuffle out,  
complain together in the churchyard, and swagger home to  
beg the now sanctified raisin bread, eggs, or sausage. Each  
family kept a store of unblessed food, too, though nothing  
could equal the share in the baskets. But never once would  
our parents permit us to touch, let alone eat, the food that  
had been blessed until Easter morning.  

The younger women, a group that included our mothers,  
did not go to rosary, nor did they participate in our devo-  
tions. Instead, they played bingo in the church basement. I  
went only twice and, although I was bored by it, I was  
jealous of the girls who went regularly because they seemed  
so much more grown up than I. And so I always wheedled  
and whined to be able to go.  

My mother never won anything except an Aunt Jemima  
cookie jar, but my Aunt Clara won almost every time she  
played: towels, doilies, and a salt and pepper set. Once, on  
one of the two nights I had been allowed to go, Aunt Clara  
won the $50 jackpot.  

She told me to place the red see-through chips on her  
card, but I was too slow, and eventually she took over. I  
was almost asleep, my head pressed against the narrow  

polka in the streets that night on the way home, and the next  
day my aunt bought a turkey and we had a huge family  
dinner at my grandmother’s, just like Thanksgiving, to  
celebrate.  

Aunt Clara told all of my aunts and uncles and cousins  
that I had brought her luck and I got to pull the wishbone  
with her, although, as usual, she won.  

She even won a toaster in the church raffle. It wasn’t  
first prize, but still. Each of us had to sell five books of  
tickets, which was pretty easy since relatives usually bought  
a whole book. But Aunt Clara won her toaster and was the  
only person in the whole family who had bought just one.  

It was she to whom the Blessed Virgin once miraculously  
appeared. It was, in fact, the Virgin’s only appearance in  
Western Pennsylvania.  

My Aunt Clara had never been my favorite. I remember  
her sitting on the front steps in the summertime drinking  
beer, setting the bottle on the steps beside her after every  
swig. I used to worry that my friends would see her, but if  
they did, they never told me, never teased me about it  
which they would have, I am sure.  

She was a very loud woman whose teeth were laced with  
gold. She laughed a lot, throwing her head back so that all  
of the fillings would show. When she hugged me, she  
squeezed too tight and her breath smelled of beer and her  
cheeks of powder. I would squirm to get away from her,  
but she always managed to hug me more than anyone else.  
At least it seemed so.  

Her rooms were next door to us, small and cluttered with  
her winnings and her handiwork. All of our sheets had been  
bordered by Aunt Clara, and she made my mother’s finest  
tablecloth, reserved for Christmas and Easter dinners. Most  
of my aunts and uncles bought doilies from her to give as  
wedding presents and to use in their homes. My parents did  
not use doilies, except for one long one across the dining  
room buffet, and so, in our house, all of the doilies that  
Aunt Clara had given us were upstairs in the third drawer  
of my parents’ chest of drawers, wrapped in white tissue  
and smelling faintly of lavender sachet.  

But Clara’s rooms had lots of doilies and long crocheted  
strips with tasseled edges hanging from the window frames  
and on the door between her bedroom and sitting room.  
There were many religious statues — the Infant of Prague,  
the Virgin in her various guises, a small wooden statue of  
St. Joseph — with sanctuary candles burning red and blue  
before them. And on the wall at the entrance, a white  
enamel holy water font. Her rooms were hot, and the holy  
water was always lukewarm. I loved to dab it on my fore-  
head when I came in, and so I never really minded having  
to make the Sign of the Cross when we went there, even  
though we didn’t do it at home, only at church or at my  
grandmother’s and Aunt Clara’s.  

On the day that the Virgin appeared, my aunt had fin-  
ished a blue tablecloth. Every year on that day, June 12,  
she used that cloth and uses it today. "It was blue, and blue  
is her color," my aunt told everyone later. "I should have  
known, because I’d never made a blue one before."  

When she called on my mother that night, she did not  
behave as if she knew the Virgin was coming. Instead, my  
aunt came an hour before the bingo was to start, as she  
always did, settled in the green armchair with a loud, deep  
sigh, as she always did and, pulling off her shoes, began to  
rub her feet, which she did only when she had spent the day  
delivering her needlework.  

“Please can I go?" I asked my mother.  

“Not tonight, Kotka," my mother said, and before they  
left, they each kissed my cheek for luck.  

May devotions ended, I had nothing to do that night. My  
father worked a crossword and listened to the radio, and I  
went to bed early. In a fuzzy way, I remember hearing my