The Power of Contradiction

I’m Dying Laughing, by Christina Stead. New York: Henry Holt, 1987, $19.95, 447 pp.  
Ocean of Story, by Christina Stead. New York: Penguin, 1987, $7.95, 560 pp. (PB)  

by Nancy Lee-Jones  

A book that examines the  
contradictions of human  
life, I’m Dying Laughing is  

an especially appropriate title for Chris-  
tina Stead’s last novel. Hegel wrote that  
power for human beings was the ability  
to support contradiction, and Stead’s  
genius lies in her ability to create power-  
ful and powerfully contradictory charac-  
ters. Australian by birth, Stead under-  
stood the dynamics of power — in re-  
lationships between colonizer and colo-  
nized, parent and child, man and  
woman — and how insidious and effec-  
tive was a dominance maintained  
through the inertia of ambivalence. In  
Emily Wilkes Howard, Stead portrays a  
heroine at once frightening, charming,  
and compelling.  

I'm Dying Laughing chronicles the  
lives of Emily and Stephen Howard,  
communist ideologues who crave luxu-  
ry. “All we want, our heart’s desire,”  
Emily croons, “all this and communism,  
too.” Stephen Howard is a son of  
American capitalism, wanted by the  
Party only for the money that his family  
will not give him while he stays with the  

Love Child  
by Jean Bedford  
Ringwood, Victoria, Australia: Penguin  

Books Australia, 1986, $5.95,  
108 pp. (PB)  

Jean Bedford's haunting novel of  
mother and child is a braid of lives  
touched by horrors so mundane they  
could happen to you. In fact, some of  
them probably will: marriages lost in  
war, children lost to catastrophe or  
scarred by neglect, little losses of hope  
when we find ourselves treating our  
children the way we hated our parents’  
treating us. It is the inevitability of hor-  
ror in our lives that makes the stories of  
Anne and her mother, Grace, so dis-  
turbing.  

Grace is a flashy, musical Cockney,  
who runs out on her husband and chil-  
dren during the Blitz, when she falls in  
love with an Australian sailor. Bill  
promises sunshine and prosperity in  
Australia, but war and divorces and mis-  
carriages leave Grace exhausted and  
complaining. Anne, their love child,  
grows up in a household of vindictive-  
ness and reproach, battling her parents  
for love. In her own marriage and moth-  
erhood, Anne won’t admit the inevita-  
ble portents of pain: “I felt we held each  
other inside a charmed circle, that  
nothing bad would ever happen to us,  
that we were touched by the gods.”  
Anne’s traumatized spirit, her creeping  
madness, is the culmination of all those  
horrors Grace had tried to survive.  

In her poetic style, Bedford draws  
husbands and fathers with a fine edge,  
but they are overwhelmed by the passion  
and anguish of the women in this novel.  
Even her description of women passing  
the time of day is portentous: “That ab-  
solutely essential, assuaging ritual of the  
way women talk together, the rhythms  
as repetitive and subtle as a Mozart piano  
concerto, and just as mysterious.”  

Bedford’s second novel has the eerie  
feel of a true story. She tumbles three  
generations into a hundred pages, and  
lets us know these characters the way  
they know one another, the way we  
know our own families. “I loved her,”  
Anne says of her mother, “I blamed her  
for everything.”  

Belles Lettres  

—Lorraine E. McCormack  

left. A Marxist dandy (more dandy than  
Marxist), Stephen’s most political act is  
his choice of wife, the expansive,  
rough-hewn Emily Wilkes, over the  
svelte heiresses picked by his queenly  
mother. Stephen believes more in the  
workers than in himself but likes both  
rather less than his taste in custom-made  
shirts. An ineffectual writer (not even a  
“failed playboy”), Stephen suffers for his  
inconsequence until the ultimate be-  
trayal — after a lifetime of betrayals —  
sets him “free.” When he says rather  
desperately, “I don’t want ideas. Ideas  
are civil war,” Stephen neatly details the  
battlefield of his marriage.  

But the book’s roller coaster ride be-  
gins and ends with Emily Howard,  
whose force of character overwhelms  
and empowers the novel. Another of  
Stead’s brilliant egotists, Emily enacts  
her triumphs and failures like a theater of  
one. Indeed, she compares herself to  
Lady Macbeth, a role that is far too minor for  
her. A more suitable comparison is to a  
“female Danton” — a “lion of courage,  
attacked because he loved luxury.”  

On a boat to Europe to consume  
European culture, Emily introduces her-  
self as a “one hundred and one per cent  
hayseed and ignoramus, the big, brain-  
less American wonder from Hix-in-  
the-Stix.” And there is much “con-  
sumption” throughout the novel — of  
food, ideas, and other people — a tidy  
reminder of Stead’s definition of greed  
(in The Man Who Loved Children), as  
“the wilful devouring of other people's  
lives.” Emily’s intelligence and flash  
soon take control of the other passengers  
as they do the story line. When she says  
that America has no history — “we have  
only contradictions” — she defines her-  
self as well as her country. A further  
rumination is equally self-revealing:  

Well, that’s the bitter truth, the  
savagery of life which staggers you,  
keeps you rooted to the spot and  
your outcries stop your breath; and  
yet it is so wildly out of line with  
all our ideals, humanity, peace,  
brotherly love, do unto others, until  
you laugh, shout, you understand  
your own simplicity and wickedness  
and denseness and greed — that’s  
American humour.  

Emily becomes a popular writer, a suc-  
cess she considers “just custard pie I  
throw in the face of the mamma public,  
stupid, cruel and food crazy.” Although  
she longs to write a great novel of ideol-  
ogy and revolution, she finds herself “fa-  
mous,” “a success,” sustained by drugs  
and drink, and “fighting for the wrong  
things.” As eyes are drawn to examine  
an ugly scar, Emily knows her failure as  
Stephen knows his but plays it out in  
manic-depressive scenes of extravagant  
“soul-drama.” The life she and Stephen  
lead is a curious blend of frenzy, self-  
indulgence and torment — an existence  
that validates Emily’s bitter witticism  
that “nothing inhuman is alien to me.”  

I’m Dying Laughing demonstrates  
again Christina Stead’s talent to im-  
merse her audience in the politics of love  
and the morality of ideology. Profes-  
sional and personal betrayals abound;  
characters demand love and loyalty yet  
have none to offer. Although Emily  

Christina Stead. Photo courtesy Australian  
Information Service.  

Getting Away From It All  

Dancing on Coral, by Glenda Adams.  
New York: Viking Penguin, 1987,  
$16.95, 291 pp.  

by Suzanne Berne  

How far can a novel go on clev-  
erness alone? Dancing on Coral,  
by the Australian writer  

Glenda Adams, attempts to answer that  
question. Full of incisive, comic de-  
scriptions of people trying to find them-  
selves, this is a modern picaresque novel  
for aimless youth. It goes pretty far too,  
from Australia to New York to Paris.  
And getting there is definitely most of  
the fun.  

The novel begins when, after her fi-  
nal exams, Lark Watter arranges for an  
interview with Qantas airlines to be an  
attendant. “That was one way to get  
away,” she thinks. Lark has always  
wanted to get away. At the age of four,  
“she had packed her cardboard sewing  
case with supplies for the journey. . . .  
She planned to wander around the  
world, until she found some kind of is-  
land: to settle on, where it would be  
peaceful.”  

The desire to get away appears to be  
endemic to her world, which, up until  
now, has consisted primarily of her fam-  
ily’s unkept backyard. Lark’s father, for  
instance, also dreams of leaving Aus-  
tralia, although he does not say why,  
and even memorizes the streets of Lon-  
don and possible stops between Chicago  
and Detroit in case he ever needs to  
know them.  

Lark’s boyfriend, Solomon Blank,  
does get away, on a fellowship to study at  
the University of Illinois at  
Champaign-Urbana, a place that sounds  
wonderfully exotic to Lark. There he  
soon finds another “person of the female  
persuasion.” But at the university Lark  
halfheartedly attends, she meets Tom  
Brown, “her first American.” He is  
immediately her great love, being a  
young man perpetually on the point of  
departure, even when he appears to be  
sitting solidly in a chair.  

She also meets Donna Bird — her  
rival for Tom’s affections — the peri-  
patetic, pale, and self-consciously orig-  
inal daughter of Professor Manfred Bird,  
a world-famous anthropologist. Re-  
jected by Qantas, Lark gets caught up in  
Tom and Donna’s enterprising business  
of manufacturing articles for a tabloid.  
“You know,” says Tom, “mother eats  
baby, that kind of thing.” They attach  
apparently innocent photographs of  
people and objects to lurid stories and  
sell them as “real” incidents.  

After deliberately staging a scandal  
and creating the possibility of a lawsuit  
for themselves, the three decide to flee  
to America, Lark and Donna Bird  
aboard a German freighter. By the time  
the ship reaches Tacoma, Washington,  
Lark has managed to rid herself of Donna  
Bird (it would be unfair to reveal how)  
and heads off alone across the country,  
by train, to meet Tom in New York  
City.  

Their ensuing relationship with its  
trials and Lark’s disillusionment occu-  

Howard speaks as if to overpower lis-  
teners by the weight of her words, what  
she recites most is the comic tragedy go-  
ing on around her — inner lives not rec-  
onciled to reality, praxis not coming  
close to theory. Emily is both predator  
and prey, funny and fascinating. Al-  
though the novel was never finished to  
Stead’s satisfaction (a few in-  
consistencies do remain), I’m Dying  
Laughing is a compelling narrative pow-  
erfully held together by the astonishing  
vitality of Emily’s characterization.  

Ocean of Story, a collection of short  
stories and autobiographical pieces, fur-  
ther displays Stead’s ability to explore  
the individual psyche and examine the  
compromises that compose all re-  
lationships. Her stories, compassionate  
but never sentimental, range from the  
domestic trials of young children (in “A  
Little Demon,” a woman compares the  
self-serving loyalty of household pets to  
that of children) to a remembrance of a  
reputed great lover (in “I Live in You”).  
“Peter had many love affairs! — If every  
wish and dream, contact and word of  
mouth, sentiment of desire and glance of  
admiration is a love affair: and to him all  
these were. . . This was love to him; it  
is love if you think so.”  

Stead’s gift for storytelling and vi-  
brant characterization make this collec-  
tion a welcome addition to her oeuvre.  
Unfortunately, her editor’s arrangement  
of stories by subject instead of in chron-  
ological order is not especially helpful in  
charting Stead’s development as a  
writer.  

The daughter of a passionate natural-  
ist, Stead’s examinations of human  
character are clinically precise. In  
Cotter’s England, one of her characters  
dwells on the reality in which we exist  
and the shadows in which we enact our  
dreams. Masterful in her depictions of  
the “reality and shadow” of individual  
lives, the naturalist in Christina Stead  
could objectively differentiate each and  
the artist in her could feel and portray  
the terrible beauty of both.  

Nancy Lee-Jones teaches English Lit-  
erature at Tufts University and Clark Uni-  

versity.  

Lark discovers that traveling across the world is  
not thrilling. New York is not thrilling.  
Living with Tom is not thrilling. She is  
perhaps the most unthrilled character in  
recent history. Nothing seems to move  
her except a vague discontent and her  
hatred of the ubiquitous Donna Bird.  
Getting away, in other words, has not  
gotten her anywhere.  

Set in the freewheeling sixties,  
Dancing on Coral paints a time when  
everyone was turned on to something  
and anywhere was better than where you  
were. By leaving Lark unturned on by  
anything and by using her unenthusi-  
astic gaze as the book’s point of view,  
Glenda Adams manages to make the  
absurdities of the era even more absurd.  
There are some wicked parodies of the  
radical lifestyle (burlap-covered walls,  
Javanese batiks, and imported walnut  
oil); the depiction of preening,  
intellectual-guru Professor Manfred  
Bird, anthropologist-turned-plunderer,  
is equally merciless. And by the end of  
the book, Lark’s hopelessly conde-  
scending lover Tom has been reduced to  
a little puddle of fatuousness.  

But unfortunately, Adams has sacri-  
ficed fictional sparkle for the sake of a  
farce about self-absorbed people. Lark  
and her lack of enthusiasm become tire-  
some; she is essentially boring. And so is  
everyone else after a while, interesting  
party patter about the “unicellular un-  
conscious” and “contemporary Western  
culture” aside.  

What began as a quirky, poignant  
story about wanderlust eventually turns  
into a flat, almost careless tale with some  
political satire added for carbonation.  

JuLy/AuGusT 1988 |