Asian Women Writers

The Sushi Writers

The Tale of an Old Geisha and Other Stories, by Kanoko Okamoto. Translated by Kazuko Sugisaki. Santa Barbara, CA: Capra Press, 1985, $7.50, 78 pp. (PB)

A Woman Called En, by Tomie Ohara. Translated by Kazuko Furuhata and Janet Smith. London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986, $9.95, 121 pp. (PB)

Rabbits, Crabs, Etc.: Stories by Japanese Women, translated by Phyllis Birnbaum. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1982, $15.00 (HB), $7.95 (PB), 156 pp.

by Lisa Forestier

Eating raw meat is barbaric. Eating strips of raw fish wrapped in delicate cakes of cold rice is refined. Why? Surely not because the inventor of sushi set out to teach a ponderous moral lesson about the paradoxical bond of barbarity and delicacy in refinement. Sushi just is. So are the stories of these Japanese women. They are intimately raw. And they have neither guilt nor explanation for why they should be so.

There are certain qualities, of course, that these writers share with their male counterparts: coolness, a sense of space in scene construction as though they were staging a Nō play, the ability to prune the visual world down to vibrant significant detail, and a tendency to be more metaphysical than psychological. However, the quality that becomes more dominant with each book as they progress chronologically from The Tale of an Old Geisha through A Woman Called En to Rabbits, Crabs, Etc., is a kind of hysteria muted by refinement. Yes, it is present in Yukio Mishima. And yes, it was there in the movie Kwaidan. Still, seldom is the rawness at the heart of refinement as chilling and as inevitable as it is in the best of writing by Japanese women.

Consider “Sushi,” a story by Kanoko Okamoto. She relates the encounter of a fiftyish man named Minoto and a young woman, Tomoyo, who works at a sushi restaurant. He is elegant. She is direct. There is an attraction. He tells her about how, as a sickly child, he could eat only sushi and how it returned him to a vigorous life. Although Tomoyo is a simple girl, she finds through Minoto’s story a language to penetrate the deceptive civility of his refinement. The haunting ending to the story reveals Minoto’s novel promiscuity as he hops from sushi restaurant to sushi restaurant but, more importantly, it evokes Tomoyo’s quiet resignation.

Okamoto’s writing is elegant without being mandarin. Phrases like “the pool appeared an intense light green like the color of new tea leaves” and “his voice was like thin paper trembling in a wind” create an aura of gentle refinement. Here is the Japanese nearsightedness that records minutiae but should never be taken for a head-in-the-sand sheltered life. Thus Okamoto is perfectly capable of skimming off refinement and looking beneath as when Minoto first discovers sushi:

“It must have been a real fish,” he thought. Then he felt the new strength of a conqueror who has killed an animal by tearing it apart alive. He wanted to look around and reassure himself of his new strength. Moved by this unknown delight he raised his hands to the sides of his belly and scratched with dancing fingers.

A Woman Called En is based on a true story of a 17th-century girl’s exile with her family after her father loses political power. She was finally released at the age of 44 after her brothers had died and she and her sisters were too old to bear children. Written in the formal classical style of Japan during the Edo period, this book, first published in 1960, might at first appear to be a quaint historical reconstruction. However, as Tomie Ohara explains in “Preface: The Woman Within Me,” she saw En as a paradigm for herself as she struggled late in life to establish herself as a serious writer. The fierce fatalism the book exudes is a far more mannered rebellion against male dominance than one would ever find in the West, but it speaks compellingly.

Lately, some Japanese women have entered literary realms that might be termed excessively “bizarre,” “violent,” or “pathological.” Rabbits, Crabs, Etc. includes excellent stylists of this school. However, it would be wrong to consider these “modern” tendencies distinct in kind from that merger of rawness and delicacy in the 1939 story “Sushi.” From the gluttonous father and daughter in Kanai Mieko’s “Rabbits” who are brutally consumed by their obsession for slaughtering rabbits to Yūko’s fixation on finding crabs (and only crabs) for dinner in “Crabs” by Kono Takako, the protagonists invariably are in the thrall of arbitrary passions that suck them down a vortex as meaningless phenomena drift by. There is a strange beauty to it all but also an aimless despair. The notable exception is “A Bond for Two Lifetimes — Gleanings” by Enchi Fumiko, author of Masks and The Waiting Years. Fumiko Enchi, as she is often called, may well be the touchstone for her generation simply because she refuses to define reality solely as a raw vortex devoid of elegance, reflection, and a certain sly humor.

Of the three books, I preferred The Tale of an Old Geisha because I think Okamoto is the best writer of the group. Her patterns of thought and sensuality are incomparably pure, and her story collection is half of a Capra Back-to-Back book that also includes Anaïs Nin’s The White Blackbird and Other Writings. “Sushi” alone is worth the price of the book, but “The Old Geisha” and “North Country” are also excellent. The literary ingredients are perfectly balanced. Since Okamoto’s time, her female compatriots represented here (excepting Enchi Fumiko) are long on the raw meat and short — often painfully short — on the rice.

© Lisa Forestier is a writer, editor, and translator who lives in Maryland.

Maidens, Mistresses, and Mothers

The Mother of Dreams and Other Short Stories: Portrayals of Women in Modern Japanese Fiction, edited by Makoto Ueda. New York: Kodansha International, 1986, $19.95, 279 pp.

by Kazuko Watanabe

This anthology of 16 short stories focuses on women in postwar Japan. Some of these writers, such as Nobel prizewinner Kawabata Yasunari, playwright Abe Kōbō, and the well-known author Ariyoshi Sawako, are established, but others are translated here for the first time. This selection is not representative of contemporary Japanese literature, but each features various transforming phases of Japanese women of today; some are realistic, others more imaginative and more universal.

The stories are classified according to the sexual roles assigned to women: the maiden, the wife, the mistress, the mother, and the working woman, and the editor gives a concise historical background of each type. This categorization is similar to that in Mary Anne Ferguson’s Images of Women in Literature (1986), in which one also finds women without men, women becoming, and women’s self-images. This structure enabled Ferguson to include images of women beyond those defined by sexual division and politics. These issues and nontraditional images are conspicuously absent from this anthology, particularly in the section on working women in which two of the three stories are about barmaids, who make use of their sexuality and traditional roles. The Mother of Dreams also reveals the Japanese women’s preoccupation with womanhood, marriage, and family. However, Ueda’s categorization rather ironically deconstructs the categories themselves, since most of the protagonists defy rigid definitions. The anthology in fact reveals the relativity of classification and, by emphasizing the ample, multiple experiences of Japanese women, goes beyond stereotypes.

The most varied portrayal of women is found in “the Wife”; none of them is simply submissive, enduring, and virtuous, although all are confined to the home. In “The Lady Who Entertained,” Dazai Osamu portrays a wife who takes a nurturing role and is temporarily revitalized by her self-effacing feeding of male guests. In “Umbrella on a Moonlit Night,” Tsuboi Sakae reflects on the realities of modern housewives, who enjoy limited freedom with other women and share “each other’s joy and anger, pleasure and grief,” but they still find their roots in their families. The wife in Mori Yōko’s “Be It Ever So Humble” suffers from a sense of futility in her life, which she allays through a series of affairs. In contrast, the supposed submissive, battered wife in Matsumoto Seichō’s “Wait a Year and a Half” actually betrays and murders her husband and her lover.

The portrayals of “the mothers” are also not just of those who fit into the typical mothering role; the stories about women writers are especially rewarding. They manage to disclose complex inner worlds of intuition and suppressed and emerging emotions. The mother of the title story, by Ōoka Shōhei, is depicted from the perspective of her son. He dreams of his “maidenly” mother who often appears as an old, withered woman. Moreover, he confuses her with his sweetheart, a prostitute, and finally the Virgin Mary with the Christ child. Setouchi Harumi’s autobiographical story, “Pheasant,” is about a mother’s search for her child. The author employs blood images of birth, menstruation, and abortion. At the end, the pheasant image of maternal love and an abortion scene that embodies her “resistance toward seeing her daughter” are sublimated to her reconciliation of womanhood and motherhood, her “whorish personality,” and “maternal capacities.” Hirabayashi Taiko’s “A Woman To Call Mother” portrays a similar conflict. The mother of a Kabuki dancer, overwhelmed with her sexuality, the “inner fire of life,” makes the mistake of falling in love with her daughter’s fiancé and is severely punished for it.

Within the last few years, a growing number of anthologies and translations have made Japanese literature more accessible to Western readers, among them collections of women writers. The Mother of Dreams is a somewhat different addition to these anthologies — half of the portrayals of women are written by men, which allows for an examination of gender difference. Women’s sphere is culturally separated from the world of men, and this is reflected in Japanese literature.

The section “the mistress” most clearly demonstrates how Japanese men’s and women’s images of women differ. In “Nude,” by male author Nagai Kafū, the mistress feels confidence, pride, and even triumph over the admiration of men who buy her body as a sexual object. In another story by a male author, Kaiko Takeshi, the mistress of the American soldier is depicted through the sympathetic eye of an escapist man. In both stories, the male narrator remains as an outside observer, attempting to analyze women.

Woman author Fumiko Enchi depicts a woman who is overwhelmed by her womanhood, cursing even her sexuality in “Blind Man’s Bluff” through her half-sister’s eyes. To the narrator, the woman’s amorousness and beauty and her suicide to punish herself are irrelevant; in the game, the blindfolded demon catches the victim. The contrast in how men and women perceive women’s sexuality is striking.

All the translations are excellent, and the book is beautifully done, conveying the characteristics of things Japanese.

© Kazuko Watanabe is an associate professor of American literature at Kyoto Sangyo University, Japan, and is working on 19th-century New England women writers.

May/June 1987