Women and War

War and Love

Gone to Soldiers, by Marge Piercy. New  
York: Summit Books, 1987, $19.95, 703 pp.

by Edith T. A. Davidson

Gone to Soldiers, Marge Piercy’s

panoramic novel of World

War II, gives long overdue  
credit to both women and Jews who  
served the war effort at home and a-  
broad. Though immensely complex, the  
story is related at a fast clip and contains  
no barren spots.

A docudrama waiting to be trans-  
formed into a great TV serial, it is a ro-  
mance that conjures up what it was like  
to be alive in those now faraway days.  
One of the highest human values is the  
caring of women, not just for their men  
and families but for each other, shown in  
the love of Ruthie for the refugee Naomi  
and of Jacqueline for Daniela and Rysia.

Despite its realism, what defines this  
novel as romance is that most of Piercy’s  
characters eventually find love, very  
good sex, and, if they survive the war,  
happiness. One falls under the spell of  
hope.

Maintaining a feminist perspective  
even in battle scenes, the novel  
nevertheless contains no spite against  
men, even for their occasional meanness  
toward the women who are replacing  
men everywhere in “the emergency.”  
Except of course the Nazis and the one  
villain (the American, Hickock, whose  
villainy affects not the women but a fel-  
low Marine), all the main male charac-  
ters — including Leib, a married man  
who gets the teenager Naomi pregnant  
— are likable, even lovable.

Central is the plight of a family of  
Parisian Jews. Jacqueline, whose mother  
and sister Rivka have been taken to the  
camps and whose father is a leader in the  
Resistance, also joins the Resistance.  
She falls prey to the concentration  
camps herself but eventually escapes.  
Her sister Naomi finds refuge with  
Jewish relatives in Detroit and becomes a  
more-or-less typical American teenager,  
albeit terrified by her terrible dreams of  
her twin. Of all the characters, Jac-  
queline comes most to life, through her  
journals.

The American Jews in the book are re-  
lated to Jacqueline or to her story in var-  
ious ways. Louise, a successful writer, di-  
vorced from her husband Oscar (who  
works for the Office of Strategic Ser-  
vices, OSS), becomes a war correspon-  
dent and eventually, after both have a  
number of affairs, remarries him. Daniel,  
a cryptographer working on Japanese  
codes, marries the gentile Abra. Murray,  
after surviving many battles in the  
Pacific, returns to marry his girlfriend  
back home, who has been faithful to  
him. Ruthie, his fiancée, works long  
hours on night shifts in a wartime factory  
while earning a college degree so that she  
can become a social worker.

The gentiles include Bernice, a  
WASP (Women’s Air Service Pilot)  
who gradually becomes aware that she is  
a lesbian and ends up in Alaska with a  
new male identity and a wife. Her  
brother, Jeff, is in the OSS and works  
with the Jewish Resistance in France. He  
falls in love with Jacqueline but commits  
suicide rather than betray his friends.  
Abra (that other kind of WASP) also  
works for OSS and dismays her anti-  
Semitic family when she marries Daniel.

That Piercy does not lose readers al-  
though she focuses on the abject misery  
of the Holocaust is largely due to the  
structure she has chosen: Dark alternates  
with light, sorrow with joy, evil with  
goodness, hate with love, anti-Semitism  
with cooperation, trivial everyday life  
with the monumental and insane. The

10 ® Belles Lettres

fact that the Nazis are not allowed to be-  
come real characters, along with her re-  
lentless piling up of shocking images, en-  
ables Piercy to stir readers who may be  
desensitized by the frequent appearance  
of stereotypical Nazis on their user-  
friendly, living room screens.

Piercy wants, above all, to be fair.  
Murray, a Marine in the Pacific theater,  
shoots and kills not only the Japanese  
but becomes enraged at and eventually  
kills the anti-Semitic Hickock, his  
immediate superior. Is this a case of the  
ends justifying the means? What is the  
difference between what Murray does  
and the “final solution” invented by the  
Nazis? The difference is that Hickock  
deliberately fires upon Murray and inno-  
cent bystanders. Murray shoots back in  
self-defense. Vicious prejudice can be a  
boomerang that turns on the one who  
casts it.

In this story of the extremes of human  
destructiveness and love, it is clear  
which side Marge Piercy is on. As a  
woman who served in the Women’s  
Army Corps during the war, I am grate-  
ful to Piercy for recreating some of our  
experiences and for finally recognizing  
the contribution of women to that war.

® Edith T. A. Davidson is a professor of  
English at SUNY Oneonta, New York.

Marge Piercy. Photo by Thomas Victor.

In the Autumn Wind  
by Dorothy Stroup

New York: Scribner’s, 1987, $19.95, 437 pp.

On August 6, 1945, Chiyo awakens at  
dawn, after a sleepless, air raid-  
interrupted night. About 8 o’clock there  
is another alarm, followed quickly by the  
all-clear. Against the heavens Chiyo  
sees the silver streaks of a lone B-29  
bomber. Suddenly “A brilliant blinding  
light surrounded her, jabbing itself into  
her body with the force of a thousand  
electric suns, all echoing a huge, ghostly  
roar. The wind whipped the bowels of  
the earth. The wall collapsed. Dark si-  
lence enveloped her. The earth stopped  
breathing. An excruciating pain throb-  
bed in her arm. She was pinned under a  
dark, heavy shadow.”

Dorothy Stroup presents the effects of  
the horror that came slowly “in the au-  
tumn wind,” case by understated case.  
Chiyo’s grandmother has radiation sick-  
ness. Chiyo herself has purple spots on  
her body, her face is scarred, and her hair  
falls out. Youngest son, Hiroshi, is in  
shock. Neighbors alive one hour die the  
next. Most dreadful, however, is the dis-  
appearance of eldest son, Kenichi, who  
that morning was working together with  
his class and teacher on a civilian de-  
fense project to remove roof tiles. Chiyo  
is obsessed by a terrible and recurring vi-  
sion: “Kenichi shimmered before her in  
full force, breaking into a thousand

— continued on next page

Mothers in the Fatherland:  
Women, the Family, and  
Nazi Politics

by Claudia Koonz

New York: St. Martin’s, 1987, $25, 556 pp.

Filling in a missing chapter in history,  
Mothers in the Fatherland is a sad, depress-  
ing, chilling, and essential study. It be-  
gins with an interview with  
Reichsfrauenführerin Gertrud Scholtz-  
Klink, a still-believer, who created the  
Nazi vision of women’s role for 30 mil-  
lion German women and 20 million  
women in occupied lands. Readers are  
then introduced to women’s organiza-  
tions and dozens of lesser Nazi women  
leaders who left brief footnotes on the  
12-year record of the 1,000-year Reich.  
Fittingly, Koonz closes her study with an  
interview with a survivor of There-  
sienstadt, who says she breaks her silence  
“because so many Germans have taken  
up the search for a positive Hitler.”

The message of Koonz’s long and  
exhaustively researched text is that  
women are not necessarily morally or  
emotionally superior to men:

Far from building a barrier against  
Nazi encroachment, non-Socialist  
women leaders provided an avenue  
along which battalions of women  
marched into the Nazi world.

It fell to women to put all of these  
[Nazi] edicts into practice. Scholz-  
Klink’s [chief of the Nazi’s Women’s  
Bureau] social workers, teachers, and  
nurses, turned over the names of the

Women and War  
by Jean Bethke Elshtain

New York: Basic Books, 1987, $19.95,  
288 pp.

In some ways, this is not an easy book to  
read. Its range — essentially all of West-  
ern cultural and intellectual history — is  
immense. Its goal — an analysis of the  
complex relationship that has obtained  
between women and war in Western his-  
tory — is daunting. What seems at first  
like an annoying archness pervades its  
tone and style. But Elshtain proves her-  
self mistress of her material, and the tone  
and style she adopts turn out to be ap-  
propriate in view of the final import of  
her work.

For, as she says, “there are sanctimo-  
nies to deconstruct, amnesias to lift,  
stories to remember” about the relation-  
ship between women and war. She be-  
gins with the “exemplary” story of her  
and her family’s experience of the Sec-  
ond World War in Colorado, and shows  
how this influenced her development as  
a political theorist. From here Elshtain  
goes on to examine the development of  
the concept of armed civic virtue from  
Homer until today. On her way through  
history, she notes the main constructs  
associated with war: the warrior, the  
ideal republic, the nation state, the Mar-  
xist alternative, and the contemporary  
“science” of war and politics. She  
examines the roles assigned to and ac-  
cepted by women, and she acknowledges  
those who criticized and were exceptions  
to these roles. Her study in this section is  
roughly chronological, but she returns to  
a closer examination of the United  
States and the significance armed civic  
virtue has had for American women in  
particular, from the time of the Civil  
War until today.

Elshtain’s analysis of attempts to dis-  
arm civic virtue reveals that this has  
often been done in the name of the  
dichotomy of male destructive aggres-  
sion versus female life-giving nurtur-  
ance. In the wide-ranging second half of  
the work, “History’s Gender Gap,” how-

mentally retarded, schizophrenics,  
alcoholics, and misfits to Nazi steriliza-  
tion agencies. Brides left the labor  
market in order to receive state loans  
and bear many children; housewives  
boycotted Jewish businesses and cut  
lifelong Jewish friends out of their  
social lives; women professionals  
founded eugenic motherhood schools  
and educated young women for house-  
wifely careers; and women organizers  
carried on missionary work to convert  
the unconvinced.

The evidence Koonz offers for such  
conclusions was found in scanty and  
scattered archives. (In fact, the story of  
the decade of research is almost as com-  
pelling as the book itself.) Especially use-  
ful were archives of the women’s organi-  
zations that were the core of Germany’s  
organized religion: Protestants — “While  
some individuals were brave, institu-  
tions were not”; Catholics — “Like Pro-  
testants, they did not so much work for  
the demise of the Nazi state as attempt to  
keep their distance from its claims”; Jews  
— “Jewish women, having just begun to  
feel accepted as women in public life,  
were excluded as Jews by the very ‘sisters’  
with whom they had worked for entry  
into the male world”; Resistors —  
“Women as women did not in general re-  
sist. . . . Women who opposed Hitler  
did so in the context of a clandestine and  
integrated subculture, whose history has  
been recorded by men.”

Despite the scope of the book, one  
wishes for a deeper treatment of German  
women resistors.

— Anita M. Mallinckrodt

ever, she shows that there are many ex-  
ceptions to this simplistic contrast. This  
“historic cleavage” (as she perhaps too  
coyly terms it) between men and women  
is a construct destructive in its exclusion  
of the opposite sex: men as the life tak-  
ers, wrapped up in the self-enclosing  
mysteries of war, and women as the life  
givers, wrapped up in the self-enclosing  
mysteries of pregnancy and childbirth.  
The perpetuation and legitimization of  
this construct is the most fundamental  
problem Elshtain identifies. She argues:  
strongly that, in the actual world of nu-  
clear proliferation, any dichotomy be-  
tween man as warrior and woman as vic-  
tim of war is not operative. Indeed, in  
order to break the symbiosis between  
warrior and victim she identifies, she ar-  
gues strongly that what is necessary is a  
relocation of “male and female selves to  
provide for a freer play of individual and  
civic capacities.”

Instituting compulsory military ser-  
vice for young Americans of both sexes  
would be one concrete way of moving in  
the direction Elshtain indicates. She ad-  
vocates “a way of being in the world that  
promotes civic identity and connection”  
rather than being influenced by utopian  
visions or apocalyptic prophets. She  
warns against fantasies of perfect control  
of the world around us as well as against  
cynical withdrawal from the world. As  
model patriots she names Abraham  
Lincoln and Martin Luther King, “chas-  
tened patriots” who have learned from  
the past, who are willing to forgive and  
thus break cycles of vengeance.

In the course of reading this book, I  
came to see in Elshtain’s arch tone the  
ironic approach that she advocates as the  
most effective means of disarming civic  
virtue. Irony and skepticism are the best  
proof against “wartime’s mobilized lan-  
guage,” which permeates everyday polit-  
ical and domestic discourse, and which  
makes peace as well “an ontologically  
suspicious concept.” Parallel to her un-  
veiling of the destructiveness of the  
male/female dichotomy in Western soci-  
ety’s construct of war is Elshtain’s call for  
a “politics beyond war and peace.”

— Linda S. Pickle

Marcu/Arrit 1988  
eee |