An Eye Toward the Past

$15.95, 146 pp.

Leaving Brooklyn, by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989,

by Suzanne Berne

“This is the story of an eye,”

begins Leaving Brooklyn,

“and how it came into its
own.” The eye of the story belongs to
Audrey, a Jewish girl growing up in New
York during World War II, whose right
eye was injured in a mysterious delivery
room accident. She is left with a wan-
dering eye, almost blind, but capable of
cloudy perception. Fiercely partisan
about her damaged eye, Audrey de-
termines that it was “made for another
sort of vision,” a blurred, incoherent
vision that reveals “the volatile nature of
things before they congeal, and tenu-
ousness and vulnerability of all things.”
The conflict between this alternate vi-
sion and what Audrey sees from her
“good” eye forms the basis of this mem-
oir-like novel by Lynne Sharon
Schwartz, the author of Disturbances in
the Field, and becomes a metaphor for
the fusion of fiction and memory, of real
and imagined life.

Embarrassed that her daughter
doesn’t look “perfect,” Audrey’s mother
sends her to a series of optometrists out-
side Brooklyn, known as “big men.”
None of these big men can do anything
about the eye, so Audrey is allowed to
apply her double vision to the life around
her well into high school. What she sees
is Brooklyn: its ration lines during the
war, its thick glass milk bottles with
cream rising at the neck, its card parties
hazy with cigar smoke. She also sees that
Brooklyn “admitted no gulf between
image and reality,” clinging tenaciously
to a homogeneous view she — with her
“secret vision” — has never known.

IMPORTANT REMINDERS:

Floss your teeth, call your parents,

vote, get your library to subscribe to
Belles Lettres, and send us your change
of address promptly when you move. 

Woodpecker Point and
Other Stories
by Carmel Bird

New York: New Directions, 1988,
$19.95, 153 pp.

This new collection of short stories by
Carmel Bird, a writer highly esteemed in
her native Australia, takes the
American reader rather by surprise. Her
narrative world sometimes allows the
mundane to coexist with the superna-
tural, the impossible, or the metaphysi-
cal. She seems to have been influenced
by Latin American magic realists and by
Muriel Spark, yet the style in which she
wraps her fictional surprises is unique
and deft, ranging from dry understate-
ments to lyrical bursts.

In the most successful story, which
gives the volume its title, Bird uses an
actual Tasmanian tourist attraction, the
geological oddity of a blowhole in the
coastline rock, as an entrance into the
underworld. Here the disoriented newly
deceased find a virtual replica of their
favorite inns from the quaint town
above, bump into some old faces, seek or
avoid others, miss their tobacco, worry
about getting stamps, and generally set-
tle in. The story consists of letters ex-
changed chiefly between the living and
the dead. A spinster suspected of slight
insanity lowers to her father a tuck box
crammed with cake and other earthly
delights that he still craves. He commu-
nicates with her during the television
weather reports and by the postal ser-
vice, which is never wholly reliable.
Despite the underlying philosophical
commentary on the permanence of our
attachments to loved ones in both the
hither and the nether worlds, “Wood-
pecker Point” is a jolly read, weirdly
charming.

“Every Home Should Have a Cedar
Chest” sneaks up on the reader in a simi-
lar way. At first it seems to be a piece of
particularly lush, descriptive advertising
copy on fashions for ladies and their
homes; then it slowly becomes recog-
nizable as a queer sermon, a sort of gro-
tesque, somber, wry meditation on
death and the sometimes silly ways we
try to divert ourselves from that finality.
Other stories are almost fairy tales, usu-
ally with the stress on the grimmer side
of childhood’s imaginings. Bird’s tech-
nique of presenting her bold, unusual
vision of the universe occasionally fal-
ters, but on the whole she is a promising
new talent from one of the most innova-
tive corners of contemporary literature.

—Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

Lynne Sharon Schwartz.
Photo by Thomas Victor

intense discussions about art and life.
She dreams of a larger scope, of becom-
ing an actress with her own stage. In the
midst of these dreams, Audrey visits her
final “big man” and marches alone into
an erotic, unstable world that Brooklyn,
battling “against the forces of entropy
and division,” cannot comprehend.
Her mother has decided Audrey
should get a contact lens for her eye to
keep it from wandering. Restricting the
eye is clearly equated with keeping
Audrey locked inside Brooklyn. Never-
theless, compelled by her mother,
Audrey consents to the torturous, re-
strictive lens. Unlike the “minuscule
glistening transparencies” of today, she
is given a “hard, clear plastic disk about
the diameter of a half dollar and the
thickness of a fine china cup.” In the
book’s most visceral descriptions,
Schwartz evokes the anguish of a con-
stricted view, the horror of clamping on
that rigid lens. “My bad eye was kept in
its place,” Audrey tells us, “and with its
confinement, a freedom seemed to have
been taken from me.”

Weekly visits to the eye doctor are
required. Audrey soon realizes that the
doctor (who never acquires more of a
name) is interested in more than cor-
recting her vision. One day he puts his
hand on her leg. Instead of responding
with proper Brooklyn outrage, Audrey
touches him back, where “he would
want to be touched.” They begin a se-
cretive, almost dreamlike affair far re-
moved from the daily drone of Brook-
lyn’s concerns. Used to gleaning her
escape from books, Audrey realizes that
making love to the eye doctor “was as
vivid and insistent as any book and gave
the same relief of arrival at a resting
place, a bedrock reality.” A reality
Audrey can walk out on.

In a book devoted to precision,
Schwartz precisely announces her in-
tentions: Leaving Brooklyn is a story of
how an “I” came into being, how a per-
spective was formed. “To thine own self
be true,” Audrey’s mother tells her. But
Schwartz asks us to reconsider what it
means to be true to oneself. What, she
asks, is a true story? The “literal truth or
the truth that should have been, the
truth of the image of one’s self?” Her
questions are disconcerting. In this
world of shifting perspectives, of televi-
sion images and magazine covers, this
world of beauty, degradation, discovery,
collapse, what are we to see? Wherever
we look, something from the past is dis-
solving. That dissolution is what we
have wanted to see and what is there.
How can we understand where we are
going if we don’t know where we have
been? Binary vision alone, argues
Schwartz, is not the vision of compre-
hension. To see well, we must use our
true depth perception — memory — and
discover the present within the past.

Suzanne Berne is a fiction writer who
teaches at Harvard University.

parable about growing up, “The Hedgehog” is

The Pilgrim's Progress first appeared in England,
Henri IV became the sensation of France. Nancy
provides a crisp English to the dry, aphoristic style of

Translated from the Portuguese into a chill- 

know what she was doing. She knew exactly...