Peggy Deery: An Irish  
Family at War  
by Nell McCafferty  

Pittsburgh: Cleis Press, 1989, $24.95  
(HB), $9.95 (PB), 142 pp.  

I received a review copy of Peggy Deery  
from the women of Attic Press, whom I  
met at a Women’s Congress in Dublin  
during the summer of 1987. It was my  
first trip to Ireland; I had come directly  
from a two-week trip with my mother.  
We had visited her grandfather’s birth-  
place in County Roscommon and met  
the widow and son of my great-  
grandfather’s brother. Yet I read Deery’s  
books as an American, an academic,  
and a feminist; Pio Deery, Peggy’s sixth  
surviving child and third daughter says,  
“it has to fall on you, to know the way it  
leaves you,” and she is right. I found no  
easy identification.  

Nell McCafferty’s fourth book is the  
sustained story of a single, albeit large,  
Northern Irish family living in Derry at  
the heart of the conflict between Catho-  
lics and Protestants. Peggy herself was  
severely wounded during the civil rights  
march of 1968; one of her sons was  
blinded by rubber bullets during a dem-  
onstration and later killed by an explo-  
sion during an IRA run. Another son  
was kicked to death during a disco brawl.  
All fourteen of her children have been  
harassed by the British soldiers occupy-  
ing Northern Ireland, at least in part  
because of their oldest brother’s known  
affiliation with the IRA. For them, the  
economic consequences of occupation  
and armed conflict are equally damag-  
ing. Local unemployment runs twenty-  
five percent rising to eighty percent in  
Catholic areas; only one of the children  
has held a steady, permanent job.  

The Deery family’s history is inter-  
woven with summaries of the political  
and economic circumstances of Catho-  
lics in the North. While these are useful  

Nell McCafferty  

for an uninformed audience, they do  
raise questions about the intended  
reader. The background material some-  
times seems tangential because the  
Deerys’ story is never narrowed to serve  
only as an illustration of the effects of  
war. But as it expands and wanders,  
their family life often resists political  
application. McCafferty’s earlier books  
of essays and her article in the Septem-  
ber 1989 Ms. led me to expect more  
pointed and direct questions about the  
role of women in the conflict, the Cath-  
olic church in Ireland, and the masculi-  
nist implications of war. But this narra-  
tive focuses on Peggy Deery as a mother  
and the children as her family; there is  
respect for her life and pain and, on  
McCafferty’s part, a kind of resignation  
in telling only one of many similar family  
stories. Forget all the appealing myths  
you have heard about Ireland; this book  
helps us to see the real country and its  
women’s struggles.  

—Kathleen Gregory Klein  

The Other Side  
by Mary Gordon  

New York: Viking, 1989, $18.95, 386 pp.  

It is said that the sins of the father are  
visited upon the son. In Mary Gordon’s  
fourth novel The Other Side, add the sins  
of the father and the mother upon the  
sons and the daughters.  

This is a multigenerational saga of an  
Irish Catholic family called the Mac-  
Namaras — over sixty years of growing  
up, growing apart, and then together ag-  
ain in Queens, New York. We open with  
Grandfather Vincent about to return after  
recuperating from a bad accident, in time  
to be with his dying wife, Ellen.  

Before he gets home — which takes  
over 300 pages — we learn the sad stories  
of some dozen family members and how  
resentments, feuds, and insecurities bubble  
and boil and are transfused from  
generation to generation. Among the clan  
are Dan, whose father died in World War  
II and whose mother eventually ran off  
with her boss from the five-and-dime; his  
cousin Cam, who married a man she did  
not love because her own mother was near  
death and who is now carrying out a  
brazen love affair; Cam’s mother Mag-  
dalene, who outlived the prophecy of  
fatal cancer and has lived the past twenty  
years in a lavender room she decorated in  
preparation for death. And so on.  

Although the cast of characters is large  
and there are plenty of well-imagined and  
warming details, no one seems especially  
vivid, and their suffering — lots of mental  
dialogue and anguishing on every page —  
makes dull reading.  

One of Gordon’s themes is the fix-  
ation Catholics have on judgment and  
punishment. Cam, for example, “under-  
stood the pleasures of judgment, the taste  
for condemnation like a taste for salt. A  
racial trait, she guessed, of pre-  
serving, self-preserving Irish women.  
She’d seen them thrive on judgment,  
finding in it nutrition, healing, the re-  
ward for hours of exhaustion and for years  

Spring 1990  

Mary Gordon. Photo by Joyce Ravid  

of self-control.”  

That much seems clear. After all, we  
all know about guilt. Perhaps it is easier  
to enjoy this book if you treat it as if it  
were an early sixties novel about clan-  
nishness and family and social para-  
meters. Because the focus of this book is  
Family, the outer world and social issues  
intrude peripherally — Grandmother Ellen  
is a big supporter of Roosevelt and unions,  
but this seems merely to illustrate her tough-  
mindedness. Some of the situations seem  
pretty retro for people living in a major  
metropolitan area today. Cam, her  
estranged husband, and her mother in the  
lavender room have lived under the same  
roof for twenty years, not knowing what  
else to do — surprising especially since  
Cam, a lawyer who donates time to liberal  
causes, is portrayed as the real do-er of  
the lot. Perhaps she was just waiting for the right  
boyfriend?  

Gordon’s first novel, Final Payments,  
(1978) was marvelous and engaging.  
Someday may she bring us another novel  
as good.  

—Scarlet Cheng  

Lurking Beyond the Parlour  

Dublin Belles, edited by Mairin Johnston. Dublin: Attic Press [Available in the U.S  
from Inland Book Company], 1988, $9.95, 159 pp. (PB)  
Give Them Stones, by Mary Beckett. New York: Harper & Row, 1989, $6.95, 152 pp.  
(PB)  

by Susan Swartzlander  

For the 1988 Dublin millennial  

celebration, Mairin Johnston col-  

lected twenty-four personal histo-  
ries of Dublin women who come from  
different religious and socioeconomic  
backgrounds. A few remember the po-  
litical Troubles of 1916, while others  
focus on the economic troubles of 1988.  
They tell of their childhoods, their early  
educations, their families, and of living  
and working in Dublin. Some of the  
contributors with limited access to edu-  
cation were expected to take jobs in fac-  
tories, while others are well-known in  
the arts. Taken together, this patch-  
work of personal stories constitutes a  
unique social history. But this collection  
is more. Each of these “Dublin Belles” is  
working in her own way to improve her  
community, to shape history.  

In discussing the poverty of Dublin,  
the women describe in detail crowded  
flats and city road projects exacerbating  
the low-income housing shortage and  
destroying Dublin’s charm. They talk  
about the limited opportunities for  
youth and about the “Feminization of  
Poverty.” Drugs, crime, and violence  
have destroyed their sense of community  
and a pride of place. Jean Roche ex-  
plains that “The poverty is still there.  
What’s missing now is the community  
and what has taken its place is total al-  
ienation. Dublin could turn into a really  
horrific place to live in if something isn’t  
done about it.”  

These women are determined that  
something be done about it. Tina Byrne  
has organized a local neighborhood de-  
velopment program and works on local  
committees to improve conditions for  
youth and the elderly. Deirdre Kelley  
has organized the Living City Group to  
address city planning. Ellen Kennedy  
became an officer of a residents’ organ-  
ization she helped to found when she  
spoke up: “I noticed it was all men. I  
said, ‘Hold on there, There are four  
women here,’ and that is how I got elec-  
ted and I am still there.”  

As a young mother, Cathleen  
O'Neill took adult improvement classes  
with nine-month-old twins in tow: “In  
the class I heard people put sentences  
around my thoughts. I heard the word  
feminism for the first time, even though  
in my own way I had been a committed  
feminist all my life and didn’t know it.”  
O'Neill now works with the Kilbarrack  
Local Education for Adult Renewal  
(KLEAR) group to help other working-  
class women find their voices. Pauline  
Cummins takes her feminist art to the  
community to challenge attitudes that  
demean women. One of her paintings  
depicts the joy of childbirth and satirizes  
“the huge battle scene paintings popular  
at the turn of the century where you  
have these thundering horses and men  
killing each other and mashing each  
other into the ground.” The mural, part  
of “The Living Art Exhibition,” was  
painted in the courtyard of Holles Street  
Hospital but was replaced by a white wall  
within a week after Cummins donated it  
to the hospital.  

One of the women compares the Mil-  
lennial celebration to “opening up your  
parlour while the rest of the house is a  
mess.” Dublin Belles shows what lurks  
beyond the parlour, but it is also an in-  
spirational story of women who are  
working as a community, committed to  
bringing about change.  

Mary Beckett’s novel Give Them  
Stones is a social history of another sort.  
About a “Belfast Belle,” Martha  
Murtagh, the novel shows the intimate  
connection between political strife and  
family life. The novel covers over thirty  

years of Mary’s life from her youth during  
World War II, when she is sent to live  
with two aunts in the countryside, to her  
later life when she watches as barricades  
and barbed wire change the character of  
her neighborhood.  

Beckett skillfully weaves a story that  
focuses at once on the interrelationship  
of the church, the state, and political  
organizations, and on the fragile and  
subtle psyche of her main character.  
From her childhood (when her father is  
interned), Martha feels like an outsider,  
abandoned and unloved.  

Mairin Johnston  

She marries out of need rather than  
love: “I knew I wanted to marry Dermot  
when I saw his gas cooker.” The story of  
her difficult life, from the embarrassment  
about her poverty that prompted her to  
leave school to the expectation that she  
would take a factory job, reads very  
much like the real lives chronicled in  
Dublin Belles. What is missing from that  
collection about Dublin life, though, is  
the daily confrontation with sectarian  
violence that Martha, the Belfast resi-  
dent has to cope with. IRA knee-  
cappings, occupation by British soldiers,  
and retributions that destroy her lifelong  
dream of personal independence domi-  
nate Martha’s story.  

Beckett’s epigraph from Nathanael  
West’s Miss Lonelyhearts summarizes the  
oppression she writes about: “When  
they ask for bread don’t give them  
crackers as does the Church, and don’t,  
like the State, tell them to eat cake.  
Explain that man cannot live by bread  
alone and give them stones.”  

@ Susan Swartzlander’s last article for  
Belles Lettres was a rediscovery of the Irish  
writer Norah Hoult.  

AN  
Cy  

I  

me  

BELLES LETTRES T-SHIRTS  

Available for $15 (+ $1.50 postage) in jet  
black, 100% cotton (specify M, L, or XL).  
Make checks payable to Belles Lettres, and  
send to 11151 Captain’s Walk Court,  
North Potomac MD 20878.  

on  

Belles Lettres @ 5