Remembrances of Things South

Telling Memories Among Southern Women: Domestic Workers and Their Employers
in the Segregated South, by Susan Tucker. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University

Press, 1988, $24.95, 279 pp.

Motherwit: An Alabama Midwife’s Story, by Onnie Lee Logan as told to Katherine
Clark. New York: Dutton, 1989, $16.95, 177 pp.
Even Mississippi, by Melany Neilson. University: University of Alabama Press, 1989,

$24.95, 199 pp.

by Shelley Crisp

These books contain a jumble of

stereotypes and startling revela-

tions about social equality — the
distance there is yet to go and the de-
termination and sacrifice it takes to
achieve it. Telling Memories collects the
stories of Black domestic workers and
their white employers. Motherwit traces
the life and times of the last Black
granny midwife in Mobile, Alabama.
Even Mississippi chronicles Melany Neil-
son’s traditional, white upbringing and
her work in the Congressional races of
Mississippi’s first Black state representa-
tive.

Although all three offer the first-
hand evidence and forthright convic-
tion of the personal narrative, the pure,
clear truth of Onnie Lee Logan’s oral
history, rendered in her own words, at
her own pace, and with the syntax of her
language and life fully intact, pierces the
veil of racial difference to offer readers
an exemplary journey into the heart of
an oppressed culture; the other two fail
to penetrate beyond the good intentions
of white folks.

Susan Tucker’s Telling Memories
attempts to scrutinize “the interplay of
individual memory and historical fact.”
Through forty-two interviews with
employers and domestics, she aims to
capture the complex relations between
the white women of the South, from all
social classes, and the Black women
employed as their cooks, housekeepers,
nannies, and factotums over the years.
Tucker defines her work as an oral his-
tory, yet she makes a serious blunder in
her rendering of the stories. She co-
piously and carefully interviewed, work-
ing with social worker Mary Yelling,
who is Black, to recover the stories of
women who mistrust a white interview-
er. But between transcription and publi-
cation, she edited and reedited to guar-
antee “clarity and simplicity” as “the
product not only of the words of the in-
terviewer and the interviewee but also of
the evolving focus of the editor.” Al-
though she did not change word choice,
she did alter word order and standardize
language (except for the words “nigra”
and “miz”) “for ease in transcribing,
editing, and reading.” Not wanting to
contaminate dialect differences with her
white perspective, Tucker trades lin-
guistic honesty for neutralizing revision.
But in seeking to avoid a violation of
cultural difference, Tucker commits this
very crime. The narratives are stainless
but colorless too. Tucker’s intrusions
rob the stories of atmosphere and the
poignancy of immediate thought. Her
own narrative and descriptive style is
insufficient to compensate for the loss.
The most honest renderings of her sub-
jects are those captured in the conclud-
ing collection of photographs, an in-
disputably ironic record of the complex
ties that bind servant to mistress.

Tucker would have done well to heed
the advice of Dell Hymes, whose work
with Native American texts led him to
conclude that “No scholarship ignorant
of the linguistic foundations of its text
can survive the first breath of rigorous
criticism.” The advice is particularly
applicable here because Tucker often
defines her research using the conven-
tions of oral history, and literary exam-
ples provide much of her best explana-
tory framework. She makes the mistake
of ignoring the complex connections
between language and culture, insisting
on “authenticity, but not on the original

Winter 1990

texts,” an attitude that displaces the
poetry of human voices and replaces it
with the impersonal ethnologist as a
transmitter who we can only assume is
“personally assimilated to that which she
transmits.” In effect, the stories of these
women and much of the commentary
revert to Tucker’s reminiscences of
Black presences in her life and an exor-
cising of the common racist ghosts that
haunt her.

I might have read Telling Memories
with less disapproval if I had not first
read Onnie Lee Logan’s Motherwit. It is
telling that at the end of this book I

knew nothing more about the “as told to
Katherine Clark” than I did at the start.
Logan, too, is a domestic worker and has
been since her early twenties. Her story
tells of the other life she lived away from
white culture, an existence often al-
luded to but rarely shared in Tucker's
book. Logan’s reminiscences reveal the
lives Southern Blacks lead when they are
not, as Robert Clark calls it, being
“careful of the white folks.”

Logan details her start as the fifteenth
of sixteen children born in 1910 to a
farmer and his wife, a midwife like her
mother before her. Her family was land
rich, money poor. They had a buggy, a
surrey, and a wagon and did not have to
sharecrop. But the post-Civil War agri-
cultural South, Logan reminds us, was
hard for everyone. Logan’s family
farmed, gardened, hired out as day labor
and carpenters, took in wash, picked,
sold, and cared for tirelessly. But they
also took it as their duty to “love, care,
and share.” The races were equally bur-
dened, and Logan remembers how her
mother and a white neighbor down the
road nursed each other’s children as the
need arose. Poverty did not discrimi-
nate. Yet the Klan and racism provide
an undercurrent that quite clearly inter-
feres with daily survival. She states her
conclusions about this evil with the wis-
dom and candor that characterize the
tenor of the book, “I’d rather have a
black dirty body cause I can clean that up
easy, than to have a black dirty heart.”

The traditions of midwifery practiced
by Logan’s foremothers are as fascinating
as they are disconcerting. Of the boiled
animal fat used to grease the vagina, the
axes under the beds to prevent after
pains, the sassafras tea and castor oil
that hastened the contractions, Logan

says, “They had nothing else. They had
to use somethin so they used what was in
their mind and through God it worked.”
With no doctors, no clinics, no prenatal
care, no money, often no food or heat,
Logan’s clients, like those of her moth-
ers before her, depended on the midwife
to see them through the hours of their
labor and the first days of their house-
hold cares after childbirth. Logan de-
pended on God. “I’d rather see a baby be
born in the world than to eat if I’m hun-
gry. I love it. I’m looking at the work of
God that man didn’t do and that’s
something to think about.”

If Logan’s narrative argues the unde-
niable truth that one person can make a
difference, Melany Neilson’s memoir
may be a disappointing testimony to the
fact that the opposite often seems true.
Presumably Neilson wrote it because she
was the anomalous young white woman
who dared to become a worker in the
political campaigns of a Black politician
at a time when the mixing of the races

Brothers, Nurse at home, and Ida M’Toy,
midwife (“Born in This Hand”). From the
exquisite collection Eudora Welty Photographs

was seldom done by choice. In Mis-
sissippi, that time is the 1980s. Often
Neilson refers to the stereotypic disap-
proval that her job calls down on her,
yet this odd coupling of Black political
ambition with white naiveté seems to be
the only justification for the book. Neil-
son’s picture of growing up southern is
smoothly written, pleasant to read, and
proverbial rather than shallow in its cli-
chés. What it lacks is the challenging
revisioning of history that hindsight can

offer. How, for example, is one to con-

sider Neilson’s disappointing exclusion
from the sorority life at Ole Miss in light
of Robert Clark’s ironic need to fight
against his own legislation in the State
House in order to get political support?
How does one square an egg thrown on
Neilson’s car with Clark’s Black opposi-
tion slandering him as an Uncle Tom, in
spite of all the “firsts” he accomplished
for the unrepresented Black people of his
region?

Even Mississippi takes its title from a
part of Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have
a Dream” speech stating that even in this
state there will one day be a transforma-
tion such that “freedom and justice” pre-
vail. But Neilson’s parting scene leaves
us to wonder when. Having braved the
racist and sexist prejudice of neighbors
and friends who gossip about her work
with a Black candidate, having chal-
lenged her parents and classmates to
reconsider their values, and having
fought unsuccessfully to see Clark be-
come Mississippi’s first Black national
politician, Neilson wavers over her own
decision to invite him to her wedding.
But she does. And there among the
belles and beaus, the mothers and fa-
thers of the proper South seated in the
long pews of the church, Neilson sees

Clark “standing in the back pew, his
round brown pleasant face very apparent
amid the rows of white ones. He was the
darkest object in the whole of the dark,
candlelit church.” Not yet in Mississippi
(the wedding takes place in 1985), not
even in the life’s breath of this one indi-
vidual, is an “oasis” of racial equality to
be found, not at least in this story of the
modern South.

Several phrases and themes recur
throughout these books to remind us
that, as in Neilson’s experience, there is
still a long way to go. “She’s one of the
family” repeatedly, mythically describes
the relationship of the Black maid, the
gardener, the nursemaid who tended to
the needs of the white folks. The
Neilsons’ maid Elsie constituted no so-
cial dilemma when she was invited to
the wedding because she was just like
family. Yet the irony of the phrase rings
harsh when one remembers that “one of
the family” was given a few dollars a
week for limitless hours of servitude,
required to use separate bathroom facili-
ties, paid in leftover food, and expected
to be proud and thankful of the cast-off
clothing and household furnishings
given to supplement a weekly wage,
even though poor relations would scorn
to accept them. “One of the family” be-
lies the truth that the Black people who
crossed the tracks and rode the buses
into white homes had families,
children, and needs of their own to attend to
after their employers had been serviced.
But the job came first so that “one of the
family” would also mean you were a
“good nigra,” even though that entailed
biting your tongue and nurturing your
pride and dignity only when it didn’t
interfere with your duties. Images like
“the big black lock” used on the jail
when a “bad nigra” was waiting trial, the
“black bottle” Black women feared
would be used to poison them at the
white medical clinics, and the need to
“skip city” resonate in these pages. You
cannot read them and not know differ-
ence, inequality, and prejudice.

Even so, the poetry of Onnie Lee
Logan’s language offers a common
ground, perhaps even an oasis where the
struggles between races, parties, and
classes can be laid to rest. Often she
would wrap the afterbirth in plastic to
carry home and dispose of. She says,
“You want to see me count the many
that are buried in my backyard? There’s
a million of 'em buried in my backyard. A
million, million placentas. A million
placentas is buried in my backyard. I
have peach trees and whatnot trees back
there. I buried a lot of placentas around
that peach tree. I had the biggest
peaches you ever did see.” Somehow the
poetry here transcends difference to
prove that life, in its almighty struggle
against hardship, abides.

® Shelley Crisp teaches in the Depart-
ment of English at the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte.

How to Start a Book Group
and Keep It Interesting

by Susan P. Willens

Indispensable advice from a consummate
bookwoman! Available from Arbor Seminars,
3409 Newark St., NW, Washington, D.C. 20016.
Single copies: $3; group orders (5 copies
or more to one address): $2.50 each.

Belles Lettres © 3