Angeles Carabi calls this interview "Special Eyes: The

Chinese-American World of Maxine Hong Kingston." In it we
learn about the novelist’s mythopoetic works The Woman
Warrior and China Men, as well as about her new
“colloquial” effort, Tripmaster Monkey — His Fake Book.

The world of magic, the supernatural is
present in your work. Was this part of
growing up?

Yes, although there is an attitude of
rebellion. When I was growing up
people around me saw spirits and crea-
tures, I don’t know whether it is because
of the social and cultural upbringing or
that these people had special eyes —
maybe their eyes were different. It
wasn’t just that they brought ghost
stories from China, but that they saw
spirits and magic people in the world
around them, and that they tried to use
the magic for or against themselves.

For a few years I was terrified all the
time. I was always afraid of forces that I
couldn’t control. I thought the world
was made of spirits, ghosts, vampires. I
was so terribly frightened that later I
wanted to be a scientist, an engineer, to
have a very rational life. I thought I had
achieved this goal, that I had controlled
and destroyed the supernatural world.

Yet, it surprises me that my son, who I
did not raise with a sense of magic, re-
lates to the world of the supernatural.
Because I did not want his childhood to
be haunted like mine, I always talked to
him in a very rational way, not even
giving him a religious upbringing. I bare-
ly let him know that there is a Santa
Claus. My husband, who is an ex-
Catholic, had the same feeling, so we
did not raise him in a church. It’s
surprising that even having had a secular
upbringing he sees magic creatures like
leprechauns and goonies. He is now
twenty-three years old and you would
think that his childhood hallucinations
would be over, yet he hears music and
has special relationships with birds and
spirits. So I wonder if people have spe-
cial eyes, if they have a sensitivity to
what is alive on this planet, that they
feel and see more than other people,
more than the scientific people.

You once said that you write about the un-
forgettable, that memory selects what mat-
ters.

People often ask me if I take notes or
if I tape people who talk story, and
whether I do research in order to write
what I write. I don’t. I think that part of
the process of writing is being very
awake and aware of life as it goes on,
and listening to people without trying
terribly hard to remember the stories.
My memory is part of the process of edit-
ing and finding what’s important and
what is not important. There are stories
that are unforgettable, images that do
not go away even though I try to forget
them. They will stay and then I will see
what is relevant, what is powerful, and
what cannot be lost. When my mother
brings stories from China — the
legends, the myths — she tells them and
I remember only some of them. Quite
often they were bedtime stories and I
didn’t hear all of them; they would be-
come part of a dream. Later, when I
would be writing, I would ask myself
"How can I remember everything? How
could I be accurate?" But I decided that I
don’t have to do it word for word the
way she passed it on. Whatever I
remember, that is the unforgettable. I
don’t have to tell the story exactly in
the same way; there isn’t only one ver-
sion, her version. I trust whatever I don’t
forget, and I have a right to tell the story
the way I want to tell it.

10 @ Belles Lettres

Would you apply this creative freedom to
ancient myths to the point of giving them a
present perspective?

Oh yes! I feel free to draw on parts of
myths that interest me or that I feel are
alive or apply to our twentieth-century
American lives. Critics have sometimes
attacked my work for not being true to
authentic Chinese mythology. They
don’t like my taking the traditional
myth and rearranging it or using it as I
please. But I defend myself by saying
that if the myths don’t change, then
they die.

It is not my job to be an archivist,
preserving the ancient myths. A lot of
critics want a writer to have that role
today, and I refuse it. I think that
mythology has always been like that:
Legends change from one speaker to
another speaker, and there is no defini-
tive version. Critics who think that the
true version is what you have in the
library make a real mistake.

Also, to work with myth gives us a
continuity from the past; I am sure that
the reason we draw on myths from
Africa and from Asia is that there is
such a sterility in America. What is
American culture now? Is it what we
have from television, from advertising?
Is that all we can draw on? That’s not
enough.

All photos of Maxine Hong Kingston
by Lynda Koolish.

In reaction to this homogeneous American
culture, would you say that you are creat-
ing a Chinese-American language?

Yes, I am trying to capture a Chinese-
American accent in the American lan-
guage. However that has been part of a
tradition in American literature from
the beginning. From the beginning,
American literary people have been ask-
ing themselves how to speak. American
writers first tried to find out what Amer-
ican language is versus British language.
Every generation of American artists has
worked with that kind of problem, and I
feel that I am doing the same thing. The
novel that I am working with now is
more slangy. It is a modern American
slang of the way people talk, but at the
same time I include a Chinese-Amer-
ican accent.

Is there a different rhythm in Chinese-
American language?

Yes, and a different vocabulary also.
The speakers will bring in new transla-

tions and will be constantly playing and
changing. So it is both rhythm and
vocabulary.

Can you talk about your new novel?

Tripmaster Monkey — His Fake Book is
the title, and in it you can see 1960s
slang as well as Chinese mythology. I
work with the monkey stories, and I
show that the monkey has come to
America and that there are many
monkey images. I connect King Kong
with the Chinese monkey. He has the
spirit of the trickster and he wants to
continue the long tradition of Chinese-
American theater. Sometime during the
1950s he died, and only recently has he
been regenerated again.

The oral tradition of storytelling has been a
means to bring history to the community.
Now that communities tend to spread out,
do you think that the novel can replace the
function of storytelling?

I don’t think so. It is true that
storytelling creates community; but in
America people don’t read enough, so I
don’t think the novel can create that
function. Besides, there is something
very special about storytelling and that is
people’s daily face-to-face communica-
tion — every day coming from work and
telling one another what happened.
With the novel, the reader is solitary.
"Talking story" is communal: It has to
have at least two people participating
face-to-face for the story to be alive and
change. Now storytelling seems to be
dying. It is too bad that it is only revived
by the new refugees coming here from
Asia.

The Western world tends to emphasize the
individual person, whereas it seems that in
the Chinese tradition the individual func-
tions with the tribe. In The Woman War-
rior, for instance, the name of the father is
not known to the children. As a Chinese-
American, how do you reconcile these two
different attitudes, individual versus tribal?

I think that’s a very difficult struggle
because the only way to achieve
American success is by doing it in-
dividually. Actually, though, I see ethnic
Chinese people being able to reconcile
these two concepts much better than
other tribal people. The struggle lies in
breaking away from families and trying
to make a life of one’s own, trying to
make decisions that often are against the
nuclear structure without consulting the
family. Yet Chinese people are able to
make this break very well, probably be-
cause Chinese society allows for a great
deal of eccentricity; maybe that’s why
they become Americans very well.

It is foreign to us to compete against
one another. Everybody rises up as a
group or we don’t. But American society
is not made like that, and it becomes a
problem. I picture having a school sys-
tem where the whole class is a tribe
where children do not compete for their
grades or for a few prizes.

I think that you wrote your first two books
before you went to China. When you went
there, did you feel that the China of your
imagination, of your novels, was very dif-
ferent from the actual country?

No! I felt that the China of my imag-
ination was very similar and so I felt real-
ly good that I had such a strong imagina-
tion. I kept saying: “Oh! My mother
should see this!" For the large themes
that I wrote about, I didn’t see anything
that invalidated my work.

There were only small things that I
wished I had seen earlier. Like I didn’t
imagine how close together people lived:
a whole village with common walls, so
many people living in one small area.
That made me understand how each
person’s life and drama affected everyone
else; and that’s what it seems to be a
tribal person, how much it takes to break
away, and how much it takes for No
Name Woman, my character in The
Woman Warrior, to have a child out of
wedlock. The act is not individual; it af-
fects everyone. The whole village chan-
ges because of her deed, and I understood
it from seeing these common walls. I also
saw that the well where she jumped into
is right next door to the temple, and
then I saw how dramatic it is to have a
well to commit suicide be next to a holy
place. I wished I had put that in the
book.

Relating this to your question about
people becoming individuals in America,
I guess I examined how a person was an
individual in China and how she had to
pay with her life. Yet she had the daring
to be an individual. She became a
woman that other women hear about
and can see as an example of bravery. I
thought it was brave to have a love affair
like that, and then it was amazing that
my mother could bring the story to us
here. So, we had a story of individuals
here. Although Chinese people think
they have all these themes of com-
munism, of community, and tribe, they
also have these ideas about eccentricity
and individuality.

Does the community rejoice at the fact that
No Name Woman, the evil woman for
them, dies?

No, I don’t think so. They think the
whole thing is tragic; there is nothing
they can fix and the last thing they can
do is to say "Let’s not talk about her, let’s
forget about it." Also there is a
Dionysian outpouring of passion because
everybody gets to wear their mask and
they slaughter, make mischief and chaos.
I think that is in the human spirit. Every
once in a while we must go out and make
mischief and No Name Woman made it
possible for these people to run amok.

No Name Woman becomes a cathartic ex-
perience for the villagers.

Yes, people are able to hit and stab
and fling blood around. She becomes a
sacrificial victim.

The story of No Name Woman is kept
secret by the elders. Your novel starts “You
must not tell anyone." There is a need to
keep things in silence.

Yes, "Don’t tell, don’t tell." This
beginning has a connection with Toni

Morrison. She starts her book The Bluest

Winter 1989