The Lonely Life

The Writing Life, by Annie Dillard.  
New York: Harper & Row, 1989, $15.95,  
111 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

What happens when you've  
been writing seriously for  
years, devoting much of your  

life to your art, and suddenly you begin  
to doubt your purpose? You have two  
options. One is to quit writing; the other  
is to talk yourself out of your doubts.  
Reminding other writers of the value of  
writing is a way of reminding yourself. In  
The Writing Life, meditations on being a  
writer, Annie Dillard tells of the time  
she’s spent in lonely cabins, tool sheds,  
and library carrels, writing, writing,  
writing. “It takes years to write a book,”  
she informs us solemnly, “between two  
and ten years.” So why, we ask, does  
anyone choose to be a writer? Dillard  
once knew a painter, who when asked  
how he decided to be a painter replied,  
“I liked the smell of the paint.” What  
draws a writer to writing? Sentences, she  
says. It is knowing and loving your own  
medium so much that you're intoxicated  
by it, lured away from other pursuits.

But how does a writer keep writing?  
Beyond loving sentences, from where  
does the motivation come? Day after  
day, year after year, there is the writer in  
a small room staring into a blank page or  
screen, trying to make something from  
what appears, gloatingly, to be nothing.  
Writing is a drudge’s life. Work all day  
and there is still more, always more, to  
do. The writer, according to Dillard,  
“must be sufficiently excited to rouse  
himself to the task at hand, and not so  
excited he cannot sit down to it. He  
must have faith sufficient to impel and  
renew the work, yet not so much faith he  
fancies he is writing well when he is  
not.” Alone in that small room, you  
bore yourself, praise yourself, goad your-  
self. Not even the smell of paint and tur-  
pentine is there to wake you.

The Writing Life begins: “When you  
write, you lay out a line of words. The  
line of words is a miner’s pick, a wood-  
carver’s gouge; a surgeon’s probe. You  
wield it, and it digs a path you follow.”  
These sentences introduce Dillard’s  
examination of the drive, the destina-  
tion, even the madness, behind the sol-  
itary struggle with words. These sen-  
tences also reveal what she’s really up to:  
She wants to snatch writing out of the  
realm of the ephemeral and plunge it  
back into the physical. She wants to  
make the work of writing familiar, part  
of the world — to feel less alone as a  
writer herself. She wonders at one  
point, “Why wasn’t I running a ferry-  
boat, like sane people?”

Why else search so hard for ways to  
make writing’s labor visual but to seem  
like a sane person to everybody else?  
“One of the few things I know about  
writing is this,” she announces toward  
the end of The Writing Life, “spend it all,  
shoot it, play it, lose it, all, right away,  
every time.” Unpredictability is an oc-  
cupational hazard: one minute writing is  
honest labor — like a miner’s or a wood-  
carver’s work — the next it’s gambling.  
Writing is a pocketful of change, a crap  
game, a poker hand. You win by risking  
everything you know in an attempt to  
discover more. “Anything you do not  
give freely and abundantly becomes lost  
to you,” warns Dillard. “You open your  
safe and find ashes.” In other words,  
writing doesn’t last unless it’s on paper.  
A writer keeps going because, finally,  
she wants to make something last.

For people looking for pointers about  
writing, this is no how-to handbook; it  
offers no hints for the beginner on de-  
veloping characters, handling plot, or  
outlining an essay. Instead, Dillard of-  
fers exhortations to the entrenched  
writer. “Push it,” she yells like a drill  

sergeant. “Examine all things intensely  
and relentlessly.” Don’t give up. Keep  
looking. Get it on paper.

There is no writing without an exam-  
ination of the physical world. There is  
no sense to be made of the world without  
contemplation and interpretation. Yet  
the external world, necessary as it is, can  
be distracting. She tells us she once had  
to tape a drawing of the scene outside her  
window to the closed venetian blinds so  
she would stop looking out at life in her  
effort to see into it. To capture what she  
sees, Dillard believes she must turn to-  
ward an inward vision. “If I had pos-  

sessed the skill, I would have painted  
directly on the blind, in meticulous col-  
ors, a trompe l’oeil mural view of all that  
the blinds hid. Instead, I wrote it.”

Her attempts to inspire us are gener-  
ous. There is something companionable  
in knowing that someone else is trying to  
make sense out of why we scratch words  
on paper. Yet there’s a nagging little jeer  
of “so what?” running through the  
musings and anecdotes in this book.  
Shut the blinds, tape a drawing to them  
and what do you have? A drawing and a  
dark room. Behind the stories of late-  
night vigils at the computer screen,  
coffee-primed revelations, relentless  
examinations, The Writing Life is about  
being alone and not liking it much. As  
Dillard notes, “The written word is  
weak. Many people prefer life to it.” The  
next moment she’s off on another medi-  
tation, but the worry has slipped in.

Write and keep writing, she seems to  
be saying, because if you stop, if you take  
too deep a breath and look around at  
what other people are doing, you might  
realize that what you are doing is tinged  
by the ridiculous. In another moment of  
doubt, she admits that writers cling to  
“the ludicrous notion that a reasonable  
option for occupying yourself on the  
planet until your life span plays itself out  
is sitting in a small room for the dura-  
tion, in the company of pieces of paper.”  
At least painters have that smell of  
paint.

One of the pleasures of this book is its  

Losing and Finding  

and Losing Again  

Among Sisters: Short Stories by Women Writers, edited by Susan Cahill. New York:  
Mentor,/NAL, 1989, $4.95, 352 pp. (PB)  

The One You Call Sister, edited by Paula Martinac. Pittsburgh/San Francisco: Cleis  
Press, 1989, $9.95, 195 pp. (PB)  

Close Company: Stories of Mothers and Daughters, edited by Christine Park and Car-  
oline Heaton. New York: Ticknor & Fields, $9.95, 299 pp. (PB)  

by Lynne M. Constantine  

A heterosexual friend of mine  
once remarked that in all her  
romances, she kept trying to  

find a relationship like she had with her  
sister, and instead kept recreating her  
relationship with her mother. I’ve al-  
ways thought that a profound insight.  
The deep, complex, and vexatious love  
women have for their mothers is intense  
and passionate, often bound up in ex-  
pectations neither party can ever quite  
satisfy. The sisterly bond can also be  
tumultuous — filled with petty jealou-  
sies, sibling rivalries, betrayals, and  
deceptions. But all sisters have experi-  
enced the other side of that special bond  
—a peaceful, egalitarian, sharing, even  
conspiratorial love that lingers in the  
soul and defines the unconditional love  
we all crave.

Two of these three books explore the  
many aspects of that magical bond, and  
are in many ways complementary to  
each other. The stories anthologized by  
Paula Martinac burrow deep inside the  
sister relationship; Susan Cahill’s an-  
thology provides multiple perspectives  
as a means of reconstructing sisterhood  
through the fragments of their collective  
memory each sister holds.

I defy any woman to read more than  
one of the stories in Paula Martinac’s  
superb anthology at one sitting. Not  
that the fifteen she collects are long; if  
they consisted only of the words on the  
page, they would be, as much short fic-  
tion is to the truly voracious reader,  
sweeter in twos and threes. But these  
stories so powerfully evoke memory,  
sensation, regret, longing, and hope  
that each one will stall any reader who  
lets it in to the place where fiction  
touches us most intimately.

Martinac relishes the profound im-  

Cover art from “The One You Call Sister”  

pact of these stories; in fact, in her brief  
introduction, she says that she hopes the  
stories will make women pick up the  
phone and call their sisters. The ones  
most likely to provoke that call are Mar-  
tinac’s own “Kay, Grown Up,” a sweet  
tale of how one sister’s dreams may find  
reality in another sister’s life, and Linda  
Ostreicher’s “My Sister, My Eye,” a sur-  
real meditation on the value of seeing  
the world through a sister’s eyes.

In Among Sisters, Cahill’s intent is  
different. Memory, she says, is as im-  
portant in the stories she collects as is  
character. “Do all sisters grow up pos-  
sessed by conflicting memories of their  
common parents?” she asks. Perhaps as a  
way of answering that question, the  
twenty stories by nineteenth- and twen-  
tieth-century writers as diverse as Sarah  
Orne Jewett and Alice Munro, Nadine  
Gordimer and Mary Wilkins Freeman  
provide a mostly exterior perspective.  
The society in which the sisters live, as  
well as parents, brothers, lovers, and  
spouses, provide clues to help the out-  
sider reconstruct the formless mass from  
which each sister took her unique form.

Specificity. Dillard, who won a Pulitzer  
Prize for Pilgrim at Tinker Creek, a per-  
sonal narrative about the mysteries of  
the natural world, is a collector of pre-  
cise terms and proper names. We are  
treated to all the places she has gone to  
write: an island on Haro Strait in  
Northern Puget Sound, a library carrel  
in Roanoke, Virginia, a pine shed on  
Cape Cod. We are presented with he-  
roes, nonwriters who exhibit daring and  
skill and afford parallels between other  
jobs and writing. She gives us lots of  
quotations, good, inspiring quotations,  
the kind to print on index cards and tape  
above the word processor. But much of  
this book reads like a pep talk. The most  
convincing moments are when Dillard  
lowers her voice and something confi-  
dential creeps in. After describing yet  
another instance of her devotion to  
writing, she allows, “But the fanaticism  
of my twenties shocks me now. As I  
feared it would.”

“It’s all right,” we want to say. It’s  
part of writing to get sick of writing.  
Still, perhaps if Dillard had admitted  
that to herself, we wouldn’t have this  
book. She is always, no matter what her  
subject, a wonderful stylist. And what  
finally convinces us of the importance of  
the writing life are the wondrous sen-  
tences that she uses to describe it.

© Suzanne Berne, who teaches writing  
at Harvard, reads short stories for possible  
inclusion in Belles Lettres.

The styles in the collection are re-  
markably diverse. One especially note-  
worthy selection in Among Sisters is an  
excerpt from Candace Flynt’s powerful  
novel Mother Love (1987), a superbly  
crafted story of three sisters coming to  
terms with the memory of their charm-  
ing, impossible mother.

Unlike the other two books, the  
twenty-five stories in Close Company,  
explore another early love — the  
mother-daughter bond. Like those in  
Martinac’s collection, the stories are  
rich and insidious in the ways they evoke  
the past.

The editors, both Londoners, have  
included stories from many different  
cultures, told variously from the per-  
spectives of mother or daughter. The  
sheer stylistic variety is delightful, and  
all of the stories in the collection are  
beautifully crafted. Their diversity can  
be glimpsed from two examples. Miche-  
lene Wandor’s “Meet My Mother” tells  
about a Jewish lesbian whose mother  
evolves before her eyes, suddenly spout-  
ing up-to-date opinions and looking in  
on a lesbian dance. The narrator’s  
half-serious lament that she now hasn’t  
got a mother pinpoints the uncomforta-  
ble place women can be in when their  
privileges are threatened by the very lib-  
eration they espouse. “A Visit From the  
Footbinder,” by Emily Prager, explores  
the feelings of a girl, her mother, and  
her sisters as the day of her footbinding  
approaches. Despite their differences,  
both stories ask a troubling question:  
How are women to be allies in an op-  
pressive culture that pits them against  
each other, making mothers the instru-  
ments of their daughters’ entrapment  
and daughters their mothers’ accusers?

Like shrapnel in a wound from a  
long-forgotten battle, questions arise in  
response to the gentle prodding from  
these three books. These stories, with  
their raw truth and emotional intensity,  
represent some of the most exciting  
writing of which women are capable.

© Lynne M. Constantine is a freelance  
writer and critic who divides her time be-  
tween the Washington, D.C., metro area  
and Lost River, West Virginia.

Spring 1990