The First Wave

Making Waves: An Anthology of Writings By and About Asian American Women, by  
Asian Women United of California. Boston: Beacon Press, 1989, $16.95, 481 pp. (PB)  
Without Ceremony, by Asian Women United of New York. Special issue of Ikon  
Magazine (Box 1355 Stuyvesant Station, New York, NY 10009), Second Series, No. 9,  

1988, $6.00, 127 pp. (PB)  

by Dorothy Rony  

One of the questions most often  
asked of Asian American  
writers is why there seem to be  

so many more published women than  
men. The leading example of this phe-  
nomenon is Maxine Hong Kingston,  
who, after the publication of The  
Woman Warrior in 1975, became one of  
the few Asian American writers recog-  
nized nationally. Recently, Hong King-  
ston was joined in this position by Amy  
Tan, author of The Joy Luck Club.  
Although well-known Asian  
American authors remain the exception  
rather than the rule, it is quite true that  
work by Asian American women has  
been relatively more available in the  
past few years than work by Asian  
American men. This resulted from the  
feminist movement, more specifically,  
the women of color movement, which  
both encouraged and created a forum for  
women of color writers. In the past sev-  
eral months, two more Asian American  
women’s anthologies have joined this  
body of work: Making Waves: Writings  
By and About Asian American Women  

All New People  

by Anne Lamott  

Berkeley: North Point Press, 1989,  
$16.95, 176 pp.  

“One thing I know for certain is that my  
memories are not the same as those of my  
brother or mother or father... . If you  
took our four versions and laid them one on  
top of the other in bands, as they do in sound  
mixing, you would end up with a song of my  
family.”  

In All New People, Anne Lamott’s  
latest novel, Nanny Goodman is the  
young weaver of this family’s song, and  
the Golden Gate Bridge is her treble  
clef. As Nanny recounts her version of  
her family’s struggles in a northern Cal-  
ifornia railroad town in the 1960s, we  
come to know her family and friends as  
intelligent, idiosyncratic, and impas-  
sioned. In particular, Nanny’s mother,  
Marie, has a pervasive, almost haunting  
presence in the book. Marie is a Pi-  
casso-inspired vision with ‘a soul roomy  
enough to accommodate many perspec-  
tives. “She was a Christian, and not af-  
raid of death or getting older . . . but  
she was secretly afraid of revolving doors  
and houseplants. She was secretly con-  
vinced that houseplants sucked up oxy-  
gen... . My father explained on more  
than one occasion that houseplants do  
just the opposite . . . and my mother  
always responded, ‘Yes, in theory.’ ”  

Where Are Those  
Fairy Godmothers?  
Guess what? The Open Meadows  
Foundation has given us a matching  
grant of $1,000 to buy that com-  
puter we've blathered on about  
needing in issues past. Please send  
your tax-deductible contributions  
in ASAP, so we can hack away (just  
kidding — we mean typeset and  
process book data and keep our  
accounts). The sooner you act, the  

sooner we'll be in the black!  

12 @ Belles Lettres  

and Without Ceremony.  

Making Waves is clearly the most  
comprehensive Asian American  
women’s anthology to date. Drawing on  
works dating from the early 1970s to the  
present, the book offers a rich variety of  
literature, poetry, nonfiction, and his-  
torical essays. Its contents are divided  
into seven themes: immigration, war,  
work, “generations,” identity, injustice,  
and activism.  

The anthology’s range of contribu-  
tions is commendable. In the past, the  
bulk of materials about Asian American  
women has focused on second- and  
third-generation Chinese Americans  
and Japanese Americans, a reflection of  
which members of the Asian American  
women’s community have traditionally  
had the most access to recording their  
experiences. The book’s integration of  
the South Asian American and South-  
east Asian American experience is a  
much-needed acknowledgment of the  
impact that these groups are making in  
American culture, especially following  
the 1965-1968 immigration laws.  
Another strength of the anthology is its  
incorporation of several historical essays  

Anne Lamott. Photo by Thomas Victor  

With a Fly’s Eye, Whale’s  
Wit, and Woman’s Heart  
Edited by Theresa Corrigan  
and Stephanie Hoppe  

San Francisco and Pittsburgh: Cleis Press,  
1989, $9.95, 234 pp. (PB)  

As I write this review, my rabbit, Dusty  
(also called Bunion), hops about my  
feet. (It seemed, somehow, that the two  
cats, Kali and Lilli, hadn’t been  
enough.) The anthology, With a Fly’s  
Eye, Whale’s Wit, and Woman’s Heart  
was designed for folks, like me, who find  
themselves with furry or feathered crea-  
tures as boon companions.  

Theresa Corrigan, called “the weird  
cat lady on the corner” by her neighbors,  
and Stephanie Hoppe, whose cat, Van-  
essa, oversees her work, have done a  
lovely job as editors. The twenty-nine  
pieces are highly varied — fiction, in-  
terviews, nonfiction, essays on animal  
liberation, and some fine poetry (which  
made me wish for a poetry anthology on  
the subject). The authors, who range  
from the famous (Ursula LeGuin, Judy  
Grahn, Anne Cameron, and Margaret  
Atwood) to the lesser known (Karen  
Kidd, Natalie Kusz, Jean Anaporte-  
Easton, and Joan Dobbie) have two  
things in common: a deep affinity for  
other species and a feminist identity.  

that illuminate and anchor the other  
pieces.  

A glimpse of one section, “Thunder-  
storms: Injustice,” will illustrate the  
book’s diversity. It offers a poem by  
F. A. Chea Villanueva about the ex-  
ploitation of women workers in the  
Philippines due to American military  
imperialism; Meena Alexander’s short  
story “Mosquitoes in the Main Room,”  
about a young woman gang-raped by  
policemen in Hyderabad, India, in 1978;  
Valerie Matsumoto’s short story “Two  
Deserts” about a Japanese American  
woman’s rejection of the unwelcome  

Diane Yen-Mei Wong  

Readers who appreciate Lamott’s  
three previous novels and who enjoy the  
fresh approach of her articles and restau-  
rant reviews in California Magazine  
(“after all it was just a frigging taco”) will  
recognize trademarks of her style in All  
New People: the mood is laid back and  
rambling, and yet the narrative is cohe-  
sive and insightful. Her characteriza-  
tions are full, her language rich, with  
the lush northern California terrain  
framing every page.  

Lamott has a gift for perspective, and  
she has the understanding and skill to  
tell a story from a woman’s point of view  
without making all the male characters  
insensitive jerks. When Lamott does the  
sound mixing, nobody’s solo gets cut.  

—Lorraine E. McCormack  

Is there something special about the  
connection between women and ani-  
mals, a kind of “Lady of the Beasts” my-  
thology we need to honor? I believe so,  
yet leave it to the reader to wander de-  
lightedly through these pages to discover  
the cat who talks back, Cinderella  
Dober-Mutt, a beaver named Fuzzy  
Face, Queen Jane the goat, Aunt May’s  
lion, and Nahani the elephant and to  
find her own answers.  

The book is refreshingly free of senti-  
mentality; the animals in it are honored  
for themselves. They choose to be part  
of humans’ lives, never being fully  
owned by them. Grief is here, too, as  
animal companions die or must be left  
behind.  

The volume is attractively designed,  
with an annotated table of contents in  
which each section is titled. This allows  
for most people’s favorite way of reading  
an anthology, one story at a time, not  
necessarily in sequence. We may all look  
forward to the second volume, which  
was created from overflow submissions  
to the first, slated for later this year.  

My only carp is that I wish this, as  
well as other feminist anthologies, did  
not trade so heavily on well-known  
writers. I would love to say more but  
have to go now. The rabbit wants to  
play.  

—Patricia Roth Schwartz  

advances of her white, male neighbor;  
and two essays, “Domestic Violence  
Among Pacific Asians” by Nilda  
Rimonte and “Matchmaking in the  
Classifieds of Immigrant Indian Press” by  
Rasmi Luthra.  

In contrast to the national scope of  
Making Waves, Without Ceremony,  
published as an issue of the literary mag-  
azine Ikon, showcases work by New York  
and other East Coast women. Organized  
by Asian Women United of New York,  
the anthology features art, fiction, pho-  
tography, poetry, prose, roundtables,  
and an interview.  

The anthology contains many fine  
gems, such as Penny Jufiko Willgerodt’s  
interview with Korean American artist  
Yong Soon Min and Frances Chung’s  
poem “Chinese Women.” Unfortunate-  
ly, the anthology is uneven, with some  
pieces seeming dated or amateurish.  
This brings out an important issue about  
editing such an anthology. Because the  
contributors are women who have tradi-  
tionally been discriminated against and  
excluded by virtue of their gender and  
race, there probably was a political de-  
sire to be as inclusive as possible. Hence,  
there might have been a shying away  
from using more rigorous criteria. Per-  
haps this is why selections were admitted  
that were created by Asian American  
women but were not explicitly about  
them. This might also explain why en-  
tries from outside the East Coast were  
included, even though this anthology  
concentrates on that area.  

The cost of this approach is that the  
anthology becomes uneven and loose.  
Without Ceremony is made even more  
difficult to absorb because of its lack of  
clear division by theme or genre. In a  
later edition, the anthology might be  
strengthened by editorial comments that  
weave the pieces together and by a back-  
ground essay that discusses the experi-  
ence of East Coast Asian American  
women as a whole. Because the anthol-  
ogy is so dominated by New York en-  
tries, it might also be suggested that a  
decision be made either to focus the an-  
thology solely on New York or to expand  
it to be truly representative of the East  
Coast experience.  

Both Making Waves and Without Cer-  
emony are testimony to the growing  
maturity of Asian American women’s  
literature. I hope that the next wave of  
anthologies will push beyond their more  
traditional use as a forum for diverse  
experiences to create new analyses about  
Asian American women and their con-  
nections to other women of color na-  
tionally and globally. One important  
step would be to generate anthologies  
with more focused themes, such as  
Asian American women and work or  
Southeast Asian American women who  
came to this country as refugees.  

On another level, questions have to  
be raised about the audience for  
community-based works like Making  
Waves and Without Ceremony. Because  
of issues of access, publication cost, and  
the leisure time required to read these  
anthologies, most audiences for them  
tend to be middle-class, college-  
educated women. Yet, many contrib-  
utors hope to see the information in an  
anthology returned to a community that  
is immigrant, working-class, and  
non-English-speaking. If so, then these  
collections in their present form may be  
unsatisfactory vehicles for reaching this  
audience. They must undergo renewed  
scrutiny for the relevance of their con-  
tent to this audience and, if necessary,  
be translated via language and format  
into more accessible productions, such  
as feature articles for community-  
language newspapers. In short, Making  
Waves and Without Ceremony should be  
viewed as beginnings rather than as end  
products.  

@ Dorothy Rony is a graduate student in  
the Department of American Studies at Yale  
University and a consultant to the New  
York Chinatown History Project.  

Winter 1990