Short Stories

Revelations of Loss

Spirit Seizures, by Melissa Pritchard. The University of Georgia Press, 1987, $13.95,

182 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

others losing children, hus-

bands losing wives, sisters los-

ing sisters — everyone in Spirit
Seizures is losing someone or something.
This year’s winner of the Flannery
O’Connor Award for Short Fiction,
Melissa Pritchard has assembled an im-
pressive first collection of short stories
dealing with the confusion, dislocation,
and pain of loss.

One of the most compelling stories in
the book, “A Private Landscape,” con-
cerns the familiar upsets that occur when
a daughter reaches puberty and begins to
move away from her parents’ sphere of
influence. Told through the rumina-
tions of the girl’s quietly resentful
mother, the story is deceptively slight.
Contrasting her daughter’s “vital buoy-
ant manner” with her own view of her-
self as “clumsy” with a “weight prob-
lem,” the mother hints at a conflict
much deeper than arguments over doing
the dishes. She admits: “Sometimes I
almost hate her.” The final image in the
story, when the mother, seeking to lose
“those boundaries set by daylight, by
marriage, by family” goes for a nighttime
gallop on a horse, is as unearthly, and as
symbolic, as a surrealist landscape.

“With Wings Cross Water” also con-
cerns family upset, but in this case a
young mother, Mrs. Grant, has found a
lump in her breast. While her husband
and two small children enjoy themselves
during a summer vacation at a resort on
Lake Michigan, Mrs. Grant struggles to
face the fact that she may be dying while
pretending that nothing is wrong. She
listens for death as she would for a baby’s
cry, and she “hears it in the siege and
shake of dour black wings.” Death is a
great black crow, perceived only by Mrs.
Grant. It is a bold metaphor, which
could have been crude were it not so
deftly handled, and it becomes ab-
solutely chilling as the story progresses.

In “A Dying Man,” a complacent,
selfish man with a wife and a mistress
decides he is dying. As he contemplates
losing control over their lives, he hears
them discussing him in the kitchen.
“There is something ghastly about two
women,” he says furiously, “who should
be vying for my love and financial pro-

TRIVIA

A JOURNAL OF IDEAS.

Radical feminist visionary
writing

Theory and Scholarship
Critical essays — Reviews
TRIVIAL LIVES

Necessary sustenance for
the labrys-toting mind.

Melissa Pritchard.

tection, calculating their futures with-
out me, discussing me as mothers who
compare their children’s earaches.” It is
a story about women’s fundamental
ability to bond — especially when they
can stop vying for a man’s attention —
and about men’s fundamental jealousy of
that bonding.

A native of northern California,
Pritchard nevertheless invests many of
her stories with a distinctly southern
flair. “Companions,” for instance,
which concerns an unattractive, un-
talented girl with a lame hip who wants
to escape being a “misfit,” is clearly pat-
terned along the lines of “southern gro-
tesque” (a term often associated with
Flannery O’Connor’s fiction, although
its aptness is debatable), with characters
who are exaggerated, almost flattened,
to create a seriocomic effect. “The
Housekeeper,” which is about a biblical
wind, and “A Man Around the House,”
in which three women running a retire-
ment home are undone by a young trav-
eling salesman, are two other stories that
seem a little labored in their attempts to
follow this genre.

Pritchard is at her best when she al-
lows her characters fullness, as in “A
Dance With Alison,” about a girl at
summer camp who finds she has a painful
crush on another girl. They dance to-
gether once briefly, then camp is over.

A few days later, Alison dies suddenly
and senselessly. “My griefs, up to then,
had been open, consolable. Public,”
says the narrator. “This was mine, and it
mauled me.” The more straightforward
and declarative her characters are, the
more movingly they speak to us.

In the title story, a nineteenth-
century psychic woman enables a family
to “visit” with their dead daughter Mary
by allowing Mary’s spirit to occupy her
body: “From February to May 1878,
Mary’s spirit read like the wildest news
out of the living envelope of Lurancy
Vennum.” But Lurancy’s husband dis-
approves and forces her to homestead
with him, leaving behind “those wide,
fertile talks about spirit worlds, angels,
and spirit guides.” Based on notes from a
doctor investigating the case, the story
winds through several consciousnesses,
all focusing on that astonishing moment
when death lost its meaning. As Mary
speaks for herself at the story’s end:
“What is Soul or Spirit but Mystery. . .
if a man die, shall he live again?”

In the best of these stories, there are
moments of revelation when characters
are forced to confront the extent of a
personal loss. Suddenly they see them-
selves thrown into a kind of relief, shad-
owed on either side by the world as they

Valerie Martin. Photo by Thomas Victor.

The Consolation of Nature
by Valerie Martin

Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988, $16.95,
147 pp.

Valerie Martin’s first collection of short
stories, The Consolation of Nature, takes
place on strange ground. For those who
have read her novels (the last was A Re-
cent Martyr), this collection will not be
the startling initiation it will be for oth-
ers. Martin either consciously under-
stands religious and sexual obsession
better than most anyone or she has a dis-
secting eye and surprises herself with her
deft exposures. Her themes are brutal,
her prose supple.

Her short stories do not disappoint.
The significance of the title extending to
the whole collection is perhaps an irony.
For some characters, women or girls on
the cusp of emotional insecurity or
death, finding a correspondence in na-
ture to their own vulnerability or loss is
consoling. For an eleven-year-old girl
terrorized by a rat her father finally kills,

knew it and the world they have come to
perceive through their loss. It is in that
moment of “seizure” that the spirit is
most truly exposed.

The title also suggests the possibility
that many of these stories were written
in the grip of a powerful “spirit” or voice,
achieved by the sort of inspirational
communion writers can have with a sub-
ject, so that the “seizure” was thus a
shared one. Spirit Seizures is full of
voices, some from other centuries, some
from other countries, all from their own,
sharply realized worlds. Some voices are
clearer than others and speak with more
authority, but each is valid.

Too often, young writers’ short fic-
tion collections are criticized because
they lack a unifying voice. Melissa Prit-
chard proves that a wealth of voices is
exactly that. This is a book rich in spirit.

@ Suzanne Berne is a writer living in
California and working on a novel.

NEXT ISSUE — Women and
Humor, Firsts in Fiction,
Interview with Francine Prose.

nature’s comfort is a warm, moon-
drenched garden. She feels assured: The
delicate shoots have survived the tor-
rential rain that brought the rat out.
And she has survived: her worst fear —
that a rat will jump in her bed and get
tangled in her hair! Fear made its rank
assertion. Lily survived. The garden
consoles by reflecting to her her own
resilience.

However happy this child’s comfort,
the other stories belie that there is any
ultimate consolation. Nature brought
Lily the fierce intruder just as surely as it
presented her with the glistening epi-
phany in the aftermath. And that is the
irony. Nature is strange ground.

Most of the women in the other sto-
ries are middle-aged, some with daugh-
ters Lily’s age (the mother-daughter re-
lationship is perennial with Martin),
and frankly they are less resilient than
they might have been as young girls.
Some are slaves to a fear or an obsession.
Others flirt with some primal fantasy,
like mermaids’ lovemaking at water’s
edge or a wolfman’s sexuality after the
party is over. One woman enters an ab-
sorbing “parallel world” and irrevocably
alters her way of seeing. Describing the
creatures she meets in the world that
“lies between the ground and the tips of
the long grasses,” the woman tells us
“They are many-eyed. When they see
one another they meet in such a multi-
plicity of dimensions that they exchange
first glances in a hall of mirrors. Every
image is repeated and repeated on the
eye into infinity.”

What will surely strike you in reading
these stories is the multiplicity of di-
mensions Martin is able to evoke. Each
story proves a facet in her compound
vision and reflects a correspondence in
nature for a fear, an obsession, or a fan-
tasy in the female psyche. It is energizing
and slightly unnerving — just as a brisk
walk to nature’s edge and back through
your own unconscious should be.

—Jeanne Casey

MAIL NOTES — Eleven percent of bulk mail gets “lost.” It is also extremely
slow moving, and the post office will not forward it. If you miss an issue,
please let us know and we will replace it free if you let us know at the
beginning of the next issue month (we come out Jan, Mar, May, July, Sept,

TRIVIA is published three times a year. $12/year — individuals

$18/year — institutions

$14/year — out of U.S.
Sample Copy: $5.00/$6.00

TRIVIA PO Box 606 N. Amherst, MA 01059

and Nov). And please don’t forget to send those all-important change of
address notes as early as possible.

Belles Lettres @ 13

July/August 1988