The ABCs of Activism

The Dora Russell Reader: 57 Years of Writing and Journalism, 1925-1982, foreword  
by Dale Spender. London: Pandora Press, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983, $6.95,  

242 pp.

The Religion of the Machine Age, by Dora Russell. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,  

1983, $13.95, 267 pp.

Outside the Magic Circle: The Autobiography of Virginia Foster Durr, edited by  
Hollinger F. Barnard, foreword by Studs Terkel. University of Alabama Press, 1985,  

$16.95, 360 pp.

by Susan Waugh

What makes a person devote a  
life to social and political  
change? This is only one of  

the questions that comes to mind about  
the lives of Dora Russell and Virginia  
Foster Durr, two very different women  
who made similar commitments to  
changing the world. Russell’s books suf-  
fer from poor or nonexistent editing,  
while Durr’s has been greatly enhanced,  
but each provides important insights  
into the personal and group processes of  
change.

Dora Russell, born in 1894 into the  
English professional class, was part of  
the first substantial cohort of women to  
receive a university education at  
Cambridge. There she met and married  
the great mathematician and philoso-  
pher Bertrand Russell, the father of her  
children, from whom she was eventually  
divorced. Together they founded a pro-  
gressive school which she continued to  
run alone after they separated; all along  
they were at the center of intellectual  
life, pacifism, and progressive politics in  
England. As a writer and journalist  
Russell campaigned for birth control and  
sexual freedom for women in the 1920s,  
for progressive education in the 1930s,  
and for peace from World War I until the  
present.

The Reader provides a sampling of her  
shorter writings, many of which first  
appeared in newspapers. Russell  
addresses a fine array of subjects over a  
57-year period, and it is fascinating to  
witness both the changing social and  
political climates in which she finds  
herself and the continuity of her own  
vision of a better world. Russell’s con-  
stants include concerns for children,  
women, and the proletariat as oppressed  
classes and the dangers to all human life  
of the world as powerful White males  
have made it. Her essays contain some-  
thing of the domestic feminist ideology  
of women as social housekeepers, but  
Russell goes far beyond it:

Paradoxically, with all our modern  
sexual permissiveness, the entire  
basis of our advanced industrial  
systems is a flight from sex. And  
since to suppress emotion and to  
reach out for impartiality and  
accuracy in thought and daily work  
imposes too severe a discipline, rage  
and violence inevitably underlie our  
social structure . . . I say, with all  
earnestness, that this is the heart of  
the problem, as between individuals  
and in society as a whole. Civiliza-  
tion does not rest upon motorcars or  
nuclear power but upon two sexes,  
man and woman, who have never  
yet learned fully to understand and  
love one another.

The wealth of intelligent, stimulat-  
ing essays deserved better editing. The  
foreword by Dale Spender is adulatory  
and brief; it fails to provide the reader  
with a view of Russell’s life or opus or to  
give a context for the pieces as they  
appeared. The selections are arranged  
chronologically, which is little help.  
It is difficult to understand why the  
volume was published in this way.

To some extent the same holds true  
for The Religion of the Machine Age,  
which was 61 years in the making, and  
which cries out for a helpful introduc-  
tion. This volume is not such a fun and  
easy read, since it basically covers the  
development of western civilization  
from Russell’s point of view and builds  
up to her point that adoration of the  
machine is now the primary world relig-  

Jury/August 1986

Dora Russell

ion — with disastrous consequences.  
This is an old-fashioned book, abstract  
and philosophical — and typical of  
works written late in life. This is not a  
work of scholarship but a book of ideas.  
The patient reader will be rewarded by  
some memorable passages:

We have spent centuries educating  
and admiring the intellect. Let us  
turn our attention to educating what  
we feel... . Conflict within the  
self gets transposed to the environ-  
ment... . As for the universe,  

each of us is alone in the face of it,  
and we should be left free to come to  
terms with it in our own way.

Virginia Foster Durr’s Outside the  
Magic Circle provides a different sort of  
opportunity. After 50 years of activism  
— none of it expressed through writing  
— Durr talked her autobiography to  
Hollinger F. Barnard. Barnard has done  
a superb job of organizing the narrative  
while retaining all of Durr’s distinctly  
spoken sentences. It is fitting that Studs  
Terkel contributed a brief and charming  
introduction, not only because he met  
her when he was doing oral histories in  
Montgomery, Alabama, but because he  
has contributed so much to the genre of  
oral history. This book belongs then  
both to oral history and to autobiogra-  
phy.

And a delightful book it is —  
thoroughly absorbing both in the history  
it recounts and in the fascinating per-  
sona of Durr as she evolved from  
southern belle to civil rights activist.  
Durr was born into families deeply  
rooted in the Confederacy and was  
raised mostly by a Black nurse — whom  
she credits for her first inkling that  
Blacks were not inferior. From a history  
of plantations and slaveholding the  
Fosters slipped from genteel poverty to  
just plain poverty, but with all the habits  
and obligations of their former prosper-  
ity intact. Durr’s grandfather opposed  

the Civil War and refused to buy Con-  
federate bonds, and her father was de-  
frocked as a Presbyterian minister  
because he would not profess the literal  
truth of the Bible. Perhaps there was  
nonconformity in the genes, because  
little else existed to dissuade her from a  
conventional life of bridge, the Junior  
League, and “marrying well.”

How does a person who, as a Welles-  
ley student, initially refused to share a  
table with a fellow student who was  
Black, devote her life to ending the poll  

tax and promoting civil rights? This  
book is the story of a transformation.  
Losing neither her gentility nor her  
“sense of owning the country” because of  
her background, Durr became radical-  
ized about more than race. Witnessing  
the Depression in a Southern company  
town, she began to distrust concen-  
trations of wealth and other forms of  
political and economic repression. She  
became a feminist. While her husband  
was head of the FCC under Roosevelt,  
Durr organized the campaign to end the  
poll tax, working with Mary McLeod  
Bethune, Mary Church Terrell, and  
others.

After their stint as New Dealers,  
Clifford Durr eventually took his family  
back to Alabama, where he continued  
to work as a civil rights lawyer. Even in  
Washington he had begun to pay the  
price for those who do not go along.  
Defending people who had been accused  
during the McCarthy period, Durr was  
shunned by the radio and television  
stations that had courted him assidu-  
ously. The Durrs were red-baited and  
harassed. After their return to Mont-  
gomery, the Presbyterian church that  
five generations of Durrs had attended  
turned them away. Dr. Martin Luther  
King, Jr., Ralph Abernathy, and Rosa  
Parks did not.

Durr tells about all of this without  
rancor and without self-consciousness.  
This is what happened and this is who  
she is, with all of the complications and  
contradictions of both. Typical of her  
attitude about herself is this:

My children, as they reached  
adulthood, would sometimes say  
they wished I had stayed home and  
baked brownies as other mothers  
did. But what good were brownies  
in a society that tolerated poverty  
and denied people the education to  
enable them to get out of poverty?  
What good were brownies in a  
society that denied people the right  
to vote? 

Usually she was just “getting the next  
thing done,” and she presents matter-of-  
factly that as time went on “the next  
thing” was not pouring tea.

This book is extremely valuable as a  
memoir of growing up as a sheltered and  
privileged child in the South, of the  
Depression, of the New Deal, of the  
McCarthy period, and of the civil rights  
movement. It is also a frank, charming,  
and absorbing account of an ex-  
traordinary woman’s personal and  
political transformation that sheds light  
on the process of personal commitment  
to social and political change.

These three books represent two  
remarkable women toward the end of  
their activist lives. Durr’s words perhaps  
express best the spirit of both: “What we  
won was, we got the vote and we got  
segregation abolished, but now there’s a  
new fight to fight. The only thing I  
regret is I won’t be here to fight it.”

© Susan Waugh is professor of English  
and coordinator of the Liberal Arts Program  
at St. Louis Community College in  
Meramec. She is working on a study of au-  
tobiographies of radical American women.

WHAT IS IT REALLY LIKE TO BE A LESBIAN?

Introducing  
LESBIAN  
LETTERS...

a book that gives new perspectives  
on lesbians who—like other women—  
possess great variety, dignity,  

and courage.

It addresses the broad range of heartfelt issues  
that face lesbians, their families and friends.

Available at local bookstores for $8.95 or order directly from Heron Press:  

copies of LESBIAN LETTERS at $9.50 each postpaid.

Please send me  
Enclosed is my check for $  
made payable to Heron Press.  
Name  

Address  

City  

Apt. No.  
State Zip  

Heron Press, P.O. Box 31539,  

San Francisco, CA 94131  

Belles Lettres @ 11