A Writer of

Conscience and

Consequence  
by Doris Grumbach  

Words That Must Somehow Be Said:  
Selected Essays of Kay Boyle, edited by  
Elizabeth S. Bell. North Point Press (850  
Talbot Ave., Berkeley, CA 94706), 1985,  
$16.50, 288 pp.  

Kay Boyle is now a very senior  

citizen. She is 83, was born in  

the Midwest, went to France as  
a young woman married to a  
Frenchman, married twice more, bore  
six children and raised them without  
any noticeable diminution of her  
fictional and poetic production (Tillie  
Olson’s theory of silencing is  
contradicted by Boyle, who, on  
occasion, retired to the bathroom and  
sat on the toilet to do her work). She  
stayed in Europe for more than 25  
years, and since her return has lived  
on the West Coast where she has  
been unbelievably active for the cause  
of her Black students at San Francisco  
State, Amnesty International,  
opposition to war and nuclear arms,  
and so forth. She is an indefatigable  
warrior for human rights everywhere  
in the world.  

For 30 years I have read Kay  
Boyle’s novels and poetry, going back  
again and again to such fictional  
accomplishments as Monday Night,  
Plagued by the Nightingale, and The  
Year Before. My admiration has  
advanced from her work, always  
rooted in her experience, to her  
person, as I began to see, behind the  
elegant prose and poetic facades, the  
extraordinary woman of conscience  
that she is. The instincts that drive  
her young-woman-in-France character  
are her own. They turn out to be  
winsome, loving, honest, creative  
young people, lacking the selfish  
ambitions and artistic solipsism that  
characterized many Americans in Paris  
after World War I.  

During the twenties and on for  
more than half a century, Boyle has  

been a writer and friend of strong  
moral convictions. Her friendships  
with fellow writers lasted from the  
moment they were conceived until  
death. With such persons as Robert  
McAlmon (whose autobiographical  
writings she later issued, interspersed  
with her own account of life abroad in  
the twenties in Being Geniuses  
Together), the handsome and doomed  
editor of This Quarter, Ernest Walsh,  
Hart Crane, Caresse Crosby, William  
Carlos Williams, Eugene Jolas, and  
later and still, Samuel Beckett. Her  
fidelity to her friends and to their  
work is marked by the same pure and  
sensitive conscience and loyalty that is  
at work in her novels and in her  
passionately committed poetry.  

So it is a pleasure to come upon,  
at long last, this beautifully produced  
and scrupulously edited collection of  
Kay Boyle’s essays and reviews, going  
back to 1927 and concluding with the  
charming memoir taken from  
Contemporary Authors (1984). Every  
subject of her choice, every book she  
reviews, has behind it, and shining  
through it, a sense of purpose, a  
concern for the rights of all people. In  
a review of two of Edward Dahlberg’s  
books, in 1967, she quotes a letter  
Dahlberg wrote to friend and critic Sir  
Herbert Read. A writer must beware  
of how he lives, “for man must thirst,  
and must remain in the company of  
those who are athirst . . . . Even if  
solitude is a great pain in the heart,  
still a man must remain in the  
wilderness.” Boyle’s own purity of  
motive, her own concern for those  
who are athirst, is the inevitable mark  
of her work.  

There is a touching essay (“A  
Declaration for 1955”) that recalls an  
encounter in England with Dylan  
Thomas. In it she quotes Thomas  
Mann who “has said that it is the  
writer, the intellectuals, of a country  
who bear the full weight of moral  
responsibility.” In the same essay,  
wearying of the corrupted voice of  
bought American novelists on TV, on  
the radio, and in the theater, Boyle  
calls upon writers to recognize that  
“they are men and women who have  
accepted a moral responsibility and  

who must bear it, each isolated in his  
own conviction, quite alone.”  

To writers of short fiction, such as  
Katherine Mansfield, Boyle brings the  
same demand for wider, universal  
significance of subject matter. She is  
severe in reviewing Mansfield’s  
collected stories, warning us (in the  
same way as we must discount the  
seductive beauty and tragic death of  
the poet Rupert Brooke in judging his  
poetry) to put aside our vision of “that  
lovely, proud, appealing woman. . .  
that figure’s austerity, its pride and  

Be  

Kay Boyle. Photo © by Phiz Mozesson.  

melancholy and its heart-breaking  
loneliness” in order to go about “the  
scrupulous appraisement of her work.”  
The result is that Boyle reads the  
stories, not as accomplishments, but  
as “animated by situations so futile  
that it is difficult to believe they were  
ever not of importance but even of  
interest.” To Boyle they are stories  
that reveal no great truths but instead  
“the awful, the speechless confession  
of her own inadequacy.”  

Boyle’s warning is still vital —  
that we not confuse the quality of the  
work with the personal appeal of the  
writer, especially in these days of the  
cult of the personality, when  
admiration for the work tends to go  

hand in hand with the picturesqueness  
of the personal situation that produced  
it, and the awfulness of the chosen  
death. Boyle’s impatience extends to  
the early novels of Elizabeth Bowen,  
on the grounds that her single subject  
is trivial: “the unrecorded, unuttered,  
wholly clandestine communion with  
one’s own ego is the answer offered by  
the years.” With Bowen’s Court, she  
adds, the writer seemed to be entering  
a more promising area “in a truly  
heroic effort to connect with reality at  
last.”  

Kay Boyle’s sense of what it is to  
be a writer of concern (the only kind  
worth being, to her) brings her to  
Alcatraz in 1970 where Native  
Americans occupied the abandoned  
island to call attention to the plight  
of their people. “No place,” she  
writes, “in these United States could  
be more appropriate as symbol of the  
Indian’s imprisonment on his own  
soil.” She urges readers to read Tom  
Wicker’s 1975 book on Attica “to  
recognize the dimensions of the crime  
of Attica seen through the troubled  
vision of one man’s anxieties.” She  
writes from the lockup in 1968 where  
she has been put because of her  
anti-Vietnam activities. And in a  
reprint of her preface to The Smoking  
Mountain, she tells of her experiences  
in Germany after the war, especially  
of the trial of one of Hitler’s  
murderers, Heinrich Baab, in  
Frankfurt.  

One wishes there were more. Yet  
the editor, Elizabeth S. Bell, who also  
wrote the short, well-pointed  
introduction, has done her work with  
care, combining the two sides of Kay  
Boyle in her selections, the woman of  
conscience and the writer of purpose.  
On leaving Germany, Kay Boyle told  
German students that she had to  
return to “speak out with those of the  
other America clearly and loudly  
enough” against injustice, racism,  
war, poverty, and exclusion from the  
American Dream. And she has done  
just that. For 30 years.  

© Doris Grumbach, critic and  
novelist, is working on The Magician’s  
Girl.  

Two Books  
Their Books  
They’re Books  

by Karla Jay  

Picasso: The Complete Writings, by  
Gertrude Stein. Beacon Press, 1985,  
$7.95, 114 pp. (PB)  

What Is Remembered, by Alice B.  
Toklas. North Point Press (850 Talbot  
Ave., Berkeley, CA 94706), 1985,  
$9.50, 224 pp., photos, index (PB)  

These two books of note have  

just been issued in paperback  

for the first time. Stein’s book  
contains her essays on Picasso, which  
were written at different times and in  
different styles. Although the book is  
purportedly about the great Spanish  
modernist, one does not learn a  
tremendous amount about him,  
especially if one has read any of the  
dozens of other volumes about his life  
and work. We do learn much more  
about Stein and her relationship with  
him. In addition to her admiration for  
his talent and personality, Stein was  
attracted to Picasso because he shared  
with her a preoccupation with  
developing a new aesthetic for the  
twentieth century, and they both  
contended that Paris was the only  
locale where such a transformation  
could occur. (Stein elaborates on this  
concept in Paris France.)  

Although two of Stein’s essays,  

both entitled “Picasso,” are apparently  
as objective and as factual as possible,  

September/October 1985  

Stein and Toklas by Sonia Roth  

her more personal and hermetic essay,  
“If I Told Him: A Completed Portrait  
of Picasso,” is the most intriguing  
document in the book. The artist  
himself is not mentioned by name,  
but is referred to as “Napoleon”  
throughout. It is debatable whether  
the reference is intended to flatter or  
sting. Stein repeatedly intones,  
“Would he like it if I told him if I  
told him if Napoleon.” What was it  
she wanted to tell him but could not  
“now. Not now. And now.” Was  
there something she could not tell us  
about Picasso and not even tell  
Picasso himself? What are the  
boundaries of close friendship? Did  
she recognize them, touch as close to  
the edge as possible and restrain  
herself?  

The possibilities of the subtext of  
this essay are myriad, and this last  
essay reveals Stein’s delightful rhythms  
at their best. The reader is advised to  

plunge right into the text of this  
book, skipping if possible the  
generally unenlightening and  
somewhat misogynistic introduction by  
Leon Katz and Edward Burns. Their  
comments about Picasso’s, and by  
implication, Stein’s, “sale [dirty]  
sexuality” and their reference to their  
“heroic years of seminal work”  
(emphasis mine) makes one wonder  
why Beacon did not have the good  
sense to commission a new  
introduction or simply drop this one.  

The manuscript of Stein’s book  
was written in French and translated  
by Alice B. Toklas, whose  
contribution to the development of  
the work and to translating it is noted  
in the afterword. The reader is told  
that “at Alice Toklas’s request her  
own role. . . was not mentioned.”  
One is given the impression, so easily  
believed by male scholars, that  
women intentionally obscure  

themselves!  

Toklas comes into her own in  
What Is Remembered, a charming  
collection of stream-of-consciousness  
recollections beginning with her  
childhood in San Francisco through  
her migration to Paris and her well-  
known relationship with Stein. Her  
technique of “automatic writing”  
jumbles together the monumentally  
important with the incredibly  
insignificant, but Toklas recalls each  
event with such verve and style that  
one can forgive her rushing through  
meetings with Natalie Barney or the  
Cone sisters or Matisse in order to  
recount a tale about a neighborhood  
dog or about a child who had a crush  
on Stein.  

Toklas writes with great wit and  
flair, and after finishing the book, one  
wonders who really did write The  
Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas. It  
seems quite conceivable that Toklas  
did so herself, but being practical, she  
knew that Stein’s name would ensure  
publication. I do not think she was  
obscuring herself in any case. In fact,  
I hope the reissuance of this book will  
save her from being remembered only  
as Stein’s widow and the creator of  
the well-known hash brownie recipe.  
And this is a far better book than the  
oftentimes whining and boring Staying on  
Alone. After all, Toklas too was a  
writer she was all right in her own  
right.  
© Karla Jay, Assistant Professor of  
English at Pace University, is currently  
presenting an audio-visual production, “A  
Feminist Tour of Paris, 1900-1985.”  

Belles Lettres © 5