pee SS

Belles Lettres

P.O. Box 987  
Arlington, VA 22216  

Janet Palmer Mullaney  
Deanna D’Errico  
EDITORS  
a  
Carol Armbruster  
Cathie Brettschneider  
Jewelle Gomez  
Doris Grumbach  
Helaine Harris  
Joyce Joyce  
Susan Koppelman  
Michelle M. Tokarezyk  
Diane Yen-Mei Wong  
CONSULTING EDITORS  
od  
Carmen Johnson  
Darcie Conner Johnston  
Mary Lynn Skutley  
Donna Stewart  
EDITORIAL ASSISTANCE  

vy  

Belles Lettres (ISSN 0884-2957)  
is published six times a year in Sep-  
tember, November, January,  
March, May, and July. Available  
by subscription and distributed by  
Cornucopia Distribution, Seattle,  
WA; Inland Book Company, East  
Haven, CT; Alternate News Dis-  
tributors, Toronto; Ubiquity Dis-  
tributors, Brooklyn, NY; and Belles  
Lettres.  

Subscription Rates: $30.00/ insti-  
tutions; $15.00/ individuals;  
$12.50/ students with photocopy of  
student ID. Classroom Discount:  
Individual issues or yearly subscrip-  
tions $2.00 an issue for classes of 10  
or more. Send a request (one month  
before desired issue) on letterhead  
signed by the course instructor.  
Sample Issue: $1.00. Make all  
checks payable to Belles Lettres.  

Editorial Policy  

Belles Lettres features reviews of  
books written by women, published  
by trade, university, and small  
presses. Both scholarly and popular  
works are reviewed in the genres of  
fiction, nonfiction, essays, biog-  
raphy, and criticism. Our purpose  
is to promote and celebrate writing  
by women and in doing so, to inform  
and entertain. For a more detailed  
editorial statement, send SASE for  
a copy of the Guidelines for Review-  
ers. All views expressed in Belles  
Lettres represent the views of the  
individual authors.  

Submissions  

Contributors must query first and  
send clips to Janet Mullaney. En-  
close SASE for return of materials.  

Advertising  

Only display advertising is ac-  
cepted. Classified ads are accepted  
only as display ads. Copy should be  
camera-ready (stats or veloxes).  
Other forms will be accepted (i.e.,  
manuscript, negatives, or photo-  
copies); production charges will be  
assessed for typesetting or camera  
work. Deadline for space reserva-  
tions is the first of the month, two  
months preceding the month of  
issue. Address questions about reser-  
vations, dimensions, and rates to  
Deanna D’Errico or call 703-524-  
7743. Belles Lettres reserves the right  
to reject advertising that is inap-  
propriate to its stated editorial goals.  

March/April 1987  

SS SS SSS SSS SS ESE S|  

Letters  

I would like to thank the anonymous writer  
of “ ‘Birth’ of the Novel” for a fine presenta-  
tion of the ideas that Dale Spender and I set  
forth at NWSA in June. Since we “threw  
away” our academic scripts in favor of ninety  
minutes of lively conversation, including the  
often spontaneous input of a superb audi-  
ence, the reviewer did a remarkable job of  
conveying the spirit of the interchange. I  
cannot speak for Dale, but I think the column  
conveyed the essence and intentions of my  
Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel  
in America and the reprints of America’s first  
two bestsellers (by Susanna Rowson and  
Hannah Foster) that will also appear this  
month from OUP.  

But I missed Susan Koppelman in the re-  
view. Those of you who were at the session  
know that she not only chaired it and or-  
ganized it but contributed to it with her un-  
paralleled knowledge of the history of the  
short story in America. Perhaps more impor-  
tant (and again as Dale and I noted many  
times at the session), it was Susan who knew  
of my work and of Dale’s and put us in touch  
with each other. The three of us for years  
engaged in an extended trans-Atlantic “con-  
versation” that enriched and inspired us all  
to ask the hard questions. In fact, Susan is  
the best “networker” I know and I am sure  
that many readers of Belles Lettres share my  
gratitude for her tireless work as an an-  
thologist in the fullest sense of that word—  
bringing together women’s short stories in  
her many collections, bringing together  
women scholars and writers through her let-  

t d contacts.  
Cathy N. Davidson  
East Lansing, MI  

Errata  

® The name of Nan Nowik, who in-  
terviewed Louise Erdrich for the Nov/  
Dec issue, was misspelled in that issue.  

® Photo credit for May Miller Sulli-  
van (Jan/Feb) goes to Brian Parry.  

JOANNE S. FRYE  
Living Stories,  
Telling Lives  

Women and the Novel in  
Contemporary Experience  

Marriage and death have  
seemed the most likely  
resolutions to the plots of  
traditional female-centered  
novels. Such endings reflect  
the power of both narrative  
expectation and the cultural  
ideology that sets femaleness  
and autonomy in conflict.  
Joanne S. Frye’s analysis of  
novels by contemporary writers  
Margaret Drabble, Gail  
Godwin, Margaret Laurence,  
Doris Lessing, Toni Morrison,  
and Alice Munro explores  

the ways in which a female  
first-person narrator can shape  
other choices for herself. Living  
Stories, Telling Lives reaffirms  
the value of literature — in  
the lives of readers and in the  
redefinition of culture. A  
volume in our Women and  
Culture Series.  

cloth 28.00  
paper 12.95  

Michigan residents, add 4% sales tax.  

The University of  
Michigan Press  

Dept. LO P.O. Box 1104  
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106  

{_  

CONTENTS #&  

VOLUME 2/NUMBER 4  

LESBIAN WRITERS  

2 My Mama’s Dead Squirrel: Lesbian Essays on  
Southern Culture .......0.ccce cece ccc nsensc eee nee ese eeeeeeenees by Mab Segrest  
Lesbian Letters, :.04:ccssssssssaea asa ce . by Christine Heron Stockton  
For Sylvia: An Honest Account .............00:seseseee by Valentine Ackland  
The Lesbian Path ......0........cceseeeeeeneeee ee edited by Margaret Cruikshank  
The Letters of Gertrude Stein and  
Carl Van. Vechten, savers sercaes vane ces ness veo pees eapwaes « edited by Edward Burns  

3 Something Shady ............ cc ceccccseecseeeeceeeeeeeeeeseneeeeaes by Sarah Dreher  
Charleyhorse ........... by Cecil Dawkins  

ss by Lee Lynch  
ceteeeeeees by Isabel Miller  
by Rachel Guido DeVries  
eueuess by Leslea Newman  
... by Jean Swallow  
... by Sara Schulman  

Home in Your Hands ........  
The Love of Good Women .  
Tender Warriors ............  
Good Enough to Eat .......  
Leave a Light on for Me .......  
Girls, Visions, and Everything .  

Sisters of the Road) «soos oss ss0s cvs vans cas eses veews .. by Barbara Wilson  
Vesta Tilley ...........cccccesccseceneeseteeeeeneesneeseenecneeeae by Sara Maitland  
4 The Lesbian Body ...0........cccseecceeeeeeeeeeneeceneecenies by Monique Wittig  
Lesbian Philosophy: Explorations ...............00.e0ssseeeeee by Jeffner Allen  
A Faith of One’s Own: Explorations by  
Catholic Lesbians ..............cseceeceeneeneererensenens edited by Barbara Zanotti  
The Needle: om Full iss sas isos an none coanans sanauns seen ons anes e by Caroline Forbes  
Elsa: 1 Come With My Songs ...........cssesseeseeeesceeeeeeeseue by Elsa Gidlow  

by Rose Tremain  
by Mary Wesley  

8 The Swimming Pool Summer  
Harnessing Peacocks  

The Injured Party .............ss:seceeeseeneeevees by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer  
WWII NOVELS  

9 A Stricken Field ............ cee eeeeeeeecneeesceeeeeeneeeeeeens by Martha Gellhorn  

A Fine of Two Hundred Francs ............ccceeeceeesteetueeee by Elsa Triolet  

On the Side of the Angels .........0....cceceeeeecseeeeceneeeennes by Betty Miller  

One Fine Day ...............  
The Gentlewomen ..  

by Mollie Panter-Downes  
ee a ees by Laura Talbot  

Dea ASAE cangeereesansapr un eaaen acc sccaneeamracesrne joncaccsc a arena by Elly Welt  
REVIEWS  
10 = Alamo House ..............:cceseneerseteesereceene sen sensnssesseeenses by Sarah Bird  
God's Smile: cy vas sis xc0s vennaws een um 2 qeanens cesar worn en oe by Irini Spanidou  
Bake-Face and Other Guava Stories ................66 by Opal Palmer Adisa  
12 Everything in the World .......0... ccc cee eee eee eeee by Lynda Barry  
The Whole Enchilada .. sa 8 by Nicole Hollander  
Films for Women .............0..000sseueeeseeenes edited by Charlotte Brunsdon  
14 Passion Fruit: Romantic Fiction with  
wl wist leet tater ett eter net eee tcer: edited by Jeanette Winterson  
Estella ........cccceccceceeceeceeneeneeeeeeceeseeeeeneenscneneeseees by Alanna Knight  
COLUMNS  

7 ~~ Belles Lettres Interview: Judy Grahn  

11 Rediscovery: Evelyn Scott [with reviews of Pretty Good for a Woman: The  
Enigmas of Evelyn Scott, by D.A. Callard; The Wave, Background in  
Tennessee, and The Narrow House, by Evelyn Scott]  

13. Impressions: Modernism at MLA, Women Artists, Bowen and Welty  

On the Cover: Mother and Sister of the Artist (1870), Oil on canvas by Berthe Morisot.  
From Women Impressionists, by Tamar Garb (Rizzoli, 1986, $14.95, 80 pp., PB).  

Bod  
Building  

Do you suffer from soft and flabby  
writing? Build up your work with  
professional advice from The Con-  
structive Critic.  

Take advantage of 450 years of combined writ-  
ing experience to help you tone up your skills.  

Whether your specialty is in fiction or non-  
fiction, your work will be personally matched  
to a professional in that field of writing.  

Give your writing strength.  

For more information write The Constructive  
Critic, Women in Communications, Inc., P.O.  
Box 9561, Austin, Texas 78766 or call Shirley  
Gipson 512/346-9875.  

Belles Lettres @ 1