The Lackluster and the Luscious

Lust and Other Stories, by Susan Minot. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989, $16.95,

147 pp.

Sweet Desserts, by Lucy Ellmann. New York: Viking Penguin, 1988, $17.95, 145 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

How could I go wrong? I asked

myself. With a moniker like

Lust, how could this book not
be steamy, raunchy, or, at the very
least, titillating?

But I was wrong, for Susan Minot’s
latest collection of short stories is pas-
sionless and formulaic. In all twelve
tales, desperate women seek elusive men
in a world without compassion or hu-
mor. Her characters are uncaring, terri-
fied of commitment, and unable to
communicate honestly. Instead, these
white men and women — yuppies or
those wishing to be part of the upper
classes — are depressed and depressing,
disconnected, uninteresting, and weak.

Women are always in pursuit of men,
trying against the odds to nail down a
covenant of equals. Since every man we
encounter is emotionally distant, if not
abusive, women are required to be con-
stantly on guard, struggling not to betray
the emotions that will scare their
would-be suitors away.

I realized something had come over me
and that I was and had been for a while I
guess in a new and different state and that

House of Mirrors

Lucy Ellmann. Photo by Tim Richmond

it had to do with him. I did not think of
it with terror at the time but serenely
because the first feeling of love is always
serene, and happy. It rejoices. Life has a
purpose after all. I knew it to myself,

knowing it was not what the man was
after, knowing it was in fact what he was
running from. But for a while it made me
very glad. Then it stopped.

So says the narrator in Minot’s “The
Man Who Would Not Go Away.”

Men are cold and incapable of love.
Infatuation with women puts them on a
treadmill of short-lived affairs, and that,
says Minot, is the way they like it. Al-

The House I’m Running From, by Michele M. Tokarczyk. Albuquerque, NM:

West End Press, 1989, $6.95, 56 pp.

by Chris Llewellyn

A poet’s first book is exciting
when the poems, like these,
are in direct, accessible lan-

guage, and they challenge conventional
ideas of poetic subjects. As a poet who
was a clerical worker for twenty years, I
am thrilled to find another poet writing
about “watching my hands as collating
machines.”

The book opens with “To the Safety
Net,” and its short, hurried lines are in
keeping with the child’s voice recalling
the cold rattling house where “We were
fed / early; / my parents / hid their plates /
that seemed too light.” The second
poem, “Heritage,” begins movement
into history through the teenage immi-
grant (Tokarczyk’s grandmother) who
gained a lifelong loathing of the ocean
from her journey in steerage:

For weeks she coughed up salted food,
for weeks she stared into faces

of people without homes,

for weeks she was terrified

lice would burrow into

her braided scalp, be uncovered

by the inspector's pared fingers,

and she, exiled on an island,

doomed to watch the ocean’s foam.

Tokarczyk continues as a skillful col-
lator and poet, gathering her historical
and personal memories from their stacks
of Family, Workplace, Neighborhood,
Religion, and Time, piling up narratives
onto the work table of her American
dreams (to complete an education and
then to “make it” into middle-class aca-
demia). Here are lines from “Academic
Fantasy”:

And after

seven more years

multiplied by how many
aspirin, how many valium,
how many exhausted arguments,
wavering between crying and
screaming, hugging and
hating my husband —

or how many years along

my drooping head propped
in my own iced hand —

After all these years

I'll get tenure,

I'll never drink another
cup of coffee. Never eat

I Fart 1989

dried cheese while running
down the street.

This is an example of what I find
challenging, even disturbing, to notions
of poetry subjects. There is an unseen
censorship of any woman writing about
her particular heartaches of health,
home, and job. Unless given in the con-
text of a recognized historical tragedy
(i.e., atrocities of war and death camp
conditions), her poems are seen as mere
complaints. Poems of strong emotion
about daily life will never constitute “an
important voice,” says the internalized
censor. After all, haven’t we all learned
that a “well-adjusted individual” triv-
ializes, denies, and/or is silent about
daily cruelties and injustices?

Consequently, it is no surprise to find
writers, teachers, and editors who dis-
miss many “confessional” poets as whiny. Yet Ms. Tokarczyk’s work is con-
fessional poetry as defined by M. L.
Rosenthal in The New Poets: “identi-
fication of private with public suffer-
ing.” Tokarczyk’s confessional auto-
biography includes the parochial school,
the garment district, the subway, the
unemployment line, the university, the
abortion clinic, and other institutional
settings.

Throughout her collection, the poet
invokes common objects to act as “con-
nectors” between self and public and to
take on the poet’s anxieties and fears.
“My father the parkie wore a sour / green
uniform; eyes butted / past him like re-
ceptacles he filled” (“Work Clothes”).
“Your hair to the shoulders / will not
wave; / polyester flowers fade / in
another soaking. ... Blunted heels
click to classified ads.” (“Well Tonight
Thank God It’s Them Instead of You”).
“I want my diaphragm to protect me /
from my husband’s eyes that deepen
with each friend’s baby / from the virus
that squelches your immune system, /
sucks the youth out of bodies, sucks the
life out of friends” (“Casual Sex”).

In “American Images,” grandmother
and speaker as well as memory and fan-
tasy are blended: In Part I, Tokarczyk
describes the local bartender she met in
Jamaica and his longing for America: “A
dream swallowing his eyes, pulsing from

though male buddies offer solace and
slug back a beer or two in the heat of a
summer’s eve, the women in Minot’s
world remain apart and alone. Sister-
hood, for them, seems unheard of. In
their isolation, they are left to lick the
wounds heterosexuality inflicts.

Why they do this remains a mystery.
And why they cannot find men who are
different — men who have been poli-
ticized by feminism and who are capable
of the things these women say they want
— is unclear. Minot’s preoccupation
with misery and unsatisfactory liaisons is
baffling and ultimately enraging. I
wanted to yank her out of her yuppie
kingdom and introduce her to men and
women who are engaged in real work,
whose survival demands spirited inter-
action and open communication.

A weekend with Suzy and Frannie
Schwarz, sisters in Sweet Desserts, for
example, might have been instructive.
Here is a pair who have each gone
through dozens of partners. Sexy, auda-
cious, funny, brash, and occasionally
confused and miserable, neither of the
two is hellbent on finding a permanent
mate. In fact, they are likely to do the
opposite, cavalierly lusting and having
sex before moving on.

Written by Lucy Ellmann, daughter
of Richard Ellmann, respected biogra-
pher of James Joyce and Oscar Wilde,
the book is said to be thinly veiled auto-
biography. Although the sketchiness of
the book is sometimes annoying, it puts

Jane LeCompte

his wrists / to his shoulders. Every day /
on a two-hour, forty-mile bus ride / at
every jagged blinding turn / sees an im-
age of iced water / peeking around Lady
Liberty.” Part II recalls the journeys of
grandmother, mother, and self:

At sixteen my grandmother came to
America

to scrub out a living, and maybe, maybe

learn to read and write.

When I was sixteen my mother told me

I would have to leave school,

get down on my hands and knees,

scrub floors. . . .

I never did scrub floors, but I’ve spent

my time choking on the garment district’s
dust

watching my hands as collating machines.

That was a long time ago. . . .

The person

who can have tenure looks back

in the mirror with darker green

eyes than her grandma’s. She has your
words, you can put her in job letters.
That’s what I tell myself.

Tokarczyk tells us the title of her book
is taken from a speech by Jesse Jackson:
“They see me running for the White
House. They don’t see the house I’m
running from.” In this speech, he also
called for Americans to establish “com-
mon ground.” In assembling these
poems, Michele Tokarczyk built both
the grounds and the house. For many
readers, it will be a house of mirrors in
which our own scars and strivings are
reflected.

© Chris Llewellyn is the author of a
prize-winning book of poems, Fragments
From the Fire, on the Triangle Shirtwaist
Factory fire.

Sexuality into the context of everyday
life. It is no more, and no less, than a
part of a full, rich scenario.

The novel’s strength, however, is not
its descriptions of carnal capriciousness,
but rather its look at the death of a par-
ent, in this case a father, and the multi-
ple emotions an ambivalent child feels
with his illness and eventual passing.
Charting the course from desperate sad-
ness to deep reverence for life, Suzy tells
us that

Suicide was suddenly the opposite of my
desire. I wanted the whole bloody world
to live. Life isn’t so bad — there are red-
wood trees surging straight up, there’s
Cornwall, there are lampshades made of
straw wound sweetly round in circles,
there are certain female arms by Picasso,
there are men who fuck you tenderly in
the dark, there are the perfect forms of
cats, bel canto arias. What the hell,
what’s wrong with it? Only death.

The winner of Britain’s Guardian
Prize for best first novel, Sweet Desserts is
honest and biting, a slice of real life with
its imperfections and joys. Her women
are neither male-phobic nor male-
obsessed. Unlike the women in Minot’s
sphere, these characters are by turns
zany and witty, intelligent and lovable.
One wishes to open a bottle of wine and
toast them.

© Eleanor J. Bader writes for New Di-
rections for Women, the Guardian, and
other progressive, feminist newspapers in

the United States and abroad.

Moon Passage
by Jane LeCompte

New York: Harper & Row, 1989,
$16.95, 192 pp.

Jane LeCompte’s Moon Passage illu-
minates the thoughtful exploration that
might have occurred between Snow
White and the Queen if they had turned
to each other rather than mirrors. Anne
Ellis is the legendary presence in her
wayward husband’s novels, a sibyl whose
“persona threatened to engulf her.” And
for once it is her story that readers are
given. Her husband’s latest love has
come to Anne to “scrutinize the woman
Jay Ellis never leaves.” And thereby
hangs an enthralling tale, from the
moment Anne allows Ellen Cassidy to
invade her domain and thinks, “I con-
template the lettuce and wonder if I am
going senile at forty-five.”

LeCompte pieces Anne’s memories
next to Ellen’s desire in a narrative em-
blematic and enigmatic. What is it that
Ellen wants? The moon’s passage gov-
erns this maze of push and parry, revela-
tory lights and darks, its “shards in a for-
gotten strata.” Her Anne Ellis is flawed,
sad, astonishingly vibrant, reluctant to
prod the depths. On an ocean cliff in
California she seeks peace from Jay’s
insatiable hunger for laughter, the noise
of conversation, knots of people, and his
infidelities. Until Ellen — who arrives
pursuing the myth of Jay. LeCompte’s
tale steps through the spiral of hero wor-
ship and self-delusion as Ellen and Anne
pursue each other.

Moon Passage boasts a textual rich-
ness that melds the sensual and thought-
ful. Cobalt bowls and cherry woods
complement the experience of learning
about the earth and its pleasures of body
and mind. LeCompte conjures the taste
of language and savors the juices of
words. “I rolled the word silently on my
tongue. . . . I loved it and I wanted it
for my own.” I have been hungry for a
book about women that is convoluted,
magical, wondrous, and tough. A book
whose open spaces are inviting, where
the discoveries are worth the trip, and
where “I am stirred by the unformed. . .
choice. I can do. . . something. I have
merely to decipher what.” This is that
book.

—Denise M. Marshall

Belles Lettres @ 35