Belles Lettres Interview

“I am not interested in the norm,” Pulitzer Prize-winning  
novelist Toni Morrison tells Angeles Carabi. Focusing on  
Black culture, Morrison shares her views of her work and of  
the world we live in — its past and present.  

In your novels, especially in Song of Solo-  
mon and in Tar Baby, there is a sense of  
being comfortable with the world of magic,  
with the supernatural. Was this part of  
growing up?  

In my recollection, a vivid distinc-  
tion was made between the actual world  
and the possible world by which one cer-  
tainly felt enchanted. Reality was much  
enhanced by a perception that included  
an intimacy with the possible world.  
These things were discredited in school  
because they were not seen as religion.  
What was important was that you could  
talk about dreams in a revelatory way, to  
gather information for yourself, your  
family, your neighbors. I don’t mean  
with a Freudian interpretation; in  
dreams the information is right there.  
When I began to write, particularly the  
third book, I got strong enough to incor-  
porate this quality in my writing. I  
wanted to represent that African feel-  
ing. It was not possible to talk about a  
certain time, a historical time, without  
including that perception. Well-  
educated Black people will not accept  
that because it reminds them of their  
ignorant, barefooted slave past, but  
their grandmother’s life was like that.  
[Morrison laughs.] Magic also served the  
function of narrative strategy; for me, it  
could give my book something that I  
always wished, which is a sense of ad-  
venture within the Black culture that  
functions in an imaginative way. In the  
first book there is no magic; it only exists  
for the children and it is not to be taken  
seriously. It is their last resort and is very  
personal. In Sula, I use it for natural  
causes (nature goes awry), but I did it  
much more deliberately in Song of Solo-  
mon. In Tar Baby the world of magic is  
left for the native people, Therese, Son.  

In The Bluest Eye, the reader can hear  
the music of the family, the music of the  
community gossiping, the music of  
Claudia’s mother (even, or especially,  
when she fusses). In comparison to The  
Bluest Eye, Sula is a silent book. Maybe  
this is why Nel’s cry at the end sounds so  
loud and releases the tension that has held  
the book together.  

Some of what you say is enlightening  
to me, especially about Sula being a si-  
lent book, because I think it is. I know  
this was very much in my mind, since in  
my writing I’m trying to recollect the  
ambience of life using bits and pieces of  
my own experience. The presence of  
music is very important for me. As a  
matter of fact, my mother was always  
singing different tunes to me. Those  
were the days that you could walk in the  
street and hear people singing on their  
porches, or as they walked. When the  
mailman in my neighborhood walked  
by, I ran and looked through the window  
and heard him singing this “profundo.”  
People have stopped singing because  
there are records. Singing was taken for  
granted when I was a kid, so I wanted  
this to be part of my books.  

I didn’t think about it in Sula because  
there is another kind of intense love and  
terror in the relationship between Nel  
and Sula. I had no literary precedent for  
friendship between women, and my idea  
was to try to show how valuable it was. I  
thought I would make a book about two  
women not at all alike but who loved  
one another. At one point, they cannot  
talk to each other but I wanted readers to  
miss Sula so they can share Nel’s de-  
spair. I could have made nice, loving  
girls, but it seemed to me much more  

8 Belles Lettres  

theatrical to make them different to the  
point that their friendship was harmed.  
For once what a woman said to another  
was not about men, like how to get one,  
but about themselves. Your interpreta-  
tion of Sula being a silent book is accu-  
rate because there is this effort to con-  
tain something that is new because it is  
too big, and I had tried to move away  
from the ordinary.  

In Song, the music transcends the limits of  
the community and brings echoes of the  
past. Milkman discovers his family origins  
through the song the children sing in the  
streets of Shalimar.  

Yes, Song was about that. It was about  
the song and history, about genealogy. I  
made a song that adjusted to the plot of  
the story.  

The music acts as a link to the community.  
Can you compare the function of the written  
language to that of the music?  

I think the reason for the existence of  
written art is because of the loss of mu-  
sic. Music was information. It was al-  
most never entertainment. It was artic-  
ulation, and so much of the music that  
was powerful had no words. It is not a  
contradiction. Everybody knew the  
meaning of the sound. It is the earliest  
moan, everybody’s cry. When there is  
pain, there are no words; all pain is the  
same. Everybody expresses pain at a cer-  
tain level, but to qualify the kind of pain  
that is ours and to shape it so it has an  
effect, is what is genuine. For Black  
people it is what we call moaning. Its  
tone, its African language, is what needs  
to be reflected. In Song, music takes the  
shape of a family tree.  

But my feeling is that music at one  
time was private. It was played on these  
records that nobody bought but us and,  
most important, music was the one art  
form that we determined. The musicians  
told other musicians when to get off the  
stage. They made the decisions and es-  
tablished the criteria, which is why  
there are no real mediocre [Black] mu-  
sicians; you could not even get into that  

Toni Morrison. Photo by Lynda Koolish.  

audience was very much part of it. Music  
had annihilated the normal individual  
collective tension by permitting the lis-  
tener the entrance, the access to it. Part  
of it was the active participation of the  
audience singing or swinging or saying  
“yeah” or whatever. When it became  
beloved by white people, white mu-  
sicians began to play it and it became  
white property: American music. The  
change it underwent was interesting and  
fascinating too, but there was a loss also.  
There was a need among Blacks to be  
comfortable with one another without  
using the oppressor’s language. It seems  
to me that the [Black] novel plays that  
part because music is still alive but is not  
exclusively ours. So, it must be possible  
to write a book published by a white  
publisher and edited by a white editor  
(whom I respect) but a book that is “for”  
Black people, in the sense that I use my  
criteria as if I were a musician.  

When you write, do you have in mind that  
some of your readers are going to be white?  

No, I don’t. I never had this prob-  
lem, but I have it now. Before, it was  
natural. I was determined to write and I  
worked all right for the first three books.  
By the time I did the fourth, I had gotten  
a lot of attention. People knew me, had  

The American English Black people speak has been  

ridiculed as a sign of stupidity. . . but to me it seems very  

powerful. It struck my mind even as a child. . . The  

metaphors were fabulous: They used pictures that would  
make your mind jump. So it occurred to me that I  
would use the language and strip it to its gleaming power.  

arena because the standards were so  
high.  

This is not true of literature because  
it is always filtered through white sensi-  
bilities: the publisher is white and is not  
going to buy anything that he [sic, but  
usually true] doesn’t think will sell. He  
needs traditional readership. Even if it is  
something exotic, it has to be something  
that white people are interested in. Even  
slave narratives were not read by Black  
people; they were addressed to a white  
audience. It was persuasive, important,  
but you didn’t feel it. Music was always  
an interior, individual thing. Improvi-  
sation is certainly the most individual  
thing you can think of. Even the person  
who is doing it doesn’t know what is  
coming next; but at the same time it has  
to work with the construct of the ensem-  
ble, or of the audience, because the au-  

written about my work. I felt an un-  
solicited entrance, and I had to deliber-  
ately exorcise them.  

Can you explain the presence of your white  
characters in Tar Baby?  

I had to have those white characters  
because they were part of the original  
“Tar Baby” story. I wasn’t looking to  
include white characters as a flow. (It  
would have been kind of funny; if they  
don’t put me in their books, why should  
I include them?) I was quite content to  
continue to write books that way, but  
when I got really obsessed with that story — believe me it was this incredible  
story, a prophecy — I put my mind in it  
and I just said: “Well, I have to do it and  
do it the best way I can.” Nevertheless,  
the perception would be from inside out.  

Something that is also present in your works  
is silence. Often silence emerges at moments  
of tremendous pain for the characters,  
(Cholly being rejected by his father, Hagar  
rejected by Milkman).  

Part of that very full, very rich silence  
is the absence of speech, which says  
more than words. I always want mo-  
ments of partnership between myself and  
the readers. I want to yank them and  
shut the door; but once they are in, they  
have to provide emotional information  
and vision. Sometimes I force the reader  
to see by just giving a few clues, the way  
you hear a told story. Not everything is  
in it. In told stories you share the cre-  
ativity. “How loud was the thunder?”  
you question yourself. I wanted very  
much to have this oral origin to be in the  
text. In some places you can do it with  
the language by using certain words, but  
in others I encourage an emotion that I  
assume the reader will be able to capture  
because he or she has probably had a  
similar experience. It’s like when I de-  
scribe a sexual scene. I have to assume  
that a reader’s sexuality is much more  
sensual than mine — because it is theirs,  
it is the one that matters. So I don’t  
want to take it away but to bring it in.  
And then it has the quality of a  
heightened sensuality, not because I  
describe it so, but because I have not  
described it. So silence is also imagina-  
tive space.  

On the other hand, the way your characters  
sound, often in dialogue, is powerful. The  
reader can hear them talk.  

It has to do with the language. The  
American English Black people speak  
has been ridiculed as a sign of stupidity,  
you know, like lower class, but to me it  
seems very powerful. It struck my mind  
even as a child. Standard English is ster-  
ile. I don’t mean that English is a sterile  
language, but the everyday speech of  
people is. I lived in a mixed neighbor-  
hood and I was always amazed at the lan-  
guage that people spoke, regardless of  
their education. The metaphors were  
fabulous: They used pictures that would  
make your mind jump. So it occurred to  
me that I would use the language and  
strip it to its gleaming power. This was  
not a question of subject—verb agree-  
ment. It’s not really pronunciation ei-  
ther, it is rhythm and emphasis. That’s  
where the difference in the language is,  
and it also has a sound. If I use adverbs  
all the time it sort of waters the prose  
down. But if you put the cruelty in the  
sentence — the humor, the menace, or  
the ambivalence — then you don’t need  
other things. The language of the Black  
people is extraordinary, a truly theatri-  
cal language.  

Nature, it seems to me, becomes a meta-  
phor in your works for indicating that  
everything is interrelated. The failure of the  
marigolds to grow echoes the death of  
Pecola’s baby. Sula’s arrival is announced  
by a plague of robins. Milkman achieves  
oneness with nature as a sign of his maturi-  
ty. Son is symbolically being born in the  
arms of the water lady. Can you talk about  
your perception of nature?  

I am not sure how I developed my  
passion for explaining nature. Some say  
it is a backdrop and not terribly original.  
Milkman, for instance, goes first into  
the cave. Then he walks up, then he  
goes into water, and finally he leaps into  
the air. My need to write about nature  
became progressively insistent, to the  
point that I felt nature was conveying a  
reclamation of the world. The world  
reclaims everything, and part of it is the  
place where we live, right here. In Song,  
Milkman discovers America when he  

JULY/AUGUST 1988