Living a Life Apart

Genét, a Biography of Janet Flanner, by Brenda Wineapple. New York: Ticknor &

Fields, 1989, $24.95, 361 pp.  
by Scarlet Cheng

The pages of the first half of the

twentieth century were written

by Janet Flanner — the leg-
endary New Yorker essayist “Genét.”  
She knew Greenwich Village during its  
Bohemian heyday in the post-World  
War I period. She lived in Europe during  
the creative ferment of the 1920s and  
the thickening political darkness of the  
1930s. Although she watched Europe  
burn from the sidelines of America dur-  
ing World War II, she returned quickly  
to report on what was left.

As a journalist she wrote about and  
often met pivotal figures of Western art  
and politics — Isadora Duncan, Coco  
Chanel, Marshal Pétain, Henri Mati-  
sse, even Edith Wharton. She also del-  
ved into the curious subterranean impu-  
lses beneath “smaller” events, such as  
the grisly murder of a wealthy French  
bourgeois mother and daughter by their  
long-suffering maids.

In Genét, a highly readable new biog-  
raphy, Brenda Wineapple shows Flan-  
ner as a self-imposed exile who agonized  
over her displaced existence, yet thrived  
on it. She seemed unable to commit to  
one relationship, yet her conscientious-  
ness and devotion attracted the love and  
loyalty of many.

Born in 1892, Flanner grew up in a  
prosperous middle-class Indiana family.

Her father was a mortician who ended up  
killing himself by ingesting poisons. Her  
mother, a stylish, flamboyant woman,  
wrote plays and poetry and directed local  
theater and tableaux vivants. Although  
the material about Flanner’s ancestry is  
important and necessary, the book really  
gets off the ground in the third chapter,  
which describes Flanner’s move to  
Greenwich Village in 1918 and entry  
into the portals of Bohemia — leftist  
politics, avant-garde art, and homo-  
sexuality.

There she met journalist Solita Sola-  
no, born to the world as WASP Sarah  
Wilkinson. Solano became Flanner’s  
first great love and continued to be her  
most faithful friend throughout her life.  
Together they eloped to Europe to find  
the open atmosphere they needed for  
their relationship (and themselves). As  
Flanner said, Europe made her realize  
one “could fall in love with life... I  
wanted beauty, with a capital B.”

The two settled in Paris, which was in  
the 1920s the cultural mecca of the  
West, brimming with new ideas, art,  
literature, and international denizens of  
a free-floating society. Glamorous les-  
bian circles were convened by privileged  
women like Natalie Barney, Djuna Bar-  
nes, and, of course, Gertrude Stein and  
Alice B. Toklas. As Flanner said about  
the twenties, “I had lots of fun.”

In 1925, using the name “Genét,”

Dredging in the Depths of

Dysfunction

White Girls, by Lynn Lauber. New York: Norton, 1990, $17.95, 147 pp.  
Falling Angels, by Barbara Gordy. New York: Soho Press, Inc. (1 Union Square, New  

York, NY 10003), 1990, $18.95, 208 pp.

by Eleanor J. Bader

I remember it clearly, for ours was not

a house where visitors congregated,  
drinking coffee or beer and chit-chatting  
the night away. Solemnly, slowly, my  
father went to the door and let in the  
lone guest, a visibly distraught man  
about my father’s age. Although they  
went into another room, my five-  
year-old ears were perched for listening.  
Striving for invisibility, I ascertained  
that the visit involved our new neigh-  
bors, a man, woman and child known as  
The Harrises. “No,” my father said doz-  
ens of times. “No,” he did not have the  
requested $10,000, and “no,” he could  
not help buy the Harrises off the block.  
Finally, after what seemed like hours of  
cajoling and arguing, our after-dinner  
guest left, looking no happier than when  
he had arrived.

Months later, this evening visitor  
moved, starting a chain reaction that  
within two years would leave us one of  
two remaining white families on Fair-  
view Avenue. I did not understand what  
had happened, nor did I understand the  
parental admonitions that forced me  
away from children playing within feet  
of my door. Silently I watched, uncon-  
sciously pledging myself to the struggle  
against hatred and injustice.

Loretta Dardio has a similar  
coming-of-age in Lynn Lauber’s poign-  
ant and politically charged White Girls.  
As she experiences the world of the  
1960s, she is forced to grapple with racial  
polarization, the feminine mystique, a  
dysfunctional family and small town  
hypocrisy. Through sixteen intertwined  
short stories, the world of the Dardios —  
a philandering, but hard-working fa-  
ther, a bored, depressed mother and two  
confused and often rebellious children is  

|: was 1959 when the knock came. |

8 @ Belles Lettres

presented in anecdotal simplicity.

Although it is easy to wish for more  
detail, especially when Loretta makes  
the transitions from girl-child to sexually  
provocative adolescent to troubled teen,  
the slices of life we encounter provide a  
sad commentary on the realities of big-  
otry. Our hearts ache as Loretta, sick to  
death of the petty gossip and icy-cold  
propriety that undergirds the white  
households she is part of, is taunted and  
harassed because of her attraction to the  
world across the tracks, a world of Black  
single mothers, loud, raucous parties  
and discernible emotion. A deeply lov-  
ing alliance with Luther Biggs, and an  
impassioned relationship with the Biggs  
females, provides ample opportunity for  
parties Black and white to examine the  
beliefs about race, class, and gender they  
were programmed to accept. And they  
do... until Loretta becomes pregnant  
and is sent to a home for “unwed moth-  
ers.” At this point it appears that the  
lessons gleaned have been for naught.  
But have they?

Lauber has written a gem of a book,  
aching with pain over the fate of one  
adolescent caught in a web of mid-1960s  
respectability. Gripping and intense, it  
casts no villains. Instead, it depicts a  
complex world replete with personal  
failure and political tragedy. By holding  
a mirror to racism and sexism, White  
Girls makes us see the truth about ugly  
stereotypes and empty moral platitudes,  
and reminds us of what prejudice does to  
generation after generation.

The confluence of environmental  
and personal pathology also takes center  
stage in Falling Angels, Canadian writer  
Barbara Gordy’s gut-wrenching look at  
the Field family. Through the eyes of  
three sisters, Norma, Lou, and Sandy,  
the reader sees how people in a dysfunc-  
tional family adapt to tragedy and mad-

Flanner began writing the New Yorker  
column for which she would become  
best known, “Letter from Paris.” (In  
1971 these were edited into Paris Was  
Yesterday.) She also wrote special pro-  
files and occasionally picked up work for  
other publications, but the New Yorker  
was to remain her chief outlet.

With the help of editor Harold Ross,  
Flanner invented a literary persona who  
spoke in a crisp, bemused voice — com-  
menting on people and events, yet al-  
ways decidedly distant from them.  
Though she often questioned the rele-  
vance of her work, it basically suited  
her. It afforded her the opportunity to  
travel and to meet some of the most fas-  
cinating and influential people of her  
era, and provided an income.

The Berenice Abbott portrait of her  
that graces the jacket of this book cap-  

Janet Flanner by Berenice Abbott

tures the duality of identity and vision  
that was Flanner. The writer poses  
moodily in an androgynous dark velvet  
jacket and striped silk trousers, her  
hooded eyes peering out from under the  
brim of a top hat. On the crown of the  
hat are two masks, one white, one  
black. Apparently, the dress was Flan-  
ner’s idea.

When World War II broke out in  
Europe, Janet Flanner returned home.  
In New York she met and fell in love  
with Natalia Danesi Murray, an Ital-  
ian-born broadcaster and editor, with  
whom she carried on a relationship on  
both sides of the Atlantic for the next  
forty years — somehow sandwiched be-  
tween a few other relationships that  
were either affairs or intense friendships.  
It is hard to tell which: either Wineapple  
is too discreet or the source materials are  
vague.

Flanner was a prolific writer, both  
professionally and personally. A few  
years ago Murray edited Flanner’s letters  
to her during a relationship where they  
were often separated. These lovely, ef-  
fusive, and chatty missives in Dar-  
linghissima: Letters to a Friend, show a  
warm, devoted side to Flanner’s charac-  
ter that is shortchanged in Wineapple’s  
book. After a parting in Rome in 1945,  
for example, Flanner wrote,

Darling, your sense of life was so strong  
over me after leaving you. I felt so con-  
scious of you constantly, of your voice and  
spirit and soul and love. I felt animated  
and nearly young. I kept wondering what  
you were doing in Naples, what street you  
were walking or driving on, what day of  
blue sky you would sail away in.

After the war, Flanner returned to a  
grim Paris and the fading of a gracious  
way of life. She took up being foreign  
correspondent for the New Yorker once  
more and, with Murray living in Rome,  
continued their long-distance affair.

But there was a grimness inside, too.  
For all the people swirling about her,  
Flanner was often lonely and racked  
with self-doubt. Frustrated in her efforts  
to finish a book — she was almost grasp-  
ing at subjects — and stunned by the  
death of her mother in 1947, the 55-  
year-old Flanner was increasingly  
gripped by depression. “One is old when  
one no longer believes in the possibility  
of change,” she wrote in a diary she be-  
gan after her mother’s death. “Change  
won't come true, nor dreams by day, for  
I never dream at night and so I am wide  
awake for the rest of my life, eyelids open  
in shock and tears. I feel not only with-  
out faith in my future but I know my past  
has arrived and that it now becomes in-  
escapable.”

Fortunately, depression did not stop  
Flanner. She continued thinking, ques-  
tioning, writing, trying to put together  
the pieces of the chaotic modern world  
in a coherent way — and to understand  
herself.

As enjoyable as this biography is to  
read, it has two key problems. One, I  
wish that Flanner, whose language is  
some of the most elegant in nonfiction  
writing, had been allowed to speak for  
herself more often and at greater length,  
rather than constantly paraphrased and  
excerpted in cut-up phrases. Two, there  
is a lack of discussion of the larger social  
implications of Flanner’s lesbianism. For  
example, Flanner and her friends  
seemed not to have suffered any notice-  
able insult or discrimination, yet their  
sexual preferences must have been well  
known to all. Were they really that  
sheltered?

All the same, biographer Wineapple  
has brought us a breadth of tireless re-  
search, pulling together diverse material  
(she found a cache of Flanner’s papers at  
the Library of Congress) in a cogent,  
absorbing way. It has allowed us behind  
that cool mask of “Genét” to see a real  
person, whose brilliant writing was pro-  
duced not simply out of personal angst  
and turmoil, but often — despite it.

—Scarlet Cheng

Spring 1990