They Would Not Be Moved

Holding the Line: Women in the Great Arizona Mine Strike of 1983, by  
Barbara Kingsolver. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University, ILR Press,  
1989, $26 (HB), $10.95 (PB), 230 pp.

When the company began bringing in workers to replace  
them, striking miners lined up at the mine gates in protest.  
A few days later, when Phelps Dodge won a court injunction  
barring the miners from assembling at the gates, women  
strike supporters began holding mass pickets of their own.  
When the National Guard and riot troops from Arizona’s  
Department of Public Safety (DPS) were summoned to  
occupy Clifton and Morenci, no one expected the strike to  
last much longer. The women organized rallies, pickets and  
more rallies. They were tear-gassed and arrested. They  
swore and screamed and sometimes threw rocks, and always  
they showed up for the picket. Thirteen months later, when  
they were still on the line, a DPS officer remarked, in what  
was to become the most famous summation of the strike, "If  
we could just get rid of those broads, we'd have it made."

But intrepid they were. For eighteen months, between  
June 1983 and December 1985, women from the tiny min-  
ing towns of Ajo, Clifton, Douglas, and Morenci, Arizona,  
defied propriety and cultural norms to demand justice,  
fairness, and decency from the company that ran their lives,  
Phelps Dodge (PD).

Predominantly Mexican-American, these feisty women —  
many of whom had never before been to a meeting, spoken  
publicly, or questioned authority — took to the streets and  
union halls to defend their way of life and clamor for ade-  
quate wages and benefits. In the face of Phelps Dodge’s  
intransigence, they railed against the company’s demands  
and exhorted the bosses to recognize their need for equitable  
recompense. Resistance to their efforts was fierce. The  
National Guard invaded the four towns, families were evict-  
ed from company-owned housing, and individuals were  
threatened by PD-hired thugs. Soila Bom was jailed for  
"harassment" after she called a former friend a scab. Al-  
though the charges against her were eventually dropped,  
"being legally in the right did [strikers] no more good than  
if they had been pedestrians run down in a crosswalk,"  
writes Barbara Kingsolver in her eloquent, inspiring history  
of the strike, Holding the Line.

Arizona, Kingsolver reminds us, is one of twenty right-  
to-work states, giving employees in unionized industries the  
right to refuse to join the bargaining unit and allowing  
employers to ignore picket lines, union jurisdiction, or the  
sanctity of a striker’s job. And, given the climate of the  
early 1980s — the air traffic controllers union, PATCO, had  
been broken and Greyhound strikers had been forced to  
concede major contractual losses — the women, and the  
miners themselves, knew they were facing an uphill battle.

There was a lot at stake. By attempting to bust the union,  
said Carmina, a member of the Women’s Auxiliary, Phelps  
Dodge was trying to turn back the clock to the days of  
rampant discrimination. For evidence she brought out a  
newspaper article describing a brand new PD policy forbid-  
ding employees of the company store from speaking Spanish  
(the preferred tongue of most Clifton residents) either to  
customers or to one another. “Do you see what I’m say-  
ing?" she asked Kingsolver. "The union is the only thing we  
have that’s our own. PD likes to tell us what to do, where  

to live. But I don’t think they’re going to run us out of  
Clifton. This is our home and we are staying, regardless."

Which is not to say that the thirteen unions on strike  
against Phelps Dodge always welcomed the women’s fire-  
and-brimstone brand of organizing. When the Women’s  
Auxiliary invited United Steelworkers of America insurgent  
Ron Wiesen to Arizona, many male unionists felt the Auxil-  
iary had overstepped its bounds and a rift developed, push-  
ing both groups to address questions about female autonomy  
and sexism before things were patched up.

"These were women," writes Kingsolver, "raised under  
the dictum of ‘speak when spoken to,’ and it had taken  
months for some of them to gather the nerve to express  
their opinions in their own Auxiliary meetings. Some were  
still uncomfortable expressing their opinions at the family  
dinner table. Now they were venturing into the great wide  
world and standing up before the multitudes." Harnessing  
their fears, the women began speaking publicly about their  
strike and PD’s despicable anti-union tactics. Before church  
groups and labor federations in other cities, at college cam-  
puses and on street corners, the women told the truth as  
they saw it. "Some had the full support of their families,  
while others were fighting in several war zones at once, but  
they all kept going," writes Kingsolver. Many were divor-  
ced in the process; for having taken steps toward self-actual-  
ization and assertion, there could be no return to prior  
domestic arrangements.

In the end individual growth is what mattered.  
For although the strikers and their supporters won many a  
moral victory, they lost the war. By the end of 1985, the  
company’s mining and smelting interest in Arizona — once  
the youthful, healthy giant among the state’s industries —  
was an ailing skeleton. Phelps Dodge had sold a part inter-  
est in the Morenci operation to the Sumitomo Company of  
Japan and had more or less turned its back on the rest of the  
Arizona mines. The Ajo plant was closed, and the town of  
Ajo may as well have rolled up its sidewalks. The count-  
down had begun for closing down operations in Douglas  
within the year.... Most of the retirees had stayed in Clif-  
ton, and some of the younger families kept up the difficult  
life of divided households, with one spouse driving to a job  
in some faraway city.

Tragic? Enraging? A callous and preventable outcome?  
Of course. But somehow, Kingsolver’s portrait of these  
indomitable women, changed forever by standing their  
ground and demanding to be treated as serious, intelligent  
thinkers and doers, makes the book uplifting and heartening.

"Just look at us," laughs Diane as she tells Kingsolver  
about her new self-image. "At the beginning of this strike,  
we were just a bunch of ladies." Anna concurs. "Before, I  
don’t know what we talked about. Who got married, did  
you go to the last wedding, who’s messing around with  
who. Now we talk about Nicaragua, about apartheid. This is  
a change for everybody, but especially for us."

"Before the strike," adds Cleo, "I did nothing. I just  
didn’t know there could be anything like this. Before, I was  
just a housewife, now I’m a partner."

By linking arms with women strike supporters in Arizona,  
Kingsolver has presented us with a unique, important look  
at a history often ignored. Feminism’s sweep — in subtle  
ways changing how women across race, class, and ethnic  
lines see themselves as shapers of destiny — is, she implies,  
an undeniable reality. —Eleanor J. Bader