Rediscovery

Rose Macaulay

by Barbara Griffith Furst

Some years ago in the southwest

of France when desperate for

some reading, I borrowed from
the bookcase of an English neighbor Let-
ters to a Friend, consisting of the post-
humously published letters of Rose
Macaulay to a distant cousin, an Angli-
can priest in the United States. She was
unknown to me at the time, and I con-
sider it a stroke of rare good luck to have
stumbled upon her work. The letters,
describing a spiritual journey, reveal a
truly remarkable and lively mind and a
literary style to do it justice, and they
offer glimpses of a rich, rewarding, and
at times painful life. Beginning when
Macaulay was 69, they were written from
1950 to 1952 and tell of her literary
career and of her passionate and painful
20-year love affair with a married man,
which ended only with his death. The
focus of the letters, however, was her
attempt to make sense of life through
the traditions and rituals of the Anglican
Church. (A lapsed churchgoer during
the affair, she once wrote that she was
an “Anglican agnostic, the best thing
to be in the best branch of the Church.”)
The letters also reveal a tolerance for
human frailty (including her own), a
puckish sense of humor, and a touch of
eccentricity. In her 70s she regularly
swam in the Serpentine in Hyde Park
from May through October!

In an introduction to the letters by
editor Constance Babington-Smith
(another cousin), we learn that
Macaulay was one of six children born
when her father was a master at Rugby
and that she was related to the eminent
historian Thomas Babington Macaulay
and myriad scholars, dons, and Anglican
priests. When she was a child the family
moved to the Mediterranean coast of
Italy for her mother’s health. There they
lived informally in the sun and close to
the sea, surrounded by the warmth and
color of Italian village life and its reli-
gious mysteries. In Italy she acquired her
love of swimming and boating. The in-
fluence of these early years never left
Macaulay, who was a tomboy and who
cherished “abroad” all her life. Intelli-
gent, self-reliant, but confused young
women populate her novels, and she
often mocks busy, affected literary Lon-
don by juxtaposing it with lives spent
mostly out of doors and unfettered.

Macaulay eventually spent three
happy years at Somerville College, Ox-
ford, and began to write soon thereafter.
She entered the London literary world
during World War I in her early 30s,
becoming an occasional member of the
Bloomsbury set. She never married. At
the end of her long and productive life
she was made a Dame Commander of
the British Empire.

Macaulay's early and popular novels
of the 1920s satirize upper-middle-class
England. In Dangerous Ages Neville (one
of Macaulay’s several female pro-
tagonists with a unisex name) is a 40ish
mother of a “liberated” daughter, Gerda,
and wife of a member of Parliament. Her
sisters and brothers include a doctor, a
social worker, an artist, and a flighty
sister-in-law, Rosalind. “Rosalind, who
was always taking up things — art, or
religion, or spiritualism, or young
men — and dropping them when they
bored her, had lately taken up
psychoanalysis.” Neville’s mother is in
her early 60s, and her grandmother is in
her early 80s.

It would appear that all the women
in Neville’s family are at “dangerous
ages.” Neville enrolls in medical school
despite her husband’s opposition, insist-
ing that her “brain isn’t what it was; it
may soften altogether unless I do some-

thing with it before it’s too late. Then
there I shall be, a burden to myself and

everyone else... . After all, Rodney,
you've your job. Can’t I have mine?
Aren’t you a modern, an intellectual,
and a feminist?”

Her mother forever complains and
feigns knowledge when indeed she has
none. “ ‘I’ve never had complexes,’ Mrs.
Hilary would declare indignantly, as if
they had been fleas or worse.” In a turn-
about, the unhappy Mrs. Hilary decides
to be analyzed. Soon thereafter she goes
off looking for another daughter who is
living in sin in Rome after having dis-
graced herself by competing with her
niece, Gerda, for a man and losing.
Gerda loves the man and wins him but
has no wish to marry him because she
does not believe in marriage. Neville
ponders all of their fates on a holiday
amidst the classical ruins of Greece.
“Some common way there had to be,
some freedom all might grasp, a liberty
not for the bourgeois only, but for the
proletariat; the poor, the sad, the gay

proletariat, who also grew old and lost -

their dreams.”

Rose Macaulay, 1958. Photo by
Cecil Beaton, reprinted from Letters to a
Friend (Atheneum, 1962).

Although several of Macaulay’s books
were written 60 years ago, her views on
the position of women are exactly the
same as those of today’s feminists. The
major themes of Dangerous Ages recur in
her later books. Women are as physically
fit, intelligent, and as capable as men;
women have a right to intellectual free-
dom and to professional careers; and
there is nothing that cannot be discussed
openly, from Freud to the stupidity of
social convention.

One of Macaulay’s best and most en-
tertaining books, Told by an Idiot (1923),
takes aim at nearly everything held sac-
red by upper-middle-class England and,
through ladylike but wicked satire,
shoots it down. There is little story or
dramatic tension — merely description
and the perception of life from 1879 to
1922 as seen through the eyes of three
generations of the Garden family. Again
the family is large but this time mostly
loving and happy. The book begins with
Mrs. Garden, the wife of an Anglican
clergyman, calling her children together
to announce that “poor papa has lost his
faith again.” Papa becomes in turn a
Roman Catholic, a Universalist, an Ag-
nostic, a Quaker, Seventh Day Adven-
tist, Baptist, Ethicist, etcetera. The
leading tenets of each are deftly held up
and then passed over as his wife, child-
ren, and grandchildren deal with their
own aspirations and relationships and
the ever-shifting political and social
scene.

Vicky, the eldest of the Garden chil-
dren, becomes a contented London mat-
ron with a busy domestic and social life
and six children of her own. Maurice
becomes, after Oxford, the owner and
editor of the Gadfly newspaper and is
one of God’s angry men. Rome, the
beautiful and intelligent daughter, is “a

woman of the world, known diner-outer,
fashionable — mocking, sceptical, in-
tensely modern and leisured.” Daughter
Stanley is a political activist — Fabian
socialist, Liberal, internationalistic, suf-
fragette — who marries a starry-eyed in-
tellectual, entertains poets and artists,
and, on one occasion, invites a pick-
pocket and streetwalker to dinner. As
her sister Vicky said, “They do have the
most fantastic beings to dinner. . . . It
reminds me of ten years ago, when I was
being aesthetic.”

The Gardens are always agreeable.
Stanley gets a very civilized divorce, and
even Rome takes it in stride when her
Russian lover is, rather farcically, assas-
sinated. Maurice, the exception, dislikes
his empty-headed wife and is disap-
pointed when his son becomes a writer
of florid novels. Stanley, on the other
hand, accepts her son’s becoming a vet-
erinarian. Readers are also treated to
some colorful history: We are with the
Gardens at Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee
celebrations and watch the election re-
turns the night of the great Liberal vic-
tory in 1905. Shaw, Beatrice and Sidney
Webb, Housman, Beardsley, and other
political, literary, and artistic figures ap-
pear as do “bloomers” and the newly
arrived automobile.

Vicky’s daughter Imogen is obviously
the young Macaulay herself. She is
caught in her childhood fantasies, a tom-
boy until almost 20 years old and unable
to resist committing all her thoughts to
paper. She wanted to be a naval officer
more than anything else in the world
(apparently also a dream of the young
Macaulay). “Imogen, neither then [as a
child] nor at any later time, had any
clear idea about what women ought or
ought not to do. Anything they like,
she probably thought.” The book is
mostly funny but occasionally sad as
when Rome speaks of events that led up
to World War I and the War itself as
“the very crown of human folly.”

Crewe Train (1926), is dedicated to
“the philistines, the barbarians, the un-
sociable, and those who do not care to
take any trouble” and is about Denham,
a motherless girl raised by her enervated
clergyman father in Andorra, a town in
the Pyrenees. There they live a life of
rustic and somewhat ragged leisure. By
the time Denham’s aunt, her mother’s
sister, comes to rescue her and offer her
a “coming out” in London, the girl is
quite wild but also quite docile.

Her kind aunt’s family attempt to
make her happy in London. The uncle
“was a happy little man; his hospitality,
his dinners, his cigars and his drinks were
well spoken of among his friends. His
town house, in Chelsea, was a centre of
social life and entertainment, his coun-
try house, in Surrey, was a week-end
resort of many. Since his family, like
himself, was sociable and friendly, none
of them found it too many, either in
country or town.” Denham, however,
cannot understand what is so wonderful
about London, why her cousins must al-
ways be surrounded with people, and
why one must make small talk.

Denham is wooed and won by a young
publisher who is taken by her innocence.
She agrees to become a Roman Catholic
in order to marry him, not concerning
herself with its deeper implications but
only to please. During a honeymoon in
Cornwall she moves into an abandoned
house on a cliff by the sea with a secret
passage running to a pirate cove. She
spends a good deal of blissful time alone
in an old rowboat wearing stockings with
holes in them and exploring the coast. She
cannot understand why she and her hus-
band cannot stay there permanently. In
the end the young couple settle in the
suburbs of London. There Denham
can escape the busy and overscheduled
city life and her husband can commute.

Yet Macaulay leaves us with Denham’s
mother-in-law arranging a daily
schedule for Denham starting with
breakfast, conferences with servants, ar-
ranging flowers, serious reading, lunch,
rest, exercise, tea, and so on.

In Keeping Up Appearances the pro-
tagonist is a 30-year-old insecure woman
named Daisy, the illegitimate but
acknowledged daughter of an upper-
middle-class man and a lower-middle-
class woman. Her alter ego is her high-
born half-sister Daphne, aged 25, who
has the same father. Daphne goes as
companion to the children of her father’s
friends the Folyots on a holiday in the
Mediterranean and takes Daisy along.
Extremely insecure and awkward, Daisy
lets Daphne take the lead and feels bereft
and desolate when Daphne is not pre-
sent. Daisy is a tabloid journalist churn-
ing out articles on “women’s subjects”
on command. She is also, as Marjorie
Wynne, a writer of popular novels. Dur-
ing the holiday Daphne and the child-
ren’s older brother Raymond, a
biologist, develop an attachment,
Daphne being such a good sport and per-
fect field companion when he is out
looking for specimens. Daisy disgraces
herself by letting one of the children
almost drown, leaving Daphne to rescue
him, and then again when she runs away
from a wild boar that was charging the
children. She returns to London with
Daphne and runs home to her good-na-
tured, peroxided mum and her jolly
household, who all give Daisy the
strength to return to her flat in town.
Soon Daphne becomes engaged to
Raymond, whom she loves very much.

At about this time we learn that, in
fact, Daisy and Daphne are the same
person and that Daisy/Daphne, there-
fore, is in a real predicament. Sooner or
later Raymond will find out that
Daphne, the courageous and caring
“front,” is really Daisy, a 30-, not 25-
year-old tabloid journalist who is inse-
cure and hates adventure. She will also
have to introduce him and his family to
her mother.

In her attempt to point up the absur-
dity of the English class system,
Macaulay’s “split personality” device
fails, and for the first time her pro-
tagonist is not sympathetic. Daisy, de-
spite being a hardworking career
woman, is not a very nice person and
evokes little pity. Her mother is so lov-
ing and understanding one wonders how
it is possible for a daughter to deny her.
(Macaulay said years later in letters how
much she liked Daisy’s mother.)

They Were Defeated was published in
1932 and was considered by many to be
Macaulay’s greatest novel. It is a histor-
ical novel about the Conybeare family
of Devon, ancestors of Macaulay, and
takes place in 1640 as the civil war is
heating up. Once again the protagonist
is an intelligent girl with a unisex name,
Julian Conybeare, who though un-
schooled, knows Latin and Greek and
is experienced in learned discourse. Her
father is the iconoclastic and atheist vil-
lage doctor (“leech”) and her tutor/men-
tor is the village parson — a jolly, well-
meaning poet who misses the cof-
feehouses and taverns of London. Ju-
lian’s brother has gone to Cambridge,
and when her father is driven out of
town for trying to save an old woman
from hanging for witchcraft, Julian and
the Vicar go with him to Cambridge for
an extended stay. Cambridge itself, its
old buildings and intrigue, become the
real “hero” for, although she had at-
tended Oxford, Macaulay had strong
Cambridge connections and she de-
lighted in recreating the intellectual fo-
ment of the town in the 17th century.
We meet John Milton, Andrew Marvell,
and other poets, theologians, and

philosophers.
— continued on page 5

Jury/August 1987