America. Ellen’s acquiescence to him is  
not without some insight about the cost  
of submission: “She could not help lov-  
ing her uncle . . . and if the hand that  
pressed her cheek was, as she felt it was,  
the hand of power, its touch was also  
exceedingly fond.”  

In The Lamplighter, biting the Vic-  
torian bullet is again the central con-  
cern. No sooner is little Gerty rescued  
from her vicious guardian by a kind  
lamplighter than she must pay her  
Christian debt. At eight she is taught to  
calm her stormy temper, keep house for  
the salt-of-the-earth type who saved  
her, and prefer the company of the nee-  
dy to that of little girls who like such fri-  
volities as pretty dresses. So schooled is  
Gerty in self-abnegation that in her early  
teens she leaves the comfortable home of  
a wealthy mentor, where she had come  
to stay after the death of the lamplight-  
er, to nurse a poor, ailing woman and  
her senile father. Her decision prompts  
these pious reflections: “She thank[ed]  
God that she had the resolution to for-  
sake pleasure and ease and . . . to place  
herself into the front of life’s battle, and  
bravely wait its issues.”  

Critic Jane Tompkins in her after-  
word to Warner’s novel could have been  
describing the Cummins book as well.  
Tompkins argued of the work’s appeal  
that it taught feminine readers Christian  
self-discipline, that “the only way to  
overcome adversity is through overcom-  
ing the enemy within.” The heroines of  
Warner and Cummins certainly display  
the patience of saints, swallowing re-  
bukes from threatening patriarchs, ac-  
cepting the scorn of jealous society  
belles, and enduring separation from  
their lovers before the marital dé-  
nouement. The problem is that by the  
time they achieve the self-mastery that  
enables them to rise above the pain of  
life, so little identity is left.  

ments with a kind of communal living  
herself, recording with amusement that  
the house she takes with two other  
women had just been vacated by some  
middle-rung prostitutes. And she has  
exhilarating conversations with men  
and women who speak openly of sexual  
equality, divorce, free love — all hereti-  
cal ideas to her patriarchal father and six  
antifeminist brothers. She rightly pro-  
claims herself worlds away from “the  
thoroughly conventional woman . . .  
standardized by the school and society of  
today into the well-known type.”  
Chown’s scorn for the woman with-  
out an interest in the social questions of  
the time contrasts with her compassion  
for poor women, whom she repeatedly  
seeks out and studies in the slums of  
Toronto and New York. Here she de-  
scribes a massive garment workers’ strike  
in New York City in 1913 with a charac-  
teristic mixture of idealism and insight:  

Seventy-five thousand women had walked  
out that morning, Italians, Jews, Russians,  
Slovak Armenians, Arabians . . . many  
different races, and in ages from eleven to  
the bent women of seventy. I was eager to  
be in their midst, a learner from them. A  
new era was dawning, when women, who,  
it had always been predicted, would never  
stand together, were coming out a regular  
army, to take their ranks with men in  
organized labor, to fight for wages that  
would make possible for them a better  
living.  

The Stairway merges personal and  
social history, its author filtering her  
perceptions of the era’s political turmoil  
through her belief in people’s right to be  
free, whether from the tyrannies of “in-  
herited inhibitions” or of economic  
need. That her book is timely, not  
dated, can best be understood by her  
explanation of its title:  

To be true to oneself is the great  
achievement, the only permanent reality  
. . . this is my vaulting pole, which will  
carry me up my stairs according to the  
clearness of vision and tenacity of purpose  
with which I grasp it.  

Summer 1989  

Two Timers  

How I Got Him Back, by Valerie Sayers. New York: Doubleday, 1989,  

$17.95, 300 pp.  

A Virtuous Woman, by Kaye Gibbons. Chapel Hill: Algonquin Books, 1989,  

$12.95, 158 pp.  

by Deanna D’Errico  

Mary Faith Rapple, unwed  
mother and heroine of Valerie  
Sayers’s outstanding first  

novel, Due East, has been “crazy in love”  
with Stephen Dugan since she bared her  
pregnant body to him at age fifteen.  
Now, in How I Got Him Back, she is  
almost twenty-one; he has promised to  
leave his wife and marry her. But as she  
sits in the park, waiting to feed Stephen  
a bag of cold crab omelets that she made  
from a recipe in that morning’s newspa-  
per, she reflects “with a chill that be-  
comes less and less pronounced as she  
grew used to its presence . . . that [he]  
had become very fond of her and her  
boy. Fond. Once he had been pas-  
sionate. . . . She had to think of a way  
to make him want her so badly that he  
wouldn’t mention custody and mar-  
riage.” Will Mary Faith get Stephen  
back?  

Marygail Dugan was nineteen when  
she met husband-to-be Stephen:  

Kaye Gibbons. Photo by Sarah Durant  

“nut-brown, horse-faced, horse-  
toothed, skinny, angular, all elbows and  
knees. She wore micro-miniskirts and  
pink tank tops made of spun sugar: she  
looked just fine and she knew it, too.”  
For years she has ignored Stephen and  
occupied herself instead with drugs, the  
Due East Little Theater, and sleeping  
with marines. But now Stephen has sold  
a screenplay, and she is afraid that “he is  
going to be rich and try to take Maureen  
away from me and I’ll have to go back to  
Columbia and live with Momma and  
Daddy and go to the country club every  
afternoon and play tennis with lawyers’  
wives. Oh god. Oh god. Oh god. Oh  
god. Oh god.” Will Marygail get Stephen  
back?  

Becky Perdue’s husband, Jack, has  
left her after some twenty years of mar-  
riage for Judi with an i, a dyed redhead  
who paints hearts on her fingernails.  
She has felt nothing but contempt for  
him for years; she had never forgiven  
him for being an Izod-clad real estate  
agent instead of an intellectual. But now  
that he is gone, Becky has fallen into a  
“black hole.” She has gotten drunk in  
the middle of the day on nips of Rebel  
Yell she has found in her son’s closet and  
is unable even to clean the cereal bowls  
off the kitchen island that, along with  
acres of beige carpet, she loathes. “I  
grew up in Due East, and as far as I’m  
concerned, islands were made to take  
boats to. Islands were made to leave you  
with sunburns and chiggers and ticks.  
They were not made to be in the middle  
of my kitchen.” Jack finds Becky in this  

state, and Becky finds herself thinking  
“he was wearing a yellow alligator shirt  
and his belly pressed it out in a roll over  
the top of his pants. His belly looked like  
a lump of dough and I couldn’t believe  
that after all these years of having Jack’s  
stomach revolt me I suddenly wanted to  
take this lump of pale dough and knead  
it.” Will Becky get Jack back?  

The novel itself is a bit of little  
theater in which the plot is propelled by  
numerous questions. Will Tim Rooney,  
the unemployed philosopher who dis-  
tinguished himself to the town by taking  

Valerie Sayers. Photo by Tommy Carraway  

a whiz in the front pew of Our Lady of  
Perpetual Help on Christmas Day, ever  
win Mary Faith’s love? Will the tired  
and aging Father Berkeley stop drinking  
long enough to find a new site for the  
church, and does he have enough faith  
left to shepherd the faithless back into  
the fold? Will the ladies of the Altar  
Guild ever stop fighting over what  
flowers to put at Mary’s feet, and will  
they heed May’s prediction that  
Marygail will choose Easter for her ner-  
vous breakdown? Will the rain let up  
enough for Stephen’s made-for-TV  
movie to be filmed on location in Due  
East? Will Becky or Mary Faith ever for-  
get the image of Eileen Connelly, naked  
and bound, standing in Tim Rooney’s  
bedroom window?  

Who gets whom back and other ques-  
tions, titillating as they are, are beside  
the point. The ample pleasure of reading  
this novel lies in getting to know its fas-  
cinating cast of characters intimately  
and in glimpsing how their lives inter-  
sect. Sayers is a virtuoso of portraiture.  
This group portrait develops detail by  
detail through the multiple third-person  
points of view like particles of light that,  
when absorbed through Sayers’s lens,  
bring into clear outline another angle of  
a character’s personality.  

The occasional shift to first person is  
somewhat jarring — as if a character  
suddenly steps forward and speaks out  
loud in your ear. But Sayers pulls it off,  
and when you read Stephen’s confes-  
sion, you are likely to nod your head in  
agreement and then forgive him, and  
Sayers, for reaching out from the page  
and grabbing your lapel.  

I have never been comfortable in the first  
person any more than I’ve been com-  
fortable in this marriage or in this affair.  
For years I have written a hokey weekly  
column and daily drivel for the Courier  
without resorting to the first person. For  

years I have churned out I-less poems and  
sent them off to obscure literary quarterlies  
which had never before published poems  
not written in the first person. A disser-  
tation, two unpublished novels, a made-  
for-TV movie script so bad it’s good, so  
bad it scares me: pages, folders, cartons of  
work, all without resorting to the voice of  
choice in the 1980s.  

Sayers’s characters are so three-  
dimensional that readers may find  
themselves both liking and disliking  
them, hoping that they will succeed and  
that they will not. The second visit to  
Due East is even better than the first,  
and I hope that Sayers will allow us to  
come again.  

Her slim, elegant first novel,  
Ellen Foster, displayed Kaye  
Gibbons’s formidable talent for  

rendering first-person internal mono-  
logue, shifting time frames, and “south-  
ern” dialect, breathing life into a char-  
acter and a tale that are unforgettable. A  
Virtuous Woman, her second novel, has  
many of the same characteristics. The  
story is told through alternating internal  
monologues from the past and present by  
Blinking Jack Ernest Stokes (“stokes the  
fire, stokes the stove, stokes the fiery  
furnace of hell!”) and his wife, Ruby Pitt  
Woodrow Stokes, who has died of lung  
cancer at the outset of the novel.  

As in Ellen Foster, the first-person  
storytelling technique brings even dead  
characters strangely to life; their words,  
feelings, and deeds hover in the fore-  
front of the reader’s consciousness. Ruby  
is gone, but her presence pervades the  
pages, just as it pervades Jack’s lone ex-  
istence. It takes the complete novel for  
Jack to eat “to the bottom of the deep  
freeze” that Ruby thoughtfully stocked  
before dying. There is no plot per se; the  
story is an ode to Ruby, the virtuous  
woman of Proverbs 31:10-25: “A vir-  
tuous woman who can find? / For her  
price is far above rubies. / The heart of  
her husband trusteth in her, / And he  
shall have no lack of gain.”  

Finally, however, it is the story of  
how Jack, who has only contempt for  
the afterlife described in the Bible, gets  
on with life after Ruby.  

I'm finally at the point, past the point,  
where I can say this and mean it and not  
have to worry over somebody saying to eat  
my hat. I’m sick of being myself, sick of  
myself, sick all the way around of looking  
around and not seeing a damn thing but  
the four walls and my old ugly self looking  
back out of dirty, smeared up mirrors.  
Ruby’d be ashamed. This place looks like  
the pigs slept in it, and I walk around all  
day looking like the witches rode me all  
night, raggedy, messy. I know it but I  
haven’t been able to do anything about it.  
You just can’t expect a man to take and  
do without a woman when he’s done with  
one long as I did.  

The story, which is a pleasure to read,  
evokes subtly and lovingly the bond that  
has united Jack and Ruby through life  
and beyond. I only wish the novel had  
ended with Jack lying on the sheets he  
has sprinkled with Ruby’s “smelly-good  
powders,” hoping poignantly that  
Ruby’s ghost will be enticed into ap-  
pearing. Instead, the final chapter shifts  
disconcertingly to the third person,  
punctuated with the first-person  
thoughts of not only Jack but also of  
characters whose heads we have hitherto  
not been inside. These outbursts seem as  
inappropriate as using a dash when a  
simple comma would do. Technique  
suddenly looms over the tale, and it is  
difficult to view the scene without fret-  
ting over the strings that are showing.  

@ Deanna D’Errico, former managing  
editor of Belles Lettres, works at home with  
a hand to the paper and a foot to the cradle.  

Belles Lettres 7  
|