Impressions

Gift Books

We hope readers of Belles Lettres agree
that, whatever the felicitous occasion,
books make wonderful gifts (even to one-
self). Presented below are titles pub-
lished recently that are sure to bring de-
light to those you love (or if they prove
too expensive, are worth a special trip
to the library).

* Laura Gilpin: An Enduring Grace
by Martha A. Sandweiss (Amon Carter
Museum, distributed by the University
of Texas Press, 1986, $75.00 HB, 336
pp., also available in paperback) and
The Enduring Navajo by Laura Gilpin
(University of Texas Press, 1986, $29.95,
264 pp. PB). The plates in An Enduring
Grace are exquisite, as is this oversized
art book, which features 120 tritones,
40 duotones, and 7 color photographs.
The long biographical and critical intro-
duction by Sandweiss places Gilpin as a
female pioneer in photographing the
landscapes of the Southwest. For 50
years she chronicled the lives of South-
west Indians, prompted by a deep respect
and concern for their welfare. The
Navajo culture and environment be-
comes visible for us in her collection The
Enduring Navajo, which has an accom-
panying text describing their history and
way of life.

* The Desert Is No Lady: South-
western Landscapes in Women’s Writ-
ing and Art, edited by Vera Norwood
and Janice Monk (Yale University Press,
1987, 281 pp.) has an essay on Gilpin’s
work also, as well as others on an array
of artists and writers including Willa
Cather, Chicana and American Indian
artists, Georgia O’Keeffe, and Hispanic
writers. The text is paramount, although
there are many illustrations.

* Berthe Morisot by Kathleen Adler
and Tamar Garb (Cornell University
Press, 1987, $29.95, 128 pp.) repro-
duces 49 works of Morisot in glorious
color and has 60 black and white illustra-
tions. Adler and Garb are the joint
editors of Morisot’s Letters (Moyer Bell),
a nice companion piece, and they are
doublehandedly, as it were, reevaluating
Morisot’s position in the impressionist
movement.

Beryl Markham

* West With the Night by Beryl Mark-
ham and The Splendid Outcast: Beryl
Markham’s African Stories, compiled
and introduced by Mary S. Lovell
(North Point Press, 1987, $19.95, 320
pp. and $14.95, 160 pp., respectively).
African adventurer Beryl Markham,
whose rediscovered autobiography was a
bestseller, came into the spotlight again
recently through an allegation in Vanity
Fair’s letters column that she tyrannized
her husband and that he actually wrote
her books. A subsequent rebuttal by her
“authorized” biographer, Mary Lovell,
said that Markham’s husband was a hack
who could not possibly have engendered
her gorgeous prose. Lovell promised to
lay the matter to rest in her new biog-
raphy (Straight On Till Morning — now
out from St. Martin’s Press). Lacking
that, one can see if there really is a dis-
cernibly female way of writing by perus-
ing Markham’s fictionalized accounts of
her adventures in The Splendid Outcast
and her autobiography, West With the
Night, a new gift edition with 32 pages
of photographs.

* Beacon/Virago Travellers: The
Yangtze Valley and Beyond and Un-
beaten Tracks in Japan by Isabella Bird;
Peregrinations of a Pariah by Flora Tris-
tan; Farewell Spain by Kate O’Brien;
The Cruel Way by Ella K. Maillart;
Roughing It in the Bush by Susanna
Moodie; North-West by North by Dora
Birtles; The Gobi Desert by Mildred
Cable; Untrodden Peaks and Unfre-
quented Valleys by Amelia Edwards;
The Desert and the Sown by Gertrude
Bell; High Albania by Edith Durham;
Station Life in New Zealand by Lady
Mary Anne Barker (all 1987, $8.95—
$10.95, PB).

The women at England’s Virago Press
seem to know no bounds, editorially or
geographically! In collaboration with
Beacon Press they have now added a
“vintage” travel writing series to their
genres of reissued women’s writing avail-
able in the United States. Beacon editor
Joanne Wyckoff points to the success of
Markham’s and Isak Dinesen’s work as
contributing to her decision to acquire
the uniform series, which features new
introductions (one by Margaret Atwood
for Roughing It), one first translation
(Peregrinations), and one volume with a
film option to star Deborah Winger (The
Passionate Nomad, by Isabelle Eberhardt,
due out next year). Also to come early
next year are China to Me by Emily
Hahn; Travels in West Africa by Mary
Kingsley; and My Journey to Lhasa by
Alexandra David-Neel.

* Mothers of the Novel: The Wild
Irish Girl by Lady Morgan; Memoirs of
Emma Courtney by Mary Hays; Helen
by Maria Edgeworth; Discipline by Mary
Brunton; A Simple Story by Elizabeth
Inchbald; and Miss Betsy Thoughtless
by Eliza Haywood (Pandora Press/Met-
huen, $7.95/$8.95, PB). Good intro-
ductions abound in this groundbreaking
reissue series conceived of, labored over,
and brought to fruition by the indefati-
gable Dale Spender, including one by
Spender herself and others by Brigid
Brophy, Jeannette Winterson, and Fay
Weldon. Weldon’s comments on Disci-
pline sum up the tenor of the enterprise:

I myself would very much like to see
Mary Brunton let in, at least into the
kitchen and the bedroom, if not quite
into the parlour where High Literature
sits and where Jane Austen is so
graciously and elegantly at home. . .
For improving the Brunton novels may
be, but what fun they are to read, rich
in invention, ripe with incident,
shrewd in comment, and erotic in
intention and fact, and how satisfactory
it turns out to be, after decades of
modernism, post-modernism,
expressive realism, and so forth, to read
these classic tales of seduction averted,
virtue rewarded, and evil punished.

We agree with Weldon, “it’s hard to
keep a good novel down.”

* The American Women Writers
Series: Hope Leslie by Catharine Maria
Sedgwick, Oldtown Folks by Harriet
Beecher Stowe, and Stories From the
Country of Lost Borders by Mary Aus-
tin (Rutgers University Press, 1987, $30
HB, $9.95 PB). When one thinks how
close hosts of women writers came to
being forgotten, their books out of print
and moldering away in old collections,
it is particularly gratifying to look upon
gorgeous examples of the bookmaking
art such as these uniform volumes, done
on acid-free paper with a lovely match-
up between the colors of the dust jacket
art and the hardback book covers. The
series is expertly edited and introduced
by women scholars. Hope Leslie, set in
the 17th century, presents a reevaluation
of the Puritan ethic through the
stories of the title character and
Magawisca, the daughter of a Pequot
Indian leader. Austin also focuses on
both white and Indian women in her
stories, set in the California desert and
proudly regional. The central characters
in Stowe’s novel, published 17 years
after Uncle Tom’s Cabin, are all strong
women whose actions epitomize and
celebrate women’s culture.

* The Library of America: Willa
Cather — Early Novels and Stories
(1987, $27.50, 1,336 pp. — $21.95 per
volume by subscription). The editor is
Cather biographer Sharon O’Brien, and
the selections include the novels O
Pioneers!, The Song of the Lark, My An-
tonia, One of Ours, and the short story
collection, The Troll Garden. Other
women writers in the series so far are
Harriet Beecher Stowe and Edith Whar-
ton. That’s all the women out of 35 vol-
umes, folks, which is why we welcome
so warmly series like those from Rutgers,
Virago, and Pandora. A Cather Part II
volume is forthcoming, as well as one of
Flannery O’Connor’s writing.

Briefly Noted

* Longtime readers of Belles Lettres
will remember the review of Monique
Wittig’s Les Guérillières and Virgile, Non
by Diane Griffin Crowder [March/April,
1986]. At the time the latter book was
available only in France. Now Kristin
Dufour of Dufour Editions Inc. (P.O.
Box 449, Chester Springs, PA 19425)
has published a translation of Virgile,
Non retitled Across the Acheron. Al-
though Wittig takes off from Dante’s
Divina Commedia, there is no mistaking
her originality. Her profoundly feminist
work belongs in any consideration of
avant-garde writing.

* Harcourt, Brace Jovanovich has
published a collection of Elizabeth
Bowen’s nonfiction pieces entitled The
Mulberry Tree, edited by Hermione Lee
($19.95, 325 pp.). The title piece, a re-
miniscence of her school days, leads off
the collection, which ends with her un-
finished autobiography, “Pictures and
Conversations.” In between we are
treated to reviews of books by Virginia
Woolf, Eudora Welty, and Ivy Comp-
ton-Burnett, as well as an essay on
Katherine Mansfield, pieces on writing,
and political essays. Also, Penguin has

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987

Elizabeth Bowen. Photo by Robin Adler.

been reissuing many Bowen novels in
paperback. Houghton Mifflin has
brought out the Collected Stories ($16.95
HB, $9.95 PB, 392 pp.) of American
writer Carson McCullers, including
“The Ballad of the Sad Café” and “The
Member of the Wedding.”

Loretta J. Ross, mother and activist, featured in
the 1988 Everyday Sheroes calendar. Photo by
Charlene Eldridge Wheeler.

* Now is the time to pick out calen-
dars for 1988, and we have four sugges-
tions. The first two are wall calendars
from Margaretdaughters Inc. (P.O. Box
907, Buffalo, NY 14215-0907, $9.50
each) called Everyday Sheroes and
Women’s Words. “Sheroes” was coined
by late NOW president Wilma Scott
Heide. She would have loved this selec-
tion of strong, beautiful “ordinary
women doing extraordinary work.” And
it is good to see “uncolored” women in
the minority. Women’s Words depicts
women who are “dedicated to making
women’s words visible and heard.”
Many of the women in this gratifyingly
diverse calendar will be familiar to Belles
Lettres readers (or we hope will be before
long!).

The Spirited Women calendar comes
from Firebrand Books (141 The Com-
mons, Ithaca, NY 14850, $7.95) and,
like the Margaretdaughters ones, uses
writings to accompany its inspiring and
touching photographs. Kate Gawf’s
1988 Calendar from The Crossing Press
is a spiral-bound pocket calendar featur-
ing many of her offbeat, humorous car-
toons printed in color.

Surprises in the
Mailbox

If you have received a copy of Belles
Lettres and you are not a subscriber,
chances are that you have received

a complimentary issue — we regularly
mail complimentary issues to people
who we think are interested in the
writing of women. Enjoy your free
issue. We hope you will subscribe.

Belles Lettres © 13