The Voice of a Shero

Marjory Stoneman Douglas: Voice of the River (an autobiography with John Rothchild). Pineapple Press (P.O. Drawer 16008, Sarasota, FL 34239), 1987, $17.95, 

268 pp. (photos)

The Everglades: River of Grass, by Marjory Stoneman Douglas. Pineapple Press, 1988 (rev. ed.), $17.95, 450 pp. (illus.)

by Dorothy Abbott

years old — pigtails, skinny, wear- 

ing shorts — standing under a sign that says Silver Springs. During sum- mers of my childhood, I traveled with my family to Florida where we would visit the Bok Tower and relatives and, of course, the glass-bottomed boats. As I got older and had children of my own, the trips were to Disney World or Busch Gardens and a quick journey to the home of friends. Emotionally, to me Florida meant vacation.

But I moved to Florida three years ago to make it my home. I wanted to see what Gloria Jahoda calls “the other Florida, the one which never advertises itself.” From my youth I remembered The Yearling by Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings and Strawberry Girl by Lois Lenski, and I returned to those books. I fell under the spell of the history, literature, and people of Florida.

Fortunately, I early on found the treasure that legions of Floridians have known for years — Marjory Stoneman Douglas. Forty-one years have passed since Douglas published her now classic The Everglades: River of Grass. The opening still evokes a sense of wonder:

I have an image of myself about eight

There are no other Everglades in the world. They are, they have always been, one of the unique regions of the earth, remote, never wholly known. Nothing anywhere else is like them: their vast glittering openness, wider than the enormous visible round of the horizon, the racing free saltness and sweetness of their massive winds, under the dazzling blue heights of space. They are unique also in the simplicity, the diversity, the related harmony of the forms of life they enclose. The miracle of the light pours over the green and brown expanse of saw grass and of water, shining and slow-moving below, the grass and water that is the meaning and the central fact of the Everglades of Florida. It is a river of grass.

With those three words — river of grass — Douglas forever changed the public’s perception of the Everglades. By bringing together for the first time bits and pieces of information, she discovered the Everglades not as “America’s largest swamp” but as a broad, shallow river flowing over a hundred miles, from Lake Okeechobee to Florida’s southern tip. Since the 1947 publication of River of Grass (with ten thousand copies sold yearly), Douglas has been an eloquent voice for their preservation. Called a “gladiator” and the “guardian of the Everglades,” Douglas, now ninety-eight, still fights for her beloved “grassy water.” And now her autobiography is available.

Marjory Stoneman Douglas John Rothchild, the midwife of this book, saw Douglas for the first time in 1973 in a school gymnasium in Everglades City when she spoke against a proposal for development of a suburb. Having heard of this powerful woman “old enough to be prehistoric by Florida standards,” Rothchild had imagined her to be “some sort of cross between Mother Teresa, Clare Booth Luce, Rachel Carson, Athena, and Golda Meir.” Their paths crossed again in 1980 when Rothchild visited Douglas at her home in Coconut Grove, where she has lived since 1926. What began as background for a single article evolved into an oral history of her life.

Born in Minneapolis in 1890, Douglas grew up near Boston and was graduated from Wellesley College in 1912, where she developed her interest in literature and writing. She had a strong role model in teachers like Elizabeth Fisher, one of the country’s important oil geologists, who helped her to see geography as a basic science. That led Douglas to what she named environmental geography. As her abilities blossomed, Douglas became increasingly more convinced of a woman’s right to use them. Along with five of her classmates, Douglas founded the original Suffrage Club.

Douglas was married briefly, a learning process. She says that in her marriage she was “completely dominated,” and she realized her nature was to give everything to a man. Since this insight she has never wanted to give herself over to the control of anybody. This understanding gave Douglas strength to carve for herself an independent life.

After the failure of her marriage, she moved to Florida in 1915 to become a reporter for the Miami Herald, where her father was the editor-in-chief. He was the one important man in her life. Of him Douglas writes:

He had that Quaker sense about women which is different from the usual Protestant attitude. Quakers made no distinction between men’s and women’s minds; they didn’t think that minds had any particular sex to them. My father never doubted my intellectual ability.

. . . The two of us were companions in this Miami frontier where most people had no interest in books. . . . Though we were from different generations, we met on even terms.

Douglas’s sense of social conscience — a part of her Quaker ancestry — began with her great-great uncle Levi Coffin, the head of the famous Underground Railroad. Calling herself a “writing woman,” she has spoken out on many issues such as the lack of indoor plumbing in Miami ghettoes, beatings in the labor camps, and the plight of women. “The more you read books about women written by men, the less surprised you are that men don’t believe that women are people.”

Douglas has never seen the need for a car. In the house she has lived in for sixty-two years, she has no television, no air-conditioner, no oven, no dishwasher. Books are everywhere. At the age of seventy-eight, in the early stages of blindness, she traveled to England and Argentina to gather material for a book on W.H. Hudson. At ninety-five she decided to brush up on her French.

She has lived happily alone “since raccoon coats and the Charleston” except for her wonderful cats. When asked if she is lonely, she replies, “a person can be alone, but not lonely. In fact, a person should be alone from time to time. If you’re never alone, then you'll never know who you are.” These facts are enough for me to begin pressing buttons saying Marjory Stoneman Douglas is my Shero. But there is more.

Despite the inconveniences of blindness and physical frailty, Douglas’s energy is astounding, and her insights continue to instruct. Reading her autobiography I decided she does not think of herself as exceptional, even if the rest of us do. She has worked all her life — that is apparent. I think she sees her accomplishments as a blending of her faith in herself and in the things for which she fights.

An autobiography can fill a variety of purposes. It can serve as a portrait of the times. It can function as a platform for the airing of the unaired — a confessional. It can operate as a whetstone for unground axes. It can enable a self to realize its selfness. I sense all of these purposes in Douglas’s book, but none predominates. Answering her interviewer’s questions with a free reign to talk as long as she wished, Douglas directed her comments to an external other, rather than adhering to an internal goal of creating a cohesive self-portrait that would fulfill one of the above functions of an autobiography.

The book is fascinating yet inconsistent. When she is reeling off facts, she is journalistic and rather prosaic. But when she talks about Florida, the narrative assumes a grace and an excitement that astounds. The woman, however, always prevails. Marjory Stoneman Douglas has led an amazing life, and she tells a good story.

Dorothy Abbott is a short story anthologist and assistant director for NEA’s literature programs.

The Uses of Anger

Sylvia Plath: A Biography, by Linda W. Wagner-Martin. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987, $18.95, 282 pp.

by Enid Dame

Sylvia Plath was a divided person. The discrepancy between her good-girl image, expressed in her relentlessly cheerful letters to her mother, and the undiluted rage of her last, best poems has baffled and fascinated readers. Linda Wagner-Martin’s useful, if limited, biography reveals that the two sides of the writer’s personality were less dramatically opposed than is often assumed. A careful comparison of Plath’s journals, letters, poems, and stories makes it clear that Plath was always anxious and depressed. She could, on occasion, present a facade of breezy self-assurance; some people were completely taken in. Others, such as her friend and correspondent Ed Cohen, were aware of her wracking self-doubts. Cohen, indeed, foresaw her nervous breakdown of 1953 (during which she attempted suicide), warning her that she was approaching “the ultimate breaking point.”

While there are no startling revelations in this book, it does provide an undogmatic, commonsense approach to understanding this writer’s life and accomplishments. According to Wagner-Martin, Plath’s insecurities stemmed, unsurprisingly, from her unsatisfactory relationships with both parents. Otto Plath, her father, emerges here not as the tyrant of “Daddy” but as a sick, rigid man whose approval had to be won constantly. During his long illness, Sylvia and her brother were allowed to see him briefly each day; at these times, they would literally perform for him, reciting stories and poems. Thus, Sylvia knew her father “as critic, judge, someone to be pleased.” After he died, matters became more complex: “Losing Otto ... made Sylvia heavily dependent on her mother. . . Sylvia was fearful about her standing with her mother: She had in the past been judged more critically, she felt, by Aurelia than by Otto.”

Wagner-Martin paints a picture of the Plaths, after Otto’s death, as a struggling, female-headed household, less affluent than its neighbors in Wellesley, Massachusetts. In school, Sylvia was something of an outsider, a situation that continued when she entered Smith College on scholarship. Sylvia reacted to her alien status in two ways: first, by idealizing the demands and expectations of “normal” society; second, by reviling them. The first tendency can be seen in her passion for The Ladies Home Journal, that smug arbiter of taste for women in the 1950s. The second appears in her lively, acerbic correspondence with Cohen; the friends gleefully tore apart conventional religion, Cold War politics, and the role of women in middle-class marriage.

Plath’s anger was always a force in her life, sometimes directed against society, more often — as in her failed suicide attempt — against herself. When her marriage to the British poet Ted Hughes failed, she was able, at last, to use her anger directly in her poetry. Plath had invested much imagination and emotional energy in this marriage: It was to be the perfect union of two strong, exceptional people; Hughes was to fill the roles of husband and mentor as well as “that huge, sad hole I felt in having no father.” When this fantasy collapsed, Plath managed to transform her rage into art, into poems that crackle with a fierce, original female voice. The poem “Ariel,” Wagner-Martin suggests, is pivotal in Plath’s development. It is about the harnessing of power. Riding Ariel, a horse whose name means “God’s lioness” (in Hebrew), Plath’s persona is able to proclaim “I / am the arrow,” to assume control of the wild ride, of the poem itself, and of her own art and role as woman artist.

Of these last poems, Plath asserted (to Hughes, who had moved out): “They saved me.” Unfortunately, they did no such thing. Plath, as we know, killed herself four months later. But the poems remain: Plath’s finest accomplishments, testaments to the uses of anger in creation.

In writing this book, Wagner-Martin was handicapped by the fact that two of Plath’s late journals are unavailable; Hughes destroyed one and the other “disappeared.” Thus, information given in the letters (where Plath frequently presents a brave, false version of herself) cannot be checked against her private accounts. In addition, Hughes refused to be interviewed, and his sister Olwyn (Plath’s literary executor) would not grant the author permission to quote from Plath’s work. Wagner-Martin “had to limit quotations” severely to the small amount allowed by fair-use standards. The book suffers accordingly.

The Hughes’s decisions are unfortunate, as they seriously impede Plath scholarship. However, even within her limitations, I feel Wagner-Martin could have gone more deeply into the complexities of Plath’s life and writings; the book has a distanced, flat feel at times. Even so, it is a definite contribution to understanding the work of this important writer and poet.

Enid Dame is a poet and writer living in Brooklyn. Her latest book of poems is Lilith and Her Demons. She teaches at Rutgers University and Lehman College and is working on a novel.