REPRINTS

by Laura Hapke

George Eliot created Dorothea

Brooke, a fervent young woman who
sought not the advantages of upper-class
marriage but the vocation her role as a
well-bred Victorian woman denied her.
Ever the realist, in the same novel Eliot
presented the marital quest of women
more conformist than Dorothea, who, in
any event, achieves only a Pyrrhic victory
over the society that expects her to be de-
fined by wifely duty. Still, Eliot and her
contemporaries, among them Mrs. Oli-
phant and Louisa May Alcott, produced
works, some newly reprinted, that helped
shape what their period termed the Wo-
man Question: How should a woman live
in a society that restricts her from mean-
ingful employment?

By the end of the century, social and
literary rebellion against the Woman as
Helpmeet resulted in the fiction of the
New Woman. The new type is best ex-
emplified by the heroine of a recently re-
printed novel of the 1890s by Mona
Caird. Through her witty, restless pro-
tagonist, Caird calls into question the
Marriage Market philosophy on which,
she argues, the women of her time are still
reared. Ironically, more than three de-
cades after Caird and the anti-marriage
school of writers, E.M. Delafield, like
Jane Austen before her, chronicles the
British elite’s obsession with, as one soci-
ety matron put it, having one’s daughter
“meet all the right people.” Women may
have entered the work world outside the
charmed circles of the upper class, but
Delafield’s is a fascinating exploration of
the view that feminine vocation is a de-
feated admission of spinsterhood. In
seeming contrast, Delafield’s American
contemporary Ursula Parrott searches for
the voice of the Jazz Age through her dar-
ing divorcees. These women burn their
candles at both ends, yet find time for ca-
reers that, at the very least, pay the rent.
Parrott’s ex-wives have difficulty with the
independence that their collapsed mar-
riages and a Jazz Age culture have thrust
upon them. But they at least question the
fear of nonconformity that dominates the
eminently respectable heroines who peo-
ple so much of nineteenth-century British
and American fiction.

Discomfort with conformity, however,
surfaces in female characters well before
the 1920s, as Louisa May Alcott’s newly
rediscovered stories, collected in A Dou-
ble Life (Boston: Little, Brown, 1988,
$17.95, 246 pp.), demonstrate. Edited by

I: her greatest work, Middlemarch,

Sister Gin
by June Arnold

New York: The Feminist Press, 1989,
236 pp., $8.95 (PB)

To someone unfamiliar with feminist
writers of the 1960s and 1970s, this
funny, punny, experimental third novel
by June Arnold (pioneering lesbian nov-
elist and co-founder of Daughters, Inc.,
a feminist press) could easily be mistaken
for a new book. Sister Gin feels as fresh
and distinctive today as it did in 1975.
Arnold, who died in 1982, had a gift
for inventiveness and intellectual play.
Sister Gin stakes out its territory in the
midst of the lives of an aging, alcoholic
white Southern lesbian, her cronies,
and an old Black maid named Miss May.
Though replete with symbol and
almost frightening wordplay, Sister Gin
is never opaque. In fact, Arnold’s collo-
quial style and superb sense of story make
it delightfully accessible. Arnold’s com-
mentary on women’s lives is all the more
engaging because the nuances of class,
race, aging, gender, and sexuality are
bound inextricably into the North Car-
olina landscape. The physical setting of

22 @ Belles Lettres

Madeleine B. Stern, a veteran Alcott
scholar, the collection makes available
tales like “A Pair of Eyes; or, Modern
Magic,” in which an apparently model
wife gives over her fortune to an artist
husband who does not love her. Lovely
heiress Agatha Eure is not the wife for
Max Erdmann, and she suffers the tears
and ennui of the woman without vocation
other than wifehood: Her husband has a
life; she has not. What would be a typical
dissection of a failed marriage, however,
in Alcott’s skilled hands becomes a dark
tale of the psychology of female rage. The
sexual, political battle in which Agatha,
refusing to remain submissive, engages the
rejecting Max becomes, indeed, a war to
the death. Agatha discovers the sorceress
within her and proceeds to wreak venge-
ance on a once-commanding husband.

In a lighter vein, “Taming a Tartar”
explores the limits of male power by pit-
ting a strong-willed governess against the
intractable Russian prince who employs
her. The prince is “hard to manage, and
one must tread cautiously in approaching
him,” warns a terrified female relative,
reminding the new governess and period
audiences what it is to be a woman in a
patriarchal household. And though Mad-
emoiselle acknowledges to the prince that
women “early learn to suffer in silence,”
much of what ensues seems more like a
Victorian version of a Tracy-Hepburn film
than a confirmation of what she says. In
this and many of the other entertaining
tales brought together for the first time,
Alcott’s endings are traditional enough,
but her ability to dramatize the problem of
feminine submission is impressive.

In Miss Marjoribanks (New York:
Penguin/Virago, 1989, $8.95, 499 pp.)
and Phoebe, Junior (New York: Pen-
guin/Virago, 1989; $8.95, 341 pp.), Brit-
ish novelist Mrs. Oliphant’s young pro-
vincial ladies stay far more within the
bounds of propriety than Alcott’s seekers
of vengeance or adventure. Alcott was
diverting readers weary of virtuous wives
and dutiful daughters; Oliphant wittily
entertained her wide readership by placing
such familiar feminine types in socially
challenging situations and narrating their
certain triumph. The title character of her
1866 novel, Miss Marjoribanks, worships
what is proper. A self-appointed mistress
of her widowed father’s household, she
chooses decor, seating arrangements,
even recipes to give to the cook in the
same way a politician maps out a cam-
paign strategy. For Lucilla means to turn

the southeast is inseparable from the
emotional terrain of Southern women.

Arnold ably explores southern gen-
tility and white privilege without being
didactic. Weaving not-so-genteel men-
opausal hot flashes through the ups and
downs of lesbian relationships, the re-
pressive work environment of a book
reviewer for a North Carolina newspa-
per, and the relationship of the white
women with Miss May, the symptoms of
menopause become the positive symbols
of metamorphosis. Resisting neat reso-
lutions and easy solutions, the novel
ends with an opening: an implicit invi-
tation to purge our own hearts of racism.
“It’s a mighty funny use of the word fam-
ily when we don’t share nothing but the
bottle,” says Miss May, who has spent
her entire life serving a white family.

Those who missed Sister Gin when it
was first published will discover Arnold
at her best in this reissue. Those who
read and appreciated it in 1975 will want
to read it again through the filter of
time. Jane Marcus, who wrote the in-
sightful afterword, has done a real service
by introducing a new generation of fem-
inists to this important novel.

—Suzanne Scott

Carlingford into a salon where she reigns
as social arbiter and queen. Never does
she permit herself to think that what she
wants is to control the destinies of others;
this better adjusted antecedent of Hedda
Gabler is too busy stage-managing the
weak women and passive men with whom
she surrounds herself. Pinioned by Oli-
phant as a “woman with a mission,” Miss
M is completely at ease with a life of party
giving interrupted only by condescending
visits to inferiors and graced in time by a
shrewd marital alliance. To our eyes, hers
is a case of misdirected energy, but, be-
cause the novel is a rather comic one,
Oliphant cleverly offers us a woman who
has realized her destiny. A parody of the
Victorian woman as domestic angel, Lu-
cilla is not so much in love with her duty
as with herself.

Mrs. Oliphant

Ten years later, Mrs. Oliphant is still
fascinated by the control-hungry woman
who camouflages herself in noble motives.
But this time the quest for supremacy is
embodied in a more likable character.
Stalwart, pink-cheeked Phoebe Beech-
am, adored only child of a Dissenting
minister, sallies forth to secure her family
inheritance by a return to her mother’s
shopkeeper relatives in provincial Car-
lingford. Phoebe is both alarmed at these
uncouth members of her otherwise well-
heeled family and convinced that “noth-
ing could really humiliate her.” Nor can
it, for this Young Woman in the Prov-
inces makes her way quite well. Prejudice
against her as a religious Nonconformist, a
shopkeeper’s granddaughter, and even a
pretty young woman does not dampen her
determination to fulfill personal and fami-
ly ambitions. As the eminently cool-
headed Phoebe conquers snobbery, resists
a “bad match,” gains a good one, and
masterminds everything from protecting a
friend against a criminal action to ghost-
writing her husband’s Parliamentary
speeches, the reader wonders what she
might have done in the then-masculine
world of the professions. She may not beat
her wings against the cage of feminine
conformity, but to modern readers her
marital fate is indeed talent imprisoned.

Few women, unconsciously conflicted
or otherwise, people George Eliot’s curi-
ous 1878 novella Brother Jacob (New
York: Penguin/Virago, 1989, $5.95, 77
pp.). The characters of her earlier novel,
Middlemarch, ran the gamut from high-
minded spirituality to hypocritical corrup-
tion. The dishonest sugar merchant David
Faux, brother to Jacob in this short novel,
is clearly a member of the latter category.
Other heroes — or heroines — in this
blighted moral landscape there are none,
for the story concerns David’s theft of his
family’s money, his flight and return with
a new name, and his subsequent attempt
to rise in the world. The millstone around
his neck is an oafish retarded sibling, who
stumbles into the now-prosperous Faux’s
confectionery shop one day to bring un-
welcome memories and a good deal more.

The grasping man of commerce was a
staple of mid-nineteenth century realistic
fiction from Dickens to Balzac; perhaps a
villainous female entrepreneur might
have proved more riveting. For neither
the social-climbing David nor the insipid
Penelope Palfrey, whose “prettiness,” he

thought “comparable to the loveliest
things in confectionery” and whose “sub-
missive temper” completed her attrac-
tions, holds the reader’s attention for
long. Indeed, the hardheaded Mrs. Pal-
frey, though a minor character like her
daughter, is more vivid than the principal
one. She articulates the values that every-
one in the community, the duplicitous
David included, believes. Men are mer-
cantile creatures whose financial worth
determines their marital prospects; wo-
men’s looks and breeding — and some
good hard cash — define their market
worth. No valuables, no transaction. The
poetic justice with which Eliot concludes
the novel is in its own way satisfying, but
Brother Jacob’s fleeting analysis of a
woman who knows and perpetuates her
market-oriented world also repays our at-
tention.

Mona Caird wrote The Daughters of
Danaus (New York: The Feminist Press,
1989; $29.95, $11.95 PB, 539 pp.) in
1894 as a response to Mrs. Palfrey and her
real-life counterparts. What is the serene
conviction for Eliot’s unquestioning ma-
trons that, as Caird phrases it, a “woman
esteems it her highest privilege” to marry
well, tortures Caird’s aristocratic heroine
Hadria Temperley. The polemical novel
throbs with the urgencies of the 1890s, a
time of increased female access to higher
education and consequent dissatisfaction
with marriage as destiny. Thus well-bred
Hadria Fullerton, immured in a bleak
Scottish castle while her brothers go off to
the university, remarks with characteristic
wit: “Surely no creature was ever dealt
with so insanely as the well-brought-up
girl. I feel as if I could kill every man who
acquiesces in the present order of things.
It is an insult to every woman alive!”
These are strong words, but at first they
prove empty ones, for Hadria succumbs to
family pressure and, much like Caird her-
self, marries “well.” Years later, her dis-
content has not abated. On motherhood
(she has two sons): “Name me a position
more abject”; on the married woman:
“once a woman, now a thing.” Hadria’s
“solution” to the problem of wedlock must
have been even more shocking to the
conservative reader than her acerbic
quips. She hints at divorce and moves to
Paris with a little girl she has adopted.
Pursuing a musical career and mothering a
child over whom her husband has no con-
trol, she lives out a fantasy of womanly
freedom defiant of — or spurred by — the
disapproval of her circle back in England.

Although the novel tends toward
polemic, Caird had a brilliant under-
standing of the psychic conflicts and social
pressures that shape a would-be New
Woman’s life. Hadria’s final decision, a
response to events at home, will puzzle
some readers and trouble others. But as a
chronicle of a woman about to enter the
twentieth century, Daughters of Danaus is
noteworthy.

E.M. Delafield’s 1927 novel, The
Way Things Are (New York: Penguin/
Virago, 1989, $7.95, 336 pp.), easily the
most enjoyable of this crop of reprints,
updates Hadria and her problems. The
setting is a prosperously middle-class
household within commuting distance of
London. Like Hadria, Delafield’s charac-
ter is clever, frustrated, and the mother of
two attention-claiming little boys. Unlike
her, Laura Temple is a modern woman
who manages to combine a fairly lucrative
writing career with the demands of super-
vising the house: nurses, cooks, cleaning
women. (No solidarity with working-class
women here!) What makes the book so
readable is Delafield’s ability to present
her heroine’s tug of war with desire as if
Laura herself were addressing us:

Laura knew that she and Alfred were what
is called “happily married.” Only somehow,
Laura was not happy, and she sometimes
felt that perhaps Alfred was not happy, ei-
ther, although he did not seem to think

about it a great deal. . . . She wanted a life
— an emotional life — of her own.

Spring 1990