Impressions

by Janet Palmer Mullaney et al.

Briefly Noted

® Lupe, a Mexican immigrant, and  
Stas, her Polish-born husband, live deep  
in the heart of Texas. How they got  
there is unclear, but there they are, sur-  
rounded by family and friends, in the  
offbeat, almost voyeuristic look at het-  
erosexual marriage found in Lone Stars  
by Sophia Healey (Atlantic Monthly  
Press, $16.95, 169 pp.).

Stas, a painter of no repute, plays the  
stock market, voraciously poring over  
tables and charts and speculating wildly,  
albeit successfully. Lupe, twenty years  
younger, is, at twenty-six, already com-  
ing into her own as an artist, achieving  
moderate success and making something  
of a name for herself. Career conflict  
alone would have provided ample fodder  
for a novel, but Healy does not stop  
here. Exploring sexuality, we are  
brought into close range, questioning,  
as they do, monogamy, bisexuality, and  
loyalty.

There are no easy answers in Lone  
Stars. Chapters alternate in each part-  
ner’s voice, with one chapter from Go-  
sia, an important friend to the couple.  
As their thoughts are shared and their  
emotions laid bare, we are pushed to as-  
sess our relationships, to think about  
love and life, and to wonder about what  
it is we have settled for. Luckily, humor,  
pathos, frustration, and exhilaration  
blend in this slice-of-life romance, mak-  
ing it enjoyable as well as painful, in-  
triguing as well as passé. Always engag-  
ing and well drawn, this is a first novel of  
substance. One is left craving more.

—Eleanor J. Bader

® In 1976, Mary Crow wondered  
about the role women poets actually  
played in the Latin American literary  
renaissance popularly known as “The  
Boom.” Despite the earlier influence of  
well-known poets such as Delmira  
Agustini, Alfonsina Storni, Gabriela  
Mistral, and Juana de Ibarbourou,  
women were not considered to be cen-  
tral to the Boom. Crow was concerned  
that their voices were not being heard —  
with the possible exception of Gabriela  
Mistral, who in 1945 was the first Latin  
American of either gender to win the  
Nobel Prize for Literature. (The bulk of  
her work has yet to be translated.)

Crow gathered the names, books,  
translators, and grants necessary to pro-  
duce the fine bilingual anthology  
Woman Who Has Sprouted Wings:  
Poems by Contemporary Latin  
American Women Poets (Pittsburgh:  
Latin American Literary Review Press,  

$13.95, 205 pp.). She amply demon-  

strates that women shared in the Boom.  
A particularly felicitous result of her la-  
bor is the high quality of translations,  
making this poetry accessible to many  
North American readers for the first  
time. The book, which won an award  
from Columbia University’s translation  
center while still in manuscript, in-  
cludes the work of established and new  
translators whose skill at choosing words  
and phrases from a range of highly nu-  
anced alternatives is delightfully obvious  
in their succinct, rhythmic recreations  
of the poets’ works.

The seventeen poets anthologized  
here write of love and friendship, of iso-  
lation and family, of revolution and  
peace, of work, religion, and nature. As  
one poet, Alejandra Pizarnik, says, “I  
write against fear” and “the silence of  
compression, the silence of mere being.”  
Writing presents these women with  
powerful possibilities for change, as ex-  
emplified in this verse by Renata Pal-  
lottini:

To write on my way  
as I live.

To cut out profiles  
of words;

to draw with letters  
tough statements  
that cannot be said  
(nor thought).

To write

the keys.

Only later

find what they open.

Crow’s introduction and biographical  
sketches, while insightful, do not pro-  
vide enough bibliographic information,  
should the reader wish to obtain more of  
the poet’s work. This book and the few  
others of its ilk are only an auspicious  
beginning. There are many more Latin  
American women poets to be discovered  
or recovered and translated. We need to  
correct the cultural centrism that has  
permitted female writers from other cul-  
tures to remain obscure (if not sup-  
pressed or silenced) while awaiting a  
scholarly practice that embraces the  
heterogeneity of human experience.

—Linda I. Koski

® It may seem strange to find Dante  
Gabriel Rossetti here among the  
women, but Alice Craig Faxon’s splen-  
did biography (Abbeville Press, 1989,  
265 pp, $80) warrants a mention. More  
than 250 works are reproduced here, a  
copious but carefully edited selection  
that complements the text even as the  
rich colors and evocative compositions  
distract.

Faxon is an art historian and descen-  
dant of the Rossetti family, and her en-  
thusiasm for her subject is evident in her  
lively narrative, which leads the reader  

SANUS

Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum

A collection of papers, bibliographies, and syllabi on the  
integration of gender, race, and class into the general  
curriculum, Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum will appeal to  
anyone active in or interested in higher education.

Literature, the arts, the classics, exercise and sports  
studies, science and technology, social sciences, and enlisting  
administrative and faculty support are just some of the areas  

represented.

Toward a More Inclusive Curriculum (ISBN 0-9623277-0-0) is  
available in a 124-page, 8½ x 11 paperbound format for  
$12.95 (+ $1.95 shipping and handling) — a 25% discount off  
the cover price when this ad is used or mentioned. Send  

check or purchase order to  

EPHEMERA: PROCEEDINGS OF WOMEN'S CONFERENCES  
Attn: Order Dept., 6300 Rockhurst Rd., Bethesda MD 20817.

“I realized that just when my students were at the peak  
of their own self-conscious quests for identity  
as young women, I had been presenting a syllabus  
that offered not one female writer.” —Gail C. Holian

Spring 1990

La Ghirlandata by Dante Gabriel Rossetti  
(1873), modeled by Alexa Wilding.

through the gallery of prints. It takes a  
strong writer to breathe new life into the  
old tales of the Pre-Raphaelite Brother-  
hood, but a new twist is Faxon’s empha-  
sis on the life and work of artist Elizabeth  
Siddal, who worked among the Pre-  
Raphaelites for many years, and married  
Rossetti at the end of her life. Several  
prints of her work are also included in  
the collection, but it would be of interest  
to see her life chronicled some day.

I was inclined to wonder where the  
poems the artist was said to have written  
for many of his paintings had got to;  
Rossetti’s cryptic commentary on his  
own works would have been a welcome  
addition to an otherwise thorough  
study. An early critic of Dante Rossetti  
groused that his paintings “require not  
only titles but footnotes.” A century  
later, Faxon’s scholarly and entertaining  
study so enhances the meaning and  
splendor of Rossetti’s work that she  
nearly proves the critic correct.

—Andrea Dale Lapin

® Marjory Stoneman Douglas turned  
100 this year! She was an ardent envi-  
ronmentalist before it was hip (back  
when it was “hep”). The University of  
North Florida Press has reissued some of  
her fiction (published originally in the  
Saturday Evening Post) under the title  
Nine Florida Stories by Marjory Stone-  
man Douglas. I heard an NPR commen-  
tator interviewing her on her birthday  
(April 7). In response to a question  
about why she never remarried after an  
early marriage ended in divorce, she said  
something to the effect that marriage  
and sex just didn’t do it for her. The in-  
terviewer couldn’t stomach that and  
kept pressing her to qualify that or admit  
that she’d lost out on something. She  
finally squelched him by politely saying  
that she had a hell of a lot of other things  
to occupy her and if other people  
thought that stuff was important, it was  
fine by her.

® The publication of Women on  
Women: An Anthology of Lesbian  
Short Fiction (NAL, $9.95, 320 pp.,  
PB) will be a boon to people who have  
not taken advantage of the plethora of  
such fiction available from lesbian/  
feminist presses, but for those who have,  
the collection will be redundant. Editors  
Joan Nestle and Naomi Holoch ac-  
knowledge the unprecedented work of  
these publishers and encourage people to  
support them, even as they make their  
work available to a more mainstream  
audience. One of the stories, “In the  
Life” by Becky Birtha, was also selected  
for a new anthology from Pantheon en-  
titled (grandiosely enough) We Are the  
Stories We Tell: The Best Short Sto-  
ries by North American Women Since  
1945 (edited by Wendy Martin, Panth-  
eon Books, $12.95, 333 pp.). Rah  
Becky! Maybe I’m just too darn jaded  
and critical, but the schema for the lat-  
ter book seems a little obvious and pre-  

dictable: We have the story on abortion  
by Alice Walker, the story on threaten-  
ing, awakening sexuality by Joyce Carol  
Oates, the story on childbirth by Mar-  
garet Atwood. And I know from being  
on literary panels that others share my  
complaint of encountering the same old  
round in anthologies. They’re not ex-  
actly bad pennies, but they sure turn up.  
Who is being left out?

® A good way to catch up with what  
an invaluable literary magazine has been  
publishing over the last twelve years is to  
pick up the sixteenth volume of  
Conditions: A Retrospective ($8.95,  
177 pp., PB), a priceless anthology of  
past issues that “offers ground-breaking  
writings by Audre Lorde, Gloria  
Anzaldúa, Barbara Smith, Paula Gunn  
Allen, and others.” This is a vital vol-  
ume to own, packed with stunners. In  
recent issues, Conditions has been focus-  
ing on international writing.

Cleora Butler in the 1930s

® Council Oaks Books has published  
in an oversize paperback a gorgeous book  
they originally brought out in 1985 enti-  
tled Cleora’s Kitchens: A Memoir of a  
Cook & Eight Decades of Great  
American Food by Cleora Butler. Be-  
sides the large illustrations of the ap-  
purtenances of cooking and the 300 rec-  
ipes spanning eighty years of personal  
and professional cooking are boxed in-  
serts chronicling changing culinary cus-  
toms, such as the following on “Making  
a Plain Cake”:

“Make a plain cake in the usual manner”  
was a well-understood directive in the days  
before packaged cake mixes. It meant to  
cream butter and sugar until they were  
fluffy and then beat in eggs or egg yolks  
one at a time, followed by any flavoring  
to be used. Next milk was added and (if  
the eggs had been separated) beaten egg  
whites were folded in. Last, the flour  
(sifted with salt and leavening) was beaten  
in “by degrees.” The cook was required to  
beat continuously from beginning to end  
of the process.

Here is an interesting Eggplant Soufflé  
recipe from the 1930s (sorry, it hasn’t  
been tested in the BL kitchens):

3 pounds eggplant

3 cups water

1 tablespoon vinegar

3 tablespoons butter

2 tablespoons flour

1 cup milk

1 cup fine bread crumbs

3 egg yolks, slightly beaten

1 cup chopped pecans

1 large green pepper, finely chopped

4 pounds aged Cheddar cheese

½ teaspoon coarse black pepper

¼ teaspoon cayenne

3 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Pare, cube and boil eggplant in water  
with vinegar for 30 minutes. Pour into a  
colander and drain well. Make cream  
sauce of butter, flour and milk. Add sauce  
to well-drained eggplant, mixing thor-  
oughly. Add bread crumbs, egg yolks,  
pecans and green pepper to eggplant mix-  
ture.

Grate cheese, reserving ½ cup to  
sprinkle on top of soufflé. Stir balance of  
cheese into mixture. Season to taste with  
pepper and cayenne. Fold in egg whites.  
Pour into well-buttered 3-quart casserole  
and bake in 350 degree oven for 45 min-  
utes. Serves 8 to 10.

Belles Lettres @ 29