Disobedient Daughters

Anzia Yezierska: A Writer’s Life, by Louise Levitas Henriksen (with assistance from JoAnn Boydston). New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1988, $20.95, 327 pp.  
Agnes Smedley: The Life and Times of an American Radical, by Janice R. MacKinnon and Stephen R. MacKinnon. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988, $25, 425 pp.

by Janet Zandy

One was a Jewish immigrant from Poland, the other was a multigenerational American who spent most of her adult life outside the United States, particularly in China. Yet each, in her own way, was quintessentially American.

Anzia Yezierska and Agnes Smedley survived childhoods of abject poverty to become writers. Yezierska had ten years as a nationally known storyteller of immigrant life, and then the Depression came and she was out of vogue. Smedley’s books and articles were all but erased during the McCarthy era. Each published autobiographical novels: Yezierska’s Bread Givers in 1925, Smedley’s Daughter of Earth in 1929. Each tasted the sweet/bitter contradictions of America — what is promised and what is delivered.

Louise Levitas Henriksen’s story of her mother’s life, Anzia Yezierska: A Writer's Life, is not so much a biography of facts and dates as of human intimacy and dialogue. Henriksen’s technique is to interweave her mother’s writing, taken from her published work and her letters, with her own chronological account of Yezierska’s birth, middle age, and death as a writer. She does not gloss over her mother’s faults (which were plenty) or her failure as a mother. (Yezierska was incapable of mothering anyone or anything but her work.) The emphasis is on what Yezierska struggled to be until her death at the age of about ninety — an American writer.

Henriksen begins with a question, “Who was she?” She reprints a 1922 newspaper clipping about the romantic figure of Anzia Yezierska and her rise from rags to riches. Although the book is broken into three sweeping movements in Yezierska’s life — ambition, success, and failure — the biographer resists the temptation of casting Yezierska as a heroine in a Yiddish-American melodrama. Rather, Henriksen allows us to discover Anzia Yezierska through a cinematic focus on key events.

One was Yezierska’s relationship with John Dewey. The intense, unruly Yezierska burst into the office of Dewey, her American Anglo-Saxon Adam, and challenged him to test his educational theories with reality, her reality. The relationship itself was short-lived, but its impact lasted all Yezierska’s life. Dewey was for her “the necessary listener,” the catalyst who enabled her to believe in herself as a writer.

The daughter/biographer becomes the storyteller’s storyteller; there is a fine sense of immediacy in the narration. It is easy to forget that Yezierska is dead and that her daughter is herself in her mid-seventies. To illustrate the contradictions in Yezierska’s character, Henriksen reprints samples of her mother’s handwriting. The letters are huge and sweeping, but we can imagine the tremulousness behind the polite language. Yezierska battled loneliness and self-doubt all her life, yet always insisted on the legitimacy of her own voice and on her right to be an artist.

Anzia Yezierska wanted the chance for self-transformation. Agnes Smedley wanted social and economic transformation. She called herself “a real American democrat” and would probably have resisted the word hero, but for many of us, Smedley is a hero.

Agnes Smedley wrote six books and hundreds of articles; was an advocate journalist out of the Tom Paine mold; participated in the campaign for Indian independence; lived and worked in the heart of the Chinese revolution; was active in the birth control movement; hated authoritarianism in any form; and was friend or political companion to Emma Goldman, Kathe Kollwitz, Nehru, Mao, Zhou Enlai, Ding Ling, Margaret Sanger, Roger Baldwin, and many more. Yet, she is better known in China, where she truly found her personal and professional home, than in her country of birth.

Agnes Smedley: The Life and Times of an American Radical puts the many strands of Smedley’s complex and peripatetic life into historical context. It took fourteen years to complete and is based on numerous interviews; scourings of FBI files; and journeys to Europe, India, and China. No doubt it will be viewed as the standard reference work on Smedley’s life.

Circumstances of time and place propelled Smedley onto the world stage. Circumstances of birth, on a dirt farm in Missouri, fueled her fury at all institutionalized forms of oppression. She understood political power; she predicted the war in Korea. And in December of 1946 she presciently wrote: “America is becoming a vast militaristic imperialism. ... There are powerful reactionaries in this country ... and the most dangerous are the agents of the great banks and corporations.”

The MacKinnons are historians who painstakingly show the intersections of public history with Smedley’s private history. The reader is saturated with historical details and welcomes those interruptions of fact with excerpts from Smedley’s letters and journalism.

Smedley was a writer, a powerful one. Too powerful for the tastes of American magazine publishers. When she returned to New York in 1942, she hoped to establish herself as an authority on China, but one by one her articles were rejected. She refused to tone them down and to be ideologically acceptable. She once wrote about her writing, “I lack the proper approach to writing. Instead of a perfectly balanced sentence . . . I see armies of barefoot peasants . . . reaching for the stars of humanity but being shot to death for their endeavors.”

Smedley died in England at the age of fifty-eight after a purportedly “successful” operation. She saw herself “in exile” from the United States and said in a final letter, “I have had but one loyalty, one faith, and that was to the liberation of the poor and the oppressed.”

Neither Smedley nor Yezierska would do the expedient thing. Nor would they romanticize the poor. It is precisely because they were not working-class Cinderellas that they have so much to teach us about feminism and class struggle.

Janet Zandy teaches at Rochester Institute of Technology and is editing an anthology of writing by working-class women.

—Mansfield, continued from page 17

new biographical data may have for the interpretation of Mansfield’s work and creative processes. Mansfield’s gonorrhea must have contributed to the themes of disgust with sex and childbearing that move through many of her stories. Her preoccupation with the secret lives of her characters may well have been intensified by a guilty awareness of her hidden disease. That disease must have made her New Zealand childhood seem more remote than ever, convincing her that, despite her pangs of homesickness, she could never return. She must have known that the only way she could preserve and possess her early memories was to write them down. She did so with such an extraordinary combination of nostalgic tenderness and unsentimental clarity that “Prelude” and “At the Bay” remain two of the most beautiful stories of family life in English. The shame of Mansfield’s early plagiarism might help to explain why her work lacks a cumulative quality and seems instead to leap forward, then to sag, then to leap again.

Despite the lack of discussion of the implications of Mansfield’s gonorrhea and plagiarism on her work, this is a remarkable biography. Tomalin has discovered vital new parts to this complex life and has pieced them together into a sympathetic, yet objective, whole. She has not only lifted Mansfield out of the milk jug of sentimentality, she has cleared the way for new readings of her stories and new thoughts about how they evolved.

Anne L. McLaughlin teaches English at American University, where she got her Ph.D. She has written articles on Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield. Her first novel will appear in 1989.

Note: This year is the centenary of Mansfield’s birth in Wellington, New Zealand.

Fall 1988

Slinkies, Cold Cream, Compacts, and Pincushions

How to Prepare for Your High-School Reunion, by Susan Allen Toth. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988, $16.95, 237 pp.

by Elizabeth R. Baer

Susan Allen Toth, author of two well-received memoirs, had expected middle age to be “a vast dull expanse, something like a big gray parking lot baking in the sun.” Her new book How to Prepare for Your High-School Reunion celebrates her discovery that “this phase of American life had been transformed... was quite unpredictable and full of incident.” This volume of essays — witty, poignant, incisive, moving — is perfect for reading in a hammock on a drowsy summer day, or on a getaway weekend.

In a recent telephone interview, I asked Toth whom she envisioned as her audience. She responded that, although she writes for both women and men, her voluminous mail from readers runs two to one female to male. “I think of my readers as having a sense of humor, as caring, sensitive, intelligent, as receptive and friendly. They are older, going to high school and college reunions. What I write often jogs their memories.”

If the title essay has left you curious, you will be relieved to know the five easy steps to prepare for your high school reunion are: 1) dieting, 2) choosing what to wear, 3) memorizing your high school yearbook, 4) deciding what to reveal about yourself, and 5) taking along photographs, not to show others but to console yourself.

Toth’s essays capture the essence of an emotion or event. As a person who took up exercise at thirty-five, did a triathlon at thirty-eight, and is now learning to sail at forty-two, I loved her chapters on physical exercise at mid-life. “Sure You Can Learn to Ski; Or, Fear and Guilt in the Rocky Mountains” describes Toth’s internal battle between feminist consciousness (“Remember how girls weren’t encouraged to do anything athletic? Remember how in your thirties you discovered you loved to swim, hike and bicycle? Of course you can do it”) and her first experience of being at the top of a ten-thousand-foot peak (“I suddenly realized at that exact moment I was scared of heights”). I also loved Toth’s chapter on moving, as I moved frequently as a child and ten times in twenty years of marriage. “I found it hard to get rid of anything,” she says. “Many of my excess things spoke to me reproachfully about good intentions gone sour. . . ; other oddments remind me of past hopeful images of myself.”

“Dime-Store Dreams” is full of loving detail, as Toth recounts the contents of a 1950s “five and ten”: candy, clay, Slinkies, pots and pans, rolls of oilcloth, bolts of fabric, school supplies, glass dividers that separated “frivolous party goods, gaily colored napkins, candles, and sugary cake decorations.” The list goes on: cold cream, compacts, foundations, rouge, zippers, thread, pincushions, Simplicity patterns.

Such particularity yields clues about Toth’s literary mentors: She is indebted to Thoreau and E.B. White. “Thoreau showed me what clean, tough style could be like, although my own style is not at all like Thoreau’s. Walden was one of the first nonfiction works I read as a young adult which seemed to me to have contemporary and direct relevance. He’s a moral guide I measure myself against. He touches all my sources of guilt about living in a lavish society in a larger world of hunger and horror.” Toth went on to explain that part of the intent of this book of essays is to assess in mid-life “what this is all for.” Another important influence has been Maine writer Sarah Orne Jewett. “She showed me what writing about small things could be like; details glow in her prose; she values the quiet domestic life and shares with the reader a longing for peace and tranquility.”

Toth’s essays are comforting, reassuring. Readers will not find the startling or innovative, as the chapter “Up With ‘Domestic’” explains. Finally, these are permission-giving essays: They affirm the pleasures and losses of living the first half-century of our lives.

Elizabeth R. Baer is provost and professor of English at Washington College in Chestertown, Maryland. She has published essays on Margaret Atwood, Jean Rhys, Mary Lee Settle, women’s autobiography, and children’s literature.

Belles Lettres @ 19