Smiling, Snarling Life

The Evening Wolves, by Joan Chase.  
New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux,  
1989, $18.95, 295 pp.

by Suzanne Berne

“¢ ad admits he was born to

gripe and give everybody a

hard time,” says daughter  
Margy early in Joan Chase’s The Evening  
Wolves. Margy is twelve at this point,  
and “everybody” refers to her younger  
sister, Ruthann, and baby brother,  
Tommy. After their mother dies, the  
three are left with their handsome, feck-  
less, failed-musician father, Francis,  
who does indeed give them a hard time.  
His realization that “he was born to  
gripe” doesn’t keep him from doing so,  
nor does his children’s misery stop him  
from insulting them and being cruel.  
“We're not to take him seriously,” says  
Margy, but she can’t ignore his taunts  
about her weight, her poor schoolwork,  
her precocious femininity. Neither can  
Ruthann ignore him when he dunks her  
in a lake, nearly drowning her, because  
she had hung onto his neck while they  
were swimming. A frustrated single par-  
ent can do terrible things, but Francis is  
so unpredictable that no one knows  

what will set him off. His jokes and play-  
ing turn ugly and violent before anyone  
has time to realize his mood has  
changed.

Rightfully convinced that he cannot  
care for his children alone, Francis de-  
cides to marry Gloria, a beautiful young  
widow who desperately wants a family.  
It is not long before he is giving her a  
hard time, too. Because the girls also  
mistreat her, Gloria’s life is difficult.  
However, she manages to carry on even  

Joan Chase. Photo by Jerry Bauer

A Blade of Time

The Fourth Dimension: Interviews with Christa Wolf. Translated by Hilary Pilkington,  
with an introduction by Karin McPherson. New York: Verso, 1989, $39.95 (HB),  

$14.95 (PB), 177 pp.

Accident: A Day’s News, by Christa Wolf. Translated by Heike Schwarzbauer and Rick  
Takvorian. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1989, $15.95, 113 pp.

by Nikki Lee Manos

Christa Wolf, a citizen of the  

German Democratic Republic,  

has achieved international stat-  
us as one of the leading visionary women  
writers of our time. Indeed, in her  
deeply personal, highly experimental  
novels, notably Cassandra, The Quest for  
Christa T., A Model Childhood, and No  
Place on Earth, she appears to have an-  
swered in advance the recent call by  
feminist critics for women writers to  
forge narrative strategies independent of  
the male-dominated literary establish-  
ment. In The Fourth Dimension, a series  
of interviews and conversations span-  
ning a decade, Wolf openly discusses  
what it means to be a woman and a  
writer, repeatedly insisting that the au-  
thor must not be absent from her own  
work. In Accident, her latest novel, she  
gives us a haunting meditation on the  
Chernobyl nuclear accident.

Wolf is not concerned with celebrat-  
ing women’s erotic impulses or familial  
duties. Her greatest concern in the last  
decade, as she declared in a 1983 con-  
versation recorded in The Fourth Dimen-  
sion, has been the fear she sees dominat-  
ing our view of the future. Indeed, as she  
pointed out in a 1984 interview, the  
presence of nuclear warheads in Europe  
has greatly influenced her life. In her  
metaphor, this “blade of time hanging  
over” humanity is what has motivated  
her most recent work.

Such statements from The Fourth  
Dimension supply us with a ready intro-  
duction to Accident. The narrator tracks  
the poisonous cloud of nuclear-con-  
taminated particles spreading over  
Europe the day after the Chernobyl ca-  
tastrophe. We listen along with her to  
the hourly news reports on the radio,  
“chopped up and refashioned” for public  
consumption. We learn of the experts  
“shooting up out of the ground like  
mushrooms” with reports designed to  
ease our fears. We are also reminded that  
the mushrooms will not be edible this  
season. Eggs, if we are to eat them,  
should not be too fresh, not “yesterday  
fresh.” And absolutely no milk.

34 Belles Lettres

As these details suggest, the narra-  
tor’s greatest battle is with her growing  
anxiety. We watch her fears cast a pall  
over the day as ominous as the cloud’s  
actual shadow. As a defensive measure,  
she plants sorrel, lettuce, and spinach  
seeds without wearing gloves, although  
she no longer has any appetite for fresh  
vegetables. She also checks the stable to  
make sure the wooden table can still be  
reassembled so that, once summer re-  
turns, she can invite family and friends  
to eat outside. Despite these reassuring  
actions, she cannot eliminate from her  
thoughts the impression of a “glowing  
core.” Suddenly, she selects her olive-  
wood salad utensils, throws them into  
the corner, picks them up, and throws  
them again, over and over.

The narrator’s frustration over Cher-  
nobyl is intensified because on this very  
day her brother is undergoing brain sur-  
gery. She feels she must be strong, in  
control, to support him in his ordeal as  
he faces the surgeon’s knife. Her task is  
not easy. How can she trust her brother’s  
doctors when she despises the scientists  
responsible for nuclear energy? How can  
she wait patiently for her sister-in-law’s  
phone call when she must confront  
those hourly news bulletins? Is modern  
science meant to save or destroy life?  
Are the means of communication at our  
disposal meant to enhance our sense of  
community or distort it?

Wolf does not supply us in Accident  
with easy answers to these questions, but  
her focus is clear in the helplessness her  
narrator experiences — as well as the  
strength she exhibits. In short, Wolf  
weaves for us impressions and memories  
(of Hiroshima, the “Star Wars” pro-  
gram, the Holocaust, the movie The  
Return of the Jedi) into a narrative tapes-  
try that in its completeness calls for a  
new set of values, a new way of life. As  
she repeatedly declares in The Fourth  
Dimension, we must cut through social  
structures that offer us only “false alter-  
natives.”

@ Nikki Lee Manos teaches at Mary-  
mount College in Tarrytown, New York.

after Francis wrecks her new car in a fit of  
pique, an accident that leaves her with  
fearsome headaches and crossed vision.  
Tommy is the reason she persists; she has  
declared herself his “mother,” leaving  
the girls for Francis to deal with. “Of  
course any father would like the status  
quo,” she says of Francis, “his daughters  
all to himself, trailing after him, work-  
ing overtime to impress him.” Yet she  
also trails after Francis, trying to figure  
out if he is having affairs, plotting to win  
his love and admiration.

The reader quickly decides that Fran-  
cis does not deserve love and admira-  
tion. But because he is so central to all  
the other characters in this novel, he  
becomes important to us — if only be-  
cause we want to figure out the power he  
seems to hold over everyone. And, like  
many dangerous people, Francis is  
charming when he wants to be.

As with Chase’s first novel, the  
much-acclaimed During the Reign of the  
Queen of Persia, The Evening Wolves is  
told from multiple points of view. We  
hear from the girls, from Tommy (even  
when he is five), from Gloria — from  
everyone, in fact, but Francis. Because  
Francis is the only one who doesn’t take  

Christa Wolf.  
©Hermann Luchterhand Verlag

pains to explain himself, he emerges as  
the most complex and interesting char-  
acter. He is the chief wolf of the title:  
elusive, erratic, vicious, glamorous.  
One of Margy’s earliest memories is of  

him hiding in the dark living room  
“snapping and growling,” calling “come  
here, little girl.” Like the other “wolves”  
that assail these characters — careless  
sex, poverty, violence, and death —  
Francis launches surprise attacks; life is  
smiling one instant, snarling the next.  
As the years pass, the girls especially  
grow more insecure and bewildered,  
harming themselves as they try to escape  
the pain at home.

Chase is in love with language, and  
her style is sometimes breathtaking.  
However, her characters occasionally  
present their stories in language that is  
simply not believable. Early on Margy  
says, “I feel the lonesomeness of our life  
in the house in the dark where we lie by  
the fire in No Man’s Land, company for  
a disappointed man.” Although the  
rhythm and imagery are lovely here, a  
twelve-year-old does not speak, write,  
or even think like this. After Francis  
wrecks the car, five-year-old Tommy  
says, “Then Dad’s resting his head on  
the steering wheel and it’s quiet, only  
the leaves brushing over the roof, the  
wind blowing in the trees like we’ve  
come all the way to Dad’s grave.”  
Again, we cannot reconcile the sophis-  
tication of these constructions with the  
supposed immaturity of the characters,  
no matter how nice it all sounds. Per-  
haps if Chase had chosen to tell her story  
from an omniscient point of view, she  
could have kept such lilting prose; as it  
is, in the mouths and minds of the char-  
acters she has chosen, her language too  
often sounds inflated.

Yet The Evening Wolves comes as a  
relief in this age of deadpan fiction.  
Chase’s style is at times dreamy and ele-  
giac, at other times sharp-eyed and  
blunt. “Of course Ruthann wouldn’t  
know what was best for her if she met it  
decked out in brass and leading a band,”  
says Gloria. Ruthann says of her father,  
“His golden eyes gave me a chill like he  
was an idol brought to light in a cave.”  
Like Francis himself, this is a novel full  
of unpredictable appeal.

® Suzanne Berne is a writer living in  
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

SS “TRACKS

“may be the

“Ms. Erdrich artfully sifts  
the miraculous through the  
mundane....[Her] novels, regional  
in the best sense, are ‘about’ the  
experience of Native Americans the  
way Toni Morrison's are about black  
people, William Faulkner’s and  
Eudora Welty's about the South, Philip  
Roth's and Bernard Malamud’s about  
the Jews. The specificity implies  
nothing provincial or small.””  
—New York Times Book Review

Michael Dorris

$8.95 ry

PERENNIAL LIBRARY  
LL

HARPER & ROW PUBLISHERS

story of our time”

—Los Angeles Times

“[Erdrich] is like one of those  
rumored drugs that are instantly  
and forever addictive.”

— Chicago Tribune

Fart 1989

——— |