An Invented Conversation

If You Want to Write: A Book About Art, Independence, and Spirit, by Brenda Ueland.  
Graywolf Press (P.O. Box 75006, St. Paul, MN 55175), 1987, $6.50, 179 pp. (PB)

by Carla Seaquist

The following is an imagined interview with  
Brenda Ueland (1891-1985), a writer and  
teacher, written by Carla Seaquist upon  
reading If You Want to Write, first pub-  
lished in 1938 and now republished.

Miss Ueland, T.S. Eliot said that writing in  
the 20th century is “a raid on the inarticu-  

late.”

Writing is simply putting [one’s]  
thoughts on paper. That is all there is to  
it. I know what I say is true, because it is  
true to me and therefore I say it freely  
and you must have it.

You’re as emphatic as my English teacher  
Miss Saari, but she had the advantage of  
imparting codified Rules of Grammar (the  
exceptions to which gave her “the pip” —  
your term). But Rules of Writing? Are  
there any? Instead of manuals, the great  
writers send us bulletins from the front. You  
know, Eudora Welty’s “What we know  
about writing the novel is the novel.” Not  
that you provide rules so much as a set of  
cheers, itself very helpful.

Be careless, reckless! Be a lion, be a  
pirate, when you write!

But, your book lacks organization: You set  
out your ducks, promising “More later,”  
but don’t assemble them; chapter headings  
don’t always deliver; your summary intro-  
duces new material.

I wouldn’t think of planning the book  
before I write it. You write, and plan it  
afterwards.

But what really sticks are your claims.  
Among other things, you promise the Nobel  
by noon!

I said “in ten years.”

B-b-but, you can’t say that! It undercuts  
your book’s good points.

Which are?

“Writing is not a performance but a  
generosity.” Lovely. And: “Art must be  
truly felt and cannot be willed.” And Van  
Gogh’s idea of working from “very deep,  
serious affection.”

And?

“Work freely and rollickingly as though  
talking to a friend who loves you.”  
And: “Keep a slovenly, headlong, impul-  
sive, honest diary.” I also admire your exal-  
tation of the Imagination, taking Blake’s  
“Imagination is the Divine Body in Every  
Man” as scripture. And this: “Inspiration  
does not come like a bolt, nor is it kinetic,  
energetic striving, but it comes into us  
slowly and quietly and all the time.”

What else?

Deflecting “fussy-mussy criticism” — I love  
it — and “that American pastime known as  
kidding,” from parents, older brothers (“the  
greatest sneerers of all”), teachers, hus-  
bands. And your advice to writing mothers.  

Yes. If you would shut your door  
against the children for an hour a day  
and say: “Mother is working on her five-  
act tragedy in blank verse!” you would  
be surprised how they would respect  
you.

However, you skimp on the topic of acquir-  
ing a voice.

If you speak or write from yourself you  
cannot help being original.

Yes, well, that’s this century’s tough nut:  
locating the self, so often found to be mute  
or a ventriloquist. You devote just two  
paragraphs to it.

I myself seem to be so many different  
people, sometimes a man, sometimes a  
woman, a murderer, a whiner, a  
mother, a simpering lady, an old rip, a  
minister, a burglar, a lion, a weasel.

Could you elaborate?

Brenda Ueland. Photo by Art Hager, courtesy  
of Minneapolis Star & Tribune.

The only way to find your true self is  
by recklessness and freedom. If you feel  
like a murderer... write like one....  
“Violent Passions emit the Real, Good  
and Perfect Tones,” said Blake.

About Blake’s elevation of Enthusiasm over  
Reason: Not that you debunk Reason en-  
tirely, but I do think we could use more  
Reason these days.

“Mere Enthusiasm is the All in All,”  
said Blake. I must tell you this often.

Somebody told Ollie North often enough. Who?

Sorry. About your biography: Miss Ue-  
land, you're a veritable exclamation point  
in an age of ellipses. Let’s see, daughter of  
feminists...

I was born with a birth defect: No  
herd instinct!

You lived in the Village in its bohemian  
days, during which time you introduced  
bobbed hair?

I can prove it. I told [the barber] to  
cut my hair all off..., “like Lord  
Byron’s — as if a high wind were blow-  
ing from the rear.”

You had three husbands, a child, a hundred-  
plus affairs.

But never with a married man unless  
he brought a note from his wife.

You published essays, columns, an auto-  
biography titled Me (whose tone is more  
questioning, less bromidic than If You  
Want to Write). In reading your work I  
sense that, for you, the life came first?

With the Greeks, I think the purpose  
of life... is “the tendance of the soul.”

Entailing, as discussed in your essay “On  
Making Choices,” formulating a “Life  
Conception.” Interesting: You say if Ham-  
let had done so...

The answer would have come im-  
mediately. Don’t kill Claudius. Or your  
mother. Be kinder to Ophelia. Don’t  
fake madness. Intelligently plan the  
overthrow of Claudius and establish a  
good administration.

The good life, then, over the good story, a  
priority I applaud. Your collected essays  
might be titled If You Want to Live.  
About story, though: Your book may not  
appeal to writers of “just” fiction (your  
modifier), as you don’t discuss character,  
narrator, point-of-view.

The only way to become a better writer  
is to become a better person.

You know what, Miss U.? Past the bom-  
bast, you're really quite a boost.

You see I am so afraid you will decide  
that you are stupid and...

And you know what else?  
What, dearie?

The real value of books like yours is mixing  
it up in the margins with the author, right?

Precisely! Another gooseberry?

© Carla Seaquist, who has published in  
the Christian Science Monitor and The  
Washington Post, is working on a play  
and a novel.

Soup and Art

The Search for Signs of Intelligent Life in the Universe, by Jane Wagner. New York: Harper  
& Row, 1987, $7.95, 225 pp. (PB)  
by Jewelle Gomez

I got the kind of madness Socrates  
talked about, “a divine release of the  
soul from the yoke of custom and  
convention.” I refuse to be intimidated  
by reality anymore. After all, what is  
reality anyway? Nothin’ but a collective  
hunch.

Broadway show in which Lily Tomlin  
starred, the exploration of the col-  
lective hunch is led by Trudy, a New  
York City bag lady. In order to experi-  
ence earth life, a group of alien visitors  
from outer space take advantage of  
Trudy’s singular ability to tune in and  
out of other people’s reality. As a  
medium she opens up the lives of a variety  
of people, some familiar, some as alien  
as the visitors that she escorts through  
time and space. Although the initial  
thrust of Jane Wagner’s work is to elicit  
laughter, her style ensures that the  
laughter is not totally at the expense of  
the character; Trudy is the first to ad-  
monish that there is little romantic  
about being a bag lady.  
By weaving stories together over  
time, Wagner amplifies our initial en-  

NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 1987

counter with one person. We hear from  
them or about them many times so that  
our laughter deepens to recognition.  
The personal fumblings, self-deceptions,  
and minor triumphs could as easily be  
ours. Early on we meet Chrissy, con-  
founded by her own inadequacy and des-  
perately searching outside of herself for a  
solution to her failures. She is much like  
a character in the Joanna Russ science  
fiction story “Nobody’s Home” who is  
doomed simply because of her ordinari-  
ness. Yet we see in Chrissy the possibil-  

ity of survival because her optimism is so  
strong. She, like the aliens, is on a te-  
lentless search.

Kate, on the other hand, is a vain  
fashion plate, a victim of her own self-  
centeredness. She has gazed into her  
navel so long that life has become one  
vague fuzzball. When Chrissy writes and  
discards (or loses) a suicide note, it is  
Kate who finds it. Given her “nature to  
step over things,” Kate takes her re-  
trieval of the note as a sign. The poig-  
nancy of this anonymous document  
touches her, and she finds meaning for  
her life in the scrawled and scratched-  
out sentences that outline someone  
else’s quest for direction. Kate’s ability  
to change and grow is a triumph we all  
can share.

The first half of the book is a compen-  
dium of emotional ups and downs  
wrought from a potpourri of characters.  
The second half is almost a play unto it-  
self. It chronicles the life of Lyn and her  
feminist buddies: randy Marge, who  
must be reminded that the “Lib in  
Women’s Lib stands for liberation not  
libido”; and Edie and Pam, a lesbian  
couple who are role models for Lyn’s  
rapidly fading radical aspirations. These  
women mature through the ’70s and ’80s  
with love affairs, marriage, careers, di-  
vorce, art, and children in quite an ordi-  
nary way. It is Wagner's ability to cap-  
ture just the right word to evoke their  
feelings of irony, bitterness, disappointment,  
or satisfaction that makes her  
writing so strong. And because she is  
writing for a one-person performance,  
her lean style makes the work all the  
more affecting. The second half is more  
cohesive than the first, if only because  
the circle of characters, who all interact  
with each other, has narrowed. (During  
my first reading of the book I tried vigi-  
lantly but vainly to remember how  
Tomlin made such silky transitions be-  
tween so many characters!) This strong  
narrative line, rather than the vignette  
style of the first half, plays against the  
monologue quality of the form and offers  
Wagner more of a chance to show her  
insight into human nature.

Developing a book from an individual  
performance piece is not new; Spaulding  
Gray’s acclaimed Swimming to Cambodia  
is a recent example. What is unique  
here is that, unlike that work and most  
others in this genre, Search is not a  
monologue. It is a dramatic scenario full  
of diverse characters whose lives take  
shape, move forward, and even come to  
an end with much of the movement and  
poetry of a stage play. One of Wagner’s  
skills is being able to create a kaleido-  
scope of characters that are not one-  
dimensional but are individual and in-  
telligent portraits.

Trudy uses Andy Warhol’s painting of  
a Campbell’s soup can to try to explain  
to the alien visitors the difference be-  
tween art (Warhol’s painting) and life  
(an actual can of soup that earthlings  
need for nourishment). Given Wagner’s  
witty and insightful writing and this  
book’s stylish photographic collages,  
this book is both soup and art.

Jewelle Gomez is a published writer and  
critic.

Belles Lettres © 11