Norah Hoult:

Rediscovery

A Love Generous Enough

by Susan Swartzlander

Norah Hoult’s 1940 novel Four
Women Grow Up describes
young Joan McComb, who

works for one of those “select and selec-
tive magazines” that

carry aloft the standards, telling the ig-
norant what they should read, and what
not read. And if a book was a bestseller
then in all probability, these papers
agreed, it should not be read. . . . With
what glee and brilliance did they not
puncture the seats of the mighty and suc-
cessful, and exalt, if not the meek, at
least the difficult to read, the unpopular,
the precious, and therefore, and most
likely, the good and the fine?

Her contemporaries recognized
Hoult’s exceptional talent, the Irish
Bookman in 1947 proclaiming her
“probably Ireland’s best woman novel-
ist.” But the guardians of the canon, the
academics who “carry aloft the stan-
dards,” have failed to give proper due to
this author of more than thirty works,
collections of short stories as well as
novels.

Hoult was born in Dublin in 1898 and
orphaned at ten. After an education in
English schools, she held clerical and
secretarial jobs for the Sheffield Daily
Telegraph, Pearson's Magazine, and a
tennis manufacturer in London. She was
married briefly, from 1929 to 1933; lived
in Dublin, London, and New York City;
and settled for most of her life and until
her death in 1984 in a County Wicklow
cottage. For the five years that she sup-
ported herself as a secretary, she worked
weekends on her first manuscript, the
collection of short stories entitled Poor
Women!

Hoult’s Poor Women!, published in
London and New York in 1928,
prompted Harper and Brothers to spon-
sor a Poor Women! contest. The May 11,
1929 issue of the Saturday Review of Lit-
erature included an advertisement for
the book, announcing “$100 in prizes
and asking:

Is a woman to be pitied when she is iso-
lated from a man? Miss Hoult tells the
story of seven women — victims of cir-
cumstance — and their frail hold of any
security—— emotional, mental or even
material. '

What do you think? For the best articles
on the underlying theme that Norah
Hoult develops in this book the publishers
offer seven prizes. Write the Poor Women
Contest Editor.

The collection established Hoult as a
brilliant young talent. Writing for the
June 1, 1929, Saturday Review of Litera-
ture, Grace Frank described Hoult’s
genius for taking her readers “directly
into the thoughts and feelings of her
subjects, however inarticulate and un-
demonstrative they may be, thereby
giving them a subjective as well as an
objective reality.” Much like James
Joyce in Dubliners, Hoult “concentrates
upon a few episodes — not necessarily
very dramatic episodes — probes them
with delicate, accurate fingers, and
presently we know not only a single per-
son but a whole group of individuals.”

Poor Women!, like most of Hoult’s
fiction, is an exploration of vulnerabil-
ity. Hoult shows us women who are
struggling to maintain their dignity de-
spite the hardships life has handed
them. All the working-class women
represented in this collection are coming
to terms with the realities of their lives,
realities that most often include growing
older without money or love. Issues of

Summer 1989

economics and aging are compounded
by religious and societal expectations
that dupe the women into believing all
will be well if they just do what is ex-
pected of them. In their attempts to do
this or to retain a vestige of self-esteem,
Hoult’s women usually lose touch with
other women in their lives who could be
allies. In fact, all too often their desper-
ate circumstances lead them to search
for ways to feel superior to others who
share their plight.

The collection opens with a story
about Ethel Stone, thirty-eight years
old, whose sense of worth comes wholly
from her ability to attract men. Now
that her body is not what it once was,
she fears growing old alone. As she sut-
veys herself in the mirror, Ethel thinks,

Her shoulders were good, too. She ca-
ressed them with her hand. So soft, and
warm, and white. She rarely beheld her
bare flesh without feeling regret for the
lovers who would have appreciated it so.
It was bitter to think she had been wasted
for so long. She, who had had such good
times. Well, she determined she would
have them again. Just a little manage-
ment; a little playing up.

The story is about that management,
that playing up to a man to secure a more
stable future. Ethel desperately or-
chestrates every move to become recon-
ciled with John, a husband she left be-
cause as an artist he was not making
enough money to support her in style.
Ethel manipulates, cajoles, and pleads
for John to take her back only because
she has realized the possible alternative.

She sat down and stared at the future. It
might be, after all, that it held nothing
for her. She had had lovers, heaps of af-
fairs, married the sort of husband a woman
ought to marry. A devoted fool. He had
been blind for years to the way she had
really diddled him. But now she had no
lover, nor, for practical purposes, a hus-
band. And every year reduced her chances
of getting either.

She most wants to return to a conven-
tional marital relationship to enhance
her standing in the community, so that
people will stop “wondering behind her
back where her husband was, and think-
ing that it seemed rather strange he
never came to see her!”

When the begging and pleading fail,
Ethel tries to seduce her estranged
spouse; and when that too fails, she bar-
gains with her body in another way —
offering to have a child with him, if he
will only take her back. When he rejects
this offer, Ethel tries to console herself
by thinking that she had a right to “what
most women, inferior to her in every
way, no looks, no brains or anything,
had. But she had been cheated.” The
story ends with Ethel planning to use
money from her estranged husband to go
abroad. “She might meet someone; a
rich American; didn’t look her age . . .
still attractive ... never knew your
luck.” However, the reader knows that
as long as Ethel hopes to profit by her
femininity (the only reality she knows),
she will far more likely meet the fate that
horrifies her in her most vulnerable
moments. “Even if she grabbed, took
every chance that came, there would be
more humiliations than triumphs, more
rejections than conquests.”

Just as Ethel prostitutes herself to try
to have “security,” Emily Johnson, in
“Mrs. Johnson,” walks the streets and
frequents pubs in futile attempts to at-
tract customers. Mrs. Johnson, as she is

called throughout the story, is an older
woman who has been forced into pros-
titution because her husband, a pub
owner, died after spending their money
on the horse races. The reader meets
Emily Johnson at a particularly desperate
point in her life. Barely recovered from
the flu, she is described as pale, weak,
and weary; but she must press on, make
the rounds for money to pay her rent,
already three weeks overdue. We learn
about her poverty in the excruciating
details of the choices she must make.

Norah Hoult

Mrs. Johnson was not one of those who
never knew quite how much they carried
in their pocket or bag. Circumstances
made such a fine carelessness impossible.
And so without any need to refresh her
memory by a look, her thoughts went
inside her imitation leather hand-bag, and
added together the silver sixpence, the
penny, the halfpenny, and the farthing
which lay there together. . . . It would be
better, she decided, to walk to the Ele-
phant and get a penny ’bus from there
over Westminster Bridge. Or would it save
her more if she walked as far as Westmin-
ster, and then got a penny ‘bus to the
Circus?

Throughout the evening she must
choose between walking in her weak-
ened condition and taking the bus; she
must decide how little she can manage to
spend on nourishment and a brief rest in
a café. Guiltily, she stands rather than
sits, and she eats as slowly as she thinks
she can without incurring the wrath of
the café owner.

The only attention Mrs. Johnson gets
all evening is from other prostitutes. A
younger woman, Florrie, sympathizes
with her enough to stand her a few
drinks but eventually leaves with a
young man. Mrs. Johnson later meets
Agnes, who drinks with her and com-
plains that there is no business because
the men go for gaudier types. “The mat-
ter with us is that we are too refined. It’s
the painted bird that gets the worm
every time. Much more important than
being early.”

As she returns home after her un-
successful evening, Emily Johnson
wants desperately to make contact with
others, to tell them about her husband.
As she tells a stranger about her Jim and
his death from cancer, the cold face
vanishes into the crowd. Emily knows
that “when you had money, and a home
and a husband, people loved you. But if
you were down, they’d all of them like to
give you another push.” Penniless and
barely able to walk on, she begs bus fare
from another younger prostitute who
gives her three coppers.

When Emily reaches her room, she
returns to safety. “There was a whole
night between her and the recurrence of
unpleasantness. .. . It was all over

now. The evening was over. She'd get a
little rest and peace now. Feel better
tomorrow perhaps.” Emily’s plight is all
the sadder because her only security
comes from denying that she really is a
part of that life, that she is like the other
women. She hangs on to the idea that
she is different because she had been
married, with a husband and a home. As
she drifts off to sleep she thinks of the
kindnesses the women have paid her. “I
got a few drinks for nothing. Some of
those girls, prostitutes though they may
be, have good hearts. I will say that for
them.”

Two of Hoult’s spinsters, one who
wants passionate love and the other who
wishes only for her independence, try to
find solace in religion. Miss Alice
Jenkinson (in “Alice”), a devoted mem-
ber of the “Pexbourne-on-Sea Congre-
gational Church,” worships in “a small
homely chapel in which it was not diffi-
cult to experience a cosy ‘When Two or
Three Are Gathered Together in Thy
Name’ feeling.” For this particular
“Bright and Cheerful Visitors Heartily
Welcome Sunday Evening Service”
Alice finds that “it was all very agree-
able.” But she cannot help but feel that
the others around her are “perhaps a lit-
tle commonplace, a little unseeing, in-
capable of experiencing certain of the
finer emotions.” She sees herself as more
devout, a religious heroine.

Her mind was forming a picture of Christ
with hands, dripping blood, raised in sup-
plication. Everyone turned from Him,
except herself. With every repetition of
the verse the picture became more glow-
ing. She saw herself, heedless of taunts
flung at her, drawing Him in; and now
His face was turned on her with gratitude
and love. A warm glow made her skin
tingle. She and Christ! She and Christ
alone against the world. She would sit at
His feet and tend Him like Mary Mag-
dalene. Oh, if she only lived then!

Later that evening Alice has a chance
for erotic adventure when she meets a
tourist at the seaside bandstand. Walk-
ing with the stranger, Alice has a choice
to make. “To the left was a track leading
inland to lighted houses, and safe, re-
spectable pavements. Before them a lit-
tle path wound up a stony slope and then
through a gate to the downs, dark and
silent, holding in their mystery all ad-
venture.” Despite her fears of what oth-
ers may think, Alice chooses the wild,
erotic adventure, only to abandon it at
the last minute when the lovers are dis-
turbed by the voices of passersby. As she
returns home Alice looks at the “cold-
looking, dark and grey and still sea.” 
She didn’t like looking at it. When it
was blue and there were waves topped
with white foam, that was the time to
look at the sea. Not now.

Miss Elizabeth Mary Jocelyn, in the
story “Miss Jocelyn,” hopes that her
faith will help her keep her inde-
pendence. The story opens on the
morning that she is to go to live with her
cousin and his family, relinquishing the
two small rooms she can no longer afford
because potential employers think she is
too old to be a useful servant. Up to the
end, Miss Jocelyn prays that God will
intervene, that “God would have sent
some sign, done something which would
have allowed her to keep her own little
home, her own independence.”

On the train to her new residence, a
bag with the initials “A.J.” falls from the
luggage rack above her. When the bag’s
owner does not appear, she assumes that
this is the sign; the “J” on the bag stands
for Jesus and He sent it in her time of
trouble. Although she debates about
whether this is a sure enough sign to
tamper with what might be another’s
bag, she ultimately convinces herself

—continued on next page

Belles Lettres @ 19