THE CRIMINAL ELEMENT + JANE BAKERMAN

ism, when and where are almost as  
important as who, what, and why.  
For sound, practical reasons, good mys-  
tery writers pay close attention to set-  
ting: They strengthen plot by intensify-  
ing the atmosphere, deepen realism with  
a wealth of accurate geographical detail,  
stimulate readers’ imaginations with ex-  
otic locales, or underscore viciousness by  
contrasting it to commonplace actions  
transpiring during and after the crime. A  
skillfully presented setting is one of the  
fiction writer’s most versatile tools.

Private-eye novels, for instance, usu-  
ally take place in cities, the larger and  
grimier the better. The urban scene is an  
important part of the formula. Some  
“tough ’tec” writers—and through them,  
their protagonists—have laid the firm  
and permanent claim to specific cities;  
Hammett/Spade’s San Francisco is, per-  
haps, the most widely known example.  
In more contemporary hard-boiled pri-  
vate-eye fiction, copious details about  
where to jog, where to shop, where to  
eat, and what to eat there have become  
key elements. Apparently, those littered  
urban streets are more persuasively mean  
if they crisscross recognizable territory,  
and a private eye wields more clout if  
she knows her turf.

One of the best practitioners of the  
hard-boiled subgenre is Sara Paretsky,  
who employs her traditional urban set-  
ting, Chicago, in a particularly sophisti-  
cated way, coupling it with the social  
criticism that figures importantly in  
each of her novels. Private investigator  
V. I. (Vic) Warshawski appears for the  
fifth time in Blood Shot (New York:  
Delacorte, 1988, $17.95, 328 pp.).  
Tough and clever, Warshawski is also  
strong enough to change when she sees  
the need. This capacity for growth dis-  
tinguishes her from most male counter-  
parts and improves the formula. Here,  
she returns to her old neighborhood,  
where affection for a dying friend and  
concern for the friend’s strong-willed  
daughter prompt a dangerous investiga-  
tion. In search of the younger woman’s  
father, Vic uncovers a long history of  
calculated, profitable endangerment of  
the blue-collar workers who inhabit a  
district itself victimized by pollution and  
economic exploitation. The streets and  
waterways of South Chicago, as well as  
its citizens, come alive in Blood Shot, an  
excellent contribution to a fine series.

TTT

Ladies Night (1988, $8.95, 238 pp.),  
by Elizabeth Bowers, appears in the In-  
ternational Women’s Crime Series (Seal  
Press, P.O. Box 13, Seattle, WA 98111).  
Set in contemporary Vancouver, the  
novel introduces Meg Lacey, who  
balances her responsibilities to family,  
friends, and lover with remarkable  
skill—it’s her checkbook that is out of  
whack as her practice limps along. Lacey  
shows considerable fortitude and cun-  
ning when she investigates the thriving  
child-pornography business. Memorable  

I: good crime fiction as in journal-  

characters abound (especially, perhaps,  
Salal, member of one of the Coast Bands  
of native Canadians), and readers will  
not quickly forget Ladies Night at  
Kinky’s unsavory nightclub, or its teen-  
porn dorm upstairs. Strong stuff, Ladies  
Night, and well done.

In Hit and Run (New York: St. Mar-  
tin’s, 1989, $14.95, 182 pp.), by Maxine  
O’Callaghan, P.I. Delilah West is camp-  
ing in her office, scrounging meals and  
hot showers from her friends, working as  
a waitress, and still not making ends  
meet when a case finally comes her way.  
A young tough runs over an elderly man  
and injures West, who helps identify  
him. Yet, Delilah West investigates the  
accident, persuaded by the youth’s  
mother and her own troubling doubt.  
O'Callaghan plays off the dreary  
claustrophobic atmosphere of West’s of-  
fice against opulent Orange County,  
California, as she demonstrates how  
quickly a spate of bad fortune can trans-  
form a middle-class wage earner into a  
one of the working poor. The case itself  
is absorbing, but setting is a particularly  
strong factor in this good novel.

Like their professional counterparts,  
many amateur detectives also defend  
urban law and order. One example is  
Charlotte Kent, protagonist of Mary Kit-  
tredge’s Dead and Gone (New York:  
Walker, 1989, $18.95, 250 pp.), who  
finds her second case in New Haven,  
where she awaits the outcome of a diffi-  
cult operation on her adopted son. A  
self-described hack writer, Kent subli-  
mates worry with on-site research for a  
book about hospital care (working title:  
Tricks for the Sick—her agent has his  
own way with her words) until an old  
friend is accused of murdering her feck-  
less lover. Handy to the scene, Kent in-  
vestigates unofficially but cleverly.  
Neatly offsetting tension with humor,  
Mary Kittredge captures the feeling of a  
big hospital while her narrator’s clear  
eye and tart tongue spare no one,  
neither medico, quasi-mobster, all-  
American beauty, nor herself. Charlotte  
Kent is a dandy character.

If the Boston that Charlotte MacLeod  
depicts does not really exist, it probably  
should, just for the fun of it. The Re-  
cycled Citizen (New York: Mysterious  
Press, 1988, $3.95, 253 pp.) continues  
the saga of charming Sarah Kelling Bit-  
tersohn and her endearingly goofy clan.  
Though both Sarah and Max, her  
husband and fellow sleuth, enjoy ex-  
tended families, it is the Kellings—many  
lavishly rich, most happily in love, all  
eccentric—who dominate these novels.  
When various crimes, including murder,  
threaten the usefulness of a Kelling-  
sponsored senior citizens’ recycling cen-  
ter, the investigation competes with  
Sarah’s pregnancy for the reader’s atten-  
tion. In this Boston, birth overshadows  
death, and order (of a sort) always pre-  
vails.

Despite the brutal crimes that generate  
its plots, P. M. Carlson’s Murder Un-  
renovated (New York: Bantam, 1988,  

$3.95, 217 pp.) reflects the ambience of  
New York City far less by depicting vi-  
olence than by emphasizing the vigor of  
the Big Apple. Capitalizing on the rigors  
of house hunting on a tight budget and  
on a clever, determined tenant’s fear of  
being uprooted and perhaps losing her  
independence, Carlson also evokes the  
city’s past through allusions to the his-  
tory of the crime scene, an attractive  
brownstone, and the life and accom-  
plishments of Frederick Law Olmsted. In  
this novel, as in The Recycled Citizen,  
the central characters, Maggie Ryan and  
Nick O’Connor, look forward to the  
birth of their child with excitement and  
delight, their situation contrasting  
nicely with a subplot that raises the  

Carefully  

abortion.  

question of  
developed relationships and steadily  
mounting tension contribute to readers’  
enjoyment.

Like Murder Unrenovated, Murder  
Most Gentrified by Mary Bringle (New  
York: Doubleday, 1988, $12.95, 181 pp.)  
evokes New York City life with clarity,  
liveliness, and humor. But the tone of  
this novel is ironic, for Bringle focuses  
on the tension pervading the lives of  
Manhattanites besieged by the rising  
cost of living. Just barely clinging to the  
bottom rung of the middle class, Sarah  
Mason and several fellow victims of  
neighborhood gentrification resist the  
consequent pressure to upgrade services  
in their apartment building because they  
simply cannot afford greater expendi-  
tures. When murder complicates already  
strained relationships, everyone is sus-  
pect, everyone feels threatened. Bringle  
brings plenty of suspense and feeling but  
gratifyingly little sentimentality to her  
challenging mystery.

One begins Susan Brownmiller’s  
Waverly Place (New York: Grove Press,  
1989, $18.95, 294 pp.) expecting that its  
Greenwich Village locale will be a  
major element, but somehow the full  
setting never comes alive in this  
fictional reflection of the Lisa Steinberg  
murder case. In a cool, flat tone, Brown-  
miller recounts the debasement of Judith  
Winograd at the hands of her abusive  
lover, Barry Kantor. As Winograd  
degenerates, depending more and more  
on Kantor and the drugs he supplies, she  
can do nothing for herself, let alone for  
the two children the couple have  
adopted extralegally. Neighbors, friends,  
and associates realize much of what is  
happening but settle for gossip or self-  

protective gestures, taking almost no  
helpful action. The deadly passivity of  
all these characters perhaps infects even  
readers, for Waverly Place prods the im-  
agination but does not engage the heart.

Two recent releases happily exploit  
urban settings that seem a bit exotic to  
most American readers. Micky Friedman  
transports her ebullient reporter-sleuth,  
Georgia Lee Maxwell, overseas in Magic  
Mirror (New York: Viking, 1988,  
$16.95, 247 pp.). Unlucky in love,  
humiliated by an influential socialite’s  
reaction to one of her stories, and suffer-  
ing a mini midlife crisis, Georgia Lee  
abandons Florida, intending to become  
Good Look magazine’s woman in Paris—  
“If I was going to have aggravation, I  
would have big-time aggravation.”  
Though the journalistic big time seems  
almost as elusive in Paris as in Bay City,  
Georgia Lee sticks it out, surviving all  
the expatriate’s ordinary woes and the  
chills of a murder investigation that  
overlaps with one of her assignments.  
Moreover, she has fun doing it. So will  
readers.

Another alluring European city,  
Florence, is a powerful attraction in  
Magdalen Nabb’s tales of Marshal Salva  
Guarnaccia. The Marshal and the Mad-  
woman (New York: Scribner’s, 1988,  
$16.95, 223 pp.), his fifth recorded case,  
chronicles the investigation into the  
murder of a mentally impaired woman  
who was simultaneously the object of  
ribald street humor and of practical  
compassion in her neighborhood. A  
family man who takes a strong interest  
in the youngsters under his command,  
an officer who knows his city  
thoroughly, and a compassionate person  
who seems to understand something of  
both the heights and depths of human  
nature, the Marshal is himself very in-  
teresting, and his investigations engage  
him with a rich array of characters. A  
resident of Florence since 1975, Nabb  
vividly depicts its uncanny emptiness  
when most citizens flee the city’s swel-  
tering August weather and life becomes  
a little harder for those who stay behind.

For readers who like to read about  
mysteries, The Woman Detective:  
Gender & Genre (Urbana: University  
of Illinois Press, 1988, $24.95, 260 pp.)  
by Kathleen Gregory Klein will be of  
great interest. Klein examines almost  
three hundred novels whose publication  
dates range from 1864 to 1987; each  
book features a professional woman de-  
tective. Organizing so much information  
as she analyzes similarities and differ-  
ences in works from various hands,  
created in various periods, is no easy  
task, but Klein manages it deftly. Apart  
from its intrinsic interest to mystery  
fans, feminists, and students of the  
genre, this book also identifies dozens of  
good novels whose titles are not well  
known, its promise of good reading ex-  
tending well beyond its own covers.

@ Jane Bakerman is Belles Lettres’ P.I.  
of mystery fiction.

SS SN CS RR a Be SR)

Something traumatic happened to  
Nella between the year 1894, when her  
mother married Peter Larsen, and the  
time of the 1910 census. Exactly what  
that event was we may never know, but  
there are certainly clues in Quicksand.  
Early in the novel, Helga is described as  
a “solitary girl with no family connec-  
tions.” When Helga declines her Danish  
suitor’s proposal, she informs him, “ ‘If  
we were married, you might come to be  
ashamed of me, to hate me, to hate all  
dark people. My mother did that.’ ”  
Other comments, such as “her unloved,  
unloving, and unhappy childhood,”  
scattered throughout the narrative sup-  
port the theory that Helga Crane is a  
thinly disguised portrait of Larsen her-  
self. Perhaps the greatest support for this  

Spring 1989  

conjecture, however, comes from  
Anna, who upon inheriting all of her  
half-sister’s estate when Nella died re-  
marked to a family housekeeper, “Why,  
I didn’t know that I had a sister.”  
Other sources indicate that Larsen  

never traveled to Denmark and attended  
school there as she repeatedly claimed  
(Department of State passport records)  
and that she did not earn a degree in  
Library Science as she stated a number of  
times (Columbia University records).  
Neither did she pass for white after the  
decline of the New Negro. Such a radi-  
cal move would have been inconsistent:  
She was proud of her race and her own  
accomplishments. (What an irony that  
“Sanctuary” — her most emphatic state-  
ment about race — was published at a  

time when her writing career was about  
to collapse!)

After returning to nursing, she excel-  
led. To her peers, Nella was an exemp-  
lary worker who instilled in others a  
sense of respect and admiration. “She  
really loved people,” one of them told  
me, “especially the sick. She would see  
that anything could be done to help  
them.” She was dedicated to her career  
and frequently rewarded for her superior  
efforts. Though reclusive when away  
from the hospital, at work she accepted  
the mandate of her profession. That  
there was no obituary to record her death  
hardly mattered. Her funeral was at-  
tended by forty or fifty of her co-workers.

Nella Larsen Imes was a sad, beauti-  
ful, lonely woman — elegant, sophisti-  

cated, witty, and cultured. Her com-  
panions were tragedy and disappoint-  
ment, yet she ultimately worked out a  

pattern of survival that permitted her to  

administer to the sick and the downcast,  
as she traveled along a lonely pathway  
toward obscurity. As her literary fame  
dissipated, her professional life soared.  
She knew — even if she was not re-  
warded in kind — that the pain of the  
soul can be mitigated by others, and that  
invisibility is often one’s only guarantee  
of survival.

@ Charles R. Larson, a professor of lit-  
erature at American University, is com-  
pleting a book on Nella Larsen and Jean  
Toomer.

Belles Lettres @ 15