Sandra Shotlander was born in 1941  
in Melbourne and educated there.  

For the past two decades she has  
worked in theater as performer, director,  
teacher, and playwright in the United  
States and England as well as in Australia.  
In 1970 she established “The  
Plantagenets,” a theater-in-education  
group, which she directed for seven years.  
In 1974 she set up “Mime and Mumbles,”  
one of Australia’s first theaters for the  
deaf, and directed their first major pro-  
duction. In 1977 — 78 she was a pioneer  
actor-in-residence at Melbourne Univer-  
sity. In 1982 she cofounded Salon-a-Muse  
for women in Melbourne, modeled on  
Paris salons of the 1920s.  

Sandra wrote her first play, Framework,  
after spending a year at the Women’s  
Writers Center in Cazenovia, New York.  
It successfully premiered in Melbourne in  
1983 and was produced again in Adelaide  
in 1984 and in Sydney in 1985. As co-  
winner of an international gay  
playwrighting competition, it was pre-  
sented at Meridian Theater in New York  
in 1984.  

In two acts, Framework narrates the  
budding, blooming, fading, and perhaps  
revival of a love affair between two Au-  
stralian women who meet in the Metro-  
politan Museum in New York. Lee Price,  
just over 40 and in the process of divorcing  
her American husband of many years,  
comes upon the 30-ish bohemian traveler  
Iris Blakely. Both find fascinating the in-  
tersection/contrast of Picasso’s “Portrait of  
Gertrude Stein” facing Georgia O’Keeffe’s  
“Black Iris.” As a first move, Lee invites  
Iris to dinner in her apartment. Iris  
eventually redecorates Lee’s bedroom in  
mauve and has a purplish black doona  
cover made for her bed. Lee goes through  
with her divorce. Iris returns to Australia  
and her former lover Penny. When she  
returns to Lee in New York, after several  
delays, the primary passion between them  
seems to be resentment. Finally Iris writes  
to Lee from Australia urging her to come  
there. Most of the union/reunion of the  
women is narrated by reflection — a voice  
on the tape recorder, a letter spoken by  
the writer. Like the framed museum  
portraits, the union of the women is  
framed in the past perfect tense and set in  
a city that both women regard as alien and  
terrifying, an exile from their native  
country.  

Plot is secondary to symbolism and  
reflection. Both women are artists and  
aesthetes struggling against self-imposed  
isolation and incommunicability. Iris is a  
painter who does not show her paintings  
to anyone. Lee sculpts clay figures that she  
exhibits in her living room. Life reflected  
in art and framed to set it apart from the  
evanescent and commonplace holds them  
back from spontaneous involvement.  
Whereas Framework explores a philosophy  
of art, Blind Salome offers a feminist con-  
tradiction to Jungian theories of the un-  
conscious, especially the opposite-sex  
shadows, anima and animus. Men may be  
chasing an ungraspable feminine “other,”  
but according to Sandra, women have  
little need or desire to search for their an-  
imus.  

Four Australian travelers, Bernice and  
Della (sisters), Bernice’s husband Phillip,  
and their psychiatrist friend Christopher,  
a colleague of Della’s late husband, are  
staying at a pensione in Assisi sharing  
passages from their journals with each  
other. Della and Phillip are having an  
affair, while Bernice reads and dreams  
about St. Francis and St. Clare. Both  
women grow to despise the patriarchal  
woman-imprisoning values that Chris  
embodies and promotes. A character  
called Pale English Girl fascinates the four  
but never speaks directly to them. She  
addresses letters “Dear International In-  
tellectual” to Chris, who responds with  
pompous platitudes: “Mankind strives to  
come to consciousness from the primal  
warmth and darkness of the maternal  
womb, in short, from the unconscious.  
Logos, is the way, madam, Logos, which  
age-old wisdom has ascribed to the male as  
his ruling principle, while you, the  

September/October 1986  

female, have been ascribed Eros, the  
principle of love.”  

Bernice’s dreaming and writing enables  
her to break free of patriarchal bondage  
through a fantasy proclamation of St.  
Clare to Chris at a moment when he  
would really rather seduce her: “I don’t  
want to be a virgin abbess, anymore. . .  
I’m fed up with your one and only God my  
soul must magnify. . . . [don’t want your  
marble ecstasy.” After Bernice’s  
victorious outburst, Chris so disintegrates  
emotionally that he finally leaves the  
others, who are quite happy to be rid of  
him and his hypochondria, hysteria,  
paranoia, and pedantry. The title Blind  

Above: Sandra Shotlander. “I. . .  
being described as an iconoclast.” Photo by  
Jenni Mather, 1985.  

enjoy  

Right: Alison Lyssa. “All my life I’ve been  
trying to rewrite King Lear.”  

Salome suggests that women have been  
blinded by the veils in which male culture  
has wrapped them. If Bernice can imagine  

Salome and Clare ripping off their veils,  

all three women in the play can come to  
consciousness and recognition of power.  
Currently Sandra has just finished a  
radio play, Just One More Thing, based on  
women in State Parliament, and has  
begun work on a stage play, At the End of  
the Day, about a lesbian in Federal  
Parliament. She is also co-conducting  
workshops on the Sumerian myth of the  
journey of Inanna and Ereshkigal to the  
underworld and creating a theater piece  
based on women’s individual stories.  

——Sandra Shotlander Speaks  

As a playwright, I think it’s important to  

do so in Australia, particularly since  
there are so few of us — few women  
playwrights in fact. My experience and  
knowledge as a woman and a lesbian are at  
the center of my writing. My plays focus  
on women who are protagonists, not just  
adjuncts to men. There aren’t any male  
characters on stage in Framework,  
although Lee’s husband is a peripheral  
presence, part of the framework from  
which Lee is extricating herself. The play  
centers on women’s striving for self-  
knowledge, honesty, intimacy, et cetera.  
Blind Salome does present male characters,  
who are important, but again the women  
strive and grow while the men stand still.  
This is probably a reflection of the way I  
see the world, but not the way it should  
be. In response to Bernice’s last line,  
“How long do we have to wait?” a friend  
commented, “We’ve stopped waiting,  
Sandra.”  

The women’s movement has certainly  
affected my work through books, ex-  
changes, and political involvement.  
There is a danger, however, of having  
feminist or women’s movement critics sit-  
ting on one shoulder and mainstream crit-  
ics on the other while you are writing.  
Feminists can be extremely negative.  
Some women were disappointed not to see  
replicas of themselves on stage in  
Framework and were very worried about  
the portrayal of Iris. One woman asked me  
why she didn’t go to the women’s center  
when she got to New York. Another  
woman suggested that Lee and Iris weren’t  
lesbian because they were monogamous.  
However, such functions as Women’s  
Writers Week in Sydney in 1981, where I  
first met Alison Lyssa, and particularly  
Women’s Writers Week in Melbourne in  
1984, where I first met Audre Lorde and  
where women share their differences  
frankly and creatively, have been invalu-  
able.  

There’s no doubt that I’ve been  
affected by many books by women. I keep  
Susan Griffin’s chapter on herself in The  
Writer and Her Work by my bed for those  
awful times when “the terror” hits me,  

when I’m blocked, when I feel I have  
nothing to say and no one will listen any-  
way, when patriarchal demons inhabit my  
mind.  

Compassion is part of my work and is  
probably linked with some of the humor in  
it. I would like to view the world with  
compassion without compromising on  
feminist issues. Consciousness raising has  
affected my work totally; my language,  
portrayal, everything has to be relevant to  
women. One nonfeminist woman said,  
after hearing about my projects, “But  
they're all about women. You're capable  
of writing something universal.” I told her  
I'd just seen a very “universal” film on TV  
all about men, soldiers in World War II  
killing each other.  

I have found it very positive that  
people, mainly women but one man, have  
written to say they have been profoundly  
affected by my work. After Framework, a  
woman serving in a cafe came up to tell me  
the play had enabled her to sort out her  
friendship with another woman. Another  
told me that after seeing it in 1983 she  
decided she was a lesbian. She hadn’t  
really confronted the issue before then.  

My plays do have social and political  
comment. However, I don’t want them to  
be didactic. They are explorations of  
feminist themes. Blind Salome questions  
God, Jung, and the whole concept of  
male gods — be they divine or elevated  
“professionals” designing, ordaining,  
creating “the female.” It also questions  
language. I believe in using “language,”  
which is less fashionable in the more  
sparse styles of modern drama, particularly  
Australian. Finding the language and  
words to express our female experience is  
very important. Language on stage in-  
cludes visual aspects. Several critics  
(men) couldn’t accept the image of  
Bernice straddling the psychiatrist and  
thumping his chest: “I’m a woman on top.  
I’m an unruly daughter full of animus  
.... I will not get off until there’s no  
more torture, no more head-shrinking, no  
more reducing women to ashes.” “Going  
too far,” thought one woman as well, but  
many women told me they cheered.  

I try to reach audiences with identifi-  
able emotion, but I sometimes wish that  
Australian audiences and even feminist  
audiences would be more open to works  
that require thought. I don’t think we  
should make any rules about representa-  
tion or nonrealistic style. However, the  
style the playwright chooses is part of the  
statement. If the play is representational,  
then the characters need to hold our  
attention and have something to say.  

As inspiration from other women  
playwrights, I have to mention Maria  
Irene Fornes, a favorite of mine. Meeting  
other feminists writing for theater is a  
problem. I was delighted to make contact  
with the Aboriginal feminist writer Eva  
Johnson at Writers Week 1985 and to talk  
with her in Adelaide. I also exchanged  
ideas with Adelaide playwrights My  
Tanith and Anne-Marie Mykyta. South  
Australia, a strong theater state, has an  
organization for women in theater. I  
would like to form a feminist playwright’s  
group in Melbourne but don’t find the  
readiness here yet. However, I do obtain  
nurturance from women prose writers and  
poets here.  

I have focused on women in the process  
of change, on characters who break  
boundaries, conventions, fixed roles.  
Clive Dorman in Melbourne Times  
described me as emerging as an  
“iconoclastic feminist playwright.” I  
would like the emerging to continue and  
enjoy being described as an iconoclast.  

I don’t like the term post-feminism. In  
fact, I feel very agitated about it. Femin-  
ism is alive and well. Feminist writing dif-  
fers enormously from men’s writing,  
where often the female characters con-  
form to certain patterns because they are  
men’s visions. I think that nonfeminist  
work by women also conforms to old  
patterns and accepts the world as it is,  
whereas feminist work has to challenge  
existing norms. Lesbian feminist work is  
vital. Thank goodness for the rise of  
lesbian novels. Only two lesbian plays  
written by Australian women have hit the  
mainstream or the fringe here: Pinball and  
Framework.  

Both Alison Lyssa and Sandra  
Shotlander merit global attention. Both  
are fired by loving women and by feminist  
consciousness and fury. Like many other  
Australian writers, especially feminists,  
both of these writers are iconoclasts who  
have digested the traditions and devised  
unique strategies of wit and parody to  
ridicule them. Neither portrays the  
negative utopia of Margaret Atwood’s The  
Handmaid’s Tale, nor the androgynous  
utopia of Marge Piercy’s Woman on the  
Edge of Time, nor Sally Gearhardt’s sep-  
aratist heaven, The Wanderground. Both  
present the heart-rending here and now  
while using the past as metaphor for pres-  
ent folly, as in the 17th- and 18th-century  
plagues in The Boiling Frog and St. Clare’s  
submission to St. Francis in Blind Salome.  
Despite the similarity of their politics, the  
worlds they dramatize are quite different in  
scope. Sandra’s style is more interior, in-  
tricate, intellectual. The infinities  
suggested in both Framework and Blind  
Salome are the labyrinths of the mind, the  
mystic landscapes of the soul. Alison’s  
drama is more overtly political, ex-  
pansive, theatrical. Quite consciously,  
both Pinball and The Boiling Frog  
reconsider the Big Questions of classic  
Western literature, as they are reflected in  
the Bible, Greek tragedy, and Shake-  
speare. Both playwrights offer some ironic  
answers.  

® Rosemary Curb teaches women's stud-  
ies, dramatic literature, and film at Rollins  
College. She began these interviews while  
accompanying Rollins students pursuing  
Australian Studies in 1984. In Sydney she  
lectured on American feminist theater at  
Macquarie University.  

Belles Lettres @ 5