Lesbian Writers

Lovers in Bed. Charcoal on paper (18” x 24”) by Lewaine Inzalaco.

Telling Lesbian Lives

My Mama’s Dead Squirrel: Lesbian Essays on Southern Culture, by Mab Segrest.  
Introduction by Adrienne Rich. Firebrand Books (141 The Commons, Ithaca, NY 14850),  
1985, $8.95, 237 pp. (PB)

Lesbian Letters, by Christine Heron Stockton. Heron Press (P.O. Box 31539, San Francisco,  
CA 94131), 1986, $8.95, 137 pp. (PB)

For Sylvia: An Honest Account, by Valentine Ackland. Foreword by Bea Howe. New York:  
Norton, 1985, $13.95, 135 pp.

The Lesbian Path, edited by Margaret Cruickshank. Revised and enlarged edition. San  
Francisco: Grey Fox Press, 1985, $8.95, 220 pp. (PB)

The Letters of Gertrude Stein and Carl Van Vechten, (Volume I: 1913-1935; Volume II:  
1935-1946), edited by Edward Burns. New York: Columbia University Press, 1986, $75.00,  
901 pp.

by Lynne M. Constantine

In the introduction to My Mama’s  
Dead Squirrel, Mab Segrest writes  
of her near panic as her book goes  
out into the world. “People will read it  
who know me but haven’t known that  
I am a lesbian. People who know I am  
a lesbian may find out just what that  
means, just how queer I am.” A lesbian  
telling her story inevitably confronts  
Segrest’s twin fears. Not only does the  
lesbian writer have to tell that she is a  
lesbian—a daunting enough task in a  
culture that considers lesbianism  
“queer”—but she has to tell what that  
means. And just how queer is she, any-  
way? Is she very much the same as  
everyone else, or very much different?

For Segrest, the irony in having to  
confront her southern heritage with her  
lesbian “difference” is that southern life  
and letters seemed to dwell on difference  
and strangeness, even to accord it a spe-  
cial place and grace in the world. The  
fiction of Flannery O'Connor and Car-  
son McCullers is populated by grotes-  
ques, people who cannot live and love  
in the ordinary sense because they are  
physically or mentally different from the  
mass of humanity. “Reading this stuff,”  
says Segrest of the mainstream southern  
literary tradition, “we thought if we  
could just grow up warped enough, we’d  
be works of art.”

Yet as Segrest herself learned, these  
grotesque portraits isolated and ridiculed  
those who were different, rather than  
integrating them into a richer picture of  
what it means to be human. In the works  
of women writers, the grotesques became  
a way of atoning for the dangerous and  
unladylike decision to become a writer.  
In thinly disguised fictional self-por-  
traits, both O’Connor and McCullers  
engaged in painful self-mockery and self-  
accusation, saying “I am different and  
that is very, very bad.”

Segrest’s own task, she tells us, is to  
write not the southern grotesque but the  
southern baroque, a more truthful  
character portrait that tells “just how  
queer I am,” at the same time asserting  
the great truth at the heart of much folk  
literature: “It is more amusing than dis-  
graceful to be odd because everyone is  
a bit peculiar.

2 Belles Lettres

Segrest tells us that she learned to  
place a “high moral and aesthetic value”  
on difference and to write the southern  
baroque through another group of south-  
ern writers—black lesbian southern  
writers such as Angeline Weld Grimke  
and Lillian Smith in the early part of  
this century and contemporaries such as  
Pat Parker, Dorothy Allison, and Bar-  
bara Smith. If we have the courage of  
our convictions, Segrest believes, being  
different can make a difference: “We  
need to have the hope to keep plugging  
away. We may not get all the way to  
where we want to go in this lifetime,  
but we sure get close. Our lives will  
matter.”

Honesty, Segrest says, means facing  
the difficult and sometimes frightening  
consequences of sticking up for yourself  
or for others who are labeled “different.”  
As a poignant illustration, Segrest  
chronicles the long history of struggles  
for racial equality in the South, the com-  
plexities of feeling within the genera-  
tions of her own family, and her own  
developing awareness of what racism  
means in her life as a White middle-class  
southern woman. Through learning  
about racism, she also learned how to  
stand up for herself as a lesbian.

Not all lesbians who write about les-  
bian lives have Segrest’s benign attitude  
toward lesbians. Christine Heron  
Stockton writes Lesbian Letters specifi-  
cally to provide what she calls “a context  
for the humanness” of lesbians. In a brief  
introduction, Stockton makes her liter-  
ary purpose plain: to preserve fictional  
letters and journal entries that will help  
both lesbian and straight readers see just  
how “normal” lesbians are, how they are  
subject to the same feelings, needs, joys,  
and disappointments experienced by  
straight women.

The letters Stockton creates form no  
coherent story, represent no single les-  
bian’s experience; rather, they weave in  
and out of many lives, creating a mosaic  
of how it is to fall in love, be rejected,  
be accepted, be confused, and be ecstatic  
on a lesbian journey toward fulfilling  
love. The drive to explain lesbian love,  
however, limits the range of emotions  
and experiences Stockton depicts.

Through such selection, the differences  
between lesbian life and the straight  
world can readily be minimized. For in-  
stance, the volume ends with a letter  
from Jennifer announcing to her family  
her upcoming lesbian marriage. The  
women’s courtship is overtly compared  
to that of Jennifer’s parents, and it is  
assumed that both sets of parents will  
don appropriate attire and participate in  
a mixed Christian/Goddess-worshipping  
exchange of vows. Even though such  
things surely have happened, the letter  
has an air of fantasy that borders danger-  
ously on caricature.

Far more fraught with realistic emo-  
tion and tension are several brief letter  
sequences in which Stockton has the  
opportunity to build characters and pro-  
vide a glimpse of the ways in which les-  
bian life differs from the norm. One  
sequence in particular, “Dyke Drama I,  
II, and III,” depicts a triangular relation-  
ship among three women, all of whom  
are trying to live their choices with in-  
tegrity, even if those choices include  
what the rest of the world would consider  
to be infidelity and betrayal. Because  
these letters overlap, we have multiple  
perspectives not available in other let-  
ters. Hence, Stockton is on sure ground,  
demonstrating her deep feeling for how  
women communicate with each other—  
and something closer to the true diver-  
sity of lesbian lives.

Christine Heron Stockton

For a clear picture of the extraordinary  
ordinariness of some lesbian lives, the  
actual letters that Gertrude Stein and  
Alice Toklas exchanged with Carl Van  
Vechten, critic, novelist, and champion  
of the Harlem Renaissance, give a far  
richer picture. The letters represent a  
rare longitudinal look at a lesbian life;  
most of the time we see just the dramatic  
moments, the coming-out stories, the  
highs or lows, the meetings or partings.  
Stein and Toklas corresponded fre-  
quently, in some years almost daily, with  
Van Vechten. In the 901 pages of the  
two-volume Letters of Gertrude Stein and  
Carl Van Vechten, letter after letter dis-  
cusses their garden, their dogs, their va-  
cations, mutual friends in the literary  
world, little gifts sent back and forth,  
minor and major ailments, and Stein’s  
or Van Vechten’s current work. From  
the pages of day-to-day living emerges a  
clear, if oblique, portrait of the great  
stability, tranquility, and pleasure that  
Stein and Toklas found in their life  
together.

The portrait, of course, is incomplete;  
the unabashed eroticism of some of  
Stein’s poetry is missing, as is the anger  
at the lot of literary women found in  
works such as “Patriarchal Poetry.” But  
the dailiness is there, the sense of a long,  
full life lived hand in hand, the ordinar-  
iness of some ways of being a lesbian in  
the world. And we do get little clues to  
the emotional dynamics of their re-  
lationship. For example, as the corres-  
pondence progressed and as Van Vech-  
ten’s career became more intertwined  
with Stein’s, an intimate little game  
grew up of using pet names: Van Vech-  
ten was Papa Woojums, Toklas became  
Mama Woojums, and Stein, Baby  
Woojums.

For Sylvia: An Honest Account pro-  
vides another view of a long-term,  
deeply committed relationship, this time  
at one of its crisis points. From 1930 to  
1968, Valentine Ackland was the lover  
and friend of Sylvia Townsend Warner,  
noted British poet, novelist, and trans-  
lator. For Sylvia, a brief, powerful ac-  
count of Ackland’s early life and loves  
and her alcoholism, was written in a  
single burst on July 4, 1949, as Ackland  
struggled to prevent their relationship  
from disintegrating. During a drunken  
episode many years earlier, Ackland had  
fallen in love with a woman, E, who  
was now coming to England to live with  
Ackland. The account was Ackland’s  
way of asking for Sylvia’s steadfastness  
and love and of trying to make sense out  
of her own urge to be with E when the  
relationship with Sylvia was the sustain-  
ing force of her life. By writing her  
memoir, Ackland hoped that she and  
Sylvia could discern “whether I have  
been set askew in my judgement by those  
long years of drunkenness... or  
whether I am as I feel myself to be: so  
made that I really can, in truth, be in  
love with two separate and most alien  
people.”

Whereas Stein’s letters to Van Vech-  
ten have an air of good-humored satis-  
faction with life, Ackland’s slim memoir  
evokes the bitter pain that forms the  
counterpoint to many lesbian lives.  
Ackland had for years sought help for  
her alcoholism from doctors and priests,  
only to be rebuffed repeatedly with asser-  
tions that there was no help available  
and that she would probably die of drink.  
Ackland chronicles the years of confu-  
sion, during which she was rudely sepa-  
rated from her first woman lover, left  
her second to marry and thus make her-  
self acceptable to the Catholic Church,  
suffered through the pain and emotional  
anguish of being physically unable to  
have sexual relations with her husband,  
and met with the continuing disapproval  
of her family when she chose to divorce  
him rather than endure his contempt.  
At the height of her anguish, she met  
Sylvia, but although her emotional bur-  
dens grew lighter, her drinking grew  
more oppressive to her spirit. After  
numerous unsuccessful attempts to con-  
quer her addiction through willpower,  
she finally fell into bed on October 8,  
1947, and awakened with the firm belief  
that she was henceforth to be sober—  
and she was.

Yet Ackland took little personal pride  
in her sustaining love with Sylvia or in  
her victory over alcohol. Instead, having  
no other “lives” by which to measure  
her life as a lesbian, she continually  
accused and derided herself. When de-  
scribing her older sister’s delight in tor-  
menting her, Ackland has no words of  
blame for her sister but says of herself,  
“There was little difference between me  
and an idiot all that time, so far as I can  
judge from the extraordinarily stupid  
things I did in my efforts to escape her.”  
To escape her torment, the young Ack-  
land made up adventure games, pretend-  
ing to be an Indian or a general, but  
instead of seeing this harmless pastime  
as clever self-protection, she expresses  
disgust for her “puerile” behavior. With-  
out the touchstone of other lesbian lives,  
Ackland felt like one of the grotesques  
Segrest describes. She was unable to  
make sense of the difference in her life;  
unable to see her oppression by family,  
church, and professions as unjust; and  

—continued on page 5

Marcu/Apean 1987