Stories From South Africa

Oppressor or  
Oppressed?

Home Ground, by Lynn Freed. New York:  
Penguin Books, 1986, $7.95, 293 pp.

by Evelyn Torton Beck

This unsettling novel deconstructs

the meaning of “home” and the

firmness of the “ground” on  
which its narrator stands. Set in a small  
South African mining town in the 1950s  
and 1960s, it is the coming-of-age story  
of Ruth Leah Frank, the daughter of sec-  
ond-generation Jews who have been  
educated in England and now run a small  
second-rate theater company. Ruth, the  
youngest of three sisters, lives in a world  
built on “lies, secrets, silences” and un-  
spoken contrasts and contradictions in  
which race and gender play a crucial role.

The unchecked violence of the “secret  
wars” within the family (which the  
adults participate in but refuse to  
acknowledge) mirrors the unrest and  
growing violence in the world around  
them (which these same adults refuse to  
admit into their consciousness). Ac-  
cording to Ruth, what matters most to  
her parent-actors is “voice” and the “au-  
dience” needed to witness the drama of  
their lives so they can “stylize their dis-  
cord.” This is a family of “intimate stran-  
gers” who do not understand each other,  
cannot meet each other’s needs, and are  
negatively enmeshed in each other's  
lives. Physical and psychological assault  
and revenge have become the norms of  
family interaction. The novel seems to  
suggest that the parents’ own sense of un-  
groundedness and displacement as Jews  
leads to the failure of their hopes and am-  
bitions, which in turn becomes the basis  
for the family pathology. That gender  
expectations also play a role is suggested,  
but not adequately developed.

Freed is most successful in showing the  
insanity of a system obsessed by color,  
where distinctions between Black, white  
and colored can mean life-changing dif-  
ferences in opportunity, all too often,  
the difference between life and death.

The family’s memory of poverty and  
anti-Semitism in Eastern Europe, which  
initially brought the grandfather to  
South Africa, is a leitmotif against  
which the cruelties and injustices of  
apartheid are played out. Yet, in spite of  
their liberal pretensions, as middle-class  
Jews considered “white” in South  
Africa’s class/caste system, the Franks  
participate in the privileges of that sys-  
tem, even as they are looked down upon  
by the dominant white Christian society  
simply because they are Jews. Although  
no one in the text comments on this ter-  
rible irony, the author hints at parallels  
between apartheid and anti-Semitism.

Because the point of view of the novel  
remains the young girl’s, many of the  
most powerful indictments of the society  
are scenes in which the child herself is  
implicated, but which remain without  
analysis or commentary. I find this dis-  
turbing, particularly in the powerful  
scene near the beginning of the novel in  
which the child enacts racial domina-  
tion on the body of her family’s Black  
male servant: Combining sexual curios-  
ity with an intuitive sense of her own  
power as a white girl-child, she  
humiliates the family servant in public  
by pulling on his “manhood” in full view  
of his peers in his own compound, which  
she feels free to invade.

Connections that could be made  
are also missing in a number of  
other scenes that suggest but  
do not develop the complex blurring of  
gender and racial powers in a system of  
white domination. In a similar vein, a

2 Belles Lettres

“Servant’s Quarters,” by Bongiwe Dhlomo

more complex analysis of the positioning  
of Jews in South Africa, including some  
reference to Jews’ very real participation  
in antiapartheid activism, would have  
given greater depth to the novel. One  
does not expect a disquisition in a work  
of fiction, yet a firmer grasp of how fac-  
tors of race, class, gender, and ethnicity  
intertwine would have made this novel  
more satisfying. The author also too fre-  
quently relies on stereotypes as a substi-  
tute for characterization.

In spite of these shortcomings, how-  
ever, this is an important book. It is one  
of few to even try to tackle the uncom-  
fortable theme of Jews who have made  
their home in South Africa. And, by  
showing how sexual domination crosses  
lines of color and ethnicity, Freed  
suggests deeper parallels. The Frank fam-  
ily has a Black male servant Reuben who  
beats “his woman,” the beloved family  

servant who has raised Ruth. He con-  
vinces the other servants that he is  
superior to them by mimicking the white  
master’s manner of dress, even to the  
point of straightening his hair. The  
highly assimilated young white master,  
Jeffrey, Ruth’s brother-in-law, similarly  
abuses his wife, albeit more subtly, by  
pinching her “on the sly,” slapping her  
“in jest,” rudely ordering her about, and  
otherwise humiliating her in public. In  
both cases, the woman’s helplessness is  
palpable.

Looking around her, Ruth Frank (a re-  
ference to Anne Frank?) remains unsure  
of how to be a woman and ambivalent  
about being a Jew. She cannot imagine  
choosing any of the traditional options  
open to her as a woman in her culture,  
nor can she identify with the “estab-  
lished Jewish community,” composed  
mostly of businesspeople whom she  
views as shallow and tastelessly nouveau  
riche and whose codes and stratifications  
threaten to choke her. Yet she admires  
the ways in which her Indian friend  
Maya’s family adheres to their Indian  
heritage, including their language, and  
she longs for this kind of community.  
Ruth’s grandfather Abba (literally  
“father” in Hebrew) represents the most  
viable example of a Jew who has pride in  
his heritage and who ultimately makes it  
possible for her to get her European edu-  
cation. She, however, is unable to share  
Abba’s authenticity as a Jew and by the  
end of the novel, he (like Nora, “her sec-  
ond mother”) has died.

To find herself, and to escape this  
nightmare world, Ruth does ultimately  
leave her home ground with contradic-  
tory warnings ringing in her ears. “This is  
a country that is about to explode. One  
has to be deaf and blind not to know  
that . . . You must get out of here. This  
is a country with no future.” This mes-  
sage comes from the only authentic artist  
figure in the text, a woman of indepen-  
dent spirit, wisdom, and talent who  
takes a special interest in the young Ruth  
and believes in her. The second warning  
is her father’s, based on his own experi-  
ences: “If you go to Oxford you will go as  
a Jew and a South African.” She may es-  
cape the country and the family, but she  
will be unable to escape herself. Ruth de-  
termines to take that risk, and we see her  
at the end of the novel, boarding the  
plane that will take her to England,  
where she believes she will at last be  
“free.”

Home Ground might well be read  

in conjunction with a viewing  

of Maids and Madams, an im-  
portant one-hour documentary film  
made in 1985 by Mira Hamermesh, a  
Holocaust survivor. Hamermesh is a  
Polish-born Jewish painter who now  
lives in England. Her film documents  
the lives of Black “maids” and their  
white mistresses, or “madams” as they  
are called in South Africa, some of  
whom are Jewish. The film also shows  
how racism is inextricably linked with  

— continued on next page

Heroine or Guerrilla Groupie?

A Sport of Nature, by Nadine Gordimer.  
New York: Knopf, 1987, $18.95, 341 pp.

by Nancy Engbretsen  
Schaumburger

The title of this new novel by  

distinguished South African  

writer Nadine Gordimer evokes  
the common expression “a freak of Na-  
ture.” In choosing the title A Sport of Na-  
ture, Gordimer declares the focus of the  
novel: the career of Hillela and the ad-  
miring attitude that readers are presuma-  
bly supposed to take toward her. She is a  
curious aberration from conventional  
expectations; and “sport,” after all, has  
more positive, exciting connotations  
than “freak.” The novel’s title succeeds  
in its first aim, of concentrating our at-  
tention upon the puzzle of the main  
character but fails to recruit us among  
Hillela’s fans.

A Sport of Nature is narrated as a kind  
of flashback into the life of a woman who  
becomes a well-known revolutionary fig-  
ure. The omniscient, bemused, ulti-  
mately adoring biographer traces the life  
of Hillela backward from her midlife mo-  
ment of triumph: As the wife of the pres-  
ident of a newly independent Black Afri-  
can state, she is invited to represent their  
government at the Independence Day  
ceremonies of her native country, South  
Africa. The question that this unnamed  
third-person biographer attempts to an-  
swer as Hillela’s career is researched from  
adolescence onward is: How did she ar-  
rive at such fantastic success from rather  
unlikely beginnings?

Named after a Zionist great-grand-  
father, Hillela was abandoned at the age  
of two by her sexy young mother Ruthie,  
who ran off with a Portuguese nightclub  
dancer and then left by her traveling  
salesman father to be raised alternately  
by the mother’s two sisters. These two  
generous, colorful aunts and their  
families provide the context for Hillela’s  
growing-up years. Her rich Aunt Olga  
teaches Hillela the style and grace that  

she later uses skillfully on the diplomatic  
circuit while her Aunt Pauline, an over-  
worked antiapartheid activist, exposes  
her to the meaning and cost of a social  
conscience. Hillela appears to be an un-  
exceptional girl, interested in clothes  
and boys, until the age of 19. Then she  
drops out of school and, for no apparent  
reason, breaks all ties with her relatives,  
drifting out of sight without a backward  
glance or even a postcard.

She soon has to flee South Africa with  
her first important boyfriend, a jour-  
nalist who appears to be wanted by the  
authorities and who we learn later was a  
double agent. She finds herself among  
fellow exiles deserted on the beach in a  
neighboring country. Pitied for her  
youth and penniless condition, Hillela is  
more or less adopted by them. She drifts  
a bit from job to job and lover to lover.  
Eventually she meets Whaila, a Black,  
South African, revolutionary leader,  
marries him, and bears her only child.  
She dedicates her to the cause by giving  
her the tribal, first name of Winnie  
Mandela—Nomzamo. Hillela is happy  
as a handmaiden to revolutionaries, pre-  
paring tea and baby food, until her hus-  
band is assassinated in her presence.  
This traumatic event, we are led to be-  
lieve, makes Hillela herself a committed  
revolutionary.

Using her status as the widow of a  
political martyr, Hillela works her way  
up the bureaucratic ladder of fundraising  
for her cause. She labors tirelessly, rising  
higher with each posting to various  
countries and, again, with numerous  
lovers. She meets her Castro-like second  
husband, the future president, during  
one of her daring behind-the-lines visits  
to check on the needs of his men and the  
poor villagers they are liberating. The  
rest we know: power, success, celebrity.  
Fortyish Hillela is a politically signifi-  
cant first lady, receiving visitors at the  
palace who range from her fashion model  
daughter to foreign dignitaries and dis-  
creet lovers.

Does this plot sound like a screenplay  
written for Vanessa Redgrave? Hillela  
too gets her photograph taken with Yasir  
Arafat! Unfortunately, the chief flaw in  
A Sport of Nature is that Hillela has no  
convincing inner life. She is too glamor-  
ous to be believable. The novel re-  
peatedly asks us to draw conclusions as to  
why Hillela demonstrates no loyalty to  
her family and no long-term interest in  
sexually exclusive relationships when  
she seems paradoxically so dedicated to  
freeing people and nations. This un-  
explained lack is presented as a sphinx-  
like enigma, part of Hillela’s elusive  
charm or perhaps a necessary quirk in  
some revolutionaries. However, readers  
will tend to perceive Hillela in quite  
another way as a somewhat cloying and  
annoying, typically self-centered per-  
petual teenager who happens to be kinky  
for guerrillas as others are for rock stars.  
Is she, after all, just another version of  
her runaway mother?

Exotic, technicolor locales and de-  
signer cameos regrettably do not make a  
three-dimensional character. By the  
same token, Hillela’s advocacy of the  
same humanitarian goals that we all  
share for her suffering country tends to  
trivialize them.

Gordimer’s commendable personal  
courage and humanly correct political  
opinions have understandably induced  
many reviews to overrate A Sport of Na-  
ture as literature. At best, it is a readable  
story, especially in the childhood sec-  
tions. Hillela is much more interesting as  
a child, with attachments, than as an  
adult who seems to operate on the prin-  
ciple of no-strings attached. However,  
readers new to Gordimer should first  
read some of her very fine short stories.  
For those who wish to learn more about  
the cruel realities of present-day life in  
South Africa, where Gordimer bravely  
continues to reside, I recommend the  
Albert Finney film An Inquest into the  
Death of Stephen Biko.

@ Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger is  
chair of the English Department at Manhat-  
tanville College. She teaches courses in com-  
monwealth literature and British women  
writers of the 20th century.

March/April 1988