Honoring the Creative Fires

Elsa: I Come With My Songs, by Elsa Gidlow. Booklegger Press (555 29th St., San Francisco, CA 94131), 1986, $10.95, 422 pp., photographs, index. (PB)

by Susanna J. Sturgis

Since taking root in my life a few weeks ago, the autobiography Elsa: I Come With My Songs has been a source of joy, challenge, reassurance, humor, wonder, and courage. Trying to review it, however, has been a nerve-wracking process, beset with lackadaisical prose and escalating deadline anxiety. Where to begin? How to describe its importance and why, when what I want to do is place a copy in your hands and say, “Read this”?

Of the public honor accorded her in old age, Elsa Gidlow wrote, “I feel I have done nothing remarkable unless quietly being oneself is remarkable.” In this society “quietly being oneself” is remarkable, even if one is not, as Gidlow was, a poet, lesbian, lover, and feminist from the early decades of the century until her death at age 87 in June 1986.

In 1905, Gidlow came from Hull, Yorkshire, with her family to isolation and dire poverty in a rural Quebec village. Her alcoholic father traveled extensively in his work and left the raising of seven children to his wife. With “warring wills, personalities with no space to grow and stretch, frustrated talents,” most of the seven eventually succumbed to passivity and madness.

In late 1916 the Gidlows moved to Montreal, where Elsa’s horizons expanded to include membership in a library, a little money and time of her own, and her first “passionate friendship” with another young woman. In her diary she vowed, “I am going to get a room of my own. I am going to find my kind of people.”

This she managed with considerable ingenuity. At 19 she started a writers’ group by answering her own pseudonymous letter in the daily newspaper. For her own adventuring spirit, the poet honors her mother, Alice Reichart Gidlow, who, though “caged by endless duties and commitments,” conveyed to her eldest daughter “the feeling that the world was not dangerous or menacing but a wonderful place to be explored and experienced.”

In her explorations, poetry and the love of women were twin lodestars; repeatedly Gidlow risked precarious economic security in order to sustain her inner life, and thus her writing. She made her living as a freelance editor and writer, yielding no one the right to tell her how to live. Grounded in the messy vitality of daily living, her pagan-feminist-Zen spirituality and politics resist generalization.

Gidlow’s encounters with love were sometimes short but never casual. She writes:

Deep in me, deeper than dreams, haunted the figure, the face of a woman. It is as if She had been known in some intense attachment in a forgotten life. There have been glimpses of her, a feature, at times no more than a feeling or memory, drawing me to each of the women I have loved, or who have roused passion. Always the encounter has been a surprise.

In the hands of this Sapphic poet, each telling is at once a memoir and a discovery.

Celebrating the winter solstice in 1940 with a fire in her newly bought “huddle of wood that no one else would consider a house,” Gidlow felt as if she were joined by “mother, grandmother, elder aunts, and back, back, back, all the women through the ages who had kindled and tended sacred and domestic fires.” She kept the remains of that fire and used it to kindle the next year’s, and so on to the end of her life. Likewise this book is to me the result of one fire, the material from which more can be kindled. What I feel for Elsa Gidlow is not distanced admiration for a courageous woman whose times have passed. Rather, it is a passionate, almost desperate, desire to hear her speak and speak again of honoring those creative fires, of realizing a world where human-heartedness, “the art of knowing how to live, how to be at home in life, at ease with the Universe whose expression and consciousness we are,” is no longer remarkable. “If we are not born with the gift, as some are, we must acquire it... Human-heartedness is the basis of the arts and philosophies; without it they become sterile. It must permeate every aspect of our relations with one another.”

Wearing lightly the enormous odds against her, Gidlow aimed to live in accord with her developing nature, “not only as a lesbian, but where my philosophy as a whole might lead me.” Her integrity and her tacit assumption that superhuman sanctity is not required strengthen my faith that I, too, can at each crossroad choose to remain in the present world and moment, open to the next poem, another day.

® Susanna J. Sturgis drives a borrowed car, lives in a borrowed house, and looks after two borrowed cats, all the while wishing heartily that poets were compensated as generously as defense contractors.

Note: In order to provide a place where women artists could “give unhampered of their best” and develop comradeship with each other, Elsa Gidlow established the Druid Heights Artists’ Retreat. For information write Box 426, Larkspur, CA 94939.

—Telling Lives, continued

Unable to make sense of her marriage, her love affairs, even of her love for Sylvia. Ackland considered Sylvia’s love godlike and beyond her capacity to deserve, and she considered her own extraordinary accomplishment of giving up alcohol without help a divine gift.

Books such as For Sylvia show that telling lesbian lives serves an important function for the lesbian community: It can save a woman’s sanity and sometimes even a life. For contemporary lesbians, The Lesbian Path creates a context into which lesbians can put their individual differences and collective sameness. The Lesbian Path, a pioneering book of lesbian autobiographical essays first published in 1979 and now reprinted in a revised and enlarged edition, retains much of its interest even now that numerous anthologies and full-length autobiographies have been published. The great strength of The Lesbian Path is in its size and diversity. Thirty-five contributors of various ages, races, backgrounds, and home towns each tell their different stories, but all, in some sense, tell the same story over and over again: “I am brave, because I live as a lesbian. I am afraid because I live as a lesbian. I would choose over and over to live as a lesbian, whether I feel brave or whether I feel afraid.”

The particulars of these women’s lives hang on in the reader’s imagination because their words speak so directly of the power of lesbian love and living. Even the painful stories impart a sense of community and understanding. Margaret Sloan-Hunter’s poem about her life as a fat Black lesbian wanting “a place to be tiny” is itself a tiny gem that instantly makes it clear what it feels like to be Margaret Sloan-Hunter. Unlike Ackland’s, Sloan-Hunter’s pain has a different context. Joan Nestle’s “An Old Life” invokes the world of butch and femme, only to make us realize that beneath the roles there was one lesbian reality that persists: butch or femme, a lesbian “did unwomanly things.” Butch or femme, a lesbian was an “adventurer.”

All these insights into lesbian lives have an obvious role in the lives of lesbians; they are lore, collective wisdom, keys to self-knowledge, and passports to greater intimacy with each other. But what do these books offer readers who are not lesbians? Why would a straight reader read them? For one, these books are wonderful testaments to the resiliency of the female spirit. More important, they can help us all better understand where we are different and where we are the same. Difference is not necessarily something to be feared or eschewed. Difference can bring delight, possibility, challenge. The danger arises when difference remains unilluminated. “When we allow a piece of the world to remain exotic in our imaginations,” writes Adrienne Rich in her introduction to My Mama’s Dead Squirrel, “we dehumanize its people and collaborate in our own ignorance.”

® Lynne M. Constantine is a freelance writer and critic in Washington, DC.

Belles Lettres @ 5