IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Amidst Fantasy and Freedom

by Cathie Brettschneider

Salome, Her Life and Work, by Angela  
Livingstone. Moyer Bell Ltd., June 1985,  
$18.95, 256 pp.

Nietzsche’s disciple, Rilke’s lover,  
Freud’s colleague and friend. She  
was an intelligent and influential  
woman in her own right, yet she is  
known primarily for the company she  
kept. In this provocative, astute, and  
engaging biography by the director of  
the Centre for Russian and Soviet  
Studies at Essex University in England,  
Angela Livingstone tells the fascinating  
and frequently fantastical story of Lou’s  
life and work, showing how she was  
every bit the match of her famous com-  
panions and even the source of their  
inspiration. A close look at the details  
of Lou’s life will bring into focus the  
qualities that made her so extraordi-  
nary and that captivated the company  
that she kept.

Louise von Salome was born in a  
German-speaking family living in  
Russia in February 1861. Her 57-year-  
old father and 38-year-old mother were  
members of high society, and she had  
a grand and patriarchal home life. Al-  
though Lou recalled being fond of both  
her parents, childhood incidents re-  
corded later show only hostility about  
her mother, whereas with her father  
she had a secret bond of affection. The  
youngest of six children, and the only  
girl, Lou acquired from her brothers a  
confidence in being among older men.  
Yet in spite of the good fortune and op-  
portunity that surrounded her, she was  
a withdrawn and lonely child who re-  
treated to an absolute life of fantasy.  
Lou knew two kinds of inner reality:  
one a very personal God who she never  
doubted was on her side; the other a  
deliberately cultivated stock of people,  
half imaginary, half real. The former  
eventually shattered when she noticed  
that God was neither visible nor audi-  
ble, and she lost her belief. The latter  
seemed to remain with her throughout  
her life, as manifested in her selective  
memory of people and events, the  
blurred distinction between actual  
happening and wishful thinking, and  
her complete disinterest in the social  
and political questions of the world  
outside her own inner sphere.

At 17 Lou undertook confirmation  
lessons from a Pastor Hendrik Gillot,  
whose reputation as the most brilliant  
and most unorthodox Protestant  
preacher in Petersburg prompted her  
to seek him out. He demanded that she  
give up her daydreams and do so by  
bringing them all to him. Finding that  
his teaching, with an emphasis on logic  
and learning, as well as his personal in-  
fluence rescued her from her fantasy  
world and brought her to an intellec-  
tual reality, she began to worship the  
teacher as God. The lessons were emo-  
tionally and mentally so demanding  
that in one of them she fainted. As  
Livingstone reports, Lou was sitting on  
Gillot’s lap at the time, for he offered  
love and personal closeness in addition  
to command and rigor. When the close  
feeling became erotic on his part and he  
initiated family arrangements for a  
union with her, Lou’s love of him  
“dropped out of her heart,” and the  
shock was that of a second loss of God.  
Given the forcefulness of Gillot’s per-  
sonality, Lou foresaw her loss of free-  
dom were she to accept his proposal  
and its attendant subjugation. This  
proved a decisive experience for Lou,  
for she was never to yield herself  
sexually to a man until she was free  
of this risk of subordination. At this  
point she believed her love life was  
over.

To Italy where she met Paul Ree, a  
fellow philosopher and close friend  
of Friedrich Nietzsche for 7 years. Lou  
saw Ree as someone who presented no  
risk of her falling in love, and so she  
chose him as a friend and intellectual  
companion. After declining Ree’s even-  
tual marriage proposal, Lou won him  
over to a “sexless friendship,” and they  
began to make plans to live together.  
Ree felt that Lou would be the ideal  
companion and fellow thinker for  
Nietzsche, and so he wrote to him and  
arranged a meeting. Nietzsche likewise  
fell in love with Lou and proposed  
marriage, but Lou again declined. Yet  
the friendship between them pros-  
pered, and marriage was never men-  
tioned again.

By this time in her life, Lou, at 21,  
had a reputation for being “almost un-  
womanly” in her mental directness and  
independence of will. As Livingstone  
points out, under his tutelage Gillot  
had freed her to herself, sending her  
out into the world “boyishly ready”  
rather than “girlishly dependent.” She  
had spent a year in Zurich, where she  
attended university lectures on logic,  
metaphysics, and the history of reli-  
gion; and she wrote poems expressive  
of her love of life, thirst for experience,  
and need for freedom. It was this in-  
telligent and free spirit that attracted  
Nietzsche, giving rise to his hope that  
Lou might be the “heir” to his  
philosophy.

The time Lou and Nietzsche spent to-  
gether was thick with talk of good and  
evil, the needed death of morality in  
order to live morally, the religiousness  
of the freethinker, and the heroism of  
giving oneself up to a grand goal. Lou  
and Ree meanwhile kept up a corre-  
spondence, hers a record of thoughts,  
his a stream of love letters. Nietzsche,  
Lou, and Ree spent several weeks to-  
gether in Leipzig toward the end of that  
year (1882) and, calling themselves a  
Trinity, planned their winter of study,  
went to the theatre, and entertained  
visitors.

The Trinity was not to last. In Leip-  
zig Nietzsche realized how removed  
from the center of Lou’s life he was and  
how close to that center Ree was.  
Slander from his devoted sister Eliza-  
beth, who had grown to hate Lou as a  
threat and a sinister influence on her  
brother, coupled with the risk of sacri-  
ficing his family security and dismay at  
losing Lou to Ree, turned Nietzsche  
against her. Instead of the heir to his  
ideals he saw her as a caricature of  
them. When the three friends left Leip-  
zig, Nietzsche saw neither Lou nor Ree  
again. It was several months later  
before Nietzsche, having finally re-  
cognized the ill will of his sister, could  
credit Lou with being one of his  
acquaintances to have been the most  
valuable and full of consequence; the  
most gifted, most talented creature; the  
one to have made him “ripe” for  
Zarathustra.

For the next 3 years Lou and Ree  
defied a range of expectations by living  
together without being married and  
doing so, furthermore, without passion  
or intimacy. Living in Berlin, they  
chose their acquaintances with care,  
cultivating friends among scientists,  
orientalists, historians, and philoso-  
phers—among whom Lou was the only  
woman and by far the youngest in the  
group. Her biographer astutely ob-  
serves that this was “no salon, no draw-  
ing-room reception of clever men by a  
woman more talented socially than in-  
tellectually. Lou von Salome, who  
constantly studied and wrote...was very  
much one of them....” Further, “it  
could almost seem a salon run by Ree,  
with Lou as one of the chief men”  
(pp. 59-60). Gradually, however, Lou  
and Ree grew apart and no longer  
shared their home. Lou continued to  
write and rejected several offers of mar-  
riage, until in 1886 she met Fred  
Charles Andreas, a specialist in  
Oriental languages. There is little ex-  
planation of the ensuing event, histori-  
cally or psychologically, but Lou be-  
came engaged to Andreas in November  
and married him the following June, he  
41, she 26. By marrying Andreas, Lou  
lost Ree altogether, although she never  
told him she had no intention of  
consummating the marriage. Indeed,  
she recorded an incident from early in  
the marriage when in her sleep she  
began to strangle her husband as he  
tried to take possession of her while she  
slept! Andreas allegedly never tried  
again. 

Livingstone takes this opportunity  
to develop Lou’s ideas on love, sex, and  
marriage. For Lou, married love and  
sexual love were quite separate things,  
and her view of sex as an overpowering  
subjugation had not changed. Living-  
stone speculates that Andreas was a  
kind of father figure, like Gillot, for  
whom Lou may have felt love but not  
a desire to possess or be possessed.

During the next 10 years Lou’s re-  
sistance to sexual involvement almost  
broke down, once in a relationship  
with Georg Ledebour, a journalist who  
tempted her with a “knowledge” of  
something of which she was thus far  
ignorant, and then later in an attrac-  
tion to the writer Richard Beer-Hof-  
mann. The experience with Ledebour  
prompted Lou and Andreas to ac-  
knowledge a need to live apart from  
time to time, and thus began a series of  
lengthy separations and extended  
travels. As Livingstone observes, the  
unconventional marriage not only con-  
firmed Lou’s inward freedom but also  
forced her out into greater freedom of  
movement and acquaintance. In 1897  
Lou went to Munich, where she met  
the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, who be-  
came her first lover.

Livingstone writes that at the time  
Lou met Nietzsche “she had been  
a brainy, boyish girl, twenty-one  
years old to his thirty-eight, and firmly  
armored against passion; with Rilke,  
the age relation was reversed—she was  
in her late thirties and he twenty-one.  
She was now a much published author  
...of mature and practiced intellect, and  
ready, through the Ledebour crisis and  
the mere advantage of age, to be dis-  
armed sexually” (p. 100). Lou was  
attracted to Rilke’s lack of possessive-  
ness, for he was undemanding and  
utterly submissive, a man with whom  
she did not risk losing her indepen-  
dence. She liked his grace and the way  
body and person seemed one. “If for  
years I was your wife,” she later wrote  
to him, “it was because you were some-  
thing real to me for the first time.” The  
meeting with Lou was a turning-point  
for Rilke as well. He changed his name  
at her suggestion “from the effeminate  
Rene to the stronger Rainer.” He ad-  
mired her carefree trust in all things,  
her kindness that knew no fear, and  
saw her as mother and home. It was  
she who had made the future possible  
for him, she in whom he found  
Eternity.

Throughout their first years as lovers  
Lou and Rilke were together nearly all  
the time. Andreas would visit, and  
others would come and go. Later Lou  
settled back with Andreas, and Rilke  
would frequently visit. But there was  
discord. Lou found in Rilke’s poems an  
excess of feeling, and his attacks of de-  
pression and a kind of childishness  
between periods of creativity put a  
strain on her. She tried to keep things  
cheerful and balanced and cure him of  
his fears. But Rilke in the process felt  
diminished by the very qualities in her  
he most needed, and he took trips with-  
out her in an effort to acquire indepen-  
dence and strength.

In 1899 Lou, Andreas, and Rilke  
took a train to Moscow, for Lou and  
Rilke had been studying Russian lan-  
guage, literature, and geography. They  
visited Tolstoy and other writers,  
artists, and poets; traveled around the  
country; and returned to Berlin.  
Then—without Andreas—they went  
back to Russia the following year.  
During this second trip Lou’s relation-  
ship with Rilke began to erode. Her late  
sexual awakening and discovery of new  
things about herself set her apart from  
Rilke and his anxieties, and she finally  
decided to make the break—to free him  
of his dependence on her, and to free  
herself of the burden he had become.

Rilke was later to marry, become a  
father, and then separate from wife and  
child, at which time he contacted Lou  
again. This began a series of long “con-  
fessional” letters, written at times of  
prolonged creative crisis in his life. Lou  
encouraged him to write as a release  
and to send his writings to her, be-  
lieving that the telling of his fears  
would help alleviate them and in turn  
aid the creative process. Many times  
Rilke told her, “You alone know who I  
am.” Through the years they continued  
to correspond and visit, activating  
Rilke’s deep psychic and existential  
need of her while Lou remained  
supportive and affectionate, though  
emotionally removed. This relationship  
continued up to Rilke’s death in 1926.

The culmination of Lou’s career,  
writes her biographer, was her en-