Wistful, Baffled Outsiders

Dislocations, by Janette Turner Hospital. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,

1988, $16.95, 210 pp.

by Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger

This splendid collection of short

stories by Australian-born Jan-

ette Turner Hospital focuses
chiefly on the incongruities of modern
life, with a special wry twist of perspec-
tive, for characters from extremely dif-
ferent backgrounds. Hospital draws on
her residency on four continents and
among diverse cultures for her intimate,
unmistakably authentic glimpses of the
ways in which mastery of current reality
continues to perplex and confound even
the best-prepared of humankind. Typi-
cally the lot of the unassimilated alien,
this experience of befuddlement is now
ours as well—so Hospital seems to sug-
gest. Reading these stories makes one
reluctantly perceive our common iden-
tity, at the present period of rapid tran-
sition, with the sad, wistful, baffled out-
siders who mostly populate her fiction.
It is, in short, the time that is out of
joint, not the geography.

Like some of the prize-winning work
of her fellow “dislocatee,” Bharati
Mukherjee, Hospital’s fiction expands
and enriches the canon of great writing
by women in English around the globe.
In the first and possibly the finest story of
this collection, for example, she offers a
complex variant of the “same time, next
year” plot. “Happy Diwali” involves two
lovers who have a kind of romantic pact
temporarily to forget their cultural oth-
erness in a suburban Ontario town by
attending the local Indian community’s
annual celebration of a Thanksgiving-
like Hindu festival.

Sani, called His Highness, is honored
as a descendant of a Moghul prince,
though he now (it is rumored) waits on
tables when need pinches. The Goan,
half-Christian young woman whom he
has come to meet bears the comical
name of Perpetua Engine-wallah, which
her intelligent awareness of life’s many
absurdities has permitted her to tran-
scend. They have both absorbed the best
of Western culture, such as a taste for
the symphony, but not “that neurotic
preoccupation with beginning on the
dot of the advertised hour.” Perpetua
rejoices that she has retained the Eastern

Janette Turner Hospital

perception of the glorious unity, the
oneness of all this evening’s varied ex-
periences: the colorful traditional
clothes, the spicy food, the tuning up of
the raga musicians, the French pastry to
be shared back at the hotel, the
lovemaking afterward. What they do
not know at the onset of this year’s ritual
is that it will be their last together. They
tell each other of their families’ respec-
tive arrangements for their marriages to
suitable partners back home. Consider-
ing the compromises and makeshifts of
life for them in the West, alone, we
cannot but agree that their heartbreak-
ing consent to custom is perhaps “the
best thing.”

At dawn Sani greets the sun with
Urdu poetry, while Perpetua remembers
a ruined, beautiful Portuguese mission in
the jungle that her father showed her
once when she was a child, telling her,
“We love best what we have lost for-
ever.” He brushes away her tears and
bids her tenderly, ironically, “Happy
Diwali.” The artistic power of this story
of impossible love (and other losses too
subtle to attempt describing) will evoke

Baumgartner’s Bombay
by Anita Desai
New York: Knopf, 1989, $18.95, 230 pp.

Although Anita Desai’s new novel,
Baumgartner’s Bombay, spans the same
time period of other “Raj” novels, it for-
swears their exotic and romantic atmos-
phere, casting a different light on India
and the foreigners it attracts.

The focus of the work is the antihero
Baumgartner, an outsider par excellence
who is bereft of the normal props of
identity — like country, ethnicity, and
people. The sadness of this man, whose
only desire is to exist peaceably, is over-
whelming. He comes to terms with his
father’s suicide, with having fled the
Holocaust, and with internment during
the war. He finds a sort of contentment
even when daily existence is reduced to
doing the rounds of Bombay begging
scraps for his cats.

Although he knows that he will al-
ways be a “firanghi,” or foreigner, no
matter where he is, that too has become
acceptable. But it is not his acceptance
alone that matters. In the end, one of
his own betrays him, Judas-like, for a
few silver trophies with which to buy
drugs. Baumgartner cannot explain log-
ically the emotional responsibility he
assumes toward the German hippie. He

4 @ Belles Lettres

Anita Desai

is doubtful as to how much of it is spon-
taneous and how much is forced upon
him; nonetheless an unfulfilled yearning
draws him toward losers like the German
cabaret singer Lotte and the junkie.

Desai brings to the novel a perspec-
tive derived from her heritage of mixed
German-Indian parentage. Since Cry,
the Peacock, her first novel, her style and
imagery have become more sparse, yet
she retains the ability to evoke a mood or
a personality that comes back to haunt
one. One can almost savor her novels
better in retrospect.

—Geetanjali Singh

comparisons to Chekhov at his narrative
peak, as in “The Lady With the Dog.”

Hospital’s gift for the tragicomedy
inherent in the clash of cultures is also
illustrated, in a different vein, in “Ashes
to Ashes.” Here a young Indian couple
exchange garlands and marital vows “in
an ecstasy of mutual misunderstanding,”
she thinking of the night of passion to
come, he of his sudden inspiration to
make their fortune in corpses. The
groom, a graduate of MIT with a degree
in electrical engineering, aspires to re-
place the religious rite of burning the
dead beside the Ganges (a practice that
has become distastefully primitive to
him). The wonder of American tech-
nology that Krish wants to substitute is
the electric crematorium. He persuades
the town council that such an enterprise
would be progressive, not blasphemous,
and construction begins. Then one by
one, in spooky succession, each of the
building contractors dies. The project
also suffers from a dearth of corpses with
which to demonstrate the efficiency of
the crematorium. Finally, when a visit-
ing American classmate who has gone
Hindu nears death from hepatitis, Krish
thinks he sees an auspicious end to this
macabre comedy of errors—but the con-
vert’s last wish is “that you, my dear
friend, you alone should light my funeral
pyre.” Philosophically, Krish accepts his
quirky karma.

“The Inside Story” features two kinds
of social outsiders, the inmates of a
maximum-security prison and their tea-
cher of a college-credit course on the
prisoner as hero. At first the men suspect
that she has chosen her work for “some
goddamn humanitarian reason,” that she
is just another do-gooding, “tragic bloo-
dy humanist.” She assures them that she
has no other employment opportunities
and is “only doing it for the money,” a
phrase of explanation that she shares
with a bank robber who is her student.
The class gradually accepts her because
she treats them as equals and appreciates
the insights that they provide about the
realities of prison life contrasted to the
literary representation of it. They talk
often, with grim humor, about salvation
and damnation, agreeing finally that
only “the sleaze” is damned, those who
have cracked under pressure and be-
trayed their souls. She expresses her fear
that she would crumble instantly if tor-
tured. It is at this rare, poignant mo-
ment of rapport that the students pay
their gutsy teacher, a genuine humani-
tarian despite herself, the compliment
that she treasures more than all other
awards:

You’d get mad as hell and it would jolt
you right out of all that garbage of fear
you carry around in your skull. Besides,
you can take it from us, and we are ex-
perts on this subject, you are not and
never could be a sleaze.

Of course, the teacher never makes any
lasting improvements in the lives of
these hard cases and ultimately loses her
job when riots break out. She later hears
from a parolee about the murder of a fa-
vorite student by his lovable, oddly dig-
nified, violent friend because he tried to
comfort the friend, found sobbing over a
“Dear John” letter from his wife. And
this woman who only did it “for the
money” reacts with piercing emotion, as
if she has not just lost a paycheck but an
irreplaceable set of relationships with
people she loved.

The highest praise for achievement in
the writing of fiction is perhaps that the
author’s art is adequate for the complex-
ity of human experience that she or he
tries to reflect. Hospital’s Dislocations is
distinguished for having attained this
special kind of adequacy, which borders
on perfection.

—Nancy Engbretsen Schaumburger is
professor of English at Manhattanville Col-
lege, where she teaches courses in interna-
tional writers in English and British women
writers of the twentieth century.

A Female Vision

of the City

London in the Novels
of Five British Women
Christine Wick Sizemore
July, 320 pages, illustrations,
ISBN 0-87049-599-2, $27.95

Seeking the Woman

in Late Medieval

and Renaissance Writings
Essays in Feminist
Contextual Criticism
Edited by Sheila Fisher

and Janet E. Halley

288 pages, illustrations,

ISBN 0-87049-591-7, $29.95

Black and White Women
of the Old South

The Peculiar Sisterhood
in American Literature
Minrose C. Gwin

248 pages, ISBN 0-87049-469-4,
$21.95

New Paperbacks!

Sara Teasdale
Woman and Poet
William Drake

320 pages, illustrations,
ISBN 0-87049-606-9, $32.50
cloth library edition,

ISBN 0-87049-595-X, $14.95
paper

Close Connections

Caroline Gordon
and the Southern
Renaissance

Ann Waldron

416 pages, illustrations,
ISBN 0-87049-594-1, $14.95

paper

Pauli Murray

The Autobiography

of a Black Activist,
Feminist, Lawyer, Priest,
and Poet

Formerly Song in a Weary Throat:
An American Pilgrimage

464 pages, illustrations,

ISBN 0-87049-596-8, $16.95

paper

The University of Tennessee
Press wants to publish more
outstanding feminist scholar-
ship in American studies.
Query us about your manu-
script in women's studies.
Sincerely,

Wallace Orr
Director

The University
of Tennessee Press

Knoxville 37996-0325

Summer 1989