pinnings of any literature. But, with a few strong excep-
tions, most of the stories here share a style so similar they
might have been written by the same person. This is proba-
bly more a result of the authors’ relative inexperience, or
the numbing effect of university writing programs, rather
than something in the Lake Travis water. But it is sobering.
Ah, but there are those exceptions. From Lee Merrill
Byrd we have "Hotter Here Than It Ever Was in New
Jersey," an exquisite piece that takes place entirely in the
burn unit of a Galveston hospital. Harryette Mullen’s
"Tenderhead" lovingly creates a young Black girl’s weekly
trips to the beauty parlor to have her hair straightened, a
story saved from glowing sentiment by its powerful, under-
stated ending. In "Cheers, Everybody!" by Carolyn Weath-
ers, we finally get a genuine sense of place: The story is set
in San Antonio in the sixties, and in that city’s gay bars and
roadhouses to boot. It is an offbeat, moving evocation of a
time that seems almost as remote now as the Depression.

A sixties sensibility also permeates Pat Ellis Taylor’s "A
Spell Without Books." Taylor is especially good at convey-
ing the giddy sense of freedom that follows one’s decision
to cut loose from the work-a-day world, even if her protag-
onist spends less time writing than wandering the streets of
Austin high on hallucinogenic mushrooms or making whole-
wheat bread for the winter solstice. "Old Enough" by Mary
K. Flatten is set in Austin as well: a very funny story about
someone “old enough to be left for a younger woman,
young enough not to care."

A few stories give us characters not drawn from artistic
or working classes. Joyce Meier’s "A Good-looking Wom-
an" spends her time at the Golden Door Spa, courtesy of
her ex-husband, and models at Mr. Ray’s of Dallas. The
eponymous socialite of "This One’s for Linda Joy," by
Bobbie Louise Hawkins, lives her whole life within an hour
of Lubbock before heading for Northern California. And
S.L. Wisenberg’s "The Sweetheart Is In" is marvelous, one
of the only stories here that really succeeds in making its
heroine’s experiences seem universal, even while homing in
on the particular events that comprised growing up Jewish
in Texas in the early seventies.

But highest honors go to Gail Galloway Adams, whose
contribution is just about perfect. A haunting piece about
memory and loss, "The Purchase of Order" follows a re-
tired couple on their cross-country jaunts in an RV. They
are searching for another couple, another family:

Lamont and Jean Dillon and their kids — when they met
them twenty-two years ago in Arkansas, it was one of those
meetings between two families where everything hits right
and it is forever and always. But in this case, the Maxeys
don’t know how, it fell away through not keeping in touch,
both of them moving on too many times.

In the author’s notes that accompany the collection, Gail
Galloway Adams suggests she might someday follow her
characters into a novel. For now we can only hope: This is
a stunning piece of work.

Even if this anthology only adds to the store of Texas
literature by one or two or three pieces, it is still a good
start. And Texas will always be there, waiting for the writer
who is strong enough to capture it.

© Elizabeth Hand’s novel, Winterlong, will be published
this fall. Her book reviews appear regularly in the Washing-
ton Post, Penthouse, and Science Fiction Eye. She has many
friends and relations in Texas.

People Who Are
“Too Something”

Women’s Writing in Exile, by Mary Lynn Broe and Angela Ingram.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1989, $39.95 (HB),
$13.95 (PB), 442 pp.

by Mary Anne Schofield

Exile— (n.) Prolonged separation from one’s country or home; as
by stress of circumstances, (2) anyone separated from his/her
country or home, (3) expulsion from one’s native land by authori-
tative decree.

C ritical readers

of today’s feminist
texts cannot afford to
be exiled from Mary
Lynn Broe and Angela
Ingram’s provocative
and challenging collec-
tion of essays, Wo-
men’s Writing in Ex-
ile. Using "exile" both
geographically and
metaphorically to
mean “to be separated
by other people’s
criteria, spatially and
ideologically," Broe and Ingram examine the alienated
position of the woman writer in the modern world. Though
specifically concerned with exile narratives by Djuna Bar-
nes, H.D., Alice Walker, Isak Dinesen, Jean Rhys, Nadine
Gordimer, Doris Lessing, Sylvia Townsend Warner, and
Virginia Woolf, the editors provide a far-reaching examina-
tion of exile in diverse contexts.

As with exile itself, the center is always shifting, creating
disorientation of genre and text that both engages and dis-
tances the reader. If the essays succeed, the solitary readers
join with the author of the article, the editors, and the writ-
ers being discussed in exploring and defining the ongoing
female state of exile. One thing only remains certain: to a
hierarchical, imperialist civilization, the writers in this
volume are "alien." To investigate the patriarchal culture
that has exiled the modern female writer, Broe and Ingram
explore the narrative voice of mothers, daughters, wives,
and sisters of men historically labeled exiles. These women
have produced "exilic texts which, in reflecting the master
discourses, subvert them."

Providing an ever-changing map of “no-man’s land," the
collection charts the exile’s cultural and literary territory.
Shari Benstock traces the development of literary "female
modernism exile" and gives new definitions of "expatriated
in patria." She argues that "matria" is not the underside of
"patria" (as Sandra Gilbert has described it), but instead is
an "internal exclusion ... by and through which patria is
defined." She continues: “Patria can exist only by exclud-
ing, banishing matria; matria is always expatriated." Here,
Benstock provides the central conundrum of the Women’s
Writing in Exile text: it is an outsider who defines the in-