— A Geography, continued

Words of hymns in her work, speaks of
learning things “by heart,” prayer
meetings and “being saved,” and curios-
ity about Catholics. Her title poem,
“Sacred Heart, Minnesota,” discusses
childhood differences and ends with

these lines:

When I was eight, a big Catholic
kid asked me

up to his garage loft to see his
crucifix.

Even then I knew that Lutherans
are justified

by faith alone,

and kept my legs crossed.

In Trying to be an Honest Woman,
Judith Barrington’s world is wider. She
writes of Spain, of the poet Lorca, of
Vita Sackville-West, and of the garden
Vita created at Sissinghurst. In “A
Remarkably Vigorous Rose” Barrington
begins:

They want women to be like
gardens

cultivated possessed

perfected by man.

The plucked tea rose in the vase
and the vase-shaped woman posed
their sensualities

both despised.

Plants and wives

become invisible

and husbandry is a revealing word.

Barrington’s work is more direct than
Simpson’s and Hanson’s. Her first lines
confront you. In “Lesbian” she begins,
“Nobody said the word/ when school dis-
missed two girls/ who lay in the long
grass hand in hand.” She deals with
sexual preference in an open and honest
way, telling how she learned “the word.”
Barrington is British, and an arrange-
ment of poems describes how she came
to America. She writes of her sister and
of conversations they cannot have; she
writes things unsaid to her deceased
mother, she says in an especially moving
poem, “Downhill,” which weaves child-
hood and adult reflection into a land-
scape that moves from Chanctonbury
Ring in England to an Oregon forest.

Barrington’s titles are never simple,
but are carefully fitting and fitted.
“Sonnet for a Stiff Upper Lip” begins,
“Awful truths can mutter under the
breastbone/ hide their heads, grow fat on
opulent time.” “Two Villanelles” makes
me believe in form again. “Replay” and

“Coming Home” roll and could be com-
mitted to memory. Barrington has skill
and range. Again, it puzzles me that she
is not wider published.

Martha Collins’s Catastrophe of
Rainbows is a collection iridescent and
mercurial as its name, full of magic
poems composed in a voice that narrates
several lifetimes in a line. “Blue Roses,”
a mother—daughter-self poem, overlays
assertion for independence, the surge to
sever forever the umbilical cord, and the
resolution of reality. Collins allows her
imagination to leap rainbow high, soar
balloon light. “Several Things” is a
poem that deserves a better title:

Several things could happen in this
poem.
Plums could appear on a pewter

plate.
A dead red hare, hung by one foot.
A vase of flowers. Three shallots.

The poem moves from this still life to a
painting and weather, to a relationship,
then circles again to the opening for
four last lines:

A Provencal recipe.

A bright red hare, shot at dawn.
Shallots. Brandy. Pepper, salt.
An apple in the pan.

Collins’s poems are elaborate in their
simplicity. I found myself rereading,
pulling them apart for succulent seeds
like a pomegranate.

Of these five poets, Collins, who di-
rects the Creative Writing Program at
the University of Massachusetts in
Boston, is the only one to publish in
American Poetry Review, the only one to
receive a fellowship from the National
Endowment for the Humanities. One
can see why. If, as my friend said, all
women are writing the same poem, then
some are writing it with somewhat more
skill. Collins’s work makes you see what
women can do, and you wish others
could see it, too. All five poets deserve
wider publication, fellowships, parades
in their honor, and their names in
lights. Until then, we can link our lives
through their work, reading, reviewing,
and applauding.

@ Ruth Moose is poetry editor for Arts
Journal and contributing editor for The
New Renaissance. Her collection of short
stories, The Wreath Ribbon Quilt, is
forthcoming from St. Andrew's Press.

AMELIA Pilot in Pearls

A compilation of salutes by friends, fellow
aviators, and artists — as well as letters and
reminiscences by Amelia herself. An elegant 8½
x 11 volume, illustrated with rich duotones.

Please send copies @ $24.99 + $2.00
postage/handling (20% discount for 5 or more copies)

Enclosed is my check or money order for $

Address

Courage is the price

that life extracts for City

granting peace. The
soul that knows it not,
knows no release from
little things.

AMELIA EARHART

State

Zip

Please make check payable and mail to:
LINK PRESS, INC., Box 1134, McLean, VA 22101.

Questions? Call: 703/893-7427

———
NOW IN PAPERBACK

$8.95

David Lund

“The feminist humor reprint of the year”? — The Nation.

Samantha Rastles
the Woman Question

Marietta Holley. Edited and with an
introduction by Jane Curry

Often compared in style and popularity to Mark
Twain, Holley (1836-1926) — through her character
“Samantha” — used wit and gentle satire to “rastle”
with questions concerning women’s subservience to
men. “Readable and relevant after a hundred years,
Holley tackles serious existential matters with a light-
ness of tone and an earthiness of language which will
interest general as well as scholarly audiences.” —
Mary Anne Ferguson.

30-minute audio cassette of Curry performing Holley,

Order toll free 800/638-3030. In Maryland phone
301/824-7300.

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS

$10.95

Subscription News

May/June 1986

In order to bring Belles Lettres to more
readers, we are lowering our cover and
subscription rates for individual and
student subscribers — even before the
charter year is up! Our loyal charter sub-
scribers will benefit as well. If you sub-
scribed during the charter year at the
rate of $18.00 ($15.00 for students),
please check the box on the subscription
form when you send in your renewal or
gift subscription order, and we will add a
free issue to your own subscription.

Our new prices also afford both new
and former subscribers alike with an in-

P.O. Box 987 @ Arlington, VA 22216

@ $12.50/year

Check the subscription rate that applies:
1) 1-year institution rate @ $30.00/year

2) 1-year student rate (photocopy of student ID required)

3) 2 or more individual subscriptions @ $12.50/subscription

4) Foreign mailing: Add $9.00/subscription

centive to buy more issues for yourself or
for friends. Now when you buy two or
more subscriptions, or one subscription
for two or more years, you pay our
student rate of only $12.50/year. Our
already-low institution rate remains the
same; however, we are discontinuing
our $22.00 foreign rate, which did not
sufficiently cover postage costs, nor did
it cover all of our subscription cate-
gories. Our new policy for foreign mail is
as follows: Any subscriber wishing to
have a subscription mailed anywhere

outside the U.S. must add $9.00/

subscription for postage and handling
(that’s only $1.50/issue).

One other bit of news. New sub-
scriptions will begin with the current or
next issue, depending on when your
order is received: Back issues will not
automatically be sent. You may pur-
chase back issues, however, based on
their availability, at $3.50/issue. Simply
send us a written request, specifying
which issues you would like, enclosing
payment of $3.50 for each issue
requested. Please allow 3 to 4 weeks for
shipping.

1) 1-year individual subscription (U.S. mail) @ $15.00/year

Please send 1-year subscription[s] beginning with the
issue to the address[es] below. Enclosed is my

check or money order payable to Belles Lettres.

Name

Street

City State Zip

Gift:

Name

Street

City State Zip

O) I am a charter subscriber renewing or buying a gift subscription. Extend my subscription to include a bonus issue.

Belles Lettres @ 15