aaa ees eee]

Accommodating People

$5.95, 118 pp. (PB)

by Mary Titus

Toward the end of this excellent

first collection, I began marking

passages like the one below, rec-
ognizing moments when Joan London
struck her characteristic note: “They
were used to accommodating people,
fitting their lives around others’ needs.
And it intrigued them a little, a breath
from the easy frivolous world that had
always passed them by.”

This description would slip com-
fortably onto most of the book’s central
characters. Mothers, daughters, sisters,
women alone or in marriages too full of
silence, Joan London’s heroines all live
just slightly outside of their worlds. They
puzzle for the right words, consider
reaching out a hand, watch, judge, and
often love — unsure, awkward, and
painfully hesitant. The reader fears for
them as much in their moments of deci-
sion as in their indecision.

“Lilies,” from which the above pas-
sage is taken, follows a mother’s slow
recognition that her daughter's life re-
peats her own. Violet Hollins married a
stable Episcopalian priest and studied,
unsuccessfully, throughout a lifetime to
be a proper wife. Yet, “to this day, a pot
burned if she turned her back, backs and
fronts joined together if she sewed on a
button, her sewing machine would only
go if she hummed and looked out the
window and pretended she didn’t care.”
Despite her labors, she has always felt
disconnected from her life, a spectator

Lissen, Lissen

Te Kaihau/The Windeater, by Keri
Hulme. New York: Braziller, 1987,
$15.95, 240 pp.

by Cecilia Konchar Farr

What can I say to you?

That is clean, new, untrammeled,
free of smears and fresh from
mothertongue?

Keri Hulme’s collection of short
stories speaks “fresh from moth-
ertongue” in vital insistent
voices — “clean, new, untrammeled”
— unrestrained by narrative forms and
unshackled by demands of traditional
realism. Hulme, a New Zealander of
Maori descent, won England’s prestig-
ious Booker Prize in 1985 for her novel
The Bone People. Te Kaihau/The Wind-
eater, written over the past ten years, is a
suitable follow-up. It is a courageous,
imaginative work, full of the beauties
and wonders of nature, touched with the
disorienting strangeness of fantasy.
Hulme tells stories with the power of
Maori oral, folk tradition, yet skillfully
addresses an international audience.
The writer’s skill is most evident in
the vitality of the characters she in-
vents, the narrative voices that demand
attention. “Kaibutsu-San,” the first
story of the collection, begins, “What I
heard was this: ‘Lissen lissen hey man
lissen.’” The second story, “Swansong,”
insists “I’m not concussed, I’m not.
Look, listen. You're the one who wants
to hear about her.” And suddenly you
are. Although the voices are sometimes
more gentle, they are never less compel-
ling. Most memorable, perhaps, is a fa-
ther who chronicles the pain that pulls
his family apart in “Hooks and Feelers,”
the story of a mother who accidentally
slams her son’s hand in a car door,

Sister Ships and Other Stories, by Joan London. New York: Penguin Books, 1986,

struggling to play a central role. Now ill
and nearing death, she sees her family as
drifting and disconnected too; her
daughters are strangers speaking the
proper lines.

Yet one daughter, Christine, is de-
termined to connect. She has returned
to Australia to “find a place in the bush
somewhere and talk, properly, with her
mother.” She takes Violet out to the
small farm she is struggling to patch to-
gether, and there, although the two
women share more silence than speech,
Violet at least achieves compassionate
understanding and connection not only
with her daughter’s life but with her
own.

The center of the story belongs to
Violet’s recollection of a summer early
in her marriage when she fell briefly and
luminously in love with a man other
than her husband. While in his presence
she felt completed, as though she partic-
ipated in the “easy frivolous” world oth-
ers seemed naturally to possess. She
wonders what she would be like if the
affair had worked out. Would she be one
of the blessed, “calling ‘Come and get it’
over a barbecue, waving plump arms in
welcome, a cheerful, ripened self?” She
doesn’t know. Her daughter, back in
Australia after a love affair, follows the
same bleak path; she too lives on a
memory. Christine’s farmhouse is a
shrine full of photographs of a man;
both Violet and her daughter have “held
on to... an ending” and so missed
much of life. The closing image of
Christine and Violet hurrying toward
each other on a steep, rainy path ex-
presses the risks, urgency, pain, and
compassion the two women — and pet-
haps most mothers and daughters — feel
as they struggle to connect.

In her stories, London draws a con-
crete world as familiar as the lawn chairs
her characters set out in the cool eve-
ning while the last dishes are dried in a
steamy kitchen. In her most successful
story in the collection, “Sister Ships,”
she creates her most unfamiliar and
ambitious world: a steamship on a
cruise. Hull, the heroine, is on her way
to visit relatives in England, but the
cruise seems to be her parents’ plan: they
hope she will feel independent, make
friends. But like London’s other hero-
ines, Hull is an observer: Opportunity
passes her by while she looks for the right
words. For her, the ship’s “easy frivo-
lous” world of dancing, gossip, and sex-
ual dalliance seems enviable, unattaina-
ble, and finally threatening. It is suita-

London draws a concrete world as familiar
as the lawn chairs her characters set out in the cool evening
while the last dishes are dried in a steamy kitchen.

maiming him. (This story won the
Katherine Mansfield Award.)

But the dispassionate third-person
narrator, alternating with the soul-
searching, first-person voice of the preg-
nant woman in “One Whale, Singing,”
is equally powerful. While her scientist
husband composes a lecture on the un-
contested superiority of human beings
over all other species, the woman won-
ders “what a whale thinks” and suggests
that other creatures “accept all that hap-
pens, the beautiful, the terrible, the
sickening, as part of the dance, as the
joy or pain of the joke.” The husband’s
response to this lovely lyricism is given
with delightful, wicked irony. “He
frowns, a concerned benevolent frown.
‘Listen dear, has this trip been too
much? Are you feeling at the end of your
tether, tell us truly?’” While he asserts
his superiority with the benevolence of
the royal “we,” he expresses mock con-
cern over the restrictions he imposes
with her “tether.” In the end, the boat
sinks, the husband disappears. While
the woman and her unborn child com-
mune with the sea, in “mothertongue,”
she speaks with a compassionate, preg-
nant whale.

This blending of the imaginative and
the realistic gives Hulme’s work a “Twi-
light Zone” quality that is wonderfully
disorienting. Surely even New Zea-
landers will not recognize these haunted
beaches and weird cities possessed by lost
souls of sheep, insects, fish, and hu-
mans. Yet always an element of famil-
iarity in the strangeness gives each story
its power. When the street toughs of
“Kaibutsu-San” speak in recognizable
vernacular from the tiny television
screen on a businessman’s expensive
briefcase, the reader truly wants to be-
lieve that the boys’ souls are trapped in-
side. When the lonely, adolescent girl
in “Planetesimal” finds the universe in-
side her elbow, we see her not as an in-
sane woman but as “Goddess,” arching
above, “mother of the sky host.” And
the solitary, one-eyed fisherman on
Kaitangata Bay can consume people and

Keri Hulme

make them disappear because he stands
so vividly on the beach of Hulme’s story
“A Tally of the Souls of Sheep.”
Hulme’s stories accurately reflect the
sense of displacement we feel in our
modern world: alienated from nature as
well as society. But they also instill a
sense of oneness, binding us to the earth
and to one another. Through the loneli-
ness of “While My Guitar Gently
Sings,” for instance, comes this affirma-
tive mother-message: “You look at me
hunched weeping in the dark and you
smile a marvelous smile. ‘Be happy,
Hinewai. Sing for me, my daughter.
Play!’ And I am.”

Hulme without a doubt excels at her
craft, but her excellence is most obvious
in its inconspicuousness. Because of the
strength of the narrative voices, readers
enter each story so completely that they
fail to notice how different each one is
from the others. Several are in poetic
form. Some read like movie scripts.
Others move with the freedom of
dreamscapes. Most at least occasionally
ignore traditional rules over dialogue,

ble that the book cover of Sister Ships
features praise from Alice Munro, for
like the heroine of Munro’s short mas-
terpiece “Wild Swans,” Hull’s de-
termination to participate in experience
leads her to will her own victimization.
Although she does not yield to a cabin
steward’s amorous attack — which she
has in part invited in an effort to repro-
duce her roommate’s success with the
uniformed crew — at the story’s close
Hull obediently follows an unpleasant,
unnamed German, “about [her] father’s
age,” down the ship’s corridors. The
story’s ending is painful and grotesque.
Both Hull and her chosen seducer are
dressed for a costume party. Wrapped in
white crepe paper, she represents a “sis-
ter ship.” Like her cruise boat’s compan-
ion that passes them one night in a fan-
fare of fireworks on its return trip to
Australia, Hull passes the other women
in the story, waving, yearning to reach
out, but unsure, disconnected, and fi-
nally pitiful. The German, in white
with rabbit ears, seems to be her absurd
and shameful fate — the tragic compro-
mise of life’s outsider.

London’s collection left me full of
that “pleasing melancholy” that comes
after a fulfilling reading experience.
Rather than making her stories seem
repetitive, her heroines’ similarities
unify the book without diminishing it.
Sister Ships’ repeated exploration of
yearning, connection, and loss finally
forms a single poignant emotion — pa-

thos, perhaps. This is a remarkable first
book.

@ Mary Titus teaches English at George-
town University.

capitalization, and paragraphing. And
the point of view changes constantly,
even, as in “One Whale, Singing,”
within a single story. Hulme is an exper-
imental writer, but her experimentation
is graceful and ingenuous. Nevertheless,
the experimentation is that of a fasci-
nating, literary mind.

In “Kiteflying Party at Doctor’s
Point,” Hulme reveals some of her craft.
Ostensibly written by a schoolteacher as
an assignment from a psychiatrist, the
story begins:

You said write it all down, write it
out, put it in writing.

Well, I will try.

It is not easy.

After years of marking essays, one
is inclined to mark oneself. Teach-
ing a craft tends to make one overly
sensitive, and thus, ill at ease when
handling it. One becomes a critic
rather than a practitioner.
However, I will try. I will take it
as it comes.

The schoolteacher reminds herself to
use the present tense, to mention physi-
cal details, and to try to report accurate-
ly. Hulme gives us the inner workings of
an author’s mind, overloaded with par-
ticularities, grasping at images, sharply
aware of language. For this solitary
writer, everything has a vivid life (the
sand feels pain when she walks on it) and
everything is a construction — “The sky
is paint blue. The hills are fake. The
wind comes from a machine.” Words
bring things to life, and they, like the
malicious kites in the story, have the
power to hurt and maim. Grasping the
kite-string, the writer is Hulme at her
stories. “I didn’t know I could feel this
alive. My blood has secret fires, and they
are soaring, spiraling through me. The
kite has a voice, and it is speaking.”
With this same exultation, riding with
the wind, Hulme’s Te Kaihau/The Wind-
eater speaks.

@ Cecilia Konchar Farr is a graduate
student in English who lives in East Lans-
ing, Michigan.

JULY/AUGUST 1988 |