FALL 1985

NEW BUILDING

The H.W.C.C.C. has opened its new interim building for the housing of sentenced felons, which inmates claim "It's a far cry from home” but, it's suitable for the purpose of more privacy and congenial living space.

The dormitory has 2 sections of 8 cubical units; accommodating 3 women per unit; divided by a spacious carpeted program area, containing a pool table, color TVs surrounded by rattan furnishings for our recreational pleasure.

The powder room is far more desired, however, unanimously speaking, “shower curtains" and the "bathroom doors" do offer ‘privy’ conditions.

A few inmates have taken to heart the responsibility of beautifying the entrance area surrounding Dorm 4 and 5.

BELIEVE IT OR NOT!

In the early years of 1920, when the State of Hawaii was still a territory and a growing and prosperous one at that, the juvenile delinquency population was very large.

In 1926, C.W. Dickey, who was one of the foremost architects in Hawaii and one of the primary proponents of designing a Hawaiian style architecture, was commissioned to plan what is now the Hawaii Women's Community Correctional Center. His plans were constructed by Ralph E. Wooley and finally completed in 1928. This site is a local landmark on the Windward side of Oahu with its setting in the shadow of the mountain peaks. The girls' industrial school, the Kaneohe Ranch Building, and the Kaneohe Insane Asylum were the major architectural statements from the time of 1925 to 1940.

In 1929, the facilities on the slopes of Olomana were open and in use. Originally called Maunawili Training School for girls in 1931 and renamed Kawailoa Girls Home in 1951... In 1962, the Kawailoa Girls Home and the Boys School were united as the Hawaii Youth Correctional Facility.

Here in the district of Kailua, Hawaii, on 430 acres of land on the slopes of Olomana peak still stands the historical site of the former Kawailoa Girls Home. The site, known for its spacious greenery and its Hawaiian style buildings with their prominent red roofs, provides a beautiful background for the school as well as the district.

The seven original buildings were one or two stories tall, with the exception of a cow shed. Five of the seven buildings were of masonry construction, while two were frame construction. The first cottage (or Hill Top Cottage) was used as a girls' dormitory. It is now used as the Correction's Training Center. Half of the other half, in 1984, August, Cottage Five, now Lanakilia, was destroyed by fire and never renovated. The third building is the gymnasium which was completed in 1938. Today, H.W.C.C.C. and also H.Y.C.F. uses it for recreational purposes. Cottage Four, Hookipa Cottage, was once a convalescent home for the elderly and also Kaneohe Insane Asylum before it became Kawailoa where it housed approximately fifty juveniles.

Cottage Five, originally the superintendent's cottage, is now an extension of the Hawaii Women's Community Correctional Center. This building, called Maluhia, houses approximately twenty female residents. Cottage Six was constructed to be a servant's cottage. This is currently operated by the Youth Facility. Cottage Number Eight, the employees' cottage, was moved onto the site in the 1960s. It is now the Administration Office. Number Nine, a concrete utility building used by H.Y.C.F. Number Ten is several structures which were erected due to the fire and destruction of Cottage Three and are now Olomana School for Youth. Cottage Five, the former superintendent's cottage, now known as Maluhia, part of H.W.C.C.C., became occupied by ten to twelve women who were transferred from Halawa Maximum Security in 1978. These women were later transferred down to Cottage Number Four, Hookipa (now Hawaii Women's Community Correctional Center, or the main facility), due to the growing population of women inmates. Then in 1980, the women were transferred from Hookipa to Oahu Community Correctional Center due to inappropriate living conditions at Hookipa. In 1982, the women moved back to Hookipa Cottage, due to the over-population at Oahu Community Correctional Center of men and women.

In 1984, H.W.C.C.C. completed a new addition. What was once the garage became Administrative offices. In July of 1984, Cottage Eight became the Administrator's office. On March 5, 1985, the majority of women at Maluhia began working on Community Service. We are now slowly enlarging both Community Service and State work crews from the eligible women residents of the main facility. This gives all the opportunity to once again adjust to life in the community. In February of 1985, another new addition to the H.W.C.C.C. was built. This interim building consists of two dorms which house approximately fifty women. Constructed to alleviate the inmate over-population problem, it gives us more space and therefore, peace of mind. The buildings of H.W.C.C.C. and OYC are now registered in the National Register of Historic Places by the Department of Land and Natural Resources (as of 1984). For further information, contact:

Bureau of Conveyances

1151 Punchbowl Street

Honolulu, HI

or Department of Social Services and Housing

Liliuokalani Building

Honolulu, HI

In conclusion, I would like to thank Betsy Ludwig, Instructor, for assisting me in researching this article.

Written by: Annie AuHoon