ALL SHE WROTE/MAR-APRIL

YOUR BODY

The Hole In The
Sheet” Syndrome

The attractive man sat uncomforta-
bly in the corner of the tiny room
while watching his colleagues working
nearby. No one was talking.

Suddenly, the man brightened, a
small grin playing around the corners
of his mouth.

"Do you know where they get virgin
wool?" he asked expectantly.

No response.

"From very ugly sheep," he said,
urging the others to join him in a
chuckle at the expense of unattractive
females. No one did. The silence and
the tension in the room increased.

The man with the incredibly poor
taste in hospital room jokes was the
director of reconstructive surgery at
Georgetown University Hospital, Wash-
ington, D.C., and the two younger men
working over a patient were his resi-
dents-in-training. The patient was
being fitted with a vaginal mold de-
signed to prevent stenosis of her re-
constructed vagina during the next 12
months. With some luck, the patient
would be able to have almost normal
sexual relations after the first three
months. But, she would have to wear
the mold continually for at least six
months to a year, and occasionally,
for the rest of her life. The tension

in the room was increased by the fact
that this was the patient's SECOND
vaginoplasty.

The first was per-

formed six months earlier; it failed,
totally. There was, generally, a feel-
ing of "mission" present in the young-
er men and the female RN, a real collec-
tive effort to make this project a suc-
cess; the chief was just uncomfortable.
The patient's uterus, vulva, and va-
gina were surgically removed over a
period of two years by another highly
skilled specialist at Georgetown, a
gyn-oncologist. Women traveled from
all over the world for treatment by
this great physician, hand carrying
pathology reports and high hopes of
prolonging their lives. Many of those
women are still alive and that, of
course, is something to be thankful
for. But, many will never be sexually
active again. The surgical and radia-
tion war on their cancers has left
them emotional cripples, sexually dys-
functional, frequently incontinent
with grossly deformed reproductive
systems. They have nowhere to turn,
no one to talk to, believing the loss
of their sexuality is part of the
price exacted by cancerous diseases.
And THAT is an example of what's
wrong with the medical care system to-
day.

Physicians are trained to treat the
artifact, the diseased part, not the
whole person. They are perfectly at
ease when the unconscious patient is
wheeled into the operating room with a
white sheet obscuring their humanness
and emphasizing their disease. Medi-
cal education provides them with the
skills to engineer a successful remov-
al, extraction, or reconstruction.

What medical educators do not do is
teach the physician/student to relate
to the thinking, feeling part of that

human being...the patient.

But, the artifact effect of medical
education is only one of the factors
diminishing the quality of medical
care in the U.S. today. Technological
advances that encourage widespread
disease detection/screening programs
and earlier and earlier intervention
without any clear evidence that inter-
vention is effective; the drug indus-
try's profit-motivated full-scale as-
sault on cancer and other "killer" di-
seases that promote dangerous human
testing of toxic substances without
regard for side effects and/or the pa-
tient's comfort; medical school regi-
mens so grueling that only the “over-
achievers" survive, so self-important
and arrogant that even nice people e-
merge believing they can walk on water;
a political context that places more
economic value on treatment and cures
than on prevention; and a populace so
conditioned to trust their physician-
gods and so accustomed to receiving a
"pill for every ill" that they're no
longer willing to tolerate the body's
own defense mechanisms and responses
to disease; that medical consumers
are not willing to assume some of the
responsibility for their own wellness;
these are some of the components of the
crisis in medical care systems today,
although crisis may be too strong a
word. Surveys that question individu-
als about their health care find that

most Americans are satisfied with both
quantity and quality. Yet, many agree
simultaneously that there is a crisis.

I have chosen to describe my own re-
lationship with the medical care sys-
tem from a very intimate perspective.
You see, I am that patient described
in the opening paragraphs. But, since
my "professional patient" days, I've
also been a part of the health-care
delivery system and a student in the
School of Public Health, U.H., Manoa.
Each position has given me a unique
vantage from which I can measure
causes and effects.

When wearing my "provider" hat, I
was acutely aware of the medical, poli-
tical, and business communities’ bias
against physician extenders, a preju-
dice that results in under-utilization
of mid-level practitioners, over-utili-
zation of primary care providers and,
frequently, over-treatment of minor
conditions and exorbitant health care
costs in both private and public sec-
tors.

From my swivel chair at the Women's
Health Center & Clinic, I saw daily
evidence of the medicalization of our
society. Women who'd popped birth con-
trol pills twenty days of every month
for ten years without ever investigat-
ing other less risky forms of birth
control; patients "glued" to their

physicians because he or she gives

cont. on p. 9

March 8 to March 25, 1983 / The Art Loft / 637 Sheridan Street / Honolulu
Tuesday through Friday 10-4 / Saturday 10-2 / Telephone (808) 955-0302

__ Opening Reception for the Artist / Monday, March 7 / 5:30-8 pm |

THE HAPPIEST WOMEN, LIKE THE HAPPIEST NATIONS, HAVE NO HISTORY.

GEORGE ELIOT

From The Quotable Woman, edited by Elaine Partnow.