PAGE 14

Reviews Contd from & 7

Control for power between Minos and his daughter. She seeks out Daedalus for instruction but is ever aware of the fine line she walks. Her “attempts to rally her followers, under Minos's watchful eye, fail, a consequence of which is Icarus' death.

Minos' power is growing through his looting of other cities. Agricultural failures & Minos' military exploits cause a decline in the economy of Crete threatening famine. Minos' answer is to loot and demand tribute, based on a superior navy built by Daedalus and commanded by Asterios, Bull of Minos. Thus Theseus, prince of Athens, comes to Crete as tribute.

Consort to continue his power. As the contest between them escalates, Ariadne seeks to use Theseus to regain her power. Here she tragically errs. Though Theseus is successful at helping her overthrow the power of Minos, his vision of power was not hers and debacle is the result.

The story is charmingly told, and a sympathetic view of the Mothers Cult is given. Unlike Mary Renault's, June Brindel's depiction of Theseus is far less flattering. On a visit to Daedalus “he is shown to be a crude thug, delighting in physical power & brutality. Here the language slips a little out of time and becomes more colloquially twentieth century. The book relates the sense of madness & chaos of a time in transition.

Reviewed by Barbara Mori Woman's Word Bookstore Comm.

of that time.

Thousand Pieces of Gold by Ruthanne Lum McCunn (Design Enterprises of San Francisco, 1981)

Reviewed by Claire Hamasu & Cynthia Oshiro

Her father had called her his "quianjin"...thousand pieces of gold...but when drought hit China threatening his family and land, Lalu Pathoy's father sold his eldest daughter to bandits for two bags of seeds. Eventually Lalu is transported to the United States in 1872 and sold on the auction block to a Chinese saloonkeeper from Idaho.

Lalu's story is told by Ruthanne Lum McCunn from written sources and interviews with people who knew her. McCunn weaves in fictional characters, and transposes events, but notes that Lalu's "essential story" remains accurate.

Her story echoes the experiences of Chinese immigrants who came hoping to find wealth and found instead prejudice and laws denying them citizenship and land ownership. Lalu, however, survived the hardships of this new country and ran a boarding house and homesteaded a farm—a sharp contrast to the foot-bound subservience of women in China.

McCunn adds a human dimension to her portrait of Lalu by her use of the biographical novel...a dimension which would have been missing in a straight biography. For the historical purists, however, McCunn should have included a bibliography of her sources, both written and oral, which her novel is based.

Thousand Pieces of Gold is recommended for those interested in the largely unwritten history of pioneer Asian women in the United States.

This is the personal, vivid account of Joyce Bichler, a young Jewish girl from the Bronx, whose freshman year of college in 1972 was not just books and socializing but the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, which resulted in a surgical hysterectomy and vaginectomy. This shocking and life-threatening cancer was the direct result of being a “DES daughter."

Upon entering college, Joyce experienced regular menstrual periods and extended periods of bleeding. Hemorrhaging, she was put into the hospital and subjected to a wide gamut of tests by an entire team of doctors. Almost from the beginning she was surrounded by the knowing looks of the medical staff whenever they mentioned DES. Information concerning the facts of her mother's DES use during her pregnancy were sought immediately.

At this time, media attention was beginning to focus on this rare form of cancer found in increasing numbers among teenage girls.

A lawsuit was initiated by the Bichler family. The family hired the prestigious law firm of Julien, Schlesinger and Finz of New York.

Seven years later, in 1979, Joyce Bichler was the first DES daughter to win a lawsuit against a pharmaceutical company that produced DES. She was awarded $500,000 by the jury. Later, in 1981 this decision against the Eli Lilly Company was upheld in the New York Supreme Court of Appeals.

The courtroom drama of this case is more thrilling and as heart-stopping as any episode of Perry Mason or the more recent Paper Chase.

The testimony at the trial was fraught with contradiction; collusive alliances between doctors and the pharmaceutical companies were revealed; incestuous relationships between FDA commissioners and the pharmaceutical companies were held up to the light of examination; a large payment in the form of a university grant for the testimony of a doctor in a previous DES daughter court case was discovered; and the local small pharmacy store owner's (where Mrs. Bichler had filled her DES prescription) inability to recognize Mr. & Mrs. Bichler, whom he had known for 17 years and had previously called by nicknames, was sworn to under oath!!!

The intense emotional testimony of Joyce Bichler, her husband, and her parents was dramatic to say the least.

DES is synthetic estrogen and when discovered in 1938 by Sir Charles Dodds of England, it was hailed as a medical miracle as now female hormone could be produced both cheaply and in large quantity.

Initially, diethylstilbestrol was used to replace estrogen in postmenopausal women, to inhibit lactation in new mothers, and to help treat men who had prostate surgery.

It was, however, the pharmaceutical companies who pushed to use diethylstilbestrol on pregnant women.

During the 1940s the FDA had no facilities nor means by which to test drugs so all testing was done by the pharmaceutical companies themselves. Animal tests were in common use at this time; however, the pharmaceutical companies acting in consort did not use any animal tests to determine the safety of DES for use during pregnancy.

What was used and presented to the FDA was what is called a "historical" test. Pregnant women with a history of miscarriage were given DES and compared to other similar women who were not given DES. The validity of such is unscientific. This historical study that was used was done by the Drs. George and Olive Smith and Priscilla White. The fact that the mothers who had an improved normal delivery rate when taking the DES could be attributed to any number of factors; such as a mother who had previously miscarried being more careful, getting more bed rest, getting better medical attention because she was in the study, and some mothers who will have a normal pregnancy anyway.

Five years later in 1952, Dr. Dieckmann at the University of Chicago Lying-In Hospital did a double-blind scientifically controlled study on pregnant women and found that DES had absolutely no effect on the rate of miscarriage in women.

Yet from 1941 until 1972, when the FDA banned diethylstilbestrol for use in pregnant women, millions of women had been given DES.

And, until 1979 DES was added to cattle feed to produce rapid weight gains in consumer beef. There are reports that even now DES is being used illegally for this purpose. In all probability it is safe to say that a majority of us have been touched by this DES abomination.