a

COMMUNITY
SERVICE AT
H.W.C.C.C.

We, the women of H.W.C.C.C., are now
getting out into the community. It all
started with the work of our
Administrator, Mark Abe. Community
Service is a program that allows
qualified women to go out into the

community to work in various areas under
the supervision of one ACO per crew.

There are three crews that go out daily.
There are two crews under the CITY &
COUNTY PROGRAM headed by BILLIE BEAMER
and supervisor, LEROY CASTRO. The first
of the two crews started March 5, 1985
with six women, Team A. The second
crew, Team B, started March 21, 1985

with seven women. These two crews mainly
work in the downtown areas. They started off
at Kamalii Park, then on to other areas.
They receive $3.50 daily for lunch and
use the leftover money to put into a
“KITTY" which is used for an outing
during the end of the month. The third
crew, which is the STATE crew, started
April 2, 1985 with four women. The “BIG
BOSS" is LEO JONES, and the supervisor
is FELIX DELA CRUZ. The State Crew
works from Keehi Lagoon to Kalihi
Street. They clean through trees and
plants, do weeding, trim trees and

shrubs, and remove unwanted plants with
weed killer. They recently attended a

program held by SEAWSARTYOSHT

Lox, the. Une Million ee

explained by December Pacios. It is a cause. For
organizations. All the crew were given example, for example, the recycling of aluminum cans.
T-shirts for being part of the spearheaded by Sara Tookes is the
volunteers who help beautify Nimitz
highway.
The members of the Ending Hunger
Committee are fully committed to
participating in this movement, as we
believe that helping to feed the

starving people of the world is truly
one of the greatest humanitarian causes
which exists.

By: Melanie Arneson

REHABILITATION VS.

Rehabilitation (as opposed to
imprisonment) offers the individual the
opportunity to develop a sense of
self-worth and useful skills valuable
to both the individual and to society.
The American prison system today is one
filled with inadequacies. It is both
misunderstood and misrepresented to the
American public. The majority of
Americans think that incarceration and
rehabilitation are one in the same,
while in fact, they are two different
concepts. Rehabilitation offers
individuals the opportunity to develop
self-esteem and life skills, whereas
imprisonment simply restrains the
individual.

When taking a closer look into the
prison system, one often finds it a
harsh and stagnant environment. Prison
is an environment where overcrowded and
hostile conditions prevail. These

conditions alone are enough to prevent

a person from growing or achieving a
positive outlook on life.

WAHINE TIMES

HUNGER

PROJECT

The Ending Hunger Committee of
H.W.C.C.C. has launched its series of
fundraising activities with the

inauguration of a PHOTO SALE!

The debut picture-taking event will be
in conjunction with the Volunteer
Recognition Day, July 13, 1985. Thus
far, residents have shown their
overwhelming support and interest by
pledging to purchase approximately 400
photos. With the continued
participation and support of residents
and staff, we believe that we will be
able to realize our projected goal of
raising at least $500 over a four-month
period.

Photos will be available to residents on
a monthly basis. All proceeds will go
to the Ending Hunger Project Fund. Our
ultimate goal is to provide financial
assistance to an entire community or
village in Africa or India. In pursuit
of this, we will be working with staff
and administrative members of H.W.C.C.C.
and Mr. Dave Friedberg, Briefing Leader
with the Ending Hunger Project in
Honolulu.

Along with our staff advisor, ACO Merry

Gray, our membership is made up of S.
Tookes, B. Kukahiwa, J. Napihaa, L.
Abellira, P. Sampson, L. Johnson, M.

Gardner and J. Neumayer.

All other residents are interested
in becoming a part of this project.
The plight of starving people of the world is truly
one of the greatest humanitarian causes
which exists.

By: Laverne Johnson

system that allows for little or no
chance of improvement, but where change
is rare.

Rehabilitation, however, can offer
various advantages to both the
individual and to society.
Rehabilitation often starts with

counseling in the areas of drug and
alcohol abuse. Counseling can include
both individual and group therapy.
Many people who find themselves in
prisons today are also prisoners of
alcohol and drug abuse. So, this
counseling is often imperative to get

the person on the so-called "right
track." The second step in
rehabilitation challenges the

individual to become a productive and
useful person in society. By doing
this, the person can learn both
self-worth and valuable work skills.
Many programs taught through
rehabilitation include academic courses
as well as practical experience in
technical areas. The academic courses

can offer the individual the chance to
earn a high school diploma and college
degree. This in turn, offers the
individual a chance to make it in the
competitive outside world. Work
furloughs and community service
programs also offer the individual the
chance to gain practical experience in
the community.

In conclusion, by simply imprisoning a
person and allowing her to sit dormant,
the system only adds to the problems
the person already has, and this
certainly does not help either the
person or society. Chances are high,
in such cases, that the individual,
when released, will continue on a
destructive path due to the lack of
other available options. Conversely,
rehabilitation gives the individual a
direction and the opportunity to pursue
the goals that otherwise could not have
been achieved. This, in turn, allows
the person to become a responsible
citizen and a productive member of

society.

STORY ABOUT SHIRLEY

Shirley is a talented seamstress
who creates beautiful pieces
of clothing. Shirley's talents are
being put to good use for the women of
H.W.C.C.C. She teaches a knitting and
crocheting class on weekends. If you
have an interest in knitting or
crocheting, talk with Shirley about
joining her class.

Written by: Debra Flores