PAGE 4

cover story

COLLECTIVE GROWTH - ONE YEAR By Terry Leubben

Can you believe ALL SHE WROTE is now one? A year ago we were a group of women who had decided we wanted to keep the YWCA paper, Ferity, going. The editor was leaving and it seemed the perfect time for changes to take place. ALL SHE WROTE was born and with it the only collectively operated, feminist newspaper in Hawaii.

As a writer I was interested in learning more about newspapers and how they operated. As a woman, coming from a white, middle-class tradition, I had my doubts about how well a collective could operate. My only experience with collectives had been with another women's group in Hawaii; (a disaster both on a personal and group level). Later I was to find that this had not been a collective at all. Still, I could not see how a collective could operate efficiently; how it could put out a newspaper, or how everyone could do every job to my satisfaction.

Part of the collective process, I have since discovered, is learning how to let go of just these kinds of biases. As I have worked with the women on the collective this year I have been part of a process of interpersonal growth that is both exciting and challenging. It is women working together in a non-hierarchical way, to further the communication between the women of our community.

One of the best things about the collective is the group. We all have the same rights to speak out if we want. We all have the same responsibility to express ourselves when we need to. We all have the same opportunity to learn new tasks and to gain new skills. I think all of us, in direct response to this equality, have discovered new strengths in ourselves and possibly identified places where we needed to make changes.

At one breakfast meeting we talked about our definitions of feminism. There were 12 women munching on donuts and fresh fruit and there were 12 distinctly different definitions of feminism, ranging from radical separatism to visions of a united world. We were all a little surprised and it brought home our need for a broad policy and a liberal publishing standard.

It has been hard, at times, to set limits on our liberalism. Controversies occurred over whether to accept ads from a store selling, among other things, certain kinds of sexual hardware, or whether we should aim to make a profit. At several meetings we have had women pounding on tables. And because we are a collective no decision can be made without everyone agreeing. We have had a consensus on every decision we have made.

This has not been easy. As people work together their viewpoints and opinions will not always be the same. At times someone would feel they were shouldering too much of the burden or not being allowed to express themselves. As each issue came out tension built up. We had a collective process but as humans we were unsure how to treat each other. There was no procedure for talking things out, no safe way to express resentments that naturally occur when people deal with each other. One night we all compared notes. All of us agreed that we really didn't want to be there even though we still wanted the paper to continue. We concluded that we needed a way to resolve our problem.

But not without considerable discussion and at this point several women left the collective to go on to other things. Dee Preston Dillon came to counsel us on group dynamics and interaction. The changes in the way we operate have made a real difference to the production of the paper.

It was scary to confront this anger we had acquired towards each other. It was scary to put ourselves in the position of trusting each other to express our resentments and compliments or validations. But the results, the commitment that women in the collective have about dealing with this has enabled me to get a new perspective on my own cultural biases and attitudes.

As a heterosexual I was confronted with homophobia: some of the women on the collective are lesbians and I was suddenly having to work with them. I found out that the old stereotypes aren't really an accurate portrayal. I was not attacked in the bathroom and no one has ever made a pass at me. What I found were women who were loving, supportive and strong in a way I had never experienced before. I learned that Lesbianism isn't so much who you are going to bed with, but rather being woman-oriented; having a political awareness that supports other women and working towards giving every woman the chance to be whoever she is, gay or straight, married or single, housewife or corporate executive. When I worked past my own fears and hang-ups I found friendship.

This is the beginning of a new year for ALL SHE WROTE and the collective. I did not take a poll to find out what our goals were, I did not have to. We are working towards having the voices of the women of Hawaii heard. Not just the white women, not just lesbians, or feminists, or women who went to college and write well but every woman's voice. If we publish the story or the issue of just one more woman this year we will have succeeded. But what we desire is to have the voices of all Hawaii's women raising up in whatever way to share with the world who they are and what they think. What we desire is to have the voices of Hawaii's women in print so that other women might read and see and be encouraged to do similar things. I cannot think of a better way to celebrate the second year of ALL SHE WROTE than to see these desires fulfilled.

An Exercise in IMage-ing

We are energy--electrical, magnetically polarized, pulsating surges of creativity through breath, touch, movement, and sound, we are ‘transmitters', and we receive what we send... We are therefore ‘creating’, through our own perceptions of our ‘viewing screen', our very own ‘reality’...

We have many petals, our hearts are opening, our eyes are so beautifully faceted, and as we gently gather crystalline images of the self (soul), we become the paradise we have found within.

It is all within, we are free and we release ourselves from subtle webs of ‘perceptual bondage' as we are already soaring with opalescent wings into finer and more refined dimensions of the self...

We are stars in endless scenarios--oh yes... We begin and end and start again--a kaleidoscope of magnificence...

And everything is us, and life is animated if we choose to play the surrender game... melt and allow the flow to go, we then go everywhere....

We see and hear and feel the earth speak, the sky creatures are patterning ‘cloud messages' just for us...

Nothing is new and yet all is so wonderful again and we are healing and regenerating into spontaneity.

The wind is our beloved, it is our very own breath, it comes circling, spiraling, undulating on life's wave-like currents... We are climbing and accelerating our life's rhythms and our entire beings are fine-tuning to receive manna...

Our breath, the wind, dances the leaves and sends warm rushes of messages to thee... The seeds of promise sent with gusts of love--our words the channel...

The element Fire reveals its eloquence to us with effervescent dragon-speaking...

We are the sun and the moon is our beloved--and the sacred fires of this union birth the colors of our creation.

The Earth, oh glorious mother, shares her bounty of benevolence with us...

Rivers of time's changes ebbing to seas of dreams...

Voices in trees, stones, and streams... devas of the air, and mermaids of the deep - - endless reflections of love to reap...

And so you and I are guided - -

the footprints are in the sand - - intricate lacework - - the light of the soul, at command, come and share your "divinity".