(HWPAL. con't from P9.3)

sented at any level of government.  
The League was started by individuals  
who got together in a Women's Studies  
Program course at the University of  

Hawaii during the fall semester, 1981.  
The first meeting was held in December  

1981.  

PURPOSE. According to HWPAL's  
Articles of Incorporation, the League  
"is organized exclusively for politi-  
cal, educational, and informational  
purposes to encourage more widespread  
awareness of the importance of parti-  
cipation in politics by women at all  
levels both in elective and appoin-  
tive office. The corporation is it-  
self non-partisan but its purposes  
are to urge participation in partisan  
politics. The corporation shall pro-  
mote issues important to women by:  

1. seeking out women with good  
liberal credentials for political  
office;  

2. raising funds to assist liberal  

women candidates for elective office;  
3. recruiting volunteers to help  
in election campaigns;  

4. offering services to women who  

are elected in accordance with the  
purpose of this corporation;  

5. disseminating information re-  
lating to selected issues;  

6. sponsoring conferences on im-  
portant issues,"  

ACTIVITIES. The main focus of the  
League during an election year is to  
endorse and support feminist candi-  
dates. So far this year, HWPAL has  
given its full endorsement to Patsy  
Mink, Marilyn Bornhorst and Welcome  
Fawcett. In its goal to support  
candidates, the League organizes its  

members so that they can take part in  
the campaign support work of endorsed  
candidates.  

The other major activity of the  
League is educational. HWPAL spon-  
sors lectures, seminars, and confer-  
ences on topics relevant to the  
interests of its membership. These  
special events are also opportuni-  
ties for members to get together  
socially.  

ANOTHER PERSPECTIVE OF MENOPAUSE  
by Lily Jean Lee-Adams  

Menopause is a milestone in our  

lives as women, but we forget that at  

this time of life other events are  
occurring that also have an effect.  
Women in this stage of life may be  
facing more competition in their own  
careers from younger individuals,  
they may have faced the death of one  
or both of their parents, and they  
may find themselves in the new roles  
of mothers-in-law or grandmothers.  
Their relationships between them-  
selves and their husbands and chil-  
dren also change.  

Frequently, women in midlife need  
to adapt to changes in their husbands  
who are experiencing their own hor-  
monal fluctuations. Most men are not  
aware that they go through this stage  

yet experience symptoms similar to the  

female menopause. Relationships with  
their husbands change as a result of  
career changes or successes as well  
as serious illnesses or even death.  

Their children are going through  
changes at this point, leaving home for  
marriages, jobs, or college. Some women do suffer from  
depression as a result of their chil-  
dren leaving home.  

In the United States, there is an emphasis on youth,  
and there are negative connotations to those  
women over thirty and those in meno-  
pause.  

There are no menopausal symp-  

toms (other than cessation of menstru-  
ation) in women from traditional so-  
cieties who create a higher status  

for women in menopause. The Rajput  
caste in India allow women who have  
entered menopause to leave their  
quarters and join the men in conver-  
sation and drink. Previously to this  
stage, women lived in purdah (veiled  
and secluded).  

They are leav-  

[Ainahou Ranch GATHERING]  

The Third Annual Gathering of Women  
at Ainahou Ranch at midsummer (hence-  
forth to be called Anaina O Na Wahine  
or Gathering of Women) has just  
passed.  

Cathy Gable and Lilly Hillwomyn,  
organizers of the first gathering,  
have likened the first gathering to  
the High Priestess in the Tarot deck.  
The image is of budding spirituality  
and a gathering of forces.  

Carolyn Marlow saw the second  
year's gathering as the card The Fool,  
which conjures images of innocence and  
joy and playfulness. She saw this  
year's gathering as the card The En-  
press, a mature guiding force.  

Be that as it may, I see the week-  
end at Ainahou as our creation: women  
emerging into new selves, shedding  
layers of old; and while changing,  
creating a tribe, a safe family unit  
where women are for themselves and  
each other "Mother, Sister, Daughter,  
Lover."*  

Each gathering is complete and per-  
fect unto itself. The cast of charac-  
ters changes, the lessons to be  
learned change, creating a new melt-  
ing pot of foci, talents, and person-  
alities. The gatherings are the re-  
sponsibility and creation of each  
woman there. It is a raw, open, ex-  
pansive truth space where we can all  
experience and share our visions,  
fears, pains, truths, joys and grow  
from that experiencing and sharing.  

4 Haircuttin  

Telephone 538-6168  

223 Merchant Street  

Studies indicate that menopausal  

symptoms can be related to attitudes.  
Women with high degrees of psycho-  
logical symptoms in the climacteric  
period are women who see themselves  
as unattractive, who place great im-  
portance on personal attractiveness,  
talent, and sexuality and women who  
feel negative about menstruation,  
their first sexual experience, preg-  
nancy, and childbirth.  

Those with few problems are women who have posi-  
tive feelings regarding their  
marriages, regardless of whether the  
marriage survived or not, and women  
who derive a high degree of satisfac-  
tion from careers, whether as pro-  
fessionals or as homemakers.  

Culture has an influence on our  
attitudes. There are no menopausal symp-  
toms common to menopause found in  
this culture. Women in Ethiopia can walk on sacred ground  
and eat and drink ritual food when  
they reach menopause, those in Micro-  
nesia can become healers, and in South  
Africa, women can partake in purifi-  
cation ceremonies during menopause.  
Native American women are given more  
power and are involved in sacred  
ceremonies, their opinions carry  
weight in tribal issues, and they are  
consulted on herbal medicines, sacred  
matters, and tribal history when they  
reach menopause. They are also given  
the responsibility to teach the grand-  
children traditional values and the  
wisdom of their society at this time.  
So before we seek medical help for  
our "problems of menopause," perhaps  
we should give a careful look at our  
"life's inventory of events." It may  

be that all we need is a social or  
psychological adjustment (awareness)  
rather than a hormonal one.