PAGE 14

~ YOUR BODY

DEPO PROVERA AND THIRD WORLD WOMEN

Introduction

More than a million and a half women will receive contraceptive injections of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DEPO PROVERA) this year. The drug is a proven animal carcinogen and may cause sterility in some who use it to space their pregnancies. Documented short-term side effects include amenorrhea, excessive or irregular bleeding, disturbance in carbohydrate metabolism (which poses a special risk to diabetics and pre-diabetics), nausea, dizziness, headache, nervousness, chills, change in facial skin pigmentation, painful menstruation, reduced libido, diminished orgasm, and acne. (Population Reports, K-6) However, it is a highly effective contraceptive method. Women injected with 150 mg at 90-day intervals will experience fewer than one pregnancy per hundred over a year's duration. Depo Provera injections “are as effective in preventing pregnancy as combined estrogen progestogen pills, slightly more effective than progestogen-only ‘minipills', and markedly more effective than IUDs." (Population Reports, K-6) The majority of the women receiving Depo Provera injections this year will be poor, non-white, illiterate, and at high risk of unintended pregnancy. They will not be residents of the United States. The US Food and Drug Administration has not approved Depo Provera for contraceptive use.

To understand the rationale that promotes such a dangerous drug among mostly Third World women, one must examine the etiology of the Population Crisis phenomenon.

The Population Crisis

One man, more than any other, should be attributed with the invention of the Population Crisis—John D. Rockefeller III. According to his biographers, Rockefeller's motivation for establishing the Population Council in 1952, an independent, private, non-profit organization with an international outlook, was his belief that world poverty was due to unchecked population growth. (Moss, p. 3) During his travels through Asia and other undeveloped countries, he "became convinced that questions related to population were basic, not only to people's health and physical well-being, but also to their opportunities to lead lives of dignity and fulfillment." (Moss, p. 9)

Concern with world population reached epidemic proportions in the 50s and 60s. A proliferation of private organizations and finally government programs emerged to avert world disaster through population "control" became a righteous movement of humanitarians eager to improve the economic lot of their non-white brothers and sisters.

Ernest Gruening, former chairman of the U.S. Senate's Government Operations Subcommittee on Foreign Aid Expenditures, conducted 32 hearings on the Population Crisis from 1965 to 1968. These hearings involved testimony from luminaries in the population control movement; heads of state, including former U.S. Presidents; demographers, sociologists, penologists, and clergy of various denominations; physicians, social workers, and labor representatives; and concerned citizen groups. The immediate focus of these hearings was S. 1676, which mainly called for reorganization of the executive branch so that it “might more effectively deal with rapid population growth throughout the world and the problems arising with such growth." (Population Crisis, pxv.) S. 1676 was never reported out of subcommittee, but it served as a forum for all the pro and con forces in the population control movement. And, despite the volumes presented on family planning program failures, the hearings seemed to produce a consensus on the Third World's desire for family planning assistance and justification for the linkage of foreign aid expenditures to the applying government's willingness to sponsor population control programs. Thus did the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) find itself in the Family Planning dispensary business in the late 60s.

U.S. pharmaceutical companies were already involved in Third World contraceptive field trials. Since U.S. Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) new drug application (NDA) guidelines governing the use of human guinea pigs in clinical trials are quite stringent, U.S. pharmaceuticals established ties with Third World governments in order to test unproven contraceptives on the peasantry beginning in the 50s. (It is well-known that Puerto Rican clinic patients provided the field trial clinical evidence of oral contraceptive effectiveness.)

Since a basic assumption in Third World family planning program failure is that the methods are not suited to the living conditions of the target populations, massive reproductive biology research efforts were mounted in search of the "perfect contraceptive." Instead of investigating the beliefs, attitudes, and value systems of village populations, millions of dollars have been poured into development of an effective birth control method for "low-motivation" peoples—people who don't want it! René Dubos, professor emeritus at the Rockefeller University in New York City, says, "Population control programs are plagued by the fact that the poorer the community, the more important is the role played by children in its daily life. Under restricted conditions of existence, children usually constitute the only hope of reward. They provide labor on the farm and insurance against the solitude and trials of old age; they are the most reliable and often the only source of deep emotional satisfaction; finally and probably most important, they symbolize hope and eternity." (Dubos, p. 307)

In this context, the search for the "perfect contraceptive" continued.

BETTER BIRTHING

A series of free natural-childbirth films is being offered by the Better Birthing Association of Hawaii. Each program will include a film, slide show, demonstration, and question-and-answer session.

The association also offers a free class taught by certified instructors where couples learn about choices in childbirth, exercises during pregnancy, nutrition, and the role of the husband. Information on the free class will be available at the film showings and by calling 254-4039.

The Perfect Contraceptive?

Phillida E. Bunkle, author of an unpublished report titled "Understanding the Background to Upjohn's New Zealand Contraception and Health Study," writes that the contraceptive effects of Depo were discovered inadvertently in the 1950s by a Brazilian doctor researching treatments to prevent premature labor. Bunkle states that Upjohn started testing it as a contraceptive in the early 1960s. At this time it was marketed for veterinary use under the name Promone. Promone was withdrawn from sale after it was shown to cause uterine diseases in animals. Depo enjoys a unique status as a drug you can prescribe for your wife but not your pet; the risks are too great for use on valuable animals. (Bunkle, p. 1)

The film "Childbirth for the Joy of It" shows five couples giving birth to first babies in hospitals. "Children at Birth" shows four couples giving birth in alternative settings with other children present. The slides are of couples who have recently given birth in Hawaii.

The Better Birthing Association is a non-profit organization of parents and professionals formed to promote education for birthing couples. For more info on times and locations of films, etc., contact Susan 254-4039 or Corinne, 254-3718.