ALL SHE WROTE /MAR-APRIL

STRUGGLE

A Thoroughly Modern Witch Trial

A recent custody case in California courts has become front page news there and a focus of broad outrage--because "Fishman vs. Fishman" is far more than a custody case. From the beginning one and a half years ago, when the courts gave legal blessing to the kidnapping of Tina Fishman's daughter, this entire case has been nothing but an attempt, as Tina told the press,

"to quiet the voice of women and through this type of dirty political blackmail prevent them from taking part in the great movements shaking the world today."

It all began in 1979 when Tina was arrested in a historic demonstration against Teng Hsiao Ping, who had come to Washington to enlist China in the Western imperialist bloc. Sixteen Mao Tse Tung Defendants, including especially the Chairman of the Revolutionary Communist Party, Bob Avakian, were framed up on 25 felony charges each, all revolving around conspiracy to assault police. (All felony charges were eventually dropped due to broad exposure of this blatant political persecution, and Tina did probation for a misdemeanor in the case.) All this was too much for Tina's ex-husband, Ted, a Zionist working in management in Lockheed's Sunnyvale plant, which builds Trident missiles. Just before the trial, Ted took their six-year-old daughter Riva to California and refused to return her to Tina, who might sound like kidnapping. “But not to California Judge Browning; he declared an "emergency," which allowed him to claim jurisdiction for his court in California and to award temporary custody to Ted.

Browning, who came out of retirement to rule on Ted's complaint, was a key judicial figure in the 60's for prosecuting Vietnam War resisters and for COINTELPRO investigations of the Black Panther Party, the Revolutionary Union, and others. But there’s more,

Murphy, Ted's lawyer, met with the chief prosecutor in DC about the Mao Defendants’ trial. Then, when Tina's probation officer in California recommended that Riva be returned to her mother, he was removed, and a pig named Donald Daugherty assigned. He reported that Tina offered her daughter "an intentional withholding of those intangible necessities of parenting." The proof? She did not work full time because she was an active supporter of the RCP! Finally, when Tina finished her probation and asked her Chicago probation officer to notify family court in California that she was now free of all charges, as per usual...he was told by Washington DC not to write anything to anybody re. Tina or her case.

Does this sound like a routine custody battle--or more like a nationally coordinated witch hunt, conceived in the highest echelons, against revolutionaries and specifically women in the revolutionary movement?

But recently, the government has made a show of cleaning up its act--while actually intensifying the attack. Judge Browning disqualified himself and in December of '82 the very "liberal" Judge Ragan was brought in for the permanent custody hearing. Ragan proclaimed there was no politics involved in this case-just the "best interests of the child." (What? Me sd? "This weekend..I contributed thgs ofseboe i copteiaseed,

No politics--yet it was perfectly acceptable for Ted's attorney Murphy to introduce as evidence that Tina is an “unfit mother" such crimes as: talking on the phone to her daughter about Bobby Sands and El Salvador, and writing to her about... the Blues Brothers! But any mention by Tina about what was really behind this case, and Ragan would viciously threaten to take her daughter away permanently unless she "discontinues her behavior."

On Dec. 20, Ragan's decision came down, and a very strange and convoluted one it was. Because of the packed courtrooms and national publicity, he was forced to rule that no emergency had existed, Judge Browning's ruling was illegal, and California had had no jurisdiction. Now, the law and legal precedent is crystal clear that where no emergency--i.e. imminent child abuse--exists, a child must be returned to the custodial parent and the case comes under the child's home state (in this case, Illinois). But here the liberal Judge added his own "imaginative and innovative interpretations" of the law to the already long list of attacks on Tina. He proclaimed a new emergency since Riva had not lived with her mother for one and a half years, and so awarded another six months of temporary custody to Ted--allowing one ten-day visit to mend the "rift" he claims has developed between mother and daughter due to the original illegal emergency rulings! Furthermore he suggested that jurisdiction be refused by Illinois and that his court would then decide permanent custody in six months.

There's no doubt what his decision would be. He has already ruled that Ted "provides a stable, safe, religious and orderly environment, in an attractive, comfortable community" while “unfortunately Tina has been totally absorbed by a fanatical obsession with a political cause which led her to the true needs of a 10 to 12-year-old child." This plainly has nothing to do with the "best interests of the child" and everything to do with a blatant threat to women who dare to challenge this society. Another round of this battle is upcoming in July. Funds for defense and letters of support are urgently needed and can be sent to: Committee Against the Kidnapping of Mao Defendants' Daughter, c/o 17 Brenham Pl., San Francisco, CA 94108.

-- CHERENE

“From Homestead To Physician’

Laverne Kia is a twenty-five year old third year medical school student at the University of Hawaii. Her family has lived in the Nanakuli Hawaiian Homestead since she was five years old. She is the youngest in the family of fifteen children. Her father, of seventy-five percent Hawaiian ancestry, was a construction worker. Her mother, also of seventy-five percent Hawaiian ancestry, did not work outside of the home. Laverne attended Nanaiakapono Elementary School until she was in the third grade at which time her three oldest sisters sought to give her the educational opportunity they themselves had lacked. They assumed the financial and educational responsibility for Laverne and sent her to Sacred Hearts Academy in Honolulu. It is a typical Hawaiian cultural pattern for the older children to curtail their own academic careers in order to assume financial assistance to the parents and younger children in the family. This most significant and supportive financial aid and direction was the root of Laverne's later high educational and professional ambitions.

While young and still at Nanaiakapono, Laverne never realized that she was poor or that she lacked for any material goods. Everyone in that area was of about the same socio-economic level. Upon visiting the homes of her fellow classmates at Sacred Hearts Academy, she realized that they had many things that she did not have. It was at this time that she began to be aware of the realities of the wider world.

Laverne certainly brought to mind the famous treatise by Virginia Woolf, A Room of One's Own, when she confided to me that one of her most basic motivating factors in her desire for improvement through education was "to have my very own pillow and to someday even have a room of my own."

Her family never promoted specific professional goals but they did provide her with much love, affection, and familial support. It is interesting to note that in retrospect she believes that she never did have a balanced meal at home. She never had milk or juice or fresh vegetables with her meals. It was only when she began to date that she learned from her boyfriends what foods constituted a well-balanced diet.

In nineteen sixty-five, Laverne's father suffered a series of debilitating strokes that left him paralyzed. It was during this time that Laverne decided that she wanted to become a nurse. "I didn't think that I could be a doctor and I thought a nurse would be as good as I could get."

While at Sacred Hearts Academy, Laverne received much praise, support, and encouragement from her teachers who believed in her intellectual potential and ability. She was urged by her male University of Hawaii biology counselor to change her major from nursing to biology.

cont. on p. li