PAGE 4

ALL SHE WROTE

JULY / AUGUST

HOW TO APPLY FOR CITY JOBS

How Do I Go About Getting a City Job?

Call the Department of Civil Service at 523-4301 for job information. The Department of Civil Service is the central personnel agency for the City and County of Honolulu. We recruit, select and retain, according to merit principles, the best people for city jobs.

Where Are You Located?

Our address is 530 South King St., Honolulu, Hawaii 96813. We're at the corner of South King and Punchbowl Streets in City Hall Annex (in the red brick building, Waikiki side of main City Hall) and are open from 7:45 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday except holidays.

What Basic Qualifications Do I Need?

You are required to meet minimum qualifications for the position and be U.S. citizens, American Nationals or permanent resident aliens, and also be Hawaii State residents at the time of application. Applicants must be less than 70 years old. Detailed education and experience requirements are listed on our job announcements.

How Do You Advertise Your Jobs?

We advertise job openings in the newspaper every MONDAY in the Help Wanted Section and distribute job flyers to schools, public libraries, Satellite City Halls and other agencies.

Where Do I Get Application Forms?

We accept applications only for the jobs currently advertised. Keep checking the newspaper, or call or visit us to find out about the kinds of jobs we are recruiting for.

City job applications are available at our office, State Library and branches, and Satellite City Halls. Satellite City Halls are located in Ewa Beach, Hauula, Hawaii Kai, Kailua, Kalihi, Kaneohe, Wahiawa, Waianae, and Waipahu. Check your telephone directory for addresses and telephone numbers.

Be sure to fill out your application completely. It represents "you" on paper. Mail your completed application to the Department of Civil Service or return it to our office by the closing date of the recruitment.

In addition to the application, we may ask you to fill out a training and experience evaluation form for more details about your qualifications.

What Kind of Exams Do You Give?

After we have reviewed your application and have found it to be acceptable, you are sent an admission card with the time, place and date of the test about one week beforehand. It is good practice to note the test date on your calendar as a reminder.

The examination may be a written, oral, performance, or agility test, training and experience evaluation or a combination of these. Tests are given to measure your skills, knowledge and abilities for the job.

What Is An Eligible List?

If you pass the examination, your name is placed on the eligible list in the order of how well you did on the examination. Your name stays on this list for a minimum of one year and may be extended for a longer period.

When Do I Get Called For Interviews?

For every vacancy, the top five names on the eligible list, plus any ties at the fifth position, veterans whose scores with the added veterans' points put them within the top five category, and others seeking transfer and re-employment, are sent to the agency with the vacancy. Any one of those interviewed may be selected on the basis of merit.

If you are selected, you will be required to pass our medical examination to make sure you are physically fit for your job. Passing the medical examination brings you a step closer to your new job.

Suppose I Am Not One of The Top Five?

Since the eligible list is used for one or more years, even if you had not scored in the top five, your name may be reached as higher ranking eligibles are appointed from the list, fail to accept an appointment or find other employment.

Once Selected, Do I Go Through a Probationary Period?

Yes. You must serve a six-month probationary period (one year for uniformed Fire and Police Personnel and Police Radio Dispatcher I) which is considered part of the testing process.

What Kinds of Rights Do Applicants Have?

You are protected from discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, age, physical disabilities, politics, and other non-ability criteria.

What Kinds Of Benefits Are Available?

Many! Here are a few: promotional opportunities, free life insurance, health insurance plans, up to 21 working days of vacation, up to 21 working days of sick leave, worker's compensation, membership in State Employee's Retirement System, credit union, deferred compensation plan. 

Vacation - 21 working days a year (4.2 weeks) cumulative up to 90 working days, or more than four months since five days make a working week. 

Sick Leave - 21 days a year, cumulative without limit. Unused sick leave may be converted into additional service retirement credits. 

Holidays - 13 days a year plus general and special election days and any specially proclaimed holidays. 

Retirement - Employees pay 7.8 percent of earnings to support this plan. The City pays more than twice your contributions. Permitted upon 25 years of creditable service at any age or upon 5 years of creditable service at age 55 or over. Pensions are for life at the rate of 2 percent for each year of service based on the average of three highest years earnings. (This is reduced when the retiree is under age 55. The reduction does not apply to police and firefighters and certain other class members.) Pensioners get annual cost-of-living increases of 2 percent which is automatic, plus premium-free medical insurance. Social Security is in addition to the State benefits except for police and firefighters. 

Medical Benefits - The government pays part of the premium: $14.14 a month for single plan and $45.08 for family plan. The employee pays the balance of the premium. The available plans are Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, the Hawaii Medical Service Association, and the HMSA Community Health Plan. 

Dental Benefits - The government pays the entire premium of $4.18 a month for each dependent child under age 19. Hawaii Dental Service administers the benefits. 

Group Life Insurance - The government pays a $2.25 monthly contribution for free life insurance as follows: for active employees below age 45 - $15,000; ages 45 to 64 - $11,250; ages 65 to 69 - $7,300; ages 70 and over and all retirees - $250. Employees have the option of applying the $2.25 monthly contribution toward their employee organization plan which has been approved by the Health Fund Office. 

Accidental Injury Leave - Four months at full pay for employees in hazardous work (police, firefighters, Plant Electricians, Tunnel Electricians, and certain others), plus 60 percent salary thereafter, in case of total disability; if benefits would be higher, the employee may elect to receive these instead. 

Funeral Leave - Three days with pay in case of death of a spouse, child, parent, sibling, mother-in-law or father-in-law. The Hawaiian hanai or unofficial adoptive kinships may be recognized in lieu of natural kinship. 

Military Service Leave - Up to 15 working days (three weeks) with pay for active service with military reserve units. 

Other Special Leaves - Time off with pay as required for jury service, to appear as a witness in court, or for pre-induction physical exams. 

Benefits are subject to Legislative changes.

MORE QUESTIONS? ASK US!

Department of Civil Service City and County of Honolulu City Hall Annex Honolulu, Hawaii Phone: 523-4301

96813

521-5481

Lillian P. Holcomb, Ph.D. Certified Psychologist

Counseling & Psychotherapy for Women

the Handicapped (Physically Challenged) Spiritual & Religious Concerns

Stetoz Gucen Snes Bids Honolulu, HI 96813