PAGE 2

FROM THE EDITOR,

Many changes have occurred with  
All She Wrote since the last issue  
came out in November. We lost some of  
our funding and will be starting  
again on a smaller scale with eight  
pages. We will be coming out on a  
quarterly schedule instead of bi-month-  
ly. In order to become self-support-  
ing as soon as possible I would en-  
courage all of you to either subscribe  
or to renew your subscriptions. It  
only costs $5 per year.

This issue marks my first issue as  
editor, so I suppose I ought to tell  
you a little bit about myself. I'm a  
27-year-old single mother. My daughter  
is five years old. I'm a full-time  
student at the University of Hawaii  
presently pursuing a Liberal Studies  
degree that combines Women's Studies,  
Political Science and Journalism.

My goal is to support myself and  
my daughter with freelance writing.

If you have ideas or suggestions  
for stories, cartoons or ideas for  
cartoons, if you want to write a  
letter to the editor or an article,  
please feel free

I encourage you to do so. If you  

would like to get in touch with me  
leave a message with Lue at the YWCA  
or call me at 531-3050.  
to get feedback.

Until the Summer Issue,

I'd like

THE COFFEEHOUSE IS PERKING

The University YWCA Women's Coffee-  
house is coming alive again!

We are a self-supporting non-profit  
group working to provide a place for  
women to come together. Men are wel-  
come too. We offer an informal,  
friendly atmosphere. Non-alcoholic  
beverages are available; however, you  
can bring your own booze.

Located at 1820 University Avenue  
next to Atherton Hall, YMCA, we are  
presently open on the first and third  
Fridays of each month from 7:30 to mid-  
night.

Since we are a volunteer group, we  
need people to help run the Coffee-  
house. With your help and attendance  
we hope to expand to every Friday night  
and to provide regular entertainment.

Also, we want to thank our great  

volunteers from the Metropolitan Com-  
munity Church of Honolulu for the won-  
derful job they've done in running the  
Coffeehouse on the first Fridays. MCC  
is a ministry open to gay women and  
men.

If you are interested in volunteer-  
ing or in finding out more about the  
Coffeehouse, please contact Cindy at  
239-4032 evenings before 9 p.m.

ALL SHE WROTE

ANNOUNCEMENTS

KITV OFFERS SCHOLARSHIP

KITV, Honolulu, Hawaii announces  
its Betty Smyser Scholarship Program.  
KITV will administer two (2) scholar-  
ships of $1,000 each to women students  
from Hawaii who intend to enroll in  
communications related or journalism  
courses of study.

To apply to the KITV Scholarship  
fund, the student must be a female  
resident of the State of Hawaii, cur-  
rently enrolled in a 4-year college or  
university, community college or grad-  
uate school and intend to enroll in  
communications related or journalism  
courses of study.

For application materials contact:  
Community Affairs Department, KITV,  
1290 Ala Moana Boulevard, Honolulu,  
Hawaii 96814. Phone: 526-4444. Appli-  

cation materials are also available at  
the Financial Aids Office at a Univer-  
sity or Community College in Hawaii.

Deadline for submitting applica-  
tions is April 16, 1984.

BY AN ACT OF CONGRESS...

March 4, 1984 begins this year's  
celebration of Women's History Week.

March 8 was proclaimed International  
Women's Day by the United Nations in  
1977. The purpose was to recognize  
the tremendous work of women in the  
labor movement and the international  
connections among all women.

In 1982, National Women's History  
Week was officially declared by Con-  
gress. Hawaii also celebrated the  
first Women's History Week in 1982.  
It looks like a tradition may have  
begun.

Congressional Resolution

Designating the week beginning March 4, 1984, as “Women's  
History Week”

Whereas American women of every race, class, and  
ethnic background helped found the Nation in  
countless recorded and unrecorded ways as servants,  
slaves, nurses, nuns, homemakers, industrial workers,  
teachers, reformers, soldiers, and pioneers;

Whereas American women have played and continue to  
play a critical economic, cultural, and social role in  
every sphere of our Nation's life by constituting a  
significant portion of the labor force working in and  
outside of the home;

Whereas American women have played a unique role  
throughout our history by providing the majority of the  
Nation's volunteer labor force and have been  
particularly important in the establishment of early  
charitable, philanthropic, and cultural institutions in the  
country;

Whereas American women of every race, class, and  
ethnic background served as early leaders in the  
forefront of every major progressive social change  
movement, not only to secure their own right of  
suffrage and equal opportunity, but also in the  
abolitionist movement, the emancipation movement, the  
industrial labor union movement, and the modern civil  
rights movement; and

Whereas despite these contributions, the role of  
American women in history has been consistently  
overlooked and undervalued in the body of American  
history. Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Senate  
and House of Representatives of the United States of  
America in Congress assembled, That the week  
beginning March 4, 1984, is designated as “Women's  
History Week”, and the President is requested to issue  
a proclamation calling upon the people of the United  
States to observe such week with appropriate  
ceremonies and activities.

Please contact your Representative and Senator today and  
request that they support the National Women's History Week  
Resolution.

HOW THIS SCHOLARSHIP CAME TO BE

This scholarship is a visible ex-  
ample of what can happen when women  
stand up for their right to fair and  
equal treatment.

In 1980, ten KITV employees went on  
strike protesting the station's policy  
of sex discrimination. The Honolulu  
Chapter of the National Organization  
for Women was negotiating with the  
station management for a swift agree-  
ment. When it became apparent that the  
management would not change its policy,  
NOW filed a "petition to deny" license  
renewal with the FCC.

Shortly after this petition was  
filed the strike was settled. However,  
NOW would not withdraw the petition  
until some guarantees were made.

Six and a half months after nego-  
tiations began, NOW settled with the  
station.

Among the terms agreed upon were:

---The establishment of a continu-  
ing position for an Affirmative Action  
Coordinator.

---Four internships would be award-  
ed every year. Two of these would go  
to women.

---A KITV Woman's Scholarship fund  
would be set up. $2,000 would be  
awarded every year. The Betty Smyser  
Scholarship Program is the result.

ANNOUNCEMENTS and Notices

WOMYN'S BRAILLE PRESS, inc. offers  
feminist and lesbian material in  
braille or on tape to womyn who  
are blind or cannot read ink-print.  
Write: WBP, P.O. Box 8475, Minn.,  
Minnesota 55408.

FOR SALE  
Pool table in fair condition. $50  
or offer. Inquire at the University  
YWCA Office 538-7061 x233--ask for  
Lue.

Annotated Guide to Women's Periodi-  
cals in the US and Canada. Includes  
250 publications. $12 for indivi-  
duals (2 iss) $6.50 Ind. (1 iss)  
Annotated Guide c/o NSIWS, Box E-94,  
Earlham College, Richmond, IN 47374.

Democratic Party Policy says that  
50% of the delegates to both State  
and National Conventions must be  
women (if they are available). Call  
City Hall to find your precinct.

Lesbians over 60 are needed to answer  
an anonymous questionnaire. Write  
Dr. Monika Kehoe or Sheryl Goldberg  
at CERES, PSYCH. BLDG. RM 502, San  
Francisco State University, 1600  
Holloway Avenue, San Francisco,  
California 94132.

LUE wants donations of plants and a  
couch for the YWCA office. All do-  
nations will be gratefully appreciated.