ALL SHE WROTE

NOV. - DEC. 1982 * University YWCA, 1820 University Ave., Honolulu, Hi. 96822

E ARE ONE
»” YEAR OLD!.....

I am a little more angry, very cynical, and enjoying my life. I have responded beautifully to being a mother only to insist, however, that I'm more than that and that you view me that way—(All you narrow people) I am con- I have become very energetic, aggressive—I am a good singer and artist—xerox being my newest trade—I am! Whisk, I am curious and live a life See out fae 2. I have travelled intensely with my goddess mother—Ann. I sense my artistic gifts and will pursue them. I watch my mother and wonder if she's crazy or very wise. Nonetheless, I adore her and my grandpa, this summer with my baby. And a new age is starting for me. Won't you join me? (Terry, please call).

Lisa B. Ko

Hishap

As my position was being ‘phased’ out, I am now working for a small video producing company called ‘videololo’. It is a great bunch...low-keyed...each one of the 4...distinct personalities...Love it!

Leaetta ‘Lee’ Igoe

CENTER

Who I am hasn't really changed from one year ago. I still detest labels and am committed to fighting oppression of all peoples. The one big change that has happened to me this past year is a special person in my life, Misha Ko.

+++ going through artichoke visions peeling off layers to reach the heart ...

PHOTOS BY K.C

Peggy Sullivan-Milder

Ann: Egleston

Since May, Kate Draznin has had various adventures, with moving, losing welfare benefits, looking for jobs, getting a job at Down to Earth, moving again, studying Dianetics and Taoism, picking up on Dianetics as okay stuff to study, and generally carrying on. She has also continued with pottery, though has less time for it, and has virtually no time for her various prior volunteer activities at the YWCA. She is looking forward to more moves, changes, and growth, and hopes to get an article out at some point when the dust settles!!

In June I traded in my geckos and cockroaches for the grasshoppers and crickets of IDAHO—seems to be the more simple place to “raise” a 16-year-old boy than hectic Honolulu. Single parenthood is not all it's cracked up to be; I'm glad to have my family around again for support. Although I miss the “chaotic togetherness” of the women working on ASW, I'm truly savoring the peace and quiet and the space to practice Yoga intensively.

Ann: Marie Jenson

A whole year already? My goddess, it feels like five. I'm tired, overworked, underpaid, but somehow it all seems worth it. Don't get me wrong, I'm not into downward mobility—just more realistic. I've spent the last year working on my degree in Women's studies, writing and doing ads for ASW, supervising the construction for the New England Women's Music Retreat, working on Purpleheart productions, playing music in an all-women's band called Purpleheart and Rosewood, building furniture—my favorite piece is a music stand that I made for a dear friend out of purpleheart wood and rosewood, adopting a boy—who is called Boy—I figure it must be some kind of penance, getting close to a lot of wonderful women, going crazy, falling apart, getting it back together, trying to keep a vision about this whole thing, and acquiring some new nicknames like Claricey PBC.

Clarice Cornett

I'm a 50's dyke from Denver and I've been in Hawaii since 7/29/70. The wimmin's movement didn't get to me until 1977 and it was Jan. 1978 before I sprung out of my cobweb-covered closet. Since then, I have undergone a million changes at least, with only one thing remaining unchanged: my love for Joan. We are celebrating our 25th anniversary next year and it feels ecstatic! Lesbian revenge: enjoying life and a woman/wimmin in spite of a rotten system that tries its best to deny and destroy us. Oh Goddess, let it be that millions of Lesbians are enjoying Mother Earth with free and gay spirits. Aloha nui loa, wimmin.

Jay Mays