JULY 7 AUGUST ey

ALC SHE WROTE

PAGE 5

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON TRADES APPRENTICESHIP
WITH THE CITY AND COUNTY

What is Apprenticeship?

Apprenticeship is a program to pro-
vide you an opportunity to learn a
skilled trade and become a journeyman
through on-the-job training and class-
room instruction. Under an agreement
signed by you (sanctioned by your
Union) and the City, the City agrees
to teach you skills of the trade and
you, the apprentice, agree to work
and apply yourself to learn the trade.
How Long is the Program?

Depending on the trade, you will
spend from 3 to 4 years of on-the-job
training and attending required class-
room instruction on your own time.

If you have had prior training or ex-
perience or both, you may be granted
credit for such training or experience
by the Joint Apprenticeship Committee.
This may shorten your apprenticeship
training.
A. Three Year Program (5400 Hours)
Hours Grade

Trades Apprentice I 0-1800 WB5
Trades Apprentice II 1801-3600 WB6
Trades Apprentice III 3601-5400 WB7
B. Four Year Program (7200 hours)
Hours Grade
Trades Apprentice I 0-1800 WB5
Trades Apprentice II 1801-3600 WB6
Trades Apprentice III 3601-5400 WB7
Trades Apprentice IV 5401-7200 WB7

Upon successful completion of the
appropriate journeyman certification
of WB 9, 10, or 11.
How Do I Become An Apprentice?

Our City's Civil Service Department
Recruitment Center can advise you of
the types of apprentice trades which
are available. You may request to
have your name placed on our recruit-
ment notification list for the trade
of your interest. This assures your
being notified of the next open filing
period. Other means by which we let
you know of open filing periods are by
posting examination announcements on
departmental, unions and Civil Service
bulletin boards. For those apprentice
opportunities which may be opened to
the general public in addition to City
employees, we also distribute the an-
nouncements to public libraries, Satel-
lite City Halls, and other strategic
places. We also place classified ad-
vertisements on Mondays in the daily
newspapers for those apprentice oppor-
tunities which may be opened to the
public.

Those selected will be given a medi-
cal examination by our physicians to
see that they are in proper health to
perform the duties of the trade.

During your apprenticeship training,
periodic evaluations will be made of
your progress on the job and in the
classroom. You will also have to make
periodic reports of your progress.

Upon successful completion of the
Trades Apprenticeship Program, you be-
come a fully qualified tradesperson.
What Salary Do I Receive?

All those selected for apprentice-
ship training will enter the program
at the Trades Apprentice I (WB5) level.
However, if you are now working for
the City government as a Helper in the
specified trade and your training and
experience as evaluated by the Joint
Apprenticeship Committee qualifies you
for a higher level,

Trades Apprentice level. For example,
if you are now an Electrician Helper
(WB 5) and qualify as a Trades Appren-
tice II - Electrician (WB6), you will
start at the Trades Apprentice II
level and your pay will be adjusted
accordingly.

If you had previous training and
experience in private industry, other
governmental agencies or the City in
the specified trade, you will enter
the program at the Trades Apprentice I
level. Your previous training and ex-
perience will be evaluated by the
Joint Apprenticeship Committee at the
request of the Department. You may be
advanced to any appropriate apprentice
level, at any time, if your previous
training or experience is creditable
in the trade.

There are also Peacesat hook-ups
for Tonga, Saipan, New Caledonia, Cook
Islands, Niue, Solomon Islands, Kiriba-
ti (Gilbert Islands), Vanuatu (New
Hebrides), American Samoa, Tuvalu,
Guam, Sydney and Queensland, Australia.
The Y has a hook-up every six weeks.
Any Y can propose an agenda and there
is no cost for the service. The next
meeting is set for August 25, 5-7 p.m.
The agenda will be coming soon.

Each participating Y explained what
they were doing on the areas under dis-
cussion and brought up questions or
problems. Part of the discussion was
on the Hi-Leigh Report and its rele-
vance for each area. The Honolulu par-
ticipants had not seen the report and
so were not able to respond. A copy,
however, is being sent to us. High-
lights of the discussion included:

1) active campaigns to boycott Nestlé's
and goods from South Africa in Austra-
lia and New Zealand; 2) Violence-free
areas for women marked off and publi-
cized in New Zealand with active anti-
pornography campaigns; 3) Barbara
Rogus, in Australia has just published
a book on the politics of housework
titled "Domestication of Women"; 4)
Consciousness-raising groups to deal
with institutional racism in New Zea-
land and training centers for aborigi-
nal girls in Perth.

Some of the problems that arose in
dealing with these issues seemed to be
common among all of the Y's. These
are: 1) isolation which leads to apa-
thy and lack of information to help
spur programs and activity; 2) the pro-
blem of the Y doing things for rather
than with people; 3) the unintended
exclusion of women not in the white
middle-class group; 4) the difficulty
of getting people to confront racism
and prejudice and why we are unpre-
pared to talk about Human Rights is-
sues; 5) the need for group leaders.
The issues that seem to be at the
forefront in dealing with the pro-
blems are also common such as: 1) the
effects of the economic slump and un-
employment for young women (Tabor) ;
2) management styles in dealing with
racism (Wellington); 4) overcoming
sex-role socialization so women speak.