IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

=. _~

L1 } ALL SHE WROTE PAGE

In Connections, an international women's quarterly, we read that the Great Court, a large grassy area located in
the center of the University of Nairobi (with limited access and walled in on three sides by low-lying barbed wire
decoratively covered with bougainvillea); was where some of the most exciting activity of the End of the Decade
for Women Conference took place. There participants continued discussions begun in workshops or exchanged the
personal stories that have become so integral to the growth of the women's movement. Literature was displayed,
flyers passed out, petitions signed, posters, magazines and books were sold. There was constant movement on the
Great Court: women often sang, chanted and danced. Since demonstrating outside the walls of the University was
legally denied, the Great Court became the only site for planned and impromptu demonstrations. A rally was held
in solidarity with the people of Central America, Ukrainian women held a silent march for their political prisoners,
and Filipino women organized a human chain calling for the end to the Marcos dictatorship. In renaming this
announcement column we hope it will become our Great Court as we share the spirit of Nairobi '85.

the great court

The UH Student Forums,
a newly-founded group, meets

Since 1980, the national
growth rate for clerical jobs has

regularly at the University slowed. In the largest group of the Job Creation Project of the Committee for
the workers (secretaries, steno- eee tcels emer:
This active group's main graphers, and typists), the
purpose is to effect change number of jobs has already de- seis “pop Be ache
at UH. They are questioning clined by 100,000. For a full pues: =
the appropriateness of the report--"Hidden Victims: uch 3,500 ~ $000 words

monopoly of the University
meal service. They are also
concerned about the effects

Clerical Work, Automation, and
the Changing Economy," send
$6.50 plus $1.50 postage to

of allowing classified research 9 to 5, 1224 Huron Rd., Cleve- aes. Fee ea

at UH, and brought an informed land, Ohio 44115. FELIS nacre Eaten rye

speaker to the Y. ‘ Nie perce ane
They meet on Mondays, scr ogee

4:30-6:30 p.m. Anyone invol- LIFE UNDER APARTHEID ances cramars of the J Crestion

ved with UH is invited to:

The gap in living conditions between the different racial groups
among South Africa's 28,000,000 people is a staggering indictment

join them. of the apartheid system. Here's only a few of the bitter facts. Raa tascc
For more information, call Rcctooel Merten

Lue at 538-7061, ext.

2354

Monday-Friday, 1-5 p.m.

BOYCOTT CENSUS is a newsletter

to keep you posted on all the
boycotts so you can not buy

Norway,

and then buy when there's a

ME’ 94268.

- (more)
Y News

Eight new YWCA National Board offi-
cers for the 1985-88 triennium were elected
at Convention:

1 GLENDORA M. PUTNAM, presi-
dent...attorney, civil rights leader, equal
opportunity officer, Massachusetts Hous-
ing Finance Agency, Boston, Mass.; Na-
tional Board member since 1972.

WHITE AFRICAN COLORED

ASIAN

The essays remain the property of the Committee, which plans
to publish them.

Legal Research for the Non-
Lawyer, designed for citizen
activists and others is taught
by Tom Grande, Esq., former

rs eS e © OT ©)

2 RITA M. MONIZ, vice president-
headquarters, associate professor of polit-
ical science, Southeastern Massachusetts
University; former member of city council,
New Bedford, Mass.; National Board
member since 1982.

3 LAVERA S. BROWN, vice presi-
dent at large...civil rights leader, research
specialist on housing for the Urban Lea-
gue, past president of YWCA of Pitts-
burgh, Pa.; National Board member since
1982. 5

4 STELLA BORREGO EMUNDSON,
vice president-regional relations
psychotherapist in Houston, Texas; Na-
tional Board member since 1978; secretary
1982-85.

5 EVA L. VERPLANCK, vice presi-
dent-eastern seaboard...board member,
United Way of Delaware; past president,
YWCA of New Castle County, Del; Na-
tional Board member since 1976.

6 HELEN R. GRAHAM, vice presi-
dent-mid-states...vice president, YWCA
of Metropolitan Detroit; board member,
International Credit Union; National Board
member since 1979.

7 JUNE CHAN QUAN, vice president-
western states...past president, YWCA of
San Francisco and of Chinese Newcomers
Service Center; National Board member
since 1979; vice president-western states
1982-85.

8 MARY R. BROWN, secre-
tary...coordinator of International Student

Lens) me Dreak me amy you. wars ME
3! loug aS Yor love me tls alrigdy
fo a fe] "

|
|
|

WHEN WE DEAD AWAKEN

“When We Dead Awaken/Decoding Patriarchy" is
the title of a series of four anti-pornography
posters created by Canadian artist Daria Stermac.
These slick black, white and red posters can be
ordered by sending $20 (Canadian) to Womenfilm/
Womenart, 201 Spadina Rd., Toronto, Canada M5R 2T9.

"The Run for Your Life" poster blows up an
image of a woman's foot in high heels, a ballerina's
foot, and a drawing of bones deformed by footbinding.
"Makeovers" presents numerous before and after
photos of women, some marked or scribbled over.
"Atrocity Acknowledged" shows four disturbing
photographs—children of a concentration camp; a
black man lynched; a napalmed Vietnamese village,
children fleeing; and a woman naked and bound. The
first three photos are captioned, "Atrocity Acknow-
ledged." The last is captioned, "Male Entertainment."
“Bend Me, Break Me" speaks of the way women of
means are coerced to have their bodies carved, cut
and sewn tight to live up to the ideal beauty sold
to women through most advertising.

Resource Center and assistant director of
student affairs, State University of New
York at Buffalo; vice president, YWCA of
Buffalo and Erie County, N.Y.; National #
Board member since 1982.

The Coffeeline at the University YWCA may have a
position available in late January for the break-
fast service. For more information call Lue at
538-7061 ext 235, 1 to 5 pm, Mon to Fri.