DE! ALL SHE WROTE P,

THE PROTEST WAS FANTASTICK

A rendition of the all-American love story "The Fantasticks,” a play whose plot centers around rape with savage Indians, rape made romantic in moonlight, and rape with a dozen men, opened for preview on October 20, 1983. The protest against the play opened the same night. Both ran through the scheduled performances. Both were an unqualified success.

Students Against Rape, the organizational core behind the protest, formed in order to raise public awareness and to lead the viewers to make a connection between a light and fluffy musical and the violent realities of rape.

The strategy of our protest was to illustrate that a play, especially one on a public university campus, could not portray a rape or even an abduction of a 16-year-old girl in a comical manner without a public outcry. We maintained that the play should not be presented—not as an issue of censorship, but as an issue of consciousness.

Time after time we were lured into false arguments based on censorship.

THEATRE REVIEW

Donna Obermiller

Leeward Community Theatre's FRANKENSTEIN the monster was a pieced together creation. The October 1983 Honolulu Theatre for Youth play FRANKENSTEIN was not.

FRANKENSTEIN: Sensitivity plus on every level. John Kauffman's direction was subtle, funny and balanced with carefully crafted suspense. I was very impressed with the simple artistic choices that allowed the quick flash of story vignettes and varied scenes to return and take up the action seconds later. The monster was out there somewhere, a hand gripped the doorway—Oh it was just Justine, the nervous First Lady of the Frankenstein estate. The effect? Marvelous.

Stephanie Akina's characterization of Justine was delightful. She also doubled as Victor's (the creator) landlady away from home. Akina, as Mrs. Saville, nagged her way to the laughs.

Victor Frankenstein, the young, driven scientist played by the energetic and intense Michael Cowell, sought to control the nature of life.

Who was the monster? Playwright Nick Di Martino's monster, played by Sidney Milburn, appeared as Mary Shelley intended: stranded, child-like and unwittingly hideous. He cries out, "Be free!"

LILLIAN P. HOLCOMB, PH.D.

Certified Psychologist (women's issues; marital and couples therapy; spiritual and religious concerns)

announces

at Kahumana Counseling Center

in association with

Irene Solzbacher, M.D. 86-660 Lualualei Hmstd. Rd. Waianae, Hawaii 96792

696-6776 521-5481 (until Oct. 9)

the relocation of her clinic practice when in fact we had no power to censor the play. We were merely exercising our own First Amendment rights by voicing our protest.

Censorship begins at a point long before a play goes into production with the backing of the UH theatre department and supported by its budget. It begins with a realm of possibilities which is a reflection of the belief system of the powers that be.

The point is, to paraphrase the play's director Roger Long, when the play was chosen, Long and the rest of the selection committee saw nothing offensive with the play or the rape song or the abduction scene. Quite to the contrary, they were merely looking for light entertainment. The myths about rape are so ingrained in our society that they didn't even see the horror. In our society, 26 percent of all women have been or will be raped (a recent glamour mag study), but still director Long didn't see the connection between a song which mentions various forms of rape (using the word some 40 odd times) and the rape reality of the rape which happens “out there.”

Victor, appalled, denies the creation and seeks ultimately to destroy it.

The simplicity of the hour and a half show took nothing away from the character development or the youngsters' enjoyment. Scared, Victor goes on with his wedding plans anyway. Puzzled, his fiancée, Elizabeth Lavenza, is also happy her reluctant man is attentive again.

Elizabeth Lavenza was believable. Beauty and dignity were present, though the walls are caving in on his hopes.

go forth and prosper.

by Nick Di Martino

Based on the book by MARY SHELLEY

JOHN KAUFFMAN

After contacts with Long, he maintained that his consciousness had been raised and that in view of the controversy the audience could no longer hear the song ("It Depends on What You Pay" or "The Rape Song") in the proper context. He maintained that the word rape in the play meant abduction, an archaic definition, yet the play was copyrighted in 1960.

In view of his raised consciousness, Long felt that he should change RAPE to RAID. Clearly then abduction or raiding a woman or 16-year-old girl is okay while raping is not. The point seems to lie in your perception, and commonly what is perceived by women as rape is perceived by men (in the words of the play) as a “truly charming sight."

Even with his raised consciousness, Long says he would do the play again—clearly he missed the point.

Students Against Rape Geoline Abraham

Clarice Cornett Nadine Onodera Robin Phillips Jon Watson

My imagination was captured by a beautifully choreographed guilt dance. Victor fell victim to a drug-induced nightmare, where ghouls writhed at the window, their bodies silhouetted in red.

No one connected with this FRANKENSTEIN need deny their creation. "And now," in the words of Mary Shelley, "once again I bid my hideous progeny (Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus) I have affected the nature of man.