7 ms 2 SS A SEE WROTE /MAR=APRTE™

cont. from p. 6

Asian women and men are using art
forms as political weapons to combat
traditional culture. Asian women
might be less fearful of Western mod-
ern feminism, Kingston suggested, if
in the process of self-definition they
make connections with the ancient an-
cestresses in their indigenous Asian
cultures.

Natalia Morales from the Universi-
ty of the Philippines reiterated the
theme of indigenous feminism in Asia
in her paper entitled, "The Filipino
Women: A Dilemma of Privilege and De-
privation." She explained that in the
Philippines, a matriarchal myth has
been found in folklore and legends and
there is the proverb: "After God,
woman." She also said that the crea-
tion myth in which man and woman simul-
taneously emerged from bamboo is based
on sexual equality. More recently, in
historical times, women participated
equally in national independence revo-
lutions. In the domestic sphere, a
wife/mother has economic power in the
forms of controlling the purse strings
and bearing the major responsibility
of child discipline.

Agnes Estioko-Griffin of the Uni-
versity of Hawaii presented a paper on
"The Implications of ‘Woman the Hunter"
in Ethnographic and Pleistocene Con-
texts." In her paper, she said that
among the contemporary Agta people of
northeastern Luzon in the Philippines,
there was no clear-cut sexual division
of labor and male dominance in subsi-
stence activities and politics, and
women regularly hunted with their bow,
arrow and dogs.

Since there is a great need for

feminist analysis of female solidarity

and strength from mothers in their

own cultural and historical contexts,
Asian/Pacific and Asian/Pacific Ameri-
can women need to develop feminist
scholarship in which they themselves
discuss and determine their priorities
and goals.

Summary and Conclusion

Since there is no content without
context, among the Asian/Pacific women
participants, an underlying sentiment
seemed to be that feminism should be
defined in their own terms within his-
torical and cultural contexts.

This theme is also echoed by Carol
Lee Sanchez, Third World Caucus coordi-
nator of the National Women's Studies
Association in the current issue of the
NWSA NEWSLETTER (Winter, 1982): "The
differences in agendas of white and
Third World feminists are culturally
based. Our own perspectives about our-
selves are rejected. Our explanations
and interpretations of who we are are
unacceptable. We are described, ex-
plained and interpreted through west-
ern cultural bias and yet our cultural
biases are not accepted about our-
selves."

Noticing only a few Hawaii-born
Asian/Pacific women participants at
the conference, Hawaii-born Pilipino-
American woman, Helen Nagtalon-Miller
of the University of Hawaii, suggested
that for future conferences, besides
presenting and exchanging feminist

scholarship, Asian/Pacific women needed

to just sit and talk among them-
selves to find out who they were and
what they wanted. According to her,
the predominantly academic nature of
the conference held at the East-West
Center automatically excluded many lo-

cal Asian/Pacific American women who
were neither feminists nor highly edu-
cated academicians.

-- ALICE YUN CHAT

Response

To the Editor:
In her reflections on the Interna-
tional Women's Studies Conference "Con-

cepts and Strategies: Women's Studies
in Different Cultural Contexts" held

in November, 1982 at the University of
Hawaii, Alice Chai demonstrates a clas-
sic example of the very practice she
denigrates. White women are represent-
ed as racist accusers confronting sin-
cere and beleaguered Asian or Pacific
women who are defining and interpret-
ing their experience in a self-valida-
ting way. By refusing to quote their
words fully and accurately, she has
taken away their voice and stifled
their questioning which at the con-
ference led to fruitful discussion and
exchange of insights. The dispropor-
tion of the coverage gives an unfair
description of the many valid and valu-
able papers and comments made by women
of all ethnic groups represented.

In reality, Hawaiian, Asian and
Pacific women at the conference repre-
sented a wide spectrum of experience,
outlook and background. It behooves
us to respect the freedom to speak
of all.

Arising from the freedom of speech
is the responsibility to speak meaning-
fully, relevantly and truthfully in
the context of a publicly supported in-
stitution of higher learning and re-
search. That means that speakers must
pursue research and inquiry. Of course,
it is worthwhile just to "talk story."
But we cannot ask taxpayers, communi-
ty agencies, women's organizations and
public-spirited firms to fund mere
casual exchange. We who worked to or-
ganize the recent conference, raising
funds, writing grants and attracting
high caliber speakers were proud of
the level of research, the diligence
and the quality of thought that went
into the best of the papers presented.
Each of these represented original re-
search of publishable quality and a
selection will in fact be published
in the near future. It is this quali-
ty of research--originality, insight,
and arduous quarrying of primary data
and resources--which is the measure of
our accountability to the community
which sponsored our coming together
and the measure of our satisfaction in
a job well done.

Sincerely yours,
Madeleine J. Goodman, Ph.D.
Director, Women's Studies
Program, UH, Manoa

“Why Be A Feminist
in The 1980s"

Recently, a sales representative
for a large publishing company told
me that interest in women's issues
is declining. It appears that we
"did" women in the 1970s just as
we "did" Blacks in the 1960s.
Today, everybody is interested in
vocational matters or, to put it
more bluntly, they are concerned
with "making it."

Rather than decry this trend,
my own inclination upon reflection
is to share some experiences I
have had which demonstrate the
advantages feminism offers to today's
woman who (since she has to eat and
is tired of making 57 cents for every
dollar earned by her male counter-
parts) wants to achieve and succeed
in an admittedly male dominated
system.

Over and above the obvious and
well-known problems associated
with the status, being a SENSITIVE
marginal (a non-Haole in a white
world, a gay in a straight world, a
woman in a man's world) does afford
one a unique and potentially useful
perspective on reality. That is not
to say that oppression is good or
that the experience alone necessarily
provides one with wisdom. On the
contrary, oppression usually thwarts
or destroys potential; but oppression
(or otherness) coupled with the ability
to make sense of one's immediate
situation gives one enormous insight
into the modern world. In essence,
women and other marginals must exist
IN the male world but we are not OF
it. Like strangers in our own land,
we move into male reality but like
all visitors, we see patterns in that
world that one who lives only there
will miss. It is this ability to
recognize the arbitrary nature of
male reality, to sense potential
arrangements and ways of acting
that one's colleagues do not perceive,
that can be translated into a major
asset on the job.

Let me be specific. As a feminist
criminologist, I feel that my
perspectives as a woman have offered me insights
on the problem of crime that are not
available to my male colleagues.

But to enjoy these advantages, I had
to first learn to trust my experiences
as a woman; this very important lesson
was taught to me by my female mentor
in the field who kept telling me to
"muck around in my data." I also
observed that she was using, without
apology, some of her most profound
personal experiences as data to
understand the experiences of other
women whose behavior she was studying.
Many professional women feel that
they must convert almost totally to
the dominant culture, or the male
way of thinking to succeed in a “man's
world," and they grow to distrust
anything that comes from their
experience as women. I believe that
when they do that they actually rob
themselves of some of their most
powerful attributes.

For example, while I was "mucking
around" in juvenile delinquency files
some twelve years ago, I was shocked
to discover that the juvenile court
in Hawaii was routinely locking up
large numbers of young women for
sexual indiscretions that it ignored
in male delinquents. The evidence
was not at all subtle; up until the
late 1950s girls were being given
pelvic exams every time they were

re-admitted to detention and the condition

of the hymen was noted on the forms.
Social workers, many of whom were
women, were fascinated with the girls' 
sexual activities and wrote about
their impressions at great length.
Being a good graduate student, I
dutifully went to the literature to
cont. on p. 20