YARN

These are only a few benchmark dates in the history of an organization whose efforts on behalf of women and girls are well-known.

Its pioneering in the realms of social justice and its unstinting work towards a peaceful world are expressions of the YWCA's commitment to a better life for all.

1858 First Association in the U.S.A., "Ladies' Christian Association," New York City. Philadelphia organizes the first day care.

1869 In the face of unreasoning prejudice and The first Student YWCA was organized at Normal University, Normal.

1892 Clubs for girls organized for the first time on an Indian reservation.

The American Committee joins with Great Britain, Sweden, and Norway to found the World YWCA. The first American secretary to work on foreign soil arrives in India.

1894

1909 A secretary to work in black colleges was called to the national staff; in less than a year the number of student Associations in black colleges was doubled.

1911 Bilingual instructions featured in the newly organized YWCA international institutes for immigrant families.

1913 In 1913, the National Board, YWCA, created a Commission on Sex Education.

1915 — The YWCA organized the first interracial conference ever held in the Southern states of the U.S.A., at Louisville, KY.

1918 The YWCA's Social Morality program becomes the official Lecture Bureau of the Division on Social Hygiene of the War Department in order to “cultivate an attitude of honest, open, scientific interest in the subject of sex."

At the first national industrial conference in Washington, D.C., 65 elected delegates, representing 30,000 YWCA industrial members, agree to work for “an eight-hour law, prohibition of night work, and the right of labor to organize.”

1920

1932 Local YWCAs are urged by convention action “to foster right public opinion which shall be effective against the menace of lynching and mob violence in every form."

1934 YWCA support of legislative measures to provide for dissemination of birth control information under authorized medical direction dates back to 1934.

ALL SHE WROTE

These determined YWCA women met in 1804 to set standards and discuss future directions. Well over a century later, these pioneers are still respected as having great vision, compassion, and commitment to all those who needed job training, family services, and recreational facilities: Key Years in YWCA History

1942

1946

1957

1960

1960

The YWCA extends its services and personnel to Japanese women and girls in 10 Relocation Centers.

Convention of the YWCA of the U.S.A. unanimously adopts the interracial Charter, in which the YWCA committed itself to work for an end to racial injustice.

Student YWCA and YMCAs sponsor their first USSR Exchange Project.

The opening of the YWCA cafeteria to blacks in Atlanta in December marked the first desegregated public dining facility in that city.

The National Board votes support of student YWCAs involved in “sit-in" demonstrations by statements and collection of funds for those needing bail.

1963

1965

1967

1970

1971

1973

1974

1976

1978

1981

1982

1983

1984

The National YWCA is one of the sponsors of the March on Washington.

The Office of Racial Justice is established to campaign against discrimination of minority groups.

A constitutional amendment is adopted at convention providing that if an Association is not “fully integrated in policy and practice; and thereby living up to the Statement of Purpose, it would be disaffiliated.”

Associations work on grape boycott, Operation Breadbasket, support of black businesses, getting university investment out of South Africa, boycotting war machine companies.

Convention votes the ONE IMPERATIVE: TO ELIMINATE RACISM WHEREVER IT EXISTS AND BY ANY MEANS NECESSARY.

Consultation of Asian American women, Honolulu, Hawaii.

The 26th National Convention votes “to support efforts to provide safe, low-cost abortions to all women who desire them.” Conference para Mujeres de Puertorriqueñas, Greenwich, CT.

27th National Convention mandates three targets: empowerment of women, of Third World persons, of youth.

First grant given to a voluntary agency by Department of Commerce enables 250 YWCAs in 44 states to form a network for publicizing jobs for women in local public works projects.

For three years, 1978 to 1981, the National Board heads up a service advocacy project for “endangered” teen women, involving six other youth-serving agencies and 20 or more YWCAs.

29th National Convention of the YWCA of the U.S.A.—“in business to make a difference... in the nation... in the world.” June 3-7, 1982; at Washington Sheraton Hotel, Washington, D.C.

The YWCA of the U.S.A. celebrates its 125th anniversary. The national theme, YWCA—Still Pioneering, speaks of the courageous women of the past and the indomitable spirit of today's women as they create a better future.

SPRING 84

SPRING 84

ALL SHE WROTE

PAGE 5

A History of the University YWCA.

by Cathy Tarutani

In 1932 the Normal School became the Teachers’ College of the University and the Blue Triangle Club became the Young Women's Christian Association of the University of Hawaii. The University YWCA was housed in an office in Hawaii Hall on the UH campus. Dr. Leonora Bilger, UH Dean of Women, served on the Advisory Board and Violet Fond became the president.

In 1943, Mary Atherton Richards and Theodore Richards donated stocks and a U.S. War Bond, valued at $25,000, to build "a 'Y.W.' center for the activities of the Association among the girls limited number of them during their course at the University.” These securities were held for accumulation of dividends and interest until work on a building was begun.

During 1946 the University YWCA received its charter from the National YWCA and became a fully-accredited association of the National and National Student YWCA. The University asked the University YWCA to vacate its Hawaii Hall offices and the University YWCA moved to Atherton House, the YMCA dormitory.

In 1949 the Student Association sent its first delegates to the National YWCA Triennial Convention in San Francisco and the Triennial Staff Conference in Estes Park, Colorado. Funds for their travel were provided by the McInerny Foundation.

Also in 1949, the University YWCA was again in search of housing. In October of that year, the new University YWCA was opened for business on Seaview Avenue.

Planning for the University YWCA building began in 1956. The YMCA offered to lease the property next to their own Atherton House on University Avenue to the YWCA. A nominal rent would be charged and the building was to be designed so it would be suitable for joint program planning between the YMCA and the YWCA. Plans for the two-story building were drawn up in 1957. Shortly after the plans were completed a capital fund drive was launched to raise the balance of funds required.

Construction of the building was begun in 1958 and the Mary Atherton Richards House was dedicated in 1960. “R" House remains the home of the University YWCA today.

The early sixties marked a period of great growth in membership for the University YWCA. In the 1962-63 school year there were 385 student members.

In 1963, a second full-time staff position was added to the University YWCA through a three-year salary grant from the Juliette M. Atherton Trust.

From 1959-63 a prominent part of the University program was the support of “frosh groups." Begun as social groups for incoming University freshmen, these groups developed into "interest groups" which focused around various topics, service to the community, and the leadership of the Frosh Camp program. Frosh Camp was a program for freshman orientation run jointly by the University YWCA and Atherton YMCA from the mid-fifties until the late sixties. The program continues, under the leadership of the YMCA and the Associated Students of the UH (ASUH), without the involvement of the University YWCA.

The middle sixties marked the beginning of the shift from social and community service programming to the social and political activist emphasis which remains at the University YWCA today. "Community service" had, during the fifties and early sixties, meant beautification projects and leadership workshops. By the late sixties it had come to mean spending time and making long-term commitments to working with disadvantaged youth. Interest groups came to focus on ethnic studies, ecology, and international affairs.

One of the first "radical" acts of the University YWCA was the participation of some of its members in the sit-in at Baol. The University YWCA made sure someone was at the sit-in at all times and its Executive Director, Judy Austin (now Judy Austin Rantala) was arrested for her participation in the sit-in. Her assistant director, Amanda Koutz, had to post bail for Austin and a member of the YMCA.

Several new programs and their accompanying staff positions and budget increases were added to the University YWCA during the 1970s. One of these was the Child Care program. Begun out of a need for child care services by members of the University community, this program offered a number of these services. Among these were the Learning Place which was terminated in 1980 or 1981 for lack of applicants.

Also offered were after-school care, summer fun, school-break care, and special events like puppet shows using faculty from the UH Drama department. During the late seventies and early eighties the Child Care program under Jackie Quon Eppling and then Angie Cromwell was expanded to include locations at Hokulani and Noelani Elementary Schools. In 1982, under the re-organization of the YWCA of Oahu (formerly the YWCA of Honolulu), child care was terminated at the University YWCA.

The Women's Health Center opened at the University YWCA in 1974. The Health Center provided the services of a gynecological clinic and provided health education and information. In the area of health education, programs were offered for non-English-speaking women and women in prison and the youth correctional facility.

Special projects in clinical services and educational services were initiated.

In the fall of 1975, the Breadline Restaurant was begun. Widely known for reasonably-priced but delicious offerings such as quiches, crepes, and its own freshly-baked bread, the Breadline's purpose was to train its clients in the basics of food preparation, customer service, and dishwashing. The clients trained for placement in the food service industry included people with diverse special needs.

They were physically and mentally handicapped, Indo-Chinese and other immigrants, high school work-study students, emotionally-troubled individuals, former legal offenders, displaced homemakers, and socially and economically disadvantaged. The program was terminated and the restaurant closed in February 1981.

From 1980 through 1981, the University YWCA was home for the Displaced Homemakers Services. The project, begun elsewhere in the YWCA of Oahu, used counseling, peer support, work experience, advocacy, and appropriate job referrals to increase the employability of displaced homemakers. In 1981, the project moved to a new location at the Richards Street location of the YWCA of Oahu.

During the early 70's many women's consciousness-raising groups were meeting around the United States and the United Kingdom. In Honolulu, such a group identified a need for a place to hold meetings, organize around feminist issues, and do reference and referral work. This need became All She Wrote: Hawaii Women's Voices. All She Wrote has been the result of much effort from many volunteers.

Another Women's Center activity, Everywoman's Coffeehouse, went into operation on Friday nights in 1982. The coffeehouse was begun by a collective of five volunteers.

The Coffeehouse continues to offer a bit more than a place to gather, chat, and munch on a Friday night. The coffeehouse also features evenings of women's music, songs, and poetry. Some of these are well-planned and well-rehearsed concerts, others can be spontaneous readings or jam sessions. Currently, the coffeehouse is open the 1st and 3rd Fridays of every month.

Also ongoing at the Women's Center is Woman's Word Bookstore. The bookstore was begun in 1980 after the idea was brought to the University YWCA by Kathy Feeney and Pat Couvillon. In December of 1980, the bookstore marked its grand opening with a reception with author Maxine Hong Kingston. Woman's Word remains Hawaii's only bookstore dedicated to feminist literature and non-sexist, non-racist children's books.

The history of the relationship of the student University YWCA and the community YWCA of Oahu has been one of recurring disagreement. Tied to each other by finances, personnel, and, since the mid-fifties, a physical facility, the two associations have had numerous difficulties. At least four task forces (in 1952, '72, '78, and '82) were set up to work out these difficulties. The 1982 task force recommended that the University YWCA become a completely independent organization. This recommendation was adopted by the Board of Directors of the YWCA of Oahu and the Board of Management of the University YWCA. Today, the University YWCA is working towards its goal of independence on January 1, 1987.

To gather informally. In 1973, the outcome was the Women's Center at the University YWCA.

Since this beginning, the Women's Center has offered a variety of events, activities, and services to the women's community. In 1978, a project on gender stereotyping in grade school was undertaken. In 1979, the Center ran a CETA-funded program to teach alternative occupational skills in carpentry and electrical work to young economically-disadvantaged women. In 1981, a rape awareness program was begun and offered to the high schools and UH Manoa dorm residents.

The Women's Center has also served as an umbrella for specialized women's groups. One such group was the Women's Art Collective which was organized in 1978 by Dorothy Stein, then Women's Center Director, and Ann Moriyasu. This collective sponsored exhibits of un-established women artists. The Women's Center has also hosted or co-sponsored recitals, readings, and productions by women musicians, writers, and playwrights.

One of the first projects of the Women's Center in 1973 was the production of a feminist newsletter called Woman Alive! Woman Alive! evolved and became Ferity. In 1980, Ferity changed its format to a tabloid-sized newspaper and, in 1982, Ferity continued to grow.

The Women's Center has also served as a hub for various initiatives and programs aimed at empowering women and addressing social issues.