~

ALL SHE WROTE/MAR-APRIL

cont. from p. 14

Orlander and Martin Harry Greenberg, that explore the many themes in her work, and she has also written essays on the writing of SF magazine articles and critical essays (Orlander and Greenberg provide an excellent bibliography of all these). LeGuin's work is noted overall for a continued emphasis on balance, on being ‘in touch," and for a concern with the inner realm, the arena of the psyche. Her vision of her worlds suggests an almost sacred but not sentimental view of the world and she is concerned with man's conflict in nature and what is most permanent about the human condition.

LeGuin was born in Berkeley, Ca. in 1929, the daughter of anthropologists Alfred and Theodora K. Krober ("Ishii in Two Worlds"). She has a B.A. from Radcliffe and M.A. from Columbia in French and Italian Renaissance Literature. In her long career, LeGuin has received four Hugo Awards, three Nebula Awards, one Jupiter Award, Boston Globe Horn Book Award 1969 (Wizard of Earthsea), National Book Award (Farthest Shore, 1975), and Newbery Honor (1973, Tombs of Atuan).

In the books set in the Hainish universe (The Dispossessed, The Left Hand of Darkness, Planet of Exile, Rocannon's World, The Word for World is Forest), LeGuin shows her extraordinary ability to create aliens who are significantly different from humans not only in their physical appearance but values and societal organization that are a major departure from the usual treatment of aliens in SF literature as aberrations and creatures bent on destroying the human race.

For the first time in SF literature (excepting Tolkien's fantasy worlds), believable worlds and sympathetic characters are described with the juxtaposition of these worlds and characters as central to the pursuit of the major themes of man's (in the generic sense) relationship to the world around him and the solution to dilemmas or crises caused by human action. Although the protagonists in most of these books are men, equality of the sexes is a theme she pursues.

In the Earthsea trilogy (three novellas: The Wizard of Earthsea, The Tombs of Atuan, The Farthest Shore), the themes of growing to adulthood and self-awareness are pursued for both male and female characters. This exploration is also carried into her contemporary set of novellas "The Beginning Place" and "Very Far Away From Anywhere Else." “Malifrena" and some of the stories in "Orsinian Tales" have a very different setting more reminiscent of 19th century Eastern Europe. LeGuin has also published a collection of poems "Wild Angels" and a novel "The Lathe of Heaven” which investigates the consequences of "if dreams came true” and was made into a movie for television in 1980.

The works of both these authors are available at the YWCA's Woman's Word Bookstore located at 1820 University Avenue. ~- BARBARA MORT

Pioneer Women

Pioneer Women profiles the lives of women whose voices never speak through the pages of history books, whose ambitions revolved around the traditional role of wife, mother, and homemaker, but for whom the struggle for survival and humanity required a kind of courage, stamina, and resiliency that few of us today could even imagine. Pioneer Women represents the completion of a project begun three generations ago by Ms. Stratton's great-grandmother who "set out to record the legacy of frontier women," and whose efforts resulted in a collection of over 800 autobiographical accounts, writings, and reminiscences. From this rediscovered collection, Ms. Stratton has compiled a fascinating and, at times, inspiring chronicle of the settling of the western frontier of Kansas.

The topical organization of the book provides a framework for the personal recollections and allows a systematic development of the changes that accompanied successive stages of the pioneer era. For example: Covered wagons and stagecoaches, the mode of transportation in the early years for the journey through the endless miles of prairie land, were later replaced by trains; cabin classrooms with mother as teacher, a dirt floor as blackboard, and the Bible as reader, gave way to one-room schoolhouses with

Almost as an extra bonus, a collection of rare old photographs beautifully illustrate many of the events recounted.

Throughout this book, unfortunately, there is a haunting omission, that is, the reluctance of the women themselves to speak of their more intimate existence--love, sex, childbirth and pregnancy. As the author points out, the writings were originally solicited for single young women (often teenagers) who in lieu of salary "boarded out" with the families of each of their pupils in turn. In one chapter, we find women fighting blizzards, fires, floods, and insect plagues in desperate attempts to save their crops; and in another, tales of Indians both hostile and friendly. Others focus on the importance of frontier towns, churches, and schools in the community-building efforts of the women. Clearly, however, some of the most exciting stories are those where we see these Kansas women in the political arena--from the Underground Railroad, to the temperance marches, and finally to the fight for the vote.

The Blatant Image III

To truly reflect the richness and variety of the lives of women today, The Blatant Image, a magazine of feminist photography, needs help in obtaining rarely-seen, little-photographed non-traditional images of women: for example, a woman's view of cooking, washing diapers, office work, being in court, in jail, schooling, street life, slumber parties, baby showers!

To honor the unacknowledged truths of our lives, the editors are asking for photographs of our secrets and taboos: menstruation, death, women's endurance and strength, fierceness and rage; for pictures of confrontation and protest, commanding women, women as winners!, women who sweat, who dig ditches and polish silver, who labor in childbirth.

To be true to life, they want images inclusive of all classes, ages, races, sizes, shapes and abilities.

publication, and quite probably convention did not encourage a public airing of "private matters," but the loss is ours. Another limitation of the collection of biographies is the lack of racial and social diversity, that is, the memoirs represent the white homesteading women while those of Indian women, black women, saloon girls, and working women are unrecorded. Despite the limitations of her priceless collection, Ms. Stratton has written a readable and thoroughly enjoyable work, and has ensured a place in history for the women who settled the plains.

-- PAT COUVILLON

They welcome the informal as well as the formal portrait. Women hold up half the sky--in the country as on the city streets--and around the world. Where are the images that show it? Deadline for the 3rd annual volume is June 30, 1983. There is no fee for sending photographs to The Blatant Image. Also sought are articles--critical, technical and philosophical--plus book reviews and resource materials information. For additional information or to send photographs and/or articles etc., address The Blatant Image, 2000 King Mountain Trail, Sunny Valley, OR 97497-9799. A limited number of the 1st volume (1981) are available for $10 postpaid. The new 1982 edition is $11 pp. from the same address.

OVULAR PHOTOGRAPHY

OVULAR Photography Workshops for Women will be held at Rootwords, women's land in southern Oregon, from

cont. on p. 19