PAGE 16

PUZZLE

WOMEN'S HISTORY CROSSWORD

across

1. British warrior queen

7. American poet

11. French actress

12. French scientist

13. world's greatest woman athlete

14. __Pope__, of Arc

16. Italian actress

18. 1st Roman Empress

20. 17th cent. witch

21. writer of diaries, erotica

22. American suffrage worker

26. Addams, or Austen, or Weston

28. American writer of pioneer women

30. Etruria queen of Rome

32. black abolitionist, feminist

34. Roosevelt, Butler, of Aquitaine

36. 1st black to win at Wimbledon

38. Korean poet

41. Lost American aviatrix

42. Israeli politician

43. known as "Mother of anarchy"

46. Polish woman who developed Yiddish theatre in America

47. Bayard or Bradstreet or Clough

48. American political philosopher

49. Norwegian Nobel Prize winner

50. German "Poet of the Holocaust"

51. black folklorist

down

1. British explorer

2. American patriot, revolutionary

3. Noted for sewing, charity...

4. 20th Cent. Chinese Revolutionary

5. ---Andree, Swedish musician

6. American opera singer

7. Russian scholar, Yekaterina

8. American ecologist

9. American Indian guide

10. South African writer

15. ERA drafter, crusader

17. British poet

19. Poet Edna St. Millay

22. American journalist, noted for stories on India, China

23. Advisor to French King Charles VII, Agnes

24. Pulitzer prize winner

25. Anne, Charlotte or Emily

27. Assyrian ruler

29. writer of "The Second Sex"

31. Korean Queen, assassinated by Japanese

33. French painter

35. Black singer, dancer, writer

36. Abolitionist sisters

37. Babylonian sea goddess

38. a truly lost woman

39. black founder of a women's college

40. British writer with a man's name

44. Danish queen, noted herbalist

45. 70 year old American poet, novelist Sarton

PHONE: (808) 946-9128 SUITE 2110 CENTURY CENTER

Buckith Samet Driver, Ph.D.

LICENSED PSYCHOLOGIST: CERTIFIED, HAWAII
CLINICAL AND HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY

1750 KALAKAUA AVENUE
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96826

PSYCHOTHERAPY AND
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS

ALL SHE WROTE SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER

ANSWERS ON PAGE:

PUZZLE WRITTEN BY:
PUZZLE GRAPHIC BY:

REVIEWS

JANE SINNOTT

[movie CORNER

STAYING ALIVE: Sylvester Stallone fails in his latest effort to provide the movie-going public with another loveable loser. Tony Manero (John Travolta) is now six years older, residing in a flea bag hotel in Manhattan, waiting for his big chance to be pulled from the chorus line and given the lead in a Broadway show. His talent as a dancer is questioned by everyone. With clever editing of the boring and repetitive dance sequences, Stallone convinces the audience as well that there isn't much talent here, which makes the already thin plot even more ridiculous. Stallone cast the three female leads in the traditional roles of mother, virgin and whore, and Tony uses them all. Cynthia Rhodes, as his girlfriend, Jackie, manages to survive the horrible dialogue, and gives the warmest performance of all, but even she won't tell Tony to "shove it". The ending is an embarrassment, leaving the audience with the uncomfortable feeling that someone just played a dirty trick on us, and we were dumb enough to pay $4.00 for it.

BARBARA MORI
LINDA RODARTE

‘not given proper credit.

Info for Puzzle from the book (about) "The Dinner Party" by Judy Chicago.

FLASHDANCE: This low-budget film starring Jennifer Beals and Michael Nouri provides the vehicle for the "Flashdance" sequences which are the highlights of the movie, beautifully choreographed and filmed. These segments make this movie attractive to a large part of the movie-going public, under 25, who will turn on to the great score and the dancing. The otherwise simplistic plot revolves around steelworker "Alex" who is trying to find the courage to realize her dream and become a legitimate dancer. She is supported in her effort by her boss, Tony, who has realized his dream of owning the steel mill, and her friend, Jeannie, who loses her courage and will never realize her dreams. It is unfortunate that the dancing for Beals, which was done by an unknown French dancer, was not credited. The musical score, including songs by Irene Cara, Kim Carnes, and Donna Summer, is terrific and is worth the price of admission.