PAGE 8

CONT. from p.7  
- Sometimes the policemen come in.  

I tell the madam, "The policemen are  
coming upstairs."  

She says, "Just open the door and  
bring them in the room." Her parlor.  

I asked her, “Why do they come in here  
all the time?"  

Then she explained to me, "They're  
coming in to get their cut." She had  
to give out $300 every month in order  
to hold her business; in order to get  
more business, you gotta give more.  

Those days the pay was cheap. Ten  
dollars a week. But I need the money.  
And it's steady. Every Friday you get  
paid. But you gotta work from ten  
o'clock at night to two, three o'clock  
in the morning. Everybody comes in  
about ten, eleven o'clock at night,  
you see. That's why I quit. I told  
them, "I'm tired."  

After I left the Rex Room,  
I was working one place or another.  

FEMINIST RESEARCH  
PUTTING HER IN HISTORY  

Putting her in history could be re-  
garded as a lament for the past or as  
a challenge for today. Women have not  
had their share in history perhaps be-  
cause they had little part in writing  
history. Yet, there are other factors.  
Have women tried to preserve or better,  
have they tried to create and conserve  
their history? Have they kept records  
and documents with an eye to posterity?  
The challenge then is to change this  
pattern, to be proud of women's  
achievements, proud enough to create  
and preserve documents to offer  
future historians materials for future  
history.  

A seminar held during Women's His-  
tory Week this year outlined some im-  
portant points for creating and pre-  
serving our present for the future.  
With the ever-expanding layers of pa-  
per, choices have to be made and im-  
portant documents kept while others  
are discarded. The danger in keeping  
too much is that all will be thrown  
out. What then should be kept?--  
Minutes—they are the lifeblood of any  
organization. Often they are ignored  
or poorly kept. They should not be.  
These records must be kept, read and  
corrected. They are the story, and  
primary resource for the history of an  
organization.  

=Constitutions, bylaws, goals, objec-  
tives, purposes—they define the or-  
ganization and must be kept, revised  
and updated as the group evolves. Old  
and new revisions can chart the  
changes in its history.  

-Pictures, memorabilia—collected selec-  
tively, carefully identified and dated,  
they provide the “what, where, and  
when.”  

-Membership rosters—they can be held  
for small organizations as well as in-  
formation on officers and executive  
boards.  

-Final reports, publications, and his-  
tories—they should be kept on file.  
One copy only is all that is necessary.  
-Scrapbooks—while often filled with  
zeal, pride and joy, they become bulky  
storage problems over the years. Glues  
deteriorate, pages come loose, and  
they do not contribute in a lasting  
sense to history.  

Best records, the "stuff of history"  
result when care is taken to create  
and select documents which are then  
kept in an orderly precise fashion so  
that information is quickly and easily  
retrievable. Good secretaries with  
knowledge of filing techniques and an  
awareness and respect for history are  
an organization's best curators.  

ONE WOMAN—ONE DOLLAR  

The battered women's movement has  
provided a forum, allowing the voices  
of survivors to be heard. It has bro-  
ken the imposed societal silence on  
battering, marital rape, and incest.  
It has smashed the whole patriarchal  
rationalization for blaming the victim  
for crimes against her person. It has  
helped expose the sexist socialization  
that locks 95% of the female popula-  
tion into a mindset that makes us vul-  
nerable to violence from men.  

The movement's concept of empower-  
ment and self-advocacy has successful-  
ly made way for battered women to work  
in the programs at every level. The  
tools to do our jobs and learn our  
skills have been self-developed but  
validation of our expertise has been  
dependent on a National Coalition  
Against Domestic Violence. NCADV has  
been invaluable as a coordinator and  
information clearinghouse to ensure  
that feminist philosophy prevails in  
the battered women's movement. NCADV  

MAY/JUNE  

that keep the money, don't spend—they  
way ahead today. All got businesses  
and everything.  

The maids get everything all ready  
in the room. Then, the men line up  
and then they want this girl or that  
girl. I just ask them which girl they  
want, and I call the girl to come out.  

It was good business. The money was  
terrific. We used to get twenty-five  
dollars a week. If I have three, four  
girls I take care of, every day I come  
home with a twenty-dollar tip. And you  
didn't have to pay tax. Then, I used  
to get a bonus, at the end of the month.  
They give the bonus, $200 or something,  
out to all the maids.  

Yeah, it was really good money. But  
after the war, not much business. So I  
went back to the cannery.  

(To be continued in the next issue of  
ALL SHE WROTE.)  
Edited by Cynthia Oshiro  

Finally, records will not stand the  
test of time unless care is taken in  
storing these documents. While tips  
for storage can change as new materi-  
als are available, a few are still  
worth mentioning here. Staples and pa-  
perclips rust and can destroy valuable  
information. Newspapers deteriorate,  
pertinent articles should be xeroxed  
and the xerox copies carefully filed.  
Scrapbooks deteriorate; a good filing  
box, especially in the tropics, are  
great nesting places for insects, try  
other kinds of packing. The obvious  
yet often forgotten goal is good stor-  
age facilities avoiding concrete  
floors which attract moisture, leaky  
roofs and dusty storage areas. Store  
documents in dry areas, best of all in  
temperature-controlled environments.  

This is a brief summary of tips pre-  
sented during the seminar, Women's His-  
tory Week by Agnes Conrad, State Arch-  
ivist, retired; Lela Goodell, Librarian,  
Mission Houses Museum; Blase Souza,  
author and researcher; Puanani Kini,  
President of the Chinese History Cen-  
ter; and Gwenfread Allen, author and  
journalist. Through their efforts, in-  
terest and advice, women and women's  
organizations can gain a new awareness  
of what "the stuff of history" is.  
That's putting her in history.  

is our lifeline, linking the grass  
roots systems to one another and  
broadening our power base to effect  
social change.  

Without the NCADV monitoring of  
the movement, shelters are increasing-  
ly vulnerable to creeping profession-  
alism, institutionalism, if not total  
cooptation. It is extremely important  
to battered women to maintain the femi-  
nist character of the shelter systems.  
For these reasons the Formerly Bat-  
tered Women's Task Force is endorsing  

CONT. p.9