Cf Sin

PAGE 12

networking

MASSAGE WORKSHOPS

I am now conducting massage work-
shops in my home in Lanikai. In these
workshops my basic approach is through
Esalen massage, which allows for and
requires love and care, for yourself
as well as for the women you work with.
As important as giving is learning to
receive, expanding your awareness of
your own body, feelings, thoughts and
familiar concepts, expanding your
awareness of your own capability of
receiving and giving (two wonderful
sides of one coin), getting to know
the other person(s) through non-verbal
communication, through care and touch. There will be
little talking. Sharing thoughts and
feelings are up to you, and very safe
in this atmosphere.

We will explore balancing, ground-
ing, energy, auras, polarity, healing,
channeling, and whatever will fit in
your specific group and nourish you.
The basics will be to supply you the
tools to give a massage in a gentle
way, that touches deeply in body as

well as in mind and soul. We will
train our hands to "see".

Next to these important basics, of
course, healing will take place. All
the good effects of massage apply here
also. We will work on releasing
blocks by channeling the energy flow
through the body and thus establish-
ing the balance we need in our daily
lives.

After the workshop you'll have a
form to support you in sharing your
massage gift with your family and
friends.

If you are interested in joining a
massage weekend group, or in organiz-
ing your own group for a massage week-
end, please call me or Jasmine at
261-1846. We offer the possibility to
stay overnight, and have vegetarian
meals, in our quiet and private home
near Lanikai Beach. There is also the
possibility for one-night per week
workshops.

My background is nine years experi-
ence in European and American massage,
as a therapist and trainer. I have a
B.A. in Counseling and Art Therapy,
which I use with groups, individuals
and couples.

So for workshops, individual mas-
sages, bio-counseling sessions, or
art-therapy workshops, call Alisha or
Jasmine at 261-1846.

SUSAN McGREIVY, OUR ACLU ATTORNEY

The ACLU Gay Rights Chapter is mak-
ing another call for donations to sup-
port the salary of Staff Attorney
Susan McGreivy. McGreivy is the ONLY
full-time Gay Rights attorney on the
ACLU staff, nationally, and her posi-
tion is being threatened by lack of
funds. Even though she is not a local
woman, she would be the attorney to
represent us from the ACLU, in a Les-
bian/Gay rights case. She is a dedi-
cated woman, working 25 hours a day, 8
days a week for Lesbian/Gay rights.
All donations are tax deductible. Send
them to ACLU-GRC, 633 S. Shatto Place,
Suite 207, Los Angeles, CA 90005.

ALTERNATIVES FOR WOMEN

Widows Support Group - Particularly
appropriate for those who have recent-
ly experienced loss. Group emphasizes
facilitation of the grieving

process, resolving everyday issues, and mutual support.
Alternatives for Women, 3627 Kilauea
Ave. Rm. 411. Call Heidi Dunham:
735-5431.
Rape/Sexual Assault Group -
Understanding and support for women
who have been assaulted. Deal with
the trauma, fears, and resuming your
life. Wednesdays 5-7 p.m. Alterna-
tives for Women at Diamond Head Commu-
nity Mental Health Center, 3627 Kilau-
ea Ave. Rm. 411. Call 735-5452,
Evelyn Char or Elaine Fee.

HAVE YOU EXPERIENCED ABORTION?

Abortion is a private matter, but
it is also a subject about which too
little is said publicly.

We are compiling a book of people's
personal responses to abortion. Too
much is heard from too few people a-
bout abortion - what is supposed to be
right and wrong, what you should and
shouldn't do. We are looking for new
voices. And no one is better quali-
fied to talk about abortion than some-
one who knows. Whether you are a wo-
man who has had an abortion, a man who
has been close to the experience, or
someone with another connection, if
you have something to tell people, we
would like to hear from you.

We also realize that abortion is a
sensitive topic. We will respect the
right to privacy of anyone who wishes
to remain anonymous. We will also res-
pect your right to speak out publicly.

If you write prose, poetry or fic-
tion, we are anxious to hear from you.
You can contact Debi Mandel or
Stephen Buel at P.O. Box 1028, Berke-
ley, CA 94701. For further informa-
tion, please call (415) 547-6685, from
12 to 6 p.m.

LOW-COST MALE/FEMALE STERILIZATION

Hawaii Planned Parenthood is offer-
ing low cost male and female sterili-
zation procedures in a convenient out-
of-hospital setting.

Sterilization, the most effective
method of birth control, is virtually
foolproof and has no side effects. It
is also permanent. The procedure
should primarily be considered by men
and women who already have had all the
children they planned to have but rea-
lize that the likelihood of future
pregnancy is a possibility during
their remaining fertile years.

Patients will receive full profes-
sional service from pre-screening to
post-op care by a qualified medical
team. In addition, HMSA and Medicaid
will cover the entire costs. For more
information call Hawaii Planned Parent-
hood at 537-5557.

THE LAVENDER WAHINES CLUB

If you are a gay/bisexual woman with
very few friends, then you may want to
attend a meeting or two of the Laven-
der Wahines Club. It is a social club
which provides opportunities for gay
women to get to know each other and to
do some networking. The dues are just
50¢ per meeting (to offset the cost of
refreshments, etc.) and the meetings
are very informal and loving; see the
calendar section for meeting dates and
places, or phone Jay at 946-8601. The
LWC mailing address is: P.O. Box 1371,

Women's Party for Survival ask to boy-
cott G.E. and Union Carbide to protest
their weapons manufacturing. Info:
3 Columbus Ave., S.F. CA, 94111.

OUT FROM UNDER:
SOBER DYKES AND OUR FRIENDS

This is to announce a call for ma-
terial for a new anthology under con-
tract for publication in 1983. The
anthology will draw together, for the
first time, the stories and dreams of
those of us involved with recovery
from alcoholism or drug addiction.

We want to hear from women who are
making sober and clean lives, in
lesbian communities as well as in
communities of our birth cultures
and classes. This is a call for ma-
terial from any woman who:
*has become a clean and sober dyke or

*loves clean and sober dykes or
*wants to live in a community where
there is strength and joy and the
beginning of an end to victimization
in lesbian lives.

We are looking for articles and art-
work in almost any style: journals,
letters, fiction, autobiography, poe-
try, interviews, dialogues, theory,
nonfiction, narratives, diaries, songs,
speeches, graphics, paintings or photo-
graphy. We are interested in seeing
anything honest that is not sloganeer-
ing or rhetoric.

DEADLINE: JAN. 1, 1983

SEND TO 11 BRODERICK #5, SF, CA 94117
(SASE for return, slides not original artwork,
legible or double-space typed ms.)