3 ALL SHE WROTE /MAR-APRIL

COVER STORY

YWCA
CHAMPIONS

REVISITED

Burrows  
Sixty-four years ago, the YWCA had projects, held fundraisers for the YWCA, played guard, Bessie Stewart Perkins  
an Inter-Island Championship basketball team. Pictured are the members of that team. Two of them, Harriet Pauole  
Burrows (first row, second from the left) and Rose Kalauahea Perry (second row, second from the left) continue to  
be active members of the YWCA. The interesting thing, however, is how this story originated.  
One day, as I was leafing through an earlier edition of "All She Wrote", I happened to look casually at the  
names of the members of the 1919 champion basketball team. Surprisingly, it so happens, the woman I have come to  
know is named Rose G. Perry. On the assumption that there could be another Rose Perry, I decided to question her about  
the photograph.  
Sure enough, it turned out to be her! She was "tickled" by the picture having never seen it before. In addition, she  
stated that there was a member on the team that she still sees today, but she had forgotten that they had played  
basketball together. This member is Harriet Pauole Burrows. That’s when I decided that it would be interesting  
to follow up on these two women. Both Harriet Burrows and Rose Perry are active members in the YWCA Federation.  
Harriet Burrows (Harriet Pauole) played center on the championship team. As she looked at the picture of their team,  
she recalled who played what position. Denny Stewart Gilliand  
While attending Normal School on Oahu, Rose Perry (then Rose Gooman) became a guard on the YWCA's basketball  
team. She remembers that sometimes she would be sent to "sit on the bench" because she would become a "rough little  
character". Apparently, as a first grader, she used to have to row a boat across a river at Kahili, Kauai in order to  
get to school. (That's when the thought occurred to me that most of the people I know learned how to swim at the Y.)  
Doesn't EVERYONE?  
In fact, she said, "That's when I learned how to swim." Frightfully recalling that she was afraid of the water,  
Harriet Burrows also attended Normal School (Teachers College) at this time. She taught at Aiea Elementary School  
upon graduation from Normal School, and taught until she retired.  
Rose Perry returned to Kauai after receiving her teaching diploma and taught for one year at Hanamaulu Elementary  
School. She then decided to return to Oahu and taught at Ewa, August Ahrens, Robello, and Likelike Elementary  
School. Forty years and six months later she retired, packed her bags, and took a trip around the world.  
Both women feel the YWCA has expanded greatly since 1919, offering many more programs and extending itself into  
many more fields. Being long-standing members of the Y, and involved in the activities and programs, both Harriet  
Pauole Burrows and Rose Kalauahea Perry have contributed much to the Y and to this day are still championing the  
cause of the Young Woman's Christian Association.  
COVER: 1919 Inter-Island Champs Harriet P. Burrows (front row) Rose K. Perry (second row)  

-- SANDY RHODES