19  
cont. from p. 16  

June 11-28, 1983. For the fifth conse-  
cutive year, this community of women  
will “eat, breathe and sleep" photogra-  
phy for a week in lovely natural sur-  
roundings. Sharing continues around  
the outdoor tables during meals, as  
well as during field trips, photo ses-  
sions and evening discussion.  

Women find that the Ovulars help  
them gain fresh vision, get "unstuck"  
in their work, demystify the techni-  
cal side of the art, sharpen their po-  
litical awareness, give them a net-  
work of feminist supporters, and pro-  
vide diverse and willing models!  

This summer the emphasis will be on  
working in black and white. Experi-  
ences with camera formats ranging from  
35 mm to 6" X 8" will be offered. A  

low-technology darkroom will be avail-  
able for developing and printing.  

To be able to benefit from the work-  
shop, women need at least six months  
experience in a darkroom and to be at  
ease in operating their camera.  

Rootworks is also the home of The  
Blatant Image, a magazine of feminist  
photography. Women at Ovular will be  
able to participate if they desire in  
preliminary work on the 3rd annual edi-  
tion of this herstorical publication.  

This year the cost of Ovular 5 Work-  
shop has been reduced to $125 for the  
entire seven days. This includes vege-  
tarian food, accommodations, use of the  
darkroom, (with chemicals provided but  
not paper or film). A $50 registra-  
tion fee is refundable until June 1st.  
Send a SASE to OVULAR 5, 2000 King  
Mountain Trail, Sunny Valley, OR  

97497-9799, for more information or to  

register.  

TEENAGERS CITE CONFIDENTIALITY OF  
SERVICES AS MOST IMPORTANT FACTOR  

IN CHOOSING TO ATTEND A BIRTH CONTROL  
CLINIC  

New York. Confidentiality of servi-  
ces is the single most important consi-  
deration cited by teens in choosing a  
birth control clinic for the first  
time. This is particularly true for  
white teenagers aged 16 or younger—  

61 percent cite it as a contributing  
reason for attending a specific clinic  
and 25 percent say it is the most im-  
portant reason. For teens of all ages  
and races, the next most important  
reasons for attending a particular  
family planning clinic are staff that  
cares about teens and a location close  
to their homes. The fact that friends  
attend a particular clinic and that  
the clinic is the only one the young  
woman knows about were also ranked  
very high. Other reasons cited by  
teens were that the people who perform  
the examinations are women, the clinic  
is the least expensive facility known  
and the doctors are believed to be com-  
petent.  

These are some of the findings in a  
report by Johns Hopkins University re-  
searchers Laurie Schwab Zabin and  
Samuel D. Clark, Jr. of the reasons  
teenagers give for choosing a particu-  
lar family planning clinic when seek-  
ing professional birth control ser-  
vices for the first time. The study  
also identifies the clinic characteris-  
tics that may encourage teens to come  
for contraceptive help promptly or may  
contribute to their delay in seeking  
services. This analysis of over 1,200  

teenagers who attended 31 family plan-  
ning clinics in eight cities in the  
spring of 1980 is published in the  
current issue of Family Planning Per-  
spectives (15:1), the bimonthly pro-  
fessional journal of The Alan Guttma-  
cher Institute, released today. The  
findings of this study have particular  
significance in light of the Parental  
Notification Regulation recently is-  
sued by the Department of Health and  
Human Services and due to go into ef-  
fect February 25. The regulation re-  
quires that family planning facilities  
receiving Title X funds notify a pa-  
rent of all patients under the age of  
18 to whom it supplies prescription  
methods of contraception (pills, IUDs,  
diaphragms). (Note to Editors: The  
regulation is being challenged in the  
courts by the American Civil Liberties  
Union (ACLU), Planned Parenthood, and  
the National Family Planning and Repro-  
ductive Health Association (NEPRHA)  
and a decision in one or more of these  
cases may be handed down before the  
release date on this story.)  

Black and white teenagers express  
different priorities when choosing a  
family planning clinic. Confidentiality  
and the fact that their friends  
attend a particular clinic are more im-  
portant to white teenagers than to  
black. For black teens, the proximity  
of the clinic to their home and the  
clinicians' concern for teens are  
cited as the most important reasons  
for their choice. Black teens are  
much more likely than whites to have  
come to the clinic because their  
mother chose it for them. This is par-  
ticularly true for those aged 16 or  
younger, and explains in part why con-  
fidentiality is a less important con-  
cern for black teens. This finding  
seems to indicate that mothers of  
black teen patients are in better com-  
munication with their daughters about  
contraception and clinic attendance  
than are white mothers.  

Teens who attend a clinic before or  
soon after they first have intercourse  
are more likely to choose clinics hav-  
ing specially scheduled teen hours or  
rap sessions, despite the fact that  
these teens generally do not report  
such services as being important rea-  
sons for their attendance at a particu-  
lar clinic. The authors suggest that  
the existence of these services may  
create an atmosphere that the patients  
associate with caring about teenagers—  
one of the primary reasons given for  
clinic attendance.  

News release from the Alan Guttmacher  
Institute.  

MOST U.S. ABORTIONS OBTAINED BY  
YOUNG UNMARRIED WOMEN IN EARLIEST  
WEEKS OF PREGNANCY  

New York. Of the 1.55 million abor-  
tions reported in the U.S. in 1980,  
the majority were obtained by young un-  
married women. Thirty percent of all  
abortions were obtained by teenagers,  
35 percent by women between the ages  
of 20 and 24 and the remaining 35 per-  
cent by women 25 and older. Seventy  
percent of abortion patients were  
white, 79 percent were unmarried, 58  
percent were childless and 67 percent  
had never had a previous abortion.  

The trend toward obtaining abortions  
at earlier and safer stages of gesta-  

ALL SHE WROTE/MAR-APRIL  

tion continued in 1980, with 91 per-  
cent of abortions occurring within the  
first 12 weeks of gestation and less  
than one percent occurring after 20  
weeks. Abortion rates rose among un-  
married women and white women between  
1977 and 1980, but fell among women  
aged 35 and over and among nonwhite  
women.  

These are some of the findings re-  
ported by Stanley K. Henshaw and Kevin  
O'Reilly from their analysis of U.S.  
abortion patient characteristics  
published today in the current issue  
of Family Planning Perspectives (15:1),  
the bimonthly professional journal of  
The Alan Guttmacher Institute. This  
report, estimating the number of wo-  
men who obtained abortion services ac-  
cording to selected characteristics,  
is part of the Institute's ongoing ef-  
fort to monitor abortion services in  
the U.S. since the Supreme Court  
first legalized abortion in 1973.  

Teenagers and women over 40, those  
at the highest risk of experiencing  
complications when carrying a pregnan-  
cy to term, had the highest proportion  
of pregnancies terminated by abortion.  
In 1980, 41 percent of pregnant teen-  
agers and 52 percent of pregnant women  
aged 40 and older obtained abortions,  
as compared to 22 percent of 25 to 29  
year-olds who became pregnant that  
year.  

However, between 1977 and 1980, the  
proportion of women of reproductive  
age who obtained abortions steadily  
increased for women under the age of  
35 and decreased among older women.  
Among women aged 15-19, this rate in-  
creased by 14-16 percent, while it  
increased by only 9 percent among 30 to  
34-year-old women, and declined by 5-10  
percent among women 35 and older. The  
increasing proportion of women under  
the age of 35 having an abortion re-  
flected a corresponding rise in the  
proportion of women becoming pregnant  
in this age group. The pregnancy  
rates and birthrates among women over  
35 fell along with the abortion rates.  

In comparison to other Western in-  
dustrialized countries for which com-  
plete statistics on abortion are avail-  
able, the United States has a high con-  
centration of abortions among younger  
women and unmarried women. However,  
U.S. women aged 35 and over have fewer  
abortions than women of these ages in  
many of the comparison countries, pro-  
bably because a larger proportion of  
U.S. couples who have achieved their  
desired family size are protected by  
contraceptive sterilization, the most  
effective method.  

Although about 70 percent of abor-  
tions were obtained by white women in  
1980, the abortion rate among nonwhite  
women was more than twice that of  
whites—56.8 abortions per 1,000 non-  
white women of reproductive age as com-  
pared with 24.3 per 1,000 white women.  
This differential in rates is apparent-  
ly due to the fact that nonwhite women  
had more unintended pregnancies. When  
faced with an unintended pregnancy,  
however, nonwhite women were only  
slightly more likely than whites to  
choose abortion—47 percent and 41 per-  
cent respectively—whereas the rate of  
births resulting from unintended preg-  
nancies was much higher for nonwhites  
(48 per 1,000) than for whites (21 per  
1,000).  

cont. on p. 22