POLICIES

All She Wrote: Hawaii Women's Voices  
is published by a volunteer collective  
of women at the University  
YWCA.  

EDITORIAL  
All She Wrote is a feminist paper.  
By this we mean the paper will:  

1) Be supportive of all women,  
2) Reach out to all women,  
3) Provide a forum for input  
4) Be a growing process.  

The All She Wrote collective encourages articles by and about the women of Hawaii. Because we seek the widest possible representation of women in our community, all submissions will be considered.  

We feel that each woman knows what she wants to convey and has her own unique style; therefore, those pieces selected will be edited only for spelling and punctuation. Changes in length, grammar, and content will not be made unless negotiated with the author. Due  

to space limitations articles are generally two typed pages, double spaced. Articles, graphics, poetry, and cartoons should be submitted to: All She Wrote, University YWCA, 1820 University Ave., Honolulu, HI 96822.  

ADVERTISEMENTS  

Ads submitted to the All She Wrote collective will be accepted under  

the following stipulations:  

All ads must:  
1) reflect the collective's commitment to a feminist consciousness,  
2) be subjected to approval by collective consensus prior to publication,  
3) be prepaid,  
4) be camera ready.  

(# issues)  
Size:  

Full page (15"x10") $100 $270 $480  
½ page (7½"x10") $50 $135 $240  
¼ page (7½"x5") $25 $67.80 $120  
⅛ page (7½"x2¼") $12.59 $33.15 $60  
Classified $6.45 $30  
Business Card $5 $15 $30  
Women's Personal Ads: FREE  

(roommates, child care, wanted, giveaways, etc.)  

Non-profit Organizations: FREE  
YWCA Activities: FREE  

JOIN THE COLLECTIVE  

Membership is open to any woman sharing the group's goals and committed to the collective process, which includes consensus decision-making, non-hierarchical structures, and  

knowledge, skills, and power. The ASW collective meets weekly from 7-9 pm Thursdays at the University YWCA.  

You need not be a 'writer' to join the collective. We also need women to help plan, edit, type, illustrate, proof, and paste-up each issue.  

WHO WE ARE  

We just continue to grow:  

Dorri Goodrich: Student, runner, animal lover, single mother of a 14-year-old son (does anyone know where I could buy milk cheap?). Granddaughter of Josephine Kamoaalii and Ah Sau Young, Look Moi Lau and Ah Kui Ching.  

Misha Daniel Ko: By the time the paper is out I will be two months old. I am a good and loving boy who will grow into a good and loving man. I love strolling, water, trees, milk, and classical music. I look good in aqua colors and space jumpsuits. My mother is completely dazzled and in love with me.  

Rita Green: Rita made a short stop in Hawaii on her way back to Ft. Worth, Texas. She had a three-month arrival in Honolulu. While here, she helped with ASW.  

Anne Marie Kuh: Age 12, University Lab School, 7th grade. I like science, dogs, sports, and I play the flute.  

Kai Anna Cornett: Kai for short. I’m high strung, neurotic, thirty-five in human years, chic, femme, frisbee identified, a confirmed radical feminist, and after thirty-nine kids, I'm fed up to the snoot with men. I live on a small sailboat, take a daily dip in the blue Pacific, chase exotic purple-heart wood blocks around the wood shop, much to the busy carpenter's chagrin, snarl profusely at anyone who's not in the sorority who tries to enter my personal body space, and as a last neurotic note I must confess that I gormandize out on cat chow, what can I say... it's a slight identity complex.  

These are the newest additions to our collective. If you would like to join us, we meet every Thursday evening at 7:00 pm at the Women's Center in the University YWCA.  

J.P. & D BODY & FENDER  

Complete Foreign & Domestic Auto Service  

MECHANICAL REPAIRS.  

John Perriton  
Tel: 533-7627  

Hair Stylist  

1481 South King Street / Room C  
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814  
Phone (808) 941-1488  

ASW APOLOGIES  

Edit, type, paste-up and the collective process. Hard to keep all that together and print a newspaper, too. Last issue, Marla Hamabata's poem was printed with one line omitted. Here it is in full.  

Try Listen  

I love talk pidgin  
Talk da Kine  
feel all relax, make any Kine  

Try for talk good English  
feel so foolish  

act so smart when I like fut  
Stay piss off!  
Where you get off!  
Tell me how for talk!  
So what!  
For what!  

Act like haole,  
act big shot!  
But if you my sistah  
like you said  
And you no scared  
I going buss  
your head  

Open your heart  
try understand  
Why I scared for  
hold your hand  
Eh, sistah you know why  
I so shy?  

Try listen.  

Marla Hamabata  

Correction: In the last edition we omitted Rita Green's name in "Women Who Worked on this Issue." Sorry about that, Rita.  

(808) 537-3088  
SERVICE 538-7236  

SALES: Puch, Yamaha  

Motor Mopeds  
SERVICE: most mopeds.  

CITY BIKE  

MOPED SERVICE CENTER  

449 Cooke Street  
P.O. Box 3920  
Honolulu, HI 96812