PAGE 15

* LOBBYING WITH RIBBONS
AND ROSES

On Jan. 22, 1982 NARAL (National Abortion Rights Action League) distributed an unusual gift to all of Hawaii's senators and representatives at the State Capitol: a single coat hanger, tied with a ribbon and a letter urging the continued support for a woman's right to choose an abortion. The coat hanger was symbolic of women who in the past had to resort to self-induced, sometimes fatal illegal abortions. NARAL felt that though Hawaii was the first state to legalize abortion, the yearly mobilization of the anti-abortion groups cannot be taken lightly. As one of those distributing the NARAL 'gift', I was pleased to observe efforts by other "Pro Choice" groups: NOW members were handing out long-stemmed carnations with the message, "Hawaii Women Support Free Choice For Abortion." And Hawaii Planned Parenthood had been to the offices earlier with white carnations and a printed card to commemorate all the women who have died from illegal abortions.

Reaction to our efforts ranged from polite thank you's to enthusiastic support by the staffers. One woman stopped us in the hallway to tell us how glad she was we were doing this. Another was pleased to let us know that Sen. Mary George had taken her carnation down to the Senate floor during session. And in one Republican's office, (known to be on the anti side), two of his staffers wore white carnations in their hair and showed us the accompanying card. Though several of us were either college age or young adults, two of the NOW lobbyists were over 60 with lovely white hair, and plenty of enthusiasm. It made me really glad to see such support by women not directly affected. Yet sad to think of all the younger women not there who take our right to an abortion so casually.

Ramona Hussey 1982

"The Federal Center for Disease Control estimates that the loss of Medicaid funding will mean that about 90 women will die each year from illegal and self-induced abortions. Another 25,000 will be hospitalized due to serious complications arising from illegal abortions."

C.A.R.A.S.A. page 46

Ask your doctor or contact your local health department.

New York State Health Department

Bert Kobayashi, Vice-Chairperson for the Health Committee of the House of Representatives, is sponsoring a bill to support a D.E.S. public and professional program. Watch for news of a hearing. You are encouraged to attend and support. Anywhere from 27,000 to 54,000 mothers, daughters, and sons have been exposed to D.E.S. in Hawaii. D.E.S: initials for a drug called Diethylstilbestrol, a long name for a chemical that has shortened lives. For information, call 944-5589.

D.E.S. DAUGHTERS

I am interested in setting up a group-sharing for D.E.S. daughters, as a way to collect personal experiences and to form a basis for an article on D.E.S.

For more information, call 538-7061, Ext. 234.

CHILD CARE

Childcare is being provided each Friday night at Everywoman's Coffeehouse. Hopefully, it will be possible to keep this going and expand to other women's events. The only way this will happen is for more women to participate. Any woman wanting to get involved - needing childcare or doing childcare - please leave your name and a phone number at the University Y.W.C.A. Women's Center.

Ann Egleston

1521 South King Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96826
Telephone 808 944-5589

Offices: Penthouse Suite 403

Clinic: Continental Building,

Support

MIDWIFERY

A large proportion of women in Hawaii are requesting alternative choices for their birthing experience. Nurse-midwives can provide safe choices within the hospital system; in freestanding birthing centers; and in home birth services. Reimbursement by third party payers will allow nurse-midwives to exist...so that they can offer these alternatives...for those who might want that option.

Please support House Bill 911 which will provide for reimbursement for nurse-midwifery services under Medicaid. You can help by:

1) writing a letter to members of the Public Assistance/Human Services Committee;

2) write to HMSA and ask if they reimburse for nurse-midwifery services, that it is an option you want, and if not...perhaps there are other insurance plans which do offer coverage (for instance: Aetna, Travelers, Kaiser, Continental, CHAMPUS, and others). These are members of the committee which must pass H.B. 911 on--or it dies this year:

Connie Chun (Chair)

Bertrand Kobayashi (Vice Ch.)
James Aki Herbert Segawa
Herbert Honda Mitsuo Shito
Marshall Ige Charles Toguchi

Tony Kunimura Paul Lacy
Andrew Levin Michael Liu
Yoshiro Nakamura Jimmy Wong

Thank you for your help.
Tiffany Coleman

According to Dept. of Health statistics, in 1980 at least 274 Hawaii women opted to birth their babies at home--compared to 62 in 1970. That's a 400% increase in ten years.

In the late 1800's, midwifery was prohibited in most states in the US...for the first time anywhere in the world.

Women Under Attack: Abortion, Sterilization Abuse, and Reproductive Freedom, by C.A.R.A.