PAGE 6

CONT. FROM P. 5

for she loveth much: but, to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." He turns to the weeping woman and tells her, "Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace." It appears that he sees something within these sinful women worth reaching, worth the effort of breaking law and tradition, even worth the Disciples’ disapproval.

Again, I will illustrate from the everyday Bible. When the final phase is nearing, Mary Magdalene, more perceptive than the disciples, offers comfort to Christ and anoints him very lovingly. She alone has some notion of his impending distress, his burgeoning responsibility, not just to their small circle but to all of humanity. Jesus is quick to silence Judas with his retort “let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this." Jesus knows that Mary has comprehended the magnitude of his ordeal, the greatness of his suffering. Christ suffered, too, in a rather passive, "feminine" way. I'm sure women were far more capable than we give this.

And who is first to see Christ after the ordeal has come to pass? Again, it is Mary Magdalene whom he chooses first. This is not an insignificant gesture. There is assuredly some affinity between the two that the New Testament Disciples were either unaware of, or jealous of. The three women, Mary Magdalene, Mother Mary, and Salome glimpse the resurrected Christ first because they are the ones who are there, who care about the smaller details, who accept their roles as companions without the need for title or authority. It is amazing that Christ tended to bestow titles upon men, but not on women. The men were the official disciples, elected to the club as it were. The women, however, are confidants, companions, friends, in need of no authority with Christ. They seem to have a place in his heart which transcends the need for all that officiality. I don't think Jesus was slighting women when he did not make them into part of the twelve. Rather, it could be that he realized that they needed no such hierarchy, no such validation, as they already had all they needed of that within his own mind and heart.

The Gnostic texts, though, give Mary Magdalene even this sort of substantiation. Here one must break away from the confines of the New Testament. There is a whole other reality system expressed within many of these works.

"One group of gnostic sources claims to have received a secret tradition from Jesus through James and through Mary Magdalene. Members of this group prayed to both the divine Father & Mother" (p. 58-59). These are contemporaries of all the other pre-Church Christians, and they had what they considered to be very reliable and valid sources--straight from Jesus via Mary: The "Dialogue of the Savior" not only includes Mary Magdalene as one of three disciples chosen to receive special teaching but also praises her above the other two, Thomas and Matthew: "...she spoke as a woman who knew the All." (p.77, Pagels) This suggests that Mary was privy to information which the others had no access to. 

It is unchallengeable that Christ kept her close to him, trusted in her, came to her defense. Why should it be so unthinkable that he might have wished her to carry on his work equally with men? Unfortunately, while some groups worked within this context, the main strand of Christianity went the other way with Peter and Paul blazing their trails on the principles of exclusion of women, and spiritual privilege for men. Women were not only disallowed priesthood and the activities of baptism and eucharist, but they were not even supposed to speak at all in the church, or question the authority of a man. And because all the following doctrines which issued forth in a wild stream were composed by primarily celibate men, these directions were especially unfortunate for women, especially women with a strong sense of their own spirituality. This gave men the opportunity to direct even that most private inner sanctum of women. Men who already violate a woman's privacy, her freedom, her body, could now also wreak havoc with her soul in a profoundly distressing way. “As Jewish disciples, like Paul, radiated out of Palestine into the more civilized worlds of Greece, Rome and Southern Gaul, their Semitic souls were outraged at the freedom and authority granted to Western women" (p.230, Davis).

So, under the tide of male-dominated Christianity, the gentler version, with women sharing equally in the offices of spirituality, was swept aside, buried, and has yet to emerge again with anything remotely resembling the strength of today's "Churchianity." Pagels' words serve me well here when she speaks about this unfortunate, and very entrenched trend:

Their consensus... has continued to dominate the majority of Christian churches: nearly 2,000 years later, in 1977, Pope Paul VI, Bishop of Rome, declared that a woman cannot be a priest “because our Lord was a man"! The Nag Hammadi (the Gnostic) sources, discovered at a time of contemporary social crises concerning sexual roles, challenge us to reinterpret history--and to reevaluate the present situation. (p.83, Pagels)

I would have to agree with this, especially in the spirit of scholarship and wisdom, for these elements were a large part of Christ's teaching.

There is no real proof of which events actually took place, no authority that comes to us without a hint of doubt. If one is to take the words of Jesus seriously, one cannot depend upon only one small bit of information but must look everywhere. Above all else, persecution of those who chose to seek answers elsewhere must not continue, nor should any notions which deny anyone, in this case, women, of their spirituality. Augustine even "denied that women had souls" and churchmen gathered in the sixth century to debate the matter! (p. 238, Davis). Would Christ have hesitated if he were asked about the validity of female spirit? I think not. But in the meantime, as new evidence is scanty and unfamiliar, unlike the abundant popularity of accepted doctrine, one must adopt a wait-and-see attitude, though it is also important not to grasp at the contrary texts, just because they are different. However, even within the scattered heresies, there is some cause for hope, some possible words of wisdom which advance the banner of equality among the sexes and free women from the shackles of spiritual and social inferiority. Truly, both men and women depend upon each other, each needs the other, and to hurt one is to hurt all. Christ himself surely knew this.

Bibliography

Augustine, Saint. The Confessions of St. Augustine. Airmont, 1969.

Davis, Elizabeth Gould. The First Sex. Putnam, 1971.

Fixler, M. The Mentor Bible. Mentor, 1973.

Pagels, Elaine. The Gnostic Gospels. Vintage Books, 1981.

Russell, Bertrand. Why I am not a Christian. Clarion, 1957.

Tyson, Joseph B. A Study of Early Christianity. MacMillan, 1973.

Sources Not Cited:

Daly, Mary. Beyond God the Father. Beacon Press, 1973.

O'Faolain, Julia and Martines, L., eds. Not in God's Image. Harper & Row, 1973.

521-5481

Lillian P. Holcomb, Ph.D. Certified Psychologist

Counseling & Psychotherapy for Women the Handicapped (Physically Challenged) Spiritual & Religious Concerns Mail: P.O. Box 1797 Honolulu, HI 96806

Ste 40-7 Queen Emma Bldg., 1850 Pioneer Plaza Honolulu, HI 96813