JULY / AUGUST ALL _SHE WROTE PAGE 3

COVER STORY

WOMEN IN NON-TRADITIONAL JOBS: FROM BUS DRIVER
TO BUS

MECHANIC

photo credit: Gaylene Carlos and Cindy Ling

If you find yourself

in painful, dissatisfying
patterns with lovers,
friends, work, life

in general...

Workshops Training Programs
Private/Group Counseling

In a warm, supportive
environment learn how to
nurture the child within you
and become comfortable with
the healthy feelings so many
of us had to block out in order
to survive growing up in a
harsh, non-feeling society.

Whether you're currently in

crisis or just want to open up
and grow some more:

Choosing to change

Humanistic-feminist support for clarity and power in short
term therapy. Personal problem solving, groups, couples counsel-
ing. Personalized cassette tapes available.

Donna Obermiller

What does a woman do who's bored with the same old job?
Does she quit and move on? "Hard work can take you some-
place," says Pat Kekawa, ten year THE BUS veteran employee.

Pat traded in her seat cushion to turn the wrench on
higher earnings at the Halawa bus facility. Says Pat, eyes
sparkling, “It was a challenge getting used to the heavy
labor after seven years of driving." In the beginning, Pat
rotated more than tires. She balanced a busy schedule of
driving full time and attending auto mechanics classes
at Leeward Community College.

Then she applied and was accepted as an apprentice
diesel mechanic. The early difficulties of breaking into
a non-traditional job and the physical strains haven't
gotten Pat down. She's on her way to a secure career. In
THE BUS union, seniority counts. After studies and hands-on
skills are mastered, Pat can then move on to 2nd class,
and from there to a supervisory position.

Pat isn't the first female diesel mechanic in Hawaii -
She is, however, the first woman bus driver turned mech-
anic in Hawaii. She and one other female plus her male
counterparts perform a variety of daily tasks. Anything
could go wrong or need to be serviced and it's the
mechanics who make sure THE BUS is on THE ROAD.

From clock-in to clock-out, Pat is on the go. She's
a large woman, and I asked her if smaller people could
handle the workload, "Petite guys are in there working,"
she said smiling. Pat seemed to think motivation and
wanting to do a good job were the keys to success in the
trades, not size.

It's hard to hide mistakes in diesel mechanics.

"Like when you spill 32 gallons of oil...But you can't
runse.” Right now Pat's trade is somewhere and

Pat Kekawa putting oil in The Bus.

© fund raiser oo |

Presented By The

YWCA Center
~ University YWCA

IN CONCERT

CYNTHIA
GUILES-FELLEZ

with

WARREN COHEN
AUG. 27 7:30pm

UNIVERSITY YWCA

1820 UNIVERSITY
IN ADVANCE OR AT THE DOOR