SPRING 84

PRESS RELEASES

ANDERSON APPOINTS LIEBAN

RUTH W. LIEBAN has been appointed
to the Honolulu County Committee on
the Status of Women by Mayor Eileen R.
Anderson.

The Committee advises the Mayor and
the State Commission on the Status of
Women on matters of concern to Oahu's
women. Its duties include the public
recognition of women's contributions,
assessment of changes in women's status
and promotion of equality for both
sexes. The Committee also works close-
ly with City agencies to eliminate sex
discrimination and in support of af-
firmative action programs.

Lieban is a self-employed writer/
editor/researcher/administrator. She
was previously in broadcasting as a
writer and director in Chicago and
New York and has lived and worked in
mainland China, the Philippines and
Okinawa. She is Chair of the Histo-
rians Committee of the Foundation
for Hawaii Women's History and a mem-
ber of the Community Advisory Board
for Public Television, Pan Pacific
and the Southeast Asia Women's Asso-
ciation and the Honolulu Community
Media Council.

Lieban has served on the Committee
for the past eight years; her current
term will expire on June 30, 1987.

HSCSW MAY

The Hawaii State Commission on the
Status of Women is in danger of losing
its funding after June 30, 1984. There
is some feeling in the legislature and
the community that women have achieved
equality with men and no longer need the
Commission. However, recent statistics
indicate women make 60¢ to each man's
$1.00.

The Hawaii State Commission was esta-
blished by legislative mandate in 1970,
after a study by a special commission
formed by Governor John Burns. The
study indicated that women did not have
equality with men in the areas of employ-
ment, education, and political represen-
tation.

The Commission has specifically under-
taken projects to carry out its legisla-
tive mandate. The Commission has formed
a task force of experts and is beginning
to seek funding in the community. Second,
they are compiling a directory of women's
groups and services.

Write or call your legislators asking
them to support continued funding for
the HSCSW.

ALL SHE WROTE

HAWAII WOMEN’S
HISTORY, INC.

The Foundation for Hawaii Women's
History, Inc. was established to pre-
serve and promote women's contributions
to the history of Hawaii. The Board
of Directors consists of Hazel Akim-
Naone, Arline Eaton, Yoshiko Hamada,
and four additional directors.

The Foundation has already begun
their work by making an inventory of
existing local historical materials.
“Footsteps in Time", a bibliographic
listing of all published materials on
Women of Hawaii will be published and
ready for distribution in time for
Women's History Week. Another publi-
cation, "Changing Lives of Hawaii's
Women...Progress since Statehood,"
will also be available.

A general meeting will be held
March 10 at 10 a.m. in the Cafeteria
of the Prince Kuhio Federal Building.
The public is invited. For more infor-
mation, contact Elizabeth Cummings at
524-8218.

WHAT (OR WHO) IS THE PROBLEM?

Anyone who has ever been in search
of a rental unit and was turned away
from the inn because of a child (or
children), or their "parental status”
now has the chance to push legislation
to prohibit discrimination. SB 328
came out of the Senate in the last
session with overwhelming support and
went to the House Judiciary where it

PAGE

NO CONNECTION BETWEEN
ABORTION AND STERILITY

A study of more than 3,000 women
shows that, contrary to popular belief,
those who have had abortions do not
suffer a later increase in sterility.

The report, published in the Jour-
nal Obstetrics and Gynecology, said
that women who have had induced abor-
tions have comparable pregnancy rates
to those who had children previously
and others who became pregnant during
the course of the study.

Researchers at Harvard Medical
School said 1,235 abortion patients at
three Massachusetts clinics were com-
pared with 912 women who recently de-
livered babies and 939 other previous-
ly pregnant women who visited the
clinics. Each patient was followed for
as long as 3.5 years.

"Cumulative pregnancy rates were
similar for abortion group patients,
delivery group patients and the pre-
viously pregnant clinic group," said
the report.

The number of abortions a woman had
also did not appear to affect her
future fertility, the report said.
However, a few women who had three or
more abortions did have a higher fer-
tility rate, suggesting that their
frequent use of abortion may have re-
sulted from greater than average fer-
tility to begin with, it said.

The authors said the allegation
that abortion frequently results in
sterility stems from earlier studies
primarily done in Europe and Japan.
These findings appear to have been

The question of fertility after
abortion is important, said the re-
port, because the majority of legal
abortions in the United States are
obtained by young women who later
may wish to bear children.

remains overwhelmingly stuck for reasons
unknown...While it appears to have be-
come embroiled in controversy among leg-
islators, it received unanimous support
at a public hearing before the House
Judiciary Committee. A room full of indi-
viduals and representatives from organiza-
tions spoke strongly in support of the bill.
No vocal opposition was expressed. Nonethe-
less the bill never came out of the Commit-
tee and the problem still festers, as any
mother or father seeking a rental unit will
testify...The public is being urged to get
their legislators to jar SB 328 loose from
the Committee and onto the House floor for
a vote.

-reprinted from the Legislative Reporter

Hawaii Council of Churches

Kathleen

Place

Telephone 538-6168 223 Merchant Street

DAPHNE F. MYERS, M.D.
General Internal Medicine

Professional Center Building
1481 South King Street, Suite 200
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814

Office Hours by Appointment
Telephone: 941-8494
After Hours: 988-2188

*Free academic counseling
*Individually Designed Programs
*Credit for Life and Work Experiences
*Financial Aid

*B.S., B.A., M.S., M.A., Ph.D. Degrees

Rm. B, University YWCA, 1820 University Av.