cont. from p. 8

them the magic hormones that keep hot  
flashes and wrinkled skin at bay; the  

‘daughters who find they cannot ‘main-  

tain a pregnancy NOW because their  
mothers took synthetic hormones (DES)  
25 years ago. I saw the tragic re-  
sults of IUD use and I was confronted  
daily with the overwhelming task of  
convincing medical consumers that they  
should shop for medical care as care-  
fully as they shop for groceries.  

As a Public Health School student,  
I've been exposed to the "Big Picture"  
of medical care system breakdowns.  
And, although this vantage point has  
provided me with historical, cultural  
and political background for today's  
dilemma, I find the prognosis from  
the Public Health perspective most dis-  
couraging. I see patterns and trends  
rooted in ancient medical traditions,  
conditions that have existed so long  
they are now an accepted part of our  
heritage. Conditions that may require  
almost revolutionary efforts on the  
part of consumers and the system it-  
self before change is possible. I see  
vested interests coalescing to form  
powerful lobbies, economically linked  
groups that will spare no expense to  
prevent meaningful change. I see an  
ultra-conservative administration fur-  
ther bolstering these establishment  

strongholds at the expense of the weak,  

the poor and the aged. At a time when  
medical costs consume ten percent of  
the GNP and a comprehensive National  
Health Insurance Plan is the only  
logical solution to cutting costs with-  
out eliminating care for the poor--I  
see an Administration and a Congress  

program and going enormous  
tax scene to corporate members of the  
medical industry, further fueling in-  
flationary costs and increasing the  

federal deficit. All this is distres-  
sing, but it doesn't affect me person-  
ally...yet.  

What I experienced as a patient,  
does. This is where our medical care  
system truly fails us--in face-to-face  
encounters with physicians and sur-  
geons.  

When my specialist looked me in the  
eye and said, "cancer," icy fingers  
raced down my spine. When he said  
"surgery," I didn't ask “why,” just  
"how soon?" I'd chosen this man very  
carefully. He is (or was) billed as  
the "best on the Atlantic Coast" by  
his peers. I was anxious to have the  
cancerous part of my body removed, be-  
lieving, like so many, that surgical  
removal is the only treatment that of-  
fers any real hope for survival. I  
was no smarter one year later when the  
routine biopsy revealed a new malig-  
nancy. Again, surgery was indicated  
and I agreed. Only, the second time,  
things didn't go as well.  

Within two months of the vaginecto-  
my/vaginoplasty, it was obviously a  
failure. I was angry. For the first  
time, I questioned the surgical pro-  
cedure. I went to the medical libra-  
ry and I read...and read...and read.  

And the more I learned, the angrier I  
became. The literature showed that  

the method used by my specialist was  
NOT the method most chosen by gyn's  

and plastic surgeons. The reconstruc-  
tive method and post-operative therapy  
with the highest success rate was writ-  
ten up eight years earlier and appeared  
regularly ever since! I was furious...  

and scared. A confrontation was in  
order.  

At age 39, with a healthy zest for  

life and an even healthier 39-year-old  

husband... I was not ready to remain  
in the ranks of the sexually dysfunc-  
tional. Here was hope, in the form of  
an improved procedure. Wouldn't my  
physician, my friend, want the oppor-  
tunity to help me become a fully  
functional human being?  

I took my notes, my references, my  
vocabulary cards and sat meekly in the  
specialist's office, terrified that  
my audacious confrontation might re-  
sult in his refusal to treat me. (At  
that time, there was no other civilian  
surgeon available for this procedure  
in the D.C. area, although specialists  
at Johns Hopkins and several in New  
York City were known to me.) I had  
never questioned his competence before.  

I showed him copies of the articles.  
He glanced at them, nodding almost im-  
perceptibly. "Yes," he said. "I am  

familiar with these cases," he said  
with a questioning look in my direc-  
tion.  

"Why, then, did you use the “other"  
procedure on me?" I asked, trying to  
keep my voice calm and rational.  

"I've just always done it that way,"  
he said with finality.  

I was mortified! Although my anger  
was fueled by the adrenaline racing  
through my system, I remained seated  
while he fidgeted. "Would you consi-  

der a second vaginoplasty for me with  
a plastic surgeon on the team?" I  
asked in my most diplomatic manner.  

"Why not," he shrugged insensitively,  
with a wave of his hand. Our friend-  
ship was definitely on the skids.  
But, I was deliriously happy. He  
hadn't refused to treat me! (Incredi-  
bly, even then I accepted his imperi-  
ous attitude as normal.)  

The following week, I managed to  
see the chief of reconstructive sur-  
gery at Georgetown. Yes, he was fami-  
liar with the split-level graft proce-  
dure followed by the surgical stint  
worn internally. Yes, he would be de-  
lighted to work with "Greg," but I was,  
after all, Greg's patient. HE would  
have to approve the alliance.  

How remarkable, that this physician  
(Greg), the person I had hired to re-  
pair my diseased body, now owned it!  
That only HE would be able to approve  
the hiring of another skilled member  
of the operating team going back in  
to repair his mistake! Where would  
the arrogance end?  

As you read earlier... it did end  
in the surgical procedure with two  
superstar surgeons attending; however,  
never once were they in the same  
room at the same time. The plastic  
man did not come into the operating  
room until after the gyn was finished.  
They were never on the oncology floor  
together, and even though I begged  
for a meeting with the two of them  
present, I never got it.  

The result of all this was a night-  
marish two weeks of total bed rest  
following the surgery, where, fre-  
quently, no one was accountable for me  
or my post-operative treatment. Greg  
would see me in the morning, with res-  
idents bustling around and nurses try-  
ing to service my physical needs. My  
questions were met with a hasty re-  

-ALL SHE WROTE —APRIL  

treat and a clipped comment about it  
“not being his responsibility." Since  
I was heavily sedated, it was several  
days before I realized that he was de-  
ferring decisions to the plastic sur-  
geon.  

However, when the plastic surgeon  
arrived (after evening visiting hours)  
with his retinue of residents and  
other admirers, I asked my questions  
again. "Why was the procedure not  
done the way we discussed earlier?"  
“When would I be allowed to eat and  
drink?" “When would the surgical  
dressings come off and when could I  
get out of bed?" All in all... rather  
standard questions, one would think.  
Still, I received no answers. One  
"attending" deferred to the other.  

The whole thing was beginning to  
drive me crazy. I became obsessed  
with questions. Was something wrong?  
Was that why no one was willing to be  
accountable for my condition? Had  
they found more cancer? Was there  
some reason to believe the surgery  
would fail AGAIN?  

Finally, on about day six of my con-  
finement, thoroughly demoralized, I  
asked my gyn-oncologist if I was still  
his patient. I must have been crying.  
He looked me in the eye and was hor-  
rified to see the tears coursing down  
my cheek. “Of course you are still my  
patient. Now, pull yourself together  
and straighten up," he said bluntly as  
he marched out the door. He didn't  
come back to my room for several days...  
punishment for the wayward patient?  

No one wrote orders for me for four  
days after that emotional break-down.  

Helpless? Tied to my bed by tubes,  
ignored by the men who were “saving my life," and ignored now,  
by both. My husband was worried but  
could not get information from the  
attending physicians either.  

Then, suddenly, the ambiguities end-  
ed with an emergency. Both superstars  
were out of town on the day the oncolo-  
gy fellow found evidence of a fistula.  
All of a sudden, everyone was taking  
responsibility for me! A fistula  
would mean contamination of the surgi-  
cal site and the need to remove all  
dressing immediately. It might mean  
the loss of the skin graft. It might  
very well mean that I'd been through  
all the agonies of the surgical recon-  
struction, all the dehumanizing treat-  
ment, all the emotional trauma and  
physical pain...for nothing!  

It might have...but it didn't. The  
dressings were removed (early) by the  
fellow studying with Greg, without  
any damage to the reconstructed organ.  
I finally found out how and where to  
get the mold I needed to wear for the  
next year and had the gyn department  
order it for me.  

And, to top it all, I finally had  
a long TWO-way conversation with the  
“ugly sheep" doctor in which he man-  
aged to convince me that I had the abi-  
lity to make intelligent decisions  
about my post-operative therapy. This  
was essential as I was leaving the  
mainland shortly to come live in  
Hawaii with my family.  

The resolution with the gyn-oncolo-  
gist was not as easy. He was so ob-  
viously turned off by my emotional con-  
cerns and my questioning of his compe-  
tence we were never able to re-estab-  
lish a comfortable patient/doctor re-  

cont. on p. 23 5  

ee