SEPTEMBER/ OCTOBER

more DEPO PROVERA

In 1960, the USFDA approved Depo Provera for treatment of endometriosis and threatened or habitual abortion. Approval was initially granted based on its safety; efficacy was not assessed. Fourteen years later, in 1974, the FDA concluded that Depo was not effective for these uses and approval was withdrawn. (Another consideration affecting the FDA decision was existing evidence that other steroids, such as DES, administered during pregnancy were related to congenital defects.)

Upjohn began clinical tests of Depo as a human contraceptive in 1963 and commenced field trials in 1965. In 1967, Upjohn applied to FDA for permission to market Depo as a contraceptive in the U.S. Controversy over the relevance of animal studies blocked the hearings until 1978 when the FDA ruled against it. (Sun, p. 426) In 1972, Depo Provera was approved by FDA as a treatment in advanced endometrial cancer. Today, this is the only FDA approved use. (Population Reports, K-2)

Depo Provera contraceptive injections are administered every three months, although some trials using larger doses are given every six months. The injectable progestogens prevent pregnancy in much the same way that combined orals do, by

1.) inhibiting ovulation in many women.  
2.) increasing the viscosity of cervical mucus, thus forming a barrier to spermatozoa  
3.) changing the rate of ovum transport through the fallopian tubes  
4.) making the endometrium “less receptive” to implantation  

CANCER AND SEXUALITY PROJECT NEEDS CRITICS

Linda Martin's television production on cancer treatment, and body image and sexual identity issues is "in the can" and ready for evaluation. The Cancer Center is helping construct an evaluation and community-input model that will be used in producing the second 30-minute panel formal segment of a one-hour program to be aired on KIKU TV 13 later this fall.

If your group is interested in women's health issues and will be meeting between August 22 and September 7, please contact Martin to set up a screening and discussion. The whole program will require approximately one hour, but your group's contribution could be invaluable!

Please help us take advantage of this unique opportunity to bring cancer and sexuality issues out of the closet and into a public forum. Please call Linda Martin at 625-0089 or 948-7400.

LESBIANS FORTY AND OVER  
LESBIANS ONLY  

Rap Group  

Monday Nights 7:30 p.m.  
UNIVERSITY YWCA WOMEN'S CENTER  
1820 University Ave.  

Honolulu, Hawaii 96822  

"Put a twinkle in your wrinkle"  

BISEXUAL WOMEN'S RAP GROUP  
Tuesday nights 6:00 p.m.  
University YWCA Women's Center  
1820 University Ave.  

Honolulu, Hawaii 96822  

SHE WROTE  

The contraceptive effect of Depo Provera depends primarily on its ability to stop ovulation. It is thought that progestogens affect ovulation by acting on the hypothalamus-pituitary axis, causing suppression of luteinizing hormone.  
Long-Term Effects  

Short-term side effects, irregular bleeding or amenorrhea, nausea and loss of libido sound serious enough, but long-term effects might be fatal. These are the effects that are not mentioned to Third World women lining up for their injections. These are the effects currently under debate by population control advocates, feminists, and the pharmaceutical communities.

According to all sources, the animal studies show increased incidence of both benign and malignant breast nodules in beagle dogs and endocervical and endometrial cancers in rhesus monkeys. The controversy is not "does Depo cause cancer in animals" but rather, “are the animal findings relevant to humans?" Depo opponents claim that pharmaceuticals were willing to stand by their animal test results so long as they were negative. With positive findings (cancer), they are claiming irrelevancy. Malcolm Potts, former medical director of the International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) between 1969 and 1978, insists "That Depo must be given to millions of women over the course of decades before its carcinogenic effects can be fully assessed."

Depo is legal, but mostly among poor populations. Depo is reportedly used extensively on West Indian populations in Britain, and Aboriginals in Australia. It is used on Polynesian women in New Zealand and the Pacific Islands, and incredibly Malcolm Potts suggests that it be approved in the USA especially for use on Chicanas! (Bunkle, p. 4)

HONOLULU PLAYSCHOOL, INC.

Honolulu Playschool, Inc., a non-profit parents' cooperative playgroup, has openings for two through four-year-old children with parents eager to give their children an enjoyable social experience in a non-directive group setting.

Parents share running this unique program which offers social and creative activities, a wide variety of toys and materials, the ideas of many parents and plenty of outdoor running room. The playschool, with parents' active involvement, provides a transition from home-based child care to future preschool or kindergarten programs.

The two-year-olds class meets Tuesdays and Thursdays from 8:30 to 11:30 a.m. at the Nuuanu Congregational Church, 2651 Pali Hwy. Non-profit fees include a $5 registration charge, trimester insurance fee of $7; and $10 to $15 per month for tuition and supplies.

Interested parents should contact Heather Caparoso, membership chairperson, at 845-5475, or Jane Au, general chairperson, at 847-5245 to arrange to observe the playschool.

PAGE 15

YOUR BODY

The most enthusiastic Depo promoter is Dr. Edwin McDaniel. Of missionary stock, he attacks the population control problems of Thailand with messianic zeal. After taking over the Department of Obstetrics and Midwifery at the McCormick Hospital in Chiang Mai, because "no other doctor wanted it," McDaniel was dismayed by the technical limitations of oral contraceptives and IUDs. When a friend gave him a supply of Depo Provera in April of 1965, he immediately tried it on the rural Thai women in his clinic. By the close of 1965, McDaniel was so impressed with the drug, "he made Depo a standard family planning option for women in Thailand." (Minkin, p. 11) Fifteen years later, despite the alarming results of animal studies, the missionary doctor has no regrets. He believes Depo Provera to be "one of the safest and most remarkable drugs to come upon the world scene in years." As if to emphasize this belief, he claims that a woman returning for an injection (without complaints) can be processed in 60-90 seconds, including interview, paperwork and injection. "Dispensing both Depo Provera and oral contraceptives, one of McCormick Hospital's mobile family planning clinics routinely serves 800 women in one day and 1,500 in the next on two stops near Thailand's border with Burma." (Minkin, p. 11) The Thai National Family Program is not so enthusiastic about Depo, restricting its use to women with two or more children who will be advised to undergo sterilization if, after using the injectable “for a period of time," she still plans no more children. (Population Reports, K-12)  
Strange Bedfellows  

The pro's and con's of Depo Provera use are complex and cover the globe, both geographically and politically. Leading the Depo opposition is the U.S. based National Women's Health Network. The Network is suing Upjohn on behalf of "women who've been injured by the drug," including women receiving Depo for birth control, endometriosis, menstrual disorders, use in pregnancy, and menopause. (Network News, Mar./Apr. 1983, p. 10) Joining the opposition from 180 degrees distant are some “right to life" groups, including the American Life Lobby and  

cont. Page 19  

A Gift Sous Postxail 8x40  
One Person-One Per Family  
Value $22.50