\*

PAGE 12

ANNOUNCEMENTS

GROWING YOUNG

Clowns and soap bubbles! What next?  
If you are passing the University YWCA  
on a Saturday or Sunday when Romni is  
giving a workshop, you may well see  
soap bubbles floating from the second  
story balcony. You might even see a  
few clowns with a happy smile to lighten  
your day.

Romni's September "Playshop" is on  
Saturday the 10th from 10 a.m. to  
4 p.m. and costs $20. The October  
"Playshop" is on Sunday the 9th. If  
you have wondered what it is like to  
put on white-face, become a mime, play  
games with other adults in a safe en-  
vironment where costumes and props  
encourage a bit of foolishness and fun,  
give Romni a call at 262-0316. She  
calls this a "Playshop" because it is  
a day for adults to get in touch with  
the child within. Romni believes the  
clown helps people alter their perspec-  
tive and thereby reduce the stress in  
their lives. The clown encourages  
risk-taking because it is such a  
strong symbol of survival.

NETWORKING

THE NEW MASH

The American soldier who served in  
Vietnam has usually been presented in  
a negative light by the mass media and  
rarely understood by the American  
public... Only now, ten years after  
the war, are these soldiers being given  
the recognition and support they de-  
serve for their efforts and sacrifices.  
However, there is another group of  
Vietnam veterans who also deserve rec-  
ognition and respect, the people who  
served in the medical evacuation chain:  
nurses, medics, doctors, and dust-off  
pilots. The role of nurturing, heal-  
ing, and saving lives in the midst of a  
war was one which created ambivalence,  
frustration, and guilt, but also one  
which helped develop courage, strength,  
and inner resources to a much greater  
degree than most people will ever re-  
quire.

PRESS RELEASES

LOS ANGELES, CA. -- June, 1983 -- Les-  
bians of Color, a Los Angeles-based,  
multi-ethnic organization, announces  

a National Lesbians of Color Confer-  
ence. It will take place September 8-  
11, 1983 at Cottontail Ranch in Malibu,  
California. The theme of the confer-  
ence, according to conference organi-  
zers, is “Sisters Bonding Together."

"It is a chance for women of color  
to come together," said one of the or-  
ganizers, "to share skills with one  
another, establish networks, support  
one another's struggles, develop new  
strategies and have fun!”

The four-day conference will in-  
clude workshops and seminars on topics  
ranging from education to health, spir-  
ituality to politics. Craftswomen and  
cultural events will accent the confer-  
ence and there will be ample time for  
informal exchange of resources and  
information.

The registration cost, including  
food and accommodations for the full  
four days is $75 regular and $60 low  
income. Children's registration is  
$35 (boys must be under 12 years of  
age). All donations are welcome to as-  

P >

ALL SHE WROTE

Romni has created an adult playroom  
at the University YWCA that rivals the  
children's playground at the front of  
the building. There are no slides or  
towers to climb but lots of color, cos-  
tumes, musical instruments, clown  
posters, and fun props. One feels  
younger and lighter just stepping into  
the room. Past participants in the  
"Playshop" have formed a "Society of  
Fools" and meet on Wednesday nights  
for more play. The Society is open  
to all who have taken the "Playshop.”

The University YWCA has made all of  
this possible. But there is more to  
come! Monday nights the studio is  
the setting for rehearsals of a unique  
theatre company called "Talk Story  
Theatre." Eventually the company will  
perform "with" the public in the YWCA  
theatre. The word "with" is quite  
appropriate because audience and ac-  
tors create together. Members of the  
audience are invited to come sit in  
the teller's chair and tell their  

story (a moment from their lives) or  

On July 19, 1983, the Vietnam Vet  
Center will begin a new concept in  
communication for the professional and  
para-professional medical personnel  
who served in Indo-China during the  
Vietnam War. The purpose of the group  
will be to share similar personal and  
professional experiences relating to  
Vietnam and beyond: —

Topics to be discussed will be de-  
cided upon by the group members. Pos-  
sible areas of interest include the  
development of personal support net-  
works, coping skills, and future per-  
sonal growth and/or career decisions.  
These meetings will run for approxi-  
mately two hours once a week for a  
period of ten weeks.

The meetings will be chaired by two  
Vet Center staff members: Robin LaDue,  
Ph.D. staff psychologist, and Warren  

assist in defraying registration costs.

For further information, please  
write Lesbians of Color/Lesbianas de  
Color, P.O. Box 2344, Los Angeles, CA.  
90051

APPRENTICESHIP RECRUITMENT: OAHU  
REGISTRATION

The Department of Labor and Indus-  
trial Relations announced today that  
the Electricians’ Joint Apprenticeship  
Committee will be forming a waiting  
list of qualified applicants for the  
Electricians' Apprenticeship Program  
(wireperson) on the island of Oahu.  
Registration will be held as follows:

State of Hawaii

Department of Labor and Industrial Re-  
lations

Apprenticeship Division

830 Punchbowl Street, Room 202

Honolulu, Hawaii 96813

Telephone: 548-2520

Monday, August 29, 1983 through  
Monday, September 12, 1983  
(Closed on Sept. 5, 1983)

Time: 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.  
Monday thru Friday only

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER

another person's story. Or they may  
share a dream. A group of actors then  
improvisationally act out the story to  
the accompaniment of music and the aid  
of a few pieces of cloth or props to  
suggest a character or mood. This  
kind of theatre encourages spontaneity  
in both actors and audience.

So far the company consists of Sara  
Burgess, Victoria Griffen, Hilarie and  
Romni Cash, and Joe Miller. They are  
looking for two more male actors. The  
company is now learning to become more  
spontaneous, to work with the "Talk  
Story" format, and to become an ensem-  
ble. We will let you know when they  
are ready for the public.

"Talk Story Theatre" is modeled af-  
ter “Playback Theatre" which was cre-  
ated by Jonathan Fox in Poughkeepsie,  
New York. Romni recently apprenticed  
herself to the company in order to  
bring the technique back to Hawaii.  
Long a believer in the richness of the  
oral tradition, she recognized how ap-  
propriate this theatre form would be  
in Hawaii where the oral tradition has  
always been strong.

Layton, staff member and former Army  
combat medic. Due to spatial restric-  
tions, group membership will be kept  
to a minimum, but it will be open to  
any member of the medical evacuation  
chain in Vietnam--medics, nurses, doc-  
tors, or Medevac dustoff crews.

If you are interested, or if you  
know someone who is, please contact  
either Dr. LaDue or Mr. Layton at the  
Vet Center, 1370 Kapiolani Boulevard,  
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814, or call  
546-3723 during normal working hours.

It will be our great pleasure to  
have you attend and take part in this  
very special group for very special  
people. We look forward to your  
response.

Kuakini Medical Center has opened an  
Adult Day Health Care Facility to pro-  
vide patients with an organized day  
program of therapeutic, social, educa-  
tional, recreational, and medical ser-  
vices.

This program is an alternative to  
admission to a long-term care facility  
and serves as a transition from a  
health facility to personal independ-  
ence. Participants come to the facili-  
ty daily to participate in the health  
care program, which is tailored to fit  
each individual's needs, and return  
home in the afternoon.

The program's director is  
Bernadette Ledesma. The Adult Day  
Health Facility is located in Hale  
Pulama Mau next to the medical center.  
It is open weekdays from 7 a.m. to  
5 p.m. Additional services not includ-  
ed in the program cost are also avail-  

able and may be requested by a partici-  

pant's private physician. For informa-  
tion on fees and admission require-  
ments, call 547-9534.

~