ALL’S HE WROTE

ALL SHE WROTE

Helping

the Sexually Abused Child

WHAT IF YOUR CHILD TELLS YOU SHE OR HE HAS BEEN SEXUALLY MOLESTED?

Definition:

The sexual exploitation of a child who is not developmentally capable of understanding or resisting the contact or who may be psychologically and socially dependent upon the offender.

Be aware that:

Children are usually molested by people they know—often a relative or friend of the family.

Children are usually not violently attacked or hurt physically during a sexual assault.

Children very seldom lie about such a serious matter.

Not all children are able to tell parents directly that they have been molested. Changes in behavior, reluctance to be with a certain person or go to a certain place may be signals that something has happened.

What to do immediately:

Go with the child to a private place. Ask the child to tell you what happened in his/her own words, and listen carefully.

Tell her/him s/he did well to tell you, that you are very sorry this happened, and that you will protect her/him from further molestation.

If you suspect your child has an injury, contact your regular physician or Kapiolani Children's Medical Center Emergency Room immediately.

You may call the Sex Abuse Treatment Center, 947-8589 (524-7273 hotline), for advice and information about what to do. The hotline number and Children's Protective Service, 947-8650, are available 24 hours/day.

Helping your child following the assault:

Continue to reassure your child and do not blame your child for what happened.

Consult with your physician or the Sex Abuse Treatment Center regarding the need for a medical examination.

Instruct your child to tell you immediately if the offender attempts sexual molestation again or bothers her/him in any way.

Give your child reassurance and support that s/he is okay.

Respond to questions or feelings your child expresses about the molestation with a calm, matter-of-fact attitude but do not pressure your child to talk about it.

Respect the privacy of the child by not telling a lot of people or letting other people question her/him.

Try to follow a regular routine around the home (except usual chores, bedtimes, rules).

Inform brothers/sisters that something has happened to the child but that it is being taken care of—do not give details.

Take the time to talk it over privately with someone you trust—your spouse, a friend, a relative, a counselor; express your feelings. Do not discuss a situation in front of your child/children.

Common immediate problems of sexually molested children:

Sleep disturbances (nightmares, fear of going to bed, wanting light on, waking up during the night, fear of sleeping alone).

Loss of appetite.

Irritability, crankiness, short-tempered behavior.

Bedwetting.

Needing more reassurance than usual, clinging to parent.

Changes in behavior at school or in relating to friends.

Increased fears.

Behaving as a younger child (regression).

Your child may have some of these problems. They usually will last a couple of weeks. Try to notice all changes in usual behavior, and discuss with your counselor.

No one knows for sure about the long-term emotional effects, but we believe that if the situation is handled in a direct and sensitive way at the time it is revealed, your child need not suffer permanently from the assault.

Contact the Sex Abuse Treatment Center, 947-8589, for help: medical care, counseling for parents and the child, reporting to police and going to court, getting help for the offender, and any other concerns. You are not alone.

A report must be made to Children's Protective Services if there is any potential further abuse of the child.

HEALTH:

CAN ACUPUNCTURE HELP?

Being free from disease means more than not having an ailment with a name; it means feeling physically and emotionally in balance and in tune with nature. The body's natural process is to heal itself.

When we cut our finger the body rapidly starts to heal the wound. There is a long period of time over which the body builds up (or down) to an ailment. Are we well then? Are we sick? Or somewhere in between? There are signposts if you know where to look. Remember Grandmother's warning, "A stitch in time saves nine?" It's true with health also. It is much easier, cheaper, and more desirable to correct an imbalance in the energy flow of the body or to change a habit pattern before it develops into a radical disease with a name that may require drugs or surgery.

We have all heard of preventive medicine. What does it mean?

It means tuning up your body—bringing it back into balance—BEFORE an "ouch" brings you face to face with a physical problem and you have to stop, re-adjust and change your ways to heal. Why wait until you have emphysema or lung cancer to quit smoking? Why not quit now and enjoy good health afterwards?

How many of us really feel good most of the time? And how many of us have low energy and feel "not quite right, but nothing I can pinpoint?"

Not true! Older means older. It doesn't have to mean more “diseased."

I liken it to the car. Take two cars, for example, the same make, model, and year. Why is it that one can be a faithful friend and the other a pile of junk? Generally, the faithful friend was well-serviced by its owner, who changed the oil before it left harmful deposits inside the engine. If we faithfully change the oil and care for our car so that it serves us longer and better, should we not "service" our bodies in a similar way? If we recognize that dirty oil harms the car's engine and take steps to cleanse it, should we not cleanse the interior of our bodies? At the very least, we need to take steps to see that what we put inside our bodies is the very best.

Many of us are eating and stressing and smoking our way into disease. Now I'm not advocating any particular "thing" for everyone to do because we are all individuals with different needs and different distortions from our perfection. But there is a thread that runs through the theme of Freedom From Disease. We have all heard it many, many times. It consists of adequate rest and exercise, reduction of stress, weight maintenance, proper food and drink habits, vitamin/mineral supplements as necessary; and the reduction or elimination of tobacco, coffee, alcohol, and drugs of all kinds. In addition, the body energies should be brought back into balance so that the wonderful mechanism called our body can heal itself. Remember how "magically" a cut finger heals itself? The body also wants and works to be free of disease and disorders. I believe, whenever possible, in helping the body to balance and heal itself through acupuncture and other means without drugs and their harmful side effects.

Many people have asked questions about acupuncture so I will try to answer some of the most common ones.

Does it hurt? Well sometimes, for a moment. Usually the sensation is one of a tiny pin prick or an ant bite. Afterwards, sometimes patients have asked, "Is the needle in yet?" You see, an acupuncture needle is very thin—about 2 or 3 times the diameter of a human hair.

How does one feel after a treatment? Very briefly, acupuncture balances and harmonizes the flow of energy within the body. Energy flows within pathways (called Meridians) in the body and if a Meridian is blocked or has too much or too little energy, an imbalance in the body will occur and certain organs or areas of the body will function improperly. The insertion of an acupuncture needle into specific points will help one's energy to flow more normally and assist the body to repair itself.

Before studying acupuncture, I used to think the kind of needle the doctor used to inject penicillin in my butt, or the ones the nurse drew blood with, or the kind I sometimes stick my finger with when sewing.

Acupuncture needles are quite different.

Does one bleed when the needle is inserted? No, only very, very rarely a drop of blood may appear.

Acupuncture, best known in the U.S. for pain relief, is a practice over 4,000 years old in the Orient. Books of recorded treatment predate the Bible. Certainly, it has proved the test of time! During Richard Nixon's presidency, when he visited China, acupuncture first came into the spotlight in this country. Famous heart surgeons traveling with the presidential party observed surgeries performed with only acupuncture anesthesia, and they brought knowledge of acupuncture back to the U.S. to be used in newly developing heart transplant techniques. Now, many states (including Hawaii) have laws licensing the use of acupuncture.

Ms. Webster is an Acupuncture Practitioner in private practice, and her column will be appearing regularly in "All She Wrote." If you have a question about acupuncture or holistic health, you may write her c/o this paper. Or if you would like a free consultation to see if acupuncture could be of benefit to you, you may call her at 537-3830.

UPCOMING EVENTS

Calendar of Events

REGULAR MEETINGS

Mondays:

Tuesdays:

Wed 'day:

Thurs:

Fridays:

Sat 'day:

(every) 7:30pm Abused Women Rap Group, University YWCA

(2nd only) Helping After Neonatal Death 7:30 pm Waiokeola Church; 4705 Kilauea Avenue

(every) 7:30pm Woman's AA Group University YWCA

(4th only) 5:30 pm BOD meeting in Coffeehouse

(every) 7:30 pm Lesbian Rap Group (3rd only) NOW meeting in YWCA Coffeehouse

(2nd only) 12 noon Media Task Force meets in the Corporation Council Conference Room at Honolulu Hale

(every) 7:30-12pm Coffeehouse University YWCA

(1st/3rd) 1-3pm Workshop for Board Members-University YWCA

4-8pm Seafood Jubilee Benefit for the Sex Abuse Treatment Center at the Hawaiian Regent Hotel, Hawaiian Ballroom. Tickets are $15 (deductible)

University YWCA Fundraising Spaghetti Dinner $2 ea. BYOB 50¢ admission w/o dinner. 6:30-9:30pm Everybody's invited

HWPAL General Meeting. 2nd Floor First United Methodist Church Call for info: 422-9858

KITV 4-6pm- Olympic Gold #7 "The Leading Ladies" ~ timely examination of women in sport, as LA prepares to have first women's Olympic Marathon. A look at some of the world's leading athletes.

7:30pm ABC Theatre presents "The Dollmaker" - A strong determined woman needs all the love and all the courage at her command to survive hard times in the city as she fights for her dream of a new start for her family. Stars Jane Fonda. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED

5:30-7pm Voter's Registration Training AAUW Residence, 1802 Keeaumoku St. Bring Potluck pupus. Call 548-4576 to register during the day or 261-6305 Margarite Peach, evenings. Deadline May 21.

4-6pm Historian Committee of the Foundation for Women's History meets upstairs in the McCully-Moiliili Library

7pm Orientation for Access to Kaho'olawe Kahili-Palama Library 734-1191 or Keone at 373-1309 for more information.

7pm- Preplanning meeting at University YWCA. Open to all interested in seeing a Women's Festival and Gathering the 25-26 of August. Women’s Equality Day. Bring ideas.

Annual Luncheon for Honolulu County Committee on the Status of Women and the League of Women Voters of Hawaii. Theme is Na Wahine Holomua, “Women Moving Forward Together.” $12 Reservations must be made by May 24. Luncheon will be held at Sheraton-Waikiki. For info call 523-4495.

International Gathering for Christian Singles. For all 18 and up, single, married, divorced, and separated. Register before June 1 for special rate. Call Pastor Nic Christoff 524-3703 for information.

Conference on Literature and Hawaii's Children at the UH Campus Center. Workshops, speakers, displays. Watch paper for schedule.

Workshop "Have We Come a Long Way?" planned and moderated by Mary Piette concerns sexism in children's literature. Part of the above conference this workshop is from 11:15 to 12:30 p.m. Sponsored by Historian's Committee.

9 am, HSCSW sponsors Workshop on Finding Jobs using Non-traditional Methods. will be held at McCoy Pavilion.

Sexual Abuse Treatment Center will be holding a Fundraiser aboard the Falls of Clyde. Call 947-8511 for more information.

MATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS TELL THEM YOU SAW THEIR AD IN ALL, SHE WROTE.