PAGE 18

A SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS WOMAN

When I came back from Korea, we moved again to Honolulu. That's when my life was getting better. So I bought one laundry shop. At that time, it was only $150, cheap. Only working hard could you earn money. At that time, washing and ironing one shirt and one pair of pants cost only 15¢, ironing one shirt 5¢, very cheap the labor. I worked harder. Small babies followed me. Nighttime I worked until three o'clock ironing. Oh, but every month there was not enough money; we borrowed, payday we gave back, really that time was hard.

One day one of my friends came and told me there was a rooming house somebody wanted to sell. I went downtown to Hotel Street. Then, I went to see the rooming house, 32 rooms. At that time it cost only $1,400. I cried in front of my friend. At that time I had been in Honolulu for four years already. Four years of work day and night and I had only earned $400; how could I afford to buy? Then, my friend said she would lend me $1,000, so I didn't worry. At that time she was living well already. She paid all for me. Then, that night I had to open the electricity and had to bring a $50 deposit to the Electric Company. Where was I going to get $50? So, I stood on the street corner, just tears coming down. I didn't know how I could borrow $50. So, I went to another Korean lady friend's house. She was a lady from my hometown in Korea.

25 Years Experience

INTERIOR EXPERT

KAIMUKI Corner of First & Waialae

LICENSED CONTRACTOR #C-5953

Florence E. Dick

735-3005

Owned & operated

Oh, she gave me the money quickly.

So, I ran; before four o'clock I had to reach the Hawaiian Electric office. Then, I went to the store to buy muslin material, 50 yards; then, I came home, and all night I sewed sheets and pillowcases. Then, well, business was so good, I was happy and I couldn't sleep, I was so excited.

So, I joined a Tanomoshi meeting. The first Tanomoshi, we made $50 a month. Then, I joined two. For months, I saw nobody, you know. God helped me! From the two Tanomoshi I drew $1,600. So I paid back $1,000. So, happy. The first time I bought an electric stove and refrigerator, and my neighbor and I, hugging each other, we cried, we were so happy, we cried!

That's how we first started business... by helping each other. We had a women's society lending each other money. It was also a fellowship society. Once a month we went to each other's houses for meetings and for lunch. We liked business at that time, even a small amount. We called the meeting Kye in Korean, Hui in Chinese. That's how we started living well.

A Japanese word for a private S&L cooperative.

for the people. Before, I couldn't write.

There, small boys came from

LIFELONG PASSION FOR LEARNING

I couldn't go to school in Korea. My family could not send me to school; at that time we were very poor. Very sad. So, I learned myself. I read and read storybooks. I learned Korean that way. I borrowed books. No money to buy. I read the Abraham Lincoln story. He borrowed and he read. At the fireplace, he learned law, so he was a lawyer. I remember it always.

I was young. I liked to try everything. I taught myself the Japanese language. I picked up Korean words and wrote down Japanese. That way I learned. I sat down after dinner, I read.

I always studied book reading until twelve o'clock. I read Japanese well, some Chinese too. Chinese words are very hard to learn...

I always went to the library over here. In Korea, no library, very difficult life. I came here, so happy, I didn't know what to do, which one to do. You folks have such a free country; you have so much of everything. Still, you hate learning. But, we with so much hardship, we came to this free country and we can borrow so many books freely.

I am always feeling happy; time is very short. I like learning so many things. I don't miss, don't waste any time. Always I do something. I read history books. That's why my eyesight is lost, so much book reading sometimes until three o'clock in the morning.

I try to learn with young folks, young people. I learn much English. But I can't follow young folks. How much work for me, you don't know. I can't read all. So, I go home, my daughter reads for me. Next morning comes, I read.

China, attending with me, all interested and are all teasing me, "Grandma, you can write letters, why are you studying so? You are not going to college." All Chinese students, only I'm Korean. Every Friday, they give a test, fifty spelling words. After I learn them all, I am too old; spelling can't come out, I couldn't remember. Just close the book, all I learned I forget. But still, I don't give up. Still, every day, one hour I study English.

Now, I live only by myself, alone. But I'm never lonesome; I'm too busy for lonely feelings. Last night, twenty-two Korean sailor boys came. I cooked their lunch. I cooked their dinner. I feel happy working. I don't feel tired. I work very hard. I thank God for giving me health. So, my life is very happy.

I never complain. I'm always happy and I appreciate. I don't know how long life God will give me. If I live to eighty, still I would like to drive. So, I bought a new car. My son said, "Mom, you're getting old already, why buy a car? You better take a taxi, ride more comfortably." I said, "No, still I'm feeling good." So I bought a Mercury Monarch, so I enjoy myself. I don't want to ask anybody. I don't feel like seventy-five. I'm still all right myself.

Alice Y. Chai is an anthropologist and Assistant Professor of Women's Studies at the University of Hawaii/Manoa.