REMEMBERING

The premise of my assignment was to correlate how we remember veterans of war and how these remembrances relate to the inmates of the penal institutions. I thought that it was a very timely topic because of the upcoming holidays which are close to both our hearts and minds. Mother’s Day and Father’s Day bring back wonderful memories of a sense of belonging and a closeness of family. Memorial Day serves to remind us of the ultimate sacrifice for an abstract as well as a concrete faith of freedom that the veterans had given to all of us—a gift of love, just as the Son of God has given us faith in life ever after.

I must confess that I had a little difficulty with this assignment until I realized the extent of my own incarceration. I was trying to intellectualize this article, to divorce myself from my own personal feelings; it became a hindrance. I then tried to visualize what I had felt, if anything, about these two bodies of people prior to my being remanded to this state facility. I now realize that I had given the proper salutations to both; however, it seemed that I had more respect for the heroic dead than for those who I thought deserved to be part of the human warehouse—a sleaze factory of people who had at one time extracted some perverse pleasure from trying to rip off or con.

I, being a relatively new human commodity to this penal system, am beginning to get messages from the outside akin to my passing away. My family and close friends are now being inundated by condolence messages lamenting their misfortune. Time, being my natural enemy, will soon soothe their conscious minds into slowly accepting my absence, where devoid of feelings I too will become another statistic to be buried somewhere in some far corner of their minds—where I will become more forgotten than the veterans of wars, which at least have a reminder of their passing with a holiday. We behind bars do not have such a luxurious reminder. Our reminder to society is the constant inundation by the media of the various atrocities that are being perpetuated by a despicable few, and because you feel that there is something abnormal to these spastic outbursts of behavior, society’s minds tend to shut off any feeling of compassion. I do not begrudge you for thinking that. It is much easier for you to embrace the sacrificial heroics of our dead veterans of war than to wrestle with society’s wayward children.

The only difference is that someday we will be back to be a part of society once again, and the heroic dead veterans will not. I am just asking for you to give a little more thought and compassion for the once wayward children who will be returning to your fold once again.

—A__#4_/

WAHINE TIMES:

WEDDING BELLS

of our resident married. 
took the time from her schedule to give out into her romance. The 
1 started with her.

Do not let us wallow in your benign neglect. Please extend a little more dignity, understanding, and respect—a helping hand to a handful of misfortunates who are still an integral part of humanity so we in turn may be able to mutually reciprocate in kind and once again become positive contributing members of society. When I am released back into society I would like to be a part of a compassionate solution and not an end result of a neglected problem. Will you care enough to extend a helping hand? 

I’ve known him for three years.

“Where did you meet?”

"The first time I met him was at the pool at my mother’s house in Florida. She was having a party, and she wanted me to meet him. I ignored him! I met him again at a restaurant where my mother and I were having dinner. After we were seated, the waiter brought these interesting drinks with little umbrellas in them. He told us that they were sent by the manager. I looked up, acknowledged him, and he was captivated."

My time in prison is coming to an end, and this is for my sister, my dearest friend. When I first began doing my time for this criminally sinful crime, my mother started to introduce there was a lot on my mind, a heavy load. Yes, there were times when I wanted to explode, but within myself I had to be strong, for I knew I’d be here long. This was the beginning of a romance, which reached its ultimate consummation on April 1. I’ve felt disowned and all alone, but there were a few things that needed to be arranged. I had to learn to put my ego and pride on the side, fear some of my true deepest feelings I had to hide. A lot runs through one’s mind when you are confined. If you’ll look deep into my heart, you’ll see the changes from the start. I needed to hold, yet unfold the things that were never told. I needed to feel whole and find my soul, yet it’s scary thinking of parole.

It will be so easy for me to slip and fail, but within my mind I must think of my time spent in jail. I felt thanks to Mark Abe and Tom Kosky for pushing approval through the day before the ceremony, and thanked God that everything went smoothly. When the bridal party arrived on Maui, they were wreathed in rainbows.

Congratulations Nadja and Luis Gonzalez, and may your lives together forever be wreathed in rainbows.

Like I once said, "This is my chance to prove I can make it in life once again," a chance to make it to the end. I’ll finally be united with Brian, Shona-Mae, and Alan: Boy, the loves of my life. The road may be paved with strife, but I know that the Lord will be with us through our weaknesses, madness, and sadness. So to you—my sister, be strong for it won’t be long. Hold tight to your hopes, dreams, and wishes. Remember precious memories and the man that you cherish. One day we shall meet again, my sister, my dearest friend, until then.

A man admires the woman who makes him think, loves the girl who hurts him, and marries the woman who flattens him.—Dr. Joseph Peck

Written by: Allis Graham

ALOHA AU IA GE SISTER

OUT OF CHARACTER

It’s been a year and four months after my arrest and conviction. I have grown in this period of time. My growth at times was excruciatingly painful. I have seen, experienced, and felt things I never thought that I would ever be part of in the theater of life. I never thought I would become the protagonist of this play.

Two months ago, my mother died while I was in prison. My eyes still well up with tears when my mind fills with thoughts of her. I miss her.

Her quiet encouragement gave me strength, even though I was in prison. I was her daughter—her only baby. She knew I was not a criminal. Now she is dead.

She did not write or say that she was dying. In her last letter to me, she wrote:

Please don’t change.  
I admire you so much—your sweetness and sensitivity for others.  
All I wish is to hold you for an hour.  
I love you.  
As soon as I am able I’ll fly on my wings to be by your side.

So my administration tried to get my mother’s last wish granted, but to no avail. She died soon after. I was allowed to go to the wake.

As I write this, tears are flowing from my eyes. It still hurts. Many other hurts and it’s all part of life. But in prison, we become the naked prey of reality. One is completely helpless.

Many tears have I shed on my pillow. Many tears have been shed on my shoulders, as other women’s children are taken away, their loved ones die, and their families are broken. Anguish is the knife that so nimbly thrusts into the heart.

I look at life as it goes on. I, however, cannot partake of it—just look. And yet, the heart and soul feel with each hurt, joy, and event. Perhaps incarcerated women have seen life’s reality. Some women adapt themselves to develop and grow. Others become numb, for the pain is too great. For them, life holds little hope...bitterness takes root.

But there were disappointments, suffering. Yes,

WAHINE TIMES

TO A MAN

You are a person with whom I dare to be myself; my soul can be naked with you. You ask me not to put on anything, only what I am.

You don’t want me to be better or worse when I’m with you. I feel as a prisoner who has been declared innocent; I don’t have to be on my guard. I can say what I think so long as it is genuinely you. You understand those contradictions in your nature that lead others to misjudge you. With you, I breathe free. I can avow your little vanities, envies, hates, and vicious sparks, your meannesses and absurdities, and in opening them up to you, they are lost, dissolved on the white ocean of your loyalty. 

You understand; I do not have to be ashamed. I can abuse you, neglect you, tolerate you, least of all I can keep still with you. It makes no matter. You like me; you are like fire that purges to the bone. I can keep with you, sin with you, laugh with you, and pray with you. Through it all and underneath, you see, know, and love me.

What is a friend? Just one with whom I dare to be myself.

Finally, I am grateful. Yes, I did something “out of character”—nevertheless, my story becomes better as time goes on, for I know I can put my trust.

Andrea Finley

CENTER OF HAWAII

CRAFT FAIR

HANDICRAFTS BY THE INMATES & WOMEN’S PRISON

SAT. NOV. 22 9-3 PM  
UNIVERSITY YWCA  
1820 UNIVERSITY AV  
00008,

CACY

AND THE CHILD ADVOCATE

ALL PROCEEDS WILL BE GIVEN TO AFRICARE A