a Sw as ana A a rs a eee  
NOV/DEC ALL SHE WROTE PAGE 15  
(from PAGE 13) a  

as radical as modern feminism, and so  
it is surprising to find that modern  
feminists seem to be ignorant of the  
individualists' ideas. Their contribu-  
tions to the understanding of the  
rights of women are almost never dis-  
cussed in feminist scholarship, and  
their writings rarely appear in femin-  
ist anthologies.  

The individualists' work was car-  
ried into the twentieth century by  
people such as Albert Jay Nock, the  
great libertarian theorist. Suzanne  
La Follette helped him to found The  
Freeman in 1926. "La Follette believed  
that the State was the natural enemy of  
women," comments libertarian feminist  
scholar Professor Sharon Presley.  
"Primarily, she argued that government  
hurt women by legally imposing econom-  
ic disadvantages."  

La Follette was especially opposed  
to protective legislation. She wrote:  
"So rapidly do (such regulations)  
increase, indeed, that women may be  
said to be in a fair way to ex-  
change the tyranny of men for that  
of organized uplift. (Such regula-  
tions) are sponsored by those well-  
meaning individuals who deplore  
social injustice enough to yearn  

to mitigate its evil results, but  
do not understand it well enough  

to attack its causes;...and by  
men's labour organizations which  
are quite frankly in favor of any  
legislation that will lessen the  
chances of women to compete with  
men in the labour market."  

By the time Concerning Women was  
published, the Nineteenth Amendment grant-  

ing female suffrage had been ratified  

-YOUR BODY CONTINUED FROM PAGE 10  

Stephen Minkin, "Nine Thai Women  
had Cancer,..None of them took Depo  
Provera: Therefore Depo Provera is  
Safe", Mother Jones, November 1981, re-  
printed in Right to Choose, (Australia,  
Spring 1982)  

“The Depo Provera Debate", Network  
News (The newsletter of the National  
Women's Health Network, March/April  
1983)  

Valerie J. Hully "Women, Doctors,  
and Family Health Care: Some Lessons  
from Rural Java", Studies in Family  
Planning, Vol 10:11/12 (November/Decem-  
ber 1979)  

“Note": Bunkle comments on this  
side effect in the "Upjohn New Zea-  
land Study" page 13, but Minkin also  
covers the issue in "Nine Thai Women..."  
A side-bar on page 23 of the Minkin  
piece addresses the issue of "Limp  
Libidos" in men who were given small  
doses of Depo Provera. Their sperm  
counts were reduced to nearly zero and  
loss of fertility lasted about 90 days.  
Why isn't it used on men? "The princi-  
pal objection to the use of Depo Pro-  
vera as a male contraceptive has to do  
with the loss of libido", writes  
Minkin. He continues, "Indonesian wo-  
men complained of loss of sexual drive  
with Depo, and staff at the Los  
Angeles-based Institute on the Study  
of Medical Ethics state that among the  
most common complaints by American wo-  
men using Depo have been mental de-  
pression and loss of libido."  

Population Crisis: Hearings before  

and the question of women's rights had  
lost its place at the center of politi-  
cal debate.  

Modern feminism has, over the past  
two decades, regained that place. But  
it is a feminism for the most part  
divorced from individualism. The wo-  
men's movement as a whole demands en-  
forced socio-economic equality, cal-  
ling upon the State to protect women  
as a class from the consequences of au-  
tonomy.  

But individualism and anti-statism  
have also been enjoying a revival,  
both at the political and philosophi-  
cal levels. There is a new generation  
of individualists, represented by wo-  
men like Sharon Presley (a founder of  
the Association of Libertarian Femi-  
nists), and scholar Wendy McElroy.  
Recently, the Cato Institute of Wash-  
ington, DC, published McElroy's antho-  
logy, Freedom, Feminism, and the State.  
It is the first explicitly individu-  
alist-feminist book to be published  
since 1926. Appropriately, it in-  
cludes selections from La Follette's  
Concerning Women.  

The political arm of the modern  
feminist movement seeks to impose  
equality on men and women, using the  
oppressive power of the State. But  
the individualist feminists aren't  
alone in opposing coercion. There is  
a current in modern feminist analysis  
that recognizes that power over others  
diminishes freedom, and is not what  
women should seek to accomplish. Jean  
Baker Miller, in her book Toward a New  
Psychology of Women, developed a criti-  

cal distinction between  

and restrict them...Women need the  
power to advance their own development,  
but they do not "need" the power to  
limit the development of others."  

Elizabeth Ditz is a staff member of  
the Institute for Humane Studies in  
Menlo Park, California.  

the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on For-  

eign Aid Expenditures, Committee on  
Government Operations, 1965-1968, Form-  

er Senator Ernest Gruening, Chairman,  
Foreword by David Carley (Washington  
D.C.: Socio-Dynamic Publications, 1979)  

Rene’ Dubos, Man Adapting, enlarged  
edition (New Haven: Yale University  
Press 1980)  

Phillida E. Bunkle, "Understanding  
the Background to Upjohn's New Zealand  
Contraception and Health Study" (Wel-  
lington Clinical School, New Zealand,  

6 May 1982)  

SUBSCRIBE NOW  

Maui's gay/biflesbian community organization’s  
monthly newsletter available for $5, or more, in-  
cludes 12 monthly issues mailed in plain envelopes.  
Mailing list kept strictly confidential. Send check or  
money order to Both Sides Now, PO Box 5042,  
Kahului, Maui, HI 96732.  

ALTERNATIVES FOR WOMEN: ONGOING SUP-  
PORT GROUP  

The Alternatives For Women Program  
is conducting a weekly, open, support  
group for women.  

Target Population: Women in transition,  
those who are currently experiencing a  
crisis in their life such as separa-  
tion, divorce, adjustment to a recent  
change in their life situation, or wo-  
men desiring a supportive network.  
(Psychotic women are not appropriate).  
Description of Program: Open, on-going  
group provides opportunity to share ex-  
periences and gain positive support from  
others. Alternative and creative op-  
tions for dealing with situations can  
be explored and a supportive network  
established. Increased self-awareness,  
understanding, and appreciation are  
frequent results.  

Location: Alternatives For Women  
Leaders: Evelyn Char, RN, MS and Kate  
Stewart-Sherrick, MSW Intern  

Time: Every Monday 2:30-4:00 p.m.  

Fee: $3.00 each group session (can be  
adjusted if needed)  

Contact: Leaders at 735-5452 or may  
attend any Monday afternoon.  

You are cordially invited to the  

Metropolitan  
Community  

Church  

With a special ministry to gay  
women & men  

Service: 7:30 p.m.  
Phone: 945-3973  

KA HULIAU  
SUBSCRIPTION  

D.C. Gazette/CPF  

Enclose $5 for each yearly subscription (8 issues). Institutions/foreign subscriptions  
are $10. Make check or money order  
to Ka Huliau and send to:  

Ka Huliau  
P.O. Box 61337  
Honolulu, HI 96822