SEPTEMBER/ OCTOBER

*

_ALL SHE WROTE

FEMINIST RESEARCH

NEW DIRECTIONS IN RESEARCH ON WOMEN AND WORK

Over the past decade, as research
accumulated on women's work in the
labor force and household, attention
began shifting from a static focus on
discrimination alone to a more dyna-
mic examination of the interflow of in-
equities between household and market-
place settings. With the intention of
furthering this progress, some thirty
women researchers came together at a
Summer Research Institute on "Women
and their Work: Intersections of the
Marketplace and the Household" from
July 24-29 at the Center for the Study,
Education and Advancement of Women at
U.C. Berkeley.

Collectively, the participants were
to plan a three-to-five year agenda for
research that would devote study to is-
sues and problems of ethnic, low in-
come and white working class women in
the U.S. who juggle the competing de-
mands of employment and family. The
agenda could then be used by research-
ers, foundations, community groups
and service agencies in their respec-
tive work. Margaret Wilkerson, Direc-
tor of the Center, noted that the plan-
ning for the Summer Institute was guid-
ed by the need to address three impor-
tant interstices: between social sci-
entists and humanists, between white
women and women of color, and between
professional women and those in oc-
cupations where 80% of working women
are located.

This was an unusual conference in
two respects—in the composition of the

The other notable element in this
Institute was that we spent most of
the time during the week working in
four pre-assigned small groups, with
only two formal presentations. One
came Wednesday morning from a panel of
twelve women who daily work the nine-
to-five in various clerical and ser-
vice jobs, who shared with us their
concerns and coping strategies. That
afternoon, they joined us in our small
groups helping us frame research is-
sues. The other formal presentation
came from Joyce Miller, Vice-President
and Director of Social Services for
the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile
Workers Union. She shared concerns
of her union's membership (job securi-
ty, child care, family sick leave, oc-
cupational health and safety), and
some of her own (recent union busting,
women's reticence to seek power and
authority positions, comparable worth,
and the trend toward the feminization
of poverty).

In my group were developmental psy-
chologists Gail Hornstein and Helen
Remick, sociologists Harriette Pipes
McAdoo, Mary Lindenstein Walshok,
Denise Segura and myself, and Barbara
Christian, a Professor of Afro-Ameri-
can Studies specializing in Black
Literature. In the manner of women,
we shared personal anecdotes and lots
of laughter. We each began with the

familiar—our own work and disciplines,

and our experiences from our various

perspectives and class backgrounds; in com-

the activities. With nearly equal
representation of white women and women
of color among participants, we were
firmly but calmly reminded to consider
racial/ethnic differences among women.
Furthermore, though the humanities and
social sciences use different languag-
es, the interchange between us served
to remind us of the necessity to exa-
mine both the personal as well as the
social, images as well as reality, vi-
sions as well as trends.

FS A TA ET RR SE

and the perfect. This seeking is not

only for beautiful objects and environ-

ments with which to surround myself,

but more deeply is the internal quest

for personal beauty which eventually

finds expression in one's own person.
"Until one has made himself beauti-
ful he has not the right to ap-
proach beauty. Thus the tea master
strove to be something more than
the artist - art itself." (Okakura,
The Book of Tea, p. 61)

Chado is only one of several ways I
pursue this endeavor but as it now is
linked with other aspects of my life
and I am in the happy situation of be-
ing able to do what I most want to do.

Chado may not be for everyone. We
are all individual in what provides
satisfaction. So I will not close
this essay by recommending every woman
go out and try it. However, I do
recommend that we do not blind our-
selves to the satisfaction and skills
that can be obtained through some of
the ‘traditional’ arts and activities
of women through a false assumption
that anything labeled 'traditional'
has nothing to offer.

Comparing similarities and differences we
worked to frame research questions
that would take that kind of variety
into account. We concluded that the
validity of personal experiences can
and should be empirical questions, and
that more comparative research is
needed which reflects the diversity of
women's experiences.

Of our group's four recommendations,
three topic-oriented and one was
methodological. Among the research

The National
Women’s Hall
of Fame is
growing... with
your support.

Add your name today to the growing list of NWHF members and patrons by con-

tributing to our Expansion Fund.

In the heart of the birthplace of women’s rights in Seneca Falls, New York, the
National Women’s Hall of Fame is a landmark to women of achievement. The

Hall is presently doubling its space and expanding its programs to serve our
members, our visitors, and above all, our educational goals.
Tax deductible contributions of $10 or more qualify you for one year’s full
membership.
All contributions will be acknowledged in our Annual Report. Fill out the coupon
below or call (315) 568-2936 today.

YES! I want to be a part of the National Women’s Hall of
Fame.
Contributions of $10 or more qualify you for one full year’s
membership.
O Enclosed is my tax deductible contribution of $.
O Please send me more information:
Name
Address

City State Zip

were seri-

PAGE 5

JOYCE N. CHINEN

topics we felt important were the in-
vestigation of the actual meanings wo-
men give to their various work, their
career choice-making, and their mobili-
ty patterns. We felt that special at-
tention should be given to the great
diversity in women's experiences, val-
ues, and orientations by their race/eth-
nicity, social class, generation and
age/life stage.

Methodologically, then, we called
for more comparative studies on those
topics, suggesting that more research
be done on “understudied" groups of
women, especially those located in fe-
male occupational ghettos, racial/eth-
nic women, working class women, and
older women. We recommended that
greater care be taken in forming con-
ceptual categories, perhaps through in-
creased use of exploratory studies
rather than using existing notions
which are often patriarchal and class-
biased, and that conclusions and
especially generalizations, should be
more limited in scope. Finally, we
raised a number of questions about the
ethics of research, particularly the
all-too-frequent practice of "taking"
information from subjects without
"giving back." To this point we sug-
gested that responsible researchers
share their findings, conclusions, and
recommendations with the sub-
jects of the study in a manner
meaningful to them, and thereafter with the gen-
eral public and academic community.
This would be especially important
when research results have important
political implications for the persons
studied (e.g., AFDC recipients).

Other groups’ recommendations (in
abbreviated form) included the follow-
ing proposals: to re-evaluate the indi-
cators of women's status currently
used in the social sciences; to study
the globalization of work with its ac-
companying tendencies for cultural im-
perialism, seduction by high technolo-
gy and potential for violence; to
examine the interflow between feminist

more. “RESEARCH”

See page 6.

MAIL TO: National Women's
Hall of Fame

P.O. Box 1, Seneca Falls, N.Y. 13168