NOV/DEC’

SHE WROTE

LITERATURE

Book Review

Obasan — A Novel by Joy Kogawa  
(David R. Godine, 1982)

"The language of her grief is silence.

She has learned it well, its idioms,  
its nuances. Over the years, silence  
within her small body has grown large  
and powerful."

Canadian poet Joy Kogawa has created  
a first novel of extraordinary power.  
Obasan is based on the World War II  
experiences of Japanese Canadians  
who, like Japanese Americans, were  
scapegoats in the aftermath of Pearl  
Harbor.

Naomi Nakane, a third-generation  
Canadian, returns home to care for her  
aunt, Obasan, after the death of Naomi's  
issei* uncle, a landlocked boat  
builder stripped of his livelihood  
during the war. Surrounded by the  
past, Naomi both yearns and fears to  
discover the fate of her mother, who  
left for Japan shortly before the war,  
never to return. But Obasan's knowledge  
is encased in protective silence.

It is Obasan's sister, Aunt Emily,  
who impels Naomi's search for answers.  
Aunt Emily is a "crusader, a little  
old grey-haired Mighty Mouse, a Bache-  

yists and General Practitioner of Just Causes.” Aunt  

papers lead Naomi to relive the break-  
up of her family during the war. Naomi's  
father is sent to work camp as  
Japanese Canadians are forced by gov-  
ernment order into relocation camps  
and to exile in the ghost towns of in-  

FEMINIST RESEARCH

WOMEN AGAINST THE STATE:  
FEMINISM'S FORGOTTEN ROOTS

BY ELIZABETH DITZ

Suzanne La Follette died recently  
in California at the age of 86. She  
was an early and strong feminist, but  
she will be mourned less by modern  
feminists than by their critics, such  
as the conservative writers and editors  
of National Review. La Follette—  
without compromising her feminist prin-  
ciples—was one of the founding editors  
of that magazine. How is it that  
such a juxtaposition seems so strange  
to us now?

La Follette was the last of a gener-  
ation of women who based their femin-  
ist ideology on individualism, private-  
property rights, and opposition to the  
State's intrusion into women's lives.

By contrast, the ideology and prac-  
tice of the organized feminist move-  
ment today relies upon the government  
to coerce individuals into accepting  
the movement's collectivist, egalitari-  
an goals.

It wasn't always so. Even socialist  
feminists trace the roots of the  
American women's movement to the aboli-  
tionists of the 1830s, who had entirely  
individualist roots: every human  
being had the inalienable right to  

by Cynthia Oshiro  

terior Canada, barred even years after  
the war from coastal areas. Under or-  
ders to leave their Vancouver home,  
Naomi, her brother, uncle and aunt mi-  
grate to Slocan, an old mining settle-  
ment. Later, they become farm labor-  
ers in Alberta's beet fields.

Those years on the Barker farm, my  
late childhood growing-up days, are  
sleep-walk years, a time of half  
dream. There is no word from moth-  
er...The sadness and the absence  
are like a long winter storm, the  

snow falling in an unrelieved colour-  

lessness that settles and freezes,  
burying me beneath a growing mono-  
chromatic weight.

In reclaiming the past, Naomi ulti-  
mately breaks through Obasan's protec-  
tive silence.  
tating.  
perceives the depth of her mother's  
love.

Gentle Mother, we were lost together  
in our silences. Our wordlessness  
was our mutual destruction...But the  
earth still stirs with dormant blooms.  
Love flows through the roots of the  
trees by our graves.

The revelation is devas-  
But with that knowledge, Naomi  

A Novel by Joy Kogawa

Kogawa respects the issei's stoic  
endurance in the face of discrimina-  
tion, but in keeping silent, shame and  
suffering are hidden—knowledge buried  
in stone. Kogawa writes, “Unless the  
stone bursts with telling, unless the  

A novel based on historical events, Seed flowers with speech, there is in-  

Obasan is compelling. But it is more  

policies. Against the harsh back-  
ground of wartime injustices inflicted  
on Japanese Canadians, the story of the  
Nakane family unfolds, sensitively in-  
terwoven with symbolic dreams and  
imagery.

self-ownership. Abolitionist women,  
such as the Grimke sisters, lost lit-  
tle time in seeing the similarity be-  
tween slaves, who could own no proper-  
ty but duty to their masters, and wo-  
men of all races, who could own no  
property but duty to their fathers,  
brothers, or husbands.

After the Civil War, mainstream fem-  
inism all but abandoned a principled  
approach, and concentrated almost en-  
tirely on the suffrage issue. This  
narrow focus led to some shameful con-  
ditions. (The first issue of Stanton  
and Anthony's journal Revolution was  
financed by the notorious racist  
George Francis Train, for example.)

As the goals of American feminism  
devolved to merely achieving American  
women's suffrage, the socialist cri-  
tique—presenting itself as a radical  
champion of women's rights—gained  
ground. When feminist ideology under-  
went a revival in the 1960s, the  
socialist, rather than the individual-  
ist, interpretation of the role of the  
state and private property predominat-  
ed: women could only achieve equality  
when private property, and the family  
relationships it encouraged, had been  
eliminated.

Even more moderate feminists, such  
as those represented by the National  
Organization for Women, have come to  
argue that only the coercive power of  

a  

my life no living word.” While there  

distracts, her imagery more often en-  
larges our capacity to sense, to feel,  
and finally, to understand.

*issei - first generation Japanese im-  
migrant.

the State can solve the problems that  

women face.  
Phyllis Schlafly and other anti-  

feminists understood that such people  
were relying on government force to  
achieve their goals, and exploited  
that perception to defeat the ERA. It  
was not difficult for them to convince  
a great number of people that passage  
of the ERA meant that the State would  
force men and women to share toilets  
in public places; that the State would  
compel women into the workforce, to  
struggle with jobs beyond their physi-  
cal abilities; and that the State  
would put an end to the family as we  
know it.

Even though feminist ideology had  
acquired a markedly socialistic cast  
by the early years of this century,  
the rights-based tradition of indivi-  
dualist feminism did not disappear en-  
tirely.

In the 1880s, while mainstream femi-  
nism supported Victorian mores through  
social-purity legislation (such as op-  
posing the dissemination of birth-con-  
trol literature, on the grounds that  
it was obscene), there was a strong  
individualist movement that defended  
women's rights to control themselves  
and their reproductive functions.

The arguments presented by these  
individualists for women's rights are  

CONT ON PAGE 15