ALL SHE WROTE /MAR-APRIL

LETTERS TO EDITOR

Dear ALL SHE WROTE:

We are writing to ask your help in an important new project. We are two lesbians, one a mother and the other leading groups for lesbians considering parenthood. We're writing a book entitled "Alternative Conceptions: A Workbook for Lesbians Considering Parenthood." In it, we help lesbians to identify and come to terms with the issues which they must face before bringing children into their lives.

It is crucial that we reflect the incredibly diverse and unique experiences of lesbian parents - particularly those who have become parents as lesbians. And so we're writing in hopes that lesbian parents will be willing to fill out questionnaires for us. We are also interested in hearing from women who, after a conscious decision-making process, have decided not to parent.

Although we come to the writing of this book from long participation in the lesbian and lesbian mother communities, we have of course, not had every possible experience. To reflect all the many choices and viewpoints available to lesbians considering children, we need to hear from your readers!

We ask that lesbians willing to answer questions about their experience write us at P.O. Box 3173 Oakland, CA 94609. If they are willing to share other resources or photographs, we would be very pleased to receive them.

Thank you for your help.  
Sincerely,  
Cheryl Jones  
Cheri Pies  

The Hawaii Council of Churches

Dear Friends:

First, a note of appreciation for all the work of all the people who make ALL SHE WROTE possible. I know it's a gigantic job, but I do look forward to receiving it each month.

Now to business. In the Jan/Feb edition, I noticed a block (was it an ad?) on page 4 describing the Stop the Arms Race (STAR) campaign, and thought you would like to know that I have those buttons in my office. Will be happy to make them available to anyone interested. A contribution of $1.00 plus the filling out of a registration card will make you a STAR! Give me a call, 521-2666, or come by the office, 200 N. Vineyard, Rm. 403, Honolulu 96817.

Aloha,  
Patricia Mumford  
Associate Director  

Dear ASW Collective Sisters:

I have written KTUH and insisted on a women's music program, clipped the beautiful Woody Simmons concert ad; found out there is a group who wants to hear about local media sexism; been inspired (moved to tears) by Linda Bahadosingh's "Truth, Courage, and Power"; and feel a whole lot better than I did before I got my Jan/Feb copy of ALL SHE WROTE.

Only one small note of sadness. ASW is billed (and certainly feels like) a feminist paper so---I know that NOW chapters here and elsewhere (some even have male officers!) are enough to try the patience of even the most well-intended sister. HOWEVER-- Yeah, you got it. Gotta keep reaching (stretching even) out!

Love,  
Agnes McCarty  

Dear ALL SHE WROTE:

As I am sympathetic to women and the personal insights and information provided through ALL SHE WROTE.

However, your policy regarding "letters to the Editor" in the last issue (Jan/Feb '83) by Joan Lilychild reflects a support for innuendo and personal attacks without facts. I was paraphrased as statements I actually made and was thusly presented in the author's opinion rather than the explicit facts of the individual situations.

I am very much for women's rights and equality for all people. I am not a feminist per se because I sincerely believe many of the concepts presently involved in that framework promote women's superiority over others. Historical and present male dominance is still common and I don't support it either. I just believe a new more egalitarian belief is on the post-feminism horizon that will create the unity and shared understanding that has been missing from the previous concepts.

If allowed to twist my words, ideas, and deeds that is promoted by the past articles and letters to the editor on me, they may appear true to some. However, if equal views of the issues that are promoted in ALL SHE WROTE, I wish that you would print this letter in full and acknowledge that not only should all women be community supported, but that issues ALL SHE WROTE is involved and "exposes" within its pages shall also have its full support, understanding, and perspective.

Aloha and Peace,  
Willis E. Woods  
Executive Director  
Sexual Identity Center  

-- IVONNA CONDAX  

CONCUSSION  

As the wall changes hue  
I'm picking electrode glue  
out of my head for days.  
In a sleepier phase,  
dreaming of paraplegics  
on clean sunny beaches  
awakening in wheelchairs  
and hallucinated corridors  
patterns of laser light  
flux illusions in sight.  
Behind flash floods of steam  
are windswept caverns  
caves with too many turns  
and an elusive impish elf  
hiding memories from myself--  
tried to catch her in the fog  
but got mired along the bog.  

R. JANIS PARKER  

Mongrel Consciousness  

So don't worry  
because within the thinking  
process there are  
consciousness guides  
that point us toward truth  

I have the consciousness of  
many races  

It humbles me sometimes  
makes me know I lived on  
this earth before  

Proposition  

I'll sing you a thousand thoughts  
if you will be my lover  
Give you sounds of joy  
you have never heard before  
and a touch so soft  
you'll forget yourself to me  
in a moment of wonder.  

GERMAINE JOHNSON  

Germaine Johnson; Lesbian Feminist poet and philosopher, now resides in Honolulu. Her book "The Woman of Mongrel Passions and Lesbian Descent" is available at Woman's Word Bookstore.