A colorful host of Asian goddesses  
art will descend upon Honolulu for a show-  
ing of contemporary silkscreen prints  
by Japanese-born artist Mayumi Oda.  
"Goddesses: Visions of Woman" compris-  
es twenty-three large prints executed  
from 1975 through 1982. Scheduled for  
November 14-24, 1982 at the University  
of Hawaii Commons Art Gallery on the  

Y Manoa campus, the show is the first  

opportunity for Hawaii's community to  
experience this artist's remarkable  
personal statement.  

Upon graduation from Tokyo Universi-  
ty of Fine Arts in 1966, Mayumi Oda  
moved to the United States and em-  
barked on a new life. Since then she  
has participated in many one-woman  
shows of her work in Japan and the  
United States, showing in several in-  
ternational print exhibitions as well.  
Mayumi's work is represented in these  
major collections: Museum of Modern  
Art, New York; Museum of Fine Arts,  
Boston; Library of Congress; and the  
Cincinnati Art Museum. A frequent vi-  
sitor to Japan, Mayumi currently lives  
on the outskirts of San Francisco  
near the Zen Center's Green Gulch Farm  
where she practices Zen meditation.  

Mayumi's dual cultural background--  
her native Japan and adopted America--  
provides the context for her integra-  
tion of the traditional and modern,  

Eastern and Western. Traditional  

Photo by Pauline Sugino  

Buddhist and folk art motifs of Japan  

are brought to life in Mayumi's play- WIND GODDESS  

ful and original goddess imagery: "I by Mayumi Oda, 26" x 38", Serigraph  
wanted to keep the traditions, but  

make them vital," she says. Her free,  

expressionistic style and vibrant col- Humor and wit become a means to en-  

ors breathe vitality into her  

life. Her goddesses embody  

deep cultural and  
religious values as well. Mayumi succeeds  
in giving vividly expressive and aes-  

thetically rich form to her vision of  
benevolent, powerful female forces in  

harmony with the natural order.  

Everyone is invited to celebrate  
the opening of "Goddesses: Visions of  
Woman" at a reception for the artist  
in the gallery on Sunday, November 14,  
from 2-3:30 p.m. Commons Gallery  
hours are as follows: Monday through  
Friday, 10-4 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday,  
12-4 p.m.  

Presentations by the artist and cu-  
rator of the exhibition are scheduled  
for Monday, November 15, 7:30 p.m. at  
the University of Hawaii Art Department  
Auditorium. The public is invited to  
this free event. This print exhibition  
is supported in part by the State Foun-  
dation on Culture and the Arts.  

MAYUMI AND SON, JIRO  

GODDESS HEARS PEOPLE’S NEEDS AND COMES WOMAN'S WORD  

Mayumi Oda's book, GODDESSES,  

by Mayumi Oda, 24"x 33", Serigraph is available at Bookstore