PAGE 14

TO MY FEMINIST SISTERS ON THE EVE OF THE ERA DEADLINE (June 30, 1982)

It has been forty years now that I have been a woman.  
Most of those years were enduring my womanness;  
These past few years have been celebrating my womanness.  

I celebrate that I never went to college to become a better wife,  
and when I finally went it was for me and done with excellence.  
I celebrate the active role I take in my life, my decisions,  

the meeting of my needs.  

I celebrate not only my divorce 10 years ago, but the time just before  
that act that I took a platter of meatloaf and dumped it upon  

his ugly head.  

I celebrate not only driving the truck I was once denied, but needing  
to drive it in my nursery business & having wondering men  

not understand.  

I celebrate the thinking of my woman children, who will carry the  
torch of feminism when my flame weakens in later years.  
I celebrate the enduring love of an aware man who respects my  

strengths, supports my strivings.  

I celebrate you, my sisters, my bulwark against sexism, my community  
that celebrates with me as I grow & learn & accomplish.  
You are the well-spring from which I am nourished.  

PoePeeseocenecevesves  
TATOO ROO eee O eee EO Nee Eee eseseeeeneeseeseneceeesascaeabesonnacesseceseneseureee  

At breakfast that morning, over a coffee and a cantaloupe that never was  
a favorite, orange is not a delectable color between the hours of 6 and 10  
a.m., at Breakfast, Child in Us felt the need to run away from home and  
hang out where there was no explaining, no tight-jawed retreating to words  
that were unacceptable in the first place and no saying yes, or meaning  
yes, or even thinking yes anymore in tune to the steady drip of no's that  
came out elsewhere.  

Child in Us had had it. Had had  
questions based on the necessities of  
transient economics and Child in Us  
had had it. She stepped a little  
haughtily around Heap of Rags and the  
smell that precedes any person who  
passes the night in a layer of dog  
shit and stale candy wrappers decid-  

“ing there was no danger that could  

not be traded down to a lower common  
denominator and said nothing but  
walked on picking weary tracks around  
a rotting orange.  

Heap of Rags was entirely philo-  
sophical in the whole matter deciding  
wisely, that there would be other  
runaways and that the world was a  
good place if it would just provide a  
little of the warm and lucid sliding  
down the throat bit by bit. Just a  
little and things would be something  
even better. So sitting down to the  
words entangled in a brain that denied  
interference, Heap of Rags sinks into  
a pile to meditate on the labels of  
bottles once seen stacked on the  
shelves of a very exclusive store.  
Child in Us walks on to destinations  
of grave importance, loitering in the  
hallways that branch off from the  
better districts of her brain, calcu-  
lating methods for probing the pain  
of parting experienced by the dearly  
beloved who will surely miss her  
once they find the note announcing  
her termination of intended residence  
attached to the underbelly of her  
mother's favorite parakeet.  

It is too late to decide just who  
could win in any situation where the  
end point never was the point but  
only a way to pass on to a never end-  
ing number of other offers. Child in  
Us might decide that the wickedness  
of civilization is too much a sincere  

Joay Phillips, contributing graphic  
artist, invites letters from ALL SHE  
WROTE readers.  
Delivery, Mountain View, Hawaii 96771  

Her address is: General  

pain in its rawest form, but more  
probably Child in Us steps back out  
of the dank, dark afternoon in the  

-Shadow of tall buildings and thinks  

of the smell and not the person who  
intruded on her first real exper-  
ience. It will be, it is, not the  
person but the smell that becomes the  
real issue in the incident, crying out  
for the first memory and claiming it  
like a rich man claims his hoard of  
golden shameless oozes of things not  
had for smiles.  

soup that drove the first fish to  
walking and causes Child in Us to  
walk on now. Walking on is easiest  
done in the streets of a mainline  
city where the faces turn towards an  
unruly mob of stinking and see it for  
what it is. It is us. Covered in  
dog shit and candy wrappers, covered  
and still smelling.  

Terry Luebben