PAGE 2

LETTERS TO EDITOR

Dear Editor:

I should like to raise several points in response to Madeline Goodman’s defense of the International Women’s Studies Conference.

In my experience no one way of communication is sacrosanct. T.S. Eliot asks, “Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?" Margaret Mead revolutionized anthropology (despite present detractors) by going to the source. Third World Paolo Freire’s classic “Pedagogy of the Oppressed" opened the eyes and hearts of a decade of university and community workers and "concientized" them to reflection/action and the teacher-student/student-teacher concept.

Of course, freedom of speech is important as Goodman says, "but arising from (that)...speakers must come prepared with the results of serious research and inquiry." I would ask—Who defines what that may be?

Goodman says condescendingly, "Of course it is worthwhile just to ‘talk story.’ But we cannot ask taxpayers, community agencies, women's organizations and public spirited firms to fund mere casual exchange." *

Why not? Suppose they should learn something from the way other people in the world communicate? (i.e. through talking story) Does the White Western culture always consider itself and its methods superior? Was the Conference funded, at least maximally, by the same old privileged, white-male dominated technocratic Western system? Would such sources be offended to learn anything they don't want to hear?

I acknowledge the difficulty of raising funds, outside of this smug and privilege-protecting group because I've had experience in doing so. It's hard.

But where does that leave us as feminists? What was the real purpose of holding the conference? Surely not to show that women could raise money, too! What “quality of research”—what "originality of insight"—what better "primary data and resources" than the women who were there trying to communicate the essence of their experience, and the pain in their own way to Western women.

ALL SHE WROTE

If universities are not increasingly to be used as they are today, by the military/industrial complex which could in its male dominated greed and blindness blow up our planet, do we not as feminists have an obligation to our children at least not to follow like sheep their failed example? As feminists must we not listen to each other? Must we not recognize the violence and colonialism of our Western culture with its oppressive sexist, racist patterns and seek out alternatives with other women from all over the world? They are there and they are watching and working and hoping and praying.

This is not to say that anybody, anywhere, has THE ANSWER or is free from racism and power struggles. But it is to say that for Western women to buy into Western former or present colonial sex-domination is a tragedy. Sincerely,

Charlotte C. Meacham—Nanakuli Retired National Staff

American Friends Service Committee (Quakers)

Community Relations Division Co-Director, Quaker Seminars, Southeast Asia, * Emphasis is mine

1959-71 International 1971-1975

Dear ALL SHE WROTE:

Your new format and editorial policy seems to be paying off in a better newsletter.

I would like to suggest some additions—

to your contact page list.

1. Comprehensive Employment Training Act (CETA) which serves economically disadvantaged people. We often serve women needing skills training and related support services.

2. Gay Rap Program 926-1000. It is open to all men and women and promotes dialogue between people concerned in gay issues.

3. Sexual Identity Center 2139 Kuhio Ave. Suite 213 for counseling, educational speakers, programs and civil rights advocacy.

I would certainly appreciate seeing these activities presented in your community section.

Aloha, Bill Woods

JULY 7 AUGURE

®

The One Imperative

To thrust our collective power toward the elimination of racism wherever it exists and by any means necessary.

Dear Editor

I am a published writer currently completing a book about women's experiences in wars and revolutions, dating from 1915 Turkish-Armenian massacre to conflicts in the present Afghanistan, El Salvador, Northern Ireland, Iran, etc.

Margo St. James, of Coyote, suggested I put an advertisement in your magazine for a woman who was involved in prostitution in any theatre of war.

She may be anonymous and paid for her time, if she so wishes.

Could you please instruct me as to the proper way to buy advertising space, in perhaps your "Personals" column? I would be very grateful.

Sincerely, Sally Hayton-Keeva

Ed. Note: Anyone having information on this issue should write to Ms.

Hayton-Keeva at 391 School Road, Novato, CA 94947

All She Wrote is a feminist paper. By this we mean the paper will:

1) Be supportive of all women, 2) Reach out to all women,

3) Provide a forum for input, 4) Be a growing process.

ALL SHE WROTE is published by the University YWCA Women's Center staff and volunteers. We welcome your contributions and support... All articles submitted are edited only for spelling errors and punctuation.

The Women’s Center announces the Opening of a

Game Room with Pool Table and Stereo for You!

Free to open FRI. FREE

SUPPORT THE WOMEN'S CENTER

JOIN THE YWCA: With a one year membership from the University YWCA, you will receive a one year subscription to ALL SHE WROTE:

Network.

NAME

ADDRESS

MEMBERSHIP NEW RENEWAL

Make check payable to:

Hawaii Women's Voices FREE! Support for the Women's Center and become part of the Hawaii Women's Annual membership dues $10.00*

AGE RANGE (for statistical purposes) 18 - 34

Show your support~

PHONE NO. HOME BUS.

CITY ZIP CODE

35 - 59 60 - 64___ 65+ __

UNIVERSITY YWCA 1820 UNIVERSITY AVE. HONOLULU 96822

*Please ask about the YWCA financial assistance options if payment of membership dues is a barrier to your becoming a YWCA member.

Special funds and payment plans are available: ~