Boos

PAGE 12

Ec contacting

Since All She Wrote first came
collectively off the press last year,
I have had it in mind to explore be-
hind the various names and numbers on
the Contacts list. For this issue I
have come up with what I hope to be
fairly represented and updated inform-
ation on a few community groups. I
thank all those I have thus far spoken
with for sharing their time and ener-
gies, and plan to continue "contacting
the Contacts" that are listed on the
back page of the paper. I would also
like to ask that our Contact groups
on the other islands write or call us
to let us know your current addresses,
phone numbers, activities, including
any information that would be of in-
terest and use to our readers.

(Note: My spelling of “wimmin" does
not necessarily reflect upon the groups
I have written on. It is purely my own
spelling preference, poetic license.)

ABUSED SPOUSES AND CHILDREN SHELTER
(841-0822, Hotline)

An emergency shelter operating for
emotionally, physically, and mentally
abused spouses and children; under the
auspices of Child and Family Services.
A safe place is provided and the loca-
tion is confidential. On staff is a

full-time social worker who gives

short-term treatment, follow-up, and
referrals (7 pages of resource numbers

and arranged supportive counselling, and encourage-
ment. There is a follow-up group
every Thursday for those who have been
in the shelter, and an evening rap
session for those while they are there.
Childcare services are provided for
whoever attends the groups. According
to Sister Rita Kane of the shelter, the
first shelter for the abused opened in
England during 1971.

ALOHA MOTHERS OF TWINS

(845-7101, Agnes)

A support group for mothers with
multiple births, meeting every 3rd
Tuesday of the month at Harris Method-
ist Church. Everyone is welcome. It
is oriented to share the pros and cons
of raising twins, handling twice as
much energy and expenses, balancing
attention between offspring. Social
functions are arranged, programs with
speakers periodically happen, and swap
tables to exchange children's clothes
are set up. At one of the group's
meetings four expectant mothers of twins
showed up.

ALTERNATIVES FOR WOMEN

(735-5452)

Located at the Diamond Head Health
Center, and is coming out of a summer
lull to provide more outreach for the
fall. They will have several groups
starting in September, including:
women support (handling daily diffi-
culties), assertiveness training,
self-esteem, sexual assault, widow's,

and HAND (Helping After Neonatal
Death), for parents who have lost an
infant. They are a referral source
to other groups. If you are looking
for a specific kind of group or for
details on the aforementioned groups
feel free to call.

THE CONTACTS PEGGY SULLIVAN-MILLER,

BIRD LADY OF OAHU
(261-0493)

She is the only individual in Hawaii
with a state and federal license to have
wild birds in her home. She is a veg-
etarian and avid animal lover who is
appalled by "animal factories," the
chemical inducement and slaughter of
animals. She would like to see meat in
grocery stores labelled more accurately.
For instance, instead of steak,
the label should read, the hind leg of
a cow. Very graphic. As for advice
about found birds: she says, if you
find baby birds on the ground or in a
nest on the ground, put them back in a
tree. Don't take birds home unless
they are in direct peril (cats, in-
jured). Parents bring down babies to
teach them to fly and to feed them.

DISPLACED HOMEMAKERS
(538-7061, Taz)

For wimmin who are widowed, di-
vorced, or who expect a breakup of
marriage; and who because of no recent
job experiences (outside their "invis-
ible profession as homemaker"), need
to assimilate into the work-a-day
world. Job readiness training is pro-
vided along with a support group.
Their object is to become employed.
They meet each weekday for 3 hours,
9 am-12, at Richards St. YWCA. The
next group starts on Oct. 4.

BRADLEY CHILDBIRTH
(Kathy Hallock, 988-4874)

A process-oriented natural child-
birth education method that teaches
couples, including separate mothers
with friends, how to prepare for and go
through labor. A coach is at the moth-
er's side at birth to give emotional
support. Both are in the process of
learning together how labor begins,

how it feels, how long it takes, and
how to cope and work with what Bradley
teacher, Kathy Hallock, calls, "This
very physical event." She also adds,
"In this culture we aren't accepting
of strong physical events without fear.
The idea is to educate, to share, to
learn, gather information, to inspire
self-confidence and personal growth
for parents as they approach what is a
right of passage, the restructuring of
a social view." Bradley offers a set
of classes. The first, the Early Bird,
is 8 weeks long, 2½ hours a class, and
ideally for those 2-3 months pregnant.
It is directed toward preparing for
pregnancy and labor: what will happen
physically, how to take care of the
self and the baby, nutritional and
emotional aspects, consumer tips on
what birthing methods are available,
and how to find satisfying assistance
with the birthing. The second class,
the Labor, is 8 weeks long, 2½ hours

a class, ideally for those 6-7 months
pregnant, attended by women and coach.
It includes a workbook, handouts,
movies, discussions and practice. No
preregistration is required. Fees are
generally $50, but are negotiable.
Class size averages 7 couples and the
settings are informal (homes). Classes
are completed a week or two before
labor. Anyone is welcome. It is noted
that the Bradley method is open to
additional professional help when part-
icular situations deem it necessary.

FERNHURST YWCA WOMEN'S RESIDENCE
(941-2231)

A fairly inexpensive place for
wimmin to stay. Two to a room, two
rooms to a bathroom, a swimming pool;
$14 a night for the first week, $84 a
week after the first week, $7 deposit;
price includes dinner and breakfast,
except for Sunday when breakfast is
only available.

PO'HAI PONO (CIRCLE OF WELLNESS)
(988-7423)

Formerly Booth Services, now a day
treatment facility for separate parents
or parents who are together but iso-
lated. It provides daycare and educa-
tion for children up to 36 months, and
adult classes in nutrition, budgeting,
crafts, family living, and exercise.
Outings are planned once a week for
parents and children. Transportation
is provided from Salt Lake and Aina
Haina. Counseling is available for
groups and individuals to explore op-
tions. Breakfast and lunch are served.
Parents can work with the daycare work-
ers to better understand the setting of
Po'hai Pono. There is a daily charge
and a check on eligibility.

LIMA HANA
(538-7061, Joy)

A seniors group for wimmin who knit
and crochet. They meet every Thursday.
The 1st Thursday of each month is a
general meeting at Richards St. YWCA,
where methods and means are shared.

BOPP P RCO R SSE ROS ESA ESO OOOO EE SEER EOE EE EEE EOD E DEEDS ODE OO SOO RE SESE EEE EES

Se rccccsccvece

to teaching children at the Shriner's
Hospital for Crippled Children how to
knit and crochet.
THE FEDERATION
(538-7061, Joy)

A seniors group for wimmin who meet
once a month from September through
June for breakfasts (8:30-11) at differ-
ent restaurants. They usually meet
afterwards to share music, singing,
dancing, craftwork, and talk. This
group has been in existence since the
late 1920's.
KO-HALA-KAI Y-WIVES
(538-7061, Joy)

A seniors group for wimmin who meet
at Holy Nativity Church in Aina Haina.
It is social services oriented and gets
together the 1st and 3rd Thursday of
each month. It has existed for 20 years.
HANDS UNLIMITED
(538-7061, Joy)

A seniors group for wimmin that
meets socially to share craftmaking
skills. They meet on Thursdays at

Richards St. YWCA
COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN

(548-4199)

A state agency for wimmin that
publishes an annual report and a net-
working newsletter. For information
on the newsletter, call the State Of-
fice of Affirmative Action, (Anna S.
Powell, 548-3432). It comes out week-
ly and is $15 a year.

WOMEN USA
(533-2011)

A prerecorded tape whose purpose
is to give local wimmin national in-
formation on wimmin and to provide
news features on local agencies/groups.
Funding for its operation should be
extended for another year. Weekly
messages from New York are on the

tape. (con't P9 13)