PAGE 13

What's Wrong With Using Words Like "Chairman" and "Mankind"

The use of language like "mankind," "countryman," or "brotherhood" is not acceptable as it makes women invisible and does not recognize the participation of women in all areas of life.

Language is very powerful. It is how we express ourselves, how we define our roles in life, and how we express our perceptions of the world. And just as the world changes, so too does language to reflect our changing world. For example, terms like "man" and "mankind" are commonly used in many of our laws because at one time only men could vote, hold office, or property. Women today can do all of these things and are active in all walks of life.

It's time to modernize the language to include and recognize women. Many branches of government and many private organizations have taken steps to do so, including the Federal Government, where the Department of Labor and the Department of Health and Human Services have issued guidelines for language use in government publications. Media organizations such as A.P., UPI, and the New York Times have issued language guidelines for their staffs.

Here in Hawaii, the 1978 Constitutional Convention voted to de-gender the state constitution.

And the Honolulu City Council resolved unanimously to degender the city's revised ordinances.

Even churches, which are traditionally slow to change, have made changes in language: The Catholic Church in church liturgy, changing terms like "mankind" to "human family," the National Council of Churches voting to eliminate sexist terms in the Bible, to use words that do include women.

Despite these examples, we continue to hear professional media people use sexist language. In a national news story, a TV reporter covered the death of a Catholic Cardinal in Poland and referred to "mankind" and the cardinal's "countrymen" mourning the dead prelate even as the TV picture showed women and men mourning in Poland. On a local radio news show, two male reporters covered the story of Maui's first female firefighter by talking about the first female "fireman - er - firefighter" and referring to this as a "giant step for mankind - er - humankind." By their joking, these reporters make the use of non-sexist language seem trivial. Too often, language used in the media does not reflect equal treatment or equal respect for women and men. An example of this occurred last November, in the Presidential debates when both Mr. Reagan and Mr. Carter addressed the male reporters by title, such as "Mr. Rather," and addressed the only female reporter, Barbara Walters, by her first name.

And what about the practice of referring to "girls" when discussing adult females over the age of 18? We hear about the "girls" on the Rainbow Wahines or "the girls on the Ladies Pro Golf Tour," but we don't hear about "the boys in the boxing ring" or the "boys in the NFL."

Language that is non-sexist emphasizes our common attributes rather than underlining our differences, with terms that include women and men such as police officer, firefighter, mail carrier, humanity, humankind, chairperson, or chair.

The Media Task Force has a language guide called Women, Men and the New Language, which offers suggestions for non-sexist language use. A new revised edition suggests addressing women and men with dignity and respect, emphasizing shared humanity.

This is the text of a presentation by Anne Fisher on KGMB-TV Voices of Concern. Submitted by Ruth Lieban of the Media Task Force.

Copies of the brochure are available free of charge through the Honolulu County Committee on the Status of Women. Ph: 523-4494

References

1) "No More Menstrual Cramps and Other Good News." Penny Wise Budoff, M.D., Penguin Books, 1980.

2) "Menstruation and Menopause." Paula Weideger, Knopf, New York, 1976.

3) "Menopause," Kurt Donsbach, Ph.D.; The International Institute of Natural Health Sciences, Huntington Beach, Ca., 92647; 1979.

Pat Nevin, MSc.

Maui’s Gay/Bi/Lesbian Community

(808) 537-3088
(808) 538-7236

SERVICE: Motor Mopeds

SERVICE CENTER

449 Cooke Street

P.O. Box 3920

Honolulu, Hawaii 96813

A DIVISION OF ATC CORP.