ee ee ee

elias ae SE etc eens

or named. "WITHOUT NAMES," a collection of 31 poems,

LS

LETTER TO GRANDMA

dearest lola

you must tell all the eligible single young men

to wait, I am not visiting the Philippines this year
or next year or maybe not even for five years

you know I want to be with you again

and all my aunties, uncles, and cousins

I still carry the images of ten years ago

in my mind like shiny postcards

but I cannot go back

I am afraid

I have seen newspaper photos of government soldiers
shooting guns and water cannons at nuns and priests
like bullies in a schoolyard

I have felt the scars left by shrapnel

on the bodies of Philippines senators

forever exiled from their island home

I have heard children describe how their

fathers and mothers were tortured and killed

just like a bedtime story

I am afraid:

the simple barrio life of my parents' childhood

is no more

now cousins wear soldier uniforms

government or revolutionary

the town's single schoolteacher gets pregnant
returning from Malaysia with a baby

her parents bribe the town priests to perform baptism
convincing him miracles happen

to women bearing children in their sixties.

another cousin leaves Mindanao

to be a nurse in Texas

crossing oceans, leaving bullets

and curfews behind

the first lady tells reporters

poor nation

I cry for the nation

the nation is beautiful

yes, the nation is beautiful

even in its poverty ae ae

there is beauty of children

eyes dark and wet with hunger

the grace of their dancing

in the moving traffic

selling cigarettes and newspapers

for tonight's supper

there is the beauty of young pinays
selling their bodies on the streets of Olongapo
to American soldiers

there is beauty in the anger of people
the wealthy and the impoverished
marching in the streets

singing songs of protest.

lola, I am afraid

I know the anger of one Filipino

can destroy a town

how will 7000 islands contain

the anger of a people that have been wronged?

so tell the small ones to practice their English

and Uncle Juan Pocol to practice his guitar

light a candle for me during your morning prayers

and when you greet the rising sun tomorrow

pray that our people will have the courage

I will never have.

give my love to all. N

ee ge Se

Virginia R. Cerenio is one of 15 Bay Area Pilipino and UH Philippine Studies. "Letter to Grandma" is
from the collection. She also read "photos from
the Philippines" (from which we've P the
third photo) and the poem dated "7/25/85," which
are published for the first time on the next page.

Send me copies of Without Names @ $5.00 ea. Add $1.00 postage

is the first such anthology of Pilipino American & handling for each book

works.

Cerenio read from the collection last month at the
University of Hawaii in an event sponsored by the
Hawaii Literary Arts Council, Bamboo Ridge Press

Make check or money order payable to Kearny Street Workshop. Mail to
Kearny St. Workshop, 827 Pacific St, Box 3, San Francisco, CA 94133.
Total amount $_______

Postage __________

City/State/Zip