CHAN

One March morning in 1981 our daughter, Vonny, rushed in the door, "Our China tour unexpectedly needs two more people by next week or it will fold. Would you like to join?"

"Sure," I joked. "What else is on your mind?"

The more I thought about that tour, the more exciting it seemed. The most important decisions in my life I've made spontaneously, so "China, here I come."

For 30 years capturing the soul of my fellow human beings in black and white photography has been my vocation and delight. Now I relished the thought of relaxing as a tourist without a camera, just soaking up the experience.

My Rolleiflex does not zoom in on people from a distance. I had to zoom in with my eyes touching theirs. Frequently Chinese people would press close to me, trying to see the image on the ground glass of my camera. Sometimes I would take the camera off my neck and put it around theirs. Sometimes I'd peek behind the scenes. A back alley or a knock on someone's door led to unexpected worlds, unscheduled by our guide. Without these interactions I would have merely seen the sights. The golden thread that wove myriad happenings into one great experience was my reaching out without words, essence to essence.

Who are you? There's something worthwhile in every direction. Two million people are moving ahead in unison, through agricultural communes & factory communes.

People live near their work in clean, simple dwellings. A sea of bicycles—everywhere tree-lined avenues planted at the time of the Revolution... 1949.

No private cars... no tips... no beggars to eat.

No prostitution... no venereal disease... imagine!

Children (one or two to a family) are dressed in colors. Old folks help in childcare.

We were allowed to go anywhere without our guide and met with friendly curiosity. Everywhere I let people look into my camera. I loved the easterly paintings in various places.

I felt a sense of beauty & order, powerful purpose in being alive—feeling that everyone is taken care of.

The grand experiment that is China today gives me great hope for the future of humanity.

Next issue more reflections of friendly faces by Carla Anette.