FALL 1

gories of seeing material life. For exam-
ple. During my first few days in Nicara-
gua it seemed to me that nearly everyone
in the country lived in a shack. Gradual-
ly my eye trained itself to see distinc-
tions among these shacks — shacks with
foundations versus those without; shacks
with attached roofs versus shacks with
roofs held on by large stones, or with no
roofs at all; shacks with standardized
boards running parallel to each other
versus shacks patched together in crazy-
quilt fashion with whatever scraps of wood
and cardboard are at hand. I got a slight
and distant taste of what it is like to
live so close to the edge of material
survival through the care we "turistas"
(the word still seems incongruous in this
context) took to avoid getting dysentery:
don't drink the water; don't eat or drink
anything with water on it or in it, unless
boiled; don't drink anything with ice in
it; don't drink or eat out of containers
that have been recently washed in the
water. This is of course not the same as
living one's whole life on the edge of
subsistence, but it does provide one with

a sense of what it is like to focus prima-
rily on physical needs.

The successes of the revolution in
alleviating the most fatal aspects of this
poverty are impressive. Infant mortality
has gone from 152 per 1000 children to 72
per 1000 through the reduction of infant
diarrhea, and the virtual elimination of

An Award Winning Film
DESTINATION NICARAGUA

Narrated by TYNE DALY of “Cagney & Lacey”

“Witness the experiences of average Americans
who embark on an extraordinary journey.”

1/2" video purchase...$55
16mm and 3/4” video also available

order from: Film Distribution Center
1028 Industry Dr.
Seattle, Washington 98188
(206) 575-1575

An Empowerment Project Production

measles, polio, typhoid, and diphtheria,
diseases that under the Somoza dictator-
ship killed many children every year.
The widely hailed literacy campaign has re-
duced the illiteracy rate from approxi-

PAGE 7

The Empowerment Project is working with filmmakers in the
U.S., in Central America, and in Europe to improve distribution
of films and videos that need to be seen to help end the war on
Central America. We will be reprinting their notices of recom-
mended films/videos and MEDIA ALERTS periodically. This will
be a grassroots effort to do what the profit motivated distribu-
tors won't or can't do to stop the war. As a reader, you are the
essential component. Please lend yourself to this effort. For
more information, contact The Empowerment Project, 13107
Venice Blvd., LA, CA 90066 * (213) 390-9858.

“A sobering yet encouraging documentary . . . persuasive in
its view that U.S. support of the contras is misguided and
threatens the Nicaraguans' fundamental right of self-
determination while threatening to drag us into another
Vietnam.”

—Kevin Thomas, Los Angeles Times

1. Ask your PBS station to air DESTINATION NICARAGUA now. It
will be available through the Central Educational Network of
PBS for a year starting with its satellite date of August 25, 1986.

2. Call and write to your video retail stores and ask them to get
DESTINATION NICARAGUA from Rhino Video and SALVADOR
from Vestron.

WE NEED THOUSANDS OF CALLS TO MAKE THIS WORK. If we
make this a success, more Central American videos can be made
available to the general public.

mately half of the population to less than
12%. The land reform program, which has
proceeded slowly and cautiously to mini-
mize opposition from the landowners and to

(Continued on page 12)

ws LENTATIVE CONCLUSIONS

Experiences in Nicaragua have led
me to some tentative reflections about my own commit—
ments to anarchism and to feminism. Nei-
ther feminism nor anarchism are unitary
positions whose boundaries can be clearly
specified and defended; both are loose
families of ideas that take form in a
particular context. For example, within
the United States or other western indus-
trial nations, calls to integrate women
into the existing political and economic
institutions are primarily ways to recruit
more support for an exploitative status
quo; such goals have little relevance to
the goals of social transformation that a
more radical feminism entails. But in
Nicaragua today the integration of women
could be a revolutionary process, in-
volving women in making a more equal place
for themselves within a society they are
helping to transform. Nicaraguan women's
entry into public life has been primarily
through the experience of armed struggle;
approximately one third of the revolu-
tionary forces were made up of women, and
while this has decreased slightly since
1979, their participation is still very
high. In the U.S., calls to bring more
women into the military are antithetical
to radical feminist goals, because milita-
ry training prepares both women and men to
adopt a macho attitude toward the world,
to substitute violence for communication
in the resolution of social conflicts, and
to embrace hierarchy as a method of orga-
nizing activities. But in Nicaragua,
where the military is used to make and
defend its own revolution rather than to
overthrow other people's revolutions, wo-
men are using military service to make a
greater place for themselves, and their
version of feminism, in public life.
Their experience raises some serious ques-
tions for those who have seen the connec-
tion between feminism and pacifism to be

clear and straightforward and casts a new
light on the role of violence in social transformation.

Many Western feminists have criti-
cized the Sandinistas for their purported
weakness on "women's issues", such as
abortion and childcare. (Abortion is
illegal in Nicaragua. Childcare policy
calls for the creation of day care cen-
ters, but resources are scarce; in reality
women have the responsibility for child
care.) The women in Nicaragua have said,
over and over, that their liberation is
inseparable from the liberation of their
country. Their own agenda reflects, quite
simply, the issues that are most important
to them — sexism in Nicaragua is certain-
ly recognized as a problem, but imperial-
ism is the enemy. The national women's
organization (AMNLAE) and the health care
organizations see the revolution itself as
creating the conditions that make women's
liberation possible, and they have chosen
to put aside, for now, the abortion strug-
gle for reasons that are both concrete and
strategic. Concretely, an unwanted
pregnancy is simply not the worst thing
that can happen to most of these women.
They face the very real possibilities of
being killed, or of having their children,
their homes, and their livelihood des-
troyed by the U.S.-sponsored Contra war.
I'm not saying that women do not suffer
from their lack of reproductive freedom,
but I do think that in a society in which
children are highly valued, single mothers
are common, and extended family networks of
grandmothers, aunts, sisters, etc., are
widely intact, it is understandable that abortion
would not be their highest priority. On
the strategic level, AMNLAE has achieved a
modus vivendi with the church on repro-
ductive freedom: the church does not speak
out against the national birth control
campaign (aimed at both women and men) and
AMNLAE stays away from the abortion issue.

The women in Nicaragua set their agenda in
light of their own needs and options; it —
should not have to coincide with our agenda
in order for us to support it.

In the early 1960s, C. Wright Mills
once said that he worried with the Cuban
revolution, not about it. That is my
perspective now on the revolution in Nica-
ragua. Both feminists and anarchists have
learned from history that, when we were
told to put our concerns aside until some
unspecified later time, that time doesn’t
usually come. But the women in Nicaragua
are not standing by watching the revolu-
tion and hoping that the men “will remem-
ber the ladies" when the fighting is over.
They are struggling within the revolution,
seeking to transform themselves and their
relations to men as a central part of the
national liberation process. I believe
what should compel us now, as norte ameri-
canos, is not devotion to some ideal revo-
lution, or the impossible desire to make
their revolution ours, but the urgent need

to end U.S. intervention in Nicaragua, to
give the revolution a chance. The possi-

bilities are still very open for the fu-
ture of this new state, but the Contra war
is taking an enormous toll. It uses up
scarce resources desperately needed else-
where; it distorts the already weak econo-
my; and it amplifies the power of the
military inside the nation, threatening to
crowd out other voices. I am not saying
that the Sandinistas have achieved all the
goals that anarchists and feminists would
like them to achieve; I am saying that
they have taken some important steps in
that direction, and have brought some
measure of hope and dignity to people in a
part of the world where both are usually
in short supply. Wherever this revolution
goes, at present Nicaragua is theirs in a
way that the United States will never be
mine.