IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

ae EE OO  
SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER ALL SHE WROTE PAGE 7  

The One Imperative  

In 1970, after a long history of act-  
ions against racism, the YWCA Nation-  
al Convention voted to have as its  
"One Imperative", the elimination of  
racism: To thrust our collective  
powers towards the elimination of  
racism wherever it exists and by any  

Reprinted from Girls’ Own, Sydney Feminist Newspaper, May-June, '83 Issue  
means necessary.  

HINTS FOR AN ANGLO FEMINIST WHEN FIRST SHE MEETS A BLACK/JEWISH/IMMIGRANT/  
THIRD WORLD/REFUGEE/NON ANGLO WOMAN  

1. Do not assume that all migrants are the same and come from Migrant Land.  
2. When ringing a Women's Centre (Health/Abortion/Rape Crisis/Refuge, etc)  
and a woman with an accent answers, do not assume she is the cleaner.  
3. On talking to a woman with an accent, do not assume that she cannot  
speak English and needs an interpreter.  
4. Do not assume that you have to explain about the western way of life.  
We may come from countries that were colonised by the British, are pro-  
bably inundated with western media and exploited by multinationals. Thus  
we KNOW a little about ‘white man's ways'.  

5. Do not assume that we know/understand/accept the social customs, slang  
and other peculiarities of your country. Do you?  
6. Do not instantly start talking about spaghetti/chow mein/tabouli/curries/  
tacos etc. in an effort to put the woman or yourself at ease. It is pa-  
tronising and patently clear as such.  
7. Do not assume that we know nothing about feminism, revolution or strug-  
gle. We may come from countries where these issues are extremely strong  
8. Do not assume that she has had any exposure to the Women's Liberation  
Movement or knows about feminism as it is in western, industrialised na-  
tions.  
9. Do not make assumptions about our politics and ideology by the way we  
choose to dress.  
10. Do not assume ANYTHING about our sexuality.  
11. Do not assume that a woman does not identify as a non-Anglo because her  

OCT. 5  
PLEASE CALL THE "Y" FOR MORE INFO.  

LILLIAN P. HOLCOMB, PH.D.  
Certified Psychologist  
DO not assume anyone with brown or  
aboriginal or pacific islander, etc. Wait until she tells you  
herself.  

Do not get defensive or ‘guilt trip' yourself if she is raging in anger.  
Acknowledge what your people have done or are doing to hers.  

14. Do not tell us “all women are the same". This is not only totally untrue-  
classism, racism, anti-semitism, ableism, etc., exist, but  
this statement also invalidates us and trivializes our experiences.  
15. Do not be tempted to tell her "but you're just like us." She may not  
see herself as such and may not even want to be "like you".  
16. You are a feminist and/or lesbian 24 hours a day, as we are ‘non-Anglo'  
24 hours a day. Do not expect us to forget or put aside our politics  
because YOU can't handle it.  
17. Do not assume that all of us have the same politics and ideology. We are  
as diverse as you.  
18. Do not assume we all automatically have equal power, especially not in  
collectives. The conditioning resulting from being black/jewish/migrant,  
etc., in an Anglo environment still has an effect on us, and the oppres-  
sion continues in the wider community. The fact that you are Anglo (may-  
be middle-class too) means that you are privileged in ways that you may  
be totally unaware and insensitive of.  

19. Don't be tempted to say anything, especially that her oppression as a non-  
Anglo is "just her problem." Issues of racism, anti-semitism and ex-  
ploitation affect all of us.  

20. Let her speak, while you listen carefully and take heed of what she has to  
say. Solidarity and sisterhood are possible, but not without a struggle  
we all must be committed to. For we ALL are responsible and must join to-  
gether to fight against the patriarchy.  

(As presented by members of the Immigrant, Black and Third World Women's  
Alliance at the "Black and Migrant Women and Women's Services Seminar"  
Sydney, November, 1982.)  

(Reprinted from Girls' Own, Sydney Feminist Newspaper, May-June, ‘83 Issue)  

OFFICE HOURS BY APPOINTMENT  

LESBIAN / GAY COUNSELING  

Chel Peroy, BQ.  

WOMEN’S  
COALITION  

“MAKING A DIFFERENCE IN HAWAII”  
48-157 Nahiku Pl., Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744  

Ronaele Whittington, D.S.W.  

Family, group and individual counseling  

CERTIFIED CLINICAL  

204 MAKEE RD. #1003  
HONOLULU, HAWAII 96815  
TELEPHONE 926-1778  

(808) 261-8400 By appointment