ml

il

ALL SHE WROTE/MAR-APRIL

cont. from p. 10

"I was really afraid to change
from nursing to biology because
most of the students in biology
were Japanese and haoles...and also
children of professional people
who expected their children to
follow in their footsteps...I
found that I could do the work...
I had tended to stereotype people
and thought that children of
wealthy professional people were
smarter...I found out it just
wasn't true."

Not only did Laverne discover that
she enjoyed the science courses, but
also that she did exceptionally well.

Before Laverne even took her Medi-
cal College Academic Test she made the
decision not to marry a man she really
loved. She felt that marriage at that
point would have defeated her dream to
be a doctor.

She failed her first attempt to be
admitted into the medical school, how-
ever, she did not give up, but rather,
decided to take more courses and try
again the following year.

I wondered if there was the possibi-
lity of anti-women prejudice which in-
fluenced her first failure to be ac-
cepted into the medical school. How-
ever, Laverne strongly rejected such a
possibility. Laverne's view is that
the applicants for medical school are
so well qualified by the time they
take the test that it is a very dif-
ficult thing to actually select a bet-
ter qualified candidate. It is a fact
that forty-five percent of the third
year (1982-1983) medical school stu-
dents are women. 

In her undergraduate studies, she always worked, but now
she feels she must give her mind and
body a rest from the rigorous demands
of medical school and use her time for
rest, relaxation, and exercise.

Living in this particular period of
history has been a great boon to
Laverne in many ways. Laverne Kia has
made full financial use of her minori-
ty status as a woman and as a Hawaiian
in medical school.

She has been assisted through a
vast number of federal financial pro-
grams. She received Social Security
benefits to minor children of disabled
wage earners beginning at the time
that she was a fourth grader at Sacred
Hearts Academy and continuing until
she was twenty-one years of age and a
biology major at the University of
Hawaii. Initially, the payments were
in the amount of one hundred and ten
dollars per month. The ultimate value
of this Social Security benefit
reached two hundred and twenty dollars
per month. Without this Social Securi-
ty benefit it is doubtful that Laverne
could have continued her private school
studies. Her older sisters had mar-
ried and had families of their own
that required financial support.

Laverne has fully utilized the many
following federal financial assistance
programs: the Basic Economic Opportuni-
ty Grant; the Federal Work Study Pro-
gram; the Financial Aid Program; the
National Defense Student Loan Program;
the Exceptional Need Scholarship
(which this year gave her a total of
eight thousand dollars); the Minority
Access to Research Careers Program
(which is a program for PhD research
candidates for minority students, how-
ever, due to a low number of appli-
cants, medical school students were
allowed to apply and benefit from this
program); the HAUMANA Program (which
is a federal program for minority stu-
dents interested in biological re-
search...it provides for work and stu-
dy, tuition, books; and trips to the
mainland for symposiums in the stu-
dent's area of specialty). She has
been the recipient of the following
scholarships: Princess Kaiulani Scho-
larship, Drs. Hans and Clara Zimmerman
Scholarship, Hawaii Veterans’ Scholar-
ship, Na Po Ki'i Scholarship, Wilcox
Memorial Hospital Scholarship and the
Prince Kuhio Scholarship.

She is very concerned about the po-
litical climate of the present.
Reagonomics is certainly not conducive
to the promotion and continuation of
federal aid and scholarships to the
needy and minority groups. She is al-
so very concerned about the possible
decline in the level of prosperity of
the Hawaiian community as a whole, ma-
ny of whom help to support the private
scholarships that are offered to Ha-
waiian students. She is managing her
money most frugally and saving for a
future that may well be less support-
ive in view of the political realities
of the nineteen eighties.

The benefits of recent pro-women
and pro-minorities congressional legis-
lation and Supreme Court decisions
have had a most direct effect on
Laverne Kia and her present education-
al status and future employment.

The following legislative acts,
Supreme Court decisions and Presiden-
tial Executive Orders have been of ut-
most importance in developing a posi-
tive historical climate which enabled
Laverne's dream to become a reality:
the National Labor Relations Act of
1945, the Equal Pay Act of 1963, the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of
the Education Amendments of 1972, Pres -
idential Executive Orders 11246 and
11478, and the following Supreme Court
decisions: Corning Glass v. Brennan,
1974, County of Washington v. Gunther,
1976, and the International Union of
Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers
v. Westinghouse Electric Corp., 1980.

One of Laverne's primary concerns is
to help the Hawaiian people, and she is wary of being co-opted
by the "Establishment" values that go
along with a successful medical prac-
tice. Whenever she feels out of touch
she regains her sense of purpose and
commitment by returning to her home on
Kauwahi Avenue in the Nanakuli Hone-
stead.

NAN WOND

“Anonymous Was A Woman Soldier” commentary

Although no definite statistics are
available on the number of military
women who served in Vietnam (the gov-
ernment failed to keep those records),
the number is frequently estimated to
be about 7,500. The majority of these
women served in medical situations but
many of them served in other capaci-
ties ranging from air traffic control-
ler to interrogation specialists;
legal officers to intelligence ana-
lysts. While much has been written a-
bout the 2.8 million male Vietnam vet-
erans, so little has been said about
the women that few realize that women
were actually stationed in Vietnam
during the war. Even the Veteran's
Administration has failed to include
women in its studies of Vietnam vets.

How did military women wind up in
Vietnam? Many idealistic young women
volunteered. Women were assigned to
supportive, "helping" jobs (nursing
for example). They felt it was a
humanitarian gesture to go. Others
were ordered to go. When Lily Adams
asked her recruiter whether or not
she might be assigned to Vietnam be-
fore joining the army, she was told that
only women who volunteered received
orders for Nam. The orders she re-
ceived later as an army nurse were for
Cu Chi. She did not volunteer.

Women were also told that they
would not be in combat, yet the names
of eight women who died there are on
the wall of the new Vietnam War Memo-
rial in Washington D.C. Lt. Sharon Ann
Lane of Canton, Ohio was 26 when she
won the dubious distinction of being
the first U.S. Army Nurse killed by
hostile fire in Vietnam when a rocket
struck a ward at the 312th evacuation
hospital in Chulai, 335 miles north-
east of Saigon, June 3, 1969. Lt.
Jane A. Lambarid, of Stockholm,
California was a 25-year-old Air
Force nurse who became the first fe-
male member of the Armed Forces to
receive a combat decoration in the war
in Vietnam. She received the Bronze
Star, the Air Medal, and the Commenda-
tion Medal on October 7, 1968 for ex-
hibiting "extraordinary and outstand-
ing professional skill and personal
calm" while assisting as a Medical
Air Evacuation nurse in removing
wounded from the air base hospital in
Da Nang, South Vietnam, while under
fire January 30, 1968. Former army
nurse Lynda Vandevanter says that her
hospital in Pleiku was attacked only
two hours after her arrival and that
she as well as the other nurses spent
many nights under their beds in an
effort to protect themselves from rock-
et attacks.

Once in Vietnam, the nurses worked
twelve-hour shifts, six days a week and
frequently devoted their time off to
helping with MEDCAP. Living condi-
tions were also rough. The army was
not prepared for the women. There
were no readily available supplies of
much-needed items such as tampons,
sanitary napkins, bobby pins or birth
control supplies. They frequently had
to use gauze or bandages during their
periods and had to take long and dan-
gerous helicopter trips to the largest
bases where these supplies could be
obtained.

Duty in Vietnam usually lasted
about a year, but then the homecoming
often brought more stress and trauma.
Adjusting at home was difficult.

There were no transition or depro-
gramming arrangements made. Frequently
close friends and family did not
want to discuss Vietnam; they didn't
realize how important it was to talk
about it. It is believed that most of
the women who served in Vietnam are
cont. on p. 15

= ait

uae