ALL SHE WR APRIL

COMMENTARY

International Women's Studies Conference

Reflections on an International Women's
Studies Conference, “Concepts and Stra-
tegies: Women's Studies in Different
Cultural Contexts," Nov. 15-17, 1982,
Jefferson Hall, East-West Center, Co-
Sponsored by the Women's Studies Pro-
gram, University of Hawaii at Manoa

Introduction

The Women's Studies Program at the
University of Hawaii at Manoa co-spon-
sored an international Women's Studies
conference, "Concepts and Strategies:
Women's Studies in Different Cultural
Contexts," on Nov. 15-17, 1982, at Jef-
ferson Hall at the East-West Center.
As the only faculty member of Asian/
Pacific ancestry in the program with a
personal and academic interest in
Asian/Pacific women and their experi-
ences in America, I was particularly
interested in the keynote speeches and
panels which considered the relation-
ship of Asian/Pacific women to West-
ern feminism from the Asian/Pacific
perspectives.

This theme was introduced in
Maxine Hong Kingston's keynote speech,
"Some International Feminist Ques-
tions," as well as in the following
panels: Women's Studies--An Evolving
Discipline; Feminist Perspectives of
Women in the Pacific Islands; and Dif-
ferent Cultural Perspectives. In suc-
cessfully serving as moderators, the
panelists engaged with Pacific and Asian
societies (the Solomon Islands, New
Caledonia, Tahiti, Micronesia, the
Philippines, Japan, India, and Taiwan)
as well as from Hawaii and the U.S.
mainland - the conference was an
excellent opportunity to hear the
voices of women from various politico-
cultural backgrounds. I have presented
here what I observed to be some of the
recurring themes in the conference
speeches, paper presentations and
discussions.

1. "No-Name Woman: Refusing to Allow
the Asian/Pacific Woman's Power to
Name
A basic tenet of Western feminist

thought is that women should define
and interpret their experience, re-de-
fining and re-naming, where necessary,
what other people have previously de-
fined and named for them.

In a panel called "Feminist Per-
spectives of Women in the Pacific Is-
lands,” Haunani Kay Trask, a feminist/
Hawaiian movement activist and a facul-
ty member of American Studies of the
University of Hawaii at Manoa, named
herself and proceeded to define femi-
nism in her own terms in her paper,
"Fighting the Battle of Double Coloni-
zation: The View of a Hawaiian Femin-
ist." She told us how difficult it was
for an indigenous woman to fight for
her liberation as a woman and simulta-
neously fight for the liberation of
her people. Immediately following
Trask's presentation, a white feminist,
Nancie Caraway, one of the Conference
coordinators, a doctoral candidate in
Political Science at the University of
Hawaii, asked her how she could be so
contradictory as to turn against white
Americans after having received an
American higher education and benefited
from it. In response, Bernadita
Dungca, a Chamorro woman activist in
the Chamorro movement and faculty mem-
ber of the University of Guam, asked
in anger why white feminists tried to
kill Third World women by forcing them
to defend themselves whenever Third
World women expressed their anger over
their experiences of white American
colonialism.

The following is a verbatim account
of the Chamorro woman's statement:
"Here is a situation that a person has
come up to speak what is known as the
truth for that person. I see her
speaking the truth of her Hawaiian
people. Yet, at the very instance of
an open discussion, a question is
asked, “How can you live with that con-
tradiction?" My question to you is,
“why must you impose on us to answer
the question, "Why are you in contra-
diction?" Why in God’s name must I al-
ways have to explain my contradiction?"

"My condition is the same as the
speaker. Do you know what it means to
be colonized? As a colonized person,
I have been devoid of myself from my-
self. Have you ever experienced that?
If not, can you imagine that? Those
of you who have never been colonized
don't know what it is like to be colo-
nized. Being colonized is like with-
out your mother. I was also colonized
like she said she was. In the name of
American democracy, I want to ask you,
"Why are you asking us to defend that
experience? We are simply speaking the
truth. All we are saying is we have
been through that experience. Please
allow us that freedom to express.
Please don't make us verify ourselves.
It hurts!"

"I have an American passport, I am
an American citizen. But God knows
and you know, because of my color,
where I came from and the way my moth-
er reared me to be is to be a Chamorro
or a Hawaiian first. Please let us
say what we are. Differences among us
make the United States of America the
great nation.

For this we must struggle. Please
all of you, especially those who are
involved with women, feminism, issues
and all that, please, allow us to be,
for God's sake, don't try to kill
those of us who are trying to struggle
for that freedom!"

The incident above is one illustra-
tion of how Asian/Pacific women from
various cultural contexts were able to
respond in support of each other's ana-
lyses and definitions, in spite of the
varieties of experiences among them.

2. Asian/Pacific Women's Relation to

Western Feminism

Among the Asian/Pacific delegates
who attended the conference, there was
a wide range of priorities and strate-
gies.

In Japan, "feminist" means "gal-
lant man who is nice to women," ac-
cording to Mieko Fujieda of Kyoto
Seika College, coordinator of the
Japan Women's Studies Association. In
contrast to radical feminism, which is
concerned more with sexuality and so-
cialization than with sexual division
of labor, Fujieda indicated, and King-
ston agreed, that Asian/Pacific wo-
men's identity did not seem to include
sexuality. Sexual freedom was not a
topic of general discussion, and les-
bianism, though covered by magazines,
television, and everyday conversation,
was not a political issue.

Belinda A. Aquino, director of the
Philippine Studies Program at the Uni-
versity of Hawaii, concluded in her pa-
per, “A Comparison of Southeast Asian
and American Feminist Perspectives,"
that the image and substance of the
kind of feminism that eventually de-
veloped in Southeast Asia was shaped
by historical and cultural experiences
that were different from the West. Ac-
cording to her, a word, “feminismo,"
was used in the Philippines to parallel
"machismo," which included the idea
of femininity.

Jully Sipolo, a published woman
poet from the Solomon Islands, reported
that in the Pacific Islands, people
have never heard of feminism. Sipolo
said that she would be happy to stay
in “woman's place" - the kitchen, par-
ticularly if it were an American kit-
chen, rather than do clerical work.

A Tahitian speaker, in a
mixture of French, Tahitian, and En-
glish, said that feminism to her means
respecting the desires and wishes of
all women and bringing about changes
in the evolutionary process. She be-
lieves that the problem of women is a
problem of identity: Pacific women
want to remain women, i.e., feminine,
and not feminist, by working for peo-
ple in their families and societies.

At the closing session, several
women expressed their views on the
relationships between Asian/Pacific
women and Western feminism. A white
Mormon woman from the mainland U.S.
said that she attended the conference
because she was a woman and wanted to
learn about women in Asian/Pacific so-
cieties. Through this conference she
has learned that it is important to
share each other's experiences without
imposing one's own cultural values.

Sarah Yang, a second generation
Korean American woman in her seventies
summed up the Asian position with the
remark, "I don't care if a person is a
feminist, masculinist, feminine or mas-
culine. There is a confusion about
what we mean by feminism because it de-
pends on whose definition."

3. Asian/Pacific Women's Self-redefini-

tion Through Indigenous Feminism

Maxine Hong Kingston in her key-

note speech reminded us that in Asia,
there was an indigenous, ancient fem-
inism which was overcome by modern
Western cultural influence. According
to Kingston, indigenous, ancient
feminism in Asia was pro-culture and
pro-tradition in contrast to modern
feminism which is anti-tradition. She
noted that in the twentieth century,

cont. on p. 7