PAGE 6

ALL SHE WROTE

(Black Women continued)

Testing White folks made Black—
just out of my youth, curiosity,
and resentment. I wrote on YWCA
stationery out of my innocence. The
next day, the manager was on the
line of the YWCA asking what he
could do to correct the race prob-
lem... That was my introduction to
the impact of power—that the Y had
in the world and how I had un-
consciously ... used this instrument." 
Another interviewee was long-time
CA staff member Dorothy Height, most
recently director of the YWCA Center
for Racial Justice. Height assessed
the historical role of the YWCA in
developing Black leaders:
"When the YWCA in 1895 organized a
Negro branch in Dayton, Ohio, and
when it employed on its national
staff, in 1911, Negro staff, and
when it had that staff in key posi-
tions all through those years...
When it did all that, it was un-
matched by any other major group
drawn from the major White popula-

tion of this country... You have to
look at the moment in history and
see that that was as far forward as
affirmative action is today, because
there was no organization predomi-
nantly out of the White population
that offered the same kind of execu-
tive opportunity."
Other staff members interviewed in-
clude Frances Williams, who was inter-
racial secretary of the YWCA and an ad-
ministrator in Franklin Roosevelt's
Office of Price Administration; and

secretary of the YWCA in Chicago:

The oral memoirs encompass a varie-
ty of experiences: educators, civil
rights activists, physicians, union or-
ganizers, artists, social workers,
public health workers, ministers, writ-
ers, and administrators, among others.
In addition to the interview transcripts
photographic portraits of Black Women
Oral History Project interviewees have
been collected for a traveling exhibit
entitled, "Women of Courage." For more
information and to request interview
transcripts, write to the Black Women
Oral History Project, Schlesinger
Library, Radcliffe College, 19
Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138.

Reviews

The New Mother Care

by Lyn DelliQuadri, M.S.W.
and Kati Breckenridge, Ph.D.
(Jeremy P. Tarcher, Inc.)

Reviewed by Ramona Moore

In The New Mother Care, an invalua-
ble collection of information for
mothers and mothers-to-be, Lyn
DelliQuadri and Kati Breckenridge of-
fer experience and advice on the chang-
ing demands of motherhood. The New
Mother Care deals with the psycholo-
gical, emotional, and physical changes
associated with motherhood and encour-
ages mothers to find their own identi-
ties through the transitional period
following childbirth.

Especially helpful are part one,
dealing with emotional transitions,
and part three, changing relationships.
The insecurities often felt by a new
mother regarding her expertise and
rights, the mixture of positive and
negative feelings about herself and her
baby, how to let go of the false expec-
tations of motherhood, and dispelling
the myths of motherhood which often
create guilt feelings, are discussed
in part one. Part three covers the
individuality of mother and child,
establishing a postbirth support sys-
tem, balancing the mother's desire to
be with her baby with the need for
time of her own, and redefining and en-
riching the relationship between the
mother and her partner.

A book by mothers for mothers, The
New Mother Care is well written and
easy to understand. Although there
is some clinical material offered,
the strongest impact comes from the
hundreds of interviews with mothers
of different ages. And with lines
such as: "Becoming unpregnant is like
returning from a space voyage," it is
a joy to read.

NOTE: The New Mother Care is available at
Women's Word Bookstore at the University
YWCA, Open from 1-5 pm Monday through
Friday.

Specializing in antique
kimono blouses and obis,

nui-mono, hawaii
2745 S. King St.

Honolulu, Hawaii 96826
946-7407

China tees, satchels, kimono
jackets, Guatemalan cotton
blouses and fabric.

Also baskets, ceramics.

SPRING 1985

New Titles at Woman's Word Bookstore

THE NEW OUR BODIES, OURSELVES. By
the Boston Women's Health Book Collec-
tive. Simon and Schuster, 1984. $12.95.

"Health and medical information
changes quickly. New health problems
come to the fore; legal and political
realities shift, changing people's
access to information and care. Equal-
ly important, our own political aware-
ness keeps changing: the more we learn,
the less we believe that the medical
system as it is structured today can
or will alter to meet our needs. So
in this book, less medically oriented
than the previous edition, we empha-
size what we as women can do for our-
selves and for one another, and we
often discuss nonmedical perspectives
and remedies as well as medical ones."

Of the original edition, The New
York Times said, "I don't see how any
woman—even an antifeminist one—
could fail to be enlightened.” The new
edition is expanded to 699 pages and
includes new chapters on "Health and
Healing: Alternatives to Medical Care,"
"Alcohol, Mood-Altering Drugs and
Smoking," "Environment and Occupational
Health," "Psychotherapy," "Women
Growing Older" and "New Reproductive
Technologies." Two sections, "Violence
against Women" and "Women in Motion",
have been expanded to be full chapters.

IN SEARCH OF OUR MOTHER'S GARDENS.
Womanist Prose by Alice Walker.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983. $6.95.

This is a collection of essays,
reminiscences, reviews and articles
written between 1966 and 1982 which
Publishers Weekly says, "is more re-
warding in many ways than her (Pulitzer
Prize)-winning novel, The Color Purple."
Yet, the themes of that novel are also
integral to several of these pieces:
Black women in relation to their fami-
lies, their mothers; to each other; to
Black men; to White society and the
world at large.

Walker writes about the civil
rights movement, the antinuclear move-
ment, feminism and her own childhood
in the South. In a final, courageous
memoir she tells of her scarring child-
hood accident and her daughter's heal-
ing words.

OKAY! THINNER THIGHS FOR EVERYONE.
Nicole Hollander. St. Martin's Press,
1984. $4.95.

"This book is dedicated to those who,
for whatever reason, are still in their
bathrobes when the mail carrier comes
to call!

Feisty, fiftyish, an unflappable
feminist, Sylvia is cartoonist Nicole
Hollander's answer to her own yearning
for a mid-life role model: "What I
wanted was an older woman so confident
of her self-worth that she understands
the insecurities of women but doesn't
fall prey to them." In the latest of
the Sylvia books are sections on "Ear-
ring Therapy and Other Swift Cures"
and "Dreams of Famous People: Freud
and Jung.”