PAGE 13

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER

A GLOBAL FEMINISM:

SHE WROTE

ON THE 5th NATIONAL WOMEN'S STUDIES
ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE

Held at Ohio State University

June '83

I have attended the fifth National
Women's Studies Association Conference
at Columbus, Ohio. 1,886 registered
members participated, making the con-
ference the largest for the Association
in the past five years. I will try to
summarize and make comments on some of
the major themes which I found in the
plenary sessions and some of the panels
which I have attended.

The theme of the internationalization
of feminism and Women's Studies by
transformation of Western feminism and
the women's movement into a global femi-
nism and women's movement was heard
most loudly at the conference this year.

It was said that the internationali-
zation of Women's Studies and feminism
is essential because Western feminist
women tend to make global generaliza-
tions based on their own experiences.
It is time for them to start listening
and connecting themselves with Third
World women through transformation of
Western feminism by incorporating ex-
periences of Third World women, women
of color, and working-class women in
America.

Charlotte Bunch, a lesbian feminist
and a former editor of Quest: a Femi-
nist Quarterly, pointed out reasons why
it has been difficult for American femi-
nists to think about women's issues at
a global level.

1) American women tend to think that
America is the center of the world and
therefore believe that American femi-
nism can be applied globally.
2) There is no one international femi-
nism but a variety of feminisms.
3) Feminism and Women's Studies are
ways to reconceptualize our knowledge
and worldview, thus enabling us to re-
structure society.
4) Since racism and imperialism are
part of the U.S. foreign policy, they
are both victims and beneficiaries of
the system.
5) It is difficult to find accurate
information.
6) The phrase "the personal is politi-
cal" is the strength of Western femi-
nism but at the same time, a weakness.
The phrase focuses only on individual
oppressions in socialization, family,
marriage, and sexuality.
7) Western feminists are afraid that
focusing on international issues might
entail abandoning their own concerns
and politics, and might invite further
division among Western feminists.

ANNOUNCEMENT.

SUPPORTIVE PROBLEM SOLVING

Problem Solving Group for Women to Be-
gin in Mid-September.
THE GROUP: A therapeutic problem solv-
ing group for women. (special emphasis
on relationships)
MEETING: Once a week for four weeks.
LOCATION: To be announced.
FEE: $20.00 per session.
CONDUCTED BY: Dee Preston-Dillon.
FOR REGISTRATION INFORMATION:

Dee Preston-Dillon

P.O. Box 61478

Honolulu, HI 96822—

or phone 941-1473

The plight of Arab—

ALICE YUN CHAT

There are two themes which could be
considered common experiences for both
the Western and the Third World women:
sexual and economic exploitation of wo-
men and international feminization of
poverty. Many Third World women and
women of color in America are working
as domestics and factory workers. In
both the Western and Third World soci-
eties, women's bodies are considered to
be the most profitable natural resourc—
es and best export items in both nation-
al and international markets.

Solutions for these international wo-
men's issues must come from global femi-
nist consciousness raising and organiza-
tions because they are international in
nature and intricately tied with femi-
nist concerns. For example, one can-
not be a feminist without talking about
poverty because one of the definitions
of feminism is to eradicate all inequal-
ities, and poverty is one of the most
severe inequalities. Therefore, we can-
not eradicate poverty without feminism.

Deirdre English, editor of MOTHER
JONES, said in her Opening Plenary Ses-
sion talk on “After the Leap: Feminism
and the Fears of the 80's," that the
only way to eliminate feminization of
poverty is to eliminate sexual division
of labor and gender differences in pay
and demilitarization of societies.

An editor of HYPATIA: A JOURNAL OF
FEMINIST PHILOSOPHY, and a Lebanese
feminist, Aziza al-Hibri, in her speech,
"Unveiling the Hidden Face of Racism:
Americans," at the plenary session said
that the priority for Third World and
Arab women was the physical survival and
not genital mutilation as Western femi-
nists had told them that it was their
priority. But she said that their clitoris would not be any good if they would not be able to physically survive.

Hannah Papanek of Boston University,
in a panel titled "New Shapes, New Pro-
grams: A Symposium on Women's Studies
International," said that something impor-
tant was happening in South East Asia
for Women's Studies and the women's
movement not because of the importation
of Western feminism, but as the result
of major social changes, e.g., increased
labor force participation in urban areas,
and increased unemployment of unedu-
cated and rural women. There are a
great amount of research projects and
writings on pragmatic subjects on women
for educational and policy-making pur-
poses in South East Asia, especially in
India. According to Papanek, Women's
Studies in America has been preoccupied
with theories which have nothing to do
with women's experiences in the real
world and it was about time that we
should pay attention to their experi-
ences and research writings by empha-
sizing the particularity rather than
the universality of women's experiences.

The following resolution is the one
which the coalition of Women of Color,
students, white working-class women,
Jewish women, and Lesbian caucuses of the
NWSA which was submitted to the dele-
gate assembly on June 30.

Whereas: A majority of the member-
ship of the NWSA consists of Women of
Color, students, white working-class wo-
men, Jewish women, and Lesbians; and

Whereas: These are the most op-
pressed groups of women in this society;
and

Whereas: The concerns of these
groups have been inadequately represent-
ed in the programming of the National
Convention (less than 20% of the Nation-
al Convention sessions dealt with these
concerns); and

Whereas: At the NWSA Convention
there have been significantly diminish-
ing numbers of workshops and attendees
representing these groups as well as in-
creased racist attacks on individual
Women of Color who have attended these
conventions; and

Whereas: Because of the above, an ad
hoc committee was formed by Women of
Color in coalition with students, white
working-class women, Jewish women, and
Lesbians to remedy these problems;

Therefore Be It Resolved: That the
1984 National Convention of the NWSA
provide for an autonomous institute, a
component within the convention, that
reflects 50% of the sessions to reflect
the concerns/issues of said ad hoc coalition;

Be It Further Resolved: That NWSA in-
sure that the remainder of the panels
and workshops reflect the diversity of
all women;

Be It Further Resolved: That a com—
mittee appointed by this coalition
choose a half-time program coordinator
who is a Woman of Color activist to be
paid out of conference funds to imple-
ment the above resolution;

Be It Further Resolved: That NWSA
commit itself to raising adequate con-
ference funds through public fund-rais-
ing, private contributions, grant seek-
ing, and budget prioritizing and that
the program coordinator be in charge
of these funds;

Be It Further Resolved: That the
goals of the institute coordinator
shall include provisions for the
following:

1. An increase in the number of work-
shops addressing community action.

2. A greater emphasis on Internation-
al perspectives, especially the link be-
tween Third World Women and Women of
Color in the United States.

3. A provision for at least one
joint meeting of all the caucuses.

COPING WITH PREMENSTRUAL TENSION

A five-week series of educational
meetings and group discussions to en-
able women to cope effectively with
premenstrual syndrome will commence
September 13th from 7-8:30 p.m. in
Hawaii Kai. The fee for the course is
$40 and will involve learning new ways
to cope through an understanding of
bodily functions and self remedies.
The group will be led by Dr. Jane
Stump who has master's degrees in
social work and public health as well
as a doctorate in health sciences. To
register or for more information,
please call 395-3331.