“

MAY/JUNE

STRUGGLE

< <

ALL SHE WROTE PAGE 15  
JULIA MORGAN ~ THE ROLE MODEL - SPENCER LEINEWEBER  
Factors were William Randolph Hearst's vision on the Honolulu YWCA. Ed

"I saw her knock down a chimney  
where the work of the masonry was un-  
satisfactory to her, and the mortar was  
still soft enough so she could pull  
the bricks out, and she did."1  

Passersby must have had quite a dou-  
ble take: a little lady, slightly over  
five feet, neat bun and round-rimmed  
glasses, tailored grey suit and French  
silk blouse, toppling a brick wall be-  
cause the work displeased her.  

Julia Morgan (1872-1957)  

Julia Morgan was a perfectionist,  
totally aware of what she expected in  
the office and in the field. This de-  
mand for excellence can easily be per-  
ceived when one is fortunate enough to  
experience one of her buildings. "JM,"  
as she was called by her staff, de-  
signed well over 1,000 buildings most-  
ly in the Bay Area of San Francisco,  
at a time when less than 1 percent of  
the registered architects were women.  

Hawaii is fortunate to have at  
least two remaining structures de-  
signed by Morgan—the Richards Street  
YWCA and the Homelani Columbarium in  
Hilo.  

Julia Morgan's researchers have had  
a difficult time obtaining primary  
source information about her. She was  
a very private person. She granted no  
personal interviews, refused to have  
her work published in professional  
journals, and destroyed all her office  
records in 1957.  

A native San Franciscan, she was  
the first woman to be graduated from  
the College of Civil Engineering at the  
University of California, as well as  
the first woman to study and receive  
a certificate from the École des Beaux  
Arts in Paris (1901). She is also be-  
lieved to be the first woman certified  
to practice architecture in California.  
She opened her own office in 1904 af-  
ter spending two years in the office  
of John Galen Howard. Her employer  
boasted of "possessing the most talented  
designer whom I have to pay almost  
nothing, as it is a woman."2 Except  
for a short partnership with Ira  

Hoover, she continued to operate her  
office in the Merchants Building for  

nearly fifty years.  

Her biographer, Richard Longstreth,3  
notes several reasons for JM's consis-  
tent success as an architect. She was  
a native Californian when many of the  
prominent architects in California  
were not. A large part of her work  
was commissions from family friends  

and her philanthropist mother, Phoebe  
Apperson Hearst.  

JM's practice also coincided with  
the subdivision of large tracts of  
land into East Bay communities for the  
middle-class homeowner. At the same  
time, women's organizations were begin-  
ning to organize and require facili-  
ties. It was only natural that they  
would turn to a woman to design their  
new structures. Much of Morgan's non-  
residential work falls into this cate-  
gory. Her first large nonresidential  
commission was the bell tower at Mills  
College. This school continued to be  
a client for many years; Morgan de-  
signed the Alumnae Hall and the library.  

The YWCA also was a significant cli-  
ent for the Morgan office. The first  
work was Asilomar, the great YWCA sea-  
side conference center commissioned by  
Phoebe Hearst, but the work also in-  
cluded many YWCAs across the country.  

Julia Morgan is best known for her  
least typical work: San Simeon, the  
wedding cake castle of William Ran-  
dolph Hearst, a project that was over  
twenty years in construction. It is  
often difficult to identify some of  
JM's work because she developed no de-  
finitive style. Instead, her designs  
reflect the styles and tastes pre-  
ferred by each individual client. No  
job was too small for her office to ac-  
cept. She felt that "the architect  
should be a semi-anonymous contributor  
to a team whose efforts were dictated  
by people's spiritual needs...an as-  
sertive use of form violated the mas-  
ter-servant relationship between life  
and architecture."4 Her designs  
showed a remarkable flexibility with  
the prevailing styles of the day:  
Prairie, Arts and Crafts, Romanesque  
Gothic, Neo-Classical, Italianate, and  
Eclectic, to name just a few. The ver-  
nacular style of the Bay Area in-  
trigued her also due to its quality of  
anonymity.  

If there is a common ingredient in  
all of Julia Morgan's work it is the  
derivation of her designs from histori-  
cal precedent. Her office contained a  
large library of historical and rare  
monographs. Her best work is very non-  
assertive; the details are clear ex-  
pressions of the building elements,  
within a simple organization of the  
whole. Longstreth relates the matter  
of fact way she designed “during the  
preliminary stages, sketching them  
with T square and triangle, refusing  
to draw in perspective, so as to avoid  
the temptation of simply composing for  
effect."5 A planar quality can clear-  
ly be seen in the designs of many of  
her buildings.  

Morgan ran the office as an atelier,  
or workshop. Bulletin boards and re-  
quired reading lists were as important  
a part of the job as was the drafting.  
She had sole control of the office, no  
matter how many of the personnel were  
registered architects or engineers.  
All contact with the client was hers;  
all drawings were made from her  
sketches; all field supervision was  
done by her.  

- 5  

Hussey, a member of the staff, super-  
vised the construction. Hussey relat-  
ed, however, that the control still re-  
mained in San Francisco: "I sent re-  
ports with a roll of film back to her  
every week...I was mighty embarrassed  
when we slipped a couple of inches on  
a window some way and she caught it in  
San Francisco.”  

The Morgan office was her total  
existence: she looked after her staff  
as she would have her family. In fact,  
when she finally purchased a home of  
her own, she bought the house next  
door and connected the two under one  
roof, to make the latter a group of  
apartments for her staff. She provid-  
ed for them in times of sickness or De-  
pression. She also made a special ef-  
fort to provide opportunities for wo-  
men in architecture by positions on  
her staff. By 1927 she had six women  
out of a staff of fourteen working for  
her. Most employees remained with her  
for the bulk of their working careers.  

The profession of architecture has  
not remained untouched by this little  
lady. Such a total commitment to the  
profession has left us with a legacy  
of very special buildings. But perhaps  
more important is the role model that  
she provides, for both men and women  
alike.  

1. Scharlack, Bernice "The Legacy of  
Julia Morgan" California Living  
Magazine August 24, 1975  

2. Boutelle, Sara “Julia Morgan" Women  
in Architecture, ed. by Susan Torre,  
1977, Whitney Library of Design  

3. Longstreth, Richard “Julia Morgan  
Architect," 1977, Berkeley Archi-  
tectural Heritage Association  

4. Ibid p. 22  

5. Ibid p. 22  

This article is reprinted with permis-  
sion from the June, 1979 issue of  
Hawaii Architect.  

If you find yourself  

in painful, dissatisfying  
patterns with lovers,  
friends, work, life  

in general...  

Workahopa “Training Programs  
Private/Group Counseling  

In a warm, supportive  
environment learn how to  
nurture the child within you  
and become comfortable with  
the healthy feelings so many  
of us had to block out in order  
to survive growing up in a  
harsh, non-feeling society.  

D. Preston-Dillon  
835-7603  

Whether you're currently in  
crisis or just want to open up  
and grow some more:  

Choosing to Change  

Humanistic-feminist support for clarity and power in short-term therapy. Personal problem solving, groups, couples counseling. Personalized cassette tapes available.