PAGE 6 LL SHE WROTE SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER

STRUGGLE

A WOMAN, A MOTHER, AN ACTIVIST

On Saturday, August 6th, nine people in four countries started an open-ended fast in support of disarmament. Supported by the International Conference of the Fast for Life, they feel that "a wholly unprecedented world consensus demanding the abolition of nuclear weapons already exists; and that people and their institutions only need a sufficiently clear signal to act." In support of the Fast for Life, more than a dozen people on Oahu fasted during August 6-9, Hiroshima—Nagasaki Remembrance Days.

As a 33-year-old mother of two who recently relocated from California, I felt moved to action. I took it upon myself to find out more about this protest. Through the peace community locally, I discovered what actions were being planned, and how I could participate. I was made to feel welcome and vital. But there is more to it than that.

I felt compelled to some form of action. But what could I do? I didn't feel that I could commit myself to an open-ended fast. I am devoted to my husband, my two children, and to my new career of "domestic engineer" (since the birth of our youngest child). I am the constant spiritual support for my family and for my musician husband. I felt that, while others could make that decision, I was not in that position. I was torn. I wrote in my Journal. I read about other forms of non-violent demonstration. I prayed. I searched deep within myself for the answer that could only come from within—and I came to that answer. (Helping me to make my decision was a quote from The Essential Gandhi, by Louis Fischer: "There are moments in your life when you must act even though you cannot carry your best friends with you. The still, small voice within you must always be the final arbiter when there is a conflict of duty." Written August 4, 1920) My conflict ended. I would fast for as many days as I was capable of.

Through three of the four days, I became aware of my personal commitment to ending the arms race. I was drawn closer into my own feelings, and into deep contemplation. The old question of "What can one person do?" took on a new meaning—for I was but one person, and I was doing something! I have since decided to continue fasting two days a week. My family supports this decision, and my five-year-old daughter has offered to fast part of the time with me. No one is too young or old to make their personal commitment.

What can one person do? They can do as I have done: find out what is happening, what needs to be done, and then do it. One person can put a sign on their front door, or on their car bumper telling others that they support disarmament. One person can wear a button or a T-shirt expressing their support for a Nuclear Free and Independent Pacific, or the Nuclear Freeze. One person can be part of a demonstration protesting the deployment of the Pershing II and Cruise missiles in Europe. One person can send a monetary contribution to the group of their choice, or possibly even better, one person can volunteer to be part of a letter-writing campaign, or they can help to send out mailings, be part of a telephone tree, or watch the children of other active members so that they can go to a meeting. There are dozens of ways in which an individual can make a difference. All it takes is the desire to act, and then the action. My action took the form of a fast in support of the Fast for Life. And I am continuing that action.

I, too, believe that a world consensus already exists, and that people worldwide just need a clear signal to act. For me that signal was the Fast for Life. For you, simply decide what is right in your own heart—then act. (For further information on Peace activities in Hawaii, write: Crystal Van Horn, 45-411 Nihina Place, Kaneohe, HI 96744 or phone 247-3172.)

ANNOUNCEMENT: ALTERNATIVES FOR WOMEN

ANNOUNCING NEW SUPPORT GROUP FOR WOMEN

The Alternatives for Women Program is conducting a weekly, open, support group for women.

Target Population: Women in transition, those who are currently experiencing a crisis in their life such as separation, divorce, adjustment to a recent change in their life situation, or women desiring a supportive network. (Psychotic women are not appropriate).

Description of Program: Open, ongoing group provides opportunity to share experiences and gain positive support from others. Alternative and creative options for dealing with situations can be explored and a supportive network established. Increased self-awareness, understanding, and appreciation are frequent results.

Location: Alternatives for Women

Leaders: Evelyn Char, RN, MS & staff

Time: Every Monday 2:30-4:00 p.m.

Fee: $3.00 each group session (can be adjusted if needed)

Contact: Leaders at 735-5452 or may attend any Monday afternoon.

was answering phones, relaying messages and contributing to our discussions. Eileen Boris's son caught a cold and in caring for him, she, mid-week, showed up with the sniffles to a roomful of understanding nods. Four-month-old Patrick Glenn arrived each day at noon for lunch from his mother, Evelyn Nakano Glenn, and was greeted with many cradling arms. Pictures and talk of sons and daughters, of mates and of family, permeated the "breaks" each day. All of these family responsibilities were integrated with the business of the Institute with remarkable ease and naturalness, and demonstrated to me in a truly refreshing way how women collectively, when they control the conditions of their workplace, can and do work the household-marketplace intersection.