Lesbian Books

by Karen Anna, with the critical  
assistance of Megan Crouse  

"The history of every country  
begins in the heart of a man or  
woman." (Willa Cather)  

The role of women in history  
has, as we know, been greatly ne-  
glected, distorted, or entirely  
omitted from textbooks, films, and  
other accounts of our past. While  
women have long comprised over 50%  
of the world's population, the body  
of historical literature does not  
reflect the influence or contribu-  
tions of women, either as indivi-  
duals or as a class. The reasons  
for this silence surrounding the  
power and purpose of women's con-  
tributions to all societies are  
complex. Put most simply, history  
as we know it has been recorded,  
transmitted, and defended by white  
middle-class males. They record  
what they define as important, and  
trivialize what  

defeats powerful  
women.  

The absence of women in tra-  
ditionally-related history is even  
more evident in the case of lesbians.  
The few who make it into the text-  
books are rarely identified as les-  
bians; for instance, one might find  
a coy reference to "the life-long  
relationship" between Gertrude Stein  
and Alice B. Toklas. The lesbian  
identities of such historical figures  
as Deborah Sampson, Willa Cather,  
Bessie Smith, and Eleanor Roosevelt  
have been generally omitted from  
most popular biographies and text-  
books.  

Lesbian women, like women in  
general, are simply not presented  
in most accounts of human history.  
"It is notoriously difficult to  
maintain the memory of the past. But  
groups which are socially marginal  
are particularly relegated to the  
fringes of historical discussion.  
Lesbians, suffering from the dual  
disqualification of being gay and  
female, have been repeatedly dis-  
possessed of their history." (Gayle  
Rubin) This book review features  
three books which seek to fill in  
these historical blanks.  

* * * * * *  

"Lesbian Lives," a 1974 Diana  
Press publication, is a collection  
of short biographies from The Furies,  
a lesbian/feminist newspaper pub-  
lished in the early 1970s in Wash-  
ington, D.C. The collection is ed-  
ited by Nancy Myron & Charlotte  
Bunch, who state in their introduc-  
tion, “History is political. It  
has been a parade of fossilized  
stereotypes, used for centuries to  
keep women in our place and to deny  
us any pride of past accomplishment."  
Of different nationalities and times,  
the women whose lives are presented  
shared a common goal in their strug-  
gle against female oppression. Some  
of those included are Spanish soli-  
der of fortune Dona Catalina de  
Erauso, author Gertrude Stein, pir-  
ates Anny Bonny and Mary Read, and  
Queen Christina of Sweden.  

Another Diana Press book, "Lesbian  
Lives" (1976), edited by Barbara Grier  
and Coletta Reid, presents a wealth of  
lesbian biographies originally written  
for The Ladder, a national lesbian mag-  
azine, between 1957 and 1972. In their  
introductions, Grier and Reid trace the  
history of The Ladder and make some im-  
portant observations about the invisi-  
bility of lesbians in history. Says  
Reid, "The hushing up of who we have  
been leaves us no history of ourselves  
as a people... We have no sense of  
belonging without a history and it  
enormously makes us believe that she is alone...."  

A collection of more than 65 women are  
grouped under eight section headings:  
Famous Couples (such as Eleanor Butler  
and Sarah Ponsonby); Adventurers (Amelia  
Earhart, Lady Hester Stanhope); Novel-  
ists (Marie Corelli, Radclyffe Hall);  
Queens and their Consorts (Marie Antoi-  
nette and the Duchesse de Polignac);  
Poets (Sappho, Renee Vivien, Akiko Yo-  
sano); Artists (Marie Laurencin, Rosa  
Bonheur); Writers (Margaret Fuller,  
Mary Wollstonecraft); and Pathbreakers  
(Carey Thomas).  

I include these two rather obscure  
books not for their artistic merit (as  
literature, the articles are very un-  
even in quality), but because they re-  
present other kinds of voices - working  
class, non-academic - which, like les-  
bian voices, have gone so long unheard.  

A highly literate book, thoroughly  
researched and well documented, which  
has met with critical approval and which  
may be a little easier to locate, is  
Jan Rule's "Lesbian Images," published  
by Doubleday in 1975, and in paperback  
by Pocket Books in 1976. In her pre-  
face, Rule introduces her study as "a  
statement of my own attitudes toward  
lesbian experience as measured against  
the images of other women writers in  
their work and/or lives!" Introductory  
chapters discuss her personal experi-  
ences as a lesbian novelist, give some  
historical background, and present ob-  
servations and analyses of social at-  
titudes toward lesbianism. These are  
followed by biographical sketches and  
lesbian perspectives of the writing of  
twelve authors, including Radclyffe  
Hall, Gertrude Stein, Violette Leduc,  
Dorothy Baker, and May Sarton. The final  
chapters give an overview of the lesb-  
ian in fiction from the 1930s to the  
1960s, and a commentary on the (then)  
recent nonfiction work of such cont-  
emporary writers as Del Martin and  
Phyllis Lyon, Jill Johnston, and Robin  
Morgan.  

Of her relationship to the writers  
she examines in this book, “brilliantly  
articulate women... (who) by the acts of  
living and writing have taken their own  
lives into their own hands," Rule says,  
"I am proud...to share such a risk and  
such a heritage." We, too, can be  
proud of our lesbian legacy.  

* * * * * *  

A Feminist Approach to Alcoholism...  
Fran Hill, available to address women's  
groups. Individuals, by appointment.  
Call 247-1471.  

ARIADNE, A Novel of Ancient Crete  

by June Raclury Brindel  

Brindel uses the device of two  
narrators: Ariadne, princess in line  
of succession to the throne of Crete  
and High Priestess of the Mother Cult,  
and Daedalus, architect and inventor,  
refugee from Athens, mentor to Aria-  
dne and observer of events to tell  
the story of the fall of matriarchy  
and the establishment of male chari-  
smatic leadership in the ancient  
world. This enables her to compensate  
for the limited vision of Ariadne,  
secluded in the palace, with Daedalus'  
wider knowledge of events.  

The opening chapter sets the scene  
by relating the child Ariadne's con-  
scious observation of the death of a  
sacrificial bull. Ariadne is told to  
call all the women in her family to  
witness the contribution by the Goddess.  
Raised by priestesses, Ariadne is aware  
of her future, conscious of her mother's  
preoccupation with sensuality and distant  
from her father Minos. Although she had  
felt close to her oldest brother Androgeos,  
she has little affection for Tauros and  
her separation from them to prepare her  
for her duties has left a gulf. She relies  
strongly on her nurse Mirope and is  
completely preoccupied in learning the  
rituals and dances of the cult. Her only  
companion is Icarus whom she loves. Her  
mother Pasiphae dies in childbirth  
after hearing of the death of her  
eldest son following a quarrel at the  
Attic games. The child is believed  
to be sired by her son Tauros in Minos'  
absence. This precipitates the con-  

Cont'd on P 4  

* * * * * *  

You are cordially invited to the  

Metropolitan  
Community  
Church:  

With a special ministry to gay  
women & men  

Sundays, 7:30 p.m.  
Information: 945-3973  

* * * * * *