ALL SHE WROTE APRIL 8  
< cont, from p. 17 :  

index. One extremely useful feature  

is the "Special Issues and Publications" SURVEY CONTINUED Don't  
section which lets you know about SEXUAL HARASSMENT Yes No Know  
journals which have devoted an issue 44) I have experienced sexual harassment in one or more of my jobs.  
to a women's topic. The Abstracts 45) I have been fired at some point in my working life because of  
began in 1972; we now have a valuable 46) I consider sexual harassment to be a serious problem in the workplace.  

index to a decade of writing on and 47) There needs to be better procedures to complain about sexual  
occurring in the workplace?  
48) Do you think morale at work suffers when sexual harassment is  

Hamilton's general collection  
contains women's works in literature,  

history, science, psychology, religion,  
and other topics. If yes, why do you believe they don't? (Check all that apply.)  

Access is through the card catalog for 30% to keep profits up  
works prior to 1980 and the COM 26% to fight inflation  
catalog (a microfiche system) for 16% to economic costs  
works catalogued since then. You  
can read the latest political study  
or brush up on your herstory with  
a book by one of the Pankhursts. The  
Library has tried to assemble a  
collection with a representative  

This section resulted in a lot of interesting information. Unfortunately  
it is hard to compile, so this will be part of the in-depth report we are  
planning.  

PERSONAL INFORMATION: We are asking the following questions to help us determine exactly  
who we are representing and your problems and needs so that we can  
act effectively.  
1. Age __ 2. U.S. Immigrant 14 Yes 86 No 3. 100 Female Male  
4. Marital Status 48 Married 4 Separated 4? 35. Yes 61. No  

An important aspect of establishing  
a good women's studies library lies  
in the periodical holdings. Hamilton's  
shelves house feminist journals for  
the scholar and popular titles like  
Ms. A partial list of significant  

THE FOLLOWING ARE EXPLANATIONS FOR ITEMS MARKED WITH AN ASTERISK  
31. This question reflects the percentage  

serials at UH includes: Broadsheet, of the total who checked each box.  
National NOW Times, Feminist Studies, 1. Job titles with over 3% of the survey: 37.,38. These questions require a different  
Frontiers, Heresies, International Title Number Percentage  
Journal of Women's Studies, The Longest clerk 1  
Revolution, Off Our Backs, Quest, secretary 17  
Signs, Feminist Forum, Psychology of bookkeeper 18  
Women Quarterly, and, of course, telephone operator 39  
All She Wrote! The early years of manager/supervisor 39  
the modern women's movement saw an incredible outpouring of organization  
newsletters and journals. At UH, we  

have most of these titles in the Herstory  
microfilm collection which contains  
the International Women's History  
Periodical Archives. Through the  
periodicals preserved on microfilm  
— the reader can trace the emergence  
of significant issues such as lesbian  
rights.  

I have only touched on a few major  
reference works and glancingly noted  
the wealth of books and periodicals in  
Hamilton Library. The undergraduate  
collection at Sinclair also contains  
a good number of feminist works. I  
urge you to explore for yourselves  
the amazing body of literature created  
by the women's movement. If your  
interests center on Hawaii or the  
Pacific area, we have special collections  
at UH which offer regional works. I  
should add that you will need either  
a student I.D. or an off-campus  
borrower's card to take books out of  
the libraries. As a librarian, I  
hope you will consult my colleagues  
at the reference desk when you have  
questions. We gladly accept suggestions  
of titles to order, funds permitting.  

Name  

Address  

Enclose $5 for each yearly subscription  
(8 issues). Institutions/foreign subscriptions  
are $10. Make check or money order to  

Ka Huliau and Send to:  

Ka Huliau  
P.O. Box 61337  
Honolulu, HI 96822-8337  

D.C. Gazette/CPF  

-- KAREN PEACOCK  

You are cordially invited to the  

TO SINK THE PAST BENEATH OUR FEET, BE SURE  
THE FUTURE WOULD NOT STAND.  
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING  
TO LOOK BACKWARD FOR A WHILE IS TO REFRESH THE EYE, TO RESTORE IT, AND TO  
RENDER IT THE MORE FIT FOR ITS PRIME FUNCTION OF LOOKING FORWARD.  

With a special ministry to gay  
women & men  
Meeting at 2500 Pali Highway  
Sundays, 7:30 p.m.  
Information: 945-3973  

MARGARET FAIRLESS BARBER  

From The Quotable Woman, edited by Elaine Partnow.