SEC OLY

PAGE 12

Se  
Uy ce  

2M, THE WOMEN’S HEALTH  

S  

CENTER COLLECTIVE  

closed clinic on  

THANKS TO DR. DONALD CHAR, THE UH STUDENT HEALTH SERVICE  
WILL HOUSE OUR MEDICAL RECORDS AND RELEASE THEM TO THE  

INDIVIDUAL CLIENT UPON HER WRITTEN REQUEST,  

June 25.  

We give thanks TO PATSY MINK, RUTHANNA BROWN, BART KANE,  

Dr. Lily Ning, Dr. Jane Fyrberg and Dr. David McEwan who gave us help and support  

in our alternative women's  

health care program.  

ALOH A PRAISE! TO: Eten ARO, SHERRY CHIKUMA, BARBARA HARRIS,  

TINA KIRKHAM, ELIZABETH LEE, LESLIE MCALLISTER, MARILYN MARTAM, CASSIE SQUIRES,  

AND THE WOMEN’S CENTER AT UNIVERSITY YWCA, those women described perfectly by  

Marge Piercy “who submerged in the task... who are not parlor generals  

and field deserters but move in a common rhythm when the food must come  

in or the fire be put out.  

LOVE FROM:  

%  
~  
o  

v  

fo Vicky Pratr  
Kathy Hallock  

HEALTHFUL HINTS  

INTRODUCTION:  

This article covers some basic facts  
about menopause, the symptoms associated  
with this transition, and the benefits  
and risks of hormone replacement  
therapy.  

Menopause is the gradual loss of  
function of the ovaries in women of  
average age of 50. This phase, which may  
last several years, marks the end of  

fertility, and is characterized by the  

decreased output of the hormones, estro-  
gen and progesterone, from the ovaries.  
A small supply of estrogen comes,  
indirectly, from the adrenal gland.  
It produces a hormone called androsten-  
edione, which can be converted into  
estrogen by the body's fat. The phy-  
sical, and some of the psychological,  
problems associated with menopause  
are caused by estrogen withdrawal.  
Some typical symptoms of menopause are  
hot flashes and sweating, cold in the  
hands and feet, headaches, irritability,  
insomnia, dryness of the vaginal  
walls, increased susceptibility to  
arteriosclerosis, and osteoporosis  
(brittle bones). 80% of menopausal  
women have one or more symptoms that  
interfere with their daily routine.  
Note that not every woman experiences  
all of these symptoms. Also, the total  
effect of the withdrawal of estrogen  
depends on the woman's own genetic  
resistance to aging, and her general  

HEALTH  

“TALKING ABOUT MENOPAUSE”  

health. As with menstrual difficulties,  
the healthier you are, the better  
off you will be.  

In the sixties, hormone replacement  
therapy became used for the relief of  
menopausal difficulties. Replacement  
of the natural hormone in estrogen  
replacement therapy (ERT) greatly im-  
proved the quality of life in women  
who suffer. Then in the mid 70's, the  
media began to report higher than  
normal rates of endometrial (the lin-  
ing of the uterus) cancer in women who  
had been on ERT, and many gave up the  
treatment.  

Dr. Penny Wise Budoff was treating  
her menopausal patients with a hormone  
replacement therapy that she believed  
would greatly reduce their risk of  
cancer. Dr. Budoff of New York State  
University is a true pioneer in the  
research and treatment of women's  
health problems. Her therapy was es-  
trogen, but included a monthly inject-  
ion of progesterone, or progesterone in  
the form of Provera tablets. Her  
patients had monthly periods.  

This treatment made a great deal of  

sense because it more closely matched  

the complete hormonal output of the  
ovaries. The addition of progesterone  
caused a much more controlled  
development and shedding of the lining  

of the uterus. On estrogen therapy  
alone, the endometrium is continuously  
stimulated and the cells overgrow and  
pile up, in a way that is disturbingly  
similar to a precancerous cell over-  
crowding. With progesterone as well  
as estrogen, the uterus is efficiently  
cleaned out each month, just as nature  
intended.  

Every woman who is considering hor-  
mone replacement therapy should be  
carefully screened by her doctor. If  

you have any of the following condi-  
tions, you should not consider the treat-  
ment: 1) breast cancer, 2) uterine can-  
cer, 3) known or suspected pregnancy,  
4) past history of thrombophlebitis  
(blood clots). Also, there are some  
relative contraindications to the treat-  
ment, and women with these conditions  
may take hormones, but must be carefully  
monitored. So check with your  
doctor.  

At this time, the exact role of es-  
trogen in stimulating uterine cancer is  
unclear, and the individual will have  
to balance the risks against the bene-  
fits for herself. But hormone replace-  
ment therapy is the best medicine can  
offer for the relief of menopausal  
symptoms.