PAGE 6&6

commentary

COMMENT ON WORD CHOICE IT'S TIME FOR A
by PEGGY SULLIVAN-MILLER LESBIAN!!!

by JAY MAYS, M.A.

I would like to make a short, but what I consider necessary comment, in regards to what I see as derogatory word choice in Liz Hagan's “One Dollar Column" (Sept./Oct. issue)... Staring out of the page is the word, "Buddha heads"... on the same page is an ad for Womansword bookstore advocating "non-racist" books... "queer," etc.; nor do I imagine those who are tagged as "Buddha heads" appreciate it... 

I would like all of us to consider words before we say them or write them: their connotations, how they affect others, how they pigeonhole and perpetuate stereotypes/attitudes of ignorance... 

For the last nine years our community has been served by a non-profit corporation called the Sexual Identity Center. William E. Woods, M.P.H., is the Executive Director and founder. He has put in long, sometimes very thankless hours over the nine years building up the S.I.C., and he is now working hard opening up their office in a new location (2139 Kuhio Ave., Suite 213). As lovingly as I can possibly put it: the man needs a rest.

Inhalation of foreign objects is the most common cause of accidental death under age six in the home, according to the American Lung Association of Hawaii. For more info in preventing such fatalities contact Charlotte Beal, 537-5967; 455-7536. 

The editors of ASW thank Azteca Mexican Restaurant, 3569 Waialae Ave., Kaimuki, for allowing us to spend hours editing this issue, over delicious dinner, in their restaurant. 

I have a legitimate quarrel with the S.I.C. and its Board of Directors. Namely: is it healthy for any organization to keep a leader for so long? And why keep a leader who obviously has lost the support of many Lesbians and Gay men of Hawaii? I could easily name names but I won't. It will suffice to say that I continue to love Mr. Woods and I simply have not been able to convince myself that I should hate him (though Goddess knows there are reasons to). For personal reasons of my very own I still like the man, but I am in all sincerity publicly asking him to resign and to look for new projects (there are lots of needs in our community which are not being met and for which he would be more effective doing). 

Politically and professionally, I attended the S.I.C. Board of Directors meeting and said the same thing (albeit emotionally). 

On the "Gay Information Services" hotline (926-2910) you will hear Mr. Woods say, “Our taped information service is provided as a community service by Hawaii's only gay community service agency, the Sexual Identity Center." I take issue with that statement, especially the fact that it leaves out wimmin so very much. So do the S.I.C. programs, though this is not all his fault. When we get upset with the S.I.C., we simply cease to support it. We pull out, ignore and refuse to refer our friends to the S.I.C. That is part of feminist ideology--- to withdraw your support. Many of my friends have done this, both men and wimmin. 

However, if the organization doesn't die and continues to provide a position of power to a person with serious (or even minor) problems serving wimmin, isn't it sensible to take some action beyond mere ignoring of that person or organization? How can we ask society in general to treat wimmin equally until we clean up our own organizations? I maintain that the S.I.C. serves men primarily, some 90% of the time, and really needs to clean up its own act. 

It's time for a Lesbian executive director (and I don't mean me, I'm not even qualified). If our community does not contain a Lesbian (or Gay womon if you prefer) who can do the job, then let's get a non-Gay womon. Please kokua by writing to the S.I.C. with a copy to “All She Wrote" or some womon on the S.I.C. Board (lest your letter be "lost"). Write your feelings, your needs, and your ideas to the S.I.C., P.O. Box 3224, Honolulu, 96801.. Mahalo.

Birkenstock sandals are scientifically designed to make