MAY/JUNE

CONT. from p. 17

other, always being supportive even if
it means that they must confront an in-
dividual woman about behaviors that
have a negative reflection on the wo-
men. In the Women's Movement, there

is no room for individualism. Such be-
havior is seen as an action displayed
with no regard for or accountability

to a group and is done purely in one's
own interest. 

Health and Nutrition are issues of
priority in the women's movement. The
women are very conscious of the
food they eat and that they feed their
families. The Maori women are general-
ly very active and eat healthy meals.
These women participate often in stren-
uous physical labor, as well as being
adept at handling a typewriter or
skilled at photography. This is all
part of their commitment to women be-

coming multiskilled for to be so means
to be more independent. It also means
that the Maori women do not allow them-
selves to be stereotyped as "house-
wives", "unskilled", "stupid",

or other labels given women every-
where.

Amongst the Maori women the word
depression is rarely if ever heard.
This condition is viewed as being un-
necessary and serves only to "suck on
other people's energy". The women
believe that being active and direct-
ing one's energy into the struggle
against oppressors prevents one from
being involved in a condition that
only serves to continue to label wo-
men as "sick" and "weak".

What I have attempted to illustrate
here is the Maori women's commitment to
"stripping the yoke of oppression"

PAGE 18

that for generations have held them
and other women down. The women of
Aotearoa, like other indigenous women,
the Hawai'ians included, firmly be-
lieve that no one is more committed
to liberating women of color, than
women of color. Like the people of
their Nation, the Maori women are also
committed to their people's liberation,
and confronting sexism is part of that
process. For it is in confronting
sexism and racism that the structures
that support the oppressive capitalis-
tic institutions are destroyed.
"Ka WHAWHAI TONU MATOU AKE, AKE, AKE!"
We will fight forever and ever and
ever!

A CHAMORRO WOMAN

Bernadita Dungca, a woman of Chamorro
ethnic origin, is a Pacific Islander
who was born and raised in Guam.
Professor Dungca, a woman who is strik-
ing in appearance, exhibits poise,
strength, confidence, and pride in be-
ing a Chamorro woman. She is a facul-
ty member of the University of Guam,
and speaks out on issues she believes
in. She shared, with Dr. Alice Chai’s
Women's Studies class, some of the cus-
toms of her people and also gave us a
brief history of her own life. She
stated that she was raised atypically

in that she was supported by her
father rather than her mother. Her

mother was also an "atypical" Chamorro
woman in that she had no real influ-
ence in the socialization process of
Professor Dungca’s Chamorro identity.
It was her father that played this
role. She went on to say that usually,
it is the woman's place to raise the
children, run the household, and main-
tain the family as a unit. You see,
Chamorro women hold a very special
and important place in their society.
Historically, the Chamorro race is
an old one. However, it was not until
Magellan "discovered" Guam in the
1500s when the Chamorro people first
became known to the world. 
Currently, the population of Guam
consists of approximately 110,000
people. This figure includes the
United States’ military personnel.
There are approximately 25,000 Chamorro
people (not including "Guamanians")
and 25,000 Filipinos inhabiting Guam.
Due to the wars--beginning with the
Spanish/Chamorro War, WWI, WWII, the
Korean War, and the Vietnam conflict,
the male population decreased. Thus,
the women have historically run the
territory. It was interesting to
learn from Professor Dungca that the
Chamorro culture is based on a matri-
lineal society as opposed to the U.S.
patrilineal society. Thus, the Chamorro
women have a different power struc-
ture than their American female coun-

terparts. For example, historically,
the women had power by controlling the
land, and in the organization of the
people (especially in regards to the
family and upbringing of their chil-
dren). Chamorro women have a great
deal of influence and power in the
Chamorro culture and society but this

- SANDY RHODES

CAMP
MAUNAKAI

A Retreat for Women
in the Mountains and by the Ocean
on the Island of Kauai, Hawaii
Kauai County YWCA

P.O. Box 308
Lihue, HI 96766

is not to say that the Chamorro women
treat their men in a disrespectful
way. This is not so. In fact, in
highly westernized Guam, the Chamorro
couple looks like the typical western
couple. In private however, the
woman runs the home, makes important
decisions, and serves the family.
Another unique thing in Guam
is the fact that legislation has
passed a bill which allots funds
for every household to allow the
building of a typical Chamorro style
kitchen. That really struck me in a
positive way! I don't know of any
other society that does this for
their women. Professor Dungca went
on to say that presently, the govern-
ment is thinking of compensating a
household for either building an
adjacent room to the home or building
a small home in the back so that

the elderly parents can reside near
the family. In Guam, the elderly
are highly valued and respected.
The elderly female is treated like
gold, and the elderly are never
"turned out into the cold". The
concept - FAMILY, is very important
in Chamorro culture. Professor
Dungca came from a very large ex-
tended family consisting of: her
parents, five brothers, four sisters,
four nannies (relatives from the
neighboring islands), one aunt,
cousins, and her uncle. She then
discussed how their family polices their

place of the family as a unit.
The woman's role is a very active
one. Besides having the duty of
keeping and holding the family to-
gether (nuclear and extended), teach-
ing the children respect and Catholi-
cism, they participate in school
organizations, and hold most of the
top managerial positions. One stu-
dent then asked "How do the women
get elected into these managerial
positions?" Professor Dungca smiled
and said that it is a very subtle
process. The women get together,
talk about it, and then they decide!
After learning the unique
positions women hold there, I was
surprised to hear Professor Dungca
say that there are no organized
ethnic women's groups in Guam. In
fact, the ERA is rejected because
it is considered non-traditional
for a Chamorro woman to place her-
self as an equal to a man. Tradi-
tional Chamorro women recognize
that they need their men to carry
on. The men do have power, as do
the women, but to the extent that
a woman will place herself equal
to a man (publicly) is unthought
of. Professor Dungca also stated
that men who hold political posi-
tions must have a strong wife in
order to be recognized. Apparently,
key political positions (i.e. gover-
norship, house speakers etc.) are
considered to be the man's role.
After hearing Professor Dungca
speak, I thought, "This woman has
and displays a lot of self-confidence,
self-awareness, and pride in being
a woman of Chamorro ethnicity."
She is truly a fascinating and
unique individual.