PM rm

r Bc

THOUGHTS ON MENSTRUATION:  
My Daughter's Got Her Period

It was news to me. We had  
prepared for the event for years, it  
seemed, and yet it was still so hard to  
believe. When her health class gave  
lectures on "Becoming a Teenager" to  
the children in her grade level, she  
had ordered samples from a sanitary  
napkin distributor. Months later an  
impressive box with her name on it  
arrived in the mail. Her younger  
sister and I stood back while she  
examined the goods with mild curiosity.  
Hanging her clothes, I noticed the big  
blue container stored in the bottom of  
her closet under assorted outgrown  
games. She is a quiet person. Very  
much in character, she rarely mentioned  
the changes her body marked. We never  
saw her naked or bathing once she  
became an athlete, the newest member of  
the neighborhood girl's basketball  
team. So it went, and I tried not to  
pry, being a newly sensitized mother,  
one determined to stay in communication  
through her teen years. When she  
remarked that one of her friends "got  
her period," I nodded encouragingly.  
She said no more about it. It was  
harder than I thought to stay silent.

My reward came one day when she  
popped out of the bathroom, saying,  
"Mom, it happened." She was excited,  
quite happy. I had tears in my eyes.  
Not much else was said. Our family  
drank to her health that evening in a  
little party—red roses and grilled  
steak—but we knew better than to ask  
her any questions or to say anything to  
mark the passage. We could tell she  
was pleased. I remembered a piece of  
writing I had dedicated to her when she  
was a cuddly five-year-old puppy dog  
eager and very inquisitive about  
everything to do with my body.

You ask me what I feel when I have  
my period. You worry about the pain.  
"How does it feel inside?" You want to  
know about blood and wonder how long it  

will be before it happens to you.  
Here's the journal entry I'll read  
to your grandchildren when they ask me to  
talk about the old days. I, their  
great grandmother, will say to them as  
they sit around me, "It was very  
different when I was young. In the  
first place, women had many babies, too  
many for the planet, very often not by  
choice. They didn't really take charge  

of their bodies, and they were  
considered sufferers. Pain was part of  
the process of childbirth, and every  
woman, except the unusual one, was  
expected to dutifully become a mother  
at least once. That's mainly what we  
married for.

"After the Great Bio-Change of your  
parents' time, when men or women had  
the choice of becoming life carriers,  
when they could choose the sex of the  
baby and when they could determine its  
gene qualities, a great many women  
decided not to mother. The process of  
menstruation, especially, was changed  
with the Red Pill within a year; was it  
2018? Attitudes about this waste blood  
quickly switched from negative to  
positive. No one thought it was a  
shameful thing anymore.

"Here's my voice when I was only 37  
years old.

Other women call it "the curse,"  
"the visitor," "my aunt," "rags," and  
"being sick." Not many people will  
ever openly discuss menstruation,  
especially not at parties or gatherings  
where men and women are together. Most  
women are ashamed of their blood. They  
hide away any evidence of this  
condition every month, possibly even 50  
years of hidden monthly blood. Our  
culture teaches us that menstruation is  
unclean. Women are thought to be  
dirty. Our basic function of periodic  
creativity, once believed sacred, must  
be carefully concealed. We rarely let  
on that we have it. We neutralize  
ourselves with the lacy deodorant of  
feminine behavior.

If I wear a full skirt or a  
gathered muumuu, it might be because I  
feel more protected with lots of material  
to cover my lower torso during my period.  
But what could others see, anyway? Why do  
I fear their opinion of my cleanliness, my  
womanliness? I'm still occasionally  
concerned about spotting my clothes so  
I peek at my underpants, just to check,  
every time I pee: to see if it has  
started, if it's still there or if it  
has ended. Blood is very much like a  
man's attention. A woman has it or she  
doesn't. She can't always control it.  
The word menarche sums it up for the  
presence of the male or blood. Either  
fact is vital information for women.  
Both come together only in the context  
of social recognition of the years of a  
woman's sexual potency. We women,  
however, still proudly advertise the  
male and quietly hide the blood in our  
lives. It is no Red Badge of Courage  
to us.

At thirteen, I wanted to throw away  
being a woman. Because I hated this  
troublesome femaleness, it turned into  
pain which surrounded me with edginess  
during each period. I used to sleep  
through blowsy days of cramps and aches  
or endure endless sensitive days of  
keen awareness when every detail of  
experience showed a glassy edge of  
slippery sharpness. My grandmother,  
who wore rags in her time, would  
massage my back and stomach and tell me  
that it wouldn't be so bad later on.  
She was right.

The sound of a cool gush of faucet  
water gurgling out reminds me of my  
stomach moving into a comfortable,  
aloof menstrual position. At center  
stage, my uterus is "on," humming and  
ticking in agitation like a tiny, magic  
There are hundreds of  
minute actions which become waves  

lapping one over the other to gently  
clean me out. Gravity is the other  
effective force which sucks everything  
out neatly.

This is a letter from my body. The  
message says, "How are you? I am fine.  
Glad you're here."

My mind responds, "Thank God, I'm  
not pregnant this time." Or on one  
occasion, "Why, why couldn't I hold  
that baby?"

Week's end, light blood means  
freedom to dance. My unencumbered  
spirit, airy again, lifts up. What a  
feeling of release when the term is  
over. When it's there, blood fills all  
the cells up, makes the body heavier,  

grows sensations into more weighty  
responses. I experience either  
pondering meaningfulness or remote  
ephemeral reactions. I am a shiny  

saliva bubble, velvet mucus, ready to  

burst on someone else's lip. Women  
say, "I feel bloated," alienated  
continually by perceptions of  
strangeness.

Blood sharpness can also comfort,  
because it centers me roughly. I can  
feel my own warm essence in the moment  
of throbbing inward.

"Is there another taste in my  
mouth?" It's the no-taste of the  
inside of a smooth, old teacup that  
used to hold a warm liquid. My nose  
senses a sticky thickness, murky and  
viscous. But I brush my teeth, use a  
mouthwash, spray on deodorant, peek at  
my panty, and look in the mirror before  
I join other people.

Am I smelling my own musky skin  
perfume or the woman next to me? We  
are, in an audience watching Aki ANCE...  
or Sady Cee. Then, I smell it. Blood-salt...  
acrid. It penetrates. It smells like  
a blend of the salty perspiration of  
an unwashed hand and an evasive smear  
of doggy doo on old leather. It's warm  
and attention-getting in a sweet,  
animal way. It doesn't turn me off for  
once in my life because I have decided  
not to disdain it. I remember a  
familiar ocean bay in the moonlight,  
the ripple of piano notes, and the  
smooth skin of a naked woman's rounded  
belly. What I smell is wrinkled cotton  
and faint menstrual blood. It comes  
from the young woman next to me, of  
course. It can't possibly be me giving  
out brazen information about my  
sexuality. So I check her out. She  
looks clean. She is athletically  
attractive. Why does she allow herself  
to show? Why doesn't she hide, too?  
And I look again at the soft, honest  
face.

"So that's how I began to feel what  
was inside of me for so long, so long  
ago."

Listen, my dear daughter, when your  
turn comes, we will have a family  
party. Father will pick you a night-  
blooming cereus or a magnolia bud or a  
stalk of dark red ginger. We will set  
aflame tall candles at the dinner  
table. We will drink to your health  
with rich burgundy wine. Red meat, red  
bean rice and a fresh red fish will be  
part of our feast. The ending will be  
as sweet as honey dribbled over a mound  
of shaved ice circled by slices of  
melon. We will all go outside to let  

the moon light us up afterwards.  
Mother will hold you tight one moment  
longer. And the music will flow out of  
our house into the night for you.

Mary Wakayama