Oh Wow Cont'd from P. 10

That evening, Gail borrowed Fran's long muumuu for the Frosh Dance. The muumuu was backless with a plunging neckline. She looked at herself in the mirror and smiled. Not bad, she thought, pretty daring for a Maui girl. She applied a last touch of lip gloss, licking her lips and looking again in the mirror. Fran was putting on a backless dress, too. She wasn't wearing any underwear.

Since living with Fran, Gail was less embarrassed about her own body. Fran, unlike all the local Japanese girls, was completely unashamed of hers. She'd walk naked down the hall from her shower, like she was walking down a high diving board, full of grace and confidence. When she had her period, you could see her tampon string between her thighs. She was quite a sight then, bath towel wrapped around her long washed hair, her beautiful straight, soft back, round athletic ass, and tampon string swinging to her confident step. The sight of Fran walking down the hall like that made some girls step back quickly into their rooms or stare at their feet while she passed them. Some girls would glare at her in disgust. When Gail caught sight of her, it made her smile and think what a neat roommate she had.

When Tim saw the two of them at the dorm entrance, he lifted his eyebrows, shook his shaggy blond hair, and let out a "wow!" Gail blushed and bristled at the same time. But she relished his 'wow' anyway. He wore expensive jeans tight enough to show off his nice ass and long muscular legs; a cream t-shirt that hugged his arms and chest and fell loosely to his waist, and of course, a pair of worn-out rubber slippers. Gail watched him take Fran's hand and start across the campus. Fran yelled, "Be good girl!" Gail yelled back, "You too," as they turned the corner of the building.

Gail waited for the rest of the girls, then with them, walked across the campus towards the boys' dorm social hall where the dance was being held. She liked the excited talk about clothes and boys. Every girl's love life was speculation at this point, and they all teased each other happily.

She felt like “wow” tonight.

They laughed and talked till they neared the entrance of the social hall, then they shut up and walked in quietly. Inside, it was dark. There was crepe paper everywhere and Christmas lights along the walls. A shaky, mirrored ball hanging from the ceiling weakly reflected the colored lights. Clumps of girls and clumps of boys avoided the empty space in the middle of the room meant for dancing. A band from another high school played loudly.

Everyone tried to eye each other in the dark. Gail couldn't figure out who was who beyond her clump of girls, so she sat on the floor. The music began and she watched the gradual movement of boys and girls from their clumps. A boy or two would leave their clump, go over to a girl clump, and ask for a dance. They'd dance, then quickly return to their original clump. Gail noticed a boy walking towards her. It was Mark, one of the haole twins. He tapped her on the shoulder.

"Would you like to dance?"

"Sure," she said, suddenly feeling unsure.

Mark asked her to dance several times that night, and both of their clumps began to notice and talk. Clayton Shintani, the Molokai boy, asked her to dance several times, too.

"You like dance?" he asked.

She nodded shyly and followed him out to the dance floor. He danced far away from her, barely looking at her, unlike Mark who danced very close and looked at her all the time. Gail wouldn't look at either of them.

Back and forth like that, she danced. Gail's clump was squirming with speculation by the end of the night.

"Gail, Clayton like you, eh?"

"Not," Gail said, shaking her head.

"Nah, nah."

"Eh, Gail, you like Mark, eh?"

"Nah."

On and on all night long. After much prodding from his clump, Clayton finally asked Gail if he could walk her back to the dorm. They walked parallel to each other, three feet apart and said good night from the same distance.

"Well, what happened?" Fran asked, as Gail came into the room.

"I had dance with Mark and Clayton, and then Clayton had walk me back. Big deal, he nevah even hold my hand. What did you and Tim do?"

"Well," Fran paused, a slow grin coming over her face.

"Well, what," Gail said, teasing.

"Neva mind, you wouldn't believe me."

"What!" 

"He finger fucked me. He stuck his finger up my ching ching and taught me how to jerk him off at the same time. Talk about one big boto!"

"Where'd you do it?"

"At the park, in the clump of trees behind the bathroom. Man, you wouldn't believe how many guys were out there. We got high with some of 'em before we did our own thing."

"Got high?"

"Yeah, you know, smoke dope. Tim got plenty pakalolo."

"Now."

"You wanna get high with us sometime?"

"Maybe, we better go sleep, it's getting late."

Gail didn't have a chance to be with Fran the next day. She and Tim were together every chance they got, and Gail saw them disappearing into the park at every break between classes. Gail didn't eat all day.

That evening after dinner, in the dining hall shared by both the boys and the girls, Mark asked Gail if he could walk her up to the dorm. This was the traditional beginning of coupling at HPA. Boys met their girlfriends after dinner and walked them up to the girls' dorm.

Mark took her hand and led her toward the trees just below the dorm. Her hand felt sweaty and numb. They had fifteen minutes before check-in. Mark chose a spot further away from the other couples and they sat down.

"So...how's basketball Mark?"

"We're still in pre-season practices."

"Um...where are you from?"

"L.A."

"L.A....oh, really...what part?"

"Lawndale."

"Why don't you lie down here, Gail."

"Um...um," Gail muttered. She reclined under the pressure of his palm on her shoulder. “Uh, what kind of classes do you have?” Gail asked.

“English, Algebra, Bible...," he answered. He looked at his watch, stood up, and brushed off his clothes. "Looks like it's time to go in," he told her. The other couples appeared and began walking to the dorm. Mark helped Gail up, then put his arm around her like the other couples. They were the only freshmen, but they tried to act like the older couples. When they were almost at the door, Gail turned to say good night. Mark pulled her towards him and pressed his lips against hers, his eyes closed, her eyes open. She felt his tongue pushing between her lips against her teeth, and she could see the other couples walking by them to the door and taking a quick look. She closed her eyes, opened her mouth and let his tongue in, pretending bliss, for the two seconds it was in her mouth before she pulled away. She didn't dig it.

Gail rushed into the dorm. A senior girl who had just left her boyfriend smiled knowingly at Gail. She smiled back and ran up to her room. She wanted to tell Fran what had happened, but she wasn't here. She hadn't come in for check-in after dinner: the dorm heads were looking for her. Gail fell asleep waiting. In the middle of the night, she woke to squeaking springs from the top bunk where

Cont'd to P. 13