PAGE 4

TEA CEREMONY

BARBARA MORI

Many people who know me as an open, assertive woman involved in a variety of activities associated with a feminist perspective on life find it difficult to reconcile these aspects of me with my long-term and equally active involvement in Chado (The Way of Tea, Japanese tea ceremony). Chado is stereotypically thought of as an activity for passive, traditionally oriented women. While there is some truth to this belief, it only reflects a small portion of the activities that are subsumed under the study of Chado, which is a discipline as well as an art form and may be more true of its practice in Japan than here in Hawaii. Chado began as an activity for men only, and women were unable to teach the art until 1941, although they were allowed to attend and practice it earlier. Its history is one of male tea masters who have left behind major contributions to every aspect of Japanese culture. To become a master requires 15-20 years, unless one is able to study full-time for 3 or more years at a special school like that provided by Urasenke. The student not only learns to perform a variety of ceremonies at different levels of complexity and formality, using a wide variety of utensils, reflecting seasonal variations, but also engages in other arts associated with Chado such as flower arranging, ceramics, gardening, calligraphy, lacquer work, tea house architecture, cooking, kimono wearing, etc., and to make and maintain the utensils and tea house. To do this is no mean feat and establishes a personal reputation of an aesthetic, cultivated person, a chajin.

My interest in Chado began as a result of being assigned as a teaching assistant (TA) to Dr. V. Dixon Morris. He asked me to assist him with the Way of Tea course when he took over the responsibilities for teaching the course from Dr. Betty Winchester (who is now a nun in Daitokuji temple in Kyoto) in January of 1979. My duties as a TA included preparing and grading exams, lecturing, counseling students, and working with Mr. Yoshibumi Ogawa on the practicum part of the course. In so doing, I found myself entering a new world which had come to have much significance in both my professional and personal life.

In the fall of 1979, I embarked upon a course of study which should culminate in a Ph.D. degree in Sociology in the not too distant future. As I learned methods and theories to study human society, it became quite natural to choose Chado as a phenomenon toward which to direct my inquiries on the importance and types of human interaction and the transmission of values and patterns across generations and cultures. Thus, this has become the focus of my graduate research and dissertation.

On the personal level, I found a haven from the storms of graduate life and the many life crises and problems that have beset me in the past four and a half years in the calm quiet of the tea house and the flowing rhythms of the temae (tea preparation) and attendant rituals. The terms wa, expressed in Chado not only as harmony but as balance, and jaku, tranquility, or calm space, illustrate the elusive characteristics needed to be internalized to carry out and participate fully in a busy professional and personal life.

To come to an understanding of one's spirit is not an easy task. There are many ways a woman may choose to develop spiritual awareness. Some do it at the cost of worldly involvement. Others must persist in our connection to the world and accept it as part of what enables a spirit to grow and accept that the body is the only means we have to perceive the world around us. In recognizing this, as a limitation or not, a person then begins to contemplate not only the interconnectedness between mind and body, spirit and body but also the importance of form.

"While Zen teaching consists in grasping the spirit by transcending form, it unfailingly reminds us of the fact that the world in which we live is a world of particular forms and that the spirit expresses itself only by means of form."

Chado strikes me as a particularly apt way to delve into the relationship between spirit and form and to use form and patterned movements to reach with the Zen approach to life which relies not on an intellectual grasp and verbal expression of the relationships a person is in or the realities a person experiences but instead cultivates an intuitive grasp of these through a predominantly non-verbal method of apprehension and expression. While some find this is in stressful conflict with the intellectual modes of their academic training, I have felt this as a complementary or alternate method that can be applied to the exploration of social and non-social phenomena. Rather than being locked in only one method of inquiry, the "scientific" question, answer, testing pattern of information gathering and processing, I am also able to develop an alternative form which includes those components but relies more on sense data, that does not stress that gained by the use of language. Zen training concentrates on an awareness of all the information that is coming to the mind and not listening only to that brought in by the eyes and ears.

In learning anything, art, skill or content, the learner also becomes enmeshed in a set of relationships in the learning and transmission process. These relationship patterns are important to the transmission of the content for they reflect the values and societal configurations in which that content is used. Having had opportunities to live and travel abroad, mostly in Asian countries, I am interested in the different types of relationship patterns these societies have developed and their ways of transmitting these patterns. Particularly now, there is a 'Learn From Japan’ movement advocated by Dr. Ezra Vogel from Harvard and others in the fields of economics and business who are impressed by Japan's phenomenal success in these areas accompanied by minimal political disruptions. As the wife of a Japanese, I have had some firsthand experience of the forces that are brought to bear on an individual to fit them into roles in society and of the role I was to play in introducing my son into Japanese society. As a foreigner, there were some aspects of these different relationships and the behavioral expectations with which I was very uncomfortable and others which I found quite congenial.

Chado also provides several types of relationships: teacher-student, host-guest, senpai (senior)-kohai (junior), that are a part of the interpersonal structuring blocks of Japanese society. The basic pattern of these relationships has been identified and expressed most singularly by Dr. Takeo Doi in his analysis of dependence (amae) in Japanese society and its ideal in the mother-child relationship. While Westerners perceive dependence as a negative, a restraint on the personal growth of the individual, dependence or interdependence can also be felt as providing a secure base from which to explore and a refuge in times of trouble. In a society where no one can be an island for lack of physical space, then as Donne perceived, each person's loss diminishes me and each man's gain can be my own. I am also seeking a balance where my relationship to others can be a source of security, strength and satisfaction that recognizes the needs of others but minimizes the sense of constraint those needs imply.

Freedom for personal expression is considered an important aspect of life in American society. For me, this is included in a quest for the beautiful.

R.L. Smith and Associates, Inc.  
Securities  

Suite 409  

1311 Kapiolani Blvd,  

Honolulu, Hawaii 96814  
Telephone 808 528-2900  

res. 947-6899  

Gisele Emi Pohan  
Account Executive