third photo from  
photos from the philippines  

girl cousins  

my mother said  

they are all younger than you  

this one looks like she's french  

she has big round eyes  

this other one looks like princess grace  
she has a long neck  

and pale graceful arms  

they wear levis, calvin kleins  

and short haircuts like in vogue magazine  
in fashion because they work in manila  

one in a candy factory  

one in a pharmacy  

one a local hairstylist  

one in high school still  

they have names like ruth venus athena helen  
and only return to the barrio on vacations and holidays  

i am short and small with almond eyes  
i do not buy calvin kleins or levis  
i do not read vogue  
my father named me after my mother  
which she still complains about to this day  
manila is as strange to me as new york  
and the only philippines i know is the barrio  
but my photographs line the wall  
of my grandmother's front room  
one for every year in america  
“sent dutifully by my mother  
and my girl-cousins gossip about me  
as though i lived next door,  
not an ocean and a visa away.  

copyright 1985 by v.r. cerenio  

"in manila, squatters throw stones at soldiers  
armed with American bullets  

and orders for eviction  

twelve year old Mary Grace Santiago, fallen  
into a pool of her own blood  

rushed into the white tomb of an ambulance  
dies in an hour's breadth of time."  

7/25/85  

hail mary, full of grace  

yet too slow to escape  

the staccato notes of machine gun fire  

the lord is with thee  

the twelve years of your squatter childhood  
fallen into a red pool of your own blood  

blessed art thou among women.  

though you will never know  

beyond your mother's tear-filled kiss  
the miracle of your body,  

changing with the seasons  

blessed is the fruit of thy womb  

the life you have sacrificed for this:  
the rain gutter roof for your family  
the smelly alleys lined with open sewers  
your playground, your home.  
holy mary, pray for us sinners  

the soldiers who fight brothers, sisters, parents, and cousins  
who torture and kill the young and old.  
pray for us now, mary grace  

and at this hour  

as you draw your last shuddering breath  

forgive us for trespassing  

the innocence of your childhood.  

copyright 1985 by v.r. cerenio  

PAGE 4 ALL SHE WROTE FALL 1986  

Se  

I am an orange  
cherry  
gook  

boat person  
foot person  
guerilla  
legend  
fact  

fiction  
vision  
souvenir  
seed  
memory  
metaphor  
myth  

american, a.e.  

"Made in America."  

Genny Lim says in her poem,  

Puanani Burgess, Alice Chai, Helen Nagtalon-Miller and  
June Shimokawa also defined themselves in the opening  
panel of the Fourth Biennial Conference of the National  
Network of Asian and Pacific Women held in Honolulu in  
August. They addressed being Hawaiian-Japanese, Korean,  
Filipino and Japanese in or from Hawaii, respectively,  
on the topic, "The Asian and Pacific Woman: Who am I,  
What do I do and Why? An Effort to Understand Asian  
and Pacific Women and How They Can Work Together."  

"In many ways, I still define, identify myself in ways that  
I think has meaning for others," said June Shimokawa,  
executive director of the YWCA of Oahu for the past year,  
"by my name and that I am a Japanese-American, by my place  

of birth (the Big Island of Hawaii), my job."  
"I'd like to reach the point," she continued, "where I can  
identify myself by my beliefs and values. So that I say:  

I am a person, a woman, who values life with meaning, not  
just existence, love and justice prevailing.  

I am a person, a woman, who values fostering a sense of  
community among people who share a common space.  

I am a person, a woman, who values her Christian faith,  
which serves as her source of life, energizing her to  
act on issues of justice, with compassion.  

I am a person, a woman, who values belief in the democratic  
process."  

But until society lets us identify ourselves in those ways,  
we will need to continue to say we are "hyphenated-Americans"  
and to think of ourselves collectively--as "Asian Americans"  
and "Asian and Pacific Islanders"--in political, rather than  
cultural, terms.  

Virginia R. Cerenio and Genny Lim provide additional  
perspectives on this issue with their poems.  

In her biography, in Without Names, Virginia is described as  
a second generation Filipino American whose work has  
appeared in numerous publications, including Liwanag (1976),  
Bridge magazine (1978), Berkeley Fiction Review, U.C. Berkeley  
(1983), East Wind magazine (1978), Asian Journal, Columbia  
University (1985), Breaking Silence, Anthology of Contemporary  
Filipino American Poets, Grizzly Press (1983),  
and will be appearing in a soon-to-be-published Asian  
women's anthology.  

"Genny Lim: My Pop owned the first LaSalle in Chinatown,  
He wore a suit every day. Walked lean and erect like the  
Coit Tower. He taught me how to dance the rhumba, the  
cha-cha-cha from Prado to Puente and sang Chinese opera  
at the top of his lungs when he felt good. GUM SAN was a  
mask of cloth with Mom spreading her fingers over its  

seams night and day, stitching her way to the American  
dream. She gave birth to seven kids. I am SIU KUM (Little  
Lute), the seventh born. Second generation, Toisan, THLEE-  
YIP (fourth dialect), JOOK-SING, home-grown North Beach-San  
Francisco Chinatown Kwan-tung village street child," is  
how Genny describes herself in the current issue of Bamboo  
Ridge, The Hawaii Writer's quarterly.  

P. F. Ranne