- NOV/DEC

CONFERENCE

NUCLEAR FREE AND INDEPENDENT PACIFIC  
CONFERENCE VANUATU-1983

By Nani Fernandez

“This century has seen spontaneous  
massive and bloody resistance against  
the iniquitous system of colonialism.  
In these closing years of the century,  
it is absolutely intolerable to allow  
the freedom, independence and cultural  
heritage of small nations and cultural  
minorities to be denigrated and des-  
troyed by the racial and cultural ar-  
rogance of larger nations....Indepen-  
dence for the peoples of these (Paci-  
fic) territories is their inalienable  
right, as it is the inalienable right  
of all the peoples of all the world.  
That right is not negotiable!"

Thus the fourth Nuclear Free and  
Independent Pacific Conference held  
in Port Vila, Vanuatu, July 10-20,  
1983, began with strong statements of  
support delivered on behalf of the  
government of this newly independent  
Nation by the Honourable Sethy  
Reganvanu, Deputy Prime Minister, in  
his opening address to conference par-  
ticipants, guests and the huge audi-  
ence of Ni-Vanuatu who turned out en  
masse to support the opening of the  
conference.

This year's conference was attend-  

ed by 160 delegates, representative of  
Pacific rim nations. As diverse as the  
cultures were the organizations, for  
delegates came from indigenous independence move-  
ments, anti-nuclear movements, trade  
unions, peace, church, solidarity and  
women's organizations.

This diversity speaks, not only for  
the vast numbers and different back-  
grounds of the people working to free  
the Pacific from all aspects of foreign  
political dominance, colonialism and  
resource exploitation, but also for  
the growth in size and strength of this  
movement over the years. It clearly  
indicates that Pacific peoples will no  
longer tolerate the misuse of our  
human, land and ocean resources, wheth-  
er it be the political/economic domina-  
tion of Pacific peoples by immigrant  
European and American populations; the  
exploitation of our lands and displace-  
ment of our people for such interests  
as uranium and nickel mining, live-  
stock ranching, tourism development or  
military bases; or the contamination  
of our oceans with nuclear tests, with  
nuclear waste dumping or with the  
routine release of radioactive waste  
from nuclear powered military sub-  
marines and ships which patrol our  
waters "keeping peace".

As previously mentioned, this was  
the fourth such conference to bring  
together these diverse activists for  
the purpose of educating one another  
on progress and problems of our respec-  
tive countries, building a more cohe-  
sive and unified movement, and devel-  
oping strategies for the future. As  

did the last conference, held in  

Hawaii in 1980, this year's conference  
further increased delegates' political  
consciousness and comprehension--it  
was a learning experience for everyone.

ALL SHE WROTE

Back in 1980, indigenous representa-  
tives took a strong stand to educate the  
predominantly white church, peace and  
anti-nuclear activists that nuclear is-  
sues cannot be promoted while issues of  
independence, self-determination and  
land take a back seat in the movement.  
The objective was to unify these two  
aspects of oppression by the common  
enemy, and this move resulted in the  
changing of the name from the Nuclear  
Free Pacific to the Nuclear Free and  
Independent Pacific Movement (NFIP),  
but, more importantly, the move brought  
the larger scope of Pacific politics  
into focus.

Similarly, at this year's conference,  
antagonism between some indigenous and  
non-indigenous delegates regarding  
movement priority, gave rise to an  
unscheduled meeting of all indigenous  
delegates, held in order to collective-  
ly determine our position on the ques-  
tion of what should be more heavily em-  
phasized--nuclear issues or independ-  
ence struggles. The consensus was  
that the two issues are integrally  
inter-related and therefore inseparable.

With the increased awareness of the  
connection between colonization and  
the exploitation of the Earth, as a  
natural development, the outcome of  
the conference, after three days of  
plenaries and six days of intensive  
workshops and deliberations, was that  
the independence struggles of New  
Caledonia, East Timor, West Papua  

and Tahiti were targeted as priority.

Another great stride forward at  
this conference was the increased  
participation of women, particularly  
indigenous Pacific women. Women  
representing Belau, Guam, the Marshall  
Islands, the Philippines, Mauritius,  
Fiji, Tuvalu, Kiribati, Western Samoa,  
Hawaii, Aotearoa (New Zealand) and the  
American Indian Movement greatly en-  
riched the predominantly male confer-  
ence. Their strength and political  
discipline was an invaluable contri-  
bution toward the success of the con-  
ference.

In several meetings arranged among  
ourselves during free time periods,  
indigenous women caucused over issues  
of relevance that surfaced in the dy-  
namics of the conference. These meet-  
ings served many purposes, including  
but not limited to improved communi-  
cation, increased respect for one  
another and the inevitable bond that  
developed as we are all women fighting  
for the futures of our Earth and our  
children.

While it is not possible to cite all  
the contributions of these incredible  
women, there are a few particularly  
outstanding and charismatic individuals  
whose energy and dedication was a  
source of inspiration for us all.

One such woman was Rada Gungaloo  
from Mauritius. Petite, yet driven,  
Rada spoke energetically of the forced  
removal of her people from their home-  
land, their struggle for independence  
and their present state of neo-coloni-  
alism, drawing parallels between the  
militarism of the Indian Ocean with the  
militarism of the Pacific, and the sub-  
sequent impact of militarism on native  
peoples. It was also Rada who intro-  

duced a proposal calling on future  
NFIP conferences to provide child care  
facilities for women with small chil-  
dren, a proposal adopted by the con-  
ference.

From the Republic of Belau, articu-  
late and graceful Tina Rechucher called  
on conference delegates to support  
Belau's struggle to preserve their  
unique nuclear free constitution, in  
the face of enormous political, eco-  
nomic and surreptitious manipulation  
by the United States to undermine and  
nullify their constitution in order to  
accommodate U.S. military interests in  
Belau. The key to all this is the con-  
troversial U.S. Compact of Free Associ-  
ation which, had it been approved by  
Micronesian voters, would have result-  
ed in a huge U.S. military base in  
Belau in exchange for economic aid, a  
thinly disguised attempt to further  
bind Belau into dependency on the  
U.S.A.

From further North, Biram Stege of  
the Marshall Islands expanded on a  
different aspect of U.S. "activities"  
in Micronesia--specifically, the 66  
nuclear tests conducted by the U.S.A.  
in the Marshalls between 1946 and 1958.  
Tests which used the Marshallese people  
as nuclear "guinea pigs" and left them  
with a history of radiation sickness,  
contamination of their ocean territories  
and subsequently their food and  
water supplies, an abnormally high in-  

cidence of cancer and other radiation-  
provoked diseases, and a future of  
deformed and retarded children. A lega-  
cy of pain and suffering. Additionally,  
Biram spoke on the use of Kwajalein  
atoll by the U.S. as a missile range,  
the displacement of the traditional  
land owners of Kwajalein and their  
relocation on the American created  
ghetto on the nearby island of Ebeye.  
Biram confessed that until she took  
part in Operation Homecoming--the  
Kwajalein land owners' occupation of  
their lands--she did not fully realize  
how oppressive the American military  
is.

Outspoken and articulate,  
Ku‘umeaaloha Gomes, a Hawaiian activist,  
enlightened conference participants  
with the facts and figures to document  
the historical oppression suffered by  
the Hawaiian people, a result of the  
foreign diseases, religion, values and  
economic systems imposed on our people  
for two centuries. Ku'umeaaloha spoke  
blatantly about the appalling health  
statistics of Hawaiians in comparison  
to other ethnic groups in Hawaii, and  
she attributed this rejection of the  
American system (historically and pre-  
sently) to conflicting cultural values  
which persist despite the almost com-  
plete colonization of our people and  
the attempted assimilation of  
Hawaiians into mainstream American cul-  
ture (i.e.--the abolishment of our reli-  
gion, the disuse of our language, a  
radical change in diet, and completely  
alien political, economic and educa-  
tional systems). Ku'umeaaloha out-  
lined the sequence of events preceding  
the illegal overthrow of the Hawaiian  
Nation by American businessmen in  
1893, exposed the flagrant misuse of  

conf, page 12