L SHE WROTE R-APRIL

LITERATURE

WOMEN'S SCI-FI

Science fiction (hereafter referred
to as SF) is a literary genre which
tries to convey conditional, hypothe-
tical or "lived through" futures.
Writers can describe these possible
futures and show how they might feel.
Science fiction or speculative fiction,
a preferred term by some writers, is
composed of several sub-areas including
fantasy, myth, satire, and "space op-
era." Although often writers in this
field are enamored of technology and
space travel, serious work is not
limited to these aspects. Many writers
are drawn to this area because of the
freedom afforded to experiment with
ideas and themes that do not have
to be encapsulated in time-bound detail
or tied to the laws of the physical
and social world which must be adhered
to by most fiction writers to be be-
lievable by their audiences.

The purpose of this essay is to
introduce those of you who have dis-
missed SF as hack writing for adoles-
cent males of all ages to two prominent
women writers in the field in the
hopes that it will induce some of you
into reading their work and re-
evaluating SF as a field of literature.
Although men still continue to domi-
nate in writing and editing and all
the major purchases of SF books and
magazines, women have been important
contributors to all sub-areas of the
field in writing for juveniles and
adults. In fact, the genre known as
SF can be traced back to 1818 with the
publication of Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein."

By way of introduction to Anne
McCaffrey and Ursula LeGuin, I will
provide some highlights of women's
contributions to the development of
themes in SF writing. In 1826, Mary
Shelley published "The Last Man," which
was a novel about the plague death of
humankind. Thus she is credited with
introducing two of SF's most enduring
themes: the dysfunction of an individ-
ual or society by its technology and
the dysfunction of all humankind by
forces beyond control.

In the 1930s, C.L. Moore wrote
fantasy stories with a strong female
protagonist, Jacquel of Joerdy, a woman
who was a ruler and a warrior. Leigh
Brackett, who has written many film
scripts, began to publish her work in
the 1940s, but her work is not signif-
icantly different from the themes ex-
plored by male writers of the period.
This may not reflect her interest in
women as protagonists or her ideas
concerning the role of women in the
world as much as the decisions of her
editors and publishers (males) as to
what would and would not sell to a pre-
dominantly male audience. The late
50s and early 60s saw the publication
of stories by Anne McCaffrey, Ursula
K. LeGuin, and others in science fiction
magazines such as Amazing, Astounding, and
Fantastic, and Joanna Russ brought
feminist concerns to the attention of
SF readers for the first time. During
the late 60s, Anne McCaffrey became
the first woman writer of SF to win
both the Nebula Award (Science Fiction
Writers of America) for the novella
"Weyr Search" and the Hugo Award (World
Science Fiction Convention) for the
novella "Dragonrider" (now part of the
book "Dragonflight," a novel with a
female protagonist.)

In 1970, Ursula LeGuin's novel "The Left
Hand of Darkness," which depicts a
world where the inhabitants combine
both male and female traits, won the
Nebula and Hugo Awards for best novel
of the year. There are many other
women authors who have been popular all
along or are beginning to find a wider
readership now including: Marion Zimmer
Bradley, Lenna Henderson, Date Wilhelm,
E. Mayne Hull, Katherine MacLean, Carol
Emshwiller, Andre Norton, James
Tiptree, Jr. (Alice Sheldon). As one
reads further in the genre, one is sur-
prised to note just how many women
there are. Pamela Sargent, in her
introductory essays to her three anth-
ologies of women writers ("Women of
Wonder," "More Women of Wonder," "The
New Women of Wonder") presents an ex-
cellent account of the portrayal of
women in SF by male and female writers
and the history of women SF authors.
The short stories, novellas, and novels
included in these anthologies illus-
trate the points she makes in her
essays. All three include excellent
bibliographies for further reading.
Another excellent collection to start
with is Virginia Kidd's "Millennial
Women."

Born on April 1, Anne McCaffrey had
an excellent start for a SF writer.
However, her early career aspirations
were actress and voice director. These
ended with her doing the stage direc-
tion of the American premiere of Carl
Orff's "Ludus De Nato Infante
Mirificus," in which she also played the
part of a witch. McCaffrey's work to
date consists of a collection of short
stories, novellas, and novels around
four major character groupings and
themes: "The Dragon Riders of Pern"
(a fantasy world), the "Union of the
Talented" (men and women who
possess telepathy and other extra-
sensory powers), "The Ship That Sang"
(a female cyborg spaceship), and "The
Crystal Singer" (cutters of crystals
that enable instantaneous inter-plane-
tary communication).

"Dragon Riders of Pern" is a collec-
tion of three major novels ("Dragon-
flight," "Dragonquest," "The White Dragon")
and three novellas ("Dragonsinger,"
"Dragonsong," and "Dragondrums") about the
inhabitants of Pern and their struggles
to organize and prosper. Some initial
short stories on the planet have been
incorporated into the larger novels. The
planet is potentially fertile and suitable
for human habitation except for periods
when, due to orbital conjunction with a red
planet, destructive, voracious, worm-
like beings (thread) fall from the
skies. The dragon riders, who are in
telepathic communication with their
dragons from bonding at hatchings,
destroy this Thread in the air. They
are led by Lessa, a strong-willed
young woman who is the rider of the
golden dragon, the queen. The novels
pursue the various political confron-
tations among the fief leaders in
their attempts to control the planet
and make it prosper. The novellas are
centered around two young people,
Menolly, a talented musician, and Pimer,
a younger singer who explores some of
the various themes of attaining adult-
hood.

"To Ride Pegasus," and "Get Off the
Unicorn," introduce several male and
female characters who are noted for
their possession of extra-sensory
powers. The struggles to protect these
individuals from the fear (and conse-
quences of this fear) of them by nor-
mals and the use of those powers to
solve problems and be useful in a
United States of the future are the
bases of the stories.

"The Ship That Sang" is the first,
though hopefully not the last, collec-
tion of integrated short stories about
Helva, a cyborg who controls an inter-
stellar rocketship.

Physically deformed beyond medical
aid at birth, Helva's brain is placed
in an indestructible container. She is
taught to develop her mental capabil-
ities to the fullest and to experience
the outside world through electrical
connections to computers and other
technology. Helva is, by choice, the
brain of a rocket ship and the stories
depict her strength in solving diffi-
cult problems, extricating herself
and others from dangerous situations,
and her relationships with
non-cyborgs.

"Crystal Singer" introduces
Kaleashandra Rhie, a talented singer
with perfect pitch who, when her career
as a Singer is shattered, takes up the
dangerous job of mining the crystals
that are used in communication
networks.

McCaffrey's work is noted for strong
character development and adventurous
excitement. Her worlds are not so-
cially constructed much differently
from the world we know, but her women
characters are strong, capable, and
deeply involved with those about them.
Not surprisingly, McCaffrey lives in
Dragonhold, Wicklow County, Ireland.

There are not enough superlatives
to use when discussing Ursula K.
LeGuin and her work. Of her, Harlan
Ellison, one of the few male SF writ-
ers to call himself a feminist and
actively campaign for the passage of
the ERA and a writer of great variety,
writes, "she is without question the
most elegant writer in the SF world...
she is witty, strong, emphatic and
empathetic, wise, knowledgeable, easy
going and electric, gracious, seraphic,
sanguine and sane" in his introduction
to a novella of hers, "The Word for
World Is Forest," in his anthology
"Again Dangerous Visions" (Ellison is
one of the few male writers I highly
recommend to feminist readers, al-
though not all of his works are free
of male biases, the themes he explores
are many and the writing is superior).
It would be very difficult to discuss
all the themes that LeGuin has pursued
in her prolific career. There are
two collections of essays: "Ursula K.
LeGuin - Voyager to Inner Lands and to
Outer Space," edited by Joe DeBolt and
"Ursula K. LeGuin," edited by Joseph

cont. on p. 16