PAGE 6

REFLECTIONS ON NICARAGUA

Kathy Ferguson is a Visiting Professor of Political Science at the University of Hawaii. She is on the faculty of Siena College (Albany, New York) in the Department of Political Science and Women's Studies. Her background and interests include Central American politics, and in July of 1985, she visited Nicaragua to see for herself the political situation, which she felt was not clearly represented in the U.S. media. She relates her experiences in part one of this article and presents feminist epistemologies, and her most recent book is The Feminist Case Against Bureaucracy, published in 1984 by Temple University.

The shock of returning to the United States after a week in Nicaragua was, for me, a small measure of the immense distance that separates these two contexts of living. For many days I felt a disquieting sense of displacement, a disorientation that reflected back to me the mirror image of the initial shock of arriving in Nicaragua. But the first set of "culture shocks" was expected -- after all, I knew that Nicaragua would be very different than that to which I'm accustomed. It was the fundamental strangeness of what has always been "home" for me that was unanticipated -- where are the shacks? the pigs and cattle wandering the downtown? the ubiquitous Coca-Cola? More fundamentally, where is the public discussion of the U.S. war against Nicaragua, a war barely visible in the back pages of U.S. newspapers but a central part of daily life in Nicaragua?

I feel that it is almost impossible to grasp the situation in Nicaragua from within the United States, both because the concrete detail of life in Nicaragua is not available to us here, and because the heavy-handed filter of the Cold War rhetoric has so completely framed the terms of the debate. Even those who argue against Reagan's claims that Nicaragua is a "communist totalitarian dictatorship" and a "terrorist state" have to enter into that arena of discourse to make their claims. Saying “no, Nicaragua is not a communist totalitarian..." etc. still puts one within those categories of understanding; entering into the Cold War discourse, even to do battle with it, entails a kind of confirmation of its terms. That discourse carries a set of political and linguistic assumptions that set "communism" in opposition to "democracy," "revolution" in opposition to "pluralism," and so forth. There is no room in that discourse for naming the sort of socialist pluralism that I encountered, and no room for naming the experiences of a people primarily concerned with survival, not with superpower battles over global turf. From the American left I have felt a similar set of frustrations and limitations, a similar discursive blindness.

From one faction comes a kind of deification of the Sandinistas and interpretation of “solidarity” that puts Nicaragua beyond the pale of criticism or evaluation. From another direction one hears a kind of abstract revolutionary purism that condemns the Nicaraguan revolution because it isn't ours, it doesn't reflect the agenda that Western (usually nonpracticing) radicals have established. Both of these levels of abstraction leave the concrete and the particular unapprehended; neither speaks to the political agenda of those who are making this revolution.

Finally, the persistent question I have heard since returning from Nicaragua concerns that red herring, "objectivity." The effort to divide information which is “objective” from that which is "biased" assumes that it is possible to be neutral, to have no point of view. That assumption is questionable on almost every level, but it is quite irrelevant to a society as highly politicized as Nicaragua. One's view of the revolution is rooted in one's relation to it; no one is outside of this question. Ken Kesey's aphorism from the Sixties is relevant here: one is either on the bus or off the bus. To confront this radical “either/or" situation is to be compelled to acknowledge the reality of perspective, to feel, as well as to simply see, that all knowledge is an engaged, active ordering of the world, not the passive receipt of truths discovered elsewhere.

Groping toward a form of understanding that is adequate to comprehending Nicaragua from the inside is a disquieting and compelling task. It calls for a radical shift in one’s terrain of understanding, a very basic reorientation toward the world that is not unlike the literal learning of a new language. Just as I found my halting Spanish to be barely adequate to the tasks of translation, so did I find my frameworks of understanding (which I had previously thought to be rather sophisticated and complete) to be in need of stretching and realignment. Two concrete factors that propel one toward this discursive shift are the small scale of Nicaraguan society and the immense poverty of most of the people. The small scale of the national politics means that political relations are often highly personal; in a large complex, highly bureaucratic society such as the United States, it is hard to comprehend a revolution that essentially overthrew a “ruling class" composed mainly of one family and its friends. In fact, one of the recent books on Nicaragua is aptly subtitled "revolution in the family." One of the great coups by the Sandinistas during the revolution was the 1978 takeover of the National Palace; Somoza paid the million dollars ransom not just to buy the release of most of the legislature, but to retrieve his relatives and personal friends. Reagan's demands that the Sandinistas include the Contras in the post-revolutionary government are put in a different context when one realizes that most of the Contra leaders, former officers in the hated National Guard, are widely known as torturers and killers. They have names like "Blowtorch Bob" and “El Suicido." To the people in Nicaragua these men are not simply one more opposition voice -- they are the men who may well have tortured one's friends, one's family, or oneself. In a country of less than three million people, one million of whom live in the sprawling city of Managua, the meaning of 12,000 deaths since 1981 in the U.S.-sponsored civil war (or of the 50,000 deaths during the 1978-79 struggles) is acute and personal.

Along with the small scale of politics in Nicaragua, the immense poverty of most of the people is a concrete and visceral dimension of daily life that is hard to comprehend from the economically privileged vantage point of Western life. Of course most North Americans know that the masses of people in the Third World live in poverty, but there is a big difference between "knowing" it and feeling it. The latter requires that one develop new categories of understanding that are often difficult to articulate.