- PAGE 5

4

ALL SHE WROTE MAY/JUNE

CONT. from p 4

Some versions go so far as saying that
this mother figure even allowed her

son to forget her, in the name of his
own independence! The Gnostic text
(cited in Pagels "The Secret Book of
John") attributes the young God's deni-
al of his mother to be based in jea-
lousy and arrogance.

So, returning to the Garden of Eden,
it is mother wisdom who is at work--
not the devil, not Eve's weakness and
lust. These ideas suggest that they
received "benefits," and not curses!
Pagels lists these as self-awareness,
the ability to find food, and guidance
in conception (p. 65).

Between the two views--one very ma-
triarchal, one very patriarchal--there
is another alternative, that of comple-
mentarity. There is even another ver-
sion of Genesis for this: man and wo-
man created in God's image simultane-
ously, their two spines joined toge-
ther as one. God was a "masculo-femi-
nine" entity, made up of both parts,
neither one taking precedence over the
other. In this sense God is androgy-
nous, bisexual, perhaps asexual.

Initially, the Judaistic formula-
tion of male supremacy and female sin
was rather odd, against the grain in
many ways. Davis states in The First
Sex that the "myth of male supremacy"
was "a radical and astonishing novelty
to a pagan people..." and "women were
more highly esteemed as persons by the
pagans..." But to capture the irony
of the situation, I wish to quote a
whole paragraph:

All this sounded very strange and

wild to Celtic men and women who

had long been taught to revere and
honor their sisters and wives above
their brothers and fathers. And now
to learn that these very special
people had no souls! Were not of God!
Were the servants of mere MEN! (p. 230, Da-
vis).
How odd indeed the Semitic prayers
must have sounded to these pagans--
"Blessed Art thou Lord that thou hast
not made me a woman" (p. 230, Davis).

This heritage of diminishment and op-
pression was what later influenced
strong Jews like Peter and Paul, and
in turn Churchmen like St. Augustine,
Tertullian and others. In fact, this
Semitic and male-dominant tradition may
have been far more of an influence on
their lives and in their doctrines
than the actual life and wisdom of
Christ himself--though it is heresy
for me to say so!

The Gnostic Gospels, heresy aplenty,
tend not to be imbued with this Semi-
tic, paternalistic tone (though there
are exceptions--Gnostic texts are va-
ried and wide-ranging from sexless so-
cieties to orgiastic ones). However,

it turns traditional Jewish ideas

upside down. In contrast to it,
proto-Catholic Christianity looks
like an orthodox Jewish sect...it
has been suggested that it origina-
ted from the disillusionment of
hopes expressed in that tradition

(p. 317, Tyson).

So, my own disillusionment has a long
tradition, reaching quite as far back
in history as one is willing to go.

This legacy of male superiority has
confused the issue of Christianity.
Much of what is accepted as Christian

is merely an archaic and insular conti-
nuation of Israeli Tribal Law, of domi-
nation by men. For some who came
along upon the advent of Christ, his
life was only a vehicle, in a sense,
which was seized, opportunistically,
in an effort to retain this male supre-
macy, for men were as wary of women
then as now.
With so many conflicting sources, it
is indeed quite strange that Judaism
and Christianity both have no mention
of these other possibilities. "By the
year 200---virtually all the feminine
imagery for God had disappeared from
orthodox Christian tradition" (p. 68,
Pagels). It seems fairly clear to me
that these ideas were consciously era-
dicated by the various Rabbis and
church fathers, for these ideas exis-
ted plentifully at one time. Jesus
tried in a number of ways to reduce
this trend of Semitic paternalism when
he came along, but his time was brief;
there was much to un-do; and histori-
cally it was a rough period for social
reform, much less spiritual reform.
But, it appears that there is some ra-
tionale for a strong female Spirit,
even within Judeo-Christian contexts.
Naturally, among many, my viewpoint
would be very unpopular. But this ten-
dency to alter situations in such a
way that feminine strengths are ob-
scured at best, denounced at worst, is
central to the power behind a god-
fearing (not loving) patriarchal
Church. The notion of minimizing wo-
men is pivotal to the theology of
Churchmen. But what about Christ's
own theology? Pagels quotes a despon-

-dent Mary Magdalene, who weeps as she
asks the skeptical Apostle Peter “Do
you think I am lying about the Savior?”

and Mary must always defend herself
among the disciples though she was ex-
traordinarily close to Christ, perhaps
closer than they were. (Christ says to
them at one point, "why do I not love
you as I love her?," after they have
taken offense at his kissing her).
Jesus seems to love women very much,
takes their side and directs much of
his energy towards them, especially
Mary Magdalene (p. 77, Pagels).

However, the Gnostic text, “The
Gospel of Mary," is not part of the
tradition. It is heretical and secret.
Within this text there is a conversa-
tion between Mary and Christ where she
speaks openly of her fear of Peter and
his hatred for women. Christ replies
to her by saying that "whoever the Spi-
rit inspires is divinely ordained to
speak whether man or woman" (p. 78,
Pagels). She is also described as
his "most intimate companion."

Later on when Peter and Paul made
their way into the world trying to
establish Christ's church, whose views
were they espousing? "Jesus himself vi-
olated Jewish convention by talking
openly with women, and he included
them among his companions" (p. 73, Pa-
gels). While Paul includes women with-
in the realm of Christianity, he does
so selectively. Christ was much dif-
ferent in approach and would never
have come up with Paul's injunctions
to women. Could it have been that
Paul (and Peter) were fearful of being
displaced? Was it this paranoia about
Mary's primacy and power which prompt-
ed Paul to say about women that "if
they will learn anything, let them ask
their husbands AT HOME; for it is a

shame for women to speak in the church"
(1st Epistle Paul to Corinthians)? 
This is purely Paul, not Christ!

Whether I like it or not, however,
Paul is considered one of the most
authoritative church fathers and poli-
cy formulators in all of Christendom.
In fact when St. Augustine in his mud-
dle of guilt and profligation, lust
and mother-fixation, becomes converted,
it is more than a little interesting
that his book was open not to the
words of Jesus, but to the Apostle
(p. 144, Augustine).

But Christ himself shows a differ-
ent attitude from that of his often-
quoted Apostle. In "The Woman of Sama-
ria," Jesus has a conversation with a
seemingly unsuitable woman, that has a
surprisingly intellectual flavor to it.
Not only that, but he reveals his divi-
nity to her ("I that speak unto thee
am He."), and he even comments on the
fact that she, five times married, is
now living with a man who is "not thy
husband." The disciples come upon Him
in conversation and gawk--they "mar-
veled that he talked with the woman."
But so long as Christ was powerfully
alive, they tended to keep their inter-
ference confined to gawking, and none
dared to question their master, “why
talkest thou with her?"

Christ's life is full of these exam-
ples. In another well-known instance,
Jesus sits with two women, Mary and
Martha. (Pagels mentions this too.)
Martha gets annoyed because while she
does housework, Mary sits and talks.
Jesus, however, doesn't see that house-
work is more compelling than the pro-
cess of learning and defends Mary's
break from it. Indeed Mary has chosen
"the good portion"! This also implies
that Christ welcomed women in his cir-
cle, had great faith in their know-
ledge, and even advocated getting away
from domestic duty for the sake of
one's spirit and intellect. There is
no “barefoot and in the kitchen" men-
tality at work here.

The two examples, amazingly, are
not in any hidden Gnostic texts, not
sequestered away someplace in obscure
reference, but right there in the New
Testament. There are other examples
too, notably the episode where Christ
defends a woman about to be stoned to
death by an angry, righteous mob. It
is through his experience with this
woman that he utters two of his most
revered sayings--first to the crowd,
"let he that is without sin among you,
let him cast the first stone.” Then
alone with the woman, he speaks to her
and says "Neither do I condemn thee:
go, and sin no more." There is such
gentleness expressed here, such a wil-
lingness to recognize this woman's hu-
manity.

From Luke, there is another out-
standing bit of insight into Christ's
character. When he sits down to eat
with one of the Pharisees, a woman who
is well-known as a sinner comes in,
and with tears and ointment washes his
feet, even using her own hair to do so.
The Pharisee is displeased and wonders
how such a prophet can allow himself
to be sullied in this manner. But
Jesus understands the nature of her
gift to him and is inspired to make a
lesson out of the incident. “Her
sins, which are many, are forgiven,

CONT. p. 6