PAGE 10

YOUR BODY

ALL SHE WR

[ Part Two * DEPO PROVERA AND THIRD WORLD WOMEN ]

By LINDA B. MARTIN

The Ethical Issue

Larger than the Depo Provera safety debate loom three overriding ethical questions. First, should the U.S. participate in ongoing population control programs where some resistance to family planning is evident among village populations? Should U.S. tax dollars continue to support regimes that use bribes or threats to encourage family planning compliance as is the case in many countries currently administering Depo?

Second, should the U.S. government promote any substance in Third World nations that is not deemed safe to use in America? Should we support a double standard in health care/product safety issues? And third—is the Population Crisis a "crisis"? If we accept the arguments of population control advocates, we buy into the rationale that world hunger is an economic and not a political issue. This view excuses us from considering other solutions to world hunger—like redistribution of the world's food supply, and government investment in aquaculture and other advanced technologies.

The Feminist Issues
1.) The long-term effects of in utero exposure to Depo Provera during the first trimester.

The FDA banned Depo in pregnancy management after the DES studies became public, but no one is studying the effects of exposure to babies born to women administered Depo contraceptive injections. When confronted with this potential health hazard, USAID responded:

---the data suggest an association between pre-natal exposure to these hormones and a variety of congenital abnormalities, especially cardiac defects, with a relative risk probably in the range of two-fold.

Since effective contraception prevents both normal and abnormal pregnancies, it can be shown that even if a two-fold increase in congenital defects were associated with pre-natal exposure to Depo, widespread use of the drug would result in a net decrease in the number of abnormalities. (Bunkle, p. 14)

That sentiment will surely be a great comfort to those women who become pregnant just prior to their first injection or those women given continued injections after they've conceived. In one Bangladesh study, 1.2% of the sample were pregnant. (Bunkle, p. 14) All the literature shows that an unplanned pregnancy with Depo is a real problem due to the irreversibility of the injection.

2.) Racism. Depo is considered especially appropriate for female populations for whom “informed consent" is the least meaningful; the poor, the illiterate, the dependent and repressed. Abuses abound when it comes to Depo Provera use among these women. Minkin reports that Cambodian refugees in Khao I Dang, Thailand, were given a chicken for agreeing to take Depo—a powerful inducement in a camp where refugees are fed about four ounces of meat a week. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) reported that at the Kamput refugee camp the injections were simply compulsory. (Minkin, p. 23)

3.) Cancer. Three cancer sites are involved, the breast, the cervix, and the uterus. Animal tests showed clear relationships between Depo and malignancies in all these sites. Depo advocates argue that these findings are irrelevant. However, Stephen Minkin of the Women's Health Network found evidence of a cover-up by Upjohn. Minkin claims that one subgroup of beagles was lost due to reproductive malignancies. These dogs were replaced in the study by dogs who were hysterectomized! If the animal studies are not relevant, why bother to rig the results?

Most devastating, however, is a confidential WHO report released recently saying "there has been a marked increase in admission for cancer of the cervix and breast in Chiang Mai," home of McDaniel's most ambitious field trials. (Minkin, p. 24)

Ironically, Depo Provera is most "popular in developing countries where effective, modern medicine is lacking." (Population Reports, K-1) Valerie J. Hull studied the quality of women's health care in rural Java, comparing traditional medicine to modern. She found that due to the popularity of injections, medical practitioners frequently give injections (suntiks) where not medically indicated. "Many people do not understand that the contents of injections vary, for the cure to them is in the suntik itself." These modern treatments replace the magic of the traditional medicine man; the physician is the new mystical healer. (Hull, pp. 321)

4.) Bleeding and Infertility. These side effects may not be related, but no one's really studied the issue. Most medical literature agrees that between 80 and 90 percent of women taking Depo have no periods after one year, but estimates of when women's cycles return to normal range from six months to two years, after discontinuance of Depo and/or other hormonal contraceptives. The extent of bleeding problems has raised the real issue of how to treat them. In Thailand, McDaniels routinely supplements Depo with estrogens. "He does so in an attempt to provide women with the reassurance of at least one withdrawal bleeding between injections..." Curiously, the FDA commented that the strongest claim FOR Depo was that it avoided the serious clotting problems associated with estrogen pills. This advantage is certainly nullified if estrogens are to be used to "cure" the problems created by Depo.

5.) Side Effects. Hidden among the laundry list of side effects associated with Depo is "loss of libido." These side effects are rated "subjective" and trivialized by all researchers in nearly all the literature. Bunkle says the assumption is all too obvious—that women should be grateful for contraception "at any cost to themselves." (See "note" included in references)

6.) Breast-feeding effects. Depo is frequently urged on post-partum women as the best contraceptive method. It does not interfere with the new mother's production of breast milk. (Some opponents, however, have raised serious questions regarding the quality of breast milk produced when the nursing mother has been injected with Depo.) Two unreported effects in Upjohn's animal studies involved curvature of the spine suggesting that Depo may interfere with the secretion of growth hormones and additional evidence that Depo may have an immunosuppression effect. Both conditions would be significant to nursing infants, yet Upjohn has refused to release the full findings of these studies.

The dogs died of uterine disease and Upjohn refuses to release all of the animal study data! The FDA says all product safety study material is proprietary; it belongs to Upjohn, not to the public. It makes one wonder just what is being hidden.

Summary

At the moment, only about 1.5 million women are receiving Depo injections. That number would increase considerably if the FDA approves Depo Provera. Population groups estimate that a significant number of pill users would switch and it is thought a large number of new contraceptive users would be attracted to the injectable.

Former FDA commissioner Donald Kennedy says, "The right way to solve this policy dilemma is by an export policy that recognizes national differences, and allows national autonomy in the making of decisions about health." (Sun, p. 428) Kennedy's solution is a rationale supporting a dual standard in product safety matters that avoids the ethical implications of USAID involvement. (Would he have sent Hitler Zyklon-B under the same pretext?)

Permitting the exportation of harmful drugs should be seen as a hostile act against populations in the receiving country. In the case of Depo Provera, it is a hostile act against poor, illiterate, non-white women.

Literature Cited

Marjorie Sun, "Depo Provera Debate Revvs Up at FDA", Science 217 (30 July 1982)

"Injectables and Implants", Population Reports, Series K, no. 1 (March 1975)

Elaine Moss, The Population Council, A Chronicle of the First Twenty-five Years (New York: The Population Council, 1978)

more ON page 15.....