MAY / JUNE

PACIFIC WOMEN

KOREROTIA WAHINE

"Come on Sisters, Black Sisters, let's get together to fight, for too long now we've been held apart, we need each other's strength to unite!

We must break this yoke of oppression that stripped us of our dignity!

Come on Sisters, Black Sisters, stand up stand firm and unite, for together we can win the fight, alone we are destined to die. We must break these walls that divide us and fight for our people's revolution!

Get up! Stand up! Stand up for your rights! Get up! Stand up! Don't give up the fight!"

Yo-o, yoO-O, yo-o, yo-o!

This song was written by a Maori woman in Aotearoa, (New Zealand), and is sung by the women in the Women's Movement throughout that country. In November of 1982, Titiwhai Harawira visited Hawaii and met with the Hawaiian women activists and women of the Hawai'i Women's Coalition. In her meeting with the various Hawaiian groups she spoke of her people's involvement in land struggle issues and of the strides the women have made in their Women's Movement. She encouraged and inspired the Hawaiian women to continue in their struggle to confront sexism, racism and capitalism, and challenged the men to do the same.

In January of this year I was selected to represent the Protect Kaho'olawe 'Ohana to travel to Aotearoa to demonstrate our Hawaiian people's solidarity with the Maori, by participating in their Waitangi Day Protest. I spent three weeks travelling with the Maori people, spending 98% of my time with the women. We travelled, ate, slept, sang, laughed, cried, and sometimes even "skinny-dipped" in icy cold ponds, together. The women spoke of their commitment to their political struggles and their culture, and I spoke of mine. It goes without saying that the experience of being with my Maori Sisters was a very valuable one. I returned to Hawai'i with new insights to assist our women here in our struggles to “lift that yoke of oppression."

I do not attempt to speak for the Maori women, for to do so would be an insult to them for they themselves are capable of doing that and only a Maori can speak for the Maori, just as only a Hawaiian can speak for the Hawaiian. What I will do here is to share those ideas I have been asked to share with other women in Hawai'i. I have selected a few issues for publication, for to attempt to address all the issues here would be too numerous to print.

Upon my arrival in Aotearoa, I was greeted in traditional Maori fashion with a "powhiri." This ceremony is reserved for the "manuhiri" or visitor to a marae. The ceremony culminates with the sharing of food or "kai." From the onset I began to notice that there seemed to be very few men participating in these experiences. I commented on this fact and the response from the women was “They're getting themselves together!" The comment was then followed with giggles and sneers. I soon learned that these comments were made not because the women were anti-men but rather because they were "Pro-Women," and also committed to the liberation of women, and ultimately to their people's liberation from their British oppressors.

Since 1980, the women of Aotearoa have organized to confront the issues of sexism, racism and capitalism through groups such as the United Congress of Maori and Pacific Women, Hine Tu Kaha, Auckland Black Women's Group, the Black Feminist Collective, Nga Tuahine, Black Dykes, and many more all of which are associated with the Women's Movement. Each year a National Women's Hui is held where all the Women's groups convene for a conference that includes workshops on various issues. These issues include such stimulating and consciousness-raising topics as "Feminism--the Black Women's Revolution," "Contraception and Abortion," "Black Women and Rape," "Women in Prisons," "lesbianism," Assertiveness Training and many more workshops designed to assist women in improving self-confidence and raising their self-esteem and level of awareness concerning the oppression of Maori women.

Maori women have proven that they do not conform to the stereotype of "weak," "stupid," "afraid," and “lacking organizational skills.” These women maintain significant leadership roles throughout the land struggle movement and besides being in leadership positions, they assume such roles as maintaining crowd control and discipline of participants in intense demonstrations against the British government.

The Waitangi Day "Celebrations" Protest demonstration is one such demonstration in which the women coordinate all of the activities. This protest is an extensive year-round commitment to halt British government-run celebrations of the Waitangi Treaty. The Waitangi Treaty of 1840 was formulated between the British and the Maori tribal chiefs, to guarantee the Maori people their rights to their seafood and their land. However, soon after implementation of the Treaty, the Maori began to experience colonization by the British and eventual oppression, never realizing those inalienable rights guaranteed them in the Treaty.

Today, this vast Maori nation of Aotearoa (430,000 square miles) is referred to by many as "New Zealand," a name given by the British. Thus, each year while the British "celebrate" the Treaty of Waitangi, the Maori protest it as a “fraud.”

This protest demonstration is extremely intense, includes a 200-mile, six-day march to the Treaty Grounds of Waitangi where the government-run "celebrations" are held, involves hundreds of demonstrators participating to "Stop The Celebrations," and an even score of police waiting at any chance to arrest or even “baton" the "violent protestors." The police constantly harass and heckle the Maori protestors, hoping that this intimidation will provoke some violent action. The Maori, however, are well disciplined, and the women constantly remind the participants that they must maintain control, and not react to police provocation.

To further illustrate the high level of discipline exercised by the Maori people and enforced by the women throughout their struggles, I participated in a six-hour evaluation session immediately following the Waitangi Protest. In this session the women critiqued the entire demonstration, then confronted the men with their "kick-back" attitude of support in the organizing aspect of the movement. Then the group broke into their separate male and female groups to critique themselves and their participation. The women will always appear cohesive in the presence of the men and not challenge each other. Challenges are done in their respective groups.

An example of “breaking the walls that divide us" is seen in the Maori women allowing themselves, whether "het" or "dyke," to openly confront their feelings about lesbianism and for their women involved in lesbian relationships. The women have so totally confronted this oftentimes "fearful territory," that a Dyke woman will get the support of all the women if she desires to adopt a child. In relationships, words such as "husband" or "wife" are not used; instead, the use of "partner" or "mate" is preferred and stressed. Again this prevents divisiveness and women being expected to assume a particular role. "Contracts" are also formulated between partners, and allow each person in the relationship to exchange roles and responsibilities. These “contracts” include such basics as cooking, household chores, child care, yard maintenance, etc. Specific tasks are indicated and days of the week or month. More complex issues include expected behavior with members of the opposite sex or in another relationship, moral support for each other, responsibility to visiting friends and family. Each couple develops, implements and evaluates their own contract. The women may share their contracts with each other in the context of the group, especially if there are expectations of the other women towards a particular spouse.

There have been instances where the women have had to confront the issue of spouse abuse, and have done so after much discussion. In one instance the women carried picket signs in front of a man's place of employment informing passersby that the particular establishment hired spouse abusers.

The employer was so intimidated he conferenced with the women asking them for their advice on what he should do about the employee. The man in question did not lose his job, but was reprimanded and did not repeat the offense.

Maori women work very hard at maintaining a positive attitude about each

CONT. p. 18