STUFF: art review by Phylis Parun

Advertised last month in DISTAFF was STUFF, a graduating show by Miki Pfeffer held April 1-7 in Talbot Hall at Nicholls State University, Thibodaux, La.

We have been surrounded all of our lives by art reviews which allege to be "critical" and "objective," even crushingly skeptical. It is almost as if we have been made to feel that we must destroy another woman's work with educated words, instead of loving it. All of this comes out of our own alienation from the beauties of our women's work. When we feel alienated from ourselves, we are alienated from a woman's work of art too. I cannot write like that about this STUFF. There was nothing alienating or "objective" about Miki's work. It was strictly hers. The show took my entire life up until this time to get through, and it made me see myself years from now. 

So I cannot write a short piece. It broke all degrading aesthetic rules we all know about and created some new ones. It smashed down every wall built up inside of me for so long and came right in to hug my selfness. It moved me to places inside myself that I've never dared to go. And it loved my womanness.

"It is all just you." It was totally female femaleness. This show had no monetary label on it. No prices appeared on any piece. That mode of oppression was not important here in this female femalespace. This stuff told me to love the rhythm of my life, to give and bend and not to bolt or halt my natural growth and change. It let me know quietly that I was nature and nature was in me, and that my beauty was our beauty and that we are strong and natural and good. Miki showed me the very thing I feared three times my life size hanging massively from the ceiling: "Menopause" red gushing to the floor. And I changed right there in front of it. She took our women tools of Tampax and Kotex and sewed them into industrial plastics. And told us not to be afraid. She baked concrete bread and put them on an industrial bread rack right out of the oven and placed it in the middle of the floor, and it said: "Your White and Black mothers and sisters feed us with these tools." Miki took familiar objects of our oppression and put them bigger than life right out in front of us, and seeing them hanging there like that liberated us from all the horrors which we secretly held closed inside. There was nothing "objective" or alienating about this show. It was all familiar. And none of us will ever be the same again.

600 Rue Royale - Ph. 524-3649  
904 Harrison Ave. - Ph. 482-7385  
New Orleans, Louisiana  

CHARLOTTE BEHRE  

Accredited Social Worker  

for  
Individual or Counseling  

Phone 525-2642  

Family  

WO DY Miki EP reLrer  

H CLOUDS  
A by Melanie Melito  

In the blue mirrored ring of the watchful eye,  
white skinned clouds drift by to form a whirling collage  
of elusive vapor art.  

Fluidic masterpieces, made from mist and steam  
and floating dust,  
fashioned by the fevered hand of Father Sun and Mother Gust  
are the ghostly residents  
of this blue domed menagerie.  

Thin ragged clouds lightly brushed over azurean  
canvas of waiting sky,  
defer to nature's swirling strokes,  
and become fugitive treasures never to  
be collected or signed,  
but only hung for a second  
in the galleries of the mind.  

Angry billowed giants  
riding in woolpacks on  
the back of the rearing wind,  
transient figures in phantom flight  
that swim the channels out of sight  
into the dark world of imagination  
to be resculptured in the  
dreamy protoplasm of one drifting cell.  

The clouds, ethereal captives  
in the garden of daydreams  
destined to swell,  
burst, and reform again  
beneath the starry gaze  
of the unflinching cosmos,  
above the empty hearts of  
men without imagination.