1974 NOW National Conference Update

WHO: All NOW members. WHAT: Come together for new program ideas, exhibits,

elections, special events, spotlight on issues, ideas, NOW history. WHERE: Albert Thomas
Convention Center and the Rice Hotel, Houston, Texas. WHEN: Memorial Day Weekend,
Saturday-Monday, May 25-27, 1974. Registration fee: $15.00.

TO VOTE AT THE NOW NATIONAL CONFERENCE, ALL MEMBERS MUST HAVE
DUES PAID IN FULL BY FEBRUARY 28.

VOLUNTEERS NEEDED FOR CHILD CARE! NOW President Wilma Scott Heide says
men are particularly welcome for this fun experience.

KANSAS CITY NOW MEMBER SANDRA BYRD is chairing the new Transportation Com-
mittee, created to explore means of less expensive Conference travel for NOW members.
Bids for transportation arrangements to the Conference are now being accepted. Contact:
Sandra Lee Byrd, 3201 Northeast 59th Terrace, Kansas City, MO 64119.

RESOLUTIONS FOR NATIONAL CONFERENCE

Proposed resolutions submitted by March 1 to Mary Lynn Myers, Coordinator of Resolutions Com-
mittee, will be summarized in a Conference Survival Manual. This manual will be sent to all pre-
registrants for the Conference.

You are encouraged to send proposals to relevant task force coordinators or chapters for their review
and support before sending them to Mary Lynn, since first priority will be given to Task Force/Chap-
ter resolutions, then regions and states.

Procedures for resolutions as voted by NOW’s Executive Committee indicated:

“It is recommended that all Chapters thoroughly discuss the resolutions prior to the
Conference so that members can come to reasoned decisions concerning them. In order

to deal with the press of events at the Convention, the resolutions committee is empowered
to bring to the Executive Committee guidelines for emergency resolutions. It is further
recommended that resolutions not only deal with how to change the centers of power in

this country, but also include how to implement these actions at the local level. If individuals
wish to have resolutions brought to the Convention, they may bring their resolutions to the
chapter or task force for consideration and adoption first.”

The National Planning Committee has further decided that the Conference will first deal with resolu-
tions submitted to Mary Lynn before March 1, and it will then consider those submitted to her before
May 1.

Resolutions are to be succinctly stated, or will be summarized by Mary Lynn.
Send resolutions before March 1 to: Mary Lynn Myers, 1312 East Church, Pierre, South Dakota 57501.

Remember — our bylaws provide for a nominating committee of 7 members. Four mem-
bers are appointed by the President with Board approval. Three are elected at the National

Conference. Get your forms for filing from: Judith Meuli, Nominating Committee Co-
ordinator, 1126 HiPoint Street, Los Angeles, CA 90035. Hurry — February 20 deadline!