IN THE NOW NEWS

Washington, D. C., Northern Virginia and Montgomery County NOW chapters challenged  
Christian churches with feminist theses on October 28, demanding that the “Church halt  
its sexist teachings and customs” and calling for reform of such practices..... Atlanta  
NOW has filed a sex discrimination complaint against the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce  
..... Dallas NOW members Margaret Bosse, Jane Baker, Martha Dickey, Elisabeth Janousek  
and Nancy Scully are “cooking” for the ERA — by October 12, the quintet had won 12  
ribbons and cash prizes for their culinary skills at the Texas State Fair, with all proceeds  
going to help ratification of the ERA..... Salt Lake City NOW member Carolyn Young  
is moderator for a new Salt Lake City radio program, “Women: The Unsilenced Majority”,  
with participation by Utah NOW members on the program..... Columbia, S. C. NOW  
has filed charges of sex discrimination against the state of South Carolina..... More  
news of the NOW New York State Conference on Marriage and Divorce to be held in  
New York City on January 19 and 20, 1974: Registration is $10 in advance; speakers  
include Betty Friedan and Marya Mannes. For further information, write to the NOW  
New York State Conference on Marriage and Divorce, 47 East 19th Street, N.Y., N.Y.,  
10003. In this season of many NOW State Conferences throughout the country,  
congratulations to all newly elected and re-elected State Coordinators ..... a quotable  
quote from the California State Conference: “Let our (NOW’s) watchword be ‘Organiza-  
tion and Union’” — Toni Carabillo, Vice President, Public Relations ..... San Antonio  
NOW is planning a Rape Crisis Center among many other activities including local com-  
mercials which have received highly favorable response, displays at the Texas teachers  
association convention, outreach efforts to Chicanos ..... Tulsa NOW member Pat  
Atkinson won first place honors in the 1973 American Dental Association Science Writers  
Award Competition ..... Los Angeles NOW has initiated NOW Speakers’ Bureau Train-  
ing Classes ..... San Fernando Valley (Calif.) NOW is compiling a list of friendly local  
business and service firms ..... From the Cleveland NOW newsletter: “Breathes there  

a woman among us who is not a homemaker? Who is not responsible for the care and  
feeding of someone, if but herself? And, who of us is not concerned by the astronomical  
price of food and what this is going to do to the diets, the nutritional value of the intake  
of ourselves, our families and the already hellish plight of the American poor? And do  
we not all have at least an elementary understanding of the necessity of proper nutrition  
in the development of mind and body? ..... Madison (Wis.) NOW has been successful  
in working with the Madison Police Department toward better affirmative action.....  
The Rockford (Ill.) NOW Employment Project has recently completed a study of local  

Force, has been invited to speak at the annual convention of the Toy Manufacturers  
Association — her topic: Sex Stereotyping in the Toy Department ..... Somerset  
County (N. J.) NOW, in its October newsletter, included post cards to General Mills:  
“I want General Mills to provide equal employment opportunities for women and  
minorities...” Members were requested to sign and mail the specially printed and  
addressed-to-General-Mills cards .....  

WANTED: Office Manager-Administrator, N. O. W. Legal Defense & Education Fund,  

New York City. Position available on or about February 15th, 1974. Salary up to $15,000.  
Administrative, office management, proposal development, experience desirable. Send  

resume to Sheila Tobias, Chair-one, N. O. W., L. D. E. F. Administrative Committee,  

Wesleyan University, Middletown, Ct. 06457, immediately.