FOR A BICENTENNIAL ERA

While patriots and the patriot-oriented are reliving war, memorabilia  
of war and simulations of war, matriots and other feminists of the  
Women’s Coalition for the Third Century (WC3C) are busy ad-  
dressing a next century worth living and celebrating.

NOW, along with 15 other national organizations, groups and in-  
dividuals are members of WC3C. The Coalition is committed to the  
empowerment of women; communication and support networks;  
recovery of women’s history, herstory, ourstory; and development  
of a Declaration of Interdependence and Imperatives as a 3rd Cen-  
tury covenant. A copy of the Declaration (a striking document) is  
available for $2.00 from WC3C, 99 Deerhurst Blvd., Buffalo, N.Y.  
14217, or as part of a $15 individual membership. WC3C is a coor-  
dinating, generative resource, not a superstructure.

NOW’s October Conference will include a Bicentennial workshop  
coordinated by NOW members Patricia Budd Kepler and Wilma  
Scott Heide, Coalition President and VP respectively. If you have  
projects you would like endorsed by WC3C, the only national  
organization or coalition committed to the empowerment of women  
and addressed to the Bicentennial Era, send your project in-  
formation to WC3C, 45 Francis Ave., Cambridge, Mass. 02138.  
Use of the WC3C will communicate feminist orientation — it may or  
may not facilitate funding.

WC3C’s conception and birth — September 10, 1973 at In-  
dependence Hall in Philadelphia — became imperative for the in-  
tegrity of women: The (federal) American (sic) Revolution Bicen-  
tennial Administration (ARBA) was, and is, undemographic, un-  
democratic, patriarchal and commercial. To date, less than 22% of  

ARBA (public) funds have gone to women’s programs — the rest  
has gone to men’s or male-oriented programs. Check Congresswoman  
Patricia Schroeder’s office for her July 16, 1975 statement and  
communicate with Sen. Brooke of Mass., Chair of the ARBA Board,  
to demand imperative funding of women and minorities and in-  
tegration of both for all other Bicentennial programs to avoid and/or  
redirect sexist and racist programming. DO IT NOW!

Contact WC3C Newsletter Editor, Nancy Gager, 5857 Marbury Rd.,  
Bethesda, Md. 20034 for copies of 15, 30 and 60 second public  
service radio spots you may tape to be played repeatedly, informing  
people what women have, can and will do in concert with men and  
children to impact and democratize the Bicentennial and our next  
century. DO IT NOW — You'll be glad you did!

Our foremothers impeached the U.S. government in 1876, “. . . for  
the daughters of 1976", (that is us — sisters and brothers). The  
U.S. government today may be just as deserving. Be reminded  
what America’s continuing revolution is all about: not an af-  
fluent, white, male club, but a nation for women, men and  
children of all races and orientations.

WC3C envisions a pilgrimage to Plymouth, Mass. just prior to July 4,  
1976 and a presentation of the Declaration of Interdependence and  
Imperatives to this nation (whether it wants it or not).

Who is for a tea party that is no tea party if ERA ratification has not  
guaranteed constitutional equality by our 200th birthday?

For Freedom, For Feminism,  
Wilma Scott Heide

POINT OF VIEW

As most of you know, political turmoil has erupted in NOW over the  
last several years resulting in factions within NOW. As a national  
task force coordinator and an issue-oriented person, I have at-  
tempted to stay out of the factional politics. However, a recent  
situation has thrust me right into the heart of the controversy.

In November, 1974, I was appointed national task force coordinator  
of credit. On May 28, 1975, acting in my official capacity as coor-  
dinator of the credit task force, I presented NOW’s position before  
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the  
proposed regulations to implement the Equal Credit Opportunity  
Act. I do not claim infallibility on the credit issue; however, I spent  
close to 70 hours on my testimony — researching, reviewing, com-  
piling, rewriting and polishing. My testimony reflected NOW’s policy  
on handling credit discrimination.

On July 14, Karen DeCrow and Linda Cohen, a recent member of  
the credit task force, submitted replacement testimony to the Board  
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The following  
statements are direct quotes taken from the first paragraph of their  
replacement testimony:

“The National Organization for Women (NOW) desires  
that the comments that follow be accepted as its  
position on the proposed ‘regulations to implement the  
Equal Credit Opportunity Act. We have determined that  
the views expressed in the statement and the ancillary  
testimony presented by NOW on May 28, 1975, are  
not in the forefront of feminist thinking and do not  
reflect the beliefs of the majority of NOW members.  
Therefore, we respectfully request that the May 28th  
statement and testimony be stricken from the record in  
their entirety, and replaced in full by this statement.”

As the official representative and spokesperson for NOW in the  
area of credit, I was never consulted about this replacement  
testimony. (I was told that attempts were made to reach me;  
however, I have reason to believe that they were very weak at-  
tempts, if at all.)

Is this the kind of behavior we can expect from an organization that  
purports to be based on the concept of sisterhood? If that is  
sisterhood, I can’t be part of it. And if that is the way this  
organization is going to operate, I worry about future task force  
coordinators. What guarantee do they have that the same kind of  
thing won't happen to them? How can they be assured that they,  
too, won't be publicly stripped of all credibility? What of NOW’s  
future credibility?

I have yet to hear personally from our president the reasons behind  
her actions. Had she consulted me before her actions, she would  
have found me quite open to suggestions and comments.

But acting as she did in this situation, my only recourse is to bring  
the matter before all NOW members for discussion and questioning.  
Keep in mind that I would not be bringing this to you if I had any  
doubts whatsoever about the validity or integrity of my testimony  
before the Board of Governors.

Many people have asked if I plan to resign as a result of this  
demoralizing situation. But I feel that I can still make my contribution  
in spite of efforts to undermine my work. I will continue as task force  
coordinator on credit until our new president makes an appointment.

For equality and justice.  
Susan Onaitis  
Coordinator  
National Task Force on Credit  

—13—