IN THE NOW NEWS... ;

Joan Goldstein, National Coordinator of NOW’s Women and Health Task Force, recently taped an
appearance on the nationally syndicated Lou Gordon Show, to be broadcast later this season... ..
Roxcy Bolton, member of South Dade (Fla.) NOW and convenor of the first NOW chapter in
Florida, was honored as the “Founding Mother of Florida NOW” at the state’s convention held
September 7-9 in Orlando..... Albany (N. Y.) NOW will sponsor a cross-country ski touring and
sightseeing expedition to northern Lapland in Finland, leaving from New York City, April 12-20,
1974. For further information contact: Ms. Andrea Lurie, 116 Third St., Troy, N. Y. 12180,
(518) 272-8465 ..... Ocala (Fla.) NOW held their first organizational meeting in September.
Convenor Judy Wilson says that they will “low-key” it for awhile in their conservative town —
“organize first and POW them later!” ..... Jane Plitt, NOW’s new Executive Director, seeks
photos of chapter actions and activities for display in the NOW Administrative Office. Send them
to her at 5 S. Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, Illinois 60603 ..... The dates of the N. Y. State
Marriage and Divorce Conference have been changed to January 19 and 20, 1974..... Interim
guidelines for the Task Force on Sexuality and Lesbianism are available from national co-coordinator
Sidney Abbott, 43 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10003..... Six members of Lansing NOW
participated in the first women’s role seminar ever to be held by a Michigan state department.....
Central N. Y. NOW (Syracuse) picketed at the Hotel Syracuse when Senator James Buckley addressed
an audience of 800 Right-To-Lifers..... Denver NOW is compiling a directory of local
feminist services — a project worth the effort in every city ..... Seattle NOW has produced a
Sexist Ad Slide Show; conceived by the Seattle NOW Image of Women Task Force, narrative
written by Linda Miller and photographs by Marvin Gregory ..... New York NOW also produced
a slide presentation on the Image of Women in the Media, compiled by Joyce Snyder and the

N. Y. NOW Image of Women Committee..... Wilmington (Del.) NOW will honor member

Roz Rettew with Salle Ginns Award for the outstanding feminist of the year..... Long Island
NOW has established a Women’s Talent Bank for all levels of management positions: Management
training, entry level, lower, middle and top management as well as administrative and data processing
openings in Long Island and surrounding areas. For further information write to: Long

Island NOW, Women’s Talent Bank, P. O. Box 176, Merrick, New York 11566..... A suggestion
based on mail received by NOW’s national and chapter offices throughout the country: Chapters
should consider establishing a telephone number and listing in their cities. Many potential members
are having trouble finding local NOW chapters..... Queens NOW was a sponsor of a career conference,
‘The Working World of Women’, on November 3, 1973. The all-day workshops and
exhibits were designed to meet the needs of women entering the job market for the first time or
after long absence, and featured discussions on current conditions in the employment market,
particularly the problems facing women..... The Women’s History Research Center and Women’s
History Library requests that all NOW chapters send copies of chapter newsletters to the Library,
located at 2325 Oak Street, Berkeley, California 94708, for its microfilm collection of feminist
materials. NOW members should also keep in mind that the NOW Archives are located in the
Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library, 3 James Street, Cambridge, Mass. 02138. For guidelines
on the NOW Archives, write to the NOW Membership Services Office, 1957 East 73rd Street,
Chicago, Illinois 60649 ..... Pearl Goldberg, NOW member of New York, will head a committee
of the Women and Health Task Force on Gynecological Malpractice problems. Further information
will be forthcoming in the Women and Health Newsletter, or contact: Joan Goldstein,
Coordinator, Women and Health Task Force, E-14, Lakeview Terrace, Princeton, N. J. 08540.....
East Massachusetts NOW is offering a course in self-defense.