January: Phoenix

1. NOW calls on the United States Conference of Mayors (and individual mayors) to observe the traditional American principle of separation of church and state and to reaffirm that principle at their February 27, 1976 National Conference. (This motion was occasioned by a mayor who called a Right to Life Day in his community.)

2. The Board approved the Right to Choose Mobilization for “Confronting the Hierarchy” with a budget of $4,900. This includes a research project, a public relations campaign to be developed in cooperation with the Reproduction and Population Task Force, petition drive, the development of information about the use of public funds for anti-abortion lobbying, and “Days of Outrage.”

3. The Board unanimously approved the Displaced Homemaker Action proposal, with a budget of $3,000 with other monies to be raised by the Coordinators. Coordinators Tish Sommer and Laurie Shields, of California, plan to lobby for a federal Displaced Homemaker Act, which has already been introduced in Congress, for state bills, and will work to develop a model program in California, where such a bill has been passed by the legislature.

4. The Board moved to oppose any legislation which denies a woman welfare assistance or services because of her refusal to identify the father of her child. NOW called for the repeal of provisions of Child Support Law of 1975 which forces the caretaker of a dependent child to reveal the paternity of the child and assign support for the child to the state. The Board requested that the President and the Legislative Vice President confer with the Task Force Coordinators involved in this action to facilitate proper lobbying on this legislation.

5. The Board recommended that the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund partially fund and sponsor the Mary Jo Risher custody case. (see p. 6)

6. The Board voted to join a coalition of other civil rights groups to end grand jury abuse, with a donation of $100.

7. The Board voted to establish a Task Force on Feminism in Rural America, with representation from the four regions.

8. The Board voted to oppose Senate Bill S. 1, the Criminal Reform Action, because of its many repressive provisions, and its loose definitions which are open to such broad interpretation that almost any act of protest against government policy could be called a threat to national security and therefore a felony.

9. The Board approved the use of the vacant, smaller half of the Chicago NOW office for four months by the Illinois ERA Mobilization Committee.

10. The Board resolved to support Patricia Veldon and Carmen Banos of the U.S. Navy and Air Force, who have been harassed by the military authorities for their sexual preference.

11. The Board voted to recognize as a national action the Philadelphia NOW Mobilization on Independence Mall at 1 p.m. on July 4, 1976.

12. On finance matters, the Board passed the following resolutions:

a. a temporary maximum allocation of $400 for each State Coordinator, using current reimbursement procedures, until the dues reimbursement to states policy and procedures are established.

b. to allocate $100 to the Committee on the Implementation of the Budget Allocation to States.

c. approved the contract with Graphic Communications Consultants Inc. for the ERA medallions (see p. 20 for a description and order form). All ERA medallion proceeds will go to the ERA fund.

d. to set a dollar limit on the amount of an advance for projects and to establish a ninety-day limit for the return of expense receipts to justify the advance given.

e. approved allocation of $2,000 to each Task Force, except for the Sexuality and Lesbianism Task Force (whose budget was established by Conference Resolution).

13. On Board procedures, the following motions were passed by the Board:

a. to adopt the July 1975 and October 28, 1975, National Board meeting minutes.

b. to rescind the previous policy for approval and distribution of minutes because it took too long, and to adopt a new policy which will allow the minutes to be published after Board members are given 10 days to make any changes in writing.

c. to allow NOW members in attendance at Board meetings to be recognized to speak and to have all Board meetings open to NOW members and members of the press.

d. to have agenda items and related materials for Board Meetings in the hands of the Chair-one of the Board 30 days prior to any meeting. The Chair-one will try to mail out Board Agenda within 2 weeks of the Board meeting. Any materials not mailed out should be precirculated at the meeting.

e. to affirm the actions of the President, Chair-one, and Legal Vice-President concerning their protest through Legal Counsel of the unauthorized use of the NOW name by the Bonn Gilbert Insurance Agency.

f. to establish the policy that appointments to special committees will be announced to the Board either before the end of that meeting or mailed to Board members before the committee begins to function, and that funding for special committees will be addressed at the time they are set up.

14. The President made the following appointments:

a. Doris Little to be 1977 National Conference Coordinator and Sandra Carpenter to be Conference Treasurer.

b. Eleanor Smeal, Chair-one of the Board, to be Chair of the Constitutional Convention.

c. All current Task Force coordinators are temporarily asked to continue.

d. Beverly Jones was appointed chair of the By-Laws Committee.

15. The Board set up a policy for approval of national mobilizations with some of the following provisions: that these are voluntary, that chapters and states will be given a chance to state their desire to participate or not to participate; and that at least a 2-month lead time will be given to chapters and states prior to the mobilization.

16. The Board empowered the President to appoint a committee to publish DO IT NOW if it is not in the hands of the membership within two weeks.

17. The Board affirmed a code of behavior and practice for Board members.

18. The next Board meeting will be in Washington, D.C., April 3, 4, 1976.

April: Washington, D.C.

National Board Meeting

April 3-4  
Washington, D.C.  
The Hotel Ambassador at 14th and K Streets  
Rates: $18 single, $22 double or twin

Send reservations through the Action Center  
attention: Mollie Abraham