THE ERA IS YOUNG AND LOOKIN’ GOOD!! IN 14 UNRATIFIED STATES CONVENING IN ‘74

ARIZONA boasts one of the first men’s organizations for the ratification of the ERA. Terry Korn is the  
new co-coordinator for ERA. Terry Korn, 6801 E. Opatas, Tucson, 85715.

FLORIDA’s houses have both prefiled ERA resolutions. NOW Fundraiser mail-out December: goal $10,000.  
ERA State Coalition formed.

GEORGIA’s ERA Rally parade is planned Saturday, January 12th, following the opening of the Georgia  
Legislature. Groups participating in the march will include UAW & CWA. Contact Martha Gaines, NOW ERA  
Coordinator, 2444 E. Adina Drive, N.E., Atlanta, 30324.

ILLINOIS NOW strategy aims for March 19th, the date for the primaries. The tactic is direct action lobbying  
to pressure legislators to change their stand before the primary. The legislature will be in recess from mid-  
January to mid-April to allow candidates to campaign. Illinois NOW members will be campaigning for the  
ERA at the same time.

INDIANA’s new ERA has been assigned to the Government Affairs Committee with no Republican sponsor-  
ship. A state ERA bill was introduced by a Republican and will be submitted to the same committee. The  
Government Affairs Committee will be meeting in December to consider both bills.

LOUISIANA’s new State Legislative coordinator elected in November, Janet Schoer, P.O. Box 10113,  
Southern University, Baton Rouge, 70813, will be directing ERA for May session.

MAINE is the first state to mail in PAR’s. Referendum being considered. Legal precedent doesn’t recognize state  
referendum as part of the Constitutional Amendment ratification process. Documentation of this precedent was  
requested by Legislative Office to be mailed to Maine leaders from Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional  
Amendments. If this happens in your state, please contact Legislative Office immediately!

MISSISSIPPI NOW’s SLC, Jean Muirhead, was consulted by Mississippi Home Economists in the drafting of  
an ERA resolution for their state convention in November. The Board voted 43-46 against endorsement of  
the ERA. Mississippi endorsement is coming!

MISSOURI NOW has a three-pronged strategy ready to implement: (1) coffee meetings, (2) door-to-door  
petitioning, (3) canvassing in selected districts. A NOW State Conference is scheduled for January 12-13 in  
Kansas City, emphasizing organizing and training for ERA. Job-endorsed ERA Resolution presented by  
Newspaper Guild President, Robert Steinke.

MONTANA’s ERA should be reported out of the Rules Committee during the first week of the session and  
Senate action is then expected. The Governor declared December 3-10 as Women’s Rights Week. The ERA  
Coalition has sponsored debates, meetings, and fundraisers for the ERA.

OHIO State Coalition ERA Conference, January 12th. NOW Regional Director Kathy Rand will act as a  
Resource person for the organizing workshop. Ann Scott, V.P. Legislation, will direct the Lobbying  
Workshop. The Coalition is organized in 33 of 53 counties in Ohio. Betty Carroll, NOW ERA coordinator,  
is traveling around the state, meeting with NOW Chapters to set up timelines for training, lobbying, and  
head counts. Meetings with Senators have been going on for the past month. Columbus NOW reports $150  
profit on newspaper drive for the ERA fund.

OKLAHOMA NOW Shawnee President, Wanda Peltier, and AFL-CIO President, Henry Likes, appeared on  
Talk Show for the ERA: NOW Astrid Clark and Clete Deathridge, member of the Governor’s Commission  
on the Status of Women, debated Lana Tyree, Oklahoma Attorney (who testified against ERA in Idaho,  
Utah, North Dakota, Arizona, and Oklahoma legislatures) and Betty Blake at the Eastern Oklahoma County  
Democratic Club December 4th. A 24-3 win for ERA!!

SOUTH CAROLINA’s first day of the Bicentennial celebration, NOW members met the reenactment parade  
of the first State Legislature with Broad Street painted red, white, and blue, ERA NOW! and placards reading  
“No taxation without equal rights,” “Betsy Ross could do more than sew,” “Finish the Revolution,” “Where  
is Rebecca Mott?” (SC colonial heroine).

VIRGINIA’s Legislature special “lawyers’ committee” is presently studying the ERA’s effect on Virginia law.  
NOW is working very hard on the assumption that the Task Force report will say that the ERA will have no  
harmful effect. Report due December 30th. According to Elise Heinz, SLC, Virginia state election returns  
show that pro-ERA candidates tended to win. A clear majority of next year’s freshmen delegates is expected  
to vote in favor of ratification.