1974 NOW NATIONAL CONFERENCE

Scheduled for Memorial Day Weekend, May 24-27, NOW’s 1974 National Conference will take  
place in Houston, Texas. Conference Co-coordinators are Helen Cassidy and Poppy Northcutt,  
with Conference Planning Committee members Marlyne Kilbey, Neanne Necaise, Jackie Frost,  
Cathy Irwin, Mary Jean Collins-Robson, Judy Lightfoot, Kathy Rand, Wilma Scott Heide,  
Marjorie Schuchat and staff, Jane Plitt, NOW Executive Director, and Dian Terry, NOW Public  
Information Director.

Conference Positions:

NOW members are needed to work and assist in the following areas:

Facilitators Elections

Displays Rules

Transportation Resolutions

Public Relations Registration/Credentials

If you would like to participate in the workings of the NOW National Conference, please write  
to the NOW National Office for job descriptions for the above positions and other information.

NOW National Office

5 South Wabash

Suite 1615

Chicago, Illinois 60603

NOTE: By vote of NOW’s Executive Committee, the Conference Planning Committee  
has the authority to recommend to the President the removal, replacement or  
deletion of coordinators or conference program events.

Membership and Dues

In order to participate in the 1974 NOW National Conference as a voting member, membership  
dues must be received by the National Treasurer by February 28th.

Resolutions

Resolutions from NOW chapters and members may be submitted for consideration at the Con-  
ference, with a deadline of February 28th. Further information will be forthcoming.  
Nominations

Recommendations of candidates for the National Board of Directors and officers from NOW  
chapters, state coordinators, regional directors, etc. may be submitted to the nominating com-  
mittee no later than February 20th.

The “Recommendation of Candidate” form and job descriptions for the National Board will  
appear in the January, 1974 issue of DO IT NOW. Nominating

Nominating Committee Chair is Judith Menli, 1126 HiPoint Street, Los Angeles, CA 90035.