. D.C. NOW sponsored a concert and  
reception in honor of Antonia Brico at the  
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing  
Arts. Dr. Brico conducted the National  
Symphony Orchestra in celebration of  
International Women’s Year . . . . Doro-  
thy Howze, fund raiser and Treasurer of  
Northern Prince George's County (MD)  
NOW, has been chosen by the Mary-  
land State Council to coordinate all fund  
raising at the state level, and to offer  
assistance to chapters in their efforts.  
Dorothy would like to develop some long  
range funding programs, and is interested  
in hearing from any chapters or states that  
have had particular problems and/or suc-  
cesses raising money. One of her goals is  
a NOW nation-wide communication net-  
work for members to share fundraising  
ideas. Please send your ideas to her at  
North Prince George's Co. NOW, P.O. 103,  
Greenbelt, MD 20770. She is also working  
on raising money to finance NOW’s  
statewide action programs, as well as  
providing increased funding for the State  
Legislative Office in Annapolis, which was  
the first NOW State Legislative office in the  
country.  

.. . As an outgrowth of the efforts of a  
NOW TF on Rape in the Virginia  
Beach/Tidewater area, a Tidewater Rape  
Information Service (TRIS) is now available  
to ease the way for the rape victim, her  
family and friends, through the maze of of-  
ficial indignities and anguish that surrounds  
sexual assault. . . . Fairbanks (Alaska)  
NOW is surveying the local schools to de-  
termine if boys and girls are being treated  
equally by their portrayal in textbooks, how  
physical activity time is divvied up, etc.  
NOW women hope to use the information  
to make suggestions on how the school  
system can be improved.  

. Two Tucson NOW members were  
named Outstanding Citizens by the Mayor  
of Tucson. Alison Hughes and Marilyn Jaco  
were awarded Copper Letters for their out-  

standing contributions to the City Wide  

Council. . .. South Palm Beach (FL) NOW  
prepared a Women's Suffrage exhibit  
which was displayed in the Boca Raton  
Library. They wrote ‘Bicentennial  
Messages” honoring women in American  
History and the messages were broadcast  
over a local radio station. ...San Fernando  
Valley (CA) NOW announces the opening  
of the Los Angeles Feminist Federal Credit  
Union in conjunction with 8 other CA  
NOW chapters. Betty Binder is the  
President. .. . Denver NOW announces the  
opening of a “Woman to Woman” book  
center. The book center has a good selec-  
tion of non-sexist children’s books, lesbian  
literature, herstory, records and periodi-  
cals. It will also serve as an information,  
referral and meeting center.  

.. Via a letter writing campaign, Erie (PA)  
NOW is protesting the decrease in funding  
of family and child services by United Way  
of Erie Co., Inc. . . . Metro-St. Louis  
NOW’s newsletter “& Nothing Less” has  

initiated a monthly article focusing on the  
feminist movements in the 19th and 20th  
centuries. Their goal: “to provide an in-  
formative history on individual feminists  
and show how historians have distorted  
the significance and purpose of the early  
feminist movement.” ...  

. San Diego NOW’s Human Reproduc-  
tion TF Coordinator, Jan Gleason has been  
continuing the fight for freedom of choice  
despite action by Bishop Leo T. Maher ex-  
communicating Catholic NOW women who  
are outspoken on their views on abortion.  
She was called on to tell and retell her  
story during the IWY Tribune in Mexico  
City. Reaction went beyond discussion. An  
International Right to Abortion Association  
took form as a result of international  
women comparing their experiences. They  
discovered they were battling the same  
two enemies — the celibate Church Hierar-  
chy and the State. The founder and  
provisional president of IRAA is Anne-  
Marie Dourlen Rollier, who led the fight to  
liberalize France’s abortion laws. Jan  
Gleason was named U.S. representative to  
the board.  

. .Austin NOW, along with WEAL and the  
Austin Women’s Political Caucus has filed  
a complaint with the Law Enforcement  
Assistance Administration charging the  
Austin Police Department with sex  
discrimination. The complaint has been  
acknowledged and Austin women are  
hoping for a speedy investigation. . . .Mem-  
phis (TN) NOW, after two years of work  
with the Police Department, the medical  
community and the general public has  
made great inroads with regard to changes  
in the attitude and treatment of rape vic-  
tims. NOW actions have led to the develop-  
ment of a Sex Offenses Squad within the  
police department, and some changes in  
the law with more to come from the next  
General Assembly session, and a grant  
from the Department of HEW to formulate a  
pilot comprehensive rape crisis system  
which includes counseling, examination  
and evidence collection, prosecution and  
public education. Congratulations Mem-  
phis! ... . Boston NOW is preparing train-  
ing sessions for all NOW members inter-  
ested in public speaking.  

. Nancy Stultz of Ocean County (NJ)  
NOW is heading the chapter's action in the  
Coalition for the NJ Equal Rights Amend-  
ment which was organized to help acquaint  
New Jersey voters with the benefits of a  
state ERA and work toward its passage in  
November. . . . Two Detroit area chapters  
presented State Sen. Patrick McCullough  
with the “Barefoot and Pregnant Award”  
for his anti-NOW votes on three bills this  
year.  

. Central South Dakota NOW named  
Mary Lynn Myers “Woman of the Month”  
for August. Mary Lynn, National NOW Vice  
President for Finance was hailed as a  
pioneer for women's rights in South  
Dakota for her work with Indians,  
women’s rights, and for a three-year  

struggle to integrate girls in the South  
Dakota Little League. Myers, the nation’s  
first woman State Director of Human  
Rights, was appointed when she was 27.  

. Jackie Frost, Southern Regional Co-  
ordinator, has announced that Dorothy  
Howze of MD NOW will chair the South  
Region's By-Laws Committee. The com-  
mittee is made up of representatives from  
each state in the Region and will submit a  
final report in April... . Joseph Haycraft of  
Jackson, Mississippi and Dolores Rozzi of  
Harrisburg, both NOW members were  
recently named Directors respectively of  
the Jackson and Detroit offices of EEOC. ..  

NOW  

. Ocean Co. (NJ) NOW and the Brick  
Senior Citizens program jointly sponsored  
a food co-op for senior citizens, welfare  
recipients, food stamp customers, and  
others. The co-op offered fresh produce,  
meat, eggs, and baked goods at sub-  
stantially reduced prices. . . . South Shore  
Chapter (NJ) NOW sponsored a survey of  
Islip Town’s employment practices and  
discovered that among Islip’s 340 white  
collar civil service employees, most low-  
paying jobs are held by women and most  
high-paying ones are held by men. 94% of  
the employees in the lower four grades  
were women while 94% of the employees  
in the top four grades were men. The  
salaries in the lower four grades average  
less than $6,642; the top four grades  
average above $10,838 per year.  

. . . The Hunterdon Co. (NJ) chapter  
honored International Women’s Year with  
an arts and crafts festival and sale. ...Cen-  
tral Bucks County (PA) NOW featured the  
“Role of Women in the American  
Revolution” in their monthly program as a  
contribution to Bicentennial awareness. . . .  
Congratulations to the Waupaca County  
Post (WI) because it sets aside a column  
each week for local NOW women to write  
about their programs, issues and diverse  
interests. ...  

. Newton (MA) NOW members have  
been successful in their efforts to funnel  
more money into women’s sports at local  
schools. They have also been instrumental  
in getting the local papers to devote more  
space to girls’ sports events. The NOW  
women are in the process of surveying  
junior and senior high school girls to see  
what they like and dislike about school  
athletic offerings.  

. Madison (WI) NOW is rekindling a  
statewide campaign to revise the listing  
format in phone books which does not ac-  
knowledge a married woman's existence.  
The chapter is encouraging members to  
write to the manager of the phone directory  
requesting that both the husband's and  
wife's names be listed at no extra charge.