< CAROLE A. DE SARAM

Carole De Saram is President of the New
York Chapter of NOW and a member of the
National Board. As coordinator of the
Stockholders Action Task Force she has
participated with the Council of Churches
to file stockholders' resolutions and petition
the Securities and Exchange Commission
to investigate discrimination in finance.

A senior systems analyst with a bank,
Carole holds a degree from CCNY and is
currently attending Columbia University.
She is active in gaining economic equality
for women through her efforts as a member
of the First Women’s Bank Advisory Board.

WENDY A. WINKLER >

Wendy Winkler is a management analyst in
social services programs for the City of
Cincinnati and has served on NOW’s
National Board since 1974. She has been
Cincinnati Chapter Development Coordinator
since 1973 and is active in Cincinnati Coalition
efforts dealing with child care and affirmative
action.

Wendy's greatest feelings of NOW pride
come from being a participant in and witness
to Ohio NOW’s growth. “From three
unlinked metropolitan chapters in 1971,
we have grown to 33 chapters and a
strong, active state organization. It has
been a collective accomplishment involving
fantastic NOW energies and talents
from all over the state.” Her future goal is to

ce PP ek Sea tees

Why not consult an experienced woman
for your financial planning needs, tax
sheltered savings, retirement income, et
al? SALLY MOSHER, OCCIDENTAL LIFE,
80 S. Lake, Pasadena, CA 91101. Tel.
681-5651.

see NOW grow into a fully pluralistic
organization by 1978.

She has helped organize the Ohio NOW
Council and the Ohio Women's Political
Caucus as well as taking an active role in
ERA lobbying, EEOC suits and testifying
for the City of Cincinnati Affirmative Action
Plan.

Wendy holds a Master's degree in Journalism
and Communication from the University of
Florida and has had extensive experience in
radio and television production, writing and
announcing.

Away from the job and NOW, you will find

and as an incorporator of a feminist credit
union.

Employed as a senior systems analyst for a
bank, Carole leads a full feminist-activist
life. She is a task force representative in
credit discrimination, was the National
August 26th Coordinator in 1974, and is
well known for coordinating Zap Actions.

is also a member of the In-
Women’s Year Art Festival

Carole
ternational

Executive Board. Says Carole: “Living in
this period of history and changing the lives
of women is fascinating and rewarding.”

her writing, reading or working with
children.
< ESTHER KAW

Esther Kaw, convenor and past president
of St. Paul NOW, describes herself as a
“Mexican American feminist committed to
the cause of total revolution so that sex,
race and age become irrelevant.” In furtherance
of that goal, Esther is active in several civil
rights and third world organizations.

A member of the NOW National Board,

Esther is Chair of the Civil Liberties
Committee.

To finance Esther's many activities, she
writes books on computer technology. She
believes that, “in order for NOW to be effective,
we must create change in the mouths, minds
and lives of individual women, enabling them
to see and reject their own bondage and
encourage them to join together to take
effective action to end their own oppression.”

Esther also believes, “This space could
have been better used to publicize an action,
define a problem, or even print a poem.

Layout and design of Spotlight pages by Helena Strauch.