NOW ERA TWO YEAR STRATEGY  
RAISING THE ISSUE  

Raising the Issue is the strategy NOW is using in primary/election politics for the ERA. NOW  
cannot endorse candidates because of our tax status. However, this strategy presents many  
ways and advantages for influencing elections by “issue” focus rather than “candidate” focus.  
The GOAL of the strategy is to influence all candidates to endorse the ERA. The TARGET  
selection is a “NO” district. That is, if there is an ERA voting record and the person holding  
the district seat voted “NO” you have a potential TARGET. Decisions on which districts  

to TARGET should be based on information from PAR: How close was the last election?  
How well organized is NOW in the district? What other groups that have endorsed the ERA  
are organized, or in large numbers in the district (i.e., especially labor)?  

HOW TO RAISE THE ISSUE: (1) Draw up a timeline like the one Chicago NOW has designed  
below; (2) Keep track of all candidate nights in the district and make certain NOW members  
attend and ask about the ERA; (3) Keep track of all TV talk show appearances, news interviews,  
etc. of the candidate and try to have the ERA listed as an issue to be presented to the candidates  
in each interview; (4) Each time a candidate endorses equal rights in any way, be sure to publi-  
cize their statements. A candidate may shift from total opposition to endorsing a State ERA —  

or supporting a state bill on equal credit; that is a wobble and indicates some change. Identify  
the “wobble” with growing awareness of inequality of women in law, and keep up pressure for  
full endorsement of ERA. If this candidate wins and still has not endorsed ERA, you can  

suggest win was result of “wobble” and continue to press for full endorsement. In other words,  
use the “wobble” as a save clause; (5) NOW can provide “voter information” concerning voting  
records on the ERA and public statements. Hand out sheets or small ads in suburban or rural  
weeklies, demanding “public accountability” of candidates on the ERA; (6) letter campaigns,  
telephone campaigns, door-to-door campaigns can be used to build grassroots support for the ERA  
and confront the candidates with constituency support; (7) Meet the candidates at their “shop-  
ping center” stops with placards — “Equal Rights by the 200th Anniversary of the Republic”, etc. —  
and possibly adopt a particular slogan or sign or other way of identification that is visible to the  
candidates, public and media (example: Florida met their “traveling” committee hearings at the  
airport with umbrellas painted with slogans).  

REMEMBER THAT THE GOAL OF THE STRATEGY IS TO HAVE ALL CANDIDATES ENDORSE  

THE ERA.  

NOW IS PRO ERA NOW IS NON-PARTISAN  

CHICAGO NOW ERA TIMELINE  

Involvement: a eo pote tarnee ae Committee & oe oe  

NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY  
8-11 19 15 30  
Research Set up speaking, Community Legislative ERA | ERA  
possible engagements and > involvement: | Lobbying in pas- § day:  
targets establish re} é i Springfield ses “# poli-  
community ties. E Speaking 2 P 2 tical  
2 Following” 3 © Weekend follow-up ‘5 rally;  
— Leafletting Ww F4 actions in Chicago 7 fund  
o ip a >  
& Organizing = 8 uj raiser;  
5 Picketing a e Repeat of Jan-Mar vic-  
oO & 2 type actions if tory  
‘oO Actions: 3 necessary cele-  
+S Community 2 bra-  
* means having someone at B Accountability Ps Possible “mass lobby” tion;  
every speech candidate > sessions a day in Springfield PIC-  
gives to raise the question 5 Late Feb or a NIC  
of stand on ERA. & Early Mar 3