REPORT ON BY-LAWS VOTE  
By Betty Newcomb, Coordinator, Mailed By-laws Ballot  

Your November issue of DO IT NOW contained the flash that both proposed National By-laws  
changes had failed. That neither received the 2/3 vote required by the National By-laws is shown  
in the detailed count below:  

Yes Votes No Votes Required Number Total  
for 2/3 Fewer Votes  
Than 2/3 Cast  
Delegate System 889 775 1110 221 1664  
Regional Elections 914 746 1106 192 1660  

A total of 1667 valid ballots were counted. (10 people voted on only one by-law). An additional  

120 ballots, declared invalid, were either unsigned, unidentifiable, or, when checked against the  
master membership list, were found to be cast by persons who had not paid their dues by July 31, ‘73.  
An additional 182 ballots were classified “challenged” for one of the following reasons: postmarked  
after 11/1/73, could not be found in the membership file, signatures were illegible with no other  
identifying marks. If all of the challenged ballots had been yea votes, both by-laws would still have  
failed because it would have been impossible for either by-law to receive the 2/3 yea vote necessary  
for a by-laws change. If there had been any possibility that they might have affected the final vote,  
further efforts would have been made to validate the challenged ballots.  

The by-laws committee made absolutely every effort to run a fair, smooth, voting process. Inevitably,  
some problems arose. While the National By-laws do not require such, the committee worked out a  
plan to allow secret ballots. The original copy submitted to DO IT NOW describing the ground rules  
for the election, including provisions for a totally secret ballot, had already been submitted, when  
Jo Ann Gardner notified the committee that our system did not follow Roberts Rules of Order Re-  
vised (pp. 356-357), and that according to our National By-laws (Sect. 14) we had to follow Roberts  
Rules or the vote could be declared legally invalid. A hurried telephone conversation exchange  
followed between the three committee members, Eleanor Smeal in Pittsburgh, Judy Lonnquist in  
Chicago, and me in Muncie, Indiana. One alternative from Roberts Rules allowed for a secret ballot;  
another described the procedure that we agreed upon. We gave up the benefits of the secret ballot  
primarily for financial reasons. The weight of the DO IT NOW issue carrying the by-laws change,  
even using special lightweight paper, was at the limit of the 8d rate if we included the one standard  
envelope required by Roberts Rules for the non-secret ballot. The procedure allowing for a secret  
ballot would have required in addition to an intricate ballot folding procedure, inclusion of two  
standard sized envelopes. The additional cost to NOW for supplying 30,000 additional envelopes  
and 30,000 times an additional 8¢ postage rate would have been something over $2,500. We  
reluctantly agreed to go with the non-secret ballot.  

If any of you have not already surmised, the re-stickable address labels were not used, as originally  
planned. Among the amusing anecdotes we will remember are some of the comments many members  
made regarding the non-stickiness of the tapes. Most of them were truly restrained and polite —  
totally unlike the popularly held image of feminists. Thanks to all of you for your patience. We  
really tried to make it easier for you.  

All NOW members owe a special thanks to the many people who helped us in the ballot-counting  
process — a terribly tedious procedure of counting, recounting, validating envelopes against a  

master file, deciphering signatures, stapling envelopes to ballots — all done in a successful effort  

to prepare properly for anyone who wished to check the ballot-counting procedure.  

If any of you wonder why the hurry and last-minute decisions, I will accept responsibility. I was  
adamant that the by-laws be dealt with as soon as possible. The new by-laws committee had to know  
the status of those proposed changes in time to process necessary by-laws changes to be presented