Connie Lopez is not a member of the National Board —  
not even a chapter president. But she went to Philadelphia.  
And she wanted to share her experience with you.  

8th NATIONAL CONFERENCE  

I went to Philadelphia  
and I saw the soul of woman.  
I went to Philadelphia  
and I saw the power of woman.  
It was dynamic,  
sometimes fleeting, almost nebulous.  
— Became crushing, almost oppressive,  
yet sometimes embracing.  
I saw women giving birth  
not to babies, but to ideas.  
And it was not an easy birth.  
There were wails and anguish  
amid this tremendous feat,  
for this was a prolonged, sustained labor;  
pushing an idea through the twisted framework  
of an archaic system.  
But it was all we had  
— and we used it.  
Oh... the strength and resourcefulness of woman!  
And in our pain, our stretching, our exultation  
— we were one.  
And out of Philadelphia,  
as the darkness closed in on an obscure greyhound  
to groan through the network of highways  
— this bus carrying these women home —  
these women who are making herstory respectable  
and having to expose their own respectability  
in the quest;  
who now must reenter the other world,  
this dying world.  
How do you deal with a world you've outgrown?  
But there is no other stage prepared to receive you.  
Unable to share with this world... they’re not ready yet.  
What shall some of us do with our new knowledge?  
It’s not compatible with tomorrow morning’s coffee  
and traffic jams.  
Herstory is yet to be told.  
To some, it is still only science fiction.  

Connie Crowe Lopez  

Cover: Adopted from a cartoon of the Suffragists era. Posters of this  
cartoon available for $1.50 from Deborah Erb, 940 Champion Lane,  
Dearpark, California 95776. 50% of the profits go to ERA.  

| po IT NOW is published by the National Organization for Women, 425 13th St. NW., Suite 1001, Washington, D.C. 20004. Second-class postage  
Washington, D.C. Subscription rate: $2.00 annually. Postmaster: Send 3579 Forms to 425 13th St., Suite 1001, Washington, D.C. 20004.