NOW LEGAL VICE PRESIDENT’S REPORT:  
NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN THE LAW  

The following is the first in a monthly series of reports on new law in the field of sex discrimination. The report will  
attempt to analyze and interpret recent legal decisions and explain, where possible, how these decisions can be implemented  
by NOW chapters. In following reports we will discuss pregnancy leave, sex-segregated want ads and equal pay. If you  

have requests for specific topics, please send them to: Judith Lonnquist, 201 N. Wells, Chicago, Ill. 60606 and we will  

try to accommodate you.  

VETERAN'S BENEFITS AND THE SUPREME COURT  
FRONTIERO v. RICHARDSON  
93 S. Ct. 1764 (May, 1973).  

The Frontiero case arose when Sharon Frontiero, an officer in the Air Force, sought increased quarter allowances and  
medical and dental benefits to cover her husband. Frontiero claimed her husband as a dependent under the statutes providing  
for such increased benefits for spouses.  

These fringe benefits were instituted for members of the uniformed services in an attempt to attract career personnel.  
The statutes covering these benefit allocations provide that the dependent of a male member of the uniformed services  
is his wife; a female member, however, is allowed to claim her husband as a dependent only if “he is in fact dependent  
on the member... for over one-half of his support..."  

On the basis of this clause, Frontiero and her husband were denied benefits. They brought suit, claiming that such a  
statutory difference in treatment creates an unconstitutional discrimination in violation of the Due Process Clause of the  
5th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.  

The essence of their argument to the Court was that the 5th Amendment, though it does not specifically allow for  
equal protection, does forbid discrimination so unjustifiable as to deny one due process of law. The Frontieros’ contention  
was that if she were a male officer, the benefits would be granted her without regard to the actual financial dependency  
of her spouse, and that solely because she is a woman she has been denied those benefits. This, the Frontieros claim, is  
an unjustifiable statutory classification.  

They argued that classifications based upon sex, in the same manner as those based upon race, religion and national  
origin, are inherently suspect and should be subjected to close judicial investigation.  

The Supreme Court, in agreeing with the Frontieros, based the weight of its decision upon its earlier decision in  
Reed v. Reed (1971), where the Court ruled unconstitutional an Idaho statute providing if there are two individuals  
otherwise equally entitled to be the administrator of an estate, and one of the individuals was female, the male must be  
awarded the appointment.  

The Court had reasoned in Reed, as it did in Frontiero, that sex classifications were as suspect as those based on race,  
national origin and religion. The argument used in Reed which the Court chose to extend in Frontiero was that a legislature  
cannot make classifications based on arbitrary distinctions, solely for the purpose of legislative convenience (the argument  
of the defense had been that the sexual classifications were included in the statute merely to alleviate administrative paper-  
work by narrowing one class of people eligible). The Court determined the test of the arbitrariness to be that the classification  
distinction must bear a legitimate relationship to the governmental interest sought to be protected. In other words,  
the Court decided that legislative convenience, in and of itself, is not a factor which will support the constitutional  
validity of a statutory classification. If the classification is found to be patently arbitrary in relation to the objective  
of the statute, it must be found unconstitutional.  

In Frontiero, the Court reasoned that a sexual classification was in no way shown to have any correlation to the granting  
of benefits to service people and their spouses in order to increase career personnel, other than to save administrative  
cost and time.  

It is important to note, and the Court in both Reed and Frontiero was careful to point out, that it is not necessary that  
the statute in question deny women all rights under its provisions in order for it to be found that the statutory classifications  
are discriminatory. More specifically, the fact that women were not automatically denied benefits (Frontiero’s  
husband would have been eligible for benefits if he had been found to be dependent) did not enter as a factor in the  
Court's determination that because Frontiero was denied employment benefits under different regulations from those  
applicable to her male peers, the statute was discriminatory.  

Justice Brennan, writing the majority opinion in Frontiero, looked back with considerable regret on the sexist history  
of the Court and noted that the courts have come a long way from the judicial sexism found in cases such as Bradwell v.  
Illinois (1873), where the Court concluded that:  

The harmony * * * which belongs * * * to the family institution is repugnant to the idea of a woman  
adopting a distinct and independent career from that of her husband. * * * The paramount destiny and  
mission of woman are to fulfill the offices * * * of wife and mother * * * .”  

With the backdrop of that quotation, the Supreme Court ventured again, not only to concur with its decision in Reed,  
but to expand it. The position of the Court articulated in Frontiero now seems to be only that it is a denial of a woman’s  
right to equal protection under the law to be denied a statutory privilege because she is a woman, but that any statute  
which makes a classification distinction based on sex is inherently suspect and should be held to close judicial scrutiny.  
Thus, Frontiero holds that the imposition upon a citizen of a disability based on that person's sex on its face is a denial  
of rights guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution. Judith Lonnquist  

JUDICIAL QUOTE OF THE MONTH: Net ierecene, ear Peet  
‘“* * * it can hardly be doubted that, in part because of the high visibility of the sex characteristic, women still face  
pervasive, although at times more subtle, discrimination in our educational institutions, on the job market and perhaps  
most conspicuously in the political arena * * * women are vastly underrepresented in this Nation’s decision-making councils.  
There has never been a female President, nor a female member of this Court * * * .”' (U.S. Supreme Court Justice Brennan  
in Frontiero).