Task Force News

Sexuality & Lesbianism: HR 5452

The NOW National Task Force on Sexuality and Lesbianism will be very active during the coming term. According to newly-appointed co-coordinators Nancy Boyd and Kay Whitlock, priority will be given to supporting the Abzug Bill (H.R. 5452) nationally, and mini-Bella bills on the state and local levels. The task force will work with NOW staff, the National Gay Task Force, etc., in developing short-term and long-range legislative strategies for legislation which prohibits discrimination on the basis of affectional or sexual preference.

To facilitate passage of such legislation, we will be contacting and talking with those in locales where efforts have been successful, finding out what strategies have worked (and which ones haven't!), what the legislation encompassed, and how support was effectively organized to achieve passage. We'll compile and distribute this invaluable kind of “how-to” information for distribution to NOW chapters and local task forces. If you have information to contribute, please, please contact us.

We will also help provide, where needed, educational programs regarding Lesbianism as a feminist issue and working to alleviate paranoia regarding the presence of Lesbians in NOW. We will also be developing an educational packet that teaches NOW members how the mechanisms of Lesbian-baiting work and how we can intervene to render that mechanism inoperable. It's a powerful mechanism, and it’s time we put it to rest. Many women are unsure of how to counter the threat of Lesbian-baiting effectively in their own communities. So we'll help provide that kind of information. This kind of educational effort, intended to help confront and eradicate society's pervasive homophobia, will be given priority attention by the Task Force. Contributions to our Task Force are most welcome, so get those cards, letters and creative ideas in the mail!!!

The Task Force will also explore viable coalition possibilities with other organizations, and we'll work, probably in coalition with gay and feminist groups, to change the image of Lesbians in the media.

And, you'll be hearing from us regularly. We're going to establish a regular newsletter that will help maintain communication between the national task force and local chapters. Send us your ideas, suggestions, offers of help, etc.

As the need arises, we'll be appointing persons or local task forces with portfolio to be contacts for certain issues or areas of Task Force concern. Examples might be: Lesbians & the military; Lesbian mother child custody suits; sex education in the schools, etc. In short, it means that we'll have special contact people who have demonstrated expertise in specific areas. It will help us be more effectively organized. Please note that you do not have to be a Lesbian to work with us! Our task force will be working on a multitude of sexuality-related issues, and all of them concern all women! Let us know of any NOW members who have special expertise in areas that would be related to Sexuality and Lesbianism Task Force concerns.

We'll also be working in coalition with the NOW National Task Force on Reproduction and other national task forces on various issues and actions. By doing so, we deliver the message that there is no more “Lesbian ghetto” in NOW and that we're all working together in common cause; and, we achieve greater impact by joining forces around specific issues or actions.

The NOW National Board, at the December 7th Board meeting in San Diego, passed the following resolution in support of the Mary Jo Risher case.

The National Organization for Women, in accordance with resolutions adopted by the membership at three national conferences, is committed to the principle that all women, regardless of affectional or sexual preference, have an absolute right to full equality under the law.

NOW is outraged that the basic legal rights have been compromised in the Mary Jo Risher child custody suit in Dallas, Texas, in which Ms. Risher's right to retain custody of her children is being challenged in court on the basis that she is a lesbian.

NOW believes that an individual’s affectional or sexual preference is not a valid basis on which to deny or abridge full legal rights.

NOW furthermore declares that the rights of Ms. Risher have been abridged by a court decision to consider her homosexual lifestyle to be a relevant issue. Because of pervasive homophobia in our society, that has, in fact, become the central issue in the case. The court is, in effect, allowing the affectional or sexual preference of Ms. Risher to determine the outcome of the case.

We condemn such a decision and declare that the abridgment of the basic rights of Ms. Risher and every other lesbian mother fighting a similar judgment diminishes the freedom of all women; moreover, it constitutes a flagrant denial of equal justice under law.

The National Organization for Women fully supports Ms. Risher in her struggle to receive a fair hearing in court, and calls upon all organizations dedicated to the concept of justice to do the same in this important case.

The following statement regarding the Debbit Watson & Barbara Randolph vs. U.S. Army case was unanimously adopted by the NOW National Board, December 7, 1975 in San Diego.

The National Organization for Women strongly supports Debbit Watson and Barbara Randolph for their decision to challenge the U.S. Army Regulation which stipulates heterosexuality as a criterion of ‘fitness’ for military service. NOW believes that an individual's affectional or sexual preference is not a bona fide occupational qualification for any job.

We commend Watson and Randolph and others engaged in similar litigation for beginning the long-overdue struggle to remove the equation of lesbianism with criminal conduct from military regulations. NOW demands for every woman the right to choose her own lifestyle and her own occupation without stigmatization or discrimination.

(RENEWAL APPLICATION)

Enclosed is my check (or money order) for $

a Membership $10 a Contribution.
(Minimum national membership $10 with special hardship rate of $5).

Name

Address

City State Zip

Checks Payable to NOW.

NATIONAL ORGANIZATION for WOMEN —
BOX 8068-5119
Philadelphia, PA 19177

RENEW NOW!