Task Force News

Older Women: Displaced Homemakers

1976 may well be the year of the Older Woman — particu-
larly for Displaced Homemakers — too young for Social
Security, too old to compete in the traditional market for
desperately needed jobs. “Where there’s a Bill There's a
Way.” State and national measures initiated by the Task
Force on Older Women, passed in California and are being
considered in Maryland, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Rep.
Yvonne Burke and Senator John Tunney have introduced
bills which should result in a federal DH Act before the end
of the 94th Congress.

Displaced Homemakers live in every state. Every state
should have a multi-purpose pilot center to create new
jobs and meet and treat the special needs of women in the
adolescence of aging. The problem is common regardless of
political affiliation which is why this innovative legislation
has already received wide bi-partisan support. (SB825, the
California Act, passed in 121 working days largely because
of the support of conservative Republican members of two
key committees.)

NOW is the time
— to find out, if you don’t already know, more about the DH

Bills. For copies and an update on all DH legislation,

write Laurie Shields, Displaced Homemakers Committee,

Task Force News

Consciousness
Raising

Last summer coordinator Harriet Perl with assistant Gay
Abarbanell traveled by car across the country, winding up
on the East Coast, conducting CR workshops — some one-
evening seminars, some two-day events which included
actual CR sessions as well as how-to's for setting up chapter
CR programs. Feedback from the trip indicates that dozens
of new CR programs resulted, along with lots of sisterhood.
This coming summer something slightly different is being
planned. Instead of working with individual chapters, Har-
riet would like to try area workshops, drawing women from
a radius of several hundred miles to spend a weekend
together learning about and doing CR. Anyone interested in
the possibility of such a workshop in her area should write
Harriet at once; a planning kit will be sent back quickly.

Dates should be open on a year-round basis, if all goes as
planned.

A task force newsletter is finally on its way. Chapter CR
coordinators who are official national task force members
should be receiving their copies soon. Again a reminder:
to become a member of the national CR task force requires

that the chapter president send the representative’s name
to BOTH the National NOW Action Center and to coordinator
Harriet Perl at 1835 S. Bentley Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90025.
If the chapter president has not sent in the name, that chap-
ter is not represented on the national task force.

A reminder: the National Guidelines to Feminist CR are
still available from the coordinator, still $3.50 postage paid.
Every CR coordinator of a chapter should have a copy,

which includes not only topic guides to help CR sessions do
their job but also plenty of practical information about
setting up CR programs, training leaders, developing topics,
etc. Chapter and state CR task forces can purchase the
Guidelines at a discount for resale and a chance to do some
fundraising. Write the coordinator for specifics.

Some experimental but promising guidelines on men’s
CR are currently in the works: watch for an announcement
about availability in a forthcoming issue of DO IT NOW.

Task Force on Older Women, 6422 Telegraph Avenue, or
phone (415) 655-7962.

— to do some research in your own state. Write your legis-
lators, especially all the women, ask what, if any, data
is available on the percentage of women who fall in the
DH category. Ask what they plan to do to help these
women help themselves, ask if they know about the
California experiment, if they are aware of the pending
national bills. Keep asking until they answer.

— to seek the support and join forces with other community
organizations concerned with women’s issues. Mutual
needs call for collective action. Start letter writing cam-
paigns. Personally contact members of your city and
county administrative offices and urge their support. Get
their official endorsement of the legislation.

— to ask for help if you need it. Laurie Shields, travelling
organizer for the Task Force on Older Women is avail-
able and can help get local action going. In January she
will be touching base in Minnesota, Missouri, Kentucky
and Alabama. For more information write or phone her
or Tish Sommers.

Task Force News

Minority Women

National Public Radio needs to hear from NOW ac-
tivists. On Saturday, Jan. 31, NPR produced a 90-minute
broadcast on Women in the Economy at its affiliate in
Washington, D.C. The show was hosted by Jo Hulett,
NOW member and activist with the National Committee
on Household Employment. Participating panelists includ-
ed Catherine Day-Jermany, NOW Task Force Co-Coor-
dinator of the Women in Poverty Task Force, Edith Sloan,
chair of the National Committee on Household Employ-
ment (NCHE) and Del Dobbins, NOW and National Black
Feminist Organization activist.

All four of the panelists are minority women, all raised
particular issues of concern to minority women. The pri-
mary focus was an earlier speak-out on economic injustice
and the plight of the household workers in the nation. That
speak-out was held in Congressional offices last fall. The
NPR broadcast focused on many issues of concern to the
large number of minority women who attended that
speak-out and the non-minority feminists who have be-
come activists on the issue of economic violence.

NPR’s broadcast included Edith Sloan's challenge to the
nation’s churches to address women’s issues. Poor
women, she noted, work long and hard in the nation’s
churches without recurring support from the pulpit.
Catherine gave valuable information on the availability of
food stamps and she also refuted Ford administration al-
legations (via Secretary of Treasury Simon) that the food
stamp program is grossly misused. Del repeated NOW’s
assertion that the Ford administration's tolerance of high
unemployment levels (38 percent for Black female teen-
agers, above average for all minorities) is a “strategy of
misery.”

NPR affiliates have access to a tape of the show. De-
mand that your local NPR affiliate broadcast it. The show
documents continued instances of economic violence
against women. As NOW activists, you should have ac-
cess to this material. Please inform the Minority Women’s
Task Force of the actions taken by NPR in response to
your demands.

15

— Del Dobbins