REGIONAL REVIEW

A Report from NOW’s Regional Directors

At the Western Regional Conference held in Las Vegas September 29 and 30, Patsy G. Fulcher of
Oakland, California was unanimously elected to head the thirteen-state region. A member of the California
Board of NOW and co-coordinator with Aileen Hernandez and Eleanor Spikes of NOW’s Task Force on
Minority Women and Women’s Rights, Ms. Fulcher succeeds Betty Kersh and Nancy Filler of Washington
as the West’s representative on the NOW National Board of Directors. She is also a co-founder of the
San Francisco Bay Area’s Black Women Organized for Action. Elaine Mills of Las Vegas was elected Assistant
Director for the Western Region.

Eastern Regional Co-Director Frances Kolb reports, “From September to November, the Eastern
Region was the scene of many exciting NOW meetings. States and State Coordinators gathered to view
their past with pride for the many achievements, with dismay for the jobs yet undone, and to view the
future with hope and an increased vigor to continue our many accomplishments.” Following such conferences
as the New Jersey “Our Minds, Our Bodies,” and the New York, Pennsylvania and Connecticut
State Conferences, the Eastern Regional Directors, Jo Ann Evans Gardner and Frances Arick Kolb will host
a meeting of old and new State Coordinators in Newark, N. J.

Southern Regional Director Jackie Frost relays reports from the active Southern Region:

Orlando NOW plans to rent a 20-foot space and erect an open tent in which NOW artists and craftspeople
can display and sell their work on consignment. “Fiesta in the Park” takes place at Lake Eola on
November 10 and 11.

Senator Omer Hirst chaired a long day of hearings September 18 in Richmond for the joint subcommittee
and the task force appointed to study “the extent to which the ratification of the ERA would
change the laws of the Commonwealth or Federal law as it relates to Virginians.” Phyllis Schlafly again
honored Virginia with her presence, and seemed to be getting the lion’s share of the press coverage. But
Virginia Beach NOW member Vera Henderson out-Schlaflyed Schlafly with a well-delivered presentation
just before lunch; when last seen, she was being interviewed before the TV cameras.

Witnesses FOR the Amendment included NOW members Flora Crater, Sandra Combs, Marguerite
Rawalt, Debbie Howard, Caruthers Berger, Kay Brooks, Lydia Howard and Elise Heinz. Combs, a
Vietnam veteran ex-captain in the Air Force, described the advantages of military service for women, and
her experience in a combat zone.

Tampa NOW will stage a “Barefoot and Pregnant Ball” to give away awards to people who have done
the most to “keep women in their place.” Five awards will be given at the November 2 ball, covering city,
county, state, national and international figures.

The Columbia, S. C. Chapter of NOW has filed charges of sex discrimination against Governor John West
and the State of South Carolina with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. A study by the
Bureau of Urban and Regional Affairs reveals that women fill almost half of the State’s positions, but receive
less than a third of the pay. The as yet unreleased study by the Commission on the Status of Women provides
even more proof of the State’s blatant discrimination. Most black women are employed in positions ranked
as 01, white women in grade 05 and white men in grade 11. Also, the state insurance plan allows coverage
for any illness of an unmarried man, while unmarried women are not covered for pregnancy. Women must
be on the job one year before they qualify for maternity leave. No other illness or disability has such a
requirement. Prime movers for the suit were Vicki Eslinger and Marie Jakubs.

Louisiana NOW’s first state conference on November 10 in Shreveport, La. Margaret Stanley from
Baton Rouge NOW relates that Louisiana is re-writing its State Constitution which, with the help of able
and active NOW members throughout the state, will include an Equal Rights Amendment in its Bill of Rights.
But the opposition is mounting! Anyone who is a Louisiana resident or former resident contact — The Legislative
Assembly, State of Louisiana, Delegates of the Constitutional Convention 1973, Baton Rouge, La.
WRITE ON..... !

Midwest Regional Director Kathy Rand reports that there is lots of activity in the Midwest. At recent
state conferences, Marline Rennels of Elgin was elected Illinois State Coordinator, and Lynne Schrum of
Evansville was elected Indiana State Coordinator. Congratulations to two of our newest and most active
chapters: Peoria, Illinois and Fairborn, Ohio. Both have become overnight successes in their communities!
Welcome to our newest convening chapters: Rapid City, S. D.; Aberdeen, S. D.; Danville, Ill.; and
Bellevue, Nebr. Unratified states in the region will be working especially hard to get the ERA ratified this
year. New address for Kathy Rand is 502 W. Roscoe, Chicago, Ill. 60657; new phone is (312) 528-5302.

aah Oh