at the 1974 National Conference.

Betty Newcomb, Coordinator,  
Mailed By-laws Ballot

Ballots cast on the By-law membership issue will be maintained in the NOW National Office for six  
months from the November 10 NOW Board meeting. After that time, they will be destroyed per  
instructions of the NOW Legal Vice President. Any concerns on the ballots should be directed to  
the NOW National Office, 5 South Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, Illinois 60603.

ATTENTION: NOW MEMBERS  
Plea For Input To By-Laws Committee

The by-laws committee will meet sometime in January to prepare proposed by-laws changes for the  
consideration of the 1974 National Conference. For many of you, by-laws might seem incomprehensible,  
dull, irrelevant, or a drag. But they are very important. An organization’s by-laws shape the  
organization — its base of power, its flexibility or rigidity, and its constituency — that is, the kind of  
member it will attract. The by-laws committee will attempt to formulate proposals most nearly reflecting  
the wishes of the members. Please write to me and tell your views on possible NOW structure.  
You may want to direct your comments to any or all of the following areas:

Who should set program and/or policy for NOW — the members, the chapters, the board (total board  
or the executive board), the president? What number of persons should serve on the board — minimum,  
maximum? Should the board be primarily administrative, interpreting NOW policy and servicing the  
membership, or should it set policy, provide a forum for dissent? Should all board members be elected,  
or should some be appointed to provide regional or minority representation? Should some board  
members be elected regionally? What proportion mix — elected, appointed, regional, at large? Should  
regionally elected board members be representational only or should they be regional directors?  
Should regional boards be established? If yes, what functions should they perform? Should board  
terms be staggered? Should limits be placed on number of consecutive terms allowed? Should the  
vice-presidents be elected by responsibility, i.e. legal, legislative; PR, fundraising? Should those  

four responsibilities be given executive board status? Should other responsibilities be given executive  
board status? What should be the relationship between member, chapter, state, region, national?

Should budget priorities be set by the national board, or by the membership? What function should  
be served by the National Conference — reaffirmation of sisterhood, program setting, policy-making,  
attracting media attention? Should the voting at the National Conference be by delegates? What  
representation mix? Should the mailed by-laws ballot be preserved? If you voted against either of  
the recent by-laws changes, please tell us why you voted against them, what features of the proposals  
you rejected?

I have tried to present a broad range of possibilities for comment. If your pet cause has been omitted,  
truly, it was not intentional. The only bias the by-laws committee has is to attempt to reflect the  
wishes of the membership. The list above is a long one. Long responses will be appreciated, but not  
expected; nor will neatness count in the amount of attention your reply receives. Please let us hear  
from you. We cannot reflect the wishes of the membership unless we know them. Wilma Scott Heide  
will officially appoint the members of the new by-laws committee soon. Please send your replies to  
reach me no later than the end of the first week in February, 1974, for consideration by the by-laws  
committee.

Betty Newcomb, Coordinator,  
By-laws Committee