(continued from back page)

interviews with Boston newspapers.  
Interview with New York Daily News, on feminist goals.  
Met with members of Los Angeles chapter.  
Appeared on Newsmakers in Los Angeles; discussion of politics.  
Interview on Today’s Woman, on affirmative action and employment.  
Met with task force coordinators and other California NOW members.  
Interview with Los Angeles Free Press, on gay and minority rights in the society and in NOW, and on the image of women.  
Met with Omaha, Nebraska, NOW members.  
Press conference with Omaha press. Stressed August 26 activities in Nebraska, and child care as a necessity for integrating women into the society.  
Speech in Lincoln, Nebraska, at a conference for and about women, on “The Rebirth of Women.” Stressed consciousness raising, and politics.  
Met with members of the Legislative task force, and other members of the Lincoln chapter.  
Interview with Kansas City Star, on the ERA and legislation which would be affected.  
Mayor presented me with the key to Kansas City.  
Led motorcade through the streets of Kansas City to a rally in the park.  
Met with Kansas City members.  
Appeared on TV shows, on ERA and related matters.  
September, 1974  
Rapped with Flo Kennedy about the future of feminism.  
Met with President Ford in the cabinet room with Presidents of other women's organizations. This meeting was a first for the White House. Urged Ford to work actively for ERA ratification; to veto any anti-abortion legislation which might come to him; and to support legislation ending sex discrimination in credit, housing, and other areas.  
Attended Eastern Regional Conference: Wonder Woman, No Myth America. Great feminist event, and triumphant (rain-soaked) march down the Atlantic City boardwalk for 2,500 NOW members. We gave the United States a more delightful option than Miss America.  
Interview with People magazine.  
Members of Rochester (New York) NOW came to my swearing in to the New York bar; then took me out for champagne.  
Met with feminist economists to discuss implications of feminism on the American economic system.  
Taped a speech for the Minnesota state conference, on criminal justice, and the directions I think NOW should move in.  
Taped Woman, a PBS show, produced by Sandra Elkin and shown on stations throughout the country. Sandy, also the moderator, and I discussed the recent organizing of blue collar women, and how NOW is relating to women in labor unions; and the special life situations of older women (women over 21, or 30, or 65).  
Met with Judith Younger, the third woman dean of a college of law. College of Law, Syracuse, New York.  
Delegate to meeting at the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Met with Caspar Weinberger to discuss Title IX, and also, women’s health problems.  
Met with Mary Jo Binder, who briefed me on a wide variety of problems of women and poverty.  
Met with Casey Hughes at the Legislative Office.  
Met with Johnnie Tillmon, to discuss women and poverty.  
Speech at Wells College, Aurora, New York, about Title IX, sports, and new lifestyles for women and men.  
Met with male members of NOW to discuss sexism in NOW.  
Delegate to the Economic Summit, Washington, D.C. Brought the issue to the floor that whether the panels dealt with labor, management, or government — they were male panels and could not hope to represent the women in this country who are affected by unemployment and inflation.  

Attended NOW ERA meeting in Washington, D.C.  

Attended White House party for Economic Summit delegates.  
Signed up three (male) congresspersons as NOW members.  
Attended NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund meeting, New York City.  

October, 1974  

Met with female law professors from eastern and midwestern law schools to discuss affirmative action.  

Speech to students in College of Human Development, about changing sex roles, reproduction and population, and the fun of being a feminist.  

Spoke with Anne Armstrong, then White House advisor on women, about integrating women into the federal government.  
Press conference on Title IX.  

Attended Midwest Regional Conference, Kansas City. Spoke on government, politics, and volunteerism.  

Taped speech for Southern Regional Conference.  

Appointed new Task Force coordinators, based on feedback from the members of each Task Force.  

Drew up my suggested Budget for the administrative functions of NOW.  

White House meeting on Title IX — sent a representative.  
Population Conference at HEW.  

Met with NOW members concerned with the impact of recession on women workers.  

Attended and spoke at Alabama State Conference, Mobile.  

Met with Aileen Hernandez.  

Interviews with Alabama and Florida press on the ERA.  

Met with gay NOW members from Alabama.  

Met with women film writers and producers.  

Meeting of Steering Committee, National Committee for Full Employment — sent a representative.  

Attended Budget Committee meeting, Chicago.  

Talked with Muskie staff about feminist issues.  

* * * *  

I feel that I have indeed been honored to be part of the passion of the times. This listing represents the highlights of my first seven months of a seventeen-month term — space limitations in NOW make it impossible to here reproduce my full report to the membership. If you would like a copy of my full report, please write to: NOW National Office, 5 South Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603.  

This diary is more exciting than that of Samuel Pepys. I also made thousands of telephone contacts, communicated with thousands of persons by mail, and did interviews all over the world.  

In May, 1975, I was invited to lecture in Greece, where I also met with Greek feminists and American feminists living in Greece. I helped them to organize a feminist group, and start a newsletter. I met with female legislators to help draft an equal rights provision for the new constitution (having learned how hard it is to get an equal rights provision into an already existing constitution). I helped the midwives and midwife students who were on strike to organize a worldwide feminist health demonstration, on issues very similar to those of nurses in the United States. They won every demand.  

I have been invited by the Soviet Government to speak in the U.S.S.R. in October. I consider this an honor for NOW, and shall report back to you at the National Conference in Philadelphia.  

My goal, in May, 1974, was working for a society where gender did not determine one's life, where there would be justice for women. Hopefully, in 1975, we are some small steps closer to that goal. If we are, it is because all of you have worked so well and so hard to end sexism. Thank you.  

—Karen DeCrow