NEWS FROM THE NOW LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATION FUND

The NOW Legal Defense & Education Fund’s Board of Trustees, at the Summer 1973 meeting, approved Fund participation in eight cases. Two cases, Aiello v. Hansen and Cohen v. Chesterfield County School Board; LaFleur v. Cleveland Board of Education, challenge discriminatory employment practices in regard to maternity. In Rosemary Smith v. Jerome R. Lewis, an attorney is being charged with malpractice for failing to include a wife’s interest in community property in a settlement agreement. The Fund is also taking an interest in two Title VII suits, one involving a female teacher at a university, and the other challenging the state overtime pay provision for being limited to women.

The additional cases involve a married woman’s right to retain her birth name and a suit against a doctor who performed an abortion on a minor.

If you are employed by the Xerox Corporation and wish to work for women’s rights, you might be able to do so and get paid by Xerox.

The NOW Legal Defense & Education Fund office is in need of people to work in the headquarters office, but is unable to provide for a full, salaried staff. Under the Xerox Social Service Leave Program, an employee may apply to work for programs such as the NLDEF for up to one year. If approved she/he may receive regular salary from Xerox and retain benefits and seniority.

The NLDEF particularly needs people with ability in law, budgeting and programming, project management or public relations. Any Xerox employee who is interested in working for the Fund under this program should write to the NLDEF headquarters office at 641 Lexington Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022, describing skills and experience and what she/he would like to do for the Fund.

DETROIT NOW CHALLENGES TV LICENSE RENEWAL AMIDST ATTACK BY ANTI-FEMINISTS

In two moves related to TV license renewals, Detroit NOW, in coalition with other Detroit area groups, settled successfully with WXYZ-TV and petitioned the FCC against WJBK-TV. The settlement with WXYZ, now under attack from HOW and Stop ERA members, provides for improvements in the employment of women, prime-time programming directed at feminist issues and goals, and a Women’s Advisory Council for the station.

(NOTE: The September DO IT NOW reported Women & Health Task Force Coordinator Joan Goldstein’s participation in the University of Michigan’s Conference on Aging. According to additional information received later, Detroit NOW President Joan Israel and Lillian Troll were instrumental in establishing the feminist focus of that conference. Detroit NOW Member Harriet Alpern was a member of a workshop panel on the media. NOW President Heide was a featured speaker.)

ATTENTION NOW CHAPTER FUNDRAISERS AND ALL NOW MEMBERS

Kathy Olson, Vice President of Twin Cities (Minn.) NOW, sends the following caveat: ‘The soon-available 1974 Liberated Woman's Appointment Calendar has a poem entitled “Indian Giver” opposite the September 15 entry. In deference to the personhood of all our Original/Native American sisters and brothers, please look opposite this entry BEFORE you make a decision about purchasing this calendar.’

A note from the authors, Lynn Sherr and Jurate Kazickas: (from their reply to Kathy Olson) — “We in no way mean to give a slight on Native Americans by reprinting the poem, “Indian Giver,” by Diane Wakoski. To us, it was a feminist poem, a particular part of the woman’s experience, told in the idiom of schoolchildren. In fact, that is the only reason why the term ‘Indian Giver’ was acceptable to us. We probably don’t need to point out to you our deep concern for Native Americans, as evidenced in some of our other entries. We fully acknowledge our commitment to feminist and humanist goals. As we wrote in the introduction, we hope the day will come when we won’t need publications like ours to understand — and sometimes even laugh at — some of our worst problems.”

DALLAS AND FT. WORTH NOW CHAPTERS JOIN TO CHALLENGE NEW AIRPORT

At the dedication of the new Dallas/Ft. Worth Airport, women guests including Women State Senators and Representatives were invited only to a fashion show while men attended a political luncheon. Attendees at the fashion show were greeted by the NOW members with flyers pointing out the obvious discrimination: “The Dallas/Ft. Worth Airport is designed to take us into the 21st Century, so let’s put 19th Century ideas behind us.”

INTERNATIONAL NOW CHAPTERS ARE THE GOAL OF WORLD TOUR

National Board Member Patricia Burnett, representing the NOW International Committee, is traveling to 14 countries, including the USSR, to study the status of women in those countries, and to discuss the establishment of NOW chapters throughout the world. Ms. Burnett will meet with many feminist and world leaders, including Indira Gandhi. For the two-week visit to Russia, Ms. Burnett is the guest of the Soviet government, along with Frances Farenthold, Claire Harvey and Carol Pendell.