THE MEETING

1. *Take some literature with you: NOW’s Bill of Rights (especially), NOW’s goals, position papers on dope sheets from the National Task Forces on Issues of interest to you, a sample of your chapter newsletter or publication.

2. *Tell a little about your chapter — what its priorities are, its successes, mention briefly your newsletter and your speaker’s bureau so they know you get to a lot of people. Don’t say how large or how small your chapter or NOW is — instead stress our importance as opinion-makers.

3. *Limit your presentation to probably no more than three points, but make them good and forceful. Make sure they are all things on which federal action is required. Decide ahead what points you want to cover, and what your goals are for the meeting (opening up communications with their offices, getting a yes on extension of minimum wage or childcare, etc.) If there are several of you, divide up the topics so a different person leads the discussion on each point. [Speak for the Chapter or for NOW (Our chapter’s priorities are... NOW’s legislative program calls for . . . )]

4. *Ask their offices to do something for you — keep your chapter informed or provided with copies of bills, send your legislative task force person the Congressional Record. Ask to be placed on their mailing list for the newsletters they send to their home district.

5. “Let them know what you can do for them — support them on bills, ask if you can arrange for them to speak at a chapter meeting or rally when they're home (be sure you get a good turnout), mention anything good they've done in the chapter newsletter, get them information they could use on bills they want to introduce and support or put in the Congressional Record, etc.

FOLLOW-UP

Write a letter when you get home summarizing the points of the discussion and thanking them for meeting with you. Let them know your chapter will keep in touch.

* * * * *

The most effective way to lobby is to be informed, brief and efficient. Your Representative will not agree with you on everything, but remember that in lobbying today’s enemy is tomorrow’s friend. If you can’t get to them on this issue, you may get to them on the next. Confrontation is a tactic among other tactics — use it only when it may pay off for you, and only when you have carefully planned for it.

For a copy of Nader’s Congressional Profile (the latest dope sheet on issues and attitudes of Congresspersons) of your representative (all 1972 Congresspersons are available). Send the name of your Congressperson, and $1.00 to: Congress Project, P.O. 19281, Wash. D.C. 20036

He