National Board Meetings

Below are summaries of the two National Board Meet-
ings held since the Convention Board Meeting (which di-
rectly followed the Convention). Through these sum-
maries, Secretary Jean Conger is carrying out her pledge
to communicate with every NOW member about the deci-
sions and activities of the Board.

December: San Diego

1. Eve Norman was recognized as the new Western Re-
gional Director, following the resignation of Patsy Fulcher,
former Western Regional Director.

2. The Board decided to hold its meetings the first week-
end of every other month during its term of office. First
meeting dates: January 24, 25, 1976; second meeting:
April 3, 4, 1976.

3. A Committee was formed to develop a proposal for the
organization of the Board’s committees, including the
charge of each committee; it was also empowered to re-
commend rules and procedures for Board meetings.

4. The Board went on record opposing the appointment of
John Paul Stevens to the United States Supreme Court.

5. On the ERA and the implementation of the National
Conference Resolution on the ERA, the following motions
were passed:

a. to authorize the Chair of the Board and the Legis-
lative Vice-President to call a meeting of state coordinators
and legislative/ERA coordinators prior to January 7 to
choose the six priority ERA states, as mandated in the
Conference Resolution. The state coordinators will choose
their own chair and set their own agenda. (The ERA meet-
ing was held in St. Louis, Missouri; see p. 2.)

b. to allocate $2,000 to the Illinois ERA Mobilization
Committee, as per the Conference Resolution on the ERA.
The Board also committed itself to the recruitment of 3,800
people to attend the mobilization.

c. to establish a National ERA Committee to coordinate
national ERA efforts so as to aid unratified states.

d. to direct the NOW Legislative personnel to deal direct-
ly with state legislative and/or coordinators concerning
their state’s legislative matters, including the ERA.

e. to appropriate $1,000 to the Virginia ERA action (see
p. 2 for description).

f. to mandate the Public Relations Committee to develop
promotional materials for the ERA, to be approved at the
next Board meeting.

g. to ask each member of NOW to give an additional
sum of at least 75 cents to the ERA Campaign Fund, when
the 1976 National renewals are mailed out.

6. The Board voted to put in DO IT NOW materials on the
achievements of Alice Paul, who was the founder of the
Women’s Party, and to make known to the membership
that she is 90 years old and ailing. She would appreciate
notes, cards, etc., from the members.

7. On financial matters, the Board voted as follows:

a. to permit NOW activists who are entitled to reim-
bursement of expenses under various budget line items to
receive an advance on any single project/function.

b. that new maximum amounts be allowed for lodging
and meals — $15.00 per day for meals and one-half of the
price of a double room up to $20.00 per night.

c. to rescind the emergency disbursement policy and
replace it with the following: NOW volunteers will be re-
imbursed first and all other obligations will be paid after
that on an equal basis.

d. to rescind the current procurement policy which
placed the responsibility for contracts in the hands of the
staff. An interim policy was established to put this respon-
sibility in the hands of the appropriate NOW officers, until
a new procurement committee can bring a new policy to
the Board.

e. to provide to chapters and states certain NOW mem-
bership promotional materials at no cost, with a maximum
amount of 2,000 pieces per chapter and 10,000 pieces per
state per year.

f. that no NOW member shall ever be refused admit-
tance to a National NOW function where NOW business
is being conducted or policy being set because of a lack of
funds.

g. established a committee to safeguard NOW’s line of
credit so as to establish procedures which would ensure
that unauthorized individuals did not abuse the NOW line
of credit.

8. The Board voted to reduce administrative overhead by
consolidating the three present NOW offices into one of-
fice in Washington, D.C. to be called the NOW Action
Center.

a. Specifications for membership services are being
developed by the Secretary and Treasurer and bids will be
let for processing of memberships.

b. the NOW Action Center will have five employees:
Secretary, Receptionist, Bookkeeper, Public Information
Officer, and Legislative and Federal Agency Officer. All
will be paid an annual salary of $9,500 plus 15% benefits.
Contracts for employees will continue only until the next
National NOW election.

c. After debate on the question of an office coordinator,
the matter was tabled to the next meeting.

d. Office space will include a room for future short-term
projects.

9. Notice was to be given to the present employees with
an offer to apply for the positions at the Action Center.
It is the Board’s desire that officers give special considera-
tion to present employees, but there is no legal obligation
upon the officers to give priority to the terminated em-
ployees. Employees will also be notified of allowances for
compensatory time, sick leave and vacation.

10. The Ninth National Conference to develop new by-
laws will be in Kansas City, Kansas, with the final site deci-
sion, dependent on facilities, etc., to be determined by
Mary Emery, Kansas State Coordinator. The date will
be October 9-10, 1976. The Board rescinded the prior
Board ruling against having two consecutive conferences
in the same region.

11. The Tenth National Conference will be April 23-24,
1977, or the last weekend in March, in Detroit, Michigan.
The date will be set by the Detroit NOW people.

12. The budget was adopted (see p. 12 for the budget).
A committee was set up to establish the policy for dues
rebate to states.

13. A Task Force on Battered Women was established,
as per the Conference Resolution.

14. NOW expressed support for Lesbian WACs Barbara
Randolph and Debbie Watson, who have been discharged
from the U.S. Army because of their sexual preference.

15. NOW expressed its support for the case of Mary Jo
Risher, a lesbian mother, who is trying to obtain custody
of her children, denied to her because of her sexual pre-
ference.