NOW National Office  
5 South Wabash Avenue, Suite 1615  
Chicago, IL 60603  

FROM THE  
PRESIDENT  

President’s Report to the Membership of NOW  

THE PRESIDENT’S CALENDAR  

May, 1974  

May 27. Elected to the presidency.  

May 29. TODAY show, discussing goals for feminism during the  
next five years. Emphasis particularly on changing roles for  
women and men in the family.  

June, 1974  

Marriage and Divorce Conference, Rochester, New York.  
Speech dealing primarily with state laws affecting marriage,  
divorce, and child custody, and with the way love has influenced  
the lives of women.  

Met with chapter members and task force members in  
Rochester.  

Met with professors at Nursing School, Upstate Medical Center,  
(New York) to discuss discrimination at Upstate. Work on af-  
firmative action program.  

Met with city councilors (Syracuse, New York) to discuss city af-  
firmative action program.  

Met with pro-abortion lobbyists to discuss strategy.  

Consulted on black feminist art show.  

Speech at Maine State Conference. Party with Maine members.  
Speech at Masculine Mystique Conference, New York Univer-  
sity.  

Syracuse NOW chapter meeting.  

Visit to NOW National Office, Chicago.  

Did local TV in Chicago.  

Taped a radio program for Seattle, Washington.  

Visit former NOW President Wilma Scott Heide, to get pertinent  
files.  

Ms. Magazine birthday party, on ferry on Hudson River.  
Appearance on Today's Woman, on CBS radio. Talked primarily  
about equal employment opportunity, and women in religion.  
Appearance at the Unitarian-Universalist press conference, New  
York City. Thrust was changes which feminists in that church  
want to make in church doctrine and practice. I spoke generally  
about the force which religious doctrine has on (even) secular  
life.  

Interview with Des Moines Tribune, about NOW and feminism in  
the Midwest.  

Visit to Public Information Office, New York City.  

Met with New York City chapter people.  

Met with Parade magazine writer, to discuss various NOW task  
forces and how the work of task forces could be incorporated in-  
to a whole range of articles.  

Met with women in New York state who want to run for public of-  
fice.  

Second class postage paid  
at Chicago, Ill. 60607  

2462125 04-03-1590 75 05  

NYEAN GROSCH  

85281  

Taped TV show on abortion for showing all over the east.  

Met with nurses who are organizing to strike in New York state.  
Spoke at fundraising party for Mary Ann Krupsak, who was run-  
ning for Lieutenant Governor of New York state.  

Met with Betty Friedan.  

July, 1974  

Meeting with feminist psychologists to discuss women's studies  
curriculum.  

Appeared on one hour radio show in St. Louis.  

Visit to National Office, Chicago.  

Appeared on television shows, Chicago.  

Attended Financial Development Committee, Budget Committee,  
and Board Orientation meetings, Chicago.  

Spoke to Lambda Kappa Mu, an educational sorority, about  
sexism in education, sex role stereotypes in textbooks, and the  
revision needed in vocational counseling.  

Attended the Eastern Regional State Coordinators meeting.  
Meetings with a woman, a psychologist with a city school system,  
who was fired for reasons of sex discrimination, including sexual  
harassment on the job, to plan the strategy of her legal case.  
Interview on NBC network radio, New York City.  

Attended meeting of the Economic Think Tank, originated by  
Betty Friedan, in New York.  

Interview with Essence magazine. (magazine for black women)  
Met with members of the National Gay Task Force (New York) to  
plan ways for NOW to work with them.  

Taped a show on NBC network radio, about the future of a gen-  
der-free society.  

Met with LIFE-TIME books people, with Dian Terry, to brief them  
on August 26 activities in NOW — these to appear in a special  
edition of LIFE.  

Met with female law students from the eastern states, to discuss  
Women and the Law courses, and how to integrate non-sexist  
content into all law school courses.  

Procurement Committee meeting, Syracuse, New York. First  
meeting, in attempt to bring NOW’s contracting procedures into  
compliance with National Conference Resolution (Houston,  
1974).  

Taped two television shows with Dr. Thomas Szasz, on the im-  
plications of incarceration in mental hospitals, the “witch”  
tradition, and other matters. These shows were made available  
throughout the country.  

Interview with Chemical Week, on the role of women in science.  

August, 1974  
Met with members of New York City chapter.  
Met with Carolyn Shaw Bell, economist, to discuss women in the  
economy, and the special problems of women in times of  
recession.  
Appeared on Good Morning Show, Boston, with Maxine Kumin,  
poet.  
Met with members of the Boston chapter.  
Attended National Board meeting, Boston.  

(continued on page 31)