Chapter Actions...

BOSTON:

The Boston NOW Task Force on the Image  
of Women in the Media has begun a  
product boycott. Our first target will be  
Whisk, manufactured by Lever Brothers  
and their “Ring around the Collar” ad,  
created by Batten, Barton, Durstine and  
Osborn, Inc.

The aim of the boycott is to get manufac-  
turers and the advertising industry to stop  
exploiting women by portraying them as  
weak, helpless, brainless dependents,  
domestic servants and extensions of male  
fantasies of sexual exploitation and domi-  
nation of the female.

Whisk was selected for the first boycott  
because there is a general recognition of  
the negative value of the “Ring around  
the Collar” ad by non-feminist women and  
men, as well as movement members.

NOW members across the country are  
asked to get as many people actively  
boycotting and writing letters as possible.  
In this way we can pose a real threat to the  
corporate power and the image-makers  
who exploit the prejudices, insecurities and  
fears of the consumer class women. The  
chief concern of companies is sales and  
profit. They speak a language of dollars  
and cents. If demands for humane treat-  
ment for women in advertising are ac-  
companied by a loss in sales, corporate  
management will respond.

It's high time women, who possess 85% of  
the purchasing power and to whom over  
75% of all advertising budgets are direc-  
ted, use their power to liberate themselves  
from oppressive stereotypes, rather than  
finance the institutionalization of these  
stereotypes.

The National Advertising Review Board  
(NARB) has published and sent out to  
agencies its report on “Advertising Por-  
traying or Directed at Women,” in which  
they call for the ad industry to upgrade its  
portrayal of women in order to reflect  
“women’s changing status in the modern  
world.” (A copy of this report is available  
for 50¢ from NARB, 850 Third Avenue,  
NY, NY 10022).

Apply pressure NOW to the companies  
and advertisers and accelerate changes  
which will benefit us NOW and the  
generations of women to come. We have  
the power. Let’s structure it into a national  
boycott. For more information contact:  
Nina Helene, Boston Task Force on  
Women in the Media, 45 Newbury Street,  
Boston, MA 02116.

Ms. Helene asks you to direct your  
letters of opinion to Robert Jackson, Ac-  
count Supervisor/WHISK, or P.E. An-  
derson, General Manager/Executive Vice  
President, Lever Brothers, 390 Park Ave-  
nue, New York, NY 10022, AND to  
Tom Dillon, President, Batten, Barton, Dur-  
stine and Osborn, Inc., 383 Madison  
Avenue, New York, NY 10017.

ATLANTA:  
Purchase Power

Atlanta NOW sponsored an innovative ac-  
tion against a sexist manufacturer  
marketing coffee mugs in the shape of a  
male chauvinist pig for Father’s Day.

The chapter bought up the entire stock of  
mugs in their local department store and  
then returned every one of them after  
Father's Day.

After a good deal of discussion with the  
manager, the store finally saw the point and  
promised to reconsider its purchasing  
practices in the future.

“Assert Your Self.” Think Equal — Act  
Equal. 41 pages, $2 postpaid. Seattle  
NOW, 2252 B NE 65th, Seattle, WA  
98115.

Boulder NOW  
Supports Strike

The Boulder NOW Chapter has been  
actively supporting the Amalgamated  
Clothing Workers in their local strike  
and national boycott against AMF-Head,  
producers of Head ski and tennis products.  
The union struck when the multi-national  
corporation refused over a period of weeks  
to negotiate with the newly formed local.  
The union is led by Shirley Apodoca. 75%  
of the plant workers are women who have  
been kept in low paying jobs without  
regard for their seniority.

Priority demands of the workers are an end  
to sex discrimination in promotions, the in-  
stitution of health and safety procedures to  
protect workers during their constant con-  
tact with epoxy and fiberglass, and an end  
to arbitrary lay-offs and wage rates.

—Sara Nelson

Indianapolis  
Action

Indianapolis NOW is gathering information  
from organizations and individuals relating  
to women's prison conditions as a first step  
in planning an action to improve conditions  
at the Women's Prison there.

WRITERS CONTEST

The Council on Interracial Books for  
Children is holding its 7th annual  
contest for children’s book manus-  
cripts by minority writers. Five  
prizes of $500 each are being of-  
fered for the best manuscripts with  
regard to relevancy to minority  
struggles, authenticity of culture,  
positive images, anti-racist and anti-  
sexist themes, and literary merit.  
Writers must be previously un-  
published in the children’s book field.  
The contest ends Dec. 31, 1975.  
Write the Council at 1841 Broad-  
way, NY, NY 10023.

FLASH: Senate Sub-Committee on Con-  
stitutional Amendments defeated all  
proposed abortion constitutional amend-  
ments Wednesday, September 17!

This is a new feature to highlight some of  
the chapter actions that are happening  
throughout the country. If you would like to  
contribute some information from your  
chapter, please send it to Bernice Friedlan-  
der, Editor, DO IT NOW, 1266 National  
Press Building, Washington, D.C. 20045.