Rules Committee

Proposed Rules for the 1975 NOW National Conference:

A. ADMISSION: The meeting will be open to all those duly  
registered in attendance.

B. CERTIFICATION: Only NOW members in good standing who  
have been certified by the Credentials Committee shall be eligible to  
vote. The Credentials Chairperson shall report, before the close of  
the opening session, the number of voting members registered, and  
shall again report such registration just prior to the nominations and  
elections of officers and board members.

C. MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS AND DISCUSSION IN PLENARY  
SESSION:

1. At the opening session, the President shall appoint a  
Timekeeper whose duty shall be to indicate to each speaker the ex-  
piration of the time allowed.

2. Motions may be made only by voting NOW members. The  
proponent of the motion must submit the motion to the Secretary,  
signed with the proponent's name, NOW chapter and/or state af-  
filiation. Proponent shall be allowed to open and close debate on  
her/his motion.

3. Discussion shall be limited to 3 minutes for any one speaker.  
Expiration of the time shall be indicated by the Timekeeper rising in  
place. Additional time may be allowed upon the vote of the con-  
ference.

4. Participation in floor discussion shall be limited to duly  
registered, voting NOW members, except where the Conference  
Committee has specifically invited the participation of an individual.

5. Each member who wishes to speak from the floor shall take  
her/his turn at the proper microphone (as indicated on procedure  
sheet in your conference kit). No member shall speak a second time  
on a motion until all other members who wish to do so have an op-  
portunity to do so.

D. VOTING IN PLENARY SESSIONS:

1. The tellers for the counting of the vote shall be appointed by  
the President at the opening session.

2. Only NOW members duly certified shall be eligible to vote on  
motions or resolutions, and to vote for candidates for office and for  
the National Board. There shall be no proxy voting.

3. All nominees for elective office shall have given prior consent  
to nomination and shall be willing to have their names published as  
elective officers or directors on the letterheads and official  
documents.

4. Each nominee shall be prepared to give a two-minute presen-  
tation on her/his behalf.

5. The Chairperson of the Election Committee shall be respon-  
sible for the balloting and the reporting thereof to the Conference,  
accounting for all ballots cast.

F. PARTICIPATION IN WORKSHOPS:

1. Attendance in workshops is open to all those duly registered  
in attendance. If overcrowding should exist, priority will be given to  
NOW members. All NOW members may participate in discussion;  
and all NOW members eligible to vote in Plenary Sessions shall be  
eligible to vote in workshops.

2. A Workshop may exclude the press, or cameras, or tapes, if so  
desired.

3. Any questions not specifically covered by these rules shall be  
governed by the National By-Laws and by Robert's Rules of Order  
(see sheets on both in your conference kit).

G. SMOKING: Smoking will occur only in designated areas.

Frances Arick Kolb  
Chair, Rules Committee

TRAVEL EQUALIZATION

National NOW will provide a check for 1/3 of the amount of the  
round-trip airfare to each chapter with ten or more members as of  
the date of the adoption of this plan. The check will be made  
payable to the chapter and will be mailed October 1, 1975. The  
chapter may use the money for conference travel in any way it  
chooses — by subsidizing a single member's airfare, by splitting  
among several members, by purchasing a bus ticket and providing  
the balance in cash to the member to pay for food and lodging, and  
so forth. The chapter has the sole authority to decide who will be  
assisted with this money.

Only chapters for whom the round trip airfare is $150 or more  
will be provided assistance through this travel pool.

The travel pool will be funded by voluntary contributions, a $5 ear-  
marked from each of the first 4,000 conference registration fees  
($20,000) budgeted in the conference budget, and a $5 earmarked  
fee from each registration fee over 4,000 registrants. We estimate  
the total pool will be about $25,000. The total cost of this plan  
would be approximately $24,000.

Any chapter which is unable to use its travel fund may donate its  
money to any other chapter of its choosing in eligible states.

Twenty-nine (29) states including 281 chapters are eligible for  
travel funds. Twenty-two (22) states, including D.C., are not eligible.  
The twenty-nine states which are eligible are: Alabama, Alaska,  
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa,  
Kansas, Louisiana, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana,  
Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon,  
South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin,  
Wyoming.

The Travel Equalization Plan shall be administered by a committee  
of four persons.

Nada Chandler  
1205 Addison Walkway  
Philadelphia, PA 19147

Bonnie Howard  
92 Front Street  
Marblehead, MA 01945

Charlene Suneson  
1543 West Olympic  
Los Angeles, CA 90015

Mary Jean Collins-Robson  
4800 S. Dorchester Ave., #4 3N  
Chicago, IL 60615

The above motions were passed at the National Board meeting in  
Kansas City on July 26-27, 1975. The administering committee  
was appointed at the same time. Since then the text has been cir-  
culated to the leadership list consisting of Board members, National  
Officers, Task Force Coordinators, Chapter Presidents, and State  
Coordinators. Additional correspondence is being sent to Chapter  
Presidents, State Coordinators, and Regional Directors informing  
them of the eligibility of chapters according to the National Office  
records. Any chapter which feels that its eligibility has not been  
properly determined should notify the committee immediately.  
NOTE THAT THIS PLAN APPLIES ONLY TO CHAPTERS. All  
questions should be directed to the National Office, the appropriate  
Regional Director, Bonnie Howard, or Nada Chandler. Chapters  
unable to use their funds should report to these persons how  
they wish the money designated. The decision, of course, is the  
chapter's.

The committee will be meeting in late September to actually make  
the disbursements. Checks cannot be issued until a majority of the  
committee agrees that all eligible chapters are accounted for. The  
funds are a part of the conference budget, but since they will be  
disbursed in advance of the conference, some of the funds will  
come from the national treasury. A financially successful con-  
ference will return both these funds and a profit to that treasury. Let  
us know if you have any questions.

—Nada Chandler  
Conference Coordinator