1974 NATIONAL CONFERENCE NEWS

Wilma Scott Heide has named Mary Lynn Meyers to coordinate the Resolutions Committee for the  
1974 National Conference. Proposed resolutions from regions, states, chapters, etc. for consideration  
at the Conference should be sent to Mary Lynn Meyers, 1312 East Church, Pierre, S.D. 57501.

NOW Needs You! ... To Run For National Office and NOW’s Board of Directors

The Opportunity of a Lifetime is yours for the asking — 34 positions are open that offer the chance  
for national service to the feminist cause. The reward for serving is immeasurable personal growth,  
the knowledge that you are making herstory, and shaping the destiny of the largest and most powerful  
of the feminist organizations.

Hurry! Hurry! Hurry! The form for filing as a candidate for one of the nine officerships and 25 seats  
on the Board of Directors is now available by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to Judith Meuli,  
Chair-One of the Nominating Committee, 1126 HiPoint St., Los Angeles, CA 90035 or to your Regional  
Director. This is also the form which regions, states, chapters or individuals should use to nominate  
candidates (with their advance consent) for these offices.

This year’s Nominating Committee is functioning differently. It proposes to bring in a slate of more  
than one candidate for each officer and to report all candidates legally eligible to run as officers and  
members of the Board. No one will be arbitrarily disqualified in advance unless they fail to meet basic  
requirements: paid membership in National NOW for 6 months in advance of the National Conference.  
To qualify to run for office you must be a paid member by Nov. 24, 1973.

According to our by-laws, candidates may be nominated by (1) the Nominating Committee (2) petition  
45 days in advance of Conference (3) from the floor. As you can see, the easiest, most equitable way,  
is through the Nominating Committee which has agreed to report all legally eligible nominees. So, to  
save last minute membership verification checks and to give all candidates equitable exposure, please  
file through the Nominating Committee.

Capsule Descriptions of NOW National Offices

All officers and board members of NOW, as all other members, serve as volunteers in elected positions.  
Annual membership dues income of the national organization now provides sufficient funds to reimburse  
most expenses.

NOTE: Regional Directors are not elected at National Conference. Each region is required to hold a  
conference within 6 months following to elect its own Regional Director and conduct other business.

** Chair-One of the Board. Calls and conducts meetings of the national board or executive committee;  
supervises chartering of chapters; represents the national organization to the public as necessary  
and otherwise promotes the purposes of the organization; cooperates with the President in performing  
internal administrative functions.

President. Presides at meetings of the National Conference; administers the day-to-day operations  
of the national organization between board meetings; appoints members of standing committees and  
special committees as necessary; travels extensively visiting chapters, testifying at hearings, and  
otherwise serving as the official spokesperson and representative of the national organization.

Secretary. Records and reproduces minutes and other appropriate records of the national executive  
committee, board of directors and National Conference meetings and actions; maintains some  
permanent files and carries on some correspondence for the national organization; reviews and  
reports on policy positions as necessary or requested.

Treasurer. Collects dues and other monies for the national organization and makes disbursements  
according to the national budget; files Internal Revenue Service tax information; prepares periodic  
financial reports to the board and an annual report to the membership and other records as required  
or requested; supervises chapter treasurers’ record-keeping.