. PRACTICAL PROBLEMS (PROHIBITION AGAIN?)

Will not prevent abortions — past laws, no matter how strict, have not prevented abortion —  
will generate lawlessness, black market increase — increase organized crime involvement.

. CRIMINAL LAW:

Abortion will be prosecuted as murder although never considered as such even under the  
strictest laws in the past.

Actions resulting in miscarriage would be considered a crime possibly resulting in a charge  
of manslaughter.

No pregnant woman could be jailed in the absence of a reason to jail the “fetus person.”  
A woman who took a drug for illness or for her health which inadvertently resulted in a  
spontaneous abortion could be charged with murder.

. TAXES

Would the fetus be counted as a dependent for tax purposes — from the moment of conception?  
How far could and would the IRS go to verify the pregnancy? Would Medicaid be available to  
fetuses? And Child-Welfare support?

. IMMIGRATION:

What would be the citizenship status of a fetus?

Could the fetus be a person and not a citizen? Would all children conceived by alien persons  
in the U.S. be citizens? Could a pregnant woman who is not a citizen be deported when she is  
“carrying a fetus citizen?”

. CHILD NEGLECT:

Could the state force the mother to comply with certain standards of care and activity for the  
protection of the fetus?

Could a pregnant woman be prosecuted if she smokes since this causes lower birth weight?  
Could drug-addicted women be prosecuted for more serious crimes — such as for pushing —  
due to addiction of the fetus to drugs?

- PRIVACY:

What would become of a woman’s right to privacy as the state expanded its efforts to protect  
the constitutional rights of the fetus? Would pregnancies have to be registered from the moment  
of conception?

Could State police be assigned as guardians to the fetus to ensure its well-being at all times?

The arguments are many and can be used effectively in discussing this issue with the neutral or  
uncommitted men who are lawyers, doctors, Senators, and Representatives. Good luck in putting  
them to use. Remember preservation of the right to choose is in our hands.

Bee