Don’t Cancel Food Stamps

The Senate Agriculture Committee is considering sever-
al Food Stamp Reform Proposals. The only one that the
NOW Poverty Task Force finds acceptable is the McGov-
ern-Dole bill S-2451. WE DO NOT SUPPORT THE AD-
MINISTRATION’S BILL S-2537. Please inform your Con-
gressional representatives.

On November 20, 1975, Carolyn Projansky submitted
testimony on behalf of NOW and the Women and Poverty
Task Force before the Senate Agriculture Committee,
Subcommittee on Research and General Legislation con-
cerning proposed reform legislation on the Food Stamp
Program (S-2537).

NOW attacked the Administration’s proposed legisla-
tion as particularly oppressive. NOW regards the proposal
as an unwarranted attempt to reduce or terminate the food
stamp benefits of more than 60% of the present partici-
pants in the program — particularly those who are em-
ployed.

NOW believes any bill seeking to ‘reform’ the Food
Stamp Program should include the following features:

1. No work-registration or job-search requirement for
   those responsible for the care of dependent children.

2. Elimination of the purchase requirement.

3. A method by which employed persons may deduct
   mandatory expenses such as payroll taxes, Social
   Security contributions, tuition fees, child care, and
   other work-related expenses.

The present bill (S-2537) omits these features and seeks
to institute new and punitive restrictions on the poor.

Work Registration and
Job Search Requirements

If enacted, S-2537 would require parents and other
household members responsible for the care of children
over the age of six to register and actively search for work
(regardless of whether or not suitable child care is avail-
able) in order to obtain the benefits of the Food Stamp
Program. In most states it is a criminal offense to leave a
seven-year-old child without “suitable” supervision — a
fact that proponents of this bill failed to consider. NOW
and the National Welfare Rights Organization in coalition
have defeated inclusion of similar job search requirements
under the work incentive program, and we must be vigilant
to all attempts to incorporate this oppressive requirement
in any legislation.

These provisions conflict with AFDC regulations. Cur-
rently, 45% of all food stamp recipients also receive
benefits from AFDC. Under the program, parents of
school-aged children are required to register for work but
are not placed in a job unless suitable child care arrange-
ments can be made. There is an acute shortage of li-
censed child care centers. A 1974 HEW publication on
the WIN program indicated that in the previous year
240,000 children needed placement in child care centers
so their mothers could be available for work — but only
122,000 places were found. In New York City alone in
1973 over 190,000 of the 230,000 recipients of AFDC
were classified as being unavailable for work due to the
lack of child care.

NOW contends it is cruel and harmful to family life
to force mothers to search for work when no care is
being provided for their children. It is paradoxical that
a society which extols the virtues of motherhood would
consider forcing some mothers to leave their children
without adequate care and supervision in order to seek
low-wage, dead-end jobs!

Please send a copy of your letter(s) to the NOW Women
and Poverty Task Force c/o National NOW Action Cen-
ter.

Standard Deduction

This bill would replace itemized deduction of work-
related expenses with a “standard deduction” of $100
per month. In most cases the actual cost of child care
alone exceeds the amount of the “standard deduction,”
thereby disallowing other work-related expenses (such as
Social Security, transportation, tuition fees, and state and
federal income taxes) in the computation of eligibility for the
Food Stamp Program.

This results in discrimination against employed recip-
ients in that those who work would receive fewer benefits
(less food stamps) than those who are not employed.

Purchase Requirement

This bill fails to provide for elimination of the purchase
requirement. According to a survey conducted by the
Community Nutrition Program of the Community Action
Alliance, 28% of those people who were certified as eligi-
ble for the Food Stamp Program did not purchase their
full stamp allotment because they could not afford the
purchase price.

Of those people dropped from the program because
they did not purchase their stamps for three consecutive
months, 35% stated their inability to pay for their
stamps as the reason for their non-participation.

Census data shows that over 50% of those below the
poverty line are not participating in the Food Stamp
Program.

NOW insists that no needy family ought to be denied
the benefits of the Food Stamp Program solely because
they cannot afford to purchase the stamps to which they
are entitled.

The Administration’s refusal to eliminate the purchase
requirement from this bill results in the continued
elimination of eligible low-income people from the Food
Stamp Program. The rationale for such action must in
part stem from a desire to appease the food industry
which apparently is afraid that if the poor are not forced
to buy a certain amount of food each month they will
allow themselves and their families to starve, thus re-
ducing the profits of the supermarkets. This is both patron-
izing and logically absurd.

Fraud

The Food Stamp Program has been characterized as a
“well-known haven for chislers and rip-off artists.” NOW
believes that the amount of fraud and abuse in this pro-
gram has been exaggerated out of proportion with the
facts.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s most recent sta-
tistics show the following distributions of income for
participants in the Food Stamp Program as of July 1975:

- 84% had incomes under $6,000 per year
- 94% had incomes under $9,000 per year

Of those with incomes over $9,000 per year, four-
fifths of those households contained five or more
persons, and nearly one-half contained seven or more
persons.

(Editor's note: The true fraud in the Food Stamp Pro-
gram as reported by the news media lies with those
agencies which sell the stamps and fail to turn over the
proceeds to the U.S. Government!)

Copies of the full text of the testimony presented by
Carolyn Projansky may be obtained from the NOW Action
Center, Suite 1001, 425 - 13th Street N.W., Washington,
D.C. 20004.

ACTION ITEM

Make three copies of this article. Mail one to each of
your Senators and one to your Representative in Con-
gress. Enclose a letter stating your support of NOW’s
position. Remind them that you will be voting in the
November elections!