Toward A Feminist Ethic

by Toni Carabillo

What serves and advances the feminist movement, serves and advances me. I will not allow myself, therefore, to become either possessive or envious of any position, program, or issue and whether as leader or member, I will remain open to the suggestions and innovations of others, welcoming all the help I can get, and offering all the help I can give, knowing that cooperation and collaboration — not competition or authoritarianism — are the feminist approach.

Where there are differences of opinion, I shall use persuasion and never resort to coercion, keeping in mind always that I have not necessarily converted people because I have successfully silenced them. I am aware that to be in the majority is not necessarily to be right and will listen to minority views with attention and respect, seeking opportunities for reasonable compromise. Further, I will consider and argue issues on their merit, never in terms of personalities.

Remembering that everyone has the right to be well-thought of, unless they themselves make it impossible by their own words and actions, I shall not encourage, listen to, or make disparaging comments about a sister. If a sister's actions or words puzzle or disturb me, I will discuss this directly with her as soon as possible, careful to present my concern honestly and in a non-accusatory manner and acting on the assumption that she is “innocent” until she proves herself to be “guilty.” I will harbor no “hidden agendas” nor attribute concealed motives or goals to others.

I will honor, not envy, those sisters who may be more effective or skilled than I, and encourage, support and assist those who are less, knowing I have a responsibility to myself and to the movement to both learn and teach. I will treat with special care and forbearance the gravely wounded women among us who have been so handicapped, so frustrated, so often humiliated and oppressed by our sexist society, that even among us, they are inclined to be more negative than positive, untrusting, and unwittingly more destructive than constructive.

I will respect every feminist’s right to choose a lifestyle that fulfills their individual needs and sexual orientation and will not subvert or criticize their choice either overtly or covertly, knowing there is no single ‘right’ way to live and that ‘to hold close with open arms’ is the essence of love and sisterhood.

I know that to be genuinely feminist and committed to sisterhood, I cannot harbor or practice racism, ageism, or sexism, that sisterhood permits no exclusions because of race or ethnic origin, must encompass the old as well as the young, and that one can and must be sisterly to a feminist brother.

Because I am aware that ours is a movement composed almost exclusively of people who are weary of being led, subordinate, voiceless and powerless and of conforming to rules and courses of action we had no hand in devising, whether as a member or leader, I will never sacrifice principles of participatory democracy to the false idol of organizational efficiency, knowing that the uninformed, the ignored, the unconsulted, and the excluded inevitably become pockets of dissent and resistance. I will seek to incorporate into the structure of feminist organizations to which I belong provisions to ensure that authority and power flow from the membership to a representative leadership, that the decision-making process provides maximum opportunities for membership participation and ratification and respects the right of opposition and the freedom to dissent. Further, if the leadership adulterates, distorts or perverts the goals and democratic processes of the organization, I recognize that the membership has a responsibility to insist they cease and desist, if necessary by a last resort to tactics of civil disobedience.

I understand that the freedom to dissent and the right of opposition are to be exercised with integrity and for sound and substantial reasons and it is my obligation to develop and express these reasons on the basis of perceived flaws in an idea, not prejudices against the person or persons presenting it. If I fail to make my case in fair debate, I may remain a loyal opposition, but will not resort to subversion by word or act, knowing that my obligations in such circumstances is to be ready to rescue the wrong, rather than rejoice at being right.

Tactics that men have devised to “prove” their manhood, or establish their superiority by confrontations in which one must win and another clearly lose, contradict the traditional values of womanhood and it is these values I am committed to examine in a constant effort to develop non-adversarial techniques and strategies both to achieve the movement's goals in the outside world as well as to govern our actions and resolve our differences within the feminist community. I recognize that corrupt means employed to achieve even the most exalted ends may warp their realization by corrupting those who use them.

I will remember that what I have done in the movement and at whatever personal sacrifice, I did for myself as well as my sisters and the movement “owes” me a but the same respect I give my sisters for their work and their sacrifices. I recognize that my participation has given me opportunities for personal growth and development I might never have known had there been no movement. My first and foremost obligation to myself as a feminist is to achieve economic independence and there is no prohibition against participation in a feminist enterprise offering goods and services as a source of my financial support and occupational success. However, while my participation in a feminist action organization, particularly as a leader, may provide some financial rewards, I must be wary of becoming dependent on the organization and my position in it as a source of support or as a platform for professional advancement, knowing I may run the risk of confusing my personal needs or ambitions with the political necessities of our cause and thereby precipitating a suspicion of professional opportunism or conflict of interest. At the same time I am aware that the feminist movement has no goal and sisterhood has no concept that requires martyrdom or forbids success.