YOU CAN MAKE IT HAPPEN

First write your Senators urging them to co-sponsor S.60 if they
have not yet done so. If your Senators are co-sponsoring already,
write letters of thanks.

1. The Full Employment Act will improve the situation of women
and minorities.

2. Emphasize the need for attaining genuine full employment, i.e.,
the right to useful and meaningful employment for every adult
American able and willing to work.

3. Emphasize S.60’s cognizance of the special obstacles that
women and minorities must overcome in order to achieve
economic equality.

4. Emphasize the lack of success in current economic programs
and that the policy of increased unemployment as a suitable
method for fighting inflation is no longer acceptable.

Second, work with your Chapter Legislative Coordinator and
relevant Task Force Coordinators on the Full Employment Act
Program.

1. Begin educating chapter members about the Full Employment
Act.

2. Ask your chapter President to plan a chapter meeting program
with Task Force Coordinators presenting the Full Employment
Act.

3. At your next chapter meeting, ask all members to write letters
to your Senators urging them to co-sponsor the Equal Op-
portunity and Full Employment Act (S.60).

4. Ask your chapter Newsletter Editor to include reports and in-
formation about the Full Employment Act in the Newsletter.
Publish the local employment-unemployment figures for
women and minorities.

5. Work with your chapter’s Public Relations Coordinator and
Speaker's Bureau to generate local publicity for the Full Em-
ployment Act in speeches, radio talk shows, the press, etc.

NOW CAN DO IT!!!!

We have been instrumental in initiating grassroots and
Congressional support for important pieces of legislation in the past.

Three years ago, progressive rape legislation was in the planning
stage. Today, after intense NOW lobbying efforts, authorization
exists for the National Center for the Prevention and Control of
Rape. Within the first year of its introduction in the Senate, NOW
successfully pressured 28 additional Senators to co-sponsor. NOW
CAN AND WILL DO IT AGAIN!!!

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

For a more detailed summary of the Equal Opportunity and Full Em-
ployment Act or a copy of the bill itself, write to the Subcommittee
on Equal Opportunities, Room 619, Old Congressional Hotel, 330
New Jersey Ave., SE, Washington, D.C. 20515. Ask for a copy of
the Blue Sheet summary of H.R. 50.

If you wish to receive future mailings on the Full Employment Act
Legislative Program, write to NOW Employment/Compliance Task
Force Coordinator, Lynne Darcy, 34 Witherspoon St., Princeton, NJ
08540.

For additional information in a particular area, write to the ap-
propriate Task Force Coordinator.

* Employment/Compliance .......... Lynne Darcy
* Implications of Feminism on

the American Econ. System .......... Sara Mayer
* Labor Unions .................... Sara Nelson
* Racial and Economic Justice .... Del Dobbins
* Women and Poverty............. Mary Jo Binder
* Older Women .................... Tish Sommers

Addresses are on the NOW leadership list, or write c/o NOW-
National Office, 5 South Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603.

REMEMBER — WE CAN DO IT ... SO, LET’S DO IT NOW!!
—Lynne Darcy

(Silkwood, Con’t from page 1)

Without union protection these people often become ill-informed, powerless
victims of their work surroundings. Karen’s findings perhaps could
have led to safer standards for all nuclear plant workers.

The nuclear industry has become an important force in our society.
It is vital that the communities surrounding nuclear plants live in
safety and security. The corporate approach to the development
of this industry has created a situation in which fair or impartial
review of health, safety, and environmental protection is difficult to
achieve — even with the federal regulatory agencies. Millions of
dollars are spent in contracts and political pressure is firmly applied.
It is apparent, however, that the conditions and series of events at
Kerr-McGee and the work of Karen Silkwood raised serious
questions — which must be answered — about the viability of the
entire nuclear industry.

This is now a matter for the United States Congress. We will declare
November 13 Silkwood Memorial Day and on that day we will deliver
thousands of petitions to Senator Abraham Ribicoff (D-CT) of the
Senate Government Operations Committee calling for a vigorous
and public Congressional investigation of the nuclear industry. The
ultimate goal of that investigation must be what Karen Silkwood
demanded — safety in the Kerr-McGee plant and all nuclear plants.

Send letters to Senator Ribicoff. Get your petitions signed and send
them to Sara Nelson or Kitty Tucker. Pass the Silkwood Resolution.
Lois Reckitt, State Coordinator from Maine, says NOW will present a
thousand signatures to Senator Edmund Muskie, a member of the
Government Operations Committee and a possible candidate for
President. NOW members will also use October 29, the day of the
“Alice Doesn't” strike, to collect signatures on the Silkwood pe-
titions.

Contact your local CLUW chapter (Coalition of Labor Union
Women), local unions and environmental groups. Ask them to cir-
culate petitions and pass the resolution. Keep us posted!
Washington, D.C. CLUW has passed the resolution and will propose
it in their individual unions. They are circulating the petition and will
join us at the Ribicoff meeting on November 13.

NOW is continuing to do research and develop materials on the
case. If you need more information, contact Sara Nelson, Labor
Task Force, 520 Butternut Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20012.
Please send $1.00 if you can for xeroxing, mailing, and clerical help.

Let us know if you would like to receive our newsletter. We need
your help and support.

—5—Sara Nelson