NONDISCRIMINATION IN LENDING — TWO VICTORIES  
Two victories for women, one legislative, one regulatory, occurred recently in the area of lending.  

SMALL BUSINESS ACT  

On January 2, 1974, President Nixon signed into law a bill to amend the Small Business Act which included the following amendment introduced by Congresswoman Lindy Boggs (D-La):  

“In carrying out the programs administered by the Small Business Adminis-  
tration, including its lending and guaranteeing functions, the Administrator  
shall not discriminate on the basis of sex or marital status against any person  
or small business concern applying for or receiving assistance from the  
Small Business Administration, and the Small Business Administration shall  
give special consideration to veterans of the Armed Forces of the United  
States and their survivors or dependents.”  

Okay, budding businesswomen, let’s use this opportunity to get started.  

FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD  

On December 7, 1973, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board issued the following statement of  
the Board's policy regarding nondiscrimination in lending by Federal Home Loan Bank System  
member institutions:  

“The Civil Rights Act of 1968 does not specifically prohibit discrimination  
in lending on the basis of age, sex or marital status, and the Board’s regu-  
lations are at present limited to the scope of that Act. However, such  
discrimination is contrary to the principle of, and may in fact violate,  
Constitutional provisions which guarantee equal protection of the law  
for all persons. In addition, such practices impede the achievement of  
the objectives of Federal laws intended to promote sound, economical  
home financing, fair housing opportunity and a decent home for every  
American.”  

This statement will affect Savings and Loans, the largest lenders of mortgages in the United  
States. It is only a partial victory because, being a statement of policy, it does not have  
real “teeth” when it comes to enforcement. Federal legislation prohibiting discrimination  
in granting of credit on the basis of sex or marital status is still needed.  

NOW members who do experience discrimination in obtaining a mortgage from a Savings  
and Loan should write to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in their region, with a copy to  
the discriminating institution and another to the national Credit Task Force coordinator,  
Sharyn Campbell, c/o the Legislative Office.  

HEARINGS ON THE ECONOMIC PROBLEMS OF WOMEN  

The Hearings on the Economic Problems of Women before the Joint Economic Committee  
chaired by Congresswoman Martha Griffiths (D-Mich) are now available. The hearings  
contain such information that your chapter may be able to use — especially if you're in  
an unratified ERA state. Request a copy of the three-volume publication from your own  
Senator or Representative.