South Dakota Beats Back an ERA Rescission Effort

An attempt in South Dakota to rescind ratification of
the federal Equal Rights Amendment was defeated Janu-
ary 31st by a House vote of 37 to 33. The victory for ERA
proponents is attributed to a strong coalition effort by
NOW, League of Women Voters, and American Associa-
tion of University Women. After the rescission resolution
was introduced January 26th, a cross section of South
Dakotians was quickly rallied to testify against rescission.

“Testimony in support of ERA came from bi-partisan
political leadership, church leadership, homemakers, farm
women, educators, and state presidents of NOW, LWV,
and AAUW representing their combined memberships,”
said Mary Lynn Myers, Director of South Dakota Division
of Human Rights and a NOW National Board member.

“The effort against rescission was another great victory
for equal rights in South Dakota, proving again the ERA is
not a partisan issue, but a human and civil rights issue.”
Ms. Myers continued, “The House has changed hands
since the ERA ratification in 1973. It is now Republican and
more conservative politically. The ERA has been upheld
by both political parties.”

At the House hearing, Lieutenant Governor of South
Dakota, Harvey Wollman, Democrat, spoke in support of
ERA as did a Republican State Treasurer, David Volk, who
is also campaign manager for President Ford in South
Dakota. House debate included remarks by Republican
Speaker of the House Joe Barnett. Representative Bar-
nett, a strong Catholic, stated he saw no connection be-
tween ERA and the issue of abortion as some opponents
of ERA claim.

After the House vote was displayed on the computer
board, a female legislator who co-sponsored the federal
ERA in 1973 asked for privilege. She said she had not
spoken in debate in order to give time to others. “I decided
to leave it to you men. If you took away the ERA it would
stand as your decision. I am pleased in this bicentennial
year you did not take away our equal rights.”

Nationwide rescission or threat of rescission of ERA is a
major strategy of STOP-ERA baddies. Some states are
experiencing major campaigns such as Kentucky and
Idaho, while others are being threatened. Warning signals
to be looked for are the appearance of seemingly random
anti-ERA letters to the editor in local papers and sermons
from the pulpits. The campaign is launched when a resolu-

Target States Set

To implement the ERA Resolution passed at the Na-
tional Conference, a meeting of State Coordinators and
State Legislative/ERA Coordinators was held on the week-
end of January 3-4 in St. Louis, Missouri to select 6 target
states which will receive National NOW funds in 1976.

Representatives from fifteen unratified states attended
the meeting with the following National Officers: Karen
DeCrow, Ellie Smeal, Elaine Latourell, Geri Kenyon, Martha
Dickey, Esther Kaw, and Toni Carabillo. Several members
of the National Board were also present.

By vote of the unratified states, six target states were
selected and four of these were announced to the press:

Florida, Missouri, Indiana, and Nevada. Two other targeted
states will be announced later by their State Coordinators.

Each of the targeted states was asked to submit a re-
quest for funds and a program budget. A plan was devel-
oped to divide existing ERA funds among the six states.

A summary of the meeting can be obtained from Elaine
Latourell, Vice President-Legislation.

tion to rescind is pre-filled. The seriousness of these ac-
tions catches many ERA workers off guard because anti-
mail seems timed to peak in a flood — just prior to commit-
tee debate and again just prior to a reading if the resolu-
tion should reach the floor. Floods of ladies with jam or
other such homely gifts usually arrive by the bus load on
specific well-timed lobby days — saying coyly — “keep us
sweet and in the home” — “I was ‘bred’ to be a lady
and I love it” — “Don’t jam up the constitution.”

Defeating a rescission drive is not usually an expensive
operation, but mounting the necessary political pressure
campaign does take seed money, particularly for telephone
and transportation costs.

It is recommended that we gear up NOW speakers
bureau efforts for pro-ERA speakers in anticipation of
antis moves for rescission in ratified states. Pro speakers
should avoid debating or sharing platforms with anti speak-

The 100 Mile Walk

Twelve Virginians and two Pennsylvanians walked one
hundred miles from Alexandria, Virginia, to join a rally in
Richmond on January 14, 1976. The fourteen walkers,
seven of whom completed “One Hundred Miles for Equal-
ity”, were intermittently joined by forty others along the
way for a total of 1500 miles logged.

At the Richmond Rally, Karen DeCrow and Sisy Faren-
thoid addressed the crowd under the banner “Person-
hood, Apple Pie, and the American Way.”

To counteract the jars of preserves given Virginia legis-
lators by the Steering Committee to Stop the Equal Rights
Amendment, Virginia NOW gave out apple pies and waved
signs which said, “ERA — The American Way.”

Illinois Mobilization

On May 15 & 16, 1976, thousands of ERA supporters will
converge on Illinois for a major National Action — The
Illinois ERA Mobilization.

Illinois, a key state in NOW’s ERA effort, is very close to
ratification. The ERA resolution has passed in the House
and is only 4 votes short of the necessary 3/5 majority in
the Senate. The urgent need for nationwide pressure on
the Illinois legislature brought Illinois NOW members to
the National Conference with a resolution for this action,
and it passed overwhelmingly.

The Mobilization activity will include both district work
and canvassing and a major march and rally in the State
Capitol, Springfield. NOW ERA coordinators are already
beginning recruitment efforts, and initial response from
members and other organizations has been tremendous.
Details of the action and recruitment and publicity mate-
rials will be mailed to State Coordinators and chapters
soon.

Members of the National Illinois ERA Mobilization Steer-
ing Committee are: Mary Jean Collins (Chair), Eleanor
Smeal, Elaine Latourell, Toni Carabillo, Mary Anne Sedey,
Mary Ann Lupa, Ann Ladkey, and Maureen Rogman. For
further information contact:

Mary Jean Collins
712 Buena Ave.
Chicago, Ill. 60613

Begin NOW to build your state and chapter recruitment
committees. COME TO ILLINOIS ON MAY 15-16.