NOW Raps Court Appointment

Representatives of NOW testified December 9, 1975
before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary in op-
position to the appointment of Judge John Paul Stevens
to the Supreme Court of the United States. NOW objects
not only to the nominee himself, but to the speed and
manner in which the nomination and subsequent con-
firmation proceedings were accomplished.

@ President Ford moved with unusual haste to fill the
vacancy — yet Ford himself has not been elected
to any office representing a constituency larger than
a congressional district.

@ President Ford's policy advisers in the selection pro-
cess are all male.

@ Only after extensive public outrage were the names
of two women added to the list submitted to President
Ford by the American Bar Association — reducing
women to the status of an afterthought!

@ The ABA Committee itself has no women among its
eleven members.

@ The Senate which confirms such nominations is all
male.

NOW was outraged at the callousness shown by Judge
Stevens in his remarks of December 8th in which he
opined that the pursuit of equal rights for minorities was
more important than the pursuit of equal rights for women.
NOW has long recognized the connection between sexism
and racism. NOW National Board members were horrified
that a person of Judge Stevens’ projected future does not!

President Karen DeCrow pointed out that the Judge
obviously approaches human rights issues in a token
fashion and believes that if one gives lip service to the

interests of one minority group, one does not have to -

pay attention to the legitimate interests of other groups.
Particularly repellent is the typical white-male-power-
structure tactic of pitting women against minority males,
making both out groups scramble for the crumbs of power
while the rulers go on ruling. NOW will not be driven
into such a position. Where in Judge Stevens’ scheme of
things are we to place the minority female?

Concerning Judge Stevens' avowed ignorance of the le-
gal implications of ERA (as quoted by UPI), NOW finds
it little short of unbelievable that a man seeking one of
the highest judgeships in the land can say, “. . . as to its (the
ERA’s) legal implications, I just do not know.”

President DeCrow sent the following telegram to the
members of the Senate Judiciary Committee: “NOW is
outraged by Judge Stevens' insensitivity to the rights of
women as demonstrated by his statements on the ERA
and its implications for women’s rights, lawsuits brought
by women plaintiffs, and minority issues, before the
Senate Judiciary Committee and in the media, that dis-
crimination against women is less important than dis-
crimination against minorities. NOW condemns all dis-
crimination, whether against females, minority men, or
ethnic and religious minorities. More than one-half of all
persons are minorities; and more than one-half of all
minorities are women. How dare Judge Stevens declare
that female rights are secondary to those of minorities?
The rights of all are equally important. Women will no
longer tolerate second-class status. NOW urges you to vote
NO on Judge Stevens.”

CYCLAR: 2 women's community
calendar. Monthly photos, date grid has
room for notes, info on famous women,
facts and female fists. 9-4 x12-4".
spiral bound, recycled paper. Woman:

made and distributed.

Checks, money orders ok Bulk rates
10 women’s groups for money turning
Prepaid orders only Available by
Halloween Add $09 single copy orders
only. Bulk shipping to be fulfilled.

‘Despite NOW’s objections, the all-male Senate con-
firmed the appointment of Judge John Paul Stevens to
the Supreme Court; a body that comprises one-third of
our national government.

Once more we have a clear demonstration of “govern-
ment of the men, by the men, and for the men” with
total disregard for the legitimate rights and concerns
of 53% of the American people.

In this Bicentennial year, perhaps we should remind
President Ford, Judge Stevens, the American Bar Associa-

tion, and the Senate of the warning issued by Abigail
Adams during the birth of this nation, “. . . we will not
hold ourselves bound by laws in which we have no voice
nor representation!”

RENEW NOW!

From Dorm C

The state of North Carolina not only holds the prisoners
as slaves, but confines us in a dungeon they call “Security.”
I and two other sistas are being held hostage in this dungeon
for the purpose of maintaining ‘control’ (scapegoat tactic)
of our sistas locked in Dorm C (punishment cottage), and those
walking the ground who are brave enough to call to us.

Three small prisoners (90/98/102 lbs.) were selected
out of approximately 60 sistas who were calling officials
here, “pigs, oink, oink,” and singing, “We shall overcome,”
to be carried to Security/Isolation. Despite our attempts to
walk peacefully, the male guards (totaling 500 lbs.) grabbed
us by our arms, jerked them (dislocating a shoulder) and
sprained and burned another sista's feet by dragging her
across a cement walk. Two of us were searched and locked
in this dungeon with nothing but a dirty mattress. Our other
sista was locked in an isolated area of the infirmary without
a mattress too. After five days, our sista was brought
to this rat-infested hole with us. We were then given our
toothpaste, brush, comb, and a shower.

As of now, (October 28, 1975) we have been confined here
for 17 days. We have had three showers, no sheets, one
blanket, no exercise period, cold food, no warm water in
our cells, and a 5-hour period one day with no checks to
see if we were all right. Our sista, who was first put in iso-
lation, was subjected to the Superintendent and his assis-
tant pulling out a knife and cutting a piece of her mattress.

These are the desperate actions of the officials to break
our love and unity. We remain strong as do our sistas locked
in Dorm C. All of us prisoners who are still in lock-up
because of our peaceful protest in June will not surrender
to frightened officials because we are winning and will risk
our lives for justice and equality for all oppressed people.

Sistas/Bruthas everywhere, join in our united efforts to
break the chains and bars of injustice. If the officials are
afraid of three sistas who collectively do not weigh even
300 lbs., the love and unity of all our oppressed/repressed
people will surely overcome and the oppressors will fall!!!
Letters of support and additional information may be
directed to Brooke Whiting, 1601 Sedgefield St., Apt. E,
Durham, N.C. 27705, (919) 286-0538. All correspon-
dences are welcomed and will be answered. We struggle
and suffer not just for ourselves, but for oppressed people

as a whole. Your/Our active participation is essential. Only
through mass unity and love can the needed changes be

ensured.
Your Sista in the Struggle — Ann Willett