WASHINGTON BLUE SHEET

News from the NOW LEGISLATIVE OFFICE  
1107 National Press Building  
Washington, D. C. 20004  
(202) 347-2279  
Ann Scott, V. P. Legislation  

RAPE CENTER BILL  

On September 13, Senator Mathias (R-Md.) introduced S. 2422, a bill which would establish a National  
Center for the Prevention and Control of Rape. Senator Mathias’ office worked closely with the NOW  
Legislative Office and with Mary Ann Largen, NOW’s National Rape Task Force Coordinator, in the  
drafting and tactics on the bill.  

BACKGROUND  

Written as an amendment to the National Mental Health Act, S. 2422 would, among other things:  

1. Authorize and fund study into the effectiveness of state rape laws, attitudes toward  
rape, treatment of victims, causes, motivations of rapists, impact on families, homo-  
sexual rape in prisons, effectiveness of existing programs. The wording of this section  
is careful to make organizations such as NOW eligible for grants in the event the bill  
is passed and funded.  

2. Act as a clearinghouse to compile continuing studies, conduct research and demon-  
stration projects and training programs for police and medical personnel, etc.  

3. Set a funding level of $10,000,000.  

NOW’S CONTRIBUTION  

NOW’s most important contribution to the bill was to advise the language defining rape, for the  
purposes of the bill, as “forcible, statutory, and attempted rape, homosexual assaults, and other  
criminal sexual assaults.” The usual legal definition of rape in the states’ laws is limited to “vaginal  
penetration” by a man against a woman’s will, and therefore does not include such acts as forcible  
anal or oral copulation, or use of an instrument. Our language would materially broaden the scope  
of the bill, and hopefully encourage adoption of a broader definition of rape at the state level.  
Crimes other than “vaginal penetration” are usually considered “sodomy,” and receive a lesser  
punishment.  

TACTICS  

NOW and Senator Mathias hope to get this bill through the Senate before the Christmas recess.  
Please write both your Senators urging them to co-sponsor, not just support, S. 2422.  

NOTICE TO ALL NOW CHAPTER PRESIDENTS  

Please send by postcard the name, address, business and home phone number of your chapter's  
Legislative Task Force Coordinator to BOTH the Legislative Office and the National Office.  

IT IS IMPORTANT THAT ALL CHAPTERS BE REPRESENTED ON THE LEGISLATIVE TASK  
FORCE. Your Legislative Task Force Coordinator will be your only chapter member to receive  
emergency Legislative Alerts directly from the Legislative Office. She/he in turn is responsible  

for keeping you informed.  

Also, please let the Legislative Office know the name of your Congressperson so we can get some  
effective spot lobbying going.