1. Request that the mandatory leave not be enforced and provide evidence such as a letter  
from her doctor that she is physically capable of performing her duties until a given time.  
If there is a union, she should ask the union to assist her in challenging the pregnancy  
policy.

2. If the superiors do not answer right away or give a negative reply, she should file a  
complaint (or ask NOW or her union to file on her behalf) with the Equal Employment  
Opportunity Commission (E.E.O.C.) in her area and/or the State Fair Employment  
Agency, if one exists.

3. If the E.E.O.C. cannot settle the situation within 6 months, the woman, upon request,  
will be given leave to file suit in the Federal District Court. If her employer is a govern-  
ment body, she can file directly in Federal District Court without going through the  
E.E.O.C. or the state agency, challenging the policy on constitutional grounds.

4. The suit should be for reinstatement, back wages, any increase in salary which would  
have been forthcoming had the woman not been forced to take the pregnancy leave,  
any other damages incurred from the mandatory leave, court costs and lawyer's fees  
and an injunction of any further enforcement of such mandatory pregnancy leaves.

JUDICIAL QUOTE OF THE MONTH:

‘The distinguishing factor seems to be motherhood versus fatherhood. The question then arises:  
Is this sex-related? To the simple query the answer is just as simple: Nobody — and this includes  
Judges, Solomonic or life-tenured — has yet seen a male mother. A mother, to oversimplify the  
simplest biology, must then be a woman.’ *** ‘Female employees are the only employees . . .  
who become pregnant; it follows that they are provisionally dismissed from work on account  

of their sex . . . '*** “To me, the discrimination is obvious.” Fourth Circuit Court of  
Appeals Judge Winter, dissenting in Cohen v. Chesterfield, (companion case in the Supreme  
Court to La Fleur).

The NOW Public Information Office is putting together a bibliography of special NOW publications  
(other than newsletters) — those published by chapters or by task forces. Please send a list of  

your chapter's or task force’s publications to the NOW Public Information Office, 641 Lexington  
Avenue, New York, NY 10022.

1974 DO IT NOW COPY DEADLINES (January deadline was December 3)

February — January 7 August — July 8  

March — February 4 September — August 5  

April — March 4 October — September 6  

May — April 5 November — October 7  

June — May 6 December — November 6  
July — June 7 January, 1975 — December 6  

If you have information for DO IT NOW, be sure to send it in to the Editor AS EARLY AS  
POSSIBLE. Send DO IT NOW items to the NOW Public Information Office, 641 Lexington  
Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.  

= Pas