‘NOW And The Executive Branch

NOW is lobbying the Executive Branch, testifying on regulations, advising commissions, and screening appointees. For more information on the following synopsis of NOW action, write the appropriate agency. For NOW’s position, write the appropriate Task Force Coordinator.

HEW Procedural Regulations: NOW and a broad coalition of organizations issued a joint statement condemning HEW’s new Procedural Regulations, which would free HEW from its obligation to investigate all citizens’ discrimination complaints. In 48 hours, NOW was able to line up 53 sponsors for a Senate Resolution which also condemned the Regulations. Conservatives have also objected to the Regs calling them “unlimited search and seizure laws”.

With objections coming from both sides, HEW is now reviewing all this public comment and will issue final regs at any moment. The President must sign them for them to become final. Keep your eye out for news of their release, and write the President if they eliminate the mechanism of individual complaints.

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Ellen Hilliard

Affirmative Action: Executive Order 11246 as amended, prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex by Federal contractors and subcontractors. The responsibility for enforcement lies with the Department of Labor. Secretary of DOL John Dunlop (a former professor) is an enemy of affirmative action. DOL scheduled hearings on affirmative action in colleges and universities on August 20 — a time when both Congress and colleges and universities were closed down. After strong protests from NOW, Congress, and others, the hearings have been re-scheduled for Sept. 30 - Oct. 10.

NOW has scheduled a cap and gown procession in favor of Affirmative Action for Sept. 30 in front of the DOL Headquarters. WRITE THE PRESIDENT AND DUNLOP (COPIES TO YOUR CONGRESSPERSON) IN SUPPORT OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN GENERAL AND FOR COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES IN PARTICULAR.

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Ellen Hilliard

Revenue Sharing: The Women & Poverty Task Force submitted comments on “Proposed Nondiscrimination Regulation Amendments” to the Office of Revenue Sharing — emphasizing increased effectiveness of the enforcement procedures and the incidence of programs related to women and other political minorities.

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Jo Binder

Title XX Implementation: Title XX of the Social Security Act of 1975 governs the dispensing of federal funds for the delivery of social services. In response to an alert, NOW chapters and state organizations from 13 states have confronted their State governments on gross inadequacies in required plans for delivery of services under 75%-25% matching federal-state funds.

NOW chapters, state coordinators, and Poverty Task Force members focused particularly on the lack of attention to family planning and abortion services. We severely criticized, in many cases, the inadequacy of attention to child care services, both as a means for increasing the economic self-sufficiency of poor women, and as a preventative mental health measure.

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Jo Binder

1974 Social Security Act governing Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). Legislative history indicates that all child support bills have been “attached” to welfare legislation. Most proposers and supporters of such “child support” bills have been conservative Congresspersons and Senators whose voting records are abysmal on women’s issues. The bill that passed was no exception. Sen. Russell Long (D-LA), an infamous foe of welfare mothers, was a principal mover in support of this law.

When NOW commented on the regulations proposed by HEW, we noted that non-AFDC recipients were not guaranteed access to the state enforcement units (almost universally attached to state welfare agencies).

At the same time, welfare mothers were required to “cooperate” with the State in identifying the father of their children. This “cooperation” was left dangerously undefined. Result: Those mothers found “uncooperative” would lose their share of the AFDC grant.

Advocates for the poor succeeded in convincing Congresspersons James Corman (D-CA) and Charles Rangel (D-NY) to introduce amendments to the Child Support Law which would protect welfare recipients. In late July, the House passed these amendments. Congresswomen voted unanimously in support of the amendments.

NOW, in conjunction with other groups, lobbied the Senate Finance Committee (Chair: Sen. Long) to support them as well. On August 1, the Senate passed the major portions of the bill that protected welfare recipients.

The amendments:

- safeguard AFDC-recipient families against loss of money due to assignment of child support rights to the States;

- forbid disclosing AFDC case records for reasons not directly associated with AFDC programs;

- assure that the best interest of the child will be honored by the States in determining whether the State will secure support and involve itself in establishing paternity;

- provide good cause exception to the mother’s requirement to “cooperate” with the State in such matters.

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Jo Binder

—26—