ANTI—ERA ATTACK ON FCC PROJECT

The NOW broadcast media project to upgrade news coverage of feminist events and to improve  
the image of women in programming is being subjected to a vicious attack from the far right  
as a means to obtain radio and TV airtime to espouse anti-ERA views.

DETROIT AGREEMENT TARGETED

In August of 1973, Detroit NOW reached an open agreement with its local ABC-TV station,  
WXYZ, which provided for an affirmative action plan for women and for a small amount of  
feminist programming. This agreement was submitted by the station to the Federal Communi-  
cations Commission, as a part of the station’s official public file, and was approved by the FCC.  
On September 26, 1973, the so-called ‘Center for the Public Interest’ filed a complaint against  
the station, alleging that the agreement it had reached with NOW was secret and unlawful.  
NOW and WXYZ both filed a reply defending the agreement.

DIRECT MAIL CAMPAIGN

Subsequently, a direct mail campaign was launched by CPI to raise money to fund litigation  
against NOW’s broadcast media project. The letter, signed by Congressman Trent Lott (R-Miss)  
and sent out on Congressional stationery, accuses NOW of blackmail and other crimes. It is  
being used by anti-ERA groups in both ratified and unratified states to attack NOW and,  

more importantly, to gain access to radio and TV airtime to promote their views against the  
ERA.

THE CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEREST AND THE ERA

CPI is another typical far right wing front organization, whose Board is composed of known  
anti-ERA organization members. American Conservative Union, Human Events, Young  
Americans for Freedom, and of course Phyllis Schlafly are among those endorsing CPI’s  
anti-NOW program. Copies of its letter attacking NOW have turned up in Virginia, South  
Carolina, Montana and Florida so far. In Montana a state representative received a letter  

from a constituent alluding to NOW’s “secret activities.” He brought this to a NOW member’s  
attention who had the Legislative Office send him documentation refuting the charges. In  
Florida, Shirley Schellenberger of STOP ERA went on the air to tell about NOW’s “secret  
agreements” in Detroit. The station aired NOW’s rebuttal via a phone interview with Joan  
Israel, Detroit NOW President, who very convincingly refuted the charges.

ACTION

1. Call the NOW Legislative Office immediately if the Trent Lott letter is being publicized  
in your community, or if you learn that any of your local media have received any  
communications about the letter.

2. Your chapter president, Legislative and FCC coordinators will be receiving (in fact, may  
already have received) a packet of materials from the Legislative Office and the FCC Task  
Force which should be very useful in refuting this attack. Make sure your chapter has  
these before undertaking rebuttal.

3. If NOW is attacked on radio or TV, request that the station give your chapter airtime  
to defend NOW. If NOW is not attacked but the program espoused an anti-ERA point  
of view, you should request that the station air the opposing point of view.

POSITION AVAILABLE

A position is available for a Director of Legislation (lobbyist) in the Legislative Office, who  
will implement NOW’s legislative priorities. Salary is $13,200. Previous legislative experience  
desirable and membership in NOW (preferably of long duration) is required. Include in resume  
duration of membership in NOW, positions held in NOW, activities in NOW and membership in  
other feminist organizations. Also include education and relevant experience. A full position  
description will be sent upon submission of a resume.