a program on assertive training for women. The members also held a  
vigil in Capitol Square to protest street violence crimes against  
women.  

* Chicago, IL NOW held an Equality Day rally with the theme  
“Women for Jobs and Justice” to emphasize affirmative action and  
to call for passage of the Equal Opportunity and Full Employment  
Act now in Congress. Speakers, including Governor Daniel Walker,  
focused on discrimination against women in hiring, training, pro-  
motion, and salaries.  

* Bucks County, PA NOW sponsored a picnic to commemorate  
Women’s Equality Day. Vinnie Burrows, star of the New York show  
“Walk Together Children,” gave several dramatic presentations of  
the words of Sojourner Truth, a freed slave who became an out-  
spoken suffragette.  

* Suffolk, NY NOW members marked Women’s Equality Day with  
a multi-media show “Battle for the Ballot,” showing women’s  
struggles for suffrage through slides, narrations, and skits.  

* Grand Rapids, MI NOW held a noon rally at Calder Plaza with  
keynote speaker Anne Mulder, Community Services Director at  
Grand Rapids Junior College. Ms. Mulder reminded the audience  
that “We have come a long way since 1920. We are impatient, and  
rightfully so, but you need to look at our progress to put everything  
in the right perspective.”  

* Cuyahoga Falls, OH NOW joined with Northeastern Ohio chap-  
ters to sponsor a candlelight demonstration to commemorate wo-  
men victimized by violence.  

* Waukegan, IL NOW members presented the play “Woman  
Lawyer” written by NOW member Liz Laurence. The play is about  
Myra Colby Bradshaw, a strong feminist who fought to be admitted  
to the Illinois bar. In 1892 she gained admittance, 23 years after she  
passed her bar examination.  

* Pennsylvania NOW organized their Second Annual Women’s  
Rights Tag Day to raise public awareness and funds for continued  
support for equal rights for women and girls.  

* Anne Arundel County, MD NOW revived the fervor of suffragist  
sisters by holding a rally at Annapolis city dock featuring historical  
suffragist speeches.  

* Broward County, FL NOW issued an attractive commemorative  
issue of their newsletter to celebrate August 26. The special issue  
included a Women’s Herstory quiz and a calendar listing out-  
standing events in the history of women’s fight for equality.  

* Hillcrest, OH NOW honored Josephine Irwin in their chapter  
newsletter. Ms. Irwin is one of the original suffragettes. In 1920 she  
led a march of 5,000 women, all on horseback, down Euclid Avenue  
to demonstrate for the right to vote. She is presently in her late 80s  
and lives in the Cleveland area. She was scheduled to speak at the  
Feminist Fiesta on August 26.  

* Oklahoma City NOW participated in a women’s art festival to  
celebrate August 26th. Approximately 80 women artists took part.  

* Kenosha, WI NOW held a parade for Women's Equality Day  
with participants dressing in 1920’s style.  

* Midland, MI NOW celebrated Women's Equality Day by  
donating Women at Work, a photographic documentary by Betty  
Medsger, to the local library.  

* Ellicott City, MD NOW members presented Chief of Police  
Robert O. Mathews with an honorary membership in NOW, sup-  
porting the Howard County Police Department's ‘sympathetic treat-  
ment of rape victims.”  

* Brookings, SD NOW members participated in a parade and  
demonstration to celebrate Women’s Equality Day, and staged a  
1915 style debate on suffrage on the steps of the Brookings Post  
Office.  

* New York, NY street actors performed and NOW distributed  
leaflets at 25 Federal Plaza urging volunteers to watchdog em-  
ployers’ rules concerning pregnancy. One poster read “EEOC  
discriminates against pregnant women.”  

* Bloomington, IN NOW women celebrated with a festival featuring  
puppet shows, entertainment, and auctions.  

* West Point, NY NOW sponsored art displays created by women,  
seminars on various subjects including “Rape Prevention and Sim-  
ple Self Defense,” and “Minority Women and the Movement."  

* Buffalo, NY NOW honored 12 women in Women’s Day  
ceremonies for their contributions to the area. The ceremonies in-  
cluded dance, arts and crafts exhibits, political discussions, and in-  
formation exhibits.  

* Washington, DC NOW sponsored Women's Suffrage Week with  
a women’s fair, concerts, a dance, a play, and a march to the steps  
of the Justice Department. Mary Ann Largen, NOW National Task  
Force Coordinator on Rape, spoke on the Joann Little trial. A can-  
dlelight vigil was held in memory of sisters who were victims of  
crime in the streets.  

* Hatboro, PA NOW sponsored a parade and picnic to celebrate  
Women’s Equality Day. Included were dramatic presentations of the  
words of Sojourner Truth, the freed slave who joined the women’s  
suffrage movement in the mid-1800s.  

* Baltimore, MD women heard an address by Florynce Kennedy,  
civil rights lawyer, and the NOW chapter presented awards to two  
women for their roles in civil rights activities.  

* Detroit, MI NOW centered their celebration around the theme  
“Two Centuries of Struggle.” Canadian and American women joined  
to mark Women’s Suffrage and International Women's Year with a  
march across Ambassador Bridge. New York’s Lieutenant Governor  
Mary Ann Krupsak was the featured speaker with Helen Reddy  
providing entertainment along with entertainers from Africa, Puerto  
Rico, Bulgaria, Ireland, and Argentina. Several downtown stores  
added to the celebration with displays by women artists and  
photograph displays of leaders in the struggle for women’s rights.  

* Louisville, KY NOW held a fund-raising benefit with Louisville ac-  
tresses Adele O’Brien and Mitzi Friedlander and an all-woman  
band. NOW also presented its second Annual Pioneer Feminist  
Award to Martha Pickering of Louisville for her efforts to promote  
equal rights.