WOMEN AND HEALTH ACTION

A Report from Joan Goldstein,  
National Coordinator, NOW Women & Health Task Force

The National Task Force on Health defined as one of our goals the humanizing of physician  
attitudes towards women. In response to this concern, the Baltimore NOW Health Task Force  
has developed a program concept which attempts to open communication and dialogue between  
women and women physicians. During this experimental evening of panel and discussions,  

150 Baltimore women, many of whom were not members of NOW, but may have been later,  
were finally allowed to ask basic questions and receive unhurried answers on the all too  
mysterious body. Learning was a two-way street: physicians were surprised to hear of women’s  
experience with the profession and to recognize how little is shared between doctor and patient.  
This seemed like only a beginning. Requests were made for continuous sessions on a variety  

of subjects.

In recognition of the enormous need for health dialogue, information and education, the  
Baltimore County NOW Health Task Force has put together a kit of a model program on  
women’s health to serve as a guide for groups nationally. I see this as one prototype of program  
activities which NOW chapters could adapt throughout the country. If there are other concepts,  
please contact me so that we can share our experiences. Here’s the information:

A Model program on women’s health: How to organize a panel discussion on  
“Women’s Right to Health: Phases of Her Life.” Packet contains complete  
information on how to plan and succeed, step-by-step in 8 weeks, in sponsoring  
a panel discussion by four women doctors for an audience of 150 persons on  

a low budget. Kit includes sample letters to doctors, sample program, informa-  
tion on contents of discussion, moderator’s role, publicity, budget, and refresh-  
ments. Send $2.50 to Baltimore County NOW Health Task Force, P.O. Box 21,  
Sunshine Avenue, Kingsville, Md. 21087.

Nina Tassi, the Health chairperson, an energetic and creative woman, wrote in a letter to me:  
“I have an idea that you would find Baltimore refreshing to the spirit.” I did.

U. S. Supreme Court Reverts to Stone Age on Women & Public Accommodations

On November 5, 1973, the U. S. Supreme Court voted 8 to 1 (Douglas dissenting) to leave standing  
a decision upholding the right of a New Orleans hotel to refuse to serve women in its men’s grill.  
National Board member, Karen DeCrow, says, “This is a shocking and insulting decision for  
women. As the NOW Public Accommodations Week coordinator in 1968, I was convinced that  

in 1973, this was no longer an issue for NOW, for the women’s movement. I was mistaken.  
Apparently, the Supreme Court of the United States does not feel convinced that women are  
members of the public.

I suggest that every person reading DO IT NOW write to at least one, if not all eight, of the  
Justices who voted against our right to enter a place of public accommodation and be served therein.  
This is an unusual action to take — writing the court — and I suggest we keep the letters calm,  
polite, and short..... just to let them know how humiliated we are because of this decision.”  
For further information, write Karen DeCrow, 116 Benedict Avenue, Syracuse, N. Y. 13210.

— 10: —