*

**

*

*

*

**

Finance Vice-President. Coordinates financial and fund-raising planning and activities of the  
national organization, implementing as necessary through the national Committee on Finances;  
prepares and distributes informational and inspirational materials on fund-raising and communi-  
cates with chapters; formulates budget and financial policies for board consideration; serves  

as liaison with LDEF on finances, etc. Aids membership and provision of services to member-  
ship as an essential component of fiscal development; maintains contributors files and record-  
keeping relative to direct mail and other fund-raising campaigns.  

Legal Vice-President. Serves as legal counsel for the national organization (must be an attorney);  
reviews cases presented by chapters for approval of NOW involvement and files cases on behalf  
of national; recruits feminist lawyers for advocacy work and coordinates all legal activities of  
the national organization and its sub-units; serves as liaison with LDEF on legal activities.  

Legislation Vice-President. Acts as informational resource for legislative activities of chapters,  
states, regions, Task Forces and members to aid and coordinate grass-roots lobbying; assists  

as necessary in preparation and presentation of position papers, testimony, legislative alerts;  
supervises legislative efforts and allied functions, such as working in coalitions; reports to board  
and membership current status of pertinent legislation and pressures needed. Oversees the  
operations of the National Legislative Office in Washington, D. C.  

PUBLIC RELATIONS VICE PRESIDENT: Subject to the approval of the National Board, and  
in collaboration with the Director of NOW’s National Public Information Office, develops and  
implements NOW’s national public relations program, including: contacts with the press and  
media on a national level during and between National Conferences, board meetings, and other  
national NOW events; NOW advertising campaigns; production of NOW publications and public  
relations tools of mixed media; development of appropriate public relations exposure for NOW  
and its representatives; assistance as required to NOW fund-raising campaigns; assistance to  
chapters by developing appropriate public relations materials and actions for use on the local  
level; and has Board responsibility for overseeing the operations and the development of the  
resources of the National Public Information Office.  

Chair-One of the Advisory Committee. Convenes, conducts and circulates materials for meetings  
of the National Advisory Committee; contacts prospective appointees at the direction of the  
National Board; develops and implements special projects undertaken by the Committee.  

Member of the Board of Directors. Each member of the Board of Directors is expected to either  
chair a standing committee, coordinate a task force, chair one of the board committees such as  
the Membership Services, Research and Special Projects, or Personnel & Procedures, or in some  
way take on a portfolio capacity. In addition to the above, a member is expected to assist the  
regional directors and state coordinators in chapter contacts and field development; represent  
the national organization as necessary or when called upon to carry out policies and objectives.  

Members of the Executive Committee  
Members of the Executive Committee who are also members of the Board of Directors of the  
NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, by requirement of the LDEF by-laws.  

NOTE: There are 25 members of the Board of Directors, in addition to the 13 members of the  
Executive Committee (*). The Nominating Committee is charged with ensuring relatively even  
regional representation on the slate of candidates presented for consideration as elected officers  
and members of the Board of Directors.  

COPIES OF WILMA SCOTT HEIDE’S PRESENTATION, “A FEMINIST PERSPECTIVE OF  
MANIPULATION OF WOMAN (WOMAN INCLUDES MAN)”, at the November 8, 1973  
Symposium on The Genetic Manipulation of Man (sic) of the University of Wisconsin in  
Stevens Point, are available from the NOW Public Information Office, 641 Lexington Avenue,  
New York, N. Y. 10022.  

tes es