NEW COMPLIANCE TF  
PUBLICATION  

The Compliance Task Force Coor-  
dinator, Lynne Darcy, recently an-  
nounced a new publication, Job  
Equality NOW, detailing major  
federal laws and enforcement struc-  
tures on employment discrimination.  
Price is $2.00 for NOW members. A  
copy has been sent to Board mem-  
bers, State Coordinators and all  
Compliance Task Force members.  
Orders for Job Equality NOW will be  
filled through the National Office, 5  
South Wabash, Suite 1615,  
Chicago, IL 60603.  

WOMEN IN  
THE MILITARY  

Pat Leeper and Lorraine Underwood, Co-  
Coordinators of NOW’s Committee on  
Women in the Military (Compliance Task  
Force) have been receiving complaints and  
depositions from service women alleging  
abuses of the Army Criminal Investigation  
Division (CID) and the Navy Investigative  
Service (NIS). They took these complaints  
to the CID and NIS and both agencies were  
most cooperative, regretted that abuses do  
occur from time to time and promised to  
track down further abuses brought to their  
attention.  

The complaints alleged abuses involving  
suspicion of homosexuality, the treatment  
of rape victims and the manner in which  
records are kept and used against women  
even when no charges have been filed.  
Military women also claimed they are  
harassed for confessions when questioned  
on homosexuality and are never allowed to  
face their accusers.  

Major Brigham Shuler, CID, told the NOW  
Committee that his department of Plans  
and Standards is studying civilian handling  
of sex violations and sex victims with a  
view to possibly revising their own  
regulations.  

However, this is a difficult assignment in  
view of a recent Department of Defense  
policy statement which read: “. . . The  
unique character of the military en-  
vironment precludes any possibility of  
homosexuals being assimilated into the  
armed forces under any condition.”  

This is the “unique character” that allows  
DOD to be the only federal employer  
allowed to impose quotas on women,  
regardless of their abilities. This same  
“character” frustrates service people of  
good will trying to do a decent job in race  
relations and EEOC offices. This unique  
character is called bigotry. The Committee  
plans further investigation and action in  
these areas.  

—Pat Leeper  

JO ANN LITTLE  
Combined Task Force Report  

“NOW members rejoice with Jo Ann Little  
in her victory over a criminal justice system  
which so often persecutes women. The  
decision reached by the jury in this case  
demonstrates the growing public demand  
that the sexual assault of women no longer  
be tolerated and a recognition of the  
inherent right of victims to defend them-  
selves against sexual attack,” said Mary  
Ann Largen, NOW’s Rape Task Force  
Coordinator upon learning the verdict in Lit-  
tle’s historic trial by a North Carolina jury.  

On August 15 Jo Ann Little was acquitted  
on charges of killing her white jailer who  
she contended forced her to perform a  
sexual act. Ms. Little was confined in jail in  
Beaufort County, North Carolina, at the  
time awaiting trial on a breaking and en-  
tering charge.  

Little said of the jury’s decision, “. . . it was  
as close to a fair trial as I could have got-  
ten,” but the “prosecution was more in-  
terested in sending black women to the  
gas chamber than the truth.”  

Many NOW members raised money for Ms.  
Little's defense and NOW publicly sup-  
ported her all the way.  

On July 13, the Sunday preceding the  
opening of Little’s trial, North Carolina  
NOW members picketed and demon-  
strated before the Wake County Court  
House steps in the rain. Led by Laine  
Calloway, they shouted “What do we  
want? Justice. We want it NOW.” Jackie  
Frost, Southern Regional Director for  

“Say goodbye to intercollegiate football as you  
know and love it, Coach-baby!”  

Reprinted by permission of NEA, Inc.  

TASK FORCE COORDINATORS — Send  
your newsletters and press releases to  
Bernice Friedlander, Editor, DO IT NOW,  
1266 National Press Building, Washington,  
D.C. 20045.  

NOW, was manhandled by the police and  
then banned from the trial floor after she  
participated in demonstrations on behalf of  
Little.  

Del Dobbins, NOW’s Task Force Coor-  
dinator on Minority Women and Women’s  
Rights, along with Mary Ann Largen, worked  
closely with the defense team throughout  
the Little trial. Dobbins said of Little: “Her  
willingness to go through the Court system  
and a public trial to prove her innocence  
and bring these deplorable conditions to  
the attention of the public showed great  
courage. NOW commends her fortitude  
and perseverance in this test case which  
certainly benefits all women.”  

Mary Ann Largen also commented, “The  
trial of Jo Ann Little had reconfirmed the  
commitment of the NOW National Rape  
Task Force to legally redefine the crime of  
rape to include all types of sex offenses  
against women.”  

Karen DeCrow, NOW President, said upon  
hearing of the news, “We have believed in  
and supported Jo Ann Little all along. We  
now have a legal precedent for a woman's  
right to defend herself against sexual at-  
tack.”  

The gratitude of women everywhere goes  
out to all NOW women who worked so  
relentlessly to help Little win her case. The  
NOW Task Forces on Rape, Minority  
Women and Women’s Rights, Women and  
Poverty and Women in the Criminal Justice  
System deserve special praise.  

Director of New Mexico Petroleum Recovery  
Research. New Mexico Institute of Mining and  
Technology has new position requiring leader-  
ship, initiative, research competence, and  
research administrative skills to help organize,  
develop, and administer the newly formed New  
Mexico Petroleum Recovery Research Center.  
Required qualifications: Training in petroleum  
and/or chemical engineering; Ph.D. or  
equivalent industrial or research experience.  
Achievement in both research and ad-  
ministration. Knowledge of the practical  
problems of oil recovery.  

Applications and nominations should be sent to  
Dean Frederick K. Huellmer, New Mexico Institute  
of Mining and Technology, Socorro, New Mexico  
87081. New Mexico Tech is an Equal Op-  
portunity/Affirmative Action employer.  

“WOMEN IN HISTORY” POSTER  
$2 ppd.  
An Ac another 19 Female Firsts