SOME USEFUL ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE AMENDMENT

1. The Helms amendment completely ignores the U. N. Statement of Human Rights which declares that it is a fundamental human right to be able to control the size and spacing of one’s family; it further ignores the statement in American Jurisprudence which declares: if the right to privacy means anything, it must include the fundamental right to decide whether to bear or beget a child.

2. The Helms amendment seeks to impose a view on foreign countries which is neither held by a majority in this country nor held constitutional by our nation’s highest judicial body, the U. S. Supreme Court.

3. The Helms amendment further violates the sovereignty of other countries by ignoring the fact that abortion is legal and included among the regular health services in many of those countries which receive U. S. aid.

4. The Helms amendment ignores the basic health care needs of the women living in the less-developed countries who rely quite heavily on abortion as a means of fertility control because contraception and family planning services are not available.

See your chapter's Reproduction Task Force Coordinator for additional arguments. She should have received them in a communication from the national coordinator by now.

THANKS FOR YOUR LETTERS

Thanks to all of you who are sending us the Congressional responses to your abortion letters. We’re getting a dozen or more each day and we love it. But we still don’t have any letters from these states: Pennsylvania, Vermont (don’t forget Senator Aiken is a member of the Joint Conference Committee considering the Helms amendment), Maryland, Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Delaware, Hawaii, and Maine. Please get us those letters and keep them all coming! We've been having quite a chuckle over some of the responses we have received. We're thinking of giving a prize to the Member of Congress who can use the most words to say the least. It'll be a rough choice.

STUDENT MEMBERS OF NOW

The Legislative Office is again accepting interns for the 1974 winter semester.

Interns will be given an assignment in a specific area of the LO program and will work closely with the Legislative Vice President and the LO staff. This semester one of our interns is working on abortion, another on desexing the Federal Code and another on the ERA.

Preference will be given to those students able to work full time for at least one semester. We don’t pay anything and we can’t finance your travel to Washington, but we will pay local transportation expenses.

CREDIT HEARINGS

By the time this newsletter reaches you, Sharyn Campbell, national Credit Task Force Coordinator, will have testified for NOW on the subject of discrimination because of sex or marital status in credit transactions and legislation needed to remedy it. The House Consumer Affairs Subcommittee, chaired by Leonor Sullivan, invited Sharyn to testify at oversight hearings on November 13, 1973.

CONTINUE TO WRITE YOUR REPRESENTATIVE WITH YOUR PERSONAL EXPERIENCE OF CREDIT DISCRIMINATION AND REQUEST HER/HIS SUPPORT FOR LEGISLATION THAT WILL END SUCH DISCRIMINATION. (NOW is not supporting any particular piece of legislation on the House side at this time.)

PRAYERS IN CONGRESS

Coordinator of NOW’s National Task Force on Religion, Joyce Slayton Mitchell, did some research on the number of women invited to offer the daily prayer in the House and in the Senate, and has discovered that only five women have done so in the history of the nation.

About two times a month in the Senate and four times a month in the House, the Chaplains step aside while someone invited by a Member of the respective house offers the invocation. Perhaps your chapter can suggest names of women to invite to your Senators and Representatives.