CONFERENCE COMMITTEE REPORTS  
NOMINATING COMMITTEE  

Given the unique circumstances that have prevailed in NOW in this  
pre-National Conference period, the Nominating Committee has  
determined it can best serve the organization by simply presenting  
the names of all candidates who meet the minimal qualifications for  
running for office in NOW.  

These minimum qualifications are: Dues paid and membership for  
six months preceding the National Conference. Since the Board  
voted to refer the decision on the standing of those members  
whose dues are in “escrow” or otherwise withheld, to the National  
Conference, the Nominating Committee is not addressing this issue.  
If a candidate’s dues are in escrow or otherwise withheld, it is so in-  
dicated on the following list.  

The Nominating Committee determined at its meeting in December,  
1974, that its responsibilities did not include formulation of  
guidelines for campaigning. As of this date, August 9, 1975, we are  
aware that some candidates for national office have already cir-  
culated campaign materials.  

The Nominating Committee’s budget did not include funds for a  
voter's handbook. The Standard Declaration for Candidacy Forms  
sent in by candidates will be on display at the National Conference  
October 24-27, 1975, at which time the Nominating Committee will  
present its final report.  

Linda Farris  

Chair, Nominating Committee  

NOMINATING COMMITTEE MINORITY REPORT  

The Nominating Committee has chosen (in a reversal of a previous  
decision it had made) not to present a slate of candidates for  
national office, but merely to report to the membership every name  
submitted to it on Candidates’ Forms.  

We believe this behavior represents a shirking of responsibility. It  
changes the nature of the Nominating Committee from a function-  
ing entity whose work is prescribed in the By-laws, to a mere  
processing committee doing a purely clerical task that could have  
been done as easily by the National Office.  

The mandate of the By-laws seems clear. Section 8, Nominations,  
reads:  

“A nominating committee, consisting of no less than seven mem-  
bers, shall nominate candidates for National Office and National  
Board. ...  

“... the committee shall be charged with ensuring regional  
representation according to numbers of members within a region.  

“The nominating committee shall present its slate of candidates to  
the membership at least 30 days before the conference. ... etc.”  

This year’s Nominating Committee has no slate, has not assured  
regional representation proportionate to membership, and has failed  
to accomplish the task implied by the By-laws: to recruit, evaluate,  
and recommend candidates for all national offices.  

Credentials Committee  

The Credentials Committee requests that all members in attendance  
at the National Conference bring with them a cancelled check, a  
1975 membership card, a cash receipt, or a signed affidavit from  
the chapter treasurer certifying the payment of 1975 dues.  

Gloria C. Hewitt  
Chair, Credentials Committee  

SEND NEWSLETTERS NOW!  

Please send one copy of your chapter  
and/or state NOW newsletter to:  

Bernice Friedlander, Editor  

Do It NOW  

NOW Public Information Office  

1266 National Press Building  

Washington, D.C. 20045  

There is nothing which requires the committee to present a single  
slate. More than one name might have been presented for some of-  
fices, or there might have been two or three complete slates, each  
proportionately allocated for regional representation.  

We believe democratic processes are not served by a Nominating  
Committee which fails to do its duty as prescribed in the By-laws  
which prevail during its existence.  

Under Section 9, Elections, the By-laws also require: “The officers  
and other elected members of the National Board... shall be elec-  
ted by a majority vote of those voting at the National Conference...”  
This means that one candidate must receive more than half of the  
vote. With as many as five or six candidates vying for a single office,  
the Conference could easily fail to elect, even after repetitive voting  
by those who are hardy enough to stay up all night in order to cast  
their ballots! Is this the “democracy” we seek?  

It may be that NOW needs to revise its system of electing national  
board and officers. For example, perhaps there could be preliminary  
or “primary” elections at State or Regional Conferences. However,  
unless and until the By-laws are changed to reflect a new system,  
we believe the Nominating Committee should function as the ap-  
plicable By-laws direct!  

Respectfully submitted,  

Gene Boyer  
Muriel Fox  

NOW in THIRD PRINTING!  

The Woman's Bible  
ELIZABETH CADY STANTON  
1895 Commentary on Scripture about  
the “last bastion" of Patriarchy -  
Religion. Issued by The Coalition  
Task Force on Women and Religion.  

$6.45 ppd. Bulk discounts  

NEW: STUDY GUIDE to The Woman's Bible  
$2.25 ppd. Bulk also  

SEND TO: THE WOMAN'S BIBLE  
4759 - 15th Ave. N.E.  
Seattle WA 98105  

OR FROM: WOMEN'S & OTHER BOOKSTORES  

WAIT NO LONGER ~