Highlights of NOW National Board Meeting  
November 10-11, 1973, St. Louis  

With many major administrative plans and program items for 1974 on a tight two-day agenda, the  
NOW National Board took action on the following:  

* 1974 National Budget approved  

Membership Services contract: The contract for Membership Services, one of the most  
important and most carefully considered items on the Board agenda, was awarded to  
C-R Office Programs of Chicago, with publications production to be shared in part with  
KNOW, Inc. of Pittsburgh. A contract for computer services went to Hartley Data  
Service of Skokie, Ill.  

Committees were established to consider and recommend policy and guidelines on  
State and chapter structure  
Litigation policy  
NOW participation in coalitions and/or coordinating committees  
Present restrictions on the formation of new chapters were lifted, with the viability of  
a new chapter to be a decision of the Regional Director and the State Coordinator.  
(The Board approved the convening of the Golden Gate Chapter, San Francisco.)  

*  

(NOTE: Reports to the NOW Board from NOW’s three national offices, Legislative, National,  
Public Information, are available from each office.)  

IN THE NOW NEWS .  

NOW Women & Religion Task Force Coordinator Joyce Slayton Mitchell reports that Virginia  
Mills, Director of Women’s Affairs, Presbyterian Church U.S.A. is now a consultant to the task  

TONG saan New York NOW is a plaintiff in a class action to make women as liable to jury duty  
as men in New York State..... Cincinnati NOW strongly opposed the efforts of an Ohio legis-  

lator to require sterilization of all welfare women after their second “out-of-wedlock” child.....  

Palo Alto (Calif.) NOW President Enid Davis reports the availability of a skit used for fundraising  

by Palo Alto NOW. The skit, about a mock political convention and the ERA, can be obtained  

by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope and $1.00 to Enid Davis, 1050 Newell Road,  

Palo Alto, Calif...... Eastern Massachusetts NOW has filed sex discrimination charges against  

Harvard University with the EEOC..... Tampa NOW has filed against Anheuser-Busch of Florida...  
Jean Withers, Co-President, Seattle NOW is the author of a new report on prostitution based on  

a three-year study in Seattle, “Prostitution — Fact and Fiction” ..... The Women’s History  

Library, recipient of a small grant from the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, announces  

that the deadline for internships at the Library is January 31, 1974..... NOW University  
Compliance Task Force Coordinator Dr. Ellen Morgan and Dr. Clara R. Melman are interested  
in receiving information from university or college groups which have taken or may take class  
actions in court regarding sex discrimination in academia. Write Dr. Morgan at Cranbury Road,  
Princeton Junction, NJ 08550; Dr. Melman at 120 Beverly Road, Upper Montclair, NJ 07043  
On discrimination in universities, the 12 Southwestern Pennsylvania NOW Chapters involved in  
the NOW and Johnson vs. the University of Pittsburgh case filed in 1972 with the EEOC announced  
in late November the landmark decisions of the EEOC findings: in faculty tenure, inclusion of  
classes of employees other than faculty, and discrimination on the basis of race as well as sex.....  
The first National Conference on the Masculine Mystique will be held the end of March, 1974 in  
New York City, says NOW Masculine Mystique Task Force Coordinator Warren Farrell — More  

on this in the February DO IT NOW. For more information, contact Warren Farrell, Crystal  
Plaza South, Apt. 617, 2111 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 22202..... The NOW  

New York State Marriage and Divorce Conference will be held at the Hotel Commodore, New York  
City, January 19 and 20.  

ee: ee