FROM THE PRESIDENT:

1. Apparently resulting from my protests last year to Psychosurgery funding by the National Institute of
Mental Health, N. I. M. H., of the U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, H. E. W., I was invited to
be a member of a consultant panel convened by N. I. M. H., 9/24/73. The issues are: no empirical evidence of
therapeutic effectiveness of psychosurgery (brain surgery); therefore it is human experimentation; denial of civil
liberties and civil rights of subjects who are often in no position to give “informed consent”; use of powerless
people — women, children, prison inmates, hospital inmates as subjects; criteria of mental health has documented
double standards that, for example, considers return/adjustment to ‘housewife’ (sic, no one marries a house) role
as success vis-à-vis women victims. N. I. M. H. knows my views and recommendations as a behavioral scientist,
as a NOW officer, as a civil libertarian citizen. If you are knowledgeable about this phenomenon, please write
Dr. Bert Brown, Director, National Institute of Mental Health, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md. 20852. I suggest
you insist on no public funding of Psychosurgery research, experimentation, subject selection, procedures without
additional continuous feminist consulting and monitoring. Communicate with Joan Goldstein, NOW Task Force
Coordinator on Women and Health for follow-up on these actions: E-14 Lakeview Terrace, Princeton, N. J. 08540,
(609) 452-1796.

2. Suggest each NOW member ‘recover’ at least one former NOW member who may have simply neglected to
renew, would like to know current exciting programs and progress, whose reason(s) for not renewing no longer
exist.

3. As long as I have breath and voice in NOW, I shall continue to observe, until the phenomena are eliminated,
that concepts, language and behavior that communicate: target, fight, enemy, barricades, ‘give ‘em hell’, male
chauvinist pig ~ m.c.p., etc. sound like the military, masculine mystique that is all too ‘Pentagonian’ and the
central ethos of our culture. I am as radical (getting to root causes), unequivocal, committed, vigorously feminist
as any other NOW member or other feminist; however, adversarial concepts, behavior and language are root causes
of the basic human inequality of sexism that feminism intends to cure. Alternatives to the above in sequence
might be: focus, work, beneficiary (though recalcitrants won't view or feel it that way just NOW), barriers, give
‘em heaven (again, some don’t know it yet), still normal male, i.e. sexist, etc. Indeed, the rebirth of feminism
means, in my view, that SHE IS RISEN to redefine and reassign power for life. May I suggest this be discussed/
considered in our chapters, in our homes, in the private lives of our minds.

4. NOW Executive Committee, who has responsibility for NOW conference has tentatively selected a catchy
theme for the May 1974 conference of: ‘You Can’t Stop NOW’. NOW Conference Planning Committee, delegated
Conference Planning Opportunities by Executive Committee solicits Conference theme and program ideas from
NOW membership. Committee please note another theme suggestion of: ‘NOW, She is Risen’. Stating ‘She’
does not exclude men. The ‘She’ only means that women are being empowered and that we: women, men and
children recognize the value of the so-called ‘feminine’ part of human potential for women and men publicly
and privately.

5. On the subject of men in NOW: All NOW publications, newsletters, communications, conference invitations,
must, according to our statement of purpose and incorporation, include reference to women and men, sisters and
brothers, girls and boys.

6. Finally, a problem and opportunity for all of us active in and for NOW: correspondence. Most received by
me from other NOW members is truly beautiful in content, style, brilliance, effectiveness, and sentiment. It is
also near overwhelming, coupled with other mail and responsibilities. However, please keep it coming and please
continue with your understanding that it is shared, acknowledged, answered, acted upon by: letter, phone,
word of mouth, actions, speeches, conferences, as much as energy, time and judgment can create. It is never
ignored. Criticism/advice are at least as valued as commendations. All are cherished by me as sources of thought,
inspiration, aspiration and vitalization best articulated as your expressions of caring. May God, (that is, the divine
in us all) guide us to create a world where the power of love exceeds the love of power. Onward!

In life and love, Wilma Scott Heide

FORT WORTH NOW PREPARES SLIDE SHOW ON SEXIST CHILDREN’S BOOKS

“This Book Is Rated ‘S’. A Report on Sexism in Children’s Literature” has been produced by Fort Worth NOW’s
Education Task Force. The presentation details sexism present in career education pamphlets used in schools,
in readers and library books. The slides and a taped narration are available for rental from the Fort Worth, Texas
NOW. Rental fee: $15 (postage included). Contact: Shirley Hillard, 3800 Trail Wind Lane, Fort Worth,
Texas 76109.