L. |. NOW GAINS NEW MEMBER IN A VICTORY OVER “STAGS”

Nassau (Long Island, N. Y.) NOW came to the aid of a Long Island woman — with gain of a new  
member and victory over a “stag” dinner as its reward.

Petra Capon received an invitation to the $100-a-plate Pinter Tournament of Stars banquet, a  
charity event for the American Cancer Society emceed by Bob Hope. When she called to make  
reservations for 10 — a contribution of $1,000 — she was told the dinner was stag.

Ms. Capon contacted Nassau NOW. The case was taken to the New York State Human Rights  
Commission which ordered that women be allowed at the dinner.

Betty Schlein of Nassau NOW was among Ms. Capon’s guests. In all, about 100 women attended  
the banquet.

The many press reports quoted Ms. Capon’s intention to join NOW, “I never involved myself in  
any women’s liberation activities until it hit home,” she said. “I’m not against men, I'm for  
women.”

NOW AIDS N. J. WIN OVER LITTLE LEAGUE

A New Jersey court has ruled that the Little League in New Jersey must admit girls. The ruling  
was made November 7th following a long suit in which Judith Weis and Essex County NOW  
helped to refute testimony by Little League witnesses who claimed girls were not physically  
able to play baseball with boys.

Some reports say the Little League may take the case to the U. S. Supreme Court.

NATIONAL ACTION WILL HIT “CULT OF YOUTH”

December 19th is the date for actions by many NOW chapters throughout the country — all  
designed to combat the cult of youth as it applies to women.

According to Karen DeCrow, national coordinator for the action, “The tragedy of the cult of  
youth is not that men prefer young women, it is that we women begin to hate ourselves as  
we grow old.”

On December 19, 1853, Gerrit Smith, wealthy landowner, whose daughter Elizabeth first wore  
the bloomer dress, wrote to Elizabeth Cady Stanton: “So long as woman remains in her  
clothes-prison, she will be dependent and poor.” This year, NOW chapters will celebrate the  
100th anniversary of that letter.

Suggestions and background for this action have been sent to all NOW chapter presidents.  
For further information, contact Karen DeCrow, 116 Benedict Avenue, Syracuse, New York  
13210, (315) 474-1682.

CALIFORNIA NOW TASK FORCE TO COMBAT AGEISM

Is it “raging hormones” that make some menopausal women act out, or is it just plain rage?  
The need for feminist research in this area was stressed at the Workshop on Older Women at  
the California NOW State Conference, October 26-28. Job discrimination (both sexist and  
ageist), social security inequities and pension woes were also tackled. A task force was set up  
to “raise the consciousness of NOW members to ageism and the older women, as well as to  
implement programs to alleviate our problems.”  
SS hoe Continued on Page 5