NATIONAL  
iP #.)

FOR WOMEN  

VOLUME IX, NO. 1 . JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1976  

Women’s Destiny From  
Marabel to Montini  

Remember when we were all trying hard to be popular  
girls? Many of our sisters are still trying. Total Woman, by  
Marabel Morgan, is selling millions of copies.  

Filled with quotations from the Bible, Morgan teaches  
worship of Husband — as breadwinner, boss, constant  
companion. Besides, she says, you are stuck with him for  
life. He “needs” sex about once in 48 hours, so by all  
means give it to him. No matter that you may be so busy  
with your work that you forget about sex for months (she  
understands women?!!).  

Many of Morgan’s ideas are splendid: make love, do not  
nag, act passionate under the dining room table. How pas-  
sionate can your partner feel, never knowing whether you  
are under the dining room table because you want to be, or  
because you just reached chapter 4 in the book?  

Better a wrong decision by the head of the household,  
than a right decision by the wife. And most central — love  
to serve. Serving without thought of what you will get in  
return. Surely this is not a new idea.  

The church has advocated service to God (described as  
male) or in some instances, service to the Pope (male).  
Morgan simply limits the object of service to one’s own  
den or patio: serve the husband (male). My problem is not  
only with the women who accept this as a recipe for  
pleasure and fulfillment, but with the men, who can live  
with such unearned, mindless, unsexy benefit.  

Susan Sontag, writing on pornography says:  

“It is the innate incongruence between important  
achievements in the realms of sexual fulfillment and of in-  
dividual consciousness that is exacerbated by the enlarged  
use to which sexuality has been put in modern, secular  
culture. As the credibility of religious experience has  
declined, erotic experience has not only gotten an inflated,  
even grandiose significance, but is itself now subjected to  
standards of credibility (thereby attaching a whole new  
sort of anxiety to sexual performance). In particular, the  
quest for the experience of complete psychic surrender  
now no longer enclosed within traditional religious forms  
has become increasingly, and restlessly, attached to the  
mind-blowing character of the orgasm.  

Morgan, however, does not write of pornography. Nor  
does she approach the realm of religious passion, ex-  
pressed through the centuries in art and music. She writes,  
despite the thigh-slapping hilarity of greeting one’s hus-  
band in black net stockings and an apron, of sad people.  

The credibility of religious experience may have de-  
clined, but the power of the church has not.  

At our January national board meeting we voted to de-  
mand an IRS audit of the Roman Catholic Church. In our  

own states and cities we are all aware of the vast sums of  
(tax exempt) monies being spent to lobby against the right  
to choose and ERA. We observe now the political candi-  
dates who are running with the rights of the fetus as their  
sole, or major, campaign issue.  

We of course defend the right of any candidate to run  
on any issue, but not on church (tax exempt) money to be  
matched by federal funds.  

We demand that this country observe one of the most  
critical tenets of freedom — THE SEPARATION OF  
CHURCH AND STATE. Today the state is being en-  
dangered by incursions by the church.  

Next year, the freedom of Americans may be endan-  
gered by the incursions of the state into church affairs.  
The founders of America, many of whom had left their be-  
loved homeland precisely on this issue, recognized how  
important this safeguard is.  

At the 200th birthday of our country, we must reaffirm  
this protection of liberty.  

The Pope has also taken us on. He said (January 31,  
Associated Press) “Wisdom and realism” must be used in  
granting women positions of power. He  

assailed feminist movements that run the risk of virilizing  
and depersonalizing women.  

... Woman’s essential role is motherhood and her prime  
importance is as caretaker of the family.  

Speaking at Texas Christian University, I read his state-  
ment, and pondered what virilizing women might mean.  
Should we look it up in the dictionary? My audience called  
out, it doesn’t matter what the dictionary says. We don’t  
like the statement.  

It is obvious that the family unit in this country is in trou-  
ble. My view is that only the feminist movement can save  
total disintegration of the family, total warfare between the  
sexes.  

I “debated” George Gilder (Sexual Suicide) at the  
University of Kansas. Gilder believes that the women’s  
liberation movement will eventually end relations between  
the sexes, because men, totally threatened by independent  
and autonomous women, will not be able to function sex-  
ually with us. I responded that if men do not rid themselves  
of their chauvinism, many will find themselves alone,  
because we won't relate to them — sexually or otherwise.  
There can be love only between equals; the only possibility  
for happy relations can exist when women relate to men,  
not because we need to eat, but because we want them as  
friends and lovers.  

Good news for us: the very large audience in Lawrence,  
Kansas, agreed with me. With the exception of the (now  

Continued on page 14