In The NOW News...

The 200th anniversary of the Boston Tea Party was celebrated in new ways by a number of NOW
chapters, all calling for ratification of the ERA. “No Taxation without Equality” was the 20th
Century Boston Tea Party cry..... NOW member Jeanne Cordova’s new book, “Sexism: It’s
a Nasty Affair” has been published by New Way Books of Los Angeles..... Nassau NOW
reports great success with the chapter’s legislative questionnaire sent to candidates for local
office, with results having received wide coverage in the area press — the chapter is planning

a new questionnaire on abortion..... NOW National Compliance Task Force Coordinator
Lynne Darcy signed the complaint against the New Jersey State Division on Civil Rights for

a group of the Division’s women employees. The EEOC has found “reasonable cause” for the
women’s complaint of job discrimination..... Tulsa NOW picketed the U.S. Jaycees’ national
training seminar to protest the awarding of federal funds to the organization which excludes
women from membership..... Columbus NOW reports many activities in addition to working
for ratification of the ERA, including an active Rape Task Force and recent actions protesting
discrimination due to sexual orientation..... National Board member Karen DeCrow inter-
viewed psychiatrist Thomas S. Szasz in two programs televised in Syracuse, with Dr. Szasz
giving his first TV statement on the women’s movement. Copies of the tapes are available for
rent or sale from Karen DeCrow, 116 Benedict Avenue, Syracuse, N.Y. 13210..... Sexuality
and Lesbianism Task Force Coordinator Sidney Abbott announces new research on lesbian
mothers being conducted by Barbara Bryant, School of Social Work, California State University,
Sacramento, CA 95819. The questionnaire, for which correspondence will be confidential

and can be anonymous, was developed in cooperation with NOW member Del Martin and
Paula Lyohi..... Oklahoma City NOW presented a Barefoot and Pregnant Award to a local
McDonald's with the result of improved hiring of women..... NOW Education Task Force
Coordinator Anne Grant has received an award from Mademoiselle magazine for her production
of “Our North American Foremothers”..... NOW member Adah Maurer, Berkeley NOW
notes that no women have applied for a position of Superintendent of Schools in Berkeley —
similar reports have been received from other areas — isn’t the news reaching NOW members?

One Judith Kaplan of New York NOW presented an editorial reply on WOR—TV in response
to the station’s congratulations of the Elks for ending discrimination against minorities.

Ms. Kaplan pointed out that the Elks still exclude women from membership..... NOW
member Lillian Dreyer passed along a Junior Achievement brochure titled “Your Daughter,
the President.” The only problem is that the brochure ends with “Your daughter may never
become President (But, with a little luck, she might marry one).” Do they never learn?.....
NOW member Nancy Seifer’s new book, “Absent from the Majority: Working Class Women
in America,” has been published by the National Project on Ethnic America of the American
Jewish Committee, New York. NOW President Wilma Scott Heide was a participant in a
recent conference at which the book was introduced..... “Sex Stereotyping in the Toy
Department” was the title of the speech presented to the Toy Manufacturers of America’s
annual meeting by Joan Nicholson, Former National Coordinator for the Image of Women
in the Media Task Force. Following the meeting which was attended by over 200 toy
manufacturers, TMA distributed Ms. Nicholson’s presentation to its full membership.....