JANE PLITT RESIGNS

As some of you may already know, NOW’s Executive Director since  
1973, Jane Plitt, has resigned her position to pursue other career  
directions.

“Two years ago when I accepted the job as Executive Director,”  
Jane wrote in her resignation letter to the National Board, “I believed  
I had been given the greatest honor any person could ever hope to  
receive. I made a commitment to do everything humanly possible to  
equal that honor.”

Jane can feel proud to know that she did indeed meet her goal. She  
played a key role in establishing an effective, efficient office with  
professional skill and sisterly warmth. Under her leadership we now  
have our membership and leadership records computerized. This  
process has not only meant quicker and greater communication for  
us but has reduced the membership processing cost by 60%. She  
has developed a more economic and efficient in-house distribution  
and mailing system.

The communication between the NOW National Office and chapter  
and state program services has increased incredibly and has meant  
we can work closer and more effectively with each other. Jane was  
not only responsible for this but at the same time she became a  
friend to chapter members throughout the country.

We will miss Jane’s presence at the National Office, but look for-  
ward to her future activism within NOW.

Thank you, Jane. And our best wishes go with you.

4 f * THE  
~ f > LIBERTY  
mn °  

? CAP!  

A MONTHLY GUIDE TO CURRENT, NON-SEXIST  
_CHILDREN'S BOOKS & RESOURCES  
by Enid Davis, Librarian & Founder of  

Palo Alto, Ca. NOW  
RECOMMENDED BY: MS. Women's Action  

Alliance; Children's Book Council; Wilson  

Library Bulletin; Spokeswoman; etc.; etc.  
RATES: 1 yr. $5; 6 mos. $4; 1050 Newell Rd.  
Palo Alto, Ca. 94303  

NOW Slide Show  

“The Beginnings of a Long & Real Revolution” (Second Edition) by  
Toni Carabillo, Vice President, NOW, 1971-1974, is a documentary  
history of the feminist movement in the United States in two parts  
which may be shown together, with an intermission between Parts I  
and II (total running time, 86 minutes). Each part may be shown  
separately. Because it is used primarily as an orientation program  
for new and potential members of NOW, the emphasis on Part II is  
on NOW's role, but it is suitable and informative for other groups as  
well.

Rental information: For NOW Chapters $30 for total shows, $15 for  
either part; all other groups, $50 for total show, $25 for either part.  
An additional charge of $5 will be made for shipping and handling.  
For an order that requires air mail special delivery, there will be an  
additional charge of $3. Rental customers may keep the printed  
script. Because of rental demands for the show, unless you arrange  
in advance to keep it longer, the show should be returned shipped  
no later than 24 hours after the performance date.

Purchase Price: To NOW Chapters, $150 total show; $75 either  
part. All other groups: $200 total show, $100 either part.

All rentals and sales are handled by:  
NOW Public Information Office  
1266 National Press Building  
Washington, D.C. 20045  
Telephone: (202) 638-6054  

Vice President for Administration. The person filling this new  
position will be the principal advisor to the President on ad-  
ministrative and business affairs, will have primary respon-  
sibility for the budget and for space allocation, and will super-  
vise the business, personnel, and other service activities of  
the Institute.

Required qualifications: high-level administrative experience  
in a university or research institute, preferably including con-  

tract and grant administration; familiarity with business  
operations. Applications and nominations should be sent to:  

Kenneth W. Ford, President  
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology  
Socorro, New Mexico 87801  

New Mexico Tech is an Equal Opportunity / Affirmative Action  
Employer.

CELEBRATE EQUALITY!!!

Need a fresh, new, non-sexist idea for a present??? Want to put your money towards action??? Give your special person(s) a gift of  

equality by giving to NOW!!!

Responding to popular demand, National NOW has designed a beautiful contribution acknowledgement card (dark brown ink on ivory  
parchment-like paper) with matching envelope for two occasions — Happy Birthday and a general Happy Holiday. Each card has an  

appropriate non-sexist message.

The minimum contribution is $5.00 per card, or 4 cards for $15.00. To order these cards, fill out the order form below, send it with  
your check for the total contribution to the NOW National Office (5 S. Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603), and the gift cards will  
be mailed to you. You may wish to order only one card for a particular occasion, or several cards at once at the quantity price.

Make birthdays and holidays a special time — give equality!!!

Quantity: Happy Birthday.  

Given by:  

Happy Holiday __  

Amount Enclosed: $  

(Name) NOW Member: Yes  
(Address) No  
(City, State, Zip)