NOW TASK FORCE NEWS

WOMEN AND POVERTY TASK FORCE

CHILD CARE TASK FORCE

“When we first heard about Growing-Up Skipper, we thought it was nothing but a bad joke,” said Allena Leonard, Coordinator of NOW’s Child Care Task Force’s Subcommittee on Toys. “We thought no toy company could express such contempt for the female body and its processes of maturation as to market such a doll. But we were wrong.”

Growing-Up Skipper hit the toy shelves this summer. She is a doll that develops breasts and a tapered waist when her arm is twisted.

The NOW Child Care Task Force is concerned with toys because they have the capacity to help shape a child’s concept of her/his self-worth and potential. A good toy can expand a child's horizon while a toy like Skipper has the effect of making even young girls feel they are destined to be valued more for what’s up front than what they do.

In a letter to Mattel Toy Company President, Arthur Spear, Allena Leonard expressed NOW's outrage and pointed out the obvious contrast to male dolls which lack genitals entirely. She emphasized the danger of this toy to children who may very well, “begin twisting their own arms and those of their female friends to see if breasts develop. They may discover that forceful twisting can develop dislocated arms and shoulders instead,” she said.

Ms. Leonard continued, “Although NOW has little hope that any company which would introduce such a toy would be able to understand why it is offensive and pull it off the market, we do hope — and expect — that NOW members will not be the only people to consider Growing-Up Skipper to be the worst example of wretched excess to appear on toy counters this year.”

“We'll be happy when the development of a girl's mind receives as much attention as the development of her bosom,” Leonard concluded.

Over the past ten months, the Task Force on Women and Poverty has been active at the local, state, and national levels attempting to raise the question: Why are women poor? The Task Force has monitored and needed the establishment: Capitol Hill NOW filed the first formal complaint of sex discrimination under the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973. Detroit NOW organized a statewide action on the evils of the WIN program and suggested legislative changes to make the program work for poor women; chapters and state organizations all over the country are criticizing state plans for the use of Title XX (Social Security Act) funds for social services. Cincinnati NOW deserves special praise for a massive letter writing campaign on the inadequacies in the Ohio State Plan for Title XX.

The Task Force has worked and continues to work closely with the Minority Women, Rape, Criminal Justice, Compliance, Marriage and Divorce, and Implications Task Forces on a wide variety of concerns.

If you wish to join the Poverty Task Force, ask your chapter president to send your name to Sue Doty at the NOW National Office. The Task Force plans a relentlessly probing issue clarification workshop on class and feminism at the Conference in Philadelphia as well as practical planning sessions and open raps as needed.

The Poverty Task Force newsletter, COMMON WEALTH, is currently available for 75¢ per copy from Mary Jo Binder, 1824 Redwood Terrace, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20012. Please enclose a self-addressed manila envelope and 30¢ postage to cover handling.

Newsletter topics include: Society’s View of Motherhood; Unemployment; Women in the Economic Crises; Class Issues and Feminism; Migrant Women; and others.

— Mary Jo Binder

Committee to Promote Women’s Studies

Several NOW Task Forces are joining together to form a national model conference devoted to women in education. Titled, New Time/New Space, the conference is scheduled to be held at the University of Delaware at Newark, DE in June of 1976.

The substance of the conference extends from kindergarten to graduate school. Common concerns of women include: knowledge, socialization, and institutional structure. In this regard, we hope to examine the interaction and interdependence of women.

Mary Daly, theologian from Boston College and author of Beyond God the Father, will be the keynote speaker. Suzanne Benton will present her ritual mask performance: Sarah and Hagar. Margo Barnett will present her Emmy-winning, “Black Is a Beautiful Woman.”

COMPLIANCE TASK FORCE

The Department of Labor is threatening to dismantle affirmative action in institutions of post-secondary education under the direction of Secretary of Labor John Dunlop, who according to a newspaper report considers affirmative action in universities, “silly.”

A hearing to consider the “evaluation” of Executive Order 11246 has been scheduled by the Department of Labor for September 30. (EO 11246, Revised Order #4 requires a written affirmative action program for each contractor and subcontractor dealing with the federal government.)

Mordeca Jane Pollock, Higher Education Compliance Committee, will testify for NOW. Preceding her testimony, there will be a cap and gown procession at the Labor Department to the hearing led by Mordeca Jane and Sarah Slavin Schramm. NOW members have been invited to join with them and we look forward to a real “colorful” ceremony hearing.

We would like to make this a truly national Conference by inviting NOW members everywhere to help us with it. Especially wanted are students, teachers, counselors, administrators, textbook writers, curriculum designers, education task forces, school board members, and affirmative action officers.

We need people to research foundation grants, draw up a proposal, propose sessions and workshop topics, and recommend individuals to facilitate them, help organize a traveling art exhibit, and found a permanent institute for study relating to women’s problems and perspectives as well as spread the word about this Conference-in-progress.

Suzanne Benton, Women and Arts Task Force; Lynne Darcy, Compliance Task Force; Ellen Morgan, former Higher Ed Compliance Task Force; Mordeca Jane Pollock, Higher Ed Compliance; Joan Roberts and Sarah Slavin Schramm, Committee to Promote Women’s Studies; and Mary Ellen Verheyden-Hilliard, Education Task Force make up the constituting committee for this national model conference.

For more information, write: Sarah Slavin Schramm, 1009-24th St. NW, #102, Washington, D.C. 20037. Enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope for reply.

— Sarah Slavin Schramm