MANDATORY PREGNANCY LEAVES

Recently there has been a great deal of litigation by women challenging the various mandatory  
pregnancy leave statutes, regulations and policies. Many courts have declared mandatory pregnancy  
leaves to be unconstitutional. A definitive ruling is expected soon from the United States Supreme  
Court in the case of La Fleur v. Cleveland Board of Education, (465 F. 2d 1184). NOW has filed  
an amicus curiae brief in La Fleur.  
The successful cases to date are as follows:

1. unmarried pregnant hospital employee —  

   a. Doe v. Osteopathic Hospital of Wichita Inc., 333 F. Supp. 1357 (1972, Kansas);  
2. pregnant teachers —  

   a. Bravo v. Board of Education, 345 F. Supp. 155 (1972, Illinois);  

   b. Cerra v. East Stroudsburg Area School District, 299 A. 2d 277 (1973, Pennsylvania);  

   c. Green v. Waterford Board of Education, 345 F. Supp. 501 (1973, Connecticut);  

   d. Heath v. Westerville Board of Education, 345 F. Supp. 501 (1972, Ohio);  

   e. La Fleur v. Cleveland Board of Education, 465 F. 2d 1184 (1972, Ohio), pending  
   U.S. S. Court);  

   f. Pocklington v. Duval County School Board, 345 F. Supp. 163 (1972, Florida);  
3. social worker —  

   a. Williams v. San Francisco Unified School District, 340 F. Supp. 438 (1972, California);  
4. member of the armed services —  

   a. Robinson v. Rand, 340 F. Supp. 37 (1972, Colorado).  

In all of the cases it was found that mandatory pregnancy leave statutes, regulations and policies  
discriminate on the basis of sex. Selecting a certain indiscriminate period of time that a medical  
leave must be taken for pregnancy is arbitrary and discriminatory because only pregnancy and  
not other prolonged medical ailments were subject to these restrictions. Since pregnancy is a  
physical condition exclusive to women, such restrictions discriminate on the basis of sex. The  
courts held that medical leaves for pregnancy, like those for all other physical conditions, should  
be determined individually based on a doctor’s evaluation. The selection of arbitrary dates has  
no rational relationship to the performance of duties.

The arguments that have been successful in overturning these statutes, regulations and policies are:  
that they are based on stereotypes that have no more place in our society than racial or religious  
stereotypes; advance notice of when the woman plans to leave is as good as an arbitrary date to  
allow provisions to be made for the person’s absence, and any emergency can be handled in the  
same manner as emergency leaves not for pregnancy; There is as great if not greater continuity  
when the leaves are not done by arbitrary dates; some of these provisions were based on outdated  
concepts (children giggling at the sight of a pregnant teacher); administrative convenience or the  
saving of money is not a defense when a constitutional right is in question. However, in the  
Robinson case, the woman in the armed services, the court stated that a woman who was pregnant  
and in the armed services could not be forced to resign, but could probably be transferred out of  
a combat zone.

Most of these cases were based on the violation of the equal protection clause (some were based  
also on the due process clause) of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. (The  
Pennsylvania case (Cerra) used a state human rights statute and the armed services case (Robinson)  
used the equal protection clause of the Fifth Amendment because it was a federal and not state  
body being charged.)

When a person finds herself being affected by a mandatory pregnancy leave statute, regulation or  
policy, she should take the following steps:  
Continued on Page 7