REGIONAL REVIEW

From Jackie Frost, Southern Regional Director

November and December were months of frenzied feminist activity in the Southern Region.....  
November 2-4, over 100 Alabama feminists gathered at Cheaha State Park near Anniston, Alabama.  
Sarah Jane Stewart organized workshops on Marriage & Divorce & Family Relations, the growing  
national Rape Crisis, ERA, Women in Politics, and Chapter Convening. Martha Baker of Alexander  
City was elected State Coordinator, and Mary Weidler of Montgomery, State Legislative Coordinator.  
In Shreveport, Louisiana, NOW members assembled on November 10-11 to adopt state structure  

and elect officers, with Linda Martin of Shreveport elected State Coordinator, Janet Schori of  

Baton Rouge, State Legislative Coordinator, and Josie Young of Monroe, State Finance Coordinator.  
The next weekend, Texas NOW members from throughout the state held their first NOW Organizing  
Conference in Dallas. The Lone Star State feminists established a model organizing plan by dividing  
the state into five areas for development, each with a dynamic leader elected to direct the effort.  
Martha Dickey of Dallas was elected State Coordinator.

From Patsy Fulcher, Western Regional Director

NOW's Western Region will hold a Conference on Consciousness Raising in Fresno, Calif., Febru-  
ary 15, 16 and 17, 1974. For further information, contact Patsy Fulcher, 410 Bellevue Avenue,  
No. 208, Oakland, Calif. 94610; or Harriet Perl, Los Angeles NOW, 8864 West Pico Blvd.,  

Los Angeles, Calif. 90035.

From Fran Kolb & Jo Ann Evens Gardner, Eastern Regional Co-Directors

We are delighted to announce several new State Coordinators: Eileen Kelly, New York State Co-  
ordinator; Del Perry, Connecticut State Coordinator; and Ellie Smeal, newly elected President of  
Pennsylvania State NOW (she’s also a National Board member.)

Since becoming Regional Directors, we have convened the following new chapters: Massachusetts:  
Cape Cod NOW; Connecticut: Suffield-Enfield NOW, Thames NOW; Eastern Connecticut-Seaport  
NOW; New York: Schenectady NOW; New Jersey: Mid East Jersey NOW; Pennsylvania:  
Venango County NOW, McKeesport NOW, Pocono NOW, Lehigh Valley NOW, Pittsburgh Golden  
Triangle NOW, and Blair County NOW.

Some exciting events from the Eastern Region: Pennsylvania NOW has persuaded the Pa. Attorney  
General to sue the Pa. Interscholastic Athletic Association to gain an immediate and full equality  
for girls in interscholastic athletic events throughout the state. Maine is beginning a new campaign  
for ratification of the ERA. New York State NOW is setting up Regional Assistant Coordinators  
to help the State Coordinator and is embarking on a pilot fund-raising project. New Jersey  

NOW’s Annual Conference is Jan. 12 at Rutgers-Newark. Eastern Region State Coordinators  

and Regional Directors will meet Feb. 9-10 in Providence, Rhode Island. For further information  
on this meeting, contact Frances Kolb, 521 Spring Valley Dr., Bridgewater, N. J. 08872.

From Kathy Rand, Midwest Regional Director

Congratulations to all members in the Midwest region. Since January of 1973, we have been the  
fastest-growing region in NOW. Let’s be sure to keep it up! Renew your membership for 1974  
NOW. And while you’re at it, why not recruit a friend or relative to join too. Don’t forget:  

you must be a NOW member by Feb. 28 to vote at the 1974 National Conference in Houston.  
Welcome to the newest convening chapters in the region: Joplin, Mo.; Fremont, Neb.; Bay City,  
Mich.; Menomonie, Wis.; and River Falls, Wis. Congratulations to Judy Sidwell of Cincinnati,  
recently elected Ohio State Coordinator, and Delores Elliott, new Minnesota State Coordinator.  
Attention Chapter Presidents: We are considering having a meeting of chapter presidents over a  
weekend this winter. Many have indicated that they would like to have a chance to meet with  

weink