DO IT NOW wishes to thank David Castro for his contribution to this issue.

Statement of Management
and Ownership

Title of publication: Do it NOW

Date of filing: September 5, 1975

Frequency of issue: Bi-monthly

Location of office of publication: NOW National Office,
5 S. Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603

Location of headquarters or general business offices of
the publishers: NOW National Office, 5 S. Wabash,
Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603

Publisher, owner: NOW National Office, 5 S. Wabash,
Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603

Editor: Bernice Friedlander, NOW Public Information
Office, 1266 National Press Building, Washington,
D.C. 20045

Known bondholders, mortgagees, security holders: none

Extent & nature of circulation:

ave. no. actual no.
Cops. ea. cops. single
issue pre- issue nearest
ceding filing date
12 mos.

a. total no. copies printed 48,000 42,350

b. paid circulation:
dealers, vendors 0 0

mail subscriptions 47,500 41,850
c. total paid circulation 47,500 41,850
d. free distribution:

mail 500 500

news agents 0 0
e. total distribution 48,000 42,350

f. office use, left over,
spoiled (included (included
in D.) in D.)

g. total 48,000 42,350

“Hello, Marsha? Have I got marvelous news!
My son is marrying a doctor!”

Coopersmith's cartoon reprinted with permission of
NEW WOMAN, Sept-Oct '75

GIVING WOMEN CREDIT

NOW members throughout the country are extending the women’s
movement philosophy of self-help to the economic area. They,
along with their sisters in other feminist organizations, are using
feminism as the common bond required by law to initiate credit
unions — financial institutions functioning as “money cooperatives”
— to grant each other loans and thus skirt the long-term
discrimination against women in the credit area.

The first feminist credit union was opened two years ago in Detroit,
Michigan. The idea has spread rapidly across the nation, and
feminists in San Diego, New Haven, Dallas, Harrisburg, Los Angeles,
Pittsburgh, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Washington, D.C., have
organized their own credit unions. All but one includes one or more
chapters of NOW in their field of membership.

Joann Parrent, an original founder of the Feminist Credit Union in
Michigan, and a recent recipient of the state’s NOW Feminist of the
Year award, pointed out that the credit union movement offers a
swifter means to women’s financial independence than traditional
financial institutions.

In a credit union, people with a common bond unite to save their
money and grant low-cost loans to each other. Both savings
dividends and interest rates are determined by the group; any
profits realized are returned to members at year-end through ad-
ditional dividends or rebates. The average interest rate on loans in
feminist credit unions is 12%; savings dividends are 5%-6%. Every
credit union must be chartered by the state or federal government,
which sets ceilings on interest and dividends and guidelines for
business transactions.

Because of its self-help concept, a credit union is “easy to start,”
says Joann. “We are a grassroots type of organization. People who
have not had any financial experience can join and become part of
our savings and loan cooperative.”

A feminist credit union obviously offers more empathy to a woman
seeking a loan than a bank official. Because women have been
denied opportunities to establish collateral, in a feminist credit union
an applicant’s character recommendation counts strongly. And she
need not disguise her reason for the loan, whether it be for a small
business, abortion, or consumer appliance.

The mushrooming interest by other feminists in the concept of
credit unions has led the eight existing feminist credit unions to form
an alliance to provide direction for the economic development of the
women’s movement. This Feminist Economic Network currently
counts 5200 women as members, with $1.2 million in assets.

Eight other feminist credit unions — from North Carolina to
Washington state, and Toronto, Canada — are scheduled to open
within the next few months. In September, Manhattan will see the
First Feminist Credit Union for the Greater New York area, and one
of the giant groups in the Network will be formed. Fourteen par-
ticipating feminist organizations, including five NOW chapters, are
cited in the charter.

As the Network develops its financial capacity, it will expand its op-
portunities for women. “Later, we intend to have the network invest
in businesses, films, whatever is lucrative,” said Joann.

And in this way, the credit union movement is seen by enterprising
feminists as the economic base for the women’s movement.

The Feminist Economic Network will be represented at the NOW
Convention in October in Philadelphia, where a spokeswoman will
answer questions. Feminists interested in obtaining information on
organizing their own credit union should contact their state Credit
Union League, or the Credit Union National Association, 1617 Sher-
man Avenue, Box 431, Madison, Wisconsin 53701.

—30—