FULL EMPLOYMENT ...NOW

-

WHAT IS THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND  
FULL EMPLOYMENT ACT?

The Equal Opportunity and Full Employment Act guarantees: “a  
situation under which there are useful and rewarding employment  
opportunities for all adult Americans willing and able to work.”

This new definition of full employment is very progressive, contrary  
to the current practice of setting a tolerable level of official em-  
ployment for a narrowly defined labor force.

The Full Employment Act:

@ provides explicit executive, legislative and judicial machinery for  
the development and implementation of national policies and  
programs necessary to guarantee FULL EMPLOYMENT for all.

@ addresses itself to the specific problems of disadvantaged  
groups (i.e. women, minorities and older people) that must be  
remedied in order to overcome economic discrimination.

@ supplements the Employment Act of 1946 by relating the at-  
tainment and maintenance of genuine full employment to the  
restraint of inflation, the enlargement of social justice, the  
promotion of small business and competitive private enterprise,  
and other essential national purposes and priorities.

@ requires the President to submit a program to reduce unem-  
ployment to the temporary level of 3% or less within 18 months.

@ provides for the federal government to become the employer of  
last resort.

Over the last two years increasing unemployment has had a par-  
ticularly serious effect on women and minority workers. In many in-  
stances, we have seen our hard-earned gains completely wiped  
out, and in countless cases we view with diminishing hope the op-  
portunities for women who wish to re-enter the job market or who  
had anticipated long overdue promotions or transfers into better  
paying jobs.

The interrelationship between unemployment and discrimination  
becomes clear as we view the disproportionately high unem-  
ployment rates of women and minority workers. The growing fear of  
unemployment by white males has resulted in attacks on the prin-  
ciple of affirmative action, cries of ‘reverse discrimination” and  
other evidence of white male backlash.

Because of grave concern for the effects of unemployment on the  
lives of women, six of NOW’s National Task Forces — Em-  
ployment/Compliance, Women & Poverty, Minority Women and  
Women’s Rights, Older Women, Labor Unions, and Implications of  
Feminism on the American Economic System — are working in con-  
junction with the NOW Legislative Office to gain passage of the  
Equal Opportunity and Full Employment Act (H.R. 50 in the House  
and Senate bill S.60). At the last meeting the NOW National Board  
voted to make the Full Employment Act a legislative priority.

WHY IS THE FULL EMPLOYMENT ACT  
A WOMEN’S ISSUE?

The Equal Opportunity and Full Employment Act addresses itself to  
the basic issue of the economic survival of women and minorities.  
Because full employment is basic to equal opportunity, this bill is of  
crucial importance to every American woman.

The Full Employment Act guarantees every American the right to  
“useful paid employment at fair rates of compensation.” It is a giant  
stride towards insurance from dependence on any other person for  
economic reasons.

Features of the Act relevant to women:

@ defines full employment to encompass both full and part time  
jobs. This is of great importance to people with heavy family  
responsibility and to older people a majority of whom are women.  
It also includes those not in the labor force as customarily  
measured, i.e. homemakers.

@ provides adequate day care facilities within reach of all families.  
This will allow men and women equal opportunity to seek em-  
ployment outside the home.

@ recognizes the extent of involuntary unemployment and un-  
deremployment for women that results from the present  
unresponsive system. This problem is particularly acute for  
minority and older women.

@ recognizes the loss of productive labor power as a result of  
discrimination.

@ realizes the necessity for special assistance to those suffering  
from present and past discrimination (i.e. women, minorities and  
older people) who may face special obstacles in finding and  
holding useful employment.

@ forbids discrimination in any program funded in whole or in part  
with money available under this Act.

@ rejects the concept of increased unemployment as a suitable  
method for fighting inflation. This approach harms women and  
minorities first and most severely because these groups have  
been historically the “last hired and first fired.”

@ addresses the problem of structural unemployment and the need  
to aid the “hard core” unemployed, a large proportion of whom  
are disadvantaged female heads of households.