VOLUME VII, NO. 5

Editor: Bernice Friedlander

SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER, 1975

It’s Our Revolution NOW!
NATIONAL CONFERENCE CONVENES OCT. 24

The 8th National NOW Conference will begin with a parade through
center city Philadelphia in the heart of “America’s most historic
Square Mile.” A two-hour program will be presented including music
and street theatre by feminists, and the reading of the Seneca Falls
Declaration of Sentiments and the 1876 Declaration of the Rights of
Women. Noted feminists, all NOW members, will speak as a part of
this program focusing on how far we have to go to reach full
equality.

In the Bicentennial City, women will be celebrating far less than one
hundred years of suffrage and will be demanding as yet unattained
constitutional equality. Our presence will let the city, the nation and
the world know — It’s Our Revolution NOW!

The historic march will begin at noon in front of the Bellevue Strat-
ford Hotel and reach the Benjamin Franklin Hotel at 12:15 PM. The
rally itself will begin at 1:00 PM at Independence Mall.

See Page 6 for Details

Chapters, states, regions and task forces are invited to parade un-
der their own banners in the march preceding the Independence
Mall rally. Please notify the Conference Committee if this is your in-
tent so that proper arrangements can be facilitated.

Come, raise your voices, lend your support. Remember, IT’S OUR
REVOLUTION NOW!!

NOW SEEKS JUSTICE IN SILKWOOD CASE

Karen Silkwood was an active union member of the Oil, Chemical,
and Atomic Workers Union at the Kerr-McGee plutonium factory in
Crescent, Oklahoma where she was a laboratory assistant.

Deeply concerned about the safety hazards in the plant, she
testified in September, 1974 before the Atomic Energy Commission
on 73 worker contamination incidents. On November 13, 1974, she
was killed in an automobile crash while delivering papers and
photographs which documented her concern about plant safety
hazards to a union official and a reporter from the New York Times.
Her documents disappeared from the car.

Police reports say she fell asleep at the wheel, but private accident
reports indicate that she was hit from the rear and forced off the
road.

On August 26, 1975, representatives from NOW visited the Justice
Department urging that the investigation of Karen Silkwood’s death
be re-opened.

The August 26 NOW delegation included President Karen DeCrow;
Cathy Irwin, PR Vice President; Kitty Tucker, D.C. Legislative Coor-
dinator and the initiator of the Silkwood project; and Sara Nelson,
Labor Union Task Force Coordinator. Four men represented the
Criminal Division of the Justice Department.

We expressed our personal and organizational concern for the
Karen Silkwood case and asked them what was causing delay in the
10-month investigation of the case. We asked them about the
poisoning of Karen, her death, the disappearance of her documents,
the mystery of scattered uranium pellets on the Kerr-McGee plant
grounds in December, and other serious health, safety and security
violations at the plutonium factory. One by one they told us these in-
vestigations were closed — and with no results. No matter how we
raised the issues and violations, no matter how we posed the
questions, we got empty answers.

We then asked the Justice officials about the violations of unfair
labor practices at the Kerr-McGee plant. Of the three Oil, Chemical
and Atomic Workers Union leaders, Karen is dead, one was fired,
and the third was transferred to a removed section of the plant. All
employees were subjected to lie detector tests conducted by
management. The Justice Department officials claimed that the in-
vestigation of these practices was still in process, but as of August
28, 10 months after the start of the investigation, the Oklahoma
union leaders had not been interviewed about these violations.

Lack of respect on the part of officials for Karen Silkwood and her
work pervaded the discussion. They implied that perhaps she never
really had a thick packet of documented evidence which disap-
peared. Perhaps her poisoning had been self-inflicted to discredit
the Kerr-McGee management. The sexist, anti-union implication
was that Karen Silkwood was young, unknown, a factory worker,
insignificant — maybe a kook.

The laudatory work which she began by testifying before the Atomic
Energy Commission on safety violations was thus subtly reduced to
acts with no credibility or substance. When we raised concerns
about the unsolved aspects of the case, we were told, “You watch
too much television.”

When we reached the street, after a very unsatisfactory 90-minute
meeting with the Justice officials, we were met by many members of
the press. Reporters from the Oklahoma and Washington
newspapers, from CBS, NBC, ABC, UPI, AP, the New York Times
had waited for over an hour to hear the results of our meeting.
Outraged, we announced that the Justice Department had either
been grossly negligent or involved in a cover-up. An appalling in-
justice has been done to a courageous union woman who put her
life on the line for all of us. Karen Silkwood is a folk hero of our time.

The health and safety issues here are a matter of survival for all men
and women subjected to dangerous working conditions. Without
(See Silkwood, p. 5)