SPOTLIGHT NOW...

< SHELLEY FERNANDEZ

GLORIA C. HEWITT

(no photo available at presstime)

Gloria Hewitt was a convening member of  
the Missoula Chapter of NOW and cur-  
rently serves as Montana State Legislative  
Coordinator. In this capacity she is actively  
involved in ERA activity. She arranged  
testimony on behalf of NOW on rape  
legislation and ERA implementation le-  
gislation. Recently, Gloria helped arrange  
and coordinate a State Abortion Con-  
ference in Montana.

A full professor of Mathematics at the  
University of Montana, Gloria received her  
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University  
of Washington. As an educator and  
mathematician, Gloria has served on many  
national boards, committees, and panels.  
She is particularly concerned with issues  
of minority and women’s rights.

A member of the NOW National Board,  
Gloria is Chair of both the Conference Site  
Committee and the Credentials Committee  
of the 8th National Conference.

Shelley Fernandez, a native New Yorker  
who attended college in San Francisco and  
stayed there, is a member of San Francisco  
and Golden Gate NOW Chapters and ser-  
ves as a liaison between them. She is also  
a member of the NOW National Board.

A woman of Mexican American and Jewish  
heritage, Shelley is the founder and past  
Director of the Our Lady of Guadalupe  
Health Center in San Francisco and has  
served as President of Hermanos Latinos,  
a Spanish-speaking Raza organization in  
the Bay Area.

For the past three years, Shelley has  
chaired the San Francisco Bay Area Coun-  
cil for Soviet Jewry and has visited the  
Soviet Union to assist emigrating Jews.

MARY-ANN LUPA

(no photo available at presstime)

Mary-Ann Lupa is an artist who has used  
her skills to help NOW’s National Public  
Relations Committee. A native of Chicago,  
Mary-Ann attended college in Madison,  
Wisconsin, where she was a leader in the  
march for open housing (“pre-F:  
Groppi”).

As Chicago Chapter President from 1971-  
73, Mary-Ann focused on membership  
development and passage of the ERA. She  
is completing her first term on the NOW  
National Board.

An advocate of direct action programs,  
Mary-Ann believes there must be greater  
emphasis on that in the strategy for ERA  
passage. “Politicians have a clear choice  
to vote for or against women in those  
unratified ERA states. We all need to  
demonstrate our dissatisfaction with the  
irresponsibility of legislators who have  
voted ‘NO’ for equal rights.

Sometimes Mary-Ann can be found on the  
tennis court, but her all-consuming hobby  
is and always has been “people.”

She has also led protests in front of the  
Soviet consulate in San Francisco.

Employed as an elementary school vice  
principal, Shelley is concerned with the  
problem of sexism in textbooks and the fur-  
thering of bilingual and bi-cultural  
programs.

Shelley holds a Brown Belt in Jujitsu  
Self Defense, which she earned while liv-  
ing and studying in Japan for several years. She  
believes that training in Judo has given her  
self-confidence, inner strength, and a unity  
of mind and body which helps her to  
grow and develop in NOW. For relax-  
ation, Shelley enjoys reading Spanish and  
Japanese language newspapers and liter-  
ature.

< ELAINE LATOURELL

Twice elected to the NOW National Board  
from Seattle, Elaine Latourell teaches ar-  
chitecture and planning at the University of  
Washington and maintains her own  
business as an urban development con-  
sultant and architect.

Elaine was NOW Chapter President in  
Seattle in 1972 when federal and state  
ERA’s were passed. She initiated task for-  
ces in her chapter on child care, poverty,  
and justice for women as offenders and  
victims. She lobbied extensively for laws  
on joint community property management,  
expanding credit laws to include sex  
discrimination and housing.

Last fall, Elaine was responsible for writing  
and submitting a $21,000 proposal to the  
Washington Commission for the  
Humanities. It was funded, and she co-  
directed the project.

Elaine believes that NOW is the only  
organization in the country that can ef-  
fectively demand that women be  
recognized as a client for the federal  
money slated to be spent in communities.  
“Women have the least access to cars,  
jobs, health care, child care, and housing.  
One solution to the problem is lobbying  
every budget process in the country,” she  
says.

CORRECTION

Martha Buck has asked DO IT NOW to clarify her  
bio which appeared in the July/August issue.  
Says Martha: “I was not alone in organizing the  
NJ NOW chapters into a State organization, but  
worked with Deborah Hart and hosts of other  
NOW-NJ women.”