NOW POWER COMES TO THE STEEL INDUSTRY

In cooperation with National Compliance Task Force Coordinator Lynne Darcy and other NOW  
officers, Chicago NOW and Southwestern Pennsylvania NOW Chapters have initiated actions  
seeking to improve the status of women in the steel industry.

The actions followed closely press reports that the steel companies’ plans to correct job discrimina-  
tion within the industry did not include women. In discussions with the Justice Department,  
NOW Legal Vice President Judith Lonnquist was assured that the problems of women are and will  
be included in all negotiations with the steel industry.

“Since women are presently less than 5% of the workers in the steel industry, we are particularly  
concerned that the hiring goals for women at all job levels be set sufficiently high to redress this  
gross imbalance,” Ms. Lonnquist said. “We shall continue to watchdog the settlement and will not  
tolerate anything but the best possible pact. If the agreement is inadequate, we shall take what-  
ever steps we can to see that the rights of women are protected.”

Chicago NOW sponsored a public meeting in Gary, Indiana with women of United Steelworkers  
Local 1066 — “an important first step toward joint action of NOW and union women” (Chicago  
NOW newsletter, ACT NOW). The meeting, attended by many Chicago NOW members, National  
Board members Mary Jean Collins-Robson and Kathy Rand, as well as representatives of the EEOC,  
the Department of Defense, Gary Human Relations Commission, the Indiana Civil Rights Com-  
mission and the Wage and Hour Division, was highly successful. Over thirty union women of those  
in attendance responded to NOW’s call for a committee to take action on the job discrimination  
complaints aired at the meeting and to plan further actions.

Southwestern Pennsylvania NOW Chapters, in separate but related actions, have filed a complaint  
against U.S. Steel, following attempts at negotiation by the NOW Chapters.

In negotiation sessions, the Pennsylvania chapters report, officials of U.S. Steel stated that manage-  
ment policy is to award fringe benefits differentially on the basis of sex. When the NOW repre-  
sentatives pointed out that this is prohibited by Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, one company  
officer said, “The law is absurd.”

“This is the third major challenge to established discrimination against women in Pittsburgh  
that NOW has initiated. The Pittsburgh Press and the University of Pittsburgh ultimately  
learned that the laws against sex discrimination apply to them,” commented Jo Ann Evans  
Gardner, NOW Eastern Regional Co-Director, implying that the steel companies will also learn.

The Pennsylvania NOW members also met with officers of Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp. with  
more positive results.

Both Chicago NOW and the Southwestern Pennsylvania NOW Chapters received excellent press  
coverage resulting from the steel industry actions, with articles appearing in local press as well as  
Associated Press articles with national circulation.