WASHINGTON BLUE SHEET

News from the NOW LEGISLATIVE OFFICE  
1107 National Press Building  
Washington, D. C. 20004  
(202) 347-2279  
Ann Scott, V. P. Legislation  
CONTENTS:

. Lobbying as a Chapter Action Program:

. Abortion Amendment Strategy

. ERA News.

. Minimum Wage Alert — Presidential Veto.

. The “Traveling Road Show”.

. Coalition on Human Needs and Budget Priorities — Labor HEW appropriations veto alert.

Oahwhd—

YOU ARE NOW’S LOBBYIST: LOBBYING AS A CHAPTER ACTION PROGRAM

This is the month your chapter will probably be deciding on its program for the year. It is vitally

important that lobbying your Congresspersons be a part of that program. The lobbying that
really counts is the lobbying that you and your chapter do at and from home — not only indivi-
dually through letters and calls to your legislators’ offices, but as a chapter by meeting with
them at home. Our efforts in Washington depend on you.

What follows is a suggested program for your chapter to lobby your Representative. You may

want to adapt it for your state legislators also, with help from your State Legislative Coordinator,

who may also be arranging for meetings with your Senators. (We are grateful to the State
Legislative Coordinators from California — Geri Sherwood, Michigan — and Illinois for some
of the materials used here.)

This kind of lobbying is not only what makes our efforts possible in Washington, but is the kind
of service your chapter can and should provide for its members and prospective members.

PLANNING THE MEETING

Pre-planning the meeting makes for the best results. As a chapter, decide what the goals are
for your meeting (opening up communications with your Representative’s office, getting a
commitment to oppose the abortion amendment and discharge petition, supporting credit
legislation, childcare, etc. — your chapter legislative coordinator and other task force coordina-
tors will have materials from their task forces). Plan for several of you to go — four or five at
the most — your Legislative Task Force person, President, relevant Task Force Coordinators
might be your choices. Decide on what points you want to cover — probably no more than
three — and divide up the topics so that one person leads the discussion on each point. Get to-
gether or prepare materials on each point. If you are nervous, role-play the meeting before
you go, trying to anticipate questions or objections to your program your Representative may
have. (She/he may surprise you and be very receptive!) Try to have someone in your sortie
of the same political party as your Representative.

ARRANGE THE MEETING  
Call or write your Representative’s home office, explain who you are, and that you want to

have a meeting next time she/he is in town. List the topics you want to cover and who will be
attending from the chapter, and what their chapter functions are.