ABORTION AMENDMENT STRATEGY

Task Force on Reproduction & Its Control  
Jan Liebman, Coordinator  

P. O. Box 40542  

Palisades Station  

Washington, D. C. 20016  

(This local action is outlined for the 30 ratified states. Members in the 20 unratified states will  
want to concentrate efforts on the E. R. A. and not confuse the two issues. The opposition  
is trying to connect them to defeat the E. R. A.)  

STATUS REPORT ON ABORTION  

The last two Do It Now Blue Sheets have contained information on the Constitutional Amend-  
ment on Abortion from the Reproduction Task Force and the Legislative Office. The newest  
developments concern who will control the hearing process in the Senate Judiciary Committee.  
Senator James Eastland (D-Miss.) has recently decided to co-sponsor the Buckley Constitutional  
Amendment to guarantee the Right-To-Life of the fetus. As Chairman of the Senate Judiciary  
Committee, Senator Eastland could use his power to take hearing authority on the Constitutional  
Amendment away from Senator Birch Bayh (D-Ind.). (He has already bypassed Senator Bayh  
by holding hearings on the Constitutional Amendment on Busing.) Senator Bayh states that his  
mail is running very pro-amendment at this time and that other Senators are beginning to exper-  
ience pressure also.  

PURPOSES AND FOCUS:  

This local action outline has a target: we want our Congresspersons to oppose the Constitutional  
Amendments on Abortion and support the Supreme Court decision. Always keep that target in  
sight! NOW chapters should engage in as much local lobbying at the home offices of Senators  
and Congresspersons as is possible. We also need to identify and develop the strong community  
support of individuals and groups outside NOW for the Supreme Court decision on abortion.  
Remember, the opposition intends to do the same thing!  

TACTICS  

The opposition will be using all the emotionalism they can muster from the very beginning,  
through color slide shows, color picture books, and pickled fetuses. NOW should begin our  
present campaign by giving legal, rational arguments against the Amendment. All NOW educa-  
tional efforts — speeches, television appearances, flyers — should have the goals of generating  
mail to Senators and Congresspersons which demonstrates that community support exists for  
the Supreme Court Decision and against the Constitutional Amendment. Take stationery and  
stamps with you to meetings and get people to write on the spot!