. .. The Rape Crisis Center of Sarasota  
and Sarasota NOW have been raising funds  
in support of Debra Sue Lacy, a woman  
who stood trial on charges of first degree  
murder in the shooting death of her step-  
father. The defense showed through wit-  
nesses’ accounts that Debra was the vic-  
tim of brutal rapes and beatings by her  
step-father from the age of 11 when her  
mother died of cancer. Her sisters and  
brothers testified of their own brutalization  
at the hands of the same man. Only  
through NOW fundraising action was the  
defense able to afford the services of a  
nationally known psychiatrist who testified  

NEWS  

that years of living in a pathological en-  
vironment had created a state of mind in  
Debra where her only way out was an act of  
violence. The jury brought a verdict of not  
guilty against Debra by reason of insanity.  
More money is needed to pay for  
rehabilitative and therapeutic programs  
planned.  

... Greater Springfield (MA) NOW, a new  
chapter in the western part of the state  
published their first newsletter in Sep-  
tember. The Chapter has started a feminist  
literature group which meets to discuss  
feminist books and poetry. They compare  
writing styles of various authors as well as  
the authors’ philosophies and attitudes  
toward life. A future goal of the literature  
group is to compile a list of books relevant  
to feminism . . . A new NOW chapter has  
begun in Coeur D’Alene, ID.  
Congratulations to those new members. . .  
. Memphis (TN) NOW maintains a sales  
table for jewelry, buttons, bumper stickers,  
stationery and T-Shirts at their chapter  
meetings. The sales table has allowed the  
chapter to raise money to pay off debts  
and reinvest in more items for sale. The  
chapter is also selling bumper stickers on a  
nationwide basis and plans to sell zippered,  
hooded parkas silk-screened by local  
members at the National Conference in  
Philadelphia.  

... Atlanta NOW has filed suit with EEOC  
against C & S Bank, First National and Trust  
Company of Georgia for sex discrimination  
in hiring, promotion and training after a 7  
month study... .Atlanta NOW’s good deed  
in July was redecorating a room at the  
Churches Home for Business Women.  
They turned a “drab, dirty, depressing  
room into a cozy, cheerful place for tired  
new-in-town women to stay.” It is called  
the International Women’s Year room and  
includes a plaque stating that Atlanta  
NOW donated it. . . . Karen Coolman,  
Florida State legislator and NOW board  
member, spoke at the Oklahoma State  
NOW conference and outlined strategy for  
the passage of ERA. Karen led the Florida  
fight for ERA. . . . Tallahassee NOW held its  
summer seminar on Women in Politics in  
the House Chambers of the Capitol  

Building at Tallahassee. Panel discussions  
and workshops covering every phase of  
campaigning for political office from fi-  
nancing to election day were featured.  

: . . St. Louis' two NOW chapters are in-  
volved in a heavy softball tournament.  
North St. Louis County NOW defeated  
Metropolitan St. Louis NOW 14 to 8 in the  
first game. The winning team will be  
awarded a NOW softball trophy. . . . In-  
dianapolis NOW members are observing  
United Way allocation hearings to deter-  
mine the extent of the inequities in the  
funding of male/female oriented organ-  
izations. Since it is known that women’s  
organizations receive less United Way  
support than do men’s groups, Indiana-  
polis NOW plans actions to revise allo-  
cations and add women to the United  
Way board. The chapter is also planning a  
campaign against sexist local advertising,  
an action to improve conditions at the local  
women’s prison and a campaign to  
establish affirmative action programs in  
local companies.  

. . . Chicago NOW is holding a series of  
discussions on the philosophy of social  
change movements highlighting the wo-  
men’s movement and NOW in particular.  
The first topic will be “What do we need for  
social change: A small group of wild-eyed  
revolutionaries or a mass-based grass  
roots organization?” In addition, the chap-  
ter’s membership drive added 69 new  
members in seven weeks! . . . Columbus-  
Fort Benning (OH) NOW’s Education TF  
has produced a very successful slide show  
which was presented to various college  
classes and civic groups. A feature article  
on the Education TF project was written for  
the Columbus Enquirer. The chapter has  
also been operating a vital Rape Crisis  
Hotline which is being advertised on local  
radio stations and in local newspapers... .  
Gainesville (FL) NOW held a discussion on  
“The Pill: Agent of Help or Harm,” and learned  
of a newly discovered “harm” of the  
Pill — diabetic type changes in the pill  
user’s metabolism.  

... A newly convened, West Palm Beach  
(FL) NOW chapter visited the Women's  
Section of the Palm Beach County Jail to  
study conditions there and explore some  
alternatives to jail such as half-way houses.  
. . . South Brevard and Central Brevard  
(FL) NOW chapters are sponsoring the  
second annual Emerging Woman Art Show  
in October to celebrate International  
Women’s Year.  

... Tulsa (OK) NOW has filed EEOC com-  
plaints against ten restaurants which  
refuse to hire women in the evenings —  
when the tips are better!  

... Northern Virginia NOW Employment  
TF in conjunction with TransCentury Corp.  
will sponsor a Career Empowerment for  
Women Seminar Course as a chapter fund-  
raiser. The program is an alternative to the  

Something New  
From Phoenix  

Phoenix NOW certainly recognizes  
the problem shared by many chap-  
ters concerning good financial plan-  
ning. We have recently changed our  
financial structure and now are able  
to give monthly expense stipends to  
two of our members.  

Under our old structure each Task  
Force requested monies of the  
general fund to meet the needs of  
their projects. In order to protect the  
financial interest of the chapter, the  
Board then had to decide if the Task  
Force’s needs warranted the  
request. We feel, however, that the  
Task Force should set its own finan-  
cial priorities, being guided by the  
Board.  

Therefore, we reversed the struc-  
ture. We now require each Task Force  
to contribute 5% of its gross reve-  
nues to the general fund to cover  
overhead expenses and special pro-  
jects. We also require that each Task  
Force realize a profit for themselves  
at 10% of the gross revenues. With  
the 85% balance of the Task Force's  
gross revenues, we have been able  
to reimburse all out-of-pocket ex-  
penses including transportation and  
child care.  

We feel we can now actively en-  
courage participation of all women in  
all facets of our work. We hope other  
chapters will follow our lead in this  
area. For questions and comments  
please contact: Phoenix Chapter—  
NOW, Post Office Box 11344,  
Phoenix, Arizona 85061  

—Brenda Haskins  

DO IT NOW is interested in hearing  
of federal grants received by NOW  
chapters and sharing this informa-  
tion with our sisters in other chap-  

ters. Please send this information to  
Bernice Friedlander, Editor, Do It  
NOW, 1266 National Press Building,  
Washington, D.C. 20045. Thank  
you.  

DO IT NOW is published by the National  
Organization for Women, 5 South  
Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603.  
Editor: Bernice Friedlander. Assistant  
Editor and layout: Helena M. Strauch.  
Research for this issue: Susan Hodges.  
Second-class postage paid at Chicago, IL  
60603. Address advertising correspon-  
dence to DO IT NOW, NOW Public in-  
formation Office, 1266 National Press -  
Building, Washington, D.C. 20045. Sub-  
scription rate: $2.00 annually. Post-  
master: Send 3579 Forms to 5 South  
Wabash, Suite 1615, Chicago, IL 60603.  

inherently discriminatory toward women.