ERA NEWS  
MARYLAND STATE ERA  

Maryland voters approved a State ERA by Referendum in May 1972. The State ERA  
went into effect July 1972. The State Legislature re-convened in January 1973.  

SENATOR STEERS (voted Federal ERA) went through the Maryland Code with a computer  
and simply pulled out those sections of the law which referred to sex in any way. His  
strategy was to merely change the language throughout the entire code. In some areas this  
formula worked rather well, in others — notably domestic law — this method proved to be  
disastrous, resulting in anything but equality.  

The Steers Bills caused quite an uproar and immediately, everyone concerned began  
looking for other ways of implementation of the ERA.  

1) Delegate Charles Blumenthal, who had previously sponsored the ERA ratification  
in the House, came up with a resolution to give the Attorney General power of  
declaratory judgment over the ERA. For various reasons, such as slowness,  
inconsistency, and the basic illegality of such a resolution, NOW and other groups  
opposed this method. The resolution was killed in committee.  

2) The Women’s Law Center (Baltimore) and the Maryland State Commission on the  
Status of Women screened the “Steers Bills.” The Bills were separated into three  
categories: good, recommended; mediocre, not recommended; hopelessly  
inadequate, not recommended. NOW adopted these recommendations and with  
the coordination of Casey Hughes, State Coordinator, Sylvia Wright, State Legis-  
lative Coordinator, and Ellen Luff, NOW member and attorney. Basically  
speaking the goals were accomplished in regard to these bills.  

3) Maryland NOW reports that actually most legislators were anxious to support  
good legislation, but the Steers Steamroller caused considerable confusion and  
tempers grew short on all sides. The solution to this quagmire was to call a halt  
to legislation implementation and provide for a Governor’s Commission to study  
and recommend legislation for the January 1974 session.  

LEGISLATIVE OFFICE STATE ERA IMPLEMENTATION FILES  

The NOW Legislative Office is currently designing a file system to incorporate State ERA  
action on implementation. This file will provide information on studies, action, persons  
involved with State ERA implementation. Please forward all information to the Legislative  
Office concerning your state. Ratification of the ERA is NOW’s priority! However, politics  
does not work in a vacuum as illustrated by the Maryland Case described above. The Phyllis  
Schlafly Report/May listed a “horror” story on Maryland. This has been mailed by the  
Anti’s to all state legislators in Indiana and Louisiana. The Report listed 17 “horror” bills —  
only one of those listed actually passed (and that was one on protective legislation).  

With this information we will be able to act as a referral service for NOW members and coordi-  
nators lobbying for implementation. According to our information, the Maryland Governor’s  
Commission for implementation is the first of its kind. This may be helpful to other states  
planning implementation. Contact Maryland State Coordinator for more information:  

Casey Hughes, 1400 Bayside Drive, Edgewater, MD 21037.  

~ 6B —