‘“YOU ARE NOW’S LOBBYIST’’

Ann London Scott (1929-1975)  
NOW Legislative Vice-President (1971-1975)

“Congress shall make no law...

abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.”

Congressional DISTRICT

by Elizabeth Cox

CHAPTERS AS A POLITICAL POWER BASE

NOW is a national political power with chapters in all of the 435  
Congressional Districts. This means that every chapter, even new  
or small ones, shares in that power and influence across the country.  
The political power base for Congress is the Congressional District.  
The feminist power base for NOW is the Chapter. Our goal is for our  
power base (chapter) to have influence over their power base  
(Congressional District).

@ First we establish our own opinions through Chapter Actions by  
raising feminist issues to the community. A Chapter Action sur-  
veying the lack of, or detailing the inadequate facilities, care and  
cost for abortions in the community publicizes our opinions about  
crucial health care for women. This action shows that we are  
opinion makers. A Chapter Action to solve this problem might start  
an abortion referral system for women, or abortion counseling, or  
even an abortion clinic. However, these solutions only use our own  
resources and do not force the community to assume the respon-  
sibility for re-directing community resources to implement feminist  
goals.

@ Next we force the community to change or bring new resources  
to implement feminist goals, through a Chapter Action using our  
political power by successfully demanding the service be provided  
or that better facilities and care be provided. A Chapter Action to  
change a city ordinance, or county hospital policy, or even change a  
state or national law to achieve our goal is a use of our political  
power in the community. This change leads to shifting the use of the  
community's available resources, or brings into the community new  
resources, i.e., hospital or clinic space, trained medical personnel’s  
jobs and time.

How do we use this political power in the CD? By organizing, lob-  

bying and raising issues in elections.

@ First, if we must change a hospital policy in order to provide abor-  
tions, for example, we have to organize and recruit support in the  
community to pressure the hospital decision makers (board). This  
type of action shows our political power base is growing to include  
other groups, i.e., AMA, Ministers Council, etc.

@ Second, we may have to coordinate a lobbying effort directed to  
the hospital policy makers to bring about the wanted change. This  
shows that we have the ability to deliver people and time and  
training which are valuable political resources.

@ Third, we may even have to raise the issue in the selection of the  
new board members, or the next Congressional election. This  
shows our ability to influence just who the decision makers in the  
community are going to be.

How do we know Chapter Actions in the CD have influenced  
Congress? By looking at the record. Starting with Rep. Larry  
Hogan (R-MD) who introduced the first Right to Life amendment in  
the 93rd Congress, members of the House who consistently sup-  
ported the “Right to Life” movement were defeated at the polls.  
25% of the 79 members are no longer in Congress. On the other  
hand, all 37 who consistently voted with Right to Choose were  
reelected (one retired).

@ The 93rd Congressional Voting Record showed a pattern of loss  
of abortion rights during 1973 with a slow but steady build-up by  
Right to Choose forces to defeat crippling anti-abortion amendments  
to legislation. In the 94th Congress we defeated the few attempts to  
amend legislation with anti-abortion clauses. Because of NOW’s  
Chapter political power in CD these election statistics and voting  
record show achievement for NOW goals. “Chapters as a political  
power base” simply means that we are in control of our lives in  
the community.

*— U.S. Constitution, First Amendment

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

by Casey Hughes

NOW AS A POLITICAL POWER

Only one element is necessary to obtain political power — and that  
is the ability to deliver votes in an election. In the long run, that is  
all that influences Congress. The extent that NOW can deliver  
votes is the extent that NOW is politically powerful.

Some traditional mechanisms for delivering votes are not available  
to NOW. Money, which NOW does not have, is an easy way.  
Delivering large blocks of committed votes is another mechanism  
that is not available to NOW, since we constitute, on the average,  
only .02% of the population of a Congressional District. The power  
that we do have is based on how effectively we influence large num-  
bers of voters in our role as public opinion makers and community  
leaders (see CD column).

How does Congress feel our power?

We are a national organization. We have chapters in over 95% of  
the Congressional Districts. Therefore, we can produce results  
from all over the country, and Congress has seen many examples of  
this.

Our members are well informed by the Legislative Office on  
Congressional Action and cannot be fooled. Congress is therefore  
compelled to justify their every action. For example, when we first  
rated Congress on their votes, their reaction was overwhelming.

We have an organized and effective communications system  
enabling us to produce immediate results. Congress knows they  
cannot slip anything by us.

Through the Task Force Coordinators, we can produce expertise  
on any issue relating to women, which no other organization can  
duplicate. Now our advice is sought — we no longer have to push it.

Our Legislative Office staff, CD/DC lobbyists, and chapter and state  
legislative coordinators have become well known for political ex-  
pertise. We have not yet lost a vote in the 94th Congress.  
Congress is well aware that we know when, how, and what to  
deliver.

Finally, and most importantly, Congress saw what happened in the  
1974 elections. Women (and NOW is the recognized leader of the  
women’s movement) were a powerful force in national, state, and  
local elections — and it will be stronger in 1976. Of those mem-  
bers of the 93rd Congress who were not returned to the 94th  
Congress, almost 90% received NOW voting ratings below 50%.

Select priorities: We cannot do everything. If we overextend our-  
selves, we will end up doing nothing well. Our priorities must be  
realistic. Selection of priorities should be based on the overall goals  
of the organization, and should take into account the political  
situation and what our capabilities are.

Establish a pattern of victory: When we put ourselves on the line  
(e.g. when we call for a vote), it should only be when we expect a  
victory. Expectations should be based on realistic vote counts. A  
vote count will usually divide Congress into three categories: 1)  
those who are with us (+), 2) those who are against us (−), and 3)  
those who are uncommitted (?). When we don’t have enough “+’s,”  
we zero in on the “?”’s until we have enough. And don't call for the  
vote until then.

Establish political “bank accounts”: If we do a favor for a  
Congressperson, they are indebted to us. We can then collect  
when we need it. Look for favors you can do. Always take credit.

Having and using power simply means that we are in control of  
our lives rather than having others control us.