NOW And The 94th Congress

The 94th Congress is dealing with many legislative issues of in-

terest to NOW. The following is a synopsis and progress report on

that legislation.

e For copies of a bill — write your Congressperson.

e For NOW’s position on the bill — write to the appropriate Task
Force Coordinator.

e For information on NOW’s lobbying program — write the
Legislative Office.

Title IX: After three years of hard work, intense lobbying, and
anxious waiting, Title IX Regulations are finally in effect! In June
1975, HEW released its long awaited regulations prohibiting any
federal aid recipient from practicing sex discrimination against
students or education employees. Congress had 45 days from that
time to pass a resolution of disapproval or let the regulations take ef-
fect on July 21, 1975.

On June 17, hearings began in the House Subcommittee on Post-
secondary Education, chaired by Representative James O’Hara (D-
MI). Our strongest opposition came from university football
coaches. Casey Hughes presented testimony on behalf of NOW in
conjunction with Holly Knox from the Project on Equal Education
Rights (a project of NOW-LDEF).

On July 8, O’Hara submitted a Concurrent Resolution in his sub-
committee to disapprove portions of the Title IX Regulations and in-
troduced a bill to exempt all revenue-producing sports from Title IX
coverage. WE WERE READY FOR HIM.

The Legislative Office had activated states whose Representatives
were Subcommittee members. And the power of women was
illustrated by the dynamic lobbying efforts of NOW members across
the country. NOW scored a great victory when the Concurrent
Resolution was referred to Representative Augustus Hawkins’ (D-
CA) Subcommittee on Equal Opportunity. The bill was referred back
to O'Hara's Subcommittee. Therefore, no action was taken on the
bill or the resolution before the deadline.

In the midst of all this, an attempt was made through a different
mechanism to destroy Title IX’s success. This attack came in the
form of the Casey Amendment to the Education Appropriations Bill.
It would have exempted physical education classes, certain single
sex groups, and honorary societies. The Amendment was hastily
passed by the House in April, defeated by the Senate committee,
and was voted out in disagreement by the Conference Committee
on July 11. Lobbying forces were again successfully activated and
even Representative Casey (D-TX) admitted, “I have never seen
such lobbying in my life as there has been on this Amendment. This
has been a vociferous and aggressive effort, and in many instances
it has been conducted by very charming lobbyists.” The Casey
Amendment went back to the House where it passed by one vote,
then to the Senate where it was overwhelmingly defeated, and
back to the House for a final resounding defeat.

In conjunction with other organizations who had worked for Title IX,
NOW sponsored a “Title IX Birthday Party” which was to celebrate
our victory and to honor those members of Congress who had sup-
ported us. It was a tremendous success — and well attended by
Congress!

BUT IT’S NOT OVER YET. Several restrictive amendments to Title
IX are awaiting congressional action. O'Hara’s bill (HR 8395) is still
pending before his subcommittee. Sen. John Tower (R-TX) has in-
troduced S. 2106 which would exempt all intercollegiate sports to
the extent that they provide “gross receipts or donations” to sup-
port themselves. This bill will be heard before the Senate Sub-
committee on Education on September 16 and 18. Sen. Helms (R-
NC) has introduced S. 2146, the Equal Educational Opportunity
Amendments of 1975, which would amend Title IX to restrict its
coverage to education programs that are ‘an integral part of the
required curriculum” and which directly receive federal support.
The bill also would prevent HEW from applying Title IX to em-
ployment practices, athletics, and pregnancy rules affecting either
students or teachers. Nor could HEW mandate sex-integrated
schools to use admission tests which are “generally accepted”
as “reasonably related to a proper educational purpose.” WRITE
YOUR SENATORS AND CONGRESSPERSONS ABOUT THESE
ATTACKS ON TITLE IX!

Task Force Coordinator: Mary Ellen Hilliard

Abortion: For one and a half years, the Senate Subcommittee on
Constitutional Amendments has held hearings on Sen. James
Buckley (C/R-NY) and Sen. Jesse Helms’ (R-NC) proposed con-
stitutional amendments to limit or negate the Supreme Court
decision of January 1973 which legalized women's right to choose
abortion.

Sen. William Scott (R-VA) recently introduced a new states-rights
type amendment which is also being considered by the Sub-
committee. Sen. Birch Bayh (D-IN) announced that during Sep-
tember the Subcommittee would meet in closed executive session
to consider the proposed constitutional amendments. We are
cautiously optimistic about the vote. NOW members in the states of
members of the Subcommittee have been lobbying heavily and well.
Task Force Coordinator: Jeanne Clark

Women in the Military: The Defense Procurement Bill, which in-
cludes an amendment allowing women in military academies was
passed out of Conference Committee with our amendment intact.
However, the Senate refused to accept the Conference Report (for
reasons unrelated to our amendment.)

We are reasonably sure that our amendment will survive, but the ef-
fective date when women become eligible to apply to the
academies is being delayed. WRITE YOUR SENATORS AND
CONGRESSPERSONS AND URGE THAT THEY SAVE AN AP-
POINTMENT FOR A WOMAN.

Task Force Coordinator: Pat Leeper

Full Employment Act: This is a legislative priority for NOW and is
described in detail on page 4. The bill was introduced in the
House (HR 50) by Representatives Augustus Hawkins (D-CA) and
Henry Reuss (D-WI) and now has 107 co-sponsors. NOW testified
before Hawkins’ Subcommittee on Equal Opportunities. HR 50 is
expected to be reported sometime this fall. It was introduced in the
Senate (S. 60) by Sen. Hubert Humphrey (D-MN) and now has six
additional co-sponsors: Kennedy (D-MA), Hart (D-MI), Hathaway (D-
ME), Javits (R-NY), Schweiker (R-PA), and Brooke (R-MA). Our
legislative strategy is to line up as many Senate co-sponsors as
possible. WRITE YOUR SENATOR AND URGE HE CO-SPONSOR
S. 60.

Task Force Coordinator: Lynne Darcy

Congressional Clearinghouse on Women’s Rights: CCWR is a
new internal organization established by about 20 House Members
who felt the need to continue educating their peers and colleagues
on women’s rights. NOW member Carol Forbes is the Executive
Director. CCWR is similar to other Congressional groups such as
the Democratic Study Group, Black Caucus, etc. It is a way for
Congressional feminists to pool resources and begin to organize a
block of votes to move legislation through the complicated political
system. Our Goal: 435 Members of the House and 100 Senators in
CCWR. WRITE YOUR CONGRESSPERSONS AND URGE THEM
TO JOIN.