Beeps from the Legal Veep

The persistent ringing of my telephone and the flood of  
mail on my desk lead me to believe that NOW MEMBERS  
HAVE A GREAT MANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING A  
WIDE VARIETY OF ISSUES RELATED TO THE WORK  
OF THE LEGAL VICE PRESIDENT.  

The issues I am addressing here in brief form are an at-  
tempt to provide you with answers to a few of these  
queries.  

I strongly encourage you to continue to bring your ques-  
tions to me during the coming months. Not all of these  
questions will be answered immediately, but be assured  
that they will be reviewed and the information passed on  
to you as quickly as possible.  

... LEGAL COMMITTEE FORMATION — We want to  
develop a working network of legal committees in all units  
of NOW, including chapters, task forces and state  
organizations. The NOW LEGAL REPORTER (a new  
publication) will act as a coordinating link. We will share in-  
formation with each other. Please notify me of your com-  
mittee coordinators.  

... TASK FORCE CASE EVALUATION — Beginning im-  
mediately, requests sent to me for national support  
will be forwarded to the related task force(s) for their  
evaluation. The task forces will evaluate both the feminist  
implications of this litigation and the strength of the case.  
Their cooperating attorneys will assist; this information  
should then be sent to me.  

... LITIGATION PRIORITY EVALUATION — The  
survey-research subcommittee (subtitle) of the legal com-  
mittee will shortly put together and field a pilot survey. If  
you wish to provide input into the project, please contact  
Geri Kenyon or Lee Kefauver, 1750 Culver, Dearborn,  
Michigan 48124. All suggestions and offers of help will be  
welcomed.  

... OUR CORPORATE LEGAL POLICY — Please refer to  
the working paper that was sent to your chapter president.  
Proposals would take corporate legal decisions out of the  
internal political process and power struggles in NOW;  
would assure impartial advice from competent sources.  

... LITIGATION POLICY — Again, please refer to the  
working paper available from your chapter president. My  
proposed elimination of policies requiring case approval  
and supervision by the Legal Vice President. NOW members  
typically do not need supervision since they are talented,  
intelligent, determined and have a high level of feminist  
consciousness. Now that we are so big, it is physically im-  
possible for the Legal Vice President to do this adequately  
and the requirement serves as a bottleneck. My proposal  
includes other strategies to enhance cooperation. Please  
give me your ideas on this working paper.  

... LEGAL COMMITTEE — To be composed of three  
sub-committees. 1—Surveys/Research: To assess litiga-  
tion policies of the membership; 2— Nuts ‘n Bolts: Review  
cases, find people, ideas, where do we go right NOW;  
3— Projection and Design: Will work on design of a com-  
prehensive, long-range litigation strategy.  

... MONEY FOR LITIGATION — Many chapters are in  
desperate need of money to support local litigation pro-  
jects. Cases with national impact are also in desperate  
need of funds. The 1976 NOW budget contains $20,000 for  
litigation — a first! I will entertain fundraising proposals  
for local litigation with the stipulation that the money  
made available be returned if the fundraiser is successful,  
thus enabling others to use it. Cases having national im-  
pact will be supported on the advice of the task forces,  
their cooperating attorneys, and the legal committee  

member assigned to evaluate that case. If you wish to ap-  
ply for financial support, send three copies of all relevant  
case material (briefs, pleadings, research notes, etc.) to  
me.  

... FAX INFORMATION — Your chapter will receive a  
mailing detailing income tax information.  

... NOW/LEGAL DEFENSE AND EDUCATION FUND —  
This corporation supports litigation and education efforts  
which further the goals of NOW and works to obtain funds  
from sources who give to tax-deductible organizations.  
They are now working to obtain funding for a women’s ad-  
vocacy project; when finalized, the total funding will be  
$500,000 of which $30,000 will come from NOW over a two  
year period. The focus of the project will be economic  
security for women.  

... A FEW WORDS AND A LOT OF THANKS  
Although no one has been formally appointed by the Presi-  
dent, the following attorney people have been serving  
generously and diligently and their help has been in-  
valuable thus far: Sandy Jenkins, Deborah H. Badonsky,  
David Copus, Whitney Adams and Margaret Drachsler  
(who delivered NOW’s testimony concerning Supreme  
Court Judge Stephens to the Senate Judiciary Commit-  
tee.) Lee Kefauver, a political science person who is work-  
ing with me on the membership survey of litigation pri-  
orities. All those who have given help and are not mention-  
ed here (and there are many) personal thanks.  

Task Force News  

Criminal Justice  

In its first year of existence, the Criminal Justice Task  
Force has focused on the plight of women in prison and  
the extent of abuse of the grand jury system. Stressing the  
development of alternatives to incarceration, the task force  
urges every chapter to become familiar with the conditions  
of women incarcerated locally. State prisons and county  
jails across the country are facing budget cuts, particularly  
in the area of programming, and volunteer programs pro-  
vided by N.O.W. chapters can help to fill the void.  

Valuable resource people include:  

Marlene Beckman, criminologist at the Corrections Divi-  
sion of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration.  
She is knowledgeable regarding funding available for pro-  
jects and procedures for submitting proposals. Write her at  
the L.E.A.A., 633 Indiana Ave., Washington, D.C. 20531.  

Dr. Ruth Glick, Director, National Study of Women’s  
Correctional Programs, 2054 University Ave., Room 301,  
Berkeley, California 94704, is now analyzing a very large  
scale study of the condition of women prisoners nationally.  
Her phone is (415) 464-0546.  

Judy Avner of the Coalition to End Grand Jury Abuse  
has vital information on the dangers to our civil liberties as  
citizens and feminists through abuse and misuse of the  
grand jury system. Write to her at 300 Atlantic Bidg., 930 F  
Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20004 or call her at (202)  
347-9338.