NATIONAL  
ORGANIZATION  

FOR WOMEN  

March, 1974  

MONTHLY NEWSLETTER OF THE NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN  

EDITOR: Dian Terry VOL. VII, No. 3  
(Application to mail at second class postage is pending at Chicago, Ill.) Subscription rate: $2.00 annually.  

THIS IS YOUR LAST ISSUE OF DO IT NOW UNLESS  
YOU'VE RENEWED MEMBERSHIP BY MARCH 31!  

TO 1974 NOW NATIONAL CONFERENCE ATTENDEES:  

The phenomenal growth of NOW in recent years has been exciting. The prospect of a national  
conference with over 3500 feminists in attendance is exhilarating. For conference coordinators,  
however, planning the conference can be quite a challenge.  

Our growth is a source of pride and strength; it is also the basis of tremendous logistical prob-  
lems. NOW is BIG — too big to be housed in a single hotel — too big to meet in plenary in a  
hotel ballroom — too big to leave the success of our conference to the mercy of last minute  
decisions.  

The headquarters for our conference will be the Rice Hotel in Houston, Texas. Everyone, how-  
ever, cannot sleep there. (The hotel’s not little — we’re BIG.) Overflow housing in other hotels  
is necessary. Whether you stay in the Rice or elsewhere depends on how soon you make your  
room reservations. First come — first served may not be a principle of natural law, but it seems  
the fairest method, and it’s the rule we'll observe.  

Workshops will be conducted in the Rice and plenary sessions in the Albert Thomas Convention  
Center three blocks away. (The hotel ballroom is not small — we’re BIG.) We must get from  
one place to the other somehow, so walking is indicated. (Transportation will be provided for  
persons with physical handicaps.) Wear comfortable shoes, pray for sunshine, and bring an  
umbrella anyway.  

Child care, as usual, will be provided. To assure quality care for your children, and to facilitate  
planning which can make the conference memorable for the boys and girls who attend, you  
must pre-register for child care. We're too big to guess at the number of children to expect.  
Work must be contracted for and extensive arrangements made. So bring your children but  
please let us know how many.  

Your comfort, your convenience, your full enjoyment of an exciting weekend are our primary  
goals. Help us make this conference not just bigger, but better. We need your understanding  
and your cooperation. We pledge you ours. Don’t delay on your registration and hotel reserva-  
tions. DO IT NOW!  

See you in Houston,  

Helen Cassidy & Poppy Northcutt,  

Conference Coordinators