aNOW

mr  
Urdaniza Lory  

Foy  
\  
a Women,  

Howard County (MD) NOW said, “Thank you” in a unique way. They picketed the County Police Department to bring public attention to  

the good work being done by the department to help the victims of rape.  

* Greensboro, NC NOW set August 26 as Equality Day and held a  
festival featuring exhibits of arts and crafts by local women and  
speeches and films on various concerns of women. The day was  
concluded with a march to the County Courthouse where several  
speakers were heard, including State Senator Kathy Sebo.  

* Dallas, TX NOW joined other local women's organizations to  
sponsor Women’s Equality Week. During the week there were  
games, craft and artists’ demonstrations, sports and musical  
presentations, a canoe trip, a drama, and a party honoring men. A  
mobile “women’s care van” was dedicated and made several stops  
throughout the city during the week.  

* DuPage County, IL NOW joined with the local League of Women  
Voters in sponsoring a fair to celebrate the 55th anniversary of  
women’s suffrage entitled ‘Women: Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow.’  
Women emphasized the bicentennial by dressing in the style of that  
period. Included were exhibits, films, and musical entertainment.  

* Boca Raton, FL NOW participated in a fair to celebrate Women’s  
Suffrage Day. NOW sponsored movies “We the Women,” “Making  
Policy, not Coffee.” There were women on hand registering other  
women to vote and informing them about how to become delegates  
to the National Democratic and Republican conventions in 1976.  

* Appleton, WI NOW celebrated with a picnic, inviting the public to  
join NOW in conversation and commemoration. The local chapter is  
currently involved in projects to increase the public’s awareness of  
women's concerns.  

* Fort Lauderdale, FL NOW sponsored a program entitled  
“Women in Government.” State Representative Karen Coolman, a  
NOW National Board member, was the featured speaker.  

* Manatee, FL NOW sponsored a women's day festival featuring  
an art show, workshops, feminist musicians, poets, and singers.  
Workshop subjects included consciousness raising, car main-  
tenance, self-defense, assertiveness, etc.  

* Madison, WI NOW held a Women’s Equality Day rally on the  
steps of the State Capitol with music by Madison's all-girl drum and  
bugle corps and speeches by Madison's Mayor, Paul Soglin; a  
representative from the Governor's Commission on the Status of  
Women, Kathryn Clarenback; Mildred Kreager from Senior Power;  
and Gloria Ziegler from NOW. Mildred Kreager drew a large round  
of applause when she said, “I’d rather be a wrinkled radical than an  
‘old girl.’”  

photo Barbara Beam, Ellicott City Times.  

* Clearwater, FL NOW staged a protest march with the theme of  
“Women Against Violence Against Women.” In front of the County  
Courthouse women listened to speakers from the Pinellas Rape  
Crisis Center and saw a self-awareness/self-defense demon-  
stration.  

* Tampa, FL NOW picketed two Tampa stores protesting the  
discriminatory practice of charging women for alterations to  
clothes while not charging men. Signs read “Men get tailored,  
women get taken” and “Hems for her now.”  

* Poway, CA NOW celebrated Women’s Equality Day with an all-  
day workshop on political action to show how to effect change  
through lobbying techniques.  

* Phoenix, AZ NOW held an outdoor ceremony commemorating  
women’s suffrage. Featured were musical selections, selective  
readings, and guest speakers from local and state government.  

* San Diego, CA pushed CLOUT as the key word in the political  
action conference sponsored by NOW commemorating Women’s  
Equality Day. Officials explained that “Catalyzing conventions, fielding  
candidates and campaigning with professional aplomb, women  
nationwide are acquiring political CLOUT.” Featured speakers were  
Tish Sommers, NOW National Task Force Coordinator on Older  
Women and author of The Not So Helpless Female; San Diego  
Mayor Pete Wilson; Geri Sherwood, NOW Sacramento lobbyist;  
and Maureen O'Connor, San Diego City Councilwoman. Presented  
was a slide show “Beyond the Vote” along with songs and music.  

Women for  
Jobs and Justice  

No  
W 929.9025  

Chicago NOW’s symbol at their August 26 afternoon rally.  

ied