Ee ee ere re

CHAPTER ACTIONS

NYC: The Image of Women in Film

The NOW New York Committee on the  
Image of Women in Film, coordinated by  
Midge Kovacs, is seeking support in its ef-  
forts to make films and film companies  
more responsive to women. The Com-  
mittee has called upon film executives to  
urge them to produce meaningful movies  
about women’s lives, and to allow more  
women to direct, produce, write and  
photograph these films.

The Committee asks NOW women to join  
in a letter writing campaign to film  
executives and companies expressing  
dissatisfaction with the low status and  
portrayal of women in films.

A stockholder resolution has already been  
filed with the Securities and Exchange  
Commission against Columbia Pictures for  
the Fall 1975 Annual Stockholders  
meeting. It calls for ‘guidelines whereby  
management will seek out and develop film  
roles that reflect women’s changing status  
in today’s world.”

In addition, the resolution calls for a woman  
to be appointed to the Board of Directors of  
Columbia Pictures, an improvement in the  
image of women in the film product, and a  
timetable for affirmative action.

The Committee is working with the In-  
terfaith Center for Corporate Responsibility  
on this action and others they plan to un-  
dertake.

The General Services Administration has  
been asked to crack down on those firms  
in the film industry which have government  
contracts but have not submitted affir-  
mative action timetables. For example, Gulf  
& Western is the parent company of  
Paramount Pictures and Gulf & Western is  
a huge government contractor.

For further information contact: Midge  
Kovacs, 100 West 12 Street, New York,  
NY 10011.

—Midge Kovacs

WACO: Fight FCC Rulemaking

Waco NOW urges all NOW members to write to the Federal Com-  
munications Commission, Washington, D.C. 20554 and tell them  
that you do not favor any new ruling that weakens enforcement of  
fair hiring laws for television and radio stations. Every year, TV and  
radio stations with 5 or more workers report the sex and race of  
their employees to the FCC. The public can see this report by  
asking the station. THIS REPORT IS THE BIG REASON WHY YOU  
SEE WOMEN ON TV AND HEAR THEM ON RADIO. It gives the  
public a look at how well broadcasters are obeying equal em-  
ployment laws; it provides evidence for complaints and lawsuits  
which open jobs to women.

A weak Equal Employment Opportunity Rule is now proposed  
by the FCC at the request of the stations. Under this new  
Rule, stations with 15 or less full-time workers won't have to  
file employment reports ever. That’s 80% of the broadcasting  
business — they use lots of part-time help!! Stations with 50  
workers or less won’t have to submit plans, or timetables, for  
hiring more women or minorities at all.

Write and tell the FCC:

I do not favor relaxing employment report rules for any broad-  
casting station. All stations should be required to report race  
and sex of employees annually to the FCC and the public.

I favor an employment report that shows in detail the types of  
jobs, not just broad titles. Some stations list stenographers  
under “Managers” and claim they manage a typewriter.

Stations should set goals for hiring specific numbers of  
women and set specific dates when they will hire them — un-  
til their employment record matches the general population of  
workers.

I favor clear penalties for stations which violate discrimination  
laws, such as fines up to $10,000, and reducing 3-year li-  
censes to 1 year.

A full annual Employment Report is not a big clerical job for a  
broadcaster. TV and radio profits are at an all-time high. A full  
report takes less than an hour to complete. (Some stations  
claim they can’t afford to fill out the Report!)

Any or all of these points are good. The FCC has asked for  
COMMENTS on the proposed new Rule for Equal Employment Op-  
portunity for broadcasting. They especially want to hear from  
women and minorities.

DEADLINE FOR COMMENTS is October 13. REPLY COMMENTS  
(can be the same as COMMENTS) can be sent until October 31.

For further information contact: Pris Meyer, 4424 Athens, Waco,  
TX.

Secretary

Federal Communications Commission  
Washington, D.C.  

20554  

INFORMAL REPLY COMMENT  
ON EEO RULE, DOCKET 20550  

(LIST your points here—DOUBLE SPACE it all.)  

SIGN  

(Tell who you are and what  
your interest is — such as  
women’s group or just  
television viewer.)  

DON'T let the form scare you. THE MOST IMPORTANT thing is TO  
WRITE!  

There are seven Commissioners — one is a woman, Charlotte Reid,  
former Congresswoman and the first woman to wear a pants suit in  
Congress. Another is Black, Benjamin Hooks. Both want to hear  
what minorities and women think about fair employment practices in  
the television business.

LET'S TELL THEM. -24-