NOW’S LEGISLATIVE ACTION HANDBOOK

{Last month's installment no. 1 on Lobbying as a chapter action started our handbook. From time
to time new installments will appear in the Blue Sheet.)

Preparing Testimony

Sooner or later you may want to testify before your city council or a committee of your state
legislature on a bill of interest to NOW, or, if you have a special expertise, we may ask you to
prepare testimony and/or to testify for NOW before a congressional committee.

a. Ask to testify: Write or call the city council or the state committee which has jurisdiction
over the bill, find out if and when hearings are being held (if they’re not, you may want to
push for them), and ask to testify. Ask them to send you a copy of the bill. If you can’t
make the hearing or can't get someone to present the testimony for you, ask to submit
written testimony for the record.

b. Form: Type clearly, double space. Provide enough copies for the entire committee and
the press (usually about forty). Get the testimony in, if possible, two days ahead, so the
committee members can read it. Use offset or instant printing for good reproduction.
Have a front page that says something like this:

Testimony on the Welfare Amendments Act of 1972 (S. 1234) presented

before the Poverty Committee of the Legislature of the State of California,

by Jane Equal on behalf of the National Organization for Women, June, 1972.
In your first paragraph, identify yourself by name and occupation and residence. State
that you are appearing only for NOW, and describe NOW briefly (i.e.):

The National Organization for Women was formed in 1966 for the purpose

of bringing women into full participation in the mainstream of American

life in truly equal partnership with men. With a membership of both men

and women, NOW is the largest feminist organization in the world, with

over 600 chapters, and with members in every state.

c. Content: Start out by stating NOW’s official position on the issue from our Bill of Rights
or from our resolutions taken at our national conferences. Don’t make your testimony
over 4 or 5 pages unless you have very complex, subtle, and relevant arguments. Don’t
cover the whole feminist movement — no legislature is quite ready for that — but just the
information, arguments and statistics that have direct bearing on the bill. Document
your research by citing the source in the text or in footnotes. You can append single
copies of documentation (tables, articles, letters, graphs) for inclusion in the record that
you may want to refer to but not read. Don’t be afraid of making a joke or a forceful
statement, or of using a good quotation. Stick to a few well-documented points rather
than scattering your shots. Make your strongest statements first before they fall asleep
and wind up with a succinct summary and a bit of wit if you can. (The NOW Legislative
Office can provide some model testimony if you write, or you can look in the hearings
record on the ERA).

d. Questioning: You may be cross-questioned. Take your time. If you are asked a legal or
statistical question you can’t answer, don’t bluff. Say frankly you don’t have that
specific information, but will get the answer in two days. Then do it!

e. Press Release: You should also prepare a news release, or have your chapter’s PR person
do it, of preferably one, no more than two pages, summarizing the main points of your
testimony. Distribute to the press for release the day of your testimony. See NOW’s
Press Handbook for suggestions.