other chapter presidents to share problems and experiences. Many presidents said that they found  
the meeting at the regional conference useful. You'll be getting a mailing on this soon, but in the  

meantime, let me know what you think. By the way, if your chapter has recently elected officers  
and hasn't let the National Office and me know, please be sure to do so.  

Newsletter editors: Please, please change my address on your mailing lists. My new address is  
502 W. Roscoe, Chicago, Ill. 60657.  

* * * * * *  

At the December 1-2 Executive Committee meeting in Chicago, Jackie Frost, Southern Regional  
Director, introduced an idea for expanding NOW to reach the large numbers of women and men  
who, statistics show, approve of the goals of the women’s movement. “At our present rate of  
growth, we will continue to add thousands of members each year through the organizing efforts  
of State Coordinators and Regional Directors. There is a clear need for paid field organizers to do  
the work of expanding NOW on a full-time basis. The field organizers would have direct respon-  
sibility to the National Board or Executive Committee, would set goals for increasing chapter  
strength and membership, would ‘know their territory.’” The idea will be presented to the  
February National Board meeting. Your Regional Directors would like to have your suggestions  
and reactions to this idea. Please contact them soon!  

* * * * * *  

FUNDRAISING IDEAS FROM GENE BOYER, FINANCE VICE PRESIDENT, NOW  

The month of February has several commemorative dates which make excellent occasions for  
staging fund-raising events:  

February 4, 1921 — Betty Friedan’s birthday  

February 15, 1820 — Susan B. Anthony’s birthday  

February 16, 1902 — Marian Anderson’s birthday  

February 22, 1892 — Edna St. Vincent Millay’s birthday  
(also the birthday of one G. Washington who may be known to some  
feminists)  

February 28, 1828 — Cynthia Leonard’s birthday (there’s one to look up!)  

Among the outstanding events held by NOW chapters for fund-raising purposes:  

— Luncheon honoring female legislators and other women in public life;  

— Testimonial dinner honoring early suffragists and/or current feminist notables;  

— Feminist art show and sale. (Both Dallas and Chicago chapters have recently held profitable  
art shows.)  

If needed — and if the chapter is willing to share proceeds — the National Treasury can make advance  
loans for working capital for innovative fund-raising events. Contact Finance Vice-President Gene  
Boyer, 218 Front St., Beaver Dam, Wisconsin 53916.  

* * * * * *  

ACCOUNTING & MANAGEMENT SERVICES  

The employment of professional management and accounting services are being considered for the  
national organization, and its sub-units as required. Services are to include payroll preparation,  
government reports, income and disbursement review, inventory and depreciation schedules,  
operating statements, auditing and financial counseling, etc. Services must include availability  

of on-site auditing in major cities where NOW has offices: Chicago, New York and Washington.  
Specifications may be obtained by writing to Gene Boyer, Finance Vice President, 218 Front Street,  
Beaver Dam, Wisconsin 53916.  

* * * * * *