Credit: Maude Scott

NOW Hear This. . 

by Jan Pittman-Liebman

Recently, the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) has written that NOW can endorse
candidates without losing its tax-exempt
status, provided that a substantial portion
of its time and money is not spent in this
endeavor. Now that the option exists, does
NOW want to endorse candidates?

What are the legal implications? The
money that is spent on candidates (and
money includes in-kind contributions) is
taxable, which means that separate ac-
counts must be kept by national, state, and
chapter treasurers. A NOW treasurer has
enough problems already without this ad-
ditional burden.

New post-Watergate campaign laws (Fed-
eral, state, county, and city) are extremely
complicated and carry strict enforcement
mechanisms. A violation, even unintended,
could cause NOW members not only to
suffer heavy fines, but to risk going to jail.

What would be the effect on the
organization? Endorsing candidates is
guaranteed to produce dissension. NOW,
as a non-partisan organization, has both
Republicans and Democrats, who would be
forced to become adversaries over en-
dorsement. Would NOW endorse only
women? Only feminists? Would we ever
agree on a definition of a feminist? Would
we choose the lesser of two evils? Would
we endorse only “perfect” candidates?
What would happen if two chapters in a
congressional district endorsed different
candidates? Who would have the power to
endorse (time restraints would preclude
voting by the membership)? Should
National NOW endorse in a State (as it
already has)? Should a state endorse in a
local election? Etc.
Also, NWPC was created by NOW for the
specific purpose of endorsing candidates.
If we take over their main purpose, what
will be their reaction? Do we want to start a
war with another feminist organization —
especially one of our own creation?

What would be the effect on our lob-
bying effort? NOW has built tremendous
legislative influence at the national, state,
and local level. Do we want to jeopardize
that influence? What happens if our can-
didates lose? The opponents become our
immediate enemies whose votes are lost.

LEGISLATIVE
OFFICE BRIEFS

NOW Legislative Hotline: 202/347-2272.
Call this number any time and you will hear
a recorded message indicating the most
current update on what's going on in
Congress and what you can do about it.
You can also leave messages for the
Legislative Office. Be sure to indicate your
chapter and your Congressional District
when you leave your name. We will monitor
it daily.

FLASH! Women’s Educational Equity
Act Funded: Congress has just over-
whelmingly voted to override the
President’s veto of the Educational Ap-
propriations Act, which includes money for
the Women's Educational Equity Act. Write
your Congressperson for a copy of WEEA
and ask for details.

News from the

NOW LEGISLATIVE OFFICE
1266 National Press Building
Washington, D.C. 20045

(202) 347-2279

Legislative Vice President:

Jan Pittman-Liebman
Director: Casey Hughes
Associate Director: Elizabeth Cox
Administrative Assistant:

Glenn Ellefson-Brooks
Accountant: Carolyn Feinglass

(con't from col. 1).
What happens if we fail to endorse a
legislator who has been mostly supportive?

Candidates we would endorse vote with us
anyway. What do we gain? Lobbying is
dependent on picking up the middle-of-the-
roaders on some of the issues so that any
given vote produces a majority.

What effect does NOW endorsement
have? Might we inadvertently help our
enemies and hurt our friends? Most can-
didates would prefer the person-power and
money of individuals over the paper en-
dorsement of an organization.

Do we really need it? NOW’s political in-
volvement (which has been very suc-
cessful so far) has been based on:
Raising the Issues in Campaigns:
Making public a candidate’s stands on
issues influences far more voters than
an endorsement. It also emphasizes the
issue, which is, after all, our ultimate
goal.
Building Coalitions on Issues: Working
with other organizations on issues of
mutual concern expands our sphere of
influence.
NOW HAS A GOOD THING GOING!
DON’T DESTROY IT! ABS

they gales Blue Sheet

NOW And
The State House

Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972 prohibits sex discrimination in
education. The regulation to implement
Title IX went into effect July 21. This
represents a tremendous NOW victory in
Congress — probably the biggest since
the ERA passed. No one expected us to
win — but we did! Take this national NOW
victory and translate it into a state NOW
victory.

Resources:

e Public Information Office, Office of Civil
Rights, Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Washington,
D.C. 20022. Request a copy of Title IX
of the Education Amendments of 1972
and its regulation.

e Project on Equal Education Rights
(PEER), Suite 800, 1029 Vermont Ave.
NW, Washington, D.C. 20005. PEER is a
NOW-LDEF project. Request a copy of their Title IX summary, which trans-
lates HEW language into English and
from a feminist perspective. Also ask to
be put on PEER’s mailing list — it's free.

e Education Commission of the States,
300 Lincoln Tower, 1860 Lincoln
Street, Denver, CO 80203. For $2.00
you can get a copy of “A Handbook of
State Laws and Policies Affecting Equal
Rights for Women in Education” which
will give you an indication of where your
state stands now — and how your state
is in relation to other states. Also, they
are developing a model state law based
on Title IX, which you should request
they send you when completed.

e Sex Equality in Guidance Opportunity
Project, 1607 New Hampshire Ave.
NW, Washington, D.C. 20009. Request
their list of resources on sex equality in
education.

Actions: Through legislative or executive
action, you should make your state
education department accountable for
Title IX enforcement in your state. They
should be responsible for all local school
districts. Are they providing assistance,
training, guidance, etc. to the local school
districts? Are they requesting information
from the local school districts, such as
copies of their annual self-evaluation forms
which are required by Title IX? Possibly
your state education department could use
the threat of compliance.