@ Alice

“Alice Doesn't . . .” do anything that doesn’t please her. NOW is
calling October 29 the “Alice Doesn't” Strike Day — a day in which
women are urged not to go to work; not to do the housework, not to
babysit — generally not to do all those things for which women are
taken for granted.

On October 29 NOW women will focus attention on the inequities in
society, education, employment, and human relationships. It is a
“non-support” strike against a system which ignores, oppresses,
brutalizes, rapes, and restricts women.

Women are asked to walk off their jobs — in or out of the home:
withhold monetary support of the system — don't buy anything;
refrain from supporting male egos socially, economically, and
politically; refuse to babysit — let fathers spend the day with their
children. Women should get together everywhere — in the office,

doesn't!

shop, union, school, co-op nursery, church, club — to rap, com-
mune, celebrate in sisterhood.

Be Alice! Please yourself!

If you cannot leave work all day, try a slow-down or plan a mini-CR
workshop for lunch. Organize a discussion group on feminist
issues. Use the time spent at underpaid employment to show what
is wrong with the system.

Contact Davlyn Jones, National Coordinator for Alice Doesn't, P.O.
Box 6792, San Jose, CA 95150 for more ideas and assistance. The
Committee has arm bands, buttons, public relations materials, and
more information to help you. Remember, on October 29th,

ALICE DOESN'T!

SOUTHERN COORDINATORS CONFER

NOW’s Southern Region held a State Officers and Chapter
Presidents meeting on August 30 and 31, at Emory Univer-
sity in Atlanta, Georgia. The two-day meeting, presided over
by Jackie Frost, NOW’s Southern Regional Director, gave
attendees an opportunity to discuss state and national
problems. In addition, a number of dynamic workshops on
NOW’s issues and actions were held.

Workshops were offered on Rape, Title IX, credit and credit
unions, establishing state NOW legislative offices, women
and the economic realities, media advertising and sexism, the
Jo Ann Little trial, Compliance, Sears, Right to Choose, fi-
nance and fundraising, public relations and media, and ERA
— Where from Here.

Judith Lightfoot

The Ford Foundation/NOW LDEF litigation grant was pre-
sented and discussed including the impact it will have on
court decisions and the lives of women. (See NLDEF Report
this issue.)

At the request of the attendees, a session was devoted to
national issues and perceptions of NOW’s future by national
officers and board members with participation by everyone.

Members of NOW from the South stressed our successes
such as the dynamic April 14 Florida Parade for the ERA, and
the effectiveness of Maryland's state legislative office. We
discussed our setbacks during the last year as well and con-
cluded that we must keep our eyes on the goals of NOW,
strengthen task force issues in chapters, develop effective
statewide voices, and replace rancor and division with
cooperation and achievement.

We licked our wounds from the spring setbacks and had one
of the more creative, productive, brainstorming sessions ever
on ERA strategy for 1976. With vital aid from Elizabeth Cox
and Casey Hughes of the NOW Legislative Office, we
reviewed our experiences and worked to improve State
House strategy gleaned from hard-fought drives for
ratification. NOW will put opponents of ERA out of office,
devise effective civil disobedience, and stun opponents with
our effectiveness.

Congratulations to Cynthia Hess for leading NOW’s effective
pro-ERA lobby in Atlanta. Cynthia received the highest rating
for effective lobbying by the media covering State House ac-
tivities in Atlanta!

On Saturday night the Atlanta Chapter gave a wine and
cheese party which was a pleasant chance for attendees to
get together informally. On Sunday, Judy Lightfoot, Chair-One
of NOW keynoted the final session. Describing herself as a
“senior stateswoman,” Judy defined that as ‘one who
doesn’t run for office again!”

In a serious mood, Judy said: “I leave NOW with a heavy
heart. Our organization is in trouble. You possess the means
to solve the problems to end the divisiveness and to move on
with the Revolution NOW.” Indicating that we have both the
ability to move forward or to become paralyzed, Judy urged
all NOW members to join together to make great strides in the
future. And the future is NOW.

All in all the Southern Conference attracted more than 75
people from every state in the South except two.

—Compiled from the notes of
Jackie Frost and Cathy Irwin.

24