4 AWAKE & MOVE March 1971

welfare women = all women

"There but for fortune go you and I" summarizes well the relationship between welfare women and other women. All of us derive our livelihood from men and white male-determined systems upon which we have been forced to rely. What differs from woman to woman is not the quality of this relationship, this dependence, but rather its degree and extent. For women not on welfare, it is the husband/father who preserves her place and her role in the society, through whom she lives, upon whom she is dependent for financial and emotional security. (Robin Morgan writes that the word "family" comes from the Oscan famel, a servant, slave or possession; the word "father", pater, means owner, possessor, master). For women on welfare it is the bureaucracy of the welfare system itself that tries to fill these roles. Public Assistance can be seen as the not-so-benevolent dictator trying to keep women locked into their roles as child-bearer, socializer, and homemaker.

Through the women's movement, we are seeing a new relationship between women on welfare and women in society as a whole. Women can be class enemies but remain caste sisters. Being women is our caste -- this means that whatever our place in society, it comes to us via the men to whom we relate. The fact of this dependence on men never changes; caste is permanent. Our class, however, has mobility and according to the man with whom we live, we can rise or fall in the society's hierarchy.

This creates a problematic set of relationships for women. While we might want to relate to each other as sisters, as people oppressed commonly by our caste, we operate out of very different economic or class backgrounds, which divide and disturb us. These differences are real and cannot be ignored in the discussion of women uniting.

A ruling class woman has privileges unavailable to other women in the society. She can use other women to lighten her load, to ease her physical tasks, to take care of her children. Ruling class women have these privileges to some extent at the whim of their men -- the freedom to pursue other activities is not a guaranteed freedom, but a dispensation granted which can be taken back at any moment. The fact that this privilege has a temporary quality shows us that the problems facing women are greater than simply those of redistributing privilege more equally in the society. Privilege does not guarantee certain rights -- the right of free choice, self-determination, economic independence. To discuss the relationship between women only in terms of privilege is to obscure the fact that without the rights mentioned above, we all will be, in the end, dependent and powerless.

All women are denied these basic rights. But lower class women have things to contend with in their lives that middle and upper class women are spared. Racism and poverty are obvious distinctions on the "privilege" scale. Even when the welfare recipient receives her check (which in Pennsylvania is only about half of what she needs for the basic essentials of life, according to the latest government cost of living figures), it has come after long waits in dirty and understaffed offices, after harassment, endless personal questions and forms to be filled out to prove she is truly "worthy" of the money. The ultimate insult is that along every step of her life society says that it is doing her a favor -- the favor of keeping her alive, but just alive and nothing else.

The welfare system and its accompanying myths operate to keep women divided and thereby powerless. It is difficult for women to get off the welfare rolls because of the current recession -- and its accompanying lack of jobs -- and totally inadequate child-care facilities. Middle class women with families are similarly trapped. If their husbands were no longer able or willing to support them, they would be hard pressed to find a good job and to assure good care for their children. Ask any separated, divorced, or widowed woman.

Once again women who have natural similar interests (self-determination, decent and fulfilling lives and jobs, financial security, etc.) are going to be pitted against each other and made to feel they are on opposite sides of a barrier. This will probably occur as an outgrowth of yet another welfare crisis in the Philadelphia area. This crisis arises, ironically...

radicalesbians:

coming out vs.

For many of us, joining with other women to form the radicalesbians means coming out -- announcing our identity as lesbians for the first time after hiding in the closets for many long, painful years. Others among us, myself included, have been in unsatisfactory relationships with men for many long, painful years. For these women, forming the radicalesbians means not coming out, but coming home. For me, it means finding a group of people that I belong with. To women who have been gay for a long time, the word lesbian means pain, guilt, suspicion, fear. To women who are new to the gay world, the word lesbian means joy, trusting other women, and the release of a life-long tension resulting from trying to fit society's definitions instead of our own. Both groups of women have a great deal to learn from each other. I hope that the women who have been gay for a long time can overcome their suspicion enough to welcome those of us who are coming home for the first time.

When someone asks me if I'm gay, or if I'm a lesbian, I don't know what to answer. If being a lesbian means having sexual relations with other women to the point of genital contact and orgasm, then I am not. This seems to be the definition used by the "straight" world and also by the "gay" world. But this is not my definition. I consider myself a lesbian because I love other women; I want to spend the rest of my life living with other women. Sex is not an important part of my life; loving other women is.

One of the things I have hated the most is the sexual overtones of most relationships between men and women. The "culmination" of a relationship between a woman and a man is the sex act, the genital-genital contact. If a relationship doesn't include the sex act, there is something lacking. All physical contact between the two people is meant to lead to the sex act. Contact is not accepted and enjoyed for itself; only for what it is leading to. This is the most fundamental way in which people use each other to get what they want.

It would be unfortunate if the women in radicalesbians continue to define themselves in the same way that society defines them; according to whether or not, and with whom, they are performing the sex act. All women, "gay" or "straight", will be free to enjoy other women when they stop worrying about where contact will lead and start enjoying each contact for what it is. Every contact, whether physical or only emotional, is a coming together of two people, an escape from our individual isolation, an occasion for joy. Sexual definitions can only separate women: gay women distrust straight women, straight women distrust gay women. We need to come together and enjoy each other.