4

-

GOV'T WORKERS UNIONIZE  
Seeing the Forest for the Trees...

The Pacific South West Forest and  
Range Experiment Station (PSW) in Berk-  
eley is a branch of the Department of  
Agriculture which focuses on insect  
control, improving species, fire pre-  
vention and research into our precious  
and declining natural resources and  
open spaces.

"Love, work and knowledge  
are the well-springs of our  
lives. They should also  
govern it." Wm. Reich, The  

Mass Psychology of Fascism

Government statistics revealed  
that at the PSW Station, 87% of the  
jobs held by women and minorities pay  
$5,000 to $7,000 - whereas 72% of jobs  
held by men pay $11,000 to $16,000 up-  
ward. This dead-end situation was con-  
fronted by the Woman's Program at the  
station, and they decided they should  
unionize. Thus, Local 3217 of the Am-  
erican Federation of Government Employ-  
ees evolved. This is a pioneering Local  
in two ways: it is the first union Local  
to demand equitable minority distribu-  
tion of employees from clerical into  
supervisorial, management and scienti-  
fic areas, and the first whose officers  
are women and Third World people.

YOUR JOB - Love it or Leave It??

Maintaining employment within the  
governmental system and trying, at the  
same time, to maintain the integrity of  
one's livelihood and working conditions,  
presents a conflict which is not easily  
understood. People usually think of the  

"employee as a well—"

skilled-equitably-paid employee auto-  
matically supplied with many fringe  
benefits: Does not the Government set  
the standard for the rest of industry?

In actuality, however, there are  
many drawbacks to working for the go-  
vernment. The government worker does  
not pay into nor receive Social Security  
or Disability benefits. Like farmworkers  
and Household Technicians, the govern-  
ment employee is not covered by Protec-  
tive Legislative laws (See Change, 9/72).  
Government employees cannot strike with-  
out incurring felony charges. One of  
the ways management keeps women and  
minorities in low-paying jobs is the  

use of "temporary" help when a more re-  
warding permanent job opens up (scab-  
bing) and/or the arbitrary phasing out  
of that job. Criticism of the employer  
(Treason!!!!) is prohibited under the  
fearsome specter of The Hatch Act. How-  
ever, a 3-judge panel in Washington re-  
cently held the Act to be ambiguous,  
vague and a violation of the freedom of  
speech clause of the First Amendment.

Members of American Federation of Government Employees signing their first contract.  
President of Local 3217,  

Gene Bernardi,  

This matter is now before the Supreme  
Court. The Woman's Program faced all  
these objections and decided to join  
Local 3217 of the AFGE. Management al-  
lowed the union's negotiation team a  
mere 40 hours administrative leave to  
implement their very progressive de-  
mands, while Management officials (on  
"official Duty Time") remained on regu-  
lar salary systematically thwarting  
efforts at unionization, at tremendous  
expense to the taxpayer.

"Ask not what you can do for  
your company! YOU ARE "THE COMPANY"

What were the demands which provo-  
ked such strong management opposition?  
The Woman's Program spelled out condi-  
tions for a union contract whereby on-  
the-job training, upgrading and career  
development would be focused on the  
low-paying, dead-end jobs held by the  
oppressed majority of women and Third  
World People as well as mobility into  
administrative and scientific areas;  
in-house promotions and the maximum  
utilization of all skills. Specifically,  
if 65% of the dead-end jobs are held by women and minorities,  

The Ivory Comb, short stories from Vietnam (available  

in many languages).  
can sometimes seem far away.

The day-to-day struggle in Vietnam  
These stories are adventures  

of common people fighting a long and just struggle against  

US aggression.  
and villages of Vietnam,  

They draw the reader right into the jungles  
experiencing the sorrow, triumph,  

and sense of justice and urgency that drives the people  

of Vietnam,  
inspiration.

Feeding Ourselves.  

good introduction to nutrition.

This short book can lend us much courage and  

A 32-page pamphlet that is a very  

It includes sections on  

digestion, energy, fats, proteins, minerals and diets.

Everyone interested in good food should read it!

Available from the Berkeley Women's Health Collective, 2214  
Grove St., Berkeley, Calif., 94704, for 35¢.

Feb-March 1973 CHANGE

Page  

is seated on the right.

then 65% of the training money should  
be available to those same women and  
minorities.

“RESPONSIBILITY IS: the ability  
to respond,"

It was a hard-won victory and  
Local 3217 and PSW signed their formal  
contract on January 2, 1973. Thus, the  
major demand of upgrading dead-end  

jobs was achieved. Local 3217 invites  

response and encourages readers that  
"ANYONE CAN JOIN". For more infor-  
mation, contact Gene Bernardi, Pres-  
ident, Local 3217 AFGE, Telephone:  
841-5121 Ext. 311, and by all means  

subscribe to FREEDOM NEWS, P.O. Box  
1087, Richmond, Ca., 94802 to stay  
on top of the problems of government  
workers.

Women and Third World Peoples  
through getting together in the  
Woman's Program and fighting for a  
union contract, brought some greatly  
needed changes in working conditions  
at PSW.

DeSeeeeesreesesececoen’  

we need your.  
Help...

If you've been liking CHANGE but  
don't have time to work with us, how  
about making a financial contribution?  
Many of our papers are distributed  

free downtown, and even a dollar or  

two is significant. Send contribu-  
tions: (money, articles, criticisms,  
comments) to CHANGE, 968 Valencia,  
San Francisco, California 94110.