ye

Page 4 CHANGE Feb-March 1973

STATE DISABILITY  
INSURANCE  

CAN YOU AFFORD  

Under the California Unemployment In-  
surance Code, disability insurance (SDI)  
is payable when you cannot work because  
of sickness or injury not caused by your  
job. Disability Insurance is a reform  
measure to compensate wage loss due to  
illness or injury but is an inadequate  
solution, as unreasonable as applying a  
band-aid to a gaping wound. What appears  
to be a benevolent assistance program for  
workers is in fact a complicated system  
of economic aggrandizement for the state,  
rather than an economic aid for individu-  
al workers, most of whom cannot afford to  
take advantage of this so-called benefit.  

Every worker in private industry (go-  
vernment employees are not eligible for  
SDI) in California has deducted 1% of her  
salary for disability insurance. As of  
January, 1973, the maximum deduction is  
$85 which would be 1% of a yearly salary  
of $8,500. Employees who make more than  
that, for example $10,000 a year, still  
only pay $85 a year, a deduction of less  
than 1%. However, the person who makes  
$8,500 and pays the maximum deduction is  
not eligible for the maximum benefit which  
would be $105 per week. Instead, a yearly  
salary of $8,500 makes you eligible for  
weekly benefits of only $90. An employee  
must make $10,000 a year in order to qua-  
lify for the maximum S.D.I. weekly bene-  
fit payment even though that employee  
pays the same yearly deduction of $85.  

S.D.I. benefits compensate for wage loss only; if sick  
leave is paid, the employee is not eligi-  
ble for S.D.I. benefits, even though she  
has been paying S.D.I. deductions. If va-  
cation pay is received during your ill-  
ness, you cannot collect S.D.I., in which  
case you must choose between using your  
vacation money and losing vacation time or  
taking a cut in income and going on S.D.I. Ei-  
ther way you lose.  

S.D.I. deductions don't accumulate  
like Social Security. A woman who worked  
for ten years, retires to care for child-  
ren, gets ill, is then not eligible for  
S.D.I. benefits despite her ten year con-  
tribution to the fund. If a worker loses  
her yearly salary of $8,500 and must take  
a new job making only $6,000 a year, her  
S.D.I. benefits are based on the new sa-  
lary, ignoring the deductions from the  

‘THE PIG GETS FATTER AS INTEREST ACCUMULATES’  

TO APPLY?  

higher salary. Generally an employee's  
salary increases each year; S.D.I. takes  
advantage of that also. Benefits are  
based on the salary of the previous year,  
not the present salary, so an employee  
making $125 a week now is only eligible  
for benefits based on last year's salary  
of $110 a week.  

The procedure for applying and acqui-  
ring S.D.I. is set up to be handled  
through the mail in consideration of the  
disabled person but also slows the pro-  
cess. When disabled, phone the S.D.I. of-  
fice in San Francisco at 557-3000. The  
claim date is the first day of illness.  
If disabled on March 1, this is the claim  
date. During the first eight days you are  
not eligible for benefits (these 8 days  
include weekends and holidays) so that  
the salary of the first week is lost. El-  
igibility for benefits is dated from March  
8, however payment won't be received be-  
fore March 15 under the speediest of cir-  
cumstances and usually it's much later.  
Benefits are paid every two weeks there-  
after. Therefore, you lose one week's sa-  
lary and must wait at least another two  
weeks before getting one week's benefits.  
For those of us who are living week to  
week on our wages it is impossible to suf-  
fer such a loss of income and time, con-  
sequently, we cannot afford to file for  
S.D.I. benefits and must struggle to con-  
tinue working despite illness. How else  
will the medical bills get paid?  

$12 a day for hospital expenses  

An important thing to remember if you  
are hospitalized and have personal or  
employee insurance is that S.D.I. allows  
$12 a day toward the cost of a hospital  
room in addition to the income benefit.  
You may not realize this but the insur-  
ance company does and deducts this $12  
a day from the hospital expenses, there-  
by paying only a percentage of the re-  
mainder. So even if you are not eligi-  
ble for the income benefits, file for  
the S.D.I. hospital benefits which you  
are entitled to. Hospitals are legally  
responsible to inform you of these S.D.I.  
benefits, but often do no more than give  
you the form which you may discard. An  
ill worker may be ignorant of her loss  
and no one can afford to lose $12 a day.  

~£ G7, 000,000  
eer Oe FUND  

©  
v  
8  
,  
Q  

JIL f6R ~RR fsr  

E¥%0 fu0 HAP EE  
Salary /week  

Benefits for the privileged?  

S.D.I. is a perfect example of a re-  
form measure which mainly benefits the  
privileged. Most S.D.I. beneficiaries  
receive between $90 to $105 a week in be-  
nefits, corresponding to a salary range of  
$8,500 to $10,000. The majority of em-  
ployees filing for S.D.I. are in the high-  
er income brackets; low income workers  
cannot afford to take a cut in salary or  
afford the delay in payments. Recently, I  
was very ill with pleurisy, and though el-  
igible for S.D.I. benefits, could not af-  
ford to take advantage of it. I'd lost  
one week's salary (at my job I'm not el-  
igible for sick leave); filed for S.D.I.,  
but the doctor who diagnosed my illness  
at the clinic (I'm also not eligible for  
hospitalization or medical benefits) did  
not mail in my claim, which meant an even  
longer delay in eventual payment for my  
second week of convalescence. As a result  
I had to return to work before completely  
recovered since my family is supported on  
a week to week basis and we can't wait  
four to six weeks to meet expenses.  

My experience is typical of women wor-  
kers who must depend on S.D.I. because we  
are seldom covered by the benefits of un-  
ion contracts. We are further penalized  
by being limited to the low-salaried jobs,  
thereby receiving minimum S.D.I. benefits.  
Of the men who receive S.D.I. benefits,  
approximately 85% get the maximum payment  
of $105 per week. Women workers receive,  
on the average, benefits of $75 to $80 a  
week. Minority workers, and those who do  
not speak English, are usually further  
penalized by lack of information concern-  
ing their eligibility for S.D.I.  

Another inequity of this system which  
most workers are unaware of is the S.D.I.  
Reserve Fund which presently amounts to  
$67,000,000 and accumulates interest day  
by day. Who benefits from this incredible  
sum? Certainly not the low-salaried aver-  
age worker whose wage deductions contri-  
bute to this fund. Other government de-  
partments borrow from this Reserve Fund  
and pay back with interest. Isn't it com-  
forting that your measly S.D.I. benefits,  
should you ever be able to afford them,  
are securely protected by such a large  
and growing Reserve Fund?  

Recently Governor Reagan vetoed the  
bill to extend disability payment to ill-  
ness resulting as a complication of preg-  
nancy (see CHANGE Dec-Jan). The state op-  
posed this extension on the grounds that  
such benefits would increase the indivi-  
dual deductions from 1% to 1.5% and this  
wouldn't be fair to all of the other wor-  
kers who do not become pregnant.