Page 2 CHANGE Feb-March 1973

BEYOND THE BABY SHOWER

A book at MATERNITY BENEFITS

As working women many of us have to
deal with the financial problems that
arise from being pregnant and having
children while we work. What kinds of
maternity benefits do our companies or
unions provide us with? What accounts
for the fact that women in different
workplaces get widely different bene-
fits?

WHAT A UNION CAN DO

First, the presence of a union can
and often does bring improved maternity
coverage. For example, at Met Life
there is no union, 8/10 of lower level
workers are women, and over 4% of the office
workers are non-white. They have no
official maternity leave; a woman
wanting to return to work usually can
get some position but not one at the
same level or the same pay, and she
must work there three years before she
can get $300 for hospital fees.

On the other hand, retail clerks co-
vered by the fairly strong Local 648
(grocery and drug) can leave work at any
time during pregnancy and return from
their leave without loss of seniority.
They receive $400 for a normal birth.

The Phone Co. union (Communication
Workers of America), although generally
considered to be a "company union", is
encouraging women not to sign a waiver
of maternity leave. CWA has filed
a lawsuit to extend disability cover-
age to women while they are out on
leave, which disability does not cover
now.

Perhaps the best example of the
change a union can make is at Blue
Shield. Before unionization, although
the company paid for a health plan which
covered 80% of medical costs, a woman
had to leave work by her sixth month of
pregnancy and had no guarantee of get-
ting her job back. Now that OPEIU is
representing the workers, there is no
mandatory date for leaving and a wo-
man is guaranteed her job back with
accumulated pay raises.

What this means is that companies
don't want to pay for seniority
and experience. They give child care and maternity (or pat-
ernity) benefits a low priority in
bargaining. The all-female Waitresses
Union, Local 48, is part of the larger
mixed Culinary union which determines
the industry-wide contracts for the
waitresses. No provisions for mater-
nity benefits are included in the con-
tracts at all. Each individual woman
must make private arrangements with
her employer.

ECONOMIC FACTORS

Another factor which explains why
companies offer widely different mater-
nity benefits is how economically val-
uable their workers are to them. At
Pacific Telephone, women returning from
maternity leave are placed at the bot-
tom of the seniority list for six
months. This policy is designed to
discourage women from returning to
work. It is one of the ways the
Phone Co. can get rid of the excess
workers created by automation without
paying unemployment.

On the other hand, Aetna obviously
values its women workers and their
training somewhat more. They pay mat-
ernity benefits only if the woman re-
turns to work within three months.
Women are thus seen as the "flexible"
labor source to be retained or let go
according to company needs.

PATERNITY BENEFITS - HAH

Virtually no company offers the
male parent "paternity benefits." Com-
panies maintain that these benefits
would be very expensive and "not appro-
priate," mirroring society's sexist
view that childbirth and child rear-
ing are exclusively women's functions.
Even men who want to assume greater
responsibility are unable to because
they can't get the time off. This
sexist division of roles is maintained
because the economy benefits from the
free labor of women raising children
and couldn't provide jobs for all
these women if they entered the labor
force.

WHAT TO DO

In the total picture then, unions
have been helpful in improving mater-
nity benefits at some companies, but
they have not always put forward mat-
ernity demands strongly enough. Also
we see that the economic value of the
women workers plays a large part in
what concessions a company is willing
to make. If American business did
accept full responsibility for workers'
health and welfare, effects would be
wide-ranging and ultimately devasta-
ting to capitalism. The costs would
be just too high.

Women within unions must agitate
as determinedly as women fighting to
form unions to get our demands met.
It is clear that companies won't
make any concessions unless we as
women force them to give us what we
need.

YOUR EMPLOYEE ADVISOR

Name of Company:

California Electric Supply

1585 Folsom

How Long Were They Able to Keep You Working For Them? Still
there,

Your Salary: $450 month—peanuts

Your Boss's Salary: ?

Attitudes Towards Employees: Atrocious.

Other Comments: I have a co-worker who never shows up for
work but they won't fire him. The boss started here twenty
years ago, and the department hasn't changed since. He won't
let you change the files or modernize anything in the office.
When you talk to him he not only doesn't listen to you but
he won't even answer you. When he does talk to you it's on-
ly to belittle you as a person. I think he is prejudiced
towards women because we're the only ones he speaks to like
that. And the VP of the company is just as bad. P.S. I
could go on but I ran out of room.

Note: Above is one of the many reports on
workplaces CHANGE has received from women all
over the city. We would like to hear from you,
too. We are interested in whatever you have
to say about your job, and tell us what you
think of CHANGE, as well. P.S. Use as much
room as you want! You may wish to use the
above format as a guideline of questions to
answer, or expand on them, such as: How do
employees treat each other? What is taking
place to improve working conditions? What
would be your "ideal" in a workplace?