CHANGE Page 5.

Feb-March 1973

MUNI ZQZ/US AMOK

To anyone who relies on public trans-
portation the deterioration of Muni is
obvious. It's getting harder to get to
and from work. Buses run less frequent-
ly, there are fewer drivers. So plan on
getting up 5 to 10 minutes earlier and
getting home from work a little later
and be prepared for dirtier buses, an
accelerating degree of accidents and
you'll find yourself traveling in a dirt-
y, unsafe sardine can. Now night time
is a different story. Instead of waiting
at that dark, lonely bus stop for 20
minutes scared out of your wits that
you'll be mugged or raped, count on a

good 3/4 or an hour wait. Nightmare?

What's Happening with Muni?

The P.U.C. (Public Utilities Commis-
sion) has felt that cutbacks in service
have been economically necessary. The
following facts are from the minutes of
P.U.C., the Muni budget, and testimony
of drivers at public hearings.

Line Cuts: In the meeting of Sept. 23rd
this fall, the P.U.C. decided to cut the
22 Fillmore weekend service by 5 buses,
the 47 Potrero service by one bus, and
eliminate the 13 late night service en-
tirely.

Equipment Cuts: Money allotted for mat-
erial and supplies has been cut from
$1,150,000 in 69-70 to $1,046,000 in 72-
73. Allowing for inflation this means

a serious decline in service. Replace-
ment parts have still not been purchased
for the new diesels on lease to the city.
So time and buses lost due to breakdowns
is vastly increased.

Bart Cuts: Community service lines are
to be curtailed and rearranged to serve
the heavy Bart train schedule. For ex-
ample, the 35 line in the Mission is
going to be changed to a faster line
with fewer stops to connect with the
24th Mission Bart station more often.
Personnel Cuts: The minimum number of
Muni drivers is supposed to be 1,830.

At present there are only 1,750 drivers
on the payroll, 100 of whom are in
special non-driving positions. If the
proposed cuts in service when Bart opens
are allowed to go through, there will be
about 800 drivers' jobs eliminated. In
an attempt to avoid outright dismissal
of drivers, the P.U.C. is trying to

harass them into quitting.

What Does This Mean For the Riders and
the Drivers?

Not enough drivers and buses breaking
down means fewer runs and tighter sched-
ules. Sick drivers are not even replaced.
A Muni driver told me about the terrific
pressure it puts on drivers. They can
either drive faster, increasing their
chances of accidents, give up their 5
minute layover stop, or do what so many
of us riders hate. They race off as we
frantically run to catch the bus; they
don't wait for older people or children
to get to their seats before they start
up, sending them sprawling on the floor.

It's aggravating to us as riders to have
these things happen to us. It's frustrat-
ing for the drivers to have to do these
inhuman things. It should be clear enough
that the Muni drivers are victims and not
causes of the deteriorating system. Muni
management perpetuates the myth that the
drivers are at fault, so we riders can't
focus our anger where it really belongs—
on the P.U.C. and the profiteers behind
redevelopment.

Why is This Happening?

P.U.C., which administers Muni, has
traditionally been filled from the ex-
ecutive ranks of the Bank of America,
Crocker Citizens, large construction
firms, and a token labor official or two.
These men have spread the lie that there
is not enough money to fund Muni. The
facts are, there is enough money, per-
haps even enough money to make Muni free
to riders. Other city utilities, like the
Hetch-Hetchy Dam and the Port and Air-
port Facilities have reaped profits of
about $62 million dollars for the city.
This money could legally be used to bail
Muni out of trouble. Instead it is being
used on such projects as airport mod-
ification or is left in banks waiting
for more "profitable" (to whom?) invest-
ment.

This money, which should be used for the
"public" welfare is actually being used
against it. Muni finances are clearly
related to Bart finances, and Bart is
directly linked to redevelopment. For a
fuller story on redevelopment and the
Bart-Muni tie-up see the next issue of
Change.

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY

March 8 is a good time for us to remember the tradi-
tion of women fighting for equality and a better life for

everyone.

On March 8, 1857, women garment and textile

workers in New York marched to protest a 12-hour work day

and poor pay and working conditions.

Although the police

attacked and many women were arrested, the women went on

to form their first union in March, 1850.

On March 8,

1908, the garment workers went on strike to protest the
unchanged conditions they had fought for 48 years earlier.
In 1910, Clara Zetkin (leader of the women's movement in
Germany and a communist) proposed the founding of Inter-

national Working Women's Day.

And in 1917, the women tex-

tile workers in Petrograd, Russia struck against famine and
poor working conditions—the other workers in the city

rose up to support them in a general strike.

The date of

that women's demonstration, March 8, 1917, marked the first

day of the Russian Revolution.

San Francisco Events to Celebrate:

THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 8:00pm:
SATURDAY, MARCH 10, 7:30pm:

*Women's Dance, 409 Clayton
Entertainment, Speakers, Skits

on the History of Working Women, Everett Jr. High,

450 Church
SUNDAY, MARCH 11, 11:00am:

*March from Bowling Green Park-

ing Lot (G.G. Park at 4th Ave., past U.C. Med. Center)

to Panhandle
12:00-5:00pm:

Entertainment, G.G. Panhandle

Festival:

Displays,

*Women only