®) for Who  
the bet. Toll  

The "voice with a smile" isn't  
smiling much these days. And that's  
because over 200 operators are faced  
with the prospect of losing their jobs  
as automation squeezes out the last two  
remaining toll offices in San Francisco.  
25th St. Toll (over 200 operators)  
is scheduled to close around June, and  
Bush St. Toll where 264 operators now  
work is destined to become a "residual"  
office employing about 70 operators by  
the end of the year. The old-style  
cord boards are being replaced by newer,  
more efficient boards that can handle  
the work of 6 to 8 "regular" operators.  

-Now, automation is in no way a bad  
thing in itself. As far as telephone  
service is concerned, the new equipment  
makes it possible to dial almost any  
kind of call direct. It's faster for  
the customer (that is, it will be if and  
when the many flaws are worked out of  
the equipment...), but for the operators  
living in a society where businesses are  
run for profits and definitely not for  
the benefit of those who do the work,  
automation spells layoffs, firings...  
unemployment. Conservative estimates  
expect 200 surplus operators by September--there are likely to be more, not to  
mention any number of the 900 women pre-  
sently working at Yellow Pages when it  
moves to San Jose this summer.  

"NEVER" LAYS OFF?  

And what is PTT doing about it?  
Well, they figure they can't lay off  
200-plus at once; they're still trying to  

to sell the myth that "PTT never lays off  

its employees"...So on the surface  
they're pushing their new "Upgrade  
Transfer Program," which claims that  
Pac Bell has a place for all its employees-  
surplus or no surplus. And, on the  
surface it looks good -- many operators  
are getting excited about the fact that  
we have the "right" to apply for a job  
anywhere in the Company.  

Already we're seeing some results  
of just how "fair" this transfer policy  
is: women, as always, are finding it  
hard to get jobs in the Plant department,  
though men with low seniority are  
already being trained. Furthermore,  
with a transfer request, an operator's  
ATOM (Asst. Traffic Operating Manager)  
puts down whatever she/he wants to and  
sends the application over to the trans-  
fer department, where anything can hap-  
pen, regardless of seniority. Mean-  
while, PTT is hiring people off the  
streets for jobs in Larkin Directory  
Assistance and at other offices, even  
though there are PTT employees waiting  
on transfers to those very offices.  

MORE HARASSMENT...MORE AWARENESS  
Operators are getting harassed more  
and more each day. It's traditionally  
been a thoroughly regimented type of  
job, but, as one operator, a Vietnam  
Veteran, recently put it - "This is get-  
ting worse than the army was!" New  
rules are springing up daily, but ope-  
rators often don't even know of their  
existence until they've been disciplin-  
ed for breaking them! Suspensions are  
almost daily occurrences. Even the union  
leadership admits the punishment in no  

way fits the "crime." Can you imagine  
being suspended for filing your nails  
at the board, or unplugging your head-  
set to blow your nose, or talking back  
to an ATOM? And the old rules long  
forgotten are being reinforced with a  
vengeance.  

By way of example:  

-- We're told when to go to the bath-  
room, and how often. One woman was in-  
formed that two in-and-outs a day (PTT  
lingo for a trip to the john) was ex-  
cessive, and if she persisted in going  
that often, she would be sent to medi-  

cal.  
-- One of management's favorite me-  

thods for measuring "operator service"  
is to take remote observations, which  
means that the operator has no idea  
she/he is being listened in on until  
it's all over. In the past, only an  
operator's ATOM and her assistant  
could take such observations, and they  
were taken only every week or so. But  
now, operators are fair game for any of  
the numerous ATOMs and Service Assis-  
tants. One operator was observed  
three times in one day. One woman was  
told that if she were observed making  
a mistake on an emergency call, she  
would be suspended.  

WHERE IS THE UNION?  

And where does the union (Communi-  
cation Workers of America, Local 9410)  
fit into all of this increased harass-  
ment? It's obvious that now more  
than ever operators need good, mili-  
tant shop stewards to fight for them.  
And at PTT, good stewards are rare.  
Stewards are chosen and appointed by  
the union leadership, and these  
leaders don't want to rock the boat  
by having stewards that will truly  
fight in the interests of the rank  
and file workers. Even when such  
people do make it through the process  
of being appointed, they are fettered  
by the bureaucratic structure that  
sends most grievances right over  
stewards' heads and into the hands of  
the leadership. A number of stewards  

i973  

Feb-March  

CHANGE Page 1  

also happen to be Service Assistants  
(lackeys who do the dirty work for  
management--recently one steward,  
"SA" was promoted to ATOM for an  
hour!). Operators have complained  
that many stewards discourage them  
from filing grievances; one steward  
(who used to be an ATOM) was overheard  
saying "I'd fire those operators if  
they gave me so much trouble!" Small  
wonder most operators are cynical  
about their stewards.  

THE FIGHT IS UP TO US  

Over the past few months a coali-  
tion of operators and plant workers  
has been agitating for elected ste-  
wards. But this means a union by-  
laws change, and even the first rea-  
ding of such a change requires a quo-  
rum at the union meeting. There  
hasn't been a quorum in eight months.  

With PTT breathing down our necks  
and the union leadership turning the  
other way, more and more operators  
are realizing that the fight is up to  
us. Recently operators from several  
offices in S.F. have been getting to-  
gether to figure out a strategy for  
fighting the growing harassment, sus-  
pensions, and impending layoffs.  
They have just started putting out a  
bi-weekly newsheet--Traffic--ex-  
posing the Company's abuses as well as  
the union leaders' collaboration.  
And the response has been over-  
whelming.  

At PTT we are fighting one of the  
world's largest corporations. We rea-  
lize that in the end a purely economic  
struggle is bound to fail. Fighting  
for our jobs and better working con-  
ditions is essential but only a first  
step. In a capitalistic society such  
as ours, people who labor to produce  
all the wealth are expendable. We  
must join with other workers to fight  
the exploitation of working people at  
individual workplaces and in every  
aspect of our society.  

WRITTEN BY A PHONE COMPANY OPERATOR