“women's protective legislation to

Feb-March 1973

NO FARE AINT FAIR!

San Francisco workers have not
been idle in the face of increased
oppression from that major San Fran-
cisco exploiter, the Bank of America.
In December 1972 the Bank announced
the cancellation as of March 1st of
all taxi fares hitherto paid its wo-
men night shift workers on the
grounds that passage of the Equal
Rights Amendment made the fares dis-
criminatory to men and hence illegal.

The Bank claimed it took this
step under pressure from male em-
ployees, angered by the Bank's "dis-
crimination" against them. In early
December, however, some of these
same male workers, members of BEDPA
(Bank Employees Data Processing Asso-
ciation) which is organizing workers
at the B of A's computer center,
picketed to protest their scapegoat-
ing by the Bank. They charged they
had demanded a parking lot, not an
end to taxi fares. Scarcely a week
later, Union WAGE, an alliance of
trade union women, sponsored another
informational demonstration outside
the Bank, calling for the continua-
tion of cab service and its exten-
sion to men workers at the Bank. At
this point, Yellow Cab drivers began
to realize they too would suffer
from the loss of night fares, parti-
cularly if the B of A's action were
followed by similar moves from PTT
and other San Francisco night em-
ployers. In a very immediate way,
men workers were brought to see just
how important is the extension of
cover them too. No extension of taxi
fares to men at B of A; no jobs for
many Yellow Cab night drivers.

And so January 31st witnessed a
determined picket line of Bank of
America workers, Union Wagers, mem-
bers of Change, Yellow Cab drivers,
workers from Metropolitan Life and
PTT, and other supporters of work-
ers’ rights. To the dismay of many
male Bank executives, who drifted
around the outskirts of the demon-
stration and held conferences a-
round their leader's huge black li-
mousine, the San Francisco Mime
Troupe's band played:

The Banks are made of marble
With a guard at every door;
And their vaults are full

of silver
Which the workers sweated for.

Pickets demanded extension of cab
fares to men -- "No Fare Ain't Fair"
-- and an end to Bank duplicity.
KCBS News, KPFA and KPIX television
carried extensive coverage of the
demonstration despite the Chronicle's
and Examiner's total silence on the
issue.

But the fight has just begun and
will not be ended until Bank workers
themselves have wrested from the
Bank of America their demand for
the extension of taxi fares. Nor
will the issue of protective legis-
lation stop here. Already Norris
Company of Los Angeles has denied
women all lunch and shift breaks and
extended working hours from 8 to 12
hours a day. Unless workers orga-

nize state and nationwide for their
protection, many more workers will
experience the oppressive results of
the end to protective legislation

for women.

‘PRASH"

to drop cab fares too!

MONTHS,
the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, AFL-CIO.

company intimidation.

whom are members of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers.

the biggest employer in El Paso.

canos,
people willing to scab.
around the world to the boycott!

all of us suffer.
workers and BOYCOTT FARAH PANTS!

CHANGE.

Page 3

Over 3,000 workers, mostly Mexican-American women, have been
on strike against the Farah plant in El Paso, Texas, for over 10
Farah refused to recognize their right to unionize with
The strikers at Farah
have faced gun-carrying guards, police dogs, wholesale firings and
They have organized a nation-wide boycott
of Farah pants with the strong support of organized labor.

On December 11, in San Francisco, the downtown Emporium was
picketed by several hundreds of people - mostly women - many of
One shop
steward explained that they were picketing the "Big E" because
it is the only store in San Francisco still ordering from Farah.
When told about the boycott, Macy's cancelled all further orders
from Farah, but, she said, the Emporium is notoriously anti-union,

Farah, the world's largest manufacturer of men's slacks, is also
Willie Farah, owner of the com-
pany, refused to recognize the union and thinks he can succeed in
stopping the unionizing drive because El Paso has the largest un-
organized supply of clothing workers in the U.S. - mostly Chi-
With jobs scarce and unemployment very high, particularly
among Third World workers, Farah assumes there'll always be some
Farah had not counted on the strong res-
ponse and solidarity of working people throughout the U.S. and

As long as Third World people in
the U.S. and abroad are not organized and are paid lower wages,
All working people should support the striking