Ss 6 CHANGE Feb-March 1973

San Bruno Jail - Frontera Prison

SISTERS BEHIND BARS

The 4000 women incarcerated in Cali-
fornia's jails and prisons are easily
forgotten and often misunderstood. An
already sexist media finds it easy to
overlook such a small group; and even
when reports come out, the women are
portrayed as suffering in an alien
world, which has little connection to
the racist and sexist society on the
outside. Certainly women prisoners suf-
fer more acutely than we do, yet the
types of oppression - job discrimina-
tion, low wages, poor medical treatment,
sexist attitudes - are routinely exper-
ienced by women outside as well as in-
side penal institutions.

>>>====_=_=___=_
PINK FASCISM

To the casual observer, women’s pri-
sons might not seem like such bad places
at least compared to parallel men's in-
stitutions. At Frontera Prison, near
L.A., - California's only state prison
for women - the 600 "girls" are allowed
to wear street clothes instead of uni-
forms around their "campus," are locked
in "cottages" at night, and receive "re-
ceptions" rather than plain old visits.
But look behind the facade and there is
indeed a real prison, guarded by a laser
detection system, gun tower and barbed-
wire (through which 17 women a month at-
tempt to escape). The same tactics, of
course, are used right here in the office
where we "girls" are conditioned to ac-
cept admiring glances and opened doors

systematically kept at tedious jobs with
low pay scales.

THE REAL THING

With the frosting removed, what are
conditions really like in a women's pe-
nal institution? In jails like San Bru-
no, they are particularly grim: The food

is starchy and dangerously unnutritional,

especially for pregnant women; cells of-
ten lack heat and gynecological care is
poor. (Until recently, the state as-
sumed responsibility to search internal-
ly for concealed weapons, but not for
VD.)

Visiting is one of the most crucial
issues to inmates. Until about a month
ago at San Bruno, where almost 2/3 of
the population are mothers, children
under 18 could not visit. Now, due to
pressure from demonstrations, they are
at least allowed to yell to their mo-
thers through glass and wire mesh

caging along with other visitors... In

the state prison, children outside are
often put in foster homes and are
rarely if ever taken to see their mo-
thers.

With their bonds to the outside so
brutally severed, women turn to each
other for support - often through les-
bian relationships. While lesbianism
is overlooked to some extent by autho-
rities, women getting together over

broader demands is harshly repressed.

A WOMAN'S WORK IS NEVER COMPENSATED

Training for new jobs is a farce.
At San Bruno, there are only sewing
classes and at Frontera Prison, the
choice is between being trained as a
beautician, nurse's aide, or "animal
psychologist" - really a "poodle
groomer." Work furlough programs do
not exist at all for the women in state
prison, and at San Bruno, only two
women take part in the year-old pro-
gram. Work at Frontera is compensated

by 2-16¢/hr., while the few goods available
to the women sell for 10% over
regular outside prices.

THIRD WORLD WOMEN

Just as sexist job and wage discrimi-
nation is mirrored in prison life, so
too, is racism. In most jails and pri-
sons, Third World women are present in
disproportionately large numbers. White
matrons control their predominantly
Black and Brown "girls," and Spanish-
speaking women are not allowed to use
their native language. Unity among wo-
men of different nations and national
minorities is met with special harass-
ment from the prison authorities just
as unified organizing efforts among
different national groups of workers
are feared and harassed by company
management.

CHANGES ARE COMING

A movement on the outside to specifi-
cally help women inmates is relatively
new. Several groups involved in this a-
rea are the Women's Prison Project, which
transports prisoners' relatives and holds
programs regularly at Frontera Prison,
and the Women Outside and the Women's
Jail Coalition, which both do work in-
side and around issues at San Bruno Jail.

The initial efforts of all these
groups have been around desperately-
needed institutional reforms. But
those involved realize that this will
never be enough under a system that
makes "prisoners" of women on both
sides of the bars. Prisons, like all
institutions under capitalism, are
held together with force by the state.
Nothing less than revolution can chal-
lenge that force and bring down the
system - and the prisons with it.

(For further information, contact the
Prison Law Collective - 282-3983).

SDI (cont)

It was
predicted that pregnancy disability
would cost the state $152,000,000 per
year, thereby depleting the Reserve
Fund and necessitating the increased
employee deductions. The basis for
this 50% increase was the assumption
that every woman within the child-
bearing age group (250,000 women in
California) would become pregnant
and would each draw the maximum benefit
of $105 a week. Such logic would be
humorous if it had not so effectively
denied pregnant women their rights
as workers.

S.D.I. is basically a reform
measure which doesn't satisfy the
needs of workers to secure basic human
rights such as health care and adequate
income during illness. For the most
part, S.D.I. benefits those who need
it least in terms of salary and
economic need. When you can't afford
to use a benefit, then it wasn't
designed with you in mind. It is
the basic human right of every worker
to have adequate health care and an
adequate income in times of illness.

SUPPORT THE WORKERS ON STRIKE AT SHELL

(OIL COMPANY. BOYCOTT SHELL PRODUCTS!