REGIONAL  
MEETS  
STRESS  
OUTREACH  

If a single thread wound through  
NACW regional meetings this Spring  
and Summer, it was the theme of  
“Outreach” stressed in California,  
Virginia and Texas.  

Stanislaus County CSW (California) hosted the Region IX conference in April and made a conscious effort to include member and non-member groups in the rural Northeastern California area. But commission representatives from Central and Southern California were very much in evidence.  

The meeting was coordinated through the office of Phyllis Babcock, director of Stanislaus County, with the assistance of Margaret Almeda, E.D. for the State Commission.  

The Region III meeting hosted by the Virginia CSW and coordinated by Bonnie Robinson, executive director, with assistance from Fairfax County CSW, was attended by close to 100 NACW members and local women’s groups.  

A highlight of the conference was the twin appearances of Governor Charles Robb and Mrs. (Linda Bird) Robb. Of particular interest was the showing of the film, “The Common Wealth of Women,” a history of women in Virginia produced as part of the Virginia Women’s Cultural History Project. It is highly recommended for use by other commissions wishing to focus attention on the women who helped build their states.  

Among those attending the Region III meeting were representatives from West Virginia, Maryland, Washington, D.C., Delaware and Pennsylvania.  

Because of the close proximity (conference was held in Alexandria) a number of legislative professionals and activists stationed in D.C. were among the speakers and panelists who exchanged information with several female legislators.  

Connie Woodruff and Nancy Matthews were on hand to discuss and answer questions about NACW’s role and its relationships to commission members, as was Elsie Denison, Social Science Advisor for the Women’s Bureau.  

The Region V meeting was coordinated by Gay Erwin, E.D., Texas CSW and held in San Antonio, Texas early in July.  

Once again the stress was on outreach and careful consideration was given to inviting communities which have expressed desires to establish local commissions.  

Conference theme “Commissions in the Southwest: The Women, The Issues, and the Future” drew participants from Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Mississippi. There were 110 registered participants, proving that everything in Texas is done on a grand scale.  

Conference keynoter was Pat Reuss, legislative director, Women’s Equality Action League. One of the more popular workshops dealt with how to form commissions and make them work and a sharing of innovative commissions’ programs and implementations of creative ideas.  

An overview of the current status of women in the South was offered by Mary Landrie of the Louisiana Legislation; strengthening the bond between commissions and the Women’s Bureau was discussed by Rhobia Taylor, Region V Director and a Charge and Challenge was given by NACW President, Connie Woodruff.  

Regions VII and VIII will meet at the Eastern Nebraska 4H Center in Gretna, Nebraska August 9-10.  

To Be Or Not to Be  

It has come to the attention of the Board of Directors that not all “commissions” are sanctioned; that is created by statute, ordinance, interlocal agreement, or other official declaration as a government body. Those not sanctioned voice the advantages of such a position: (a) no restrictions on activities; (b) focus on more controversial issues; (c) unlimited funding opportunities; (d) selective makeup of the Commission; and (e) total independence as they seek to achieve equality for women and children.  

There is no doubt that these are advantages. But this editor believes they are advantages at a cost. The primary responsibility of NACW members is to meet those same challenges and obligations but to do it within the system, not outside of it. In taking this route credibility is established. Government has said they accept a certain amount of responsibility for the women/children of their state, city or county by sanctioning commissions on women. Commissions serve in advisory capacities to their governing parents on topics such as legislative issues, community directions, and grant distribution; and are generally respected for their advice. Women, parents, corporations, small businesses, foundations, other government agencies and human service agencies have built-in confidence in women’s commissions. They know that if we say we will do something it will be done and done well because we have the support of our government agency to guarantee its credibility.  

Let’s talk about funding. Private organizations or women’s coalitions constantly have difficulty finding money because they are in the same ball game as every other non-profit, human service organization. Commissions sanctioned, however, seldom need additional administrative funding because this is provided by the government. Therefore we can seek “project funding” money which is much easier to find and successfully monitor as it is expended. We can design 501(c)3 funding arms to approach foundations/corporations. Sanctioned commissions can more easily seek joint contracts with the job training program, other state and city departments (i.e.: Aging, Labor, etc.) and often have easier access to the knowledge of federal funds—not off the press. Should we lose the backing of our government (defunded or eliminated) we would lose much more than an organization which had worked successfully within the system to seek change and promote equality for women and children.  

Summary  

Yes, being a government body has its restrictions. But its advantages for the families, women, and children which we represent far outweigh the disadvantages. Being part of government and working from within often makes the changes we propose more long lasting with greater impact. To those women’s groups which call themselves commissions and propose to accomplish the same goal/objectives as NACW outside the system, you may want to reconsider. Let the government body you represent take as much pride in you as you do in your accomplishments. You may find the partnership well worth the restrictions.  
(The Breakthrough staff welcomes counter points of view but they must be signed; and submitted by the next issue—deadline date Oct. 15, 1985.)  

New York City  
CSW Holds  
Conference on  
UN Decade for  
Women  

On May 18, 1985 the Commission sponsored a conference — “From New York to Nairobi” — for over 250 women from the New York City area, most of whom were planning to attend the World Conference on the end of the U.N. Decade for Women in Nairobi, Kenya. A follow-up conference will be held on September 21 at which the events in Nairobi will be discussed by a distinguished panel of World Conference participants.  

The conference was held at Marymount Manhattan College and was made possible with funds from The Equitable Life Assurance Society, the Avon Foundation, District Council 37, International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union. The Office of the Mayor provided printing and other support services for this highly successful event.