STEVENS continued from page 1

discrimination against women. In our
judicial system, this could be partially
accomplished by appointing a woman
to the Supreme Court. He failed us.
Now it has been predicted that the
Senate will ignore our plea for justice
and confirm yet another man to rule on
cases concerning the nation’s
majority—women. I urge the Com-
mittee to exercise great caution in re-
viewing this nomination. The
Committee's responsibility is all the
greater in these unique circum-
stances.

The entire process by which Judge
Stevens was selected was dominated
by men. The President's policy ad-
visors were all men—only after ex-
tensive public outrage did the Presi-
dent even bother to add the names of
two women to the list referred to the
American Bar Association for evalua-
tion.

The ABA committee which re-
viewed the President's list of candi-
dates does not have one woman
among its eleven members, although
in 1974 women made up seven per-
cent of all lawyers and judges in the
nation and almost 20 percent of law
school enrollees. Just as in Title VII
cases the courts have increasingly

recognized the potential for bias in
evaluations of minorities by whites
and of women by men, so too the ABA
committee, dominated by white men,
cannot be inferred to be without sex or
race bias. Thus, it is not surprising
that the exceedingly few women who
were submitted by the President for
evaluation were not given a top score
as was Judge Stevens. Nor is it sur-
prising that the man chosen by them
has a record of consistent opposition
to women’s rights. In case after case,
he expressly opposed women’s in-
terests. These cases are important.
They warrant review.

In Rose v. Bridgeport Brass Co.,
Judge Stevens erroneously construed
the law and revealed his lack of under-
standing of sex discrimination. In
Rose, the plaintiff alleged that she had
been the victim of discrimination
when a job reclassification by the de-
fendant employer resulted in reducing
the percentage of women in the job
from 55 to 10 percent.

In Rose, the plaintiff's statistical
showing should have shifted the bur-
den of proof to the defendant emp-
loyer. However, the federal district
court erroneously dismissed the plain-
tiff without shifting this burden. The
majority of the Court of Appeals for

the Seventh Circuit reversed, stating
that the statistical information
surely raises the possibility that the
job reclassification has a dis-
criminatory effect.

Judge Stevens stated in his dissent
from the majority that he would have
affirmed the district court’s decision
even though he, himself, acknowledged
that the lower court had applied the
wrong procedural standard in granting
summary judgment for the defendant. Judge Stevens based his
dissent on what he perceived to be the
failure of the plaintiff to include any
evidence of discriminatory intent on
the part of the employer. Signifi-
cantly, the Supreme Court, two years
earlier, had stated that the existence of
discriminatory intent is not a prere-
quisite to making out a Title VII viola-
tion.

In 1973, the Supreme Court in Roe
v. Wade held that a woman has an
absolute right to choose whether to
have an abortion during the first
trimester of pregnancy and a qualified
right thereafter. The guarantee of this
Constitutional right has not been
forthcoming, however, to hundreds
of thousands of women who live in
areas where the only available medi-
cal facilities close their doors to
women and their doctors seeking to
exercise this right.

Judge Stevens is partly responsible
for this tragic development. Some six
months after the Supreme Court's
landmark decision, Judge Stevens
ruled that a woman two months preg-
nant, trapped by a severe snowstorm
in her own county—which contained
only private hospitals which refused
to allow her doctor to terminate her
pregnancy—was not entitled to relief.
Bellin Memorial Hospital was regu-
lated by the State of Wisconsin and
had received extensive Federal fund-
ing under the Hill Burton Act as well
as other Federal programs.

In a case challenging race discrimi-
nation by a private hospital with Hill
Burton funds, the Court of Appeals
for the Fourth Circuit found, in 1963,
that there was sufficient state gov-
ernment involvement to extend the
constitutional prohibitions against
race discrimination to the hospital.
The Fourth Circuit has applied this
rule to the question of a woman’s right
to choose. The Court of Appeals for
the Sixth Circuit has found a private
hospital to reflect sufficient state ac-
tion on a slightly different rationale.
But Judge Stevens, seeming to bend
over backwards to limit this basic
right due all women, rejected the
Fourth Circuit precedent, finding the
amount of state involvement insuffi-
cient to require Bellin Memorial Hos-
pital to open its doors to the plaintiff’s
doctor.

The courts of appeals are currently
divided on this issue, and the Supreme
Court recently declined to review the
question. Thus, the law will remain
unsettled. Nevertheless, it cannot be
overemphasized that the women of
this nation will view a vote to approve
Judge Stevens as a vote to limit the
rights of many women to choose
whether to have a child.

The opinion of Judge Stevens in
Dyer v. Blair provided yet another
example of this tendency. The facts
were that the Illinois Senate had voted
on the Equal Rights Amendment
(ERA) during the 77th General
Assembly and, on the strength of a
simple majority, entered in its journal
that ERA had passed and referred
ERA to the House of Representatives.
The House did not act during that ses-
sion. When the 78th General Assem-
bly was convened, opponents of ERA
engineered a procedural change, the
‘Rule 42’. Rule 42 required prop-
osed amendments to the federal Con-
stitution to pass by a three-fifths vote
rather than a simple majority. When
the vote was taken in the House, ERA
received more votes than required for
a simple majority, but fewer than
three-fifths. It was declared to have
failed. As might have been expected,
Judge Stevens upheld the three-fifths
rule, the practical effect of which was
to defeat ERA in the State of Illinois.

Judge Stevens’ propensity to find
against female plaintiffs was again
demonstrated in Cohen v. Illinois In-
stitute of Technology, a case in
which a woman, repeatedly denied
tenure, alleged sex discrimination by
a private higher-education institution
receiving federal and state funds. In
his opinion, Judge Stevens denied the
plaintiff any discovery rights to estab-
lish facts supporting her state action
claim on the grounds that she had
failed to allege that the state had “af-
firmatively supported or expressly
approved any discriminatory act or
policy, or even had actual knowledge
of any such discrimination.”

Judge Stevens thus requires civil
rights plaintiffs to show affirmative
conduct by the state in support of dis-
crimination. However, the Supreme
Court in Burton v. Wilmington
Parking Authority took a position
far more supportive of civil rights,
when it found mere acquiescence by
the state in the discrimination to be
sufficient:

By its inaction, the Authority, and
through it the State, has not only made
itself a party to the refusal of service
(to blacks), but has elected to place its
power, property and prestige behind
the admitted discrimination.

Moreover, the burden imposed by
Judge Stevens on the woman in this
case went far beyond that required by
other courts of appeals considering
similar claims by women asserting
their rights to equal employment.

The important thing to remember
about Judge Stevens’ participation in

the following telegram was sent 11:30 a.m., December 9, 1975 to
Senator James O. Eastland, Chairman, Judiciary Committee.
Copies were sent to President Gerald Ford and Senator Charles
Percy. Copies were distributed to all members of the Judiciary

Committee.

Bowe v. Colgate, is that the real deci-
sion of this case had been made by the
Court of Appeals before his appoint-
ment. Therefore, his silent acquies-
cence in the unanimous court’s opin-
ion on the limited and secondary is-
sues presented when Bowe v. Col-
gate was appealed the second time
cannot be taken as evidence of sen-
sitivity to women’s issues. Judge Ste-
vens has never been the author of an
opinion on behalf of a woman litigat-
ing a “women’s issue” although he
wrote some 240 opinions during his
tenure.

The decisions in which he partici-
pated while sitting on the Circuit
Court raise the question of whether
he can fairly, judiciously and impar-
tially review those cases which would
reach him as a Justice of the Supreme
Court and whether he could render
fair and impartial decisions governed
by laws and facts applicable to each
case. His history as a Circuit Judge
clearly indicates that he cannot. In
many of his decisions he has been at
odds with his own Circuit. More im-
portantly, he has refused guidance
from the Supreme Court decisions on
these issues by which he was bound as
a Circuit Judge. His decisions have
flown in the face of the applicable
laws duly passed by a Congress
elected by the people, both men and
women. Thus, NOW believes that
Judge Stevens lacks impartiality—a
requisite for appointment to the Sup-
reme Court.

The National Organization for
Women believes that from this record
an antagonism to women’s rights on
the part of Judge Stevens is clear. For
this reason, we oppose his confirma-
tion.

POSTSCRIPT: In spite of the
Stevens record of insensitivity to-
ward issues affecting women, Elaine
Latourell—the only non-majority
caucus member on the executive
board of NOW—made a public
statement saying NOW was “basi-
cally pleased” with the Stevens
nomination. She added she felt Ste-
vens had a reputation for making deci-
sions on the basis of the best legal
precedent and that “women don’t
have anything to fear because our is-
sues stand up to intellectual
scrutiny.”

The National Women’s Political Caucus is appalled that Judge
John Paul Stevens, the man currently under consideration for the
second most important position in the United States government,
has not, by his own admission, thought through his opinion on the
Equal Rights Amendment. His reliance on the equal protection
clause of the 14th Amendment indicates his lack of understanding of
the need for an ERA. The courts have not categorically declared
women, like blacks, to be a suspect classification which would
mandate the courts’ close scrutiny of sex-based discrimination laws.
Accordingly, some claims of sex-based discrimination, relying on
14th Amendment protection, have been lost before the Supreme
Court. These cases would most likely be turned around by the
enactment of ERA. Judge Stevens’ indifference to the most
significant piece of legislation concerning women today is an affront
to the women of this country. We urge the committee to examine
him at great length to determine if he has sufficient sensitivity to the
legal needs of the 53 percent of this country’s population who are
women.

Audrey Rowe Colom
Chairwoman, National
Woman’s Political Caucus