Did You Know That

. 53 women are among the 1,428 living members of the National Academy of
Sciences.

. Women are 52% of the population and 6% of the U.S. engineering work-
force.

. $33,335 is the average salary offered to a student with a 1984 bachelor’s de-
gree in petroleum engineering.

. $17,742 is the average salary offered to a student with a 1984 bachelor’s de-
gree in humanities.

. In 1982, technology-oriented employment totaled about 3.2% of the work
force. High technology will account for 6% of the total employment
through 1995.

. Fifty-two percent of all students taking the SATs were female; 60% of the
black students taking the SATs were female.

. Engineering is the most popular field of intended study for males taking
the 1984 SATs. Business is the most popular field for females.

. In New England, 65.3% of high school seniors have taken three years of
mathematics, 46% is the national percentage.

. In 1981, 11% of the nation’s schools were using at least one microcomputer
for instruction and 68% were using them in 1983!

. The average male college graduate who was 18 in 1979 and is now fully em-
ployed can expect to earn $1.4 million in his lifetime. A female can expect
half a million less, ($955,000).

. In 1952, 49% of men and women in the workforce had less than four years
of high school education. Today 20% of men and 15% of women in the
labor force have less than four years of high school education.

. Nationwide, 6% of skilled craft workers are female.

. In 1984, the average teacher’s salary was $22,000. $26,403 is the average
salary for a California teacher.

. $4,747 is the median income for women over 65.

. 51.6% of black students obtaining Ph.Ds in 1983 earned them in education.

. 9% of college presidents are women.

. School enrollment among Hispanics in 1981 was 83% for 16-and 17-year-
olds and 38% for 18-and 19-year-olds.

. Twenty-three of the 25 largest city school systems enrolled 50% or more mi-
nority students in 1980.

What’s going on?

AUSTIN, TEXAS
Networking

The 250 women attending the Aus-
tin Commission for Women’s Sixth
Annual Networking Brunch, on April
27, at the Hyatt Regency on Town
Lake, gave the event top evaluation
marks.

Chairperson Billie Passmore offi-
cially welcomed Austin women and
introduced Dr. Jan Triplett, facilita-
tor, who introduced the speakers. Gay
Erwin, Executive Director, Gover-
nor’s Commission for Women, spoke
on “The Commission's Accomplish-
ments and Upcoming Calendar.” Jane
Wells, a Governmental Relations
Consultant, focused on “Networking:
The Why and How.” A newcomer to
Austin, Dian Harrison, President,
Austin Area Urban League, chose
“How to Set Up a Network when
Transferred.” “Communication in
Networking” was ably handled by
Margaret Keys, Miller-Keys Associ-
ates.

Chairpersons from the neighbor-
hood Network Satellites worked with
the Commission to arrange this fabu-
lous Austin Women’s Networking
Brunch.

Governor’s Commission for Women

Governor Mark White will inaugu-
rate 15 outstanding women into the
second annual Texas Women’s Hall
of Fame on November 14, 1985, at
the University of Texas’ Performing
Arts Center during the celebration of
“Women in Texas Today” week in
Austin.

Individuals or groups may nomi-

Florida
Conference
on Education

Tallahassee was the site of a confer-
ence geared to improving the status of
women and girls in education. Six
women legislators presented current
legislation which affects women and
children’s education needs.

Workshop topics included discus-
sions on policies in Florida schools
and colleges.

Governor Bob Graham and Dr.
Barbara Newell, chancellor of the
state university system, presented
goals and necessary improvements for
education to an audience drawn from
around the state. NACW commis-
sions attending included Dade Coun-
ty, City of Jacksonville, Palm Beach
County, Volusia County, and Gaines-
ville.

Volusia County.

The Rape Task Force was instru-
mental in opening a crisis center. The
center will include medical services,
counseling, and shelter. Located close
to a hospital, it will be staffed by paid
professionals and trained volunteers.
The center will provide services and a
hotline 24 hours a day.

SEMINARS
ON BREAST
CANCER FOR

nate women for the Hall of Fame who

NEW YORK CITY...

785 CONVENTION
FOLK!

Did You Participate
in the
“Communications
Era and Women”
Workshop??

By some oversight, our sign-up list
did not circulate. PLEASE SEND
name, etc. if you wish to be included
for follow-up “Communications Era”
mailings. Mail request to S.C.
Women’s Commission, 2221 Devine
St., Ste. 408, Columbia, SC 29205.

There is no established ‘schedule’
for mailings; we hope to keep you
alert to what’s moving forward in the
transition from high-tech to high-
touch.

FOR EVERY WOMAN

For every woman who is tired of acting weak when she knows she is strong,
there is a man who is tired of appearing strong when he feels vulnerable.

For every woman who is tired of acting dumb, there is a man who is burdened
with the constant expectations of “knowing everything.”

For every woman who is tired of being called an “emotional female,” there is a
man who is denied the right to weep and be gentle.

For every female who is tired of being a sex object, there is a man who must
worry about his potency.

For every woman who feels tied down by her children, there is a man who is
denied the full pleasures of shared parenthood.

For every woman who is denied equal employment with equal pay, there is a
man who must bear full financial responsibility for another human being.

For every woman who is not taught the intricacies of an automobile, there is a
man who was not taught the satisfaction of cooking.

For every woman who takes a step toward her own liberation, there is a man
who finds the way to freedom has been made a little easier.

have contributed their talents and
skills to make a significant impact on
the state’s development and growth in
one of the following areas:
Agriculture and Ranching; Arts; Ath-
letics; Business and Finance; Civic
Leadership; Communications; Educa-
tion; Health Professions; Legal Pro-
fessions; Public Service; Science and
Technology; and Volunteerism.
Governor White, members of the
Governor’s Commission for Women,
and a panel of public members will
select winning nominees.
- For further information, contact the
Governor’s Commission for Women,
(512) 475-0360.

South Carolina
Advisory Council

A council of former commissioners
has been set up to monitor the out-
reach of the commission’s programs
and activities and to make annual
recommendations to the commission.

WOMEN.
EMPLOYEES

With the cooperation of the New
York City Division of the American
Cancer Society, the Women’s Advi-
sors of New York City and the New
York City CSW co-sponsored a series
of seminars on early detection and
treatment of breast cancer for women
municipal employees. Starting in
April and continuing through June,
hundreds of women received litera-
ture, saw a film on breast self-exami-
nation and had the opportunity to ask
questions of experts at the seminars
which were held at more than 30
work-sites throughout the City. There
was so much interest generated by
these seminars that the CSW is con-
sidering the possibility of providing a
vehicle for the dissemination of infor-
mation on other health issues of
particular concern to women during
the coming year.

Connie Woodruff Receives Top Honor -

Connie Woodruff, current president
elect of NACW, is one of America’s
Top 100 Black Business and Profes-
sional Women, and will be featured in
Dollars and Sense magazine, “A Sa-
lute to America’s Top 100 Black Busi-
ness and Professional Women.”

Connie is invited to an elegant re-
ception at the Dallas Convention
Center on August 3, 1985 featuring a
tribute given by Reverend Jesse L.
Jackson.

Congratulations Connie, for this
special honor! 

Page 3—