Pats and Pans

A PAT, yes, to Time for recognizing women on their annual “Man of the Year” cover after almost 40 years of male covers (the last woman appeared in the 30's). A PAN for spreading the distinction thin amongst 12 women. (Do 12 women equal one man? Will this collective cover take care of women until 2000?) PAN for having a male write the cover story and for his superficial treatment of feminism, the social movement that brought the great changes, his surface reporting on the “factional disputes” within NOW, and his sinister summary of the effects of the ERA.

A beef PAT to the Longhorn Radio network which, in cooperation with the Gay Academic Union, is working on a series of half-hour programs to be entitled: “What's Normal? An Examination of Changing Sexual Lifestyles in our Society.” Series producer is Frieda L. Werden. (Reported in Pointblank Times.)

The stock answer from the media to all requests that women’s issues be given more coverage is lack of airtime. For over two weeks in December, KPRC-TV devoted about four minutes daily on “The Scene at Five” to Christmas gift ideas, featuring one specific store or restaurant daily. Four minutes of free advertising. For this Channel 2 and its free-loading advertisers.

Speaking before several thousand attending the Greater Cleveland IWY Congress she said, “My own support of the Equal Rights Amendment has shown what happens when a definition of proper behavior collides with an individual's right to personal opinions. I do not believe that being First Lady should prevent me from expressing my views.” When Time magazine told her she was one of 12 “Women of the Year,” she replied it was a shame Time could not name a “Human of the Year.”

A well-deserved PAT to the CBS Network for its recent four-part series on battered wives. The series concluded that it was the degree of acceptability of violence in society together with the conditioning of generations of men to be “tough” that leads to this male-against-female violence. The final observation by reporter David Culhain was that “we must change the definition of what makes a man a man in our society.”

An Austin-American States PAN. The Austin-American Statesman, in reporting on Barbara Jordan’s keynote address to the Conference on Women in Public Life in Austin, described the U.S. Representative as a “chunky, forceful Black . . .” Looking at the other page one newsmakers that day, one wonders if the press ever would have given “equal treatment” by describing Rockefeller as “paunchy” or Moynihan as “pudgy” forceful white males? Also on page one, a Dallas woman was described as a “37 year-old divorced mother of two.” Then why not, V. P. Rockefeller, “a 67 year-old divorced father of seven?”

A PAT to Martha Liebrum for an excellent report on the invisible minority, “The Chicana.” The article appeared last fall in the Post's “Today” section and focused on a Chicana Studies course taught by Sally Andrade at the Houston Community College.

An appreciative PAT to Texas Supreme Court Justice Joe Greenhill on his appointment of feminist leader Helen Copitka as a Parole Commissioner on the Board of Pardons and Paroles. Copitka holds a Master’s Degree in Rehabilitative Counseling and an E.D.S. in counseling psychology. She was formerly Research Director of the Houston Council on Human Relations. Her appointment will help to bring some justice into the criminal justice system.

A slightly pained PAT to the Rhodes Trust which, after 73 years, has finally agreed to accept applications from women who want to spend two paid years of graduate study at Oxford. It’s been a long, long Rhodes.

PAT to James Oitzinger and Gerald Birnberg, counsels acting on behalf of the ACLU in representing a civil suit filed by a group of inmates which charged that conditions in the county jail violated the prisoners’ constitutional protections against “cruel and unusual treatment.” PAT to U.S. District Court Judge Carl O. Bue who ordered major jail reforms for Harris County, particularly in the area of pre-trial release. Reforms range from hygienic living conditions to vocational education programs. Bue hinted he would close the jails if the county did not comply with his orders.

Cosmopolitan rates a Peter PAN for its male nude centerfolds. Don't they know that men are not sex objects?

Texas A&I is PANned for its treatment of Esther Pena, a student who was kicked off the volleyball team because she refused to wear a bra. She had played two previous seasons without one. Pena feels the bra is not the real issue. She recently presented a list of grievances ranging from the male coaches’ behavior on tournament trips to poor lodging and meals.

“Twas sick and tired of the way women in women’s athletics got treated,” she said. Pena feels that all agencies, offices and administrators on campus have failed to help her with her grievances and sees legal action as the next logical step.

PAN to the Post for its 5-column, front page headline (December 9): “4 City Drug Officers Wounded; Police Hunt Woman As Suspect.” The story reported that a male suspect was also being sought. Two weeks later, when the woman suspect was no-billed by a grand jury, the Post devoted a couple of sentences on page 2 (no headline) saying she was cleared.

PAT to KXYZ News Director Thomas Wright for broadcasting three hours of panel discussions on the image of women in the media and keynote speeches by Elizabeth Reid and Barbara Jordan from the Austin Women in Public Life Conference, and making the tapes available free of cost to individual women, women’s groups and libraries. (Program aired on KXYZ-AM and KAUM-FM).

Channel 39 deserves a pitter-PAT for having children present their news before the hour four times a day. But, they also deserve a small-fry PAN for having no Chicano representation. There are two Anglos (one male, one female) and two Blacks (one male, one female). And, while we're at it, why not at least one newscast daily in Spanish?

A well-deserved PAT to Ms. Magazine for its employee stock-ownership trust, whereby the controlling stock of the magazine will be divided among all the staffers. Founding editor Steinem and publisher Carbine, the principal stockholders, searched for over two years before coming up with this plan.

“Grateful” PAT to the Ministers of Social Affairs of the European Common Market who have agreed to give women equal access to jobs. The ministers also decided that women should have equal rights concerning vocational training, working conditions, and advancement.

A (Pi) PAN to Lamar University President John E. Gray who backed the graduate council’s rejection of the thesis of Cathryn King, a master’s candidate in mathematics, because her thesis on celestial navigation included three pictures of herself in a bikini. Gray says he will continue to support the graduate council “in their efforts to maintain high standards for the scholarship on our campus. The basic issue in this case is scholarship, not morals, not women's liberation, not civil liberties,” he said.

PAT to KHOU-TV for their coverage of the U.S. Women’s Gymnastic Competition, held for the first time in Houston.

PAN to all three television sports reporters for film clip after dull film clip of stand-up interviews with sport heroes. PAN. Where were all those highly-touted portable cameras when the U.S. Women’s Olympic Volleyball team played their Chinese counterparts in Pasadena, Texas? PAT to the sports departments (particularly KHOU-TV) for their coverage of the U.S. Women’s Gymnastic Competition, held for the first time in Houston.

PAT for the... Ames Show (KPRC-TV). Ames is a wholesome change in the noun... we still have hopes she will keep her opening-show promise to feature women community leaders and to emphasize her Spanish heritage. (AAUW spokeswomen could not get air time to present their IWY Outstanding Women of the Year project). PAN for the inordinate amount of time that has been devoted to set decorations, plants and fashions.

PAT to KHOU’s new noon-time format, a great improvement over the meek and mild interview show it replaced. Now we have extended news coverage with a woman anchor and shorter and more issue-oriented interviews at the show’s end. PAN for the daily everything-you-would-ever-want-to-know-about-weather report.

A PAT to Business Week (November 24) for an excellent article on “The Corporate Woman—Up the Ladder, Finally.” It pointed out that after a decade of federal legislation, efforts from the feminist movement, and changes in public opinion, women were making corporate gains in areas other than personnel and consumer relations. Interesting points raised on problems women executives encounter in the “old boys’ network.”

PAT for Joan Nixon's New Year Day column filled with reflections on the old year and what could have been—the first appointment of a woman to the Supreme Court, women turning off their soap operas and campaigning for women candidates, and the AMA developing a Pill for men with the same side effects and possible hazards.

PAT to delegates of the AAUW’s National convention for cancelling its 1977 convention site, St. Louis, Missouri, because delegates agreed the convention could not be held in a state that has not ratified the Equal Rights Amendment. The hotel managers expressed concern that the 5,000 delegates would meet elsewhere. Cities in states which have ratified the ERA are being considered, (Houston is in a state which has!)

PAN the Houston Chronicle Sports Section (Dec. 11) ran a solo article provocatively headlined, “Girl Athletes Called Dykes,” one of a four-part series on homosexual athletes syndicated from the Washington Star. The Star headline for the same article read, “That Lesbian Image Haunts Women Athletes”—not girl, not dyke. The Star also ran the other three articles on the series on homosexual football players. The Chronicle did not. Why not? (More on this subject from Janice Cunningham in February Breakthrough.)

PAN to newly-elected HISD board member William Holland who was quoted as saying he believed Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 was wrong. “There is only one thing a girl can beat a boy doing,” the 71-year-old retired school principal said. “That's being a girl.”

PAT to Dr. Benjamin Spock for rewriting his 1947 “Baby and Child Care” book (24 million copies have been sold) to eliminate sexist language and to stress the father’s role in parenting. Baby is no longer “he” but “they,” or sometimes Spock says, “Let’s assume it’s a girl.” He recommends that fathers spend 50 percent of their time with the child when not at work.

PAN to Post political cartoonist Bill Saylor for portraying in caricature “militant women’s lib” as a woman in a battle tank shooting shells at a male who is armed with stones and bricks. Caught in the middle of the fire is a caricature housewife carrying an ERA placard. (Saylor should be reminded that violence is abhorrent to feminists.) Below Saylor’s illustration was a Harris survey on the growth of women’s rights support.

PAN to the White House for paying its woman editor of the daily White House news summary $12,000 a year while her male predecessor received $26,000. Presidential counsel Philip Buchen asserted that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is “not applicable to the White House office.”