What’s the score?

The following is an interview with Jan Cunningham,  
National Coordinator of the Women in Sports Task  

Force, NOW.  

BREAKTHROUGH:  

Historically women have been viewed as the “weaker” sex and  
their active participation in sports has been discouraged. Con-  
sequently, the female athlete has been seen as an “oddball” or a  
misfit in society. What, in your opinion, is the reason for this at-  
titude?  

CUNNINGHAM:  

The attitude that women are the “weaker” sex is primarily the  
result of social conditioning. Sports are considered a masculine  
domain where one is rewarded for action, intelligence, creativity,  
independence, aggressiveness, competitiveness and a spirit of  
adventure, traits which are recognized by psychologists and society  
as “masculine” traits. To become an athlete a female must put  
aside the “female” identified sex traits such as dependence, inac-  
tiveness, submissiveness, passiveness, etc. and adopt the  
masculine traits. Therefore, she is seen as a “she-man,” a lesbian  
or some other sort of social freak and her achievements are thereby  
rendered “exceptional” and not to be taken seriously. This type of  
thinking is not, by the way, limited to female athletes. Any woman  
who competes successfully in a male dominated field must fear  
success as well as failure. In succeeding in her field she “fails” as a  
woman in the eyes of society.  

BREAKTHROUGH:  

Still, men are considered stronger and better suited physically for  
athletics than women. Why should women and girls be encouraged  
to participate in sports when their chances of success are minimal?  

The physiological differences between men and women are vastly  
overrated. It is true that the average male is larger, heavier and  
stronger than the average female. However, in recent tests between  
well conditioned females and males with average conditioning the  
females outperformed the males in all areas. It is only in sports  
where strength and height are the predominating factors that men  
can consistently outperform women.  

CUNNINGHAM:  

For example, 25 years ago the women’s record for the 100 meter  
dash was 11.5 seconds compared to the men’s record of 10.2. Today the  
men’s record is 9.9, an improvement of only .3 seconds, while the  
women’s record is 10.8, an improvement of .7 seconds and only .9  
seconds off the men’s record.  

Even more dramatically, Shane Gould’s current women’s world  
record for the 400 meter freestyle is 4:21.2, a full pool length ahead of  
Johnny Weissmuller’s men’s record of 4:52.0 in 1927. Physiologists  
believe that as more and more women are given the advantage of  
diet, training and coaching methods that are provided to male athletes,  
the gap between sexes in most physical tests could well be narrowed  
to 10% or less. It is already known that females outperform males  
up until puberty and, as we all know, it is in puberty that social  
conditioning really begins to make itself felt. Then the “tomboy” is  
expected to lay aside her football and take up knitting.  

BREAKTHROUGH:  

You’ve been talking primarily about competitive athletics. What  
about the woman who’s not extremely competitive? What would  
sports have to offer her?  

CUNNINGHAM:  

The Greeks had the theory that a sound body was a prime requisite  
for a sound mind. Supposedly, that is the guiding principle of  
physical educators today. Unfortunately, it is often lost in the mad  
scramble to get to the top where winning is everything and the only  
measure of success. There definitely should be a reemphasis on  
competition and a reemphasis on conditioning as a way of life.  

BREAKTHROUGH:  

Any woman who participates in some sort of athletic activity,  
whether it be jogging, exercise or active sport will eventually come  
to a greater awareness of, identify with, and satisfaction with her  
own body. This satisfaction and body awareness is seen by the  
majority of mental health authorities as being a prime requisite to a  
healthy self-image and, consequently, good mental health.  

CUNNINGHAM:  

Perhaps Olympian Francie Kraker best summed it up when she  
was discussing jogging in a recent issue of Ms. magazine. “With  
jogging, she discovered the joy of letting go, of taking off barefoot  
down a country road or across a field. She became conscious of the  
small pleasures of being fit—the harmony of mind and body, the  
ability to bound upstairs with ease, to sleep well and wake with a  
feeling of anticipation... At those times, she never doubted who she  
was. Winning diminished in importance when she realized that she  
had already won most of what she wanted.”  

BREAKTHROUGH:  
What do you see in the future for women in sports?  

CUNNINGHAM:  

There will have to be a definite change in the philosophy of  
physical educators and society in general. We are going to have to  
begin in the grammar schools by exposing girls to the same op-  
portunities in coaching and training that we give boys and this will  
have to be carried forward into the junior and senior high schools.  
Like integration, it will be a time-consuming process and won’t  
happen overnight.  

However, it has already begun. The Little League decision has  
opened the door to girls and now they’ll receive the same training  
and coaching opportunities as boys have been receiving. Gradually  
the results of this equal opportunity will pay off and you’ll see more  
and more women competing with and against men in sports like  
track, baseball, tennis, golf, swimming and other similar sports  
which are not controlled primarily by height and weight.  

Also, given the opportunity to participate together throughout  
their school years, boys and girls and men and women should learn  
to re-evaluate society’s position concerning sports and they should  
begin participating together in all sports, whether competitive or  
not, on a more or less equal basis. That is to say, men will no longer  
feel that they must dominate all sports activities and “show off” for  
women and women will no longer feel that they must sit back and be  
passive spectators.  

Pam Spira on way  
to Olympic games  

Hi there sports fans! Did you know the Olympics are coming this  
year? Did you know they are held only once every four years? Did  
you know that tryouts for the United States’ women’s Olympic team  
in gymnastics were held here in Houston December 6?  

You didn’t know that? Don’t you read the papers?  

You do read the papers, you say, but you only saw the advance  
stories and a Page 6 photo and caption in the Post Sports Section  
(Sun., Dec. 7) and a dab more in the Chronicle the day after the  
meet.  

Did you find out who qualified in this, the first of three tryouts leading  
to the Montreal Olympics?  

Did you know that 16-year-old Houstonian, Pam Spira, by  
taking a 2nd medal in floor exercises and by placing 11th out of 68  
regional finalists from all over the USA?  

Remember, you read it here!  

PEGGY HALL  

Olympic hopeful Pam Spira  

~ This  

ACLU continued from page 4  

marital status discrimination may actually be  
sex discrimination; banks which  
used to discount the wife’s in-  
come when a couple applied for  
a mortgage now say that they  
will discount either income.  

In order to attack marital  
status discrimination in Texas it  
is necessary to show the sex  
discriminatory effect of certain  
practices. The burden this  
imposes on women illustrates  
the necessity of pushing for  
inclusion of marital status in  
any future legislation.  

The enforcement provision of  
the Texas law gives the in-  
dividual a private right of action  
and does not force her to restrict  
her complaint to an administrative  
remedy. It allows the recovery of  
actual damages suffered or fifty dollars,  
whichever is greater. Our  
Statute also provides for the  
recovery of court costs, but  
unlike some states’, does not  
allow attorney’s fees or punitive  
damages to be assessed against  
the loser in the court action.  
While the Texas prohibition of  
sex discrimination shows the  
legislature’s recognition of the  
problem, the omission of  
marital status discrimination  
and the recent passage of the  
Federal Equal Credit Op-  
portunity Act, with its strong  
enforcement provisions, have  
shifted the emphasis in com-  
batting sexism in credit to the  
national level.  

The Equal Credit Opportunity  
Act prohibits discrimination on  
the basis of sex or marital status  
by any consumer or commercial  
creditor. While it permits  
creditors to consider the effects  
of applicable state laws that  
affect credit-worthiness, it  
assures equal access to credit to  
women regardless of their sex or  
marital status.  

As an amendment to the  
Federal Depository Insurance  
Bill, the Equal Credit Op-  
portunity Act is enforced  
through a number of federal  
agencies. On October 28, 1975 the  
Federal Reserve Board issued  
the final draft of its “Regulation  
B,” which provided guidelines  
for these agencies in their im-  
plementation of the Act.  

Several sections of the original  
Regulations received  
widespread criticism from the  
credit industry. While the final  
Regulations reflect this “foot  
dragging” by allowing creditors  
more time to comply with the  
provisions, the Regulations are  
generally considered to be  
comprehensive in their  
prohibition of a multitude of sex-  
based credit discrimination  
practices. The Regulations  
impose some general  
requirements on creditors, such  
as informing applicants that the  
use of titles (like Mr., Ms., Mrs.,  
or Miss) on applications forms is  
optional, or requiring creditors  
to give in writing the REASONS  
for credit denials. In addition to  
these general provisions, the  
rather complex guidelines can  
also be broken down into more  
practical “dos” and “don’ts” for  
creditors who are required to  
bring their credit practices into  
line with the Equal Credit Op-  
portunity Act.  

By PATTY O’KANE  
continued in February  
Breakthrough