Breakthrough

A feminist  
newspaper  

Vol. 1 No. 1  

Complimentary copy  

January 1976  

NOW challenges Stevens  

‘This is the Douglas seat and you  
just don’t give it to anybody.’  

That was the sentiment expressed  
by NOW President Karen DeCrow,  
herself a lawyer, when she learned in  
late November that John Paul Ste-  
vens, a jurist who has consistently  
failed in his legal opinions to recog-  
nize the issue of women’s equal  
rights, had been nominated by Presi-  
dent Ford to replace Senior Justice  
William O. Douglas on the U.S. Sup-  
reme Court.  

Throughout his legal career Justice  
Douglas, a liberal and non-  
conformist, had been an ally of  
women's causes. He voted for an end  
to anti-abortion laws. He opposed in-  
voluntary sterilization of welfare  
mothers. He was a strong adversary  
against sex discrimination.  

As DeCrow said, this was the  
Douglas seat and it could not be given  
to just anybody. Douglas’ seat was  
given to a man who will likely join the  
Nixon court in reversing the liberal  
tide dating back to Earl Warren.  

In the December Senate confirma-  
tion hearings, Stevens said he was  
more concerned about discrimination  
against Blacks than against women.  

“NOW is disgusted at this blatant  
example of the white male power  
structure pitting women against  
minority males and making us all  
scramble for the crumbs of power,”  
DeCrow said. “The NOW board is  
profoundly shocked that President  
Ford is not able to see the significance  
not only of not appointing a woman to  
the bench but of appointing a man who  
is so against women’s rights that he  
does not even understand the issues of  
civil rights for women in 1975.”  

Although he told the Senate he be-  
lieved in “the equality of the sexes,”  
Stevens has done his best to see that  
the Equal Rights Amendment has a  
rocky road to ratification. In Illinois,  
he wrote an opinion in which he said  
that that state could require a three-  
fifths vote—rather than a simple  
majority—of the Legislature to pass  
the ERA. Stevens’ ruling conse-  
quently made possible the defeat of  
the ERA in Illinois.  

In another anti-feminist decision,  
Stevens dissented from the majority  
opinion which held that United Air  
Lines could not fire women flight at-  
tendants simply because they got mar-  
ried.  

In a case involving hair codes and  
dress codes, Stevens wrote that stu-  
dents should know their styles may  
offend their elders.  

“That line of reasoning made me  
very nervous for feminists,” DeCrow  
said. In her opinion, practically every  
women’s issue that will go before the  
Supreme Court will “offend the el-  
ders, will offend somebody's idea of  
behavior for women and men.”  

NOW criticizes Stevens’ legal  
opinions on women’s issues because  
they are based on apparent personal  
philosophy—not on the facts and laws  
of the cases before him. The White  
House, however, praises Stevens for  
being a legal conservative and for  
being “strongly bound by prece-  
dent.”  

One would question anyone who  
is “strongly bound by precedent.”  
There was once a precedent to deny  
women the right to vote; there was  
once a precedent for legal slavery  
and lynchings; there was once a  
precedent for segregation; there was  
once a precedent against abortion;  
and, without the ERA, there is still  
a precedent against equal rights  
for women.  

The Supreme Court Justice is  
interpreting the Constitution and, while  
presidents are limited to two terms in  
office, Supreme Court justices are  
appointed for life. History has de-  
monstrated that one out of every four  
justices appointed to the court serves  
at least two decades—a generation.  
Stevens, who is 55 years old, can  
expect to stay on the court from 20 to  
30 years.  

Despite his conservative opinions,  
Stevens, an admitted strict construc-  
tionist, had only minimal opposition  
to his nomination from citizens’  
groups. The Senate confirmed his  
nomination 98-0.  

The strongest protest to his confir-  
mation came from NOW. The follow-  
ing is a portion of the NOW testimony  
before the Senate Judiciary Commit-  
tee.  

My name is Margaret Drachsler  
speaking for the National Organiza-  
tion for Women (NOW), an organiza-  
tion of 60,000 women, with over 700  
chapters throughout the country.  

I am here to express my grave con-  
cern regarding both the nomination of  
John Paul Stevens to the Supreme  
Court and the manner in which it was  
accomplished. This appointment was  
made by a President who has not been  
elected to the Presidency and who was  
never elected to any office by a con-  
stituency larger than a Congressional  
District. Each member of this Com-  
mittee has a statewide constituency.  

At the outset, NOW wishes to ex-  
press the feelings of millions of  
women and men today: it is time to  
have women on the Supreme Court.  
After 200 years of living under laws  
written, interpreted, and enforced ex-  
clusively by men, we have a right to be  
judged by a court representative of all  
people—more than half of whom are  
women. The President owes us a duty  
to begin to eliminate the 200 years of  

Continued on page 12  

Film grant offered  

In the December issue of Houston Town & Country magazine  
writer Harla Kaplan quotes filmmaker Janice Blue as saying:  

“Film is a social tool. There is a real need for women filmmakers  
now that we have demystified the technology of films and the  
mystery of the camera. We have a responsibility to use those tools  
to document our lives — if women don’t, no one else will.”  

To break down one of the barriers to women becoming film-  
makers BREAKTHROUGH in collaboration with the Rice Media  
Center will offer a tuition ($250) plus film (up to $200) scholarship  
to the Media Center’s evening Community Film Workshop course  
to a woman who presents the best documentary project dealing with  
the changing role of women in society today. It may be a portrait of  
one woman, a project examining a group of women, or one on the  
relationships of women to men, other women, their families or  
co-workers.  

You do not need to send a resume, or show a portfolio of photo-  
graphs or bring a film in hand. All you need is a serious commit-  
ment to communicate via film what is happening to women in the  
dramatic social changes of the 1970s. This may be done in a 1-3  
page project description.  

In collaborating with the editors of BREAKTHROUGH on this  
project, James Blue, co-director of the Rice Media Center said, “I  
think it’s very important that women, minorities, and other interest  
groups have access to the tools of communication and use them.  
The Community Film Workshop course is designed to give a prac-  
tical introduction and instruction on the use of those tools.”  

The evening course will begin in mid-February and will run  
throughout the semester. Students will work in Super-8 and  
videotape.  

Women interested in the film scholarship should send a project  
description to BREAKTHROUGH by February 4. The editorial  
staff of the newspaper will make the decision based on the written  
material submitted by the applicant. The film student and project  
will be reported on in the March issue.