AAUW Honor Roll

Alice Whatley.

These six Houston women were honored as “Outstanding Women of the Year” in 1975 by the Houston Branch of the American Association of University Women (AAUW) in recognition of the United Nations-proclaimed International Women’s Year.

A dinner was held in early November at Cohen House on the Rice University campus and was attended by over 100 AAUW members, spouses, and guests.

Gertrude Barnstone gave the keynote address and the honorees in their acceptance speeches articulated their concern for the need of progress in their career areas.

Presiding over the evening were the local AAUW officers:

Carole Pinkett.

Alice Church, President; Marge Miller, Edwina Milner and Dr. Erna B. Jones, Vice Presidents; Lucille Ferris, Secretary; Gwen Crockett, Treasurer; and Joan Hanlon, Lynne Mutchler, and Hattie Thurlow, AAUW-Award Committee Members.

The honorees were recognized for their significant contributions in their respective fields of work.

Elma Barrera.

EDUCATION. Dr. Alice Elrod Whatley is the Coordinator of the “Contemporary Woman Series” in the Continuing Education Department at the University of Houston. She initiated and developed the series, a program of credit-free workshops, for women in the area of employment - career development, academic degree completion and volunteer service-community issues. Additionally, Dr. Whatley has designed workshops and conferences on all levels for individuals and groups requesting assistance in meeting specific continuing education needs. She has been a member of the faculty at UT-Austin and the University of Oklahoma at Norman in the areas of adult education, home economics, teacher education, and family life education.

COMMUNICATION. Elma Barrera attended law school and worked in the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City before going into broadcast journalism. She began at KAUM-Radio and is now a news reporter at KTRK-TV. Barrera regularly hosts Channel 13’s “Mexican-American Dialogue” and anchors several weekly morning newscasts at the station. She also produces and anchors the only all-Spanish television news program in Houston, “Noticitas con Elma” which airs weekly at 6 p.m. on KUHT-TV. Outside the station, Barrera organized the first athletic activities for Mexican-American girls through the Magnolia Branch of the YWCA and helped organize the First National “Conferencia de Mujeres Por La Raza” in 1971.

ARTS. Janice Blue is a feminist filmmaker who co-produced Houston’s first prime-time television magazine program for women (a KPRC-TV pilot, JUST LIKE A WOMAN) which aired in April 1975. On other projects she has director-editor-camera-woman credits; CAUCUS, the only record of the first meeting in 100 years of the National Women’s Political Caucus convention; COUSINS, impressions of 2-17 year-old girls on the role of women in the American Dream; GENA AT 7 & 11, a personal record of a brain-damaged child from the point of view of the mother. For the past 2 years, Blue has been active in media reform projects for several local NOW chapters. She is an editor of BREAKTHROUGH.

Ellen Mendoza.

POLITICS. Ellen Mendoza, a magna cum laude graduate of St. Thomas and active civic worker, was the Houston Coordinator of Texans for the ERA and the ERA Chairwoman for the League of Women Voters during the 1975 rescission effort. She is an alternate to the State Democratic Party and has served on the Harris County Commissioners Court Task Force on Emergency Medical Services.

Sandra Kuenzi.

BUSINESS. Carole Pinkett graduated magna cum laude from North Carolina A&T State University and received her Master’s in Business Administration from Texas Southern University. Pinkett is chairwoman of the HISD Bi-Racial Committee, the watchdog agency set up by the federal courts to monitor desegregation in the district. She is the vice-president of the Houston Council on Human Relations, a member of the Board of Advisors for the School of Social Work for the University of Texas, the corresponding secretary of the Metropolitan YWCA, vice president of the Houston and Harris County Medical Health Associations, and vice president of the Friends of the Houston Public Library.

HEALTH. Sandra Kuenzi, who holds a Master's in Nursing in Community Health from UCLA, is a mental health consultant for the Harris County Health Department. She is the chairwoman of the Red Cross Crisis Committee. Last year she co-authored the paper “Crisis Intervention in Acute Care Areas,” which appeared in the American Journal of Nursing (May 1975). She has served on the Action Task Force of the Harris County Drug Abuse Evaluation Project, and the H-CAP Task Force on Alcoholic Women. Kuenzi has been the coordinator for rape crisis courses for nurses at the UT School of Nursing.

To keep the spirit of International Women’s Year alive in coming years, the Houston Branch of the AAUW hopes to make the Outstanding Women of the Year Awards an annual event!

Guardiola emphasizes

minorities. Guardiola focuses on issues of concern to minority women as a Majority Caucus member of the National Board of Directors of NOW. She was elected October 27 at the Philadelphia National Conference on a platform reaching out to blue collar, Third World, lesbian and other women who have not felt comfortable in feminist groups in the past. She calls for a responsiveness to minority and low-income women from feminists who have previously worked on middle-class white issues. This attention is needed on both the local and national level.

In February 1975, Guardiola convened the tri-ethnic Houston Inner City NOW chapter which encourages members to become active in other community and political groups. The purpose of the group, Guardiola says, “is not so much to achieve power in an organization but to politicize the group and to give women the self-confidence to become active.”

Task force priorities include criminal justice and women in health which looks into the hospital district.

Health care is of prime interest to Guardiola. As a health care professional, she feels she “can contribute greatly to NOW by bringing national attention to the plight of women who are at the mercy of uncaring health providers.”

BREAKTHROUGH will be following the activities of Guardiola and the NOW National Board in coming months.

Gloria Guardiola

Support BREAKTHROUGH.

Subscribe today.