Crimes remain unsolved

OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) -  
Oklahoma State Police troopers  
raided an exclusive private club 10  
miles outside Oklahoma City late  
last night and arrested the club  
manager and 17 members who,  
according to a state police  
spokesman, were watching a  
pornographic movie that shocked  
the veteran law enforcement officers.  
“In the movie, a young woman was  
actually murdered right there on the  
screen,” the state police spokesman  
said, “and the killer, a man in a black  
hood, drank her blood.” The 17  
arrested club members told the state  
police they paid $300 each to watch  
the underground skin flick. They  
were released without charges. The  
club manager is being held for  
questioning. (Oct. 31, 1975)

LOS ANGELES (AP) — FBI  
officials here are searching for the  
makers and distributors of two  
pornographic movies in which  
women were murdered. Local police  
officials have identified the women  
as “two aspiring actresses from  
Alabama” who responded to an  
actress-wanted ad in a trade  
newspaper. The FBI says the films  
were made and distributed in late  
September and early October and  
viewers paid as much as $500 each to  
see them.

A Los Angeles psychologist who  
has studied rapist-murderers and  
who has seen the two pornographic  
films reports that to some men,  
inflicting or seeing death is “the  
ultimate orgasm.” (Nov. 1, 1975)

HOUSTON — A faded roadmap  
peppered with black pins traces the  
trail of violence against nine  
Houston women in less than eight  
weeks. The map hangs on the wall in  
the Houston Police Department's  
homicide division. The pins mark the  
apartments, houses, vacant lots, and  
ditches where these women were  
found murdered.

Their killers still roam freely on  
the streets of Houston.

Between 1970-1975, 573 women  
have been murdered and 104 of these  
deaths remain unsolved.

The first murder victim in 1970  
was Sheila Elaine Mouton, a young  
pregnant working woman whose  
body was found in an abandoned  
house on Gray Street.

“That was sort of the beginning, an  
indication of things to come,”  
remembers Lannie Stephenson, a  
now-retired detective who was the  
only woman in the homicide division  
in 1970 and who worked on the  
Mouton case.

The “beginning” Stephenson  
refers to is the five-year string of  
unsolved murders.

The 104 murder cases are stuffed  
in folders in the office of  
Breckenridge Porter, the division's  
lieutenant of detectives. Most of  
them have not received any follow-up  
work since the original offense  
reports were filed.

Fifty-one were Black women.  
Thirty-seven were white.  
Thirteen were Chicana. Three  
were foreigners.

More than 50 percent of these  
murders occurred in the central  
city—Second, Third, Fourth, and  
Fifth Wards. But they have also  
occurred in River Oaks, Champions,  
Spring Branch, the waterfront,  
South Park, and Tanglewood.

In more than 90 percent of the  
cases, women were raped before or  
after being killed.

Homicide Capt. L. D. Morrison  
cites what he calls an “age-old  
problem” as the reason these cases  
have remained unsolved.

“We just don’t have enough  
people,” he says. “This division has  
less than 50 people who are spread  
out over three shifts. There’re at least  
two murders a day in this city and in  
addition to all these cases, we're like  
the garbage can. We handle rapes,  
aggravated assaults, assaults to  
murder, extortion, bomb threats,  
obscene calls, serious threats to take  
life... and if someone injures a dog  
to hunt that dog's owner, that’s our  
baby too. Hell, what do you expect  
from 50 people?”

Morrison views his detectives as  
hardworking people; however,  
Stephenson, who worked at the  
central station for 20 years,  
contradicts that.

“They're great when it comes to  
working on routine beer joint or  
family squabble killings,” Stephenson  
says of her former colleagues. “The  
killer is usually there to surrender or  
someone knows who did it and will  
lead the cops to that person. But  
when it comes to cases involving few  
clues and few details, investigation is  
required. That’s a hated word  
around the station,” she says.  
“Nobody wants to do any real  
investigation. It’s too hard.”

The division’s inability to  
solve the killings of 104 women  
could very well lie in the police  
department’s attitude toward  
almost all assault cases involving  
women.

A directive issued three years ago  
is pasted on the wall in the homicide  
division.  
“TO ALL CAPTAINS-IN-  
CHARGE ON WEEKENDS:  
Effective immediately, unless a  
woman has been admitted to a  
hospital, she will not be able to file  
assault charges against her  
husband or boyfriend until  
Monday morning when we can  
counsel with an assistant district  
attorney or a municipal court  
judge. Tell them to come back  
Monday.”

The order is signed by then-Police  
Chief Herman Short.

When a woman does manage to  
file an assault charge, the police do  
not arrest the accused man. Rather,  
they send him a letter informing him  
charges have been filed. The letter  
asks the man to go to the  
stationhouse and post bond “when  
you find it convenient.”

Currently, there are over 1,000  
outstanding arrest warrants against  
men who have beaten their wives.  
The police claim they do not have the  
“manpower to arrest these  
assailants.

Recipe for an oil change

Check your oil. Does it look like burned gravy?  
Going to fundraisers, meetings, pickets, and  
whatever, have you put 6000 miles on your car?  
If both answers are yes, well it’s time for a  
change (oil change). I have just the recipe:

5 quarts of oil (4 for 4-cylinder cars)

1 oil filter

1 crescent wrench

1 oil filter wrench

1 large pan

1 oil can spout or can opener

Take all ingredients out to your car and  
proceed to change oil. First jack your car up in  
the front. Just so the car won’t fall on your head,  
always secure it under the frame (square-  
shaped bar running length of car on both sides)  
with jack stands. Next locate the oil pan. Be  
careful not to drain your transmission fluid. It’s  
easy to mix the two pans up. The oil pan is  
forward of the transmission pan. Adjust your  

crescent wrench to a perfect fit on your oil pan  
plug. Turn counter-clockwise. Grunts, groans  
and screams are permitted on difficult plugs. If  
it doesn’t work, try a little rust lubricant (WD-40,  
Liquid Wrench, etc.) or a longer wrench. Have  
the pan handy to catch the oil. Be careful, it may  
be hot. Replace and tighten plug. Don’t forget the  
plug’s washer if it has one. While you are down  
there, see if you can locate the oil filter. If not,  
you may have to look under the hood. Place the  
oil filter wrench around the filter and again turn  
counter-clockwise. Here too, grunts, groans and  
screams are allowed. Since filters have a rubber  
gasket at the top, the hot engine may melt its  
seal. In this case, a dirty word (just one) is  
permitted to loosen it. Catch the oil. Oil the new  
rubber gasket and install new filter (clockwise).  
Tighten ¼ turn only. Pour oil into engine. Start  
her up! (or him, whatever). Check underneath  
the car for leaks. No leaks? RIDE ON,  
SISTERS!

These instructions may differ slightly on old or  
foreign cars. If your filter fits inside a metal  
cylinder, the one thing to remember is to remove  
the old gasket, oil the new gasket and set it in  
place on the car before re-installing the cylinder.

JAN TARVER

State law — written by a legislature  
that is overwhelmingly male — tends  
to be just as discriminating against  
women victims of assault.

According to the statutes, unless a  
woman is beaten so severely that she  
requires medical attention, she  
cannot file a county criminal  
charge — one which could land the  
man behind bars.

If a woman has been mildly  
beaten, she can merely file a  
municipal court charge. If the man is  
convicted, he can be fined only up to  
$100.

“My argument has been that the  
police go to great lengths to avoid  
taking action against husbands or  
boyfriends guilty of criminal assault,  
thereby encouraging vicious crimes,”  
former detective Lannie Stephenson  
says.

“My ex-colleagues assert that  
many people in Houston do not  
ordinarily think of violence between  
husband and wife as criminal  
behavior. In fact,” she says, “they  
tend to think that an occasional  
beating is part of a relationship  
which gives some satisfaction to both  
parties.”

Stephenson is convinced that it is  
this overall attitude that male  
detectives hold toward women in  
domestic muggings that keeps them  
from vigorously investigating the 104  
unsolved murders still logged on  
homicide books.

THOMAS WRIGHT

**Man’s discovery that his genitals could serve as a weapon to generate fear  
must rank as one of the most important discoveries of prehistoric times, along  
with the use of fire and the first crude stone ax.”  

— Susan Brownmiller in  
Against Our Will:  
Men, Women, and Rape

To all newspersons

We reprint a memorandum which was issued by Ray Miller,  
News Director, KPRC-TV, 10 days prior to the station’s signing  
an agreement with the Houston Area Chapter of NOW during the  
1974 license renewal period. The agreement called for an increase  
in coverage of women’s news and other programming and employ-  
ment gains. The memorandum spells out non-sexist language stand-  
ards which we hope Houston news directors will implement in their-  
departments. Breakthrough would like feedback from the station’s news  
departments regarding this New Year’s request.

“June 13, 1974

“TO: All News Reporters and News Writers

“Let us follow a regular policy of keeping sexist stereotypes out  

of our copy and off the air.

“As a general rule, you can do this by avoiding words that suggest  
a person in a certain role is likely to be of a certain sex — police  
officers instead of policemen, chairpersons instead of chairmen,  
members of Congress instead of Congressmen, and so on. (But it is  
OK to call Bill Archer Congressman Archer, since you are dealing  
with a specific member and you know his sex.)

“Unless you know of some strong feelings to the contrary on the  
part of the people you are writing about, use the title ‘Ms.’ instead of  
Mrs. or Miss, but this is not to say that women should be always re-  
ferred to as ‘Ms.’ It is better to refer to them by their names. Hazel  
Bracken, for instance, is Hazel Bracken — or Bracken — or Board  
member Hazel Bracken — and does not need to be referred to as  
either ‘Mrs.’ or ‘Ms.’ for purposes of reporting the news.

“And the women’s movements should be referred to by their  
proper names, or referred to as women’s movements, and not  
‘women’s lib movements.’”

“Thank you,  
“[signed] Ray Miller”