E

continued from front page  
great fortune to be traveling during the feast  
of Ramadan, where from sunrise to sunset not  
only can everyone not eat or drink, but  
they are also not allowed by religious law to  
swallow their own saliva. There is a great  
deal of spitting going on all that time. However,  
when you reach Afghanistan, spitting  
takes on a different dimension—which is  
green powder. People are pinching off little  
pieces of green powder, they put it in their  
mouths and chew on it for a while, and after  
it is thoroughly chewed they sort of just spit it  
out. Some people told me that it has some  
kind of narcotic effect. In Pakistan and in  
India, however, this takes on another and the  
ultimate dimension. They chew betelnut. It is  
something that looks like a peanut chopped  
up fine. It is put on a leaf with some white  
paste and some red powder. Almost everyone  
chews it, except for the very well educated  
and/or upper classes. Certainly everyone  
who can afford it chews it because it is an  
astringent. It has a pleasant, almost spear-  
mint taste, and it makes your mouth feel re-  
freshed and keeps it from feeling too dry,  
which is certainly a consideration in a very  
dry and dusty country. However, its bright  
red color stains the mouth of everyone who  
chews it forever. You can't swallow it, so  
people are forever spitting out huge bright  
mouthfuls.  
The women get up, walk around,  
switch tape recorder off  
END SCENE 1  

SCENE II  

The Women return to  
same positions as before,  

A: There is this remarkable thing where you  
cross a border and you are in such a different  
place, even though it may only be three feet  
from where you just were. I got to a small  
town which was not a tourist town in Crete. I  
was traveling with another woman and we  
were sort of looking for jobs. We had heard  
that there were jobs picking oranges and ol-  
ives and we thought that it would be fun to  
pick up a job and stay on in a place for a  
while. In this town there were about a dozen  
foreigners staying. They were all working in  
the olive fields. They told us that this was ac-  
tually the end of the season. My friend de-  
cided to go on traveling, but I was pretty  
tired from traveling continually for about  
four months at that point. I thought that I  
would stay for a bit. It would give me a  
chance to sort of relax and hang out and also  
to get an idea of what a small town was like  
and how it worked in a very different setting.  
There were five English guys and a Tunisian  
guy who had been given free housing in the  
upper part of a barn which was owned by  
a local Greek farmer who was just outside of  
town. He spoke no English at all, but he was  
a very kind man. He had told them that they  
could stay in the top part of his barn, which  
had electricity and was very well built so that  
it was just like a house. This was for free as  
long as they paid the electric bill. It had no  
animals downstairs, and a water pump out-  
side, and a sink, so it was quite a pleasant  
place to be staying. When I told them that I  
was looking for a place to stay for a couple of  
weeks, the boys said that I could stay with  
them. Since they were quite nice people, I  
took them up on it. I moved in several pieces  
of cardboard to insulate me from the floor,  
and I laid my sleeping bag in the corner.  
Now, all the other foreigners in town—with  
the exception of the very occasional tourist,  
who would come, stay for a day or two, and  
then leave—were working in the olive fields  
(I was not) and where it was very very cheap  
olive in that town, I just felt no need to go to  
work, and the work was very very difficult  
and paid very poorly, particularly for wom-  
en, who were paid about half what men were  
for the same work. So I was just hanging out,  
and of course I was hanging out in the cafes,  
which were quite a bit warmer and were very  
pleasant places to stay during the day. The  
people were just drifting in and out. Not all of  
the travelers who were working in the olive  
fields would work every day and of course if  
it rained they couldn't work. Often there  
would be one or two people to hang out with,  
and there were a number of kind of young  
Greek guys that I had made friends with in  
the town, who would seem to have nothing to  
do during the day, and we would hang out  
and play card games and joke and laugh and  
try to learn each others’ languages a little bit.  
Now this was all great fun for me, what it took  
me a little time to realize was that the towns  
people thought I was there for. There I was, a  
woman, knowing that I was staying with five  
guys. Here these guys would go off to the ol-  
ive fields and I would not. The conclusion  
they came to was that the five guys were sup-  
porting me in exchange for sexual favors.  
C: Did you know that in Guatemala asking a  
woman what time it is is a beginning ap-  
proach to wanting to know if she is a whore?  
Telling them is the beginning of agreeing that  
you are. Another thing is that women who  
drink coffee together in the afternoons are  
mostly whores. In general, it is going out un-  
escorted after six.  
R: I hitchhiked a lot in England. I hitchhiked  
around the entire country twice, taking two  
different routes. Most of my rides came from  
lorry drivers, who invariably asked me wasn't  
I bothered by other truck drivers, or had any  
of the other truck drivers tried to make a pass  

AUTOMATIC POEM TO THE MUSE  

I can smell you with my watery hair  
you are nearer to me than the knife’s swift music  

and the morning comes waking you  
with its smashed fists of burning roses  
I can touch you with my electric eyes  

you are closer than the air's bright tears  
and the afternoon descends like an open heart  
singing hymns to the sun you swallow whole  

I can see you with my spidery fingers  

and the evening rises with its songs  

licking your stiff breasts with their tongues  

I can fear you with my stone lips  

and your dreams prepare a bed for us  

out there somewhere in the future  

where a herd of stallions race among the stars  
scattering fire and lightning spreading destruction  
in which we embrace passionately waking into sleep  

John Digby  

at me. I always told them that no they hadn't  
but that every truck driver had asked me  
that. I finally realized that among truck driv-  
ers they had heard stories about picking up  
willing women who were hitchhiking and this  
was a great current piece of folklore among  
truck drivers.  

I think part of the thing was that they were  
fishing, trying to find out if perhaps I wasn't  
one of those mythical willing females. The  
other thing was that I guess they were trying  
to find out if all the other truck drivers were  
as aggressive as they believed they were.  
After that I usually took pains to explain to  
each truck driver who had happily picked  
me up that I thought that this was perhaps the  
biggest lie that had been promulgated on  
the truck driving public in general and that  
probably they could discount every story  
they had heard as being untrue.  

END SCENE II  

SCENE III  

R: Speaking of the values, I learned the val-  
ue of learning to spit. This had different ap-  
plications depending on where you were. In  
Italy one of these goons would follow you for  
hours and say “hello, I love you, I want to  
fuck you.” If you turned around and sort of  
spit on the sidewalk, they would usually go  
revolted and they would go away. Of course it  
would stop working in countries like India  
where everybody is spitting anyway. In many  
countries saliva is considered sort of the "wa-  

ter of life so that spitting on someone is like  
putting an essence of yourself on them. Also  
it is considered a dirty thing to do, so that it is  
like saying, "go away, to hell with you.” It is  
also a very useful weapon, you don't have to  
carry anything with you and saliva is avail-  

able at a moment's notice. You don't have to  
get involved—it doesn’t involve you in a  
shouting match or something. You almost  

Eavesdropping  

A One-Act Play  
Very Interesting to Hear  

can't lose,  
C: The Yanamama only have here, there,  
and far away. I met this woman who was from  
quite far away. She would ask me did I have  
brothers and sisters and where were they and  
how far away? There was no way to explain  
how far away they were. So I finally had to  
say that if I fucked Ken today and started  
walking right away, I would have the baby  
before I got there.  

Incidentally, when you are bargaining  
you get the best deals from men and the  
worst deals from children. It is probably be-  
cause, when they leave the booth with a  
child, he is given a minimum price and is  
really not allowed below it. When some Thai  
teachers came to Honolulu to do some Peace  
Corps training, the Americans told them quite  
readily that in America you do not bargain. Not  
only did they bargain, but they went into  
Woolworths and drove a hard bargain and  
walked away with quite a bit of jewelry at  
much lower prices. Which of course ruined  
the credibility of what the American Peace Corps  
people said about America.  

R: They arrived in Sri Lanka in the evening  
because the boat takes most of the day. Then  
I took a train all night to get to Colombo. The  
next night was going to be a full moon. Every  
full moon in Sri Lanka is a holiday. Busi-  
nesses close and people go off to the temples.  
This was one of the very special full moons. I  
think there are four of these during the year.  
I think this was the January one. One of them  
takes place in midsummer when they take  
the Buddha's tooth out of the temple and pa-  
rade it around. This was the opposite end of  
the year festival. I'm not sure what it was that  
we were supposed to be celebrating, but the  
temple we were celebrating around was sup-  
posed to have been a place that the Buddha  
had visited. The bodhi tree that grew there was  
a descendant of the original bodhi tree in Bodh-  
Gaya, India. I had heard of the giant cele-  
bration in Kandy, and even though I was  
dead tired I decided that I must not miss this.  
I went with a bunch of other people from the  
guest house where I was staying and we took  
the bus out to the temple. The temple had  
these murals painted all over it which were  
just beyond belief; it probably  
approached, particularly in style, the kind of  
thing that you would see in Bali. We arrived  
there at perhaps eight at night. We couldn't  
figure out when the celebration would start.  
People had said when the full moon rises.  
There were buses from all over. We came to  
the valley where this temple was, and the  
whole valley was full of people. I mean full  
and it was not a very small valley. It was very  
hot and humid. By about 10:30, when the pa-  
rade started, we were very tired. The ele-  
phants were all dressed up with colorful cloth  
with mirrors and strings of electric light  
bulbs. These were very large elephants and  
they kept bringing up more of them. I  
couldn't figure out how they were going to  
get the electric lights to work. Eventually we  
moved away from them, because there were  
too many of them and the crowds were get-  
ting very thick. We felt that we had better  
find one place and park ourselves. The  
people kept arriving and my estimate was  
that there were about 1¼ million there at the  
height. I have never in my life seen so many  
people, and I have never been packed in so  
tight with them either. Eventually it did start  
to rain and all you could do was stand there  
and get wet. Along about midnight, the pro-  
cession started and it was really worth wait-  
ing for. It lasted for hours. It had dancers,  
singers, elephants, little kids dressed up in  
costume, musicians. Behind each elephant  
with the light bulbs was a little man with a  
generator in his arms and the elephant was  
plugged into the generator. I also noticed  
that the people were quite afraid of the ele-  
phants. Every time that the procession would  
stop and maybe an elephant would turn its  
head around, people would start to tense up  
and start backing away. That was my intro-  
duction to Sri Lanka—this dreamlike proces-  
sion.  

The tape recorder is turned off  
lights go down  

the end  

afghani  

continued from front page  
Arched rooms; blackened with smoke. Out  
the cell window a view of valley and snow-  
flecked Hindu Kush. Late afternoon we go to  
hot springs. Rode an open truck through red  
rock canyons above valley. Stop at cement  
pool out of which sulfur spring bubbles. We  
all disrobe and go in; me and five other tour-  
ists, including three Afghanis.... A bad  
night's sleep. Tension in my body. Apprehen-  
sion at thought of trip back. Set out for walk  
beyond the town. Man on bike rides up, asks  
if I am going to Dragon's Way. He points to a  
white splotch on rock wall far off. A two-hour  
walk. He likes Americans and is manager of  
an experimental farm which raises potatoes.  
He tells me dragons were ravaging countryside  
and Ali came along and killed him with a back  
sword. This was long ago, continue on alone  
past farm into quiet rock-walled pass. Noth-  
ing. The road winds. I am afraid momentarily  
(tales of Aichani bandits in my head) but  
continue on. Persevere and conquer fear. I  
see an eagle who crosses my path. Good  
omen. Then see a man with sheep. I stop to  
listen to animal sounds and hear him sing.  
Realize that someone who sings will not harm  
me. Onward around two more bends and I  
see the streak of sinuous dragon atop the hill.  
Horns. He crowns the hill. I sit and rest. Then  
back via the experimental farm and a boiled  
potato and little kids pestering for bak-  
sheesh. I rest with the Buddhas. Sunbathe in  
monk cell. Change hotels as other folks go.  

MEDICATION  

Want to go but haven't got the time? Low on cash? It only takes a  
few minutes to achieve MEDICATIONAL MIND TRADE. For those  
who have not previously attempted medication's answer to boredom  
and lethargy, the following exercise is suggested:  

Sit quietly in a comfortable place with feet wrapped around neck,  
back straight, eyes gently closed, hands open on lap palms up. Begin  
(see chart) so you can learn the lan-  
guage and continue for 20 or 30 minutes total. Relax, and concentrate  

about 15 minutes before the  

upon the theme.  

—THEME: I think I can? think Tears  

Alaska 2:49 am Hawaii 2:49 am  
Baghdad 3:49 pm —_—_‘India 6:10 pm  
Bogota 7:49 am Ireland 12:49 pm  

Buenos Aires 9:49 am  
Cairo 2:49 pm  

Cape Town 2:49 pm  
Caracas 8:49 am  

Djakarta 7:49 pm Lima 7:49 am  
Europe 1:49 pm Manila 8:49 pm  
Great Britain 12:49 pm Moscow 3:49 pm  
Havana 7:49 am Peking 8:49 pm  

Istanbul 2:49 pm.  
Jerusalem 2:49 pm  

Karachi 5:49 pm  

BEARDED LADY  

Me, I'm the last one  

After I die there ain't no more.  
Yeah mister, it's real,  

All me,  

Only one left.  

They're striking the lot again tonight  
Heading east towards Bozeman  
Four bit clip joint hitting the rube towns.  

Oh yeah, I'm getting pretty white now.  

Sometimes I think it glows in the dark like a snake  
Nights I curl it around my waist  

Warm hands  

What a waste.  

Yeah, I'm the last one,  

Bearded ladies aren't easy to come by these days.  
I had a 4 inch growth by the time I was seven.  
I don't remember  

They say my mama sold me over.  

Yeah mister, it's real  
All me,  
Bearded lady.  

Last week the fat lady died.  
We buried her after the bally,  
Small town outside Topeka.  

Kate Larkin  

Johannesburg 2:49 pm Tokyo 9:49 pm  

If this is 7:49 am we might even be in Havana. Imagine that!  

Collage by John Digby  

Rio (Brazil) 9:49 am  
Saigon 8:49 pm  
Santiago (Ch) 8:49 am  
Sydney 10:49 pm  
Tehran 4:19 pm  

USA Time Zones  
Eastern 7:49 am  
Central 6:49 am  
Mountain 5:49 am  
Pacific 4:49 am  

Here I think everything is going mad. For  
the past week I have been a victim of the new  
dope laws in Europe. It's really something.  
You know. There are police at all the Metro  
stations. They search everyone under forty.  
After all, if you're not carrying dope there's