—

ee

contributors

Photo by Charlotte Massey

Lena Brigand is writing a novel about the
loss of innocence. Absolutely nothing else is
known about her.

The third edition of Ed Buryn’s book Vaga-
bonding in America (A People’s Guide to the
USA) will be out in January, 1978. It will be

Charlotte Massey, a freelance journalist and self- published photographer now living in London.

Elaine Dallman is a poet living in California.

Donald Shepherd, poet, novelist, and traveler, lives in Cornwall, England.

John Digby, surrealist poet and collagist, lives in London, England.

subscrib

There are limits to every domain, and laws
to govern every organized power. But the
vagrant owns the whole vast earth that
ends only at the nonexistent horizon, and
his empire is an intangible one, for his

domination and enjoyment of it are things
of the spirit.

—Isabelle Eberhardt

BOXCAR is for the exiled, the dispossessed,
and the traveler, in body or mind. For those
bitten slightly by the temptation to go, what

can we do to push you over the edge?

Told aloud and written down, passed along
tales, and exaggerated rumors gratefully ac-
cepted. Portraits, journal notes, and short
articles about the road and anyone on it
sought. Anything contributing towards dis-
solving the world’s ridiculous boundaries ur-

SE-GA) and will cost $4.50. He is also the

author of Vagabonding in Europe and North
Africa (Random House/Bookworks).

Jane Falk is a poet and an editor for Snake

Tongue Press, located in Kathmandu. She is
currently living in San Francisco.

gently needed.

The Women’s Itinerant Hobos’ Union was

begun in the United States by Bertha Thomp-
son, a.k.a. “Boxcar Bertha!” This magazine is
named in her honor. She rode the rails in the
1920s and ’30s, and among her achievements
arranged for traveling women’s hostels,
where one could sleep, eat, and find casual
work. The W.I.H.U. is international now. But
we have no chapters nor hierarchy. It is a

loose confederation of travelers, with no hope,
nor need of organization. Anyone traveling
with freedom in mind is welcome.

Isabelle Eberhardt, born 1877 in Switzer-
land, spent much of her life traveling in
North Africa. She wrote the following, which
is excerpted from “Pencilled Notes”
translated by the writer and traveler Paul
Bowles.

A subject to which few intellectuals ever
give a thought is the right to be a vagrant,
the freedom to wander. Yet vagrancy is
deliverance, and life on the open road is
the essence of freedom. To have the cour-

age to smash the chains with which mod-
ern life has weighted us (under the pre-
text that it was offering us more liberty),
then to take up the symbolic stick and
bundle, and GET OUT!

*From The Oblivion Seekers,
City Lights Books.

material accumulates. All submissions
must be accompanied by a stamped self-

addressed envelope. — to:
BOXCAR
1001-B Guerrero

San Francisco, CA 94110

Copyright © 1978 to The Authors