BIKE TRACKS

Bike tracks  
curve in  

to the grey hill  

and out to the sea.  

Elaine Dallman  

JOURNAL  

afghanistan  

By Jane Falk  

Awoke at 4 am with the shouting for Rama-  
dan and had the runs—back to sleep to  
dream of—I can’t remember. Up at 7 to bus  
and border blunders—3 or 4 hours—we did  
not have to pay baksheesh except to the  
minibus guys. First one would take us to bor-  
der and Herat for 70 but then reneged be-  
cause bus wasn’t full. We started walking to  
the border and another guy came pulling up.  
Take us for 20 to border only. We agreed, got  
in, each time dragging around up and down  
buses with packs. To border to be battered  
about; customs, sign-in, police, vaccination  
and on to other minibus which would only  
take us for 50 if bus was full. We started wait-  
ing for full bus. Driver impatient. (80 since  
bus wasn’t full.) We started bargaining for  
less—down to 70. Four members of the party  
would only go for 50—so deal to have six pay  
70 and four pay 50. Then two of the six pro-  
tested, so we sat still again. Driver brought it  
down to 60; finally we go. Arrive in Herat at  
night, star-bright—eat—I am sick. Remem-  
ber confiscated Playboy magazines at border  
crossing. The magazines’ owner offered to rip  
them up, but the border guards wanted them  
whole. Just purchased two grams of dark  
brown-green hashish for 4 Afghanis a  
gram—we are smoking it and listening to fla-  
menco guitar by moonlight/candlelight:  
John and Claudia, Rindi and Jane. . . . This is  
our first day in Herat, ancient brick-walled  
dusty-streeted mother-of-nomads stretched  
out in tents across the plains. The women are  
covered completely; mesh masks cover faces  
part of totally enveloping dress with attached  
headpiece. Wafers of windy ladies go  
smoothly gliding by. Baksheesh, Baksheesh  
the children cry. Old women uncovered. Are  
they nomads? We discuss the meaning of  
baksheesh. We switch hotels as we learn that  
we are staying in hotel where everyone gets  
sick—to the New Bezodh for 20 Afghanis—  
go to the bank—total confusion—and walk  
the streets with Rindi, bargain and buy shirt.  
Go to the old bazaar; windy dirt road stream  
birds whirling about old walls. Blue sky. Tin-  
kling bells—dysentery comes back. I eat yo-  
gurt. I love Herat. Banish paranoia. I trust  
these people yet they are so different. It is  
sometimes hard not to be unsure. Try to look  
behind the masks at what is there.... So  
many things have happened today—repent  
for/of my exuberance at moving from our  
hold hotel—noisier here and the room is  
smaller—bathroom farther away—but the  
garden is beautiful, there is a pelican and I  
like Haji the owner—so got R to move. She is  
still sick today, weak and listless. Bought  
good yogurt, mailed letter, Haji took me to  
mosque, shoes off barefoot across the brick  
courtyard. Peaceful, empty but for a few old  
men squatted in arched doorways. Rode  

horse cart out to minarets with Claudia.  

Seven huge minarets, remains, stand at the  
edge of town. We watched the sun go down,  
colors of light silver blue, brown, white. One  
star. cool evening. Unexpected occurrence.  
Saw alms being given to the people today  
outside the mosque—occasion of Ramadan  

Up early, much noise. We change rooms  
again, this time a good one, pink and square  

overlooking the garden. Discuss Afghani  

Eavesdropping  
A One-Act Play  
- Very Interesting to Hear  

Play occurs in Cathy's apartment. Small  
table with typewriter on it. Cathy and Robyn  
sit on the floor drinking tea, and whiskey,  
Between them is a tape recorder emitting a  
constant whirring sound. They are two  
women in their mid-thirties, neither for one  
moment without a cigarette in hand.  

SCENE I  

C: One of the hardest things that I tried to  
explain to the Yanama, and for which they  
have no concept, is having surplus—why I  
would have two pairs of socks, two shirts, two  
pants—because they wouldn't, they would  
never hear of it. For one thing, anything they  
made themselves wouldn't last if they made  
an extra one in the jungle. If they made two  
baskets, for instance.  

R: Because the insects would eat it.  

C: Or because of the general climate of the  
jungle. One basket would not last until an-  
other one was used. When you think about it,  
there is no reason to have surplus. It is our  
culture that keeps you so detached from the  
place where the goods are produced. So the  
idea of having duplicates—it's not that they  
don’t have the concept of it, it's that it makes  
absolutely no sense.  

C: Their lives, and it on  

a ae omen  

prisons with American woman whose hus-  
band is in jail. Women in for prostitution and  
murder. They live there with children and  
work at rug-making. Fasting for Ramadan,  
except for chai and Coca Cola. Reserved bus  
for trip to Kabul. Friday, the holy day, too  
many people on the streets, men, make me  
crazy, me the only woman. This is another  
world. Pink/orange sunset. Saw five camels,  
two turning a mortar in the bazaar. Interest-  
ing how their faces are so tender. How they  

This is our first day in Kabul, a small city.  
Up early wandering around searching for  
food, the usual travel syndrome. Soon run  
into old friends. Ramadan ended, the streets  
are empty; people are home feasting. I walk  
through the old part of Kabul, dirty, de-  
crepit, reminds me of Russian novels.... I  

go to American Embassy—usual gate-en-  

closed mausoleum with fat-faced Americans  
and soldiers inside. Fast, as I don't feel well. I  
try a garlic cure. The evening comes. Phi-  

lippe suggests I take some opium (tariak) for  

diarrhea—Afghani cure. Can't get to sleep.  
See vague blue and red lights. No regrets or  
second thoughts. ... Medical alert. Rindi’s  
hand has become a club foot. She stuck her  
knife into her hand opening walnuts. We  
are ordering our lives. Philippe gave me a  
French/English dictionary so we can com-  
municate better. A day of mischievous laugh-  
ter. I go with Judy to see about bus to Bam-  
yan, site of ancient Buddhist ruins. Get for-  
tune told by old man with metal dice—I will  
succeed. Then pass man with snakes. He  
bangs on drums to make them come out of  
boxes. We find bus. Go to money market to  
change money, but impossible. ... Day of  
‘Buskachi,’ Afghani horse race. Philippe and  
I ride to race on horseback. Sit high above  
the crowd watching race which is more like  
melee. Horses and riders bunch, then break  
and race down field. Everyone is after a dead  
cow. Sort of like football. Soon the air is full  
of dust and our horses are restless. We gallop  
back home. I still want to go to Bamyan, but  
there are many hassles about the bus. Dis-  
couraging. Rindi will stay in Kabul as she  

needs to rest... . %  
Awake. Ablutions. Eat. Go out to see the  
Buddhas. Most calm and clear place. Blue  
sky, red rocks. I walk up to large Buddha.  
Find a shard of pottery and old bones. I sit in  
cave. Om. Climb up and around front of  
mountain. In back is a canyon. See a large  
bird, maybe an eagle. Then walk to small  
Buddha, climb up stairs to his side out on to  
his head. Frightening in immensity. Fresco  
with lingam stupa crowned with crescent  
moon. Painting of long-earred Buddhas.  
continued on inside  

ERRICO MALATESTA  
With my hands in flames  

I write your name across the bottom of the sea  
Where it rains dazzling wings of bird song  

Waking chicken-headed men  

To the voice of the single poppy in the wheat field  

With my hands of running spiders’ eyes  

I write your name between the towering icebergs  
Clashing among the pages of your book  

I carry in my pocket of liquid fire  

With my hands of floating tenderness  

I write your name inside the shells of snails  
Galloping in and out of the mouth of the sun  

Where the lightning sleeps in its bed of radiate mud  

With my hands of burning grass buried in the sky  
I write your name among the rivers  

Climbing the steps of the moon  

To the stars scattered across the eyes of all women in love  

With my hands of leaping wild shadows  
I write your name in the dreams of racing stallions  
Carrying the flight of hummingbirds  

To the earth’s other shore  

Where the thunder laughs and wears your beard  

With my hands of sudden fires among clouds  
I write your name across the sky  

I write your name in the sleeve of silence  

I write your name in the little boxes of sleep  

With my fingers of perpetual revolt  
I write your name on the foreheads of all men  
I write your name on the foggy loaves of the poor  
I write your name on the knives of their voices:  

EAVESDROPPING  

A One-Act Play  
Very Interesting to Hear  

makes sense in a life like ours.  
R: In India women went to the river and  
bathed in their saris. That was washing their  
clothes, and it simply dried on you.  
C: You see a lot of that in Guatemala. You see  
people bathing and sitting around drying  
with their clothes, which they did first. The  
whole idea of accumulation is something that  
... in the jungle they bring in game and  
they cook it instantly and they eat it instantly,  
because even cooked (unless they smoke it)  
it wouldn’t last if they had to keep it any  
length of time.  
R: I have talked to people who have been to  
India sort of briefly: who say things like, “Oh  
god did you dare eat any of the meat! Every  
time I walked in the marketplace it was all  
covered with flies.” This may be rather dis-  
gusting, but my feelings about that was that:  
I know that everything was butchered fresh  
that day or else you would have smelled it.  
So the fact that it was covered with flies is  
really not so horrible, because as long as you  
cook it that day there is no time for maggots  
to develop.  
C: I saw a Yanamama woman one time with a  
pushpin through her ear with the point stick-  
ing out. Also they would sometimes put in  
their ears old small spools of thread. The  
Yanamama of course if they don't wear  
clothes, don't know what clothes are. If they  
lost clothes, they assign them around. On a  
rare occasion, a shaman came out, he was wearing a  
woman’s sailor dress. It was orange and had  
a low neck with a bow. He was very proud of  
himself. The thing they understood least was  
my bikini, because they look at clothes only  
as something to protect them from the in-  
sects.  
R: Nepalese women would have ten earrings  
in each ear often. They would also have  
about three holes, one in each nostril and  
one in the dividing part of their nose through  
which they would have little nose rings.  
Sometimes the nose rings were the little dan-  
gly sort with a little fish or a star so that if they  
talked the little star would wiggle. The lower  
earring was often a large flat circle of appar-  
ently bronze and was apparently quite  
heavy. The women who wore those would  
place them flat on their shoulders when they  
were riding on a bus so that the bouncing of  
the bus would not yank the weight on their  
earlobes.  
C: I was sitting in a restaurant in Rome. Sitting be-  
side me was a very elderly British gentle-  
man. He was trying to order bread and the  
waitress didn't understand him, so he turned to  
her and ordered it in Italian. Of course since  
I am Italian, I look Italian. He turned and  
looked and said very carefully, “You speak  
Italian?” I gave a big smile and said, “I speak  
very well, thank you, and my mother.” We talked for a long time  

before I told him. He thought it was a grand  
joke. He was about 86 and he and his wife  
were taking separate vacations that year.  
He wanted to take me back to his YMCA and  
play the same joke on his friend. Sometimes  
quite older men make wonderful companions.  
They are simply quite lonely and want  
the companionship, but you still have to  
watch out for them until they are certifiably  
90!  

Since my mother and father were both Ital-  
ian, and didn’t come from the same parts of  
Italy, and couldn't understand each other at  
all, I didn't have a whole lot of confidence  
that when I learned my 15 phrases in Italian  
that they were going to be universally ac-  
ceptable. I also tended to forget things like  
when I would look at my phrase book and  
practice it and practice it very carefully, that  
they would speak Italian back to me—fast. I  
found myself trying to rely on sign language.  
Lots of waving arms, etc. I found one of the  
tricks is: don’t worry about being a jackass;  
you are a jackass! You are trying to say  
something in a language you don’t know. The  
more you try to stand on your dignity, the  
more you blow it totally. Also when you set  
out to ask a question in another language,  
make sure you know all the possible answers.  
R: One thing that the traveler in at least cen-  
tral Asia is going to get used to pretty fast is  
spitting. Sissel spits. If you...  

continued on inside