FINDING WORK ON THE ROAD

Dog. Naturally, you better expect to be
looked at weird and turned down a lot,

Scopes, reading palms and tarot decks, and—

change for bed and board. Similarly, care of
the elderly and infirm is a universal need.

Magic that becomes apparent when “another

nervous and needy self with something to offer
or later, usually as a gift. He also gives freely
of his labor, offering his time and energy to

U.S.A.

(On Making Money

Any advice about making money on the
road has to begin with advice about saving
money. First of all, you must have some
money to start with, if only so you can steer
clear of vagrancy busts. (And bring along
plenty of IDs too). The ideal way is to start
with mega-multi-money in the form of trav-
eler’s checks (or even your folks’ best credit
card), and then try like mad to avoid using
them. The checks/cards will “prove” to police
and nosy others that you're a solvent,
hence solid, citizen—and of course will save
your ass if you get into a jam or find you can’t
earn enough bucks.

The way to save money anywhere, any-
time, is to spend your energy instead. Rather
than buy a ticket (whether plane, train, or
bus), spend your time and energy hitchhiking.

Inner and outer knowing is “magical” in the
root sense—that is, as a recognition of un-
suspected powers at work.

I go into this at all because it directly re-

Weekend flea market. People constantly
throw away things others will pay for, espe-
cially in another setting. If you're not sure
what can sell, go to thrift shops, swap meets,

Odd-Jobbing

Doing odd things for financial recompense
is one of the vagabond’s main standbys. For
estate agents. If you're a handyman, these
contacts can lead to small maintenance and
repair jobs on properties for rent or sale. Al-
ways ask anyone you encounter if they know

However, everyone has some artistic skill or tal-
ent (usually several), whether actual or latent
(usually both)—it's only a matter of practic-
ing it (them) for profit. Despite the tremen-

Whether or not you choose to sell at crafts
fairs, go to them and check out what’s
happening. Today's vagabond artists and
crafters are on some pretty good trips.

Reality is experienced. When you take to the wood you've gathered, shells and stones from friends and strangers alike. Not surprisingly, check with community centers and rest maybe even run off the property once in a while. You with the gift and the desire to use it. And “knighted
wood, short on money but long on faith, un- other regions. Sell custom-made or store- Jim is also offered more paid work than before, and want to pursue personal connections. But I do have the nerve to try. You can sell their petty, mundane wares, I saw a man in an Uncle Sam costume.

< continued from front page > able to predict the outcome but open to the vagaries of life, you find yourself sooner or later in places where people gather—at beaches, fairs, festivals, and campuses. A day's survey of junkyards, debris boxes, and refuse piles could easily provide the inventory for your own vagabonding with new-found intuition. This automatic heightening of consciousness, due to greater awareness, is what you do but is now experienced differently and felt in ways.

The joy of life comes from using yourself, and this is what you do but is now experienced differently and felt in ways. You can perform while the other pastes the hat. Most of all, it means simply being willing to take on something new and challenging, just for the hell of it, never minding all the "sensible" reasons why you shouldn't or can't do it. 

You may not think you can find work while traveling, you may not think you can do some of the jobs I’ll shortly be suggesting, you may not think that attempting some off-the-wall job is worthwhile enough—but if you merely

Garage sales, and other such funky merchandising extravaganzas, and talk to sellers, observe the buyers—you'll get lots of profitable ideas. Your imagination and energy are the only limits on things you can sell at a profit. This is how not only vagabonds are

For the sake of discussion, I’ll define “odd-jobbing” as pick-up work for someone else, to distinguish it from the next category I’ll discuss, which is self-employed pick-up work. Basically, the odd-jobber does whatever comes along for the sake of a few dollars, but

A job or a little work to be done, or names to contact with leads on such work. Vagabonds, and vagabond-workers, stake their whole trip on people they meet. Go out to people, be yourself with them, and you will receive all you need.

Dous resurgence—and subsequent glut—of handcrafts in the past few years, there is still a strong market for all kinds of handcrafts and original art. This is probably the best of all ways to make money while leading a traveling life, especially since summertime

And can be important examples and teach—

Performing

This is an extension of arts and crafts, and

And jewels each cut to the slope of our lips.

I dreamt myself in an office married with no links to the

Open yourself as nonjudgmentally as possible, to what happens, the results may amaze you. The real truth is that—including the best of things—is possible, but only if you take the risk of allowing them to happen. In

Made, but millionaires as well. Services are certainly salable. Offer them door-to-door, store to store, or along the roadside next to your backpack (or car or truck). With your own brush and paint kit,

The key to it is coaxing "whatever comes along" as much as possible. Lots of small jobs appear for those who keen for them and are keen at finding them.

Newspaper and handbill distribution is a good example of short-term or daily work.

More such employments: Fruit picking and farm labor jobs (check with local offices of the Farm Labor Bureau). Restaurant work, such as waiting tables, washing dishes, being a short-order cook. (Your best bets are with

America is the season of crafts fairs and art festivals of every description, of state fairs and street fairs, of historical pageants and parades—of warm weather, good feelings, and material abundance. All of this means a

Can be done in all the same places—wherever people gather, by design or accident. Performing usually means music, but it also includes poetry, dance, informal lecturing,

Unseen. I dreamt I drove a car and could no longer fly.

Practice, this simply means being willing to take on something new and challenging, just for the hell of it, never minding all the "sensible" reasons why you shouldn't or can't do it. 

Have faded or are peeling. Offering to paint house numbers on the curb or door is another easy sales talk, requiring only a stencil available in most cities. Underground newspapers need commission street sellers; contact them directly in cities where they're published. Weeklies, catalogers, advertisers will earn you a stake and serve you up a slice.

Natural facility and a lot of energy. You'll be digesting for some time to learn rapidly, and, on your own standards of talent is not the chief requirement here, just the guts to do it. Street musicians can perform while the other pastes the hat.

Most of all, it means simply being willing to take on something new and challenging, just for the hell of it, never minding all the "sensible" reasons why you shouldn't or can't do it. 

Making a fool of yourself or attempting some weird gig you wouldn't touch at home ... transport passengers, use it as a selling platform. In big cities, these services also hire bicycle messengers and delivery workers. They'll provide work but for places to crash, locations of free food missions; and other helpful free services. And especially, don't neglect The Grapevine, the energy-wastrel’s news service.

The most direct route to odd-jobbing is

Traits, so at the fairs she did “psychological portraits”—visionary interpretations of her subjects—which sold well. Painting clown faces on kids, using grease-paint or acrylics, is sure fire. Try to sell outdoor murals for

Or if you're going solo, just place the hat nearby (and keep an eye on it lest it be copped by an opportunistic music-hater). Places to do it include downtown streets, city parks, street fairs and festivals, tourist conventions, movie and theater ticket lines, college quads, student unions, and so forth.

My children found their tiny frame and fed the fish each brittle bone.

When the princess called

Moreover, it just naturally costs next to nothing to assist and please others, and on another track, how about child care and care of the elderly? Everywhere in America, people will pay you to watch their kids and relate to their seniors. This is good work; getting paid just for being yourself with others. Get in touch with babysitting services and childcare centers, put ads up on laundromat and supermarket bulletin boards, and always offer sitting services to parents you personally meet anywhere. Sit—

One of my best friends is a master scrounger and jack-of-all-trades with an always changing stash of valuable “junk,” some of which he sells to live, but much of which he gives away to people who need or want it. People are always “placing orders” with Jim for whatever they need (in any material way possible).

It’s possible to get gigs at bars and restaurants by auditioning. College towns usually have student hangouts and folk-music-type clubs that talk walk-in talent and pay something, or at least a meal, a beer, and a chance to pass that beanie one more time. And for a taste of something different, in

The princess watched the ship go down. She was calling me by my name, laughing.

All seasoned vagabonds know about the magic of the road—not the romantic soap-suds variety but the breakthrough to real power that manifests itself when you take the risk of exposing yourself to unknown and uncontrolled circumstances. This is one of the

This is odd-jobbing with you as the boss and the brains. You must have something to sell, and if you have some ingenuity and initiative, there are no limits here. You do not

Have to be a high-pressure huckster or chrome-tongued shyster; in fact, it's counterproductive to be too smooth. Just be yourself.

Things that Don Juan repeatedly shows to

< continued from front page > both men and women. They're mostly poor people from Southern Italy, Spain, Greece, Yugoslavia, and Northern African countries. Often transient, they are paid the lowest wages in the factories of wealthier countries. Work can be found in the less scrupulous factories that employ them. Working papers can often be delayed and mislaid, you can be “waiting for them” and nobody will bother you much for a while, once you've been hired. Your wages will be relatively low, and don’t expect much in the way of holidays if it's known you're just passing through. The people you'll meet and whatever conditions you'll find yourself working under will provide an introduction to the country, beyond museums and monuments. There as here, factories have a high turnover. The easiest way to find this sort of work is to walk around the industrial area of a city. You might ask before dusk, remembering it's usually in the roughest area of a town.

Holiday Resort and Hotel Work

It's easiest to find work in a resort area, in the right season. If you know where you want to work, applying immediately before the season is the best idea. Then you'll have the time to leave, and change your visa if it's necessary. Work most often available is as chambermaids or in snack bars and restaurants. I worked one autumn in the Swiss Alps. No one spoke English, except an old cowboy who had been in California for forty years and just come back home to retire. He interpreted until I learned some Italian. Total absorption seems the best way to do it.

You can work in a restaurant all year round. Of course, if you can speak the language you've got a better chance of a job outside a resort area. Looking in the newspaper want ads is usually only useful for city restaurant work. If you want to be out in the country, you've got to walk around and ask.

Restaurants are the single largest employer of immigrant, transient, and illegal labor in Europe.

Au Pair

If you really want it, you can find work as a childminder or babysitter. Babysitting isn’t bad, but Au Pair work is not my favorite. Prospective employers of Au Pairs look for young girls to whom they can pay little money. Child-minding or babysitting, as temp work, is another story. Advertisements for this type of work can be found in local youth hostels, tourist information bureaus,

EUROPE & ASIA

Productive to be too smooth. Just be your

End. Occasionally, the International Herald Tribune.

Cleaning Work

In big cities of the countries with more affluent standards of living (France, England, Belgium, Holland, Scandinavian countries, etc.) you can always find something to clean. There are an abundance of agencies that will hire you without references, and you're paid weekly, if not daily. There are usually advertisements in the papers for these jobs. I worked for a house cleaning firm in London one winter. I could choose the times I wanted to work (there were morning and afternoon sessions). The wages are not high and the agency will take half of what you earn. But the work isn't too hard, and chances are, you'll strike up a bargain with some client and jump the agency.

Art Modeling

One classic job you can do in cities is art modeling. Surprisingly, there's usually a lot of work available. One good way to make contacts is by going to the nearest art school, college, or university bulletin board. If you don't speak the language, you can put your own note up in English, and someone is guaranteed to be able to read it. Be very explicit in your wording so no one will misconstrue your intentions. The best thing would be to go directly to the art department office, be polite to the secretary and ask for an application. Art modeling is often good money, and cash on delivery.

Teaching

English teaching in Europe is a prized job that usually requires certification papers (but not always). In Asia, it’s the principal occupation of most English-speaking travelers. It is difficult in Europe, but not impossible. I taught privately in Italy one winter, just regular conversation—nothing fancy. The very best way to find this sort of work is to start phoning every English teaching school in a city. You never know, there might be a vacancy. At least you'll be speaking to someone in English who might be able to put you in touch with a private client, or some other school that has a vacancy. These types of language schools all have a few native speakers hanging around, for their image. Their other teachers will speak pure academic English and concentrate on grammar. It may be just your American accent that lands you the job. Another reason to visit university bulletin boards is that often students require private English tutoring for

Picking Fruit

A seasonal job, but something anyone can do. Late August through October, whenever the grapes are ripe, farms hire temporary workers to help with the harvest. Farming families provide accommodations (anything from a shared double in the big house to barracks that sleep 25 or more on the larger farms) and food. Not just food, but normally ENORMOUS amounts of food. Work begins early morning until night and house wine is (usually) generously available. There's a special camaraderie that develops among the temp workers on the smaller farms. Life on the larger, more mechanized farms is often less hospitable. The pay's usually the same. It will be hot in the South of France during the vendange (grape picking). Expect to work in the heat, not in the rain. You're paid by the days you work.

If you want to, you can spend the months of August through December wandering the European fruit trail. As seasons and weather change, so do the fruits needing harvesting. Grapes in Germany and France, hops in England, oranges in Spain. The biggest deal is during vendange in France, when there's a festival spirit and workers are well treated. It all gets a lot harder as the weather turns colder. You don’t necessarily need to be the strongest person in the world for this work, but you should be fit. You do a lot of bending and reaching for long hours at a time. Further info is available from the Alliance Française.

Common Market

In common market countries, there's a particular pecking order to be aware of when looking for work. Theoretically, the first people considered for jobs are citizens or permanent residents of the country you are in (obviously). Then citizens of other common market countries are supposed to be considered. Finally, if no one from that vast community is found suitable, law-abiding employers may look elsewhere. In England, add Commonwealth country nationals; result: an ever-widening casual labor pool. The facts are, some employers are very uptight about working papers, and some are not. If your employer really "wants" you he/she can make an effort to get you the right papers.

Sitting is also a good bartering service in exchange for food. For the most part, the only jobs you'll be considered for (besides bar work) are those that mysteriously raise you (to your liking or not) up a layer in the class stratum.

India

I wouldn't advise anyone to be caught broke in India. I know of only one occasionally accessible job for foreigners there. In Bombay, and Madras too, there are film studios that hire European and American “types” as extras. One of my friends lived for months in India on what she earned in a couple of weeks there. She portrayed one of twenty “hippies” at a discotheque where the innocent heroine is saved from a life of European corruption by the hero, who carries his beloved back to her teenage marriage in the village. India has the world's largest film industry. Not all the movies made there are as corny as this one, but many require Western extras. It was my friend's film “debut.” She said the actors and actresses all had “complete creative freedom in their roles, so they writhed and screamed, fulfilling the destiny churned out by Indian media concerning what could happen to your daughter if you ever let her out of the house.

Southeast Asia

In Bangkok, work as a movie extra is also available. You can find the same in New Zealand and Australia; teaching English and hostessing in bars. There's work in Australia and New Zealand for anyone who can acquire an entry visa. 

Of casual work as exists in any other Western society without too much difficulty. Wages are generally high.

Japan

Japan offers the