TRUE TALES OF RAILS

ACTUAL HAPPENINGS

TOLD BY EYE

WITNESSES

TOAST

A brief guide to riding boxcars in the Northwest
United States.

Meg's information was compiled from her own ad-
ventures during several of the freight-hopping
expeditions she’s made. In this capsule report she
explains some basic techniques.

No matter what time of year, riding the rails is
a chilly proposition. I spent much of my time in
my down sleeping bag, gratefully. The wind is
especially bad if you stay by the doors of a boxcar,
as you should to enjoy the movie screen on either
side of you. Piggy-backs are breezy, too. Warm
clothes are good to have, as are food, water,
books, railroad maps, and most of all patience.
This is the comfort lover's guide to packing; a real
Hobo can make it with newspapers for warmth,
liquor for the same reason, and bread. The slogan
“Coast to Coast on a piece of toast” describes those
who can cross the country on one loaf of bread.

However you fit yourself out for your trip, there
are some general tips for travel. One is that a box-
car with two open doors beats a boxcar with one
open door, both for view and safety. Sometimes a
sudden start or stop will start the door closing, and
being shut into a car, although probably not fatal
due to the less-than-airtight condition of most
cars, wouldn't be much fun. Secondly, a board
should be wedged into the doorway so that in any
case the door can't possibly close all the way. Two
by-fours are easy to find lying around in the yard.

Although I had horrible visions of running after
moving trains and losing my legs as I dangled
half-on, half-off, the actual process of getting on
was embarrassingly simple. First we would ask a
yard worker when a train going North, South, or
whatever, was coming. Then when it came in, we
would ask another yardman which cars would stay
on and which would be left. Then we would pick a
car and climb into the unmoving train. When there
are no empty boxcars, as happens, it is comfort-
able and fairly warm to camp between the huge
wheels of piggy-back trailers. There are some dis-
advantages to riding this way, like the fact that
you can't stand up and move around as you can in

PAULA’S

All good sinners flock here. REAL sinners, not
just somebody who robs a bank now and then.
The real sinners come to Paris to worship; and
Pigalle is Paris’ great shopping center, where they
pick up their holy medals.

Just to walk here when you have nothing to
spend, it's then you see how we are coming out
of the national strike. Everywhere in the streets,
there is rubbish, piled up. But good rubbish, full
of wine bottles, feathered hats, luscious, rich and
juicy rubbish. Everybody walking past would
rather die than disturb it. Not me! The idea, people
disassociating themselves from their rubbish! They
dress in their best boots and clothes and walk past
their rubbish, and they don't see it!

Now for some reason travelers have come upon
hard times. I had a job working mornings, it was
OK. In this dirty café everybody knew was for
travelers. One morning the police came and
simply took out the coffee machine, and the grill.
Now it is closed, so I am unemployed again. A
drag owing to the fact that I don't like looking for
work. One is expected to put up such an appear-
ance. Also I need to be ironed all over. I would
like to get another job in a café, but not a straight
one. A fumérie, or perhaps a brothel. I cannot
make honest money. Maybe I can see it's a waste
of time. I spend money too easily so there is no
reason to imagine I will get rich. I am not going
to try, it takes too much time and work. Never do
I want to be in the position where I can't go out
to look at the wall if I want or pick my nose, or
go and visit my friend Bi-Bishe.

Bi-Bishe is a traveler prostitute, and the most
amazing knitter I've ever met. She makes a pull-
cover in two days. She has an old car by the Metro
station, where she sits waiting for clients and knit-
ting all the time. Last week we went to find out if
she could have a sex change, but it is very expen-
sive and painful, so she decided not to bother.

925 50 100 150

— SOUTHERN PACIFIC COTTON BELT LINES

A boxcar, but it is certainly more bearable than
hanging around the yards waiting twelve hours or
more for the next train.

The yard people we met in the U.S. were swell
without exception. Several people told us that the
president of Burlington Northern put a clause into
its constitution to the effect that freight hoppers
are nice and should be left alone (allegedly because
he used to do it himself during the depression). I don't know if it's true, but Burlington Northern is a great line to ride. Union Pacific and Southern Pacific never bothered us either. Once when our train broke down a worker came back to tell us it would be a 6-8 hour wait, and advised us to hitchhike. Santa Fe is a bad line; it's been computerized. Computers do several horrible things; they organize trips well enough so that there are almost no empty boxcars, and they empty the yards of friendly yardmen so that moving figures stand out from a distant (manager's) office.

Meg Wilson

PIGALLE

Things are very hard for the male prostitutes
here. Did you know it's against the law to be a
transvestite in Paris, except two days a year?
Every four days they are taken by the police, and
made to pay a fine. Then they must work harder so they can afford to stay in business. Then the
lady prostitutes don't like the guys and so forth.
It's a matter of politics. Like my papers. Neither
the Irish nor the British governments can find the
missing bits of my file (I keep telling them it's the
other who has it), but nobody listens. I am another
victim of the war.

You know I had a very good work scene going
here for a while (before the café). It was this: I
decided to have an agency to do femme de ménage
(housecleaning) work, for the prostitutes in
the area. It was going great you see, I had eight
clients, four girls and four guys. I was taking their
keys in the mornings, and two friends and I were
doing the work. We were getting paid and doing
well.

We were going to the cinema, it was too much!
Then people kept complaining about the queue on
the stairs. Every evening they all came back here
for their keys, so the concierge complained to the
owner of the apartment. And I had to stop work
once again. It's sad because that was an OK job.

It’s Monday today. A friend of mine had just
come back from Morocco, with a snake. He doesn't
know what to do with it so I've taken it. It looks
nice, I have to find out what they eat.

I have gotten a letter from my sister (the countess) in England. She's bought another house. Her
way of life seems so strange to me. Somehow I
wonder if she still has nerves and all. Even when
I tremble I know I'm alive.

Au Revoir for now.

Paula is one of BOXCAR’s Paris correspondents.
This is the first in what will be an ongoing column.

JOURNALS

INDIA
Excerpts from the journal of Nancy Lay

INDIA
(in the Himalayas)

MONDAY MORNING AT THE LAST CHANCE
BAKERY AND CHAI SHOP. On approaching the
village I confront the Tibetan community with
swirling rivers in the air. Inside the Last Chance
Bakery, a dog falls beside the table comfortably. I hear
a clear flute from another window. The sound falls
on the clotting corn fields below. Skeleton legs go
up to the hips. Morning knows no flesh. Someone
examines a white leg, pulls up blue jeans. The person has a disembodied English accent. This bakery-
chai shop is a congregation spot for European trav-
elers in all states of disarray. European, in Asia,
includes Americans. Amala sweeps sunlight
under the door. Soft broom tail, wet on tip, drags
concrete, licking the shaggy dog.

Susan and Jack are going up to La Dac. They
are well equipped, have expensive cameras, etc.
Together, they are interested in Buddhism and
have taken some courses in Berkeley and India.
They ask me to show them the holy walk that circles
the Dalai Lama's headquarters. I'm glad I told
them about it so they can take me there.

To go on this walk is a magnetic venture. Later
today I will move up to Rishi Bavan; they offer to
help me carry some things. My possessions have
multiplied. I left a basket a year ago with Choten.
It has become stretched and sculptured. Some
clay pots were growing in it. Some old clothes
with mold were rounded and firm. Choten kept it
all this time in her small oiled house. Olivia sent
my sleeping bag and some clothes from Delhi. She
sent them efficiently with a checklist to Dr. Don-
den's assistant. When I went to pick up the clothes,
I was offered the concrete room. There was no time
flying. Already I am happily encumbered with
possessions.

Susan and Jack stay at Lea's house. That is
above Rishi Bavan. Between these places lives
Susanne, the nun, Ling Rinpoche and Geishi Rab-
ten. There is an orchard extending up from our
complex where the apples are large and hard.
Not fully ripe. The monkey tribe comes every day
with their bunch, with their babies to try and get
the apples. The chokedar (caretaker) fires the gun
above the trees, to scare them. Flying from tree to
tree, they spread and leave. I will take a picture of
the chokedar bathing under the water tap, naked
except for a loincloth, laughing and chuckling
with insane happiness. It sounds like internal
oblivion. He gets out before I can take the picture.
A young Rinpoche sees the situation. He tells the
chokedar to get back under there. The chokedar
does but without any consciousness of having his
picture taken. It is like turning a film back to a
part you want to see again. He acts it out just the
same, totally convincing. He is in ecstasy. The sun
is warm because it is reflecting off snow peaks.
The water is see-through and sparkling. One can
lounge in the warm air around it. The bright cold
stream rounds off Chokedar's head.

Down in Dharamsala I buy cinnamon, sesame
seeds, soap, plastic shoes and four meters of mu-
lin to make a sleeping bag liner...

I remember that the Swiss couple had been
talking about a beautiful walk to Forsyth Ganj.
They discovered it when they went down to For-
syth to buy kerosene. I decide on a whim to get off
the bus at Forsyth, to find this path and walk back
a way that would be new and gratifying. I am
carrying quite a bit of stuff. I start walking. Think-
ing that it will be easy to find the path if I go in the
general direction. It is one of those days when a
person acts hastily and continually falls into
trouble. It turns out I had to walk up a very steep
way without a clear path. Crystal drops of water
begin to christen me and the things I carry.

My heart is a little suspect that I am lost.

And that I have a fool's desire for adventure. Here
I am stumbling up a mountain, off the path, with a
heavy load of shopping. This circumstance makes
me loathe the lost walking. But I keep climbing
higher and higher and suddenly approach an im-
pressive entrance to an edifice.

Entering which, I feel narrow and without very
much rights. In other words, I have no business
here. But I go in silently because it is raining.

Where I quite normally encounter a man. The man
is Tibetan, but a new sort. He is gentry. He says
that I can sit on the porch until the rain subsides.
He has been sitting at a table, looking at a book.
I urge him to continue what he is doing. His type
of reticence makes him different from poor Tibetans. He speaks good English and we could talk
but I feel that he doesn't want to break any bar-
riers. Who am I, he doesn’t care, and if it's won-
derland to me to be here it isn't to him. He lives
here. The chair he has offered me doesn't have
any leg on it, so I have to balance with mine. This
is all well and good. I watch folded hands.

Well, it is getting later and the rain hasn't start-
ed stopping. Perhaps it is falling a little less. He
has not offered me one of several umbrellas that
are lying around. I want to ask him if I could bor-
row one but I remember my Tibetan preliminary
training. And I think, “I'll be damned if I'll ask.”
I politely take my leave, thanking him profusely.

I have to keep climbing until I reach the Chil-
dren's Village. I didn’t really gain anything by
stopping at the unapproachable house except a
vacuum seat. The man was looking at a dictionary
of birds with colored pictures in it. I did not enter
the bird pictures nor did I fly off. I was sitting on a
vacuum seat. I find the road at the children’s vil-
lage. It is one I have walked before but not re-
cently. I know it is not a short distance. But it is
flat. Now it begins to rain harder. It rains so hard
soon, that my head is coming out of the window of
the rain. I pause and drape the muslin I have
bought over the things I am carrying and a little
over myself... The road is going level around
the mountain. It passes very large rocks with over-
hangs where the water pours off like a loud shield.
I keep trying to get into one of these places under-
neath the waterfall but find the largest part of
myself still out, in fact, in the waterfall, with no
hope for disconnection. It looks ridiculous to be
standing in solid rain with a dry head though my
head is quite wet. My hair is bright. I pause like a
hare under trees but do nothing but prolong my
drenchedness.

I feel the water in my belly cave, running full
force off the roof of my head. There is none to save.
I am outside of all inner circles. Wringing up my
figure, I slop, slop. It is running off me now in
sheets and I am drinking it off my nose. The taste.
Suddenly I feel liberated but that only lasts a sec-
ond. A little light appears under the roof of my
vision with rain dropping, burning in my eyes. I
see a blurry form, is it the guard house? I have to
climb over a wire fence or walk around to the big
fallen entrance below the house. There is no time
to consider although it doesn't make any differ-
ence now. So I just go over the fence or go around
all the same having given up.

At this point the muslin is soaked. I feel myself
up as I walk in waves up to the porch and cut
through the pour off the roof hangover. It is near
dark. I walk into one dark room and throw stuff on
the floor. I get shouted at. Two freaks are smoking
joints. They have no concern for what I have been
through. So I try the next room without leaving
any explanations. It is a very small room on the

continued on back page

MIRACULOUS HARBOUR

Day on the Koh Samui wharf. Silver and dark fishermen and
sailors drinking and eating their rice, white before night
colors it. Not so dangerous at their dinner time I watch
them stir in their muscles tattooed dragons and hands and
snakes curl as they cut fish in gold strips and cubes. Brew
their purplish coffee in condensed milk tins.
Ships that carry such men must be colored in flags and ribbons,
waxy wedding flowers. Men that work such ships wear wild jasmine
in their black hair, frangipani to belt their Chinese satin trousers.
Striped sarongs to hold their money and dice. They peer out of
portholes wearing turquoise scarves around their heads, waving
bongs and leer, “Ganja, Ganja,” they whisper and laugh then invite me
to sail to an island where rare sparrow nests are fetched for all
the world’s soup. To an island where butterflies are large as bats.
To an island where 5000 fishing boats are docked all decorated and
celebrating. They say the view here is small as this porthole.

“Hey you!” They shout, “Jet Baht!” That is 35 cents for me. A pirate's
price. They needn't pay. I've always meant to go. The woman at
wharf front selling fruit watches inscrutably. She already knows
every bit of the legend. Romance has made her tough. I've come to
crave her fresh pineapples covered in salt, and wicked chilis.

The bright sea and a boat splashing through full
of families, chickens, baskets, Greeks going to the
islands, European and American kids on holiday.
The boat tosses like a horse's mane into the big
dark waves, wind and sea. There comes a harsh
island falling into the sea with only rocks at the
merging harbor with flat houses up the hill and
a few cypress trees. Otherwise the island is a sunny
rock maybe a prison. We do not get off although
before we thought this was our destination. Night
comes and water splashes onto