greece

continued from inside  
plugged with letters from an Australian mother to  
her daughter who has traveled through India. I  
write letters. Jill is beautiful and spare like a cat  
in her living here. Sand has been spread on the  
rocky floor we share with lizards.  

Days we swim, lie on the beach, eat tomato and  
onion salad, feta cheese, make friends with our  
neighbors, ride the bus or walk into town, drink in  
bars where the wind blows in off the sea, the wind  
insistent, strong and constant on this side of the  
island, not on ours. I ask people on the sailing  
boats in harbour if they're going to Alexandria or  
anywhere and need a crew. We drink Retsina in  
the evening. I come somewhere close to falling in  
love with an Irish guy named Ken. One night with  
no moon, no shoes, trying to walk through the spiny  
plants and find the boulder path back to the end of  
the headland I meet a waving torch. His cave is  
on the way to mine and very fine. Low near the  
sea and completely enclosed except for a small  
doorway covered with a white sheet. He tells me  
about India and Afghanistan and his travels, I tell  
him about mine. He is looking after the cave for a  
woman who will come back soon. He is gently  
apart and away. He is beautiful in his abstract  
movement and his body is beautiful. His love is  
abstract. His woman waits in Corfu; they have sat  
drunk with wine on church steps at night and said  
they would marry but they didn’t; they have traveled  
together for years, now she’s in Corfu and he  
said he'd be there days ago. He is going to Crete  
and Egypt.  

Days turn into days with people I get jealous of  
Ken's beauty and his impartial love for everyone,  
he embraces many women and is free like the  
tides, subject like the tides. Sun sets and rises, sea  
curls on rocks and sand. Jill on the dusty road says  
“Tomorrow I'm leaving for Santorini.” She buys  
her ticket in town. She goes. I am lonely sitting  
alone on the headland. I feel abandoned, truly on  
the way now. The cave is lonely, walking I must be  
a dawn silhouette on the ridge of the headland for  
at breakfast in the café someone says, “I saw you  
through binoculars on the headland, you looked  
glad.” Jill has gone on her adventure, her bright  
summer. In the town the wind blows all day long,  
soon I will take the boat to Athens.  

Athens. There with Jill it was a destination,  
peaches, yogurt and honey for breakfast in a small  
café off an oily shady street, people in the hotel,  
sitting on the roof writing letters, a new city, get-  
ting drunk on Ouzo then fleeing through the  
plaka full of tourists and ripoffs at night like a bat  
whose radar's broken. The oily smirch of a holy  
city with ancient roots in the dry bowl of soil.  
People at crossroads. India, Turkey, Asia, Africa.  
That time I read the Tarot in a shallow cave under  
the Acropolis overlooking the city for a mad Ger-  
man guy back from India looking for the love he  
said his mother never gave him. With him fighting  
my own bad delusions of power and sanity—  
which he could get into because then he could  
pretend I was his mother but I didn’t understand  
that dynamic then, just felt the delusions and dis-  
honesty and claims.  

This time all I wanted was a cheap ticket to  
Egypt. A few days later flying to Cairo, the flight  
my umbilical cord stretched out over the sea then  
falling into a halo of brown dust which is the first  
thing you see of Cairo.  

Jenny Shepherd  

india  
continued from inside  

end near the road. A small blonde girl is inside.  
There is a Western boy and an Indian in there  
huddled. I recognize the Indian as the same per-  
son I had gotten out of the rain with a year ago,  
only in another room. There is no mistake about it.  
We greet each other. I realize that he never car-  
ries an umbrella. I am helped by the girl to get out  
of my wet things. I really appreciate this. She is  
like my mother now. Now I recognize her. I met  
her in Pondicherry. Her name is Sandy. She is  
Australian. Sandy's room is lit up by one or two  
candles. There is no electricity here in the guard  
house. She has a beautiful arrangement of boughs  
and flowers among stones. Incense is winding,  
wrapping each person into position.  

Sandy's face is lit up by the candles. Her rosy  
high cheeks. Her white blonde braids. Her father  
came from Greenland to Australia. She was raised  
on a ranch. Her words spread out and hop. She  
can say, “Oh,” for a longer time than a big hare  
with a watch. She gets me into some naked clothes  
of hers that are hanging on nails, and gives me  
some hot tea. This is indeed wonderful. One does  
not think any further than this when one has been  
exposed. Far out into the ice of exposure, the hot  

cup of tea takes one solidly into bodies and souls in  
a small room. Thank you I think, with my arms  
out figuratively. Let this demon come inside out of  
the cold whiteness.  

It is rosy in this room with Sandy's cheeks, with  
a huddled mountain man. He is not Indian, he is  
mountain. The Western boy has faded out of my  
mind. I am groping through the wet clothes of get-  
ting out. And the warmth of nakedness. Letting  
my skin dry. There is nothing like dry cloth. Thank  
you I feel.  

PASSAGE #4  

The pain comes back  

to verify the wound  

The mouth of the crocodile  
The white mouth  

The mouth  
open to the belly  

opens to its belly  

Not an entrance  
but a change of place  

A dozen handsigns  

A dozen words in an  
order of accident  
of reason in danger  

The river shakes loose  
an island  

The island  
floats on its root  

Get down  
on your heart  
my friend  

Get out  
of my way  

Captain of the shoreline  
Captain of the runaways  

I have come home  

Beau Beausoleil  

_CRIMINALS  

Two criminals take him by the arms.  

Then they lead him up a staircase, to his own room.  

“They put him to bed,  

and tuck the cobwebs under his chin.  
They wrap them around his face and ears,  
over his head like a shawl,  
over his mouth even.  

They go away, leaving him like that for hours.  

Soon the bed stalks off in disgust, leaving him in his cocoon. . .  

In his room in the morning he finds:  

An old-fashioned bed that is covered with cobwebs  

an automobile that is covered with cobwebs  
a woman’s shoe from the turn of the century  
that is likewise covered with cobwebs...  

an egg, a tooth, a plumber’s helper. . .  

a map of the world as it was before the invention of cobwebs.  

Marc LeCard  

castletown house  

FINE INEXPENSIVE ACCOMMODATIONS  

Write: CastleTown House Castleconner via Ballina County Mayo, Ireland  

SHE LET GO with a roar that drowned  
all other sounds  

I DON'T SIP IT, I GULP IT  

I floated into a suspicious nowhere  
a bloated red kite  

I was dead on the couch  
and no one  
was into necrophilia  

No one loves a corpse  
really  

they try to remember  

the line without the color  

a picture  

of someone who simply died  
her way out  

of it all  

how beautiful she once was  
pale before the green  
before her hair rooted  

its way into the sink  

before she spat  

before all that mortality  
greened its way out  

green is such a bilingual color  
like a fly in a fly-eating plant  
I take in my fate  

even while  

it takes me in  

— Laura Beausoleil  

POEM  

In the African night  

the women are talking  

their voices are wind in the river's long  
grasses  

or the scattered cry of a bird,  

she has hair glistening like eagles’ wings  

we start up  

a moonlight wealth of butterflies  

I do not see where they go.  

Jennifer Shepherd  

early subscription $2.00. Published as  

material accumulates. All submissions:  
must be accompanied by a stamped self-  
addressed envelope. Send to:  

BOXCAR  

1001-B Guerrero  

San Francisco, CA 94110  

‘Name  
Address  
City