IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

New Colorado Law Will  
Affect Women in Prison  

Susan Goding  

(This is a follow-up to an article  
that appeared in the “Women in Prison“  
issue of Big Mama Rag July/August  
1978.)  

On April 1st a bill amending the cri-  
minal sentencing law went into effect.  
Under this new amendment judges will  
be required to set a definite term of  
sentence.  

Previously, a person convicted of a  
criminal offense would be sentenced to  
“the term proscribed by law", a very  
broad range of years. For instance,  
for a Class 2 felony conviction, the  
term would have been 10 to 50 years.  
The parole board would then set the  
sentence.  

In theory the indeterminate sentence  
would protect persons convicted of a  
crime from vindictive or arbitrary  
sentencing by a judge and place sent-  
encing with a group of experts in  
human behavior, the parole board. The  
parole board would consider all sides  
of the case, any extenuating circum-  
stances surrounding the crime, an indi-  
vidual's past history and her progress  
in prison in order to set a fair  
sentence. There was no means to ap-  
peal their decision.  

The original proponents of the  
indeterminate sentence never lost  

sight of its punitive value either.  
Sarden Zabulon R. Brockway who spoke  
in favor of this kind of sentencing  
in 1870 wrote in The American Refor-  
matory System, "The indeterminateness  
of the sentence breeds discontent,  
breeds purposefulness, and prompts to  
a new exertion. Captivity, always  
irksome, is now increasingly so be-  
cause of the uncertainty of its  
duration..."  

This, in effect, set the parole  
board up as moral watchdogs for  
society. A woman would not only serve  
time for her crime but also for how  
far she had stepped out of her role  
as the passive female. Lesbians, pol-  
itical prisoners, inmate leaders, and  
all women who do not fit the feminine  
role would be incarcerated for the  
maximum term as an example to other  
inmates or in a moral crusade for  
society.  

The prison system's purpose can be  
clearly shown in the kinds of “re-  
habilitation" and "vocational" programs  
it set up for women. These programs  
consist almost exclusively of cooking,  
sewing, and laundry.  

Since indeterminate sentencing had  

been adopted in 1870 women were spend-  

ing longer terms in prison than be-  
fore for identical crimes. In 1973  
the state of New Jersey justified it  
by saying in the case of The State of  
New Jersey vs. Costello:  

",..the legislature could legit-  
imately conclude that female  
criminals were basically differ-  
ent from male criminals, that  
they were more amiable and  
responsive to rehabilitation and  
reform...which might, however,  
require a longer period of con-  
finement in a different type of  
institution."  

This new amendment, sponsored by  
Ann Gorsuch, Denver, is an effort at  
making prison sentences for the same  
crimes roughly equal. The judge will  
now set a definite term from within  
a narrow range of years. Now a person  
convicted of a Class 2 felony will  
serve a specified term to be within  
8 to 12 years. Class 3 felonies would  
be within 4 to 8 years. Class 4,  

2 to 4 years and Class 5 between 1 to  
2 years. Class 1 felonies, such as  
first degree murder and kidnapping,  
would still receive life or the death  
penalty.  

A judge could impose a sentence up  
to twice the maximum or half the min-  
imum under mitigating or aggravating  
circumstances, but would have to ex-  

-BMR graphic by Karen Martin  

plain this action in writing. These  
sentences would automatically be re-  
viewed by the Colorado Court of  
Appeals which could overrule.  

The new law also provides for  
"earned time" off the prison sentence  
as well as “good time" off. These  
will allow a prisoner to reduce time  
served in half.  

The new law applies only to those  
convicted of crimes committed after  
July 1, 1979. While the parole  
board will still make decisions con-  
cerning sentences based on their view  
of “good" behavior, their decisions  
will have a less significant effect.  
The end of the indeterminate sentence  
was a greatly needed reform for  
Colorado women in prison. However,  
there still are states that have the  
indeterminate sentence, so the work  
is not over. We need to end this  
type of sentencing on a national le-  
vel. This is a vital change that must  

be fought for.  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 3  

Jury Acquits Activists  

Solitary Confinement Abolition Project  

The attempted railroading of prison  
movement activists Gay Hoon and Betsy  
Wood has been derailed by a British  
Columbia Supreme Court jury. Wood and  
Hoon, two long-time community activ-  
ists and campaigners against solitary  
confinement, were acquitted in March  
following a six-week jury trial aris-  
ing out of an aborted escape attempt  
at the maximum security British Colu-  
mbia Penitentiary.  

Wood, acting as her own lawyer, and  
Hoon succeeded in turning the tables  
on the penitentiary system during the  
trial, exposing the brutal conditions  
inside the B.C. Pen and showing that  
the charges of prison break against  
them were the result of a vindictive  
case of selective prosecution.  

The two had originally been charged  
with attempted murder (a guard was  
stabbed by a prisoner in the escape  
attempt) and other offenses, carrying  
in total a life sentence. A judge at  
a preliminary hearing threw out all  
the charges because of a lack of ev-  
idence, but the B.C. Attorney-General  
overruled the decision and directly  
indicted them, in an unusual exercise  
of his discretionary power.  

The defense strategy during the  

women activists' trial was to show  
that the prosecution single-mindedly  
pursued the case through selective  
gathering of evidence, public preju-  
dice against activists and prisoners,  
circumstantial evidence and "bought"  
testimony. Wood, drawing on her per-  
sonal experiences with prisoners and  
her dealings with penitentiary ser-  

vice officials, was able to turn the  
prosecution's own evidence around  
time and time again, forcing prosecu-  
tion witnesses under cross-examination  
to either acknowledge the corruption  
of the prison system, or to be  
blatantly "forgetful" or evasive.  
One witness who had been pressured by  
police into coming to court to testi-  

More On Page 14  

Clinic Arsonist Captured  

A Nassau County Grand Jury has in-  
dicted a 21-year-old New Yorker on  
five counts of attempted murder in  
connection with the February 15th  
burning of an abortion clinic.  

The suspect, Peter Burkin, is  
charged with attempting to murder five  
people who were in the waiting room  
of the Bill Baird Abortion Clinic in  
Hempstead, Long Island, and then of  
torching the clinic. The abortion  
clinic subsequently burned to the  
ground.  

Bill Baird, founder of the clinic,  
said Burkin, who had been recognized  
at previous anti-abortion demonstra-  
tions in front of the clinic, entered  
the premises on February 15. Baird  
charged that Burkin menaced the pat-  
ients in the waiting room, indicated  
he planned to call a press conference,  
and threatened to burn the building  
down with everyone in it during the  
conference.  

Burkin sustained minor burn injuries  
himself when he threw gasoline around  
the clinic and then torched the place.  
He is charged with arson and reckless  
endangerment.  

“This incident appears to be among  
the worst of the anti-abortion vio-  
lence we have seen so far," said Karen  
Mulhauser of the National Abortion  
Rights Action League (NARAL).  

Since last February, when NARAL  
issued a report detailing burning,  
bombing, vandalism and invasions of  
fourteen clinics, anti-abortion vio-  
lence has continued. Clinics have  
been burned in Akron, Ohio; Burling-  
ton, Vermont; Columbus, Ohio; and  
Iowa City, Iowa since then. Picketing,  
invasion of clinics, and harassment  
of patients and staff have also con-  
tinued around the country.  

Many abortion or family planning  
clinics have been forced to install  
bullet-proof doors and windows (as  
had Baird's clinic) and hire armed  
guards or set up escort services to  
protect themselves and their patients  
against the threats of violence by  
anti-abortion fanatics.  

“While some pickets and disruptions  
at abortion clinics do not always jeo-  
pardize the physical health of pat-  
ients and clinic staff, others do,"  
said Mulhauser. "But any invasion or  
disruption is an attack against the  
right of every individual to seek  
legal health care."  

Peter Burkin, if found guilty of the  
attempted murder indictments, could  
receive a stiff prison sentence of up  
to 25 years. He is believed to be the  
first person ever to stand trial in  
the US for the burnings and invasions  
of the abortion clinics across the  
country.  

College Attempts To Purge  
Feminist Author Mary Daly  

Mary Daly, well-known feminist phil-  
osopher and author of the recently  
published "GYN/Ecology: The Metaethics  
of Radical Feminism," and a tenured  
professor at Boston College is the  
target of serious harassment and es-  
calated threats by the University.  

The University has been trying to  

dig into Daly's past and find grounds  
to dismiss her by soliciting com-  
plaints against her from her former  
students.  

Boston College has also recently  
threatened to suspend Daly without  
pay. This action was coupled with the  
attendance of monitors in all of her  
classes, an unprecedented action at  
Boston College. The harassment follow-  
ed the publication of her new book.  

As a result of press coverage, mon-  
itors are no longer in Daly's classes,  
however there are threats that they  
will reappear in the future. The  
threats are constant as are the Uni-  
versity's continuous use of bullying  
tactics in an attempt to force Daly  
into submission. Soliciting com-  

plaints against Daly is one example,  
others are: inordinate demands, grill-  
ing in interviews, spreading vicious  
rumors, and the administration's  
general attitude of animosity towards  
Daly.  

Other forms of harassment have in-  
cluded: discouragement of students  
from registering for Daly's courses  
and attempts to dictate the subject  
matter of those courses. Moreover,  
while Daly was on leave of absence  
writing her latest book, serious mis-  
information concerning her whereabouts  
was given to callers trying to contact  
her.  

Mary Daly is the author of two  
previous books, "The Church and the Sec-  
ond Sex," and “Beyond God the Father:  
Toward a Philosophy of Women's Liber-  
ation,” which inspired Boston Col-  
lege's earlier attacks on Daly.  

As a response to the continuing at-  
tacks upon Mary Daly, a rally to  
indict the oppressors of women in  
universities will be held at Boston  
University on April 8th.  

pre-