page 26

Spiritual Legacy...

From Page 3

the boat is in the shape of a crescent moon. The Babylonians, known as the astronomers of the ancient world, worshipped the moon as queen of the night and powerful not only for its physical effects but also for the moon’s power over mental activity.  
Vulva as Spiritual

All crescent shapes seem to represent the goddess. The crescent appears on the Turkish flag. It appears in the Tarot pack, especially on the card for the High Priestess who is considered a personification of Isis. In the Waite Tarot deck, the card for the moon reveals the various aspects of the unconscious, the material level, and the astral plane. The symbol of the vulva is two crescents joined at the tip. As such it is still found in Ireland, remnant symbols of the Celts and Druids. (Druidism is a goddess religion). In the Eastern philosophy of Tantra, the coco-de-mer and other crescent vulva shapes are points of meditation and a focus of spiritual aspirations. The Yoni (vulva) itself is crescent-shaped like the moon and in India the word means “altar — a sacred place.” (Davis, p. 112)

The vulva-shaped Kauri shell was referred to as the Matriculus or porculus (porcelain). Thus closely associated were three terms: pottery, shell, and genitalia.

The Cult of the Mother

Goddess appears in other manifestations besides the moon though that seems to be one of her most powerful out-ward aspects. In India, the “Mother Goddess” is worshipped as Parvati, or Ambika, the source of all life. In Sumeria, she appears as Inanna, goddess of the wine; in Canaan as Astarte and Anat. The Canaanite princess Jerah gave her name to the city of Jericho. In fact, in Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Greece, the names become so interwoven that identification and separation become almost too complex to handle. Stretching as far away as Alaska, the Eskimos pursued a mother goddess cult referring to her as “She who will not have a husband.” Finally, in the earliest recorded account of the universe, the Enuma Elish, Tiamat is revered as the Mother of Gods, the creator of all.  
Witches and the Moon

Unfortunately, as the world turned to gods instead of goddesses and replaced old beliefs with new, some sense of balance was lost, and unfortunate misconceptions arose. For example, Hecate was not seen as an aspect of the Terrible Mother, only a witch to be associated with a new connotation of lunar madness and havoc. The thirteenth month was not only eliminated but 13 became unlucky. Left, the side favored by the gynocracies, became sinister. Witches themselves, who were often women who persisted in holding on to old cults and beliefs, whether vegetarian or goddess cults (but not Male or Christian) were seen as being under the influence of the night and the moon — and the moon in that context was only to be seen as evil.

As Christianity spread throughout the world, and Europe especially, many of the people who were holding fast to their ancient cults were appeased with the symbolism of Mary. It is the cult of the Virgin (and virgin originally meant unwed, not chaste) that was contrived to replace the Great Mother. Mary, often identified with Isis, became the goddess incarnate. According to Elizabeth Gould Davis, “Christianity succeeded because it represented a return to original goddess worship which the Olympian gods had temporarily replaced but which never had been totally replaced in the minds and hearts of the people.”

To confirm goddess worship, matriarchal rule, and the archetype of the Great Mother is not to supplant one mode of worship and ritual with another, mother for father as it were. It is to recover along with the lost traditions and symbols some sense of our roots, our relationship to the universe, our own spiritualizing powers. Esther Harding in a book called Women’s Mysteries talks of what happens when we do not attempt to rediscover our inheritance through unconscious archetypal traditions. She feels that as women’s physiological life is linked to the moon in its watery, emotional, reproductive essence, then when the world becomes only attuned to the sun, more than political havoc reigns. Women forced to follow gods and male rhythms of life become out of touch with their own. This results in an imbalance, a stultifying of half the natural responses and urges. Yang cannot exist without Yin. Men cannot exist without being in touch with the Feminine. Women cannot exist by outwardly following a male set of values and inwardly being unattuned to their own psychic needs.

Spirituality as Energy

Spirituality for women then is not an abstract religion; it is a focus of energy that begins within. Within our bodies, our unconscious. For all of us, life began in the Great Round, in the watery wombs of our mothers. For all of us, our first sense of unconscious rumblings are to the Feminine. For all of us, spirituality is an attempt to rediscover that sensation of oneness, the reunion with the Feminine. The collective unconscious of humankind is a starting point for a focus of energies that keeps us in tune with the vibrations of the universe. For women especially, the focus of energy must be inward, towards ourselves before it radiates outward, since we have seen the distortions of outward types of power.

The recollections and reinstitution of ancient reverence for the Great Mother can only be reverence and identification — not imitation, not taking the twentieth-century child and clothing her in antique modes of worship. It means being in touch with dreams and vibrations that trace back to the Feminine and of which women are the main carriers. It means expressing the SPIRIT of her principles: Feminist Humanism. It is a merging with nature rather than a conquest of it. It is not a cult of Cybele reincarnated, but a merging, organic relationship with that part of our being which rejects the ugly and nourishes the SPIRIT of the archetype within us. SPIRITuality:

Fran Rominski, writing in the first edition of Womanspirit, speaks of demystifying and informalizing the goddess by using a small ‘g,’ and many ‘s’s. She adds, “May all the goddesses attend you as you meet clearly and boldly the center of power that rings and vibrates through all the creatures of the universe.” This is not a passiveness. This is not religion as escape. Searching for those ultimate centers of power that we share with all life in this world is a spirit world in which sun is not opposed to moon nor conscious opposed to unconscious, nor dogma against dogma. It is the great round encompassing all.

Sources and Recommended Reading

Archaeologia Mundi: Anatolia  
The First Sex  
The Great Mother  
Mothers and Amazons  
Myth, Religion and Mother Right  

AN ORGANIZATION OF GAY CATHOLICS AND OTHER CONCERNED PERSONS

Meetings:  
Second and fourth Tuesdays  
7:30 p.m.  
Oxford Hotel  
17th Street and Wazee  

Information:  
Bill — 447-0045  
Jeff — 722-6722  
Charlie — 377-6150  

Write:  
DIGNITY / Denver  
P.O. Box 1402  
Boulder, CO 80302  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 6  

WOMEN &  

Ahem @¢ see  
BRS 28 P| Ed  
SSTRSseaes Be  

a column  

Treatment of “Trich” With Flagyl Dangerous  

WASHINGTON (LNS) — New evidence on the dangers of Flagyl, one of the most widely prescribed drugs for women, suggests a link between the drug’s use and birth defects, stillbirths, and premature deliveries. This follows information revealed last March that Flagyl causes cancer.

Flagyl, whose generic name is metronidazole, is prescribed about two million times annually to women suffering from a common vaginal infection — trichomonas vaginitis (“Trich”). About one-third of the 2,260,000 prescriptions for Flagyl in 1972 were for diseases which cannot be cured by the drug, however, such as nonspecific vaginitis, fungus infections, and gonorrhea. This is over 700,000 prescriptions and therefore makes Flagyl a major drug abuse of doctors.

In a paper he presented October 22 to an international medical conference, Dr. Marvin Legator, head of genetic toxicology at Brown University, revealed that the urine of people treated with Flagyl contained a substance showing the occurrence of gene mutations. Genetic mutation is one known cause of birth defects.

Other studies also point to connections between Flagyl and birth defects. One study that will be published in December shows tests made on people who took the equivalent of one Flagyl tablet revealed a significant increase in the mutation rate of bacteria normally present in the human body.

The standard dosage of Flagyl is three tablets (250 mg. per tablet) a day for at least 10 days and the disease’s tendency to recur would increase the patient's intake of the drug to exceed this amount in many cases.

In a related Bulgarian study, small doses of Flagyl were reported to cause increases in birth defects, stillbirths, and premature births in guinea pigs and mice.

The importance of these discoveries was stressed in a letter to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) written by Sidney Wolfe and Anita Johnson of the Health Research Group. HRG is a Washington-based public interest organization that has been pressing for the removal of Flagyl from the market for several months. Last March, HRG filed a petition with the FDA to ban the drug because of evidence that Flagyl causes cancer.

HRG's letter to the FDA includes a chart prepared by the Drug Administration itself, which shows that Flagyl given to seven different species of animals induced malignant tumors causing breast and lung cancer.

“We cannot imagine a larger or more solid body of cancer information on any environmental chemical than is now available for Flagyl,” wrote Wolfe and Johnson in the HRG letter.

HRG demanded not only the banning of Flagyl, but also that Searle Inc., the drug’s sole manufacturer, collect all human evidence on birth defects and cancer for the ten to forty years that it often takes for the disease to develop, and pay for all medical care wherever adverse effects from Flagyl are observed.

“This alarming additional evidence,” concluded HRG, “makes it clear that Flagyl — long regarded in ignorance as a drug of little toxicity — is a lethal weapon against patients.”

YESTERDAY’S LESSONS

a novel

“They had this buffet or al-a-cart or something and they served snails and squid and Janice was eating it. She made me take some but I almost vomited. “Do you want me to throw up here in front of everyone before we get our trophy?”

By Sharon Isabell  
$2.50  

send orders to  

the women’s press collective  
5251 Broadway, Oakland, Cal. 94618  

737 E. 17th Ave.  

LARGE WOMEN'S SECTION  
ALSO BOOKS on GAY  

CHINA, CUBA, VIETNAM, MARYISH,  
ANARCHISM, #5. IMPERIALS A,  

ALL BOOKS 20% Off AT  
Ade. Tims  

Monday 12-6  
Tuesday - Saturday 12-6