WOMEN'S POLITICAL CAUCUS

The Colorado Women's Political Caucus (CWPC) meetings Sat. March 10 at Temple Square seemed on the surface to be a dull affair. Not only was the meeting strong-armed by a presiding officer and a parliamentarian, but the agenda included such exhilarating topics as the budget and by-laws!

But tucked away in the back pages of CWPC's rulebook are some exciting concepts, to-wit:

1. U.S. women have held more than 70% of the delegate positions at the precinct convention level and less than 4% at the state level, which means that women have had the deciding vote in electing men to represent them. A little political consciousness raising is in order here!

2. Women are beginning to recognize themselves as a voting block transcending traditional party affiliations. To quote Republican State Rep. Carol Tempest, the same people voted for her that voted for Democrat Pat Schroeder.

3. To organize a self-conscious women's vote is to give women power. It's a lot easier to negotiate when you can say with credibility, "There are 40,000 voting women waiting to hear your decision.”

A conversation with outgoing CWPC chairperson Mary Ellen Gallagher revealed that CWPC is just getting firmly on its feet as a non-partisan women's caucus. Last year during election efforts, separate caucuses formed inside each party, with the Democrats' CWPC emerging as the strongest. (50% of Colorado's delegates to the national Democratic convention were women.)

When the National Women's Political Caucus (NWPC) convened in Houston last February, two groups attended from Colorado, the Democratic caucus and the non-partisan caucus. Since that time, much has gone on behind the scenes to resolve the problem of party co-existence within the Colorado caucus to make it an organization that any woman - Republican, Democrat, or Independent -- would feel comfortable in. Some of the tedium evident at Saturday's meeting was directly related to such efforts, Ms. Gallagher said.

In reference to NWPC's convention, she cited as "frustrating” the fact that there was "absolutely no parliamentary procedure." The assembly spent four hours trying to resolve a very minor detail, she said. However, out of the chaos, women gained new confidence in themselves. "You'd hear someone speaking who didn't know a whole lot more than you did, and the next thing you knew, you'd be up there yourself having your say before the crowd."

The "superstars" stayed in the background: women like Shirley Chisholm, Bella Abzug, and Gloria Steinem made themselves available to the delegates, sharing their expertise, but they were deliberately low-key so that new leaders would emerge.

One inspiring element of the NWPC convention that Ms. Gallagher "didn't anticipate" was a "sense of history," of being a part of a movement, not only in rhetoric but in actual, solid, practical fact.

Bringing that inspiration to the grassroots level involves a lot of hard work. Current priorities include: (1) expanding membership to establish a true power block; (2) getting women elected to all levels in government ("If you want girls in shop classes in high school, you'll get funds for the equipment a lot faster if there are women on the school board."); and possibly (3) researching the effect on women of negative political maneuvers like Nixon's welfare cutbacks.

Ms. Gallagher, who is more comfortable herself outside the present political system, nevertheless believes that an organized women's effort utilizing present party structures is needed at this time. She pointed out that, although some feminists are “liberating themselves" by creating autonomous lifestyles outside the system, there are many women oriented to traditional political structures for whom a women's caucus provides a first rallying point for feminist issues. Moreover, women of all political leanings--inside and outside the system--who realize the need to join with other women in a common effort look to the caucus for the necessary structure to make this realization a powerful reality.

A few facts: President of NWPC is Frances (Sissy) Farenthold of Texas. Newly elected CWPC officers are President Marye Scharf, Vice President Estelle Firkany, Secretary Marilynne Siggerstaff, and Treasurer Bonnie Andrikopoulos. CWPC's Board of Directors: Jean Bain, Mary Ellen Gallagher, Karen Paget, Lydia Pena, Cynthia Small, and Rory Zahorek. Membership mailing address: 560 Clarkson.

COLORADO LEGISLATION PENDING

HB 1129. Discrimination in Consumer Credit. Pending in Senate Business Affairs Committee. Senator Garnsey would be besieged with letters and telephone calls.

HB 1128. Discrimination in Housing. Senate State Affairs. Expected to move from committee in April.

SB 53. Child Care Guide. No problem.

HB 1258. Requesting $800,000 for Child Care Appropriations. Being introduced by Rep. Chuck Howe.

(Above information from Bonnie Andrikopoulos, NOW's lobbyist. There is also a bill being pursued by Rep. Carol Tempest to equalize legal contractual age, but its number was not available at this printing.)

U.S. LEGISLATION PENDING

There are two anti-abortion bills before the U.S. Congress at present - HJ 261 and HJ 284. Each bill would “Guarantee the right to life" of the fetus. One states that it would guarantee this right “from the moment of conception," while the other says "from conception." Both bills must be defeated.

The Right-to-Life people are well organized, so we've got to get going. Write to every U.S. Senator and U.S. Representative, whether or not you are one of her/his constituents. Pat Schroeder says the Right-to-Life people have gained access to her office several times at night to leave an aborted fetus on her desk. She also said she has received over 2000 letters urging her support of these bills. As you can see, the Right-to-Life group will resort to any sort of emotionalism. We've got to make our position known to Congresswoman Schroeder and the others.

3/5/73

Now

Memo