P 2 2  
was a a pe,  

struggle  

Pre ire  
7 fy  

Roe = Big Mama Rag ., Vol.8 No.5  

We Must Confront All The Contradictions  

Susan Goding  

A successful revolutionary strategy cannot be based on the wholesale adoption  
of other revolutionary experiences. Strategies that must be developed  
by us to overthrow capitalism in the US have to be rooted in the conditions  
of US capitalism. This seems basic. Yet most analyses of class struggle in  
the US fall short in this when they omit discussion of international struggles  
against US colonialism.  

Traditionally, the left, including feminist, analysis has maintained that  
through struggle to resolve contradictions between the ruling class and the  
working class, the workers who have the potential power to control production  
will seize that power from the ruling class. That when workers realize they  
are being exploited for the profit of a few and always will be under capital-  
ism they will become radicalized into a revolutionary force. Once the contra-  
dictions of capitalism are exposed, people will support the idea of a workers'  
state and will work for communist change.  

This analysis ignores the fact that the US is an imperialist nation and  
that all Americans benefit from US imperialism. We have failed to discuss  
the investment that we, the working class, have in maintaining capitalism and  
imperialism. The capitalist class, on the other hand, is well aware of this  
investment, in fact created it, and has successfully exploited it for over  

two hundred years. Their power and wealth rests in the willingness of US  
workers to maintain open access to foreign resources and markets.  

We are the richest people in the world because while the capitalists have  
been robbing other countries of their wealth they are letting some trickle  
down to us. Then when these countries fight back, the capitalists can say  

they are threatening our “way of life.”  

A good example of this is what's going on in the Mid East. Many of the coun-  
tries are struggling to kick out US corporations and nationalize their resour-  

ces, to reclaim them for themselves.  

In the US we have heard that if the oil  

rich countries kick out Standard Oil, Exxon, etc., that we will be in danger  
of losing our access to oil, or at the least that the price of oil will go up.  

Struggle Commemorated  

In the eight months since the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua, the  
"Association of Nicaraguan Women - Luisa Amanda Espinosa" has already  
organized many childcare centers, skills training workshops, voluntary  
auxiliary medical brigades and rehabilitation projects for women.  

A notable milestone, both in gathering strength for renewed effort and  

commemoration, was the great International Women’s Day celebration on March 9, when  
thousands of Nicaraguan women came to Managua for the women's holiday.  
Delegations arrived on fruit trucks and vans from other cities and from  
remote rural areas. The event was organized by the women's association.  
Many brigades of women's militia, dressed in brown shirts with army  
pants and black berets, marched to the meeting place in military forma-  
tion. The entire procession, about eighty blocks long, kept straight  
lines, the women four abreast. As  

they came, they chanted: "To make a  
new society; We'll create the new woman!" "Against CIA maneuvers" and  
more.  

The vast majority of delegates were  
working class and peasant women,  
though every section of the new so-  
ciety was represented.  

Honorary awards went to several wo-  
men. Among them were three commanders  
of the revolution: Comandante Monica  
Balterdino, Comandante Claudia Dora  
Maria Telles and Comandante Leticia  
Herrera. All three achieved their  
leading positions during the course  
of the revolution. They continue  
playing important roles in the San-  
dinista National Liberation Front  
(FSLN).  

Other prizes went to: Dorris Tijer-  
ino, head of Foreign Relations for  
the FSLN, a famous guerrilla fighter;  
to three peasant women imprisoned and  
tortured during the Somoza dictator-  
ship; and to the mother of one of  
the first women guerrillas in the FSLN,  
killed in battle, Luisa Amanda Espin-  
osa, whose name the Nicaraguan Women's  
Association bears.  

An elderly woman who fought along  
with General Augusto Cesar Sandino  
in the early 1930s spoke about con-  
ditions during the war against the  
U.S. Marines and sang a revolution-  
ary song of that period.  

Several women spoke. Gloria Carrion,  
General Secretary of the Association,  
told of the role of Nicaraguan women  
throughout the revolutionary strug-  
gle. She emphasized that women have  
participated in every phase of this  
revolution, including bearing arms  
and leading squadrons. She describ-  
ed women's new role in the reconstru-  
ction now going on.  

She restated the women's main ob-  
jectives, which include:  

-Abolition of all laws that discrimi-  
nate against women;  

-Creation of a law to protect mothers,  
especially single mothers;  

-Assurance and definition of a policy  
for educating and training women so  
they become able to integrate fully  
in all fields of production.  

One chant best expressed and summed  
up the conscious role of Nicaraguan  
women in the revolution and reconstr-  
uction, "Se siente, se siente, la  
mujer esté presente." (You can feel  
it, you can feel it, woman is here.)  

(Information from 064 Our Backs  

to the point where we cannot afford it. The oil companies then created a  
false shortage of gas and heating oil to convince us of the possibility that we  
could all “freeze to death in the dark." Now they are trying to convince us  
that we may be forced to go to war to protect “American interests and the  
good ole American way of life." Deep in our souls we believe that what's good  
for Exxon Oil is good for the U.S.A.  

In US imperialism lies the privilege of being the richest people in the  
world and in US imperialism lies the vulnerability of US capitalism. This is  
the contradiction that we need to expose and confront, because in this con-  
tradiction also lies the vulnerability of the radical movements in the US.  

In revolutionary struggle, there are steps we need to follow. The first step  
in revolutionary struggle is to gain mass support for change. The capitalists  
have the support of the workers now. As the struggle for national liberation  
against US colonialism becomes stronger it will become the primary motive  
force for a change in capitalism. In order to offset the loss of resources and  
markets that nationalist revolutions cause, capitalists will try to control  
the wealth they still have through more efficient management methods. They  
are developing strategies to remove as many variables from production as pos-  
sible, by increased use of technology and more importantly, by trying to con-  
trol labor.  

In U.S. imperialism lies the  
vulnerability of U.S. capitalism...  
and the privilege of being the  
richest people in the world.  

This is already going on. The demand that women have the right to control  
their own bodies is in conflict with the capitalist need to control population.  
The policies concerning the sterilization of women is one example. Women from  
populations who have the greatest revolutionary potential, minority women, are  
being sterilized forcibly. Because white people have the greatest investment  
in capitalism, and therefore can be counted on to have the greatest resistance  
to a threat to it, white women have a hard time getting sterilized or getting an  
abortion.  

The ruling class measures its wealth in private property and material goods.  
To a lesser extent, so does the working class. The ruling class values wealth  
more than the quality of the workers' lives. This is shown in their continued  
development of nuclear power, the use of practices that are dangerous to  
workers and in their disregard of the environment.  

The ruling class hasn't figured out how to charge workers for using the sun,  
so we do not have real access to solar power units in our homes. It is still  
more profitable in dollars to build nuclear power plants, despite the expense  
of possible destruction to people if they have an accident at one of their  
plants.  

The working class measures its wealth in material goods to a lesser extent  
because we bear the expense of producing it. We are in a position where we  
have to compare the benefit of our wealth to its costs to our health, civil  
liberties and the ability we have to control our lives.  

As the US is kicked out of its imperialist holdings the US access to wealth  
will diminish. The ruling class will keep its profits as high as they can  
by passing their losses on to us as much as they can. They will then try to  
mobilize us into going to war to regain their holdings. We are told that by  
going to war and winning not only will we benefit materially, we will be sav-  
ing the people from an evil government. Historically this is why we have gone  
to war every time. From the time we kicked out King George and English rule,  
so the capitalists could have complete control of their holdings to Vietnam.  
They are using the same story to mobilize us for war in the Mid East.  

That the US will be kicked out of its imperialist holdings is inevitable.  
Colonial countries have the potential power to control the production in their  
countries and will, through nationalist struggle, realize that power. That the  
US working class will suffer materially because of it is inevitable. Our  
wealth is largely obtained through the exploitation of colonial countries.  

In our analysis of class struggle we must expose the dependency of the  
working class on imperialism, the means the ruling class has used to foster  
dependency and how they use our dependency for their ends. We have to begin  
laying the groundwork to convince people that the ruling class is responsi-  
ble for the oppression of working class people, not nationalist struggles, or  
minorities or communists. Imperialism is the root of our dependence on capit-  
alism and our vulnerability to capitalist demands is dependent on its imperial-  
ist control of foreign resources and markets.  

As the US begins to employ its strategies to control us in order to make  
more efficient use of our labor, capitalists will exploit our vulnerability.  
Americans have always been willing to make sacrifices in order to maintain  
our “way of life." We have fought in imperialist wars and we have planted vic-  
tory gardens. In our vulnerability lies the tendency and the threat of a right-  
wing uprising within the working class.  

This is why we must include nationalist struggles in our analysis of the  
working class. Imperialism and capitalism are not in the best interests of  
the working class. We have to expose the contradictions of US capitalism,  
including the working class' investment in it, in order to recognize  
and have an analysis to offer to diffuse reactionary and rightwing tendencies  
in the working class movement.  

Because capitalists will need to control all variables in their efforts to  
control people our organizing will have to be on all fronts. While there has  
been continuous organizing around workplace conditions, most other radical  
organizing has been spontaneous, in reaction to repression but without long-  
term effect. After going to two or three demonstrations I could pretty much  
guess that the same 300 people would probably be at the next one. It is clear  
that we are not doing a good job of radicalizing people, or if we are, we are  
failing to provide them with a way to plug in.  

As feminists, one of our major failings has been our inability to establish  
an identity. I tell people at work I'm a feminist and I end up spending half  
an hour explaining which kind. I tell people I'm a communist and people  
have a better idea of my politics.  

We need to build a feminist party. The advantages of a party to spontaneous  
organizing are many. It would always be there for women, to join, get analysis  
and participate in political struggle. A party would have a political base  
built so that when an action was organized we wouldn't be trying to get our  
politics together before we made the speech. Having a defined political strat-  
egy would enable the group to take action that would expose the contradictions  
of capitalism and would educate people, as well as being able to organize  
immediately in response to repression, with analysis of the repression as well  
as demands.  

As revolutionaries we must always envision the struggles we will have on the  
road to political and cultural change. We must expose and analyze our compli-  
city in maintaining capitalism because any advantage we have under capitalism  
will be an obstacle to revolutionary consciousness. But, just as with imperial-  
ism, any advantage we have, the ruling class has at a cost to us, and therein  
lies a key to the development of a successful revolutionary strategy.