more-on page

Where We're At from page 2

to the Film Committee and/or BMR--the money is really need-
ed. We need to raise some money--anyone with ideas out
there? We do make money when we have garage sales. We want
to save stuff for a spring sale and we need someone who has
some storage space here in Denver to loan to us for awhile.
Please give BMR a call at 322-2010 if you can work on any
of this with us--Thanks.

Last month Juana La Paz wrote a wonderful and exciting
letter (BMR, see pg 3, Dec. '83) to us about writing/doing
interviews for BMR and we had a response--which in fact ne-
ver went in the paper. OOPS! Mostly what we wanted to say
was--yea! We always need women's voices, not just the col-
lectives to be in the paper. BMR is a political tool and it
is really important for political publications to be used by
political activists to share information and analysis of the
lives of women/people in the world. We always wait for/want
our mail to arrive full of graphics, letters, and writings.
(Juana, we'll answer the rest of your questions in a letter
to you soon).

Besides Rose's criticism/clarification on Deb/BMR's col-
lective note on our Middle East coverage (see Rose's letter
pages 4 & 5 of this issue), we also heard we need to make
another clarification. Writing that we had been "an all
white collective, until a year ago an all gentile collect-
ive...", it wasn't clear that this had changed when Deb
joined the collective. Deb is a Jewish woman. Deb's writings
next month, on the history of anti-Semitism and the Jewish
people will begin the collective's input that will continue
for the next few issues. With only barely three weeks be-

-Inside/Out

16 - Big Mama

Rag, January, 1984

Page

tween last month's production and this month's, we were glad
to receive the article by Rose on Israel & Palestine (see
page 9) for printing this month...Deb needing more time to
finish her research and writing.

We are including lots of the letters and information we
received this month about women in the US working against
US intervention in Nicaragua. The powers in Washington, D.C.
are building an “acceptable war mentality" through all the
media and through direct government action. We all must be
finding ways to act against US imperialism in Nicaragua and
in support of the Nicaraguan revolution. Send $! Organize! !

In last month's Where We're At, we "announced" that Sue
Goding and Joan Pettijohn were pregnant. We said they "got
artificially inseminated". Well really that's not quite
what happened. Since they are really pregnant--it was hard-
ly "artificial". Also, the way it was written sounds like
Joan and Sue were totally passive in the situation--like
they were waiting on a street corner and some sperm leapt
out at them...Hardly!

What was involved was a whole lot of political arguments,
struggle and fights between a few women who organized to
collect sperm from different men. The politics of who con-
trols reproduction--maintaining male power was always at
issue...among lesbian feminists in the community as well as
with the men. The politics of the family, who the "real
father" is, fatherhood, and male ownership of children are
really complicated issues. It was/is really political work.

Well, we think that about covers our "stuff" for this
month. Cover your ass in the New Year!

HeriZONS from page 3

all that, I couldn't begin
to go through the process of
the transition. It could not
have been done without my
participation, not totally.
Herizons Bookstore was
classist/racist/anti-Semitic/
et al. For me, alterations
were not enough. Changes
would have only reduced, not

In Sept/Oct I really could
not take it anymore. And I
did just stop going to the
store for awhile. There were
discussions about changing
Herizons to a collective,
but I said no. I firmly be-
lieve(d) that the overhead
at the store-front was too
high to even begin to sup-

port a political bookstore/
women's center. I had also
come to see the very loca-
tion as being racist. In
addition to (will you under-
stand if I say "because of?")

Madre

from page 11

MADRE is calling on women
throughout the United States
to participate in a winter
drive to help Nicaraguan
women sustain the lives of
their children. Start now
by collecting donations of
fortified powdered milk and
baby cereal. MADRE's address
is 853 Broadway Room 905,
New York, NY 10003, (212)
777-6470.

eliminated, any of this. I
saw the need to destroy it,
to bury it. I can only con-
tinue to write, later, to
try to explain what that
means.

Punishment

from page 15

raising urgently needed
funds, and finding more ways
to let your voices be heard.
We would like to encourage
supporters to correspond
with the Committee. Also,
Tina will continue to be
available for speaking en-
gagements. Contact the
Committee Against the Kid-
napping of Tina Fishman's
Daughter; 2525 N. Lincoln
Ave., Chicago IL 60614

about the cover artist

I am a Lesbian, and artist

present. I try to transpose

and a Jew. I live in the woods, what I discover into my pot-
tery, drawings and paintings.

with my lover, Beth, and our
three dogs.

There is an ancient mytho-
logy of womyn filled with
goddesses, rituals and sym-
bols. Each of us has our own
mythology filled with rituals
and symbols as well...I am
drawn to the past and to the

Being Jewish and feeling
proud of it, for the first
time in my life, has added
another dimension to all
this.

There is so much more to
learn and to discover.