Is Patty Hearst a Feminist?

In the July 11th edition of The  
San Francisco Examiner covering  
the visit of Gloria Allred,  
ton of the LA chapter of NOW,  
Patricia Hearst. During the visit  
Hearst stated that "she considers  
herself a feminist", has definite  
plans for marriage upon release  
(which may be up to 5½ years in  
the future), and is worried "that  
she might not be able to hold a  

regular job when she is released  
because ‘insurance companies won't  
insure the company she would work  
for; because she would be considered  
a high risk." Hearst was also  
concerned that this "high risk sta-  
tus would hinder her from obtaining  
automobile insurance."

The purpose of Allred's visit was  
to “explain NOW'S recent decision to  
support legal efforts to obtain her  
release from custody."

Following publication of the inter-  
view, BMR received the following open  
letter from Emily Harris to Gloria  
Allred.

Dear Gloria Allred:

On Friday I was reading the San  
Francisco Examiner in my cell at  
Santa Rita. I came across an article  
about Los Angeles NOW's decision to  
support Patricia Hearst's release  
from prison. The main thing that  
sparked my anger was the fact that  
NOW calls itself a feminist organi-  
zation and yet fails to acknowledge  
the very existence of vast numbers  
of women who need their support.

NOW has frequently been considered  
an organization that puts the inte-  
rests of more privileged women - pro-  
fessionals and upper middle class -  
above those of poor and working wo-  
men. Perhaps this is because the or-  
dinary woman is not a public figure -  
she has no access to the media. Per-  
haps it is because the ordinary woman  
does not have the same leisure time  
to organize and fight the objects of  
her oppression when they are so nu-  
merous and she barely has enough  
hours in the day to keep her own head  

above water. Or perhaps this is be-  
cause the problems of most women's  
lives are so commonplace as to be  
duplicated over and over again in the  
homes, schools, prisons, workplaces  
everywhere. The widespread oppression  
of all these nameless, faceless women  
is ignored so that NOW can focus on  
the plight of those women who oppor-  
tunistically view women's liberation  
as the method for seizing their half  
of the corrupt patriarchal pie.  
Recently publicized reports of Los  

Angeles NOW's support for efforts to  
gain Patricia Hearst's release from  
prison is further proof that NOW is  
only interested in the liberation of  
some women not all women. I do not  
speak to the issue of whether Patri-  
cia Hearst should or should not be  
released from prison. Rather I ques-  
tion the priorities of a group that  
claims to be feminist. The prisons  
and jails are filled with women who  
deserve to be released. Some are in-  
nocent and were unjustly convicted by  
courts who shuffle individuals through  
the machinery as if they were cattle.  
Others are guilty only because their  
acts were judged by a patriarchal  
system that punishes women severely -  
as juveniles for being runaways or  
recalcitrant; as prostitutes for sell-  
ing a commodity that is promoted and  
hyped throughout our culture - their  
sexuality - instead of giving it a-  
way; as mothers who will provide for  
their families in any way they can;  
MORE ON PAGE 10  

HAGS Spank Dummy Griffin

John W. Griffin, superintendent of the  
Colorado Women's Correctional Insti-  
tution, spanked a 20-year-old inmate  
on November 15 because he was “trying  
to be helpful."

Before spanking the woman in the  
presence of other inmates, he had  
talked to her parents and taken her  
home with him. A 3-man panel heard  
nine witnesses, including the woman  
who was spanked. All had good things  
to say. The panel found that Griffin  
had exercised poor judgment. First  
the spanking, second, in driving the  
inmate to his home in the absence of  
another staff member and third, in  
having a female resident as a guest  
in his home.

Allen Ault, executive director of  
the Colorado Corrections Department,  
followed the recommendation of the  
panel and docked Griffin "three or  
four” days pay.

On December 17, a public spanking  
was held for John Griffin on the steps  
of the Capitol in Denver. Organized  
by the HAGS (Homeworkers Against  
Ghastly Sadism), women connected the  
spanking of the inmate with violence  
against women. After the speakers,  
anyone who wanted to was welcome to  
spank a dummy of Griffin.

Local Woman Becomes Journeyman

The women's movement has been push-  
ing for women to enter non-traditional  
jobs, to enter all-male bastions, and  
break the conventions and traditions  
holding women back.

When a woman does make the effort,  
who is there for support and who is  
there afterwards to say, right on,  
sister - thanks for your time, energy,  
patience; for facing the man alone  
day after day for five years.

Mary Shannon has been five years in  
a carpenter's apprentice program;  
five years as the only woman, of going  
out on job sites where you don't know  
anyone or anything and the men have a  
personal background and conditioning  
which makes their apprenticeship much  
easier.

On Saturday, November 18, Mary was  
awarded the certificate of journey-  
woman at a banquet where, except  
for the wives of other carpenters, she  
was the only woman present. Maybe we  
could not be there for her that night,  
or for the five years she took to per-  
sist in going out to job sites alone,  
but we can be there for her now by ac-  
knowledging what she has accomplished  
and to keep in mind that only two wo-  
men in the whole state are journeyman  
carpenters and this is in a country  
where the quota for women in this  
field is 19%. Only 1% of carpenters  
are women.

It's one thing to talk about doing  
something; it's another thing to do  
it, stick with it, and really accom-  
plish it. Sweat as well as rhetoric,  
at the very least our personal ac-  
knowledgement to one who did it.

Right on, Mary.

History only happens when observers  

note it, record it and acclaim it.

Living Your Socialist Feminism

The following was presented as part  
of a panel entitled "Living Your  
Socialist Feminism," given by the  
Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective  
at a conference on Socialist Feminism  
at the Redfeather Institute, Liver-  
more, CO, May 27-28, 1978. Each col-  
lective member chose to address a  
specific area to relate to the theme  
of the panel. Many of the ideas ex-  
pressed here were worked out collec-  
tively. This article is the third  
in a series, the first being run in  
the September issue of BUR, the sec-  
ond in the December issue.

As a world view, our socialist fem-  
inism seeks to end traditional power  
relationships and give all people  
throughout the world the opportunity  
to control their own lives and to  
develop to their fullest human po-  
tential. We want to end the oppres-  
sion of those in this country and a-  
broad who are starving because of the  
unequal distribution of the world's  
resources; who have unequal opportun-  
ity to satisfy even their basic human  
needs (much less seek fulfillment);  
who are forced to work in inhuman con-  
ditions for depressed wages just to  
stay alive while their labor supports  
the affluent, self-indulgent, over-  
consumptive lifestyle of the American  
middle and upper class.

As American women with a socialist  
feminist perspective, we recognize  
that Americans consume more than 40%  
of the world's resources while we ac-  
count for 6% of the world's popula-  
tion. This kind of over-consumption  
is only made possible through paying  
underdeveloped countries less than a  

fair value for the natural resources  
and products that we consume here.  
These countries, in turn, are unable  
to pay their workers a fair wage for  
their labor. This system constitutes  
blatant exploitation. We also recog-  
nize that the world's resources are  
being rapidly depleted and that what  
we consume now and what we waste now  
will affect future generations for  
centuries to come.

As our attention is drawn to the  
nuclear weapons plant in our own  
backyard, as our cities become more  
and more polluted because sprawling  
suburbs continue to be built, as  
rents continue to rise while incomes  
(when we have them) do not, a social-  
ist feminist analysis leads us to  
examine the relationship between cap-  
italism and environmental degradation.

The ethic of our economic system is  
one of constant consumption, growth,  
wastefulness, and highest profit in  
land use. Consequently, our cities  
have become core areas composed of  
monolithic concrete phallic symbols  
(disguised as office buildings).  
These are surrounded first by rings  
of deteriorating neighborhoods pop-  
ulated mainly by minorities and poor  
people, and then by sprawling suburbs  
which waste our land and natural re-  
sources while excluding those who  
can't afford to live there (such as  
women heads of households and minori-  
ties).

Our socialist feminist analysis  
leads us to question what role our  
own consumption patterns play in sup-  
porting this rape of land and re-  
sources. Are we ourselves caught up  
in the never-ending cycle of getting  

and spending that capitalism fosters?  
Do we ourselves choose to live in  
aesthetically pleasant but racially  
exclusive and economically privileged  
communities? Do we ourselves drive  
when we could easily cycle, bus or  
walk? Discussing these questions in  
our group has led us to believe that  
living our socialist feminism in-  
cludes conserving energy whenever  
possible, being frugal in our use of  
natural resources, not eating junk  
food, patronizing minority-owned or  

alternative businesses, and ignoring  
the push to get ahead.

Some of us also feel the need to  
commit ourselves to particular poli-  
tical actions, although this is an  
individual choice based on whatever  
level of involvement each of us is  
comfortable with. These are just a  

few of the issues which our social-  
ist feminist analysis has led us to  
address with respect to consumerism  
and environmental consciousness.