A CONVERSATION WITH DENVER’S

THE FOLLOWING IS A REPORT AND ANALYSIS OF AN INTERVIEW WHICH PAT SCHROEDER, RECENTLY
ELECTED DENVER CONGRESSWOMAN, GRANTED TO TWO STAFF MEMBERS FROM BIG MAMA RAG, J. BRYSON
AND M. WATERS. 

WE FEEL THAT CRITICIZING THE WOMAN'S IDEAS SERIOUSLY MEANS THAT WE TAKE THAT FOR OURSELVES.

THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT WILL GROW STRONGER ONLY BY CAREFULLY EXAMINING WHAT WE ARE DOING POLITICALLY.

Pat Schroeder's campaign slogan
read, "She wins. We win." But did
we, the women who are her constitu-
ents, really win? A recent interview
with the Denver Congresswoman-elect
raises some interesting questions.

For example, when asked where she
stood on women's issues, Ms.
Schroeder replied, "You know, I don't
have any problems with that at all.
The whole campaign was still run as
a humanist campaign. It seems to me
that I'm not pushing for men, I'm
not pushing for women. I'm not push-
ing for children. We're pushing for
people, and that's what the whole
darn thing's about. . . Everybody
wants a fair crack at it without
looking at whether they're male,
female, black, brown, old, young. .

Furthermore, in responding to a
question dealing with what kinds of
specific legislation Ms. Schroeder
plans to work for while in Congress,
she cited at least seven different
concerns without so much as men-
tioning even one issue which deals
directly with the problems of
women as women in this country to-
day. (Abortion, child care, job
discrimination, etc.)
~~ Listed under "New Directions,
"72-'76," the Democratic Platform
states, "We are determined to remove
barriers that limit citizens be-
cause they are black, brown, young,
or women; because they never had
the chance to gain an education; be-
cause there was no possibility of
being anything but what they were."
Although Ms. Schroeder's stands are
certainly in line with this ideal,
that is all it is--an ideal. In
other words, it is of primary im-
portance at this particular time in
history for minority groups and
women to identify themselves as
such first. Of course we are all
working ultimately for human libera-
tion, but if we spread ourselves
as thinly as cheap mayonnaise over
too many causes, we may end up with
only an ineffectual thin coating of
liberality.

When approached on this point--
that certain groups (particularly
women) must work for their own
rights first, Schroeder had this to
say, "Sure it's important for women
to seek an identity and I'm not put-
ting that down at all. But I’m also
saying that you can't just do that
to the exclusion of everything else."

BMR: "To be successful in politics,
you mean?”

SCHROEDER: "I don’t even think
that's it. I just don't believe in
any one issue. I'm also concerned
about peace. If I had to pick one
thing, it would probably be peace--
defense spending, Armed Forces,
environment. . . Those are equal-
ly as important. If I stood up and
said that I'm primarily concerned
about women's rights, I'd be lying.
I'm very concerned about women's
rights, but no more so than I'm con-
cerned about peace, environment. . .

THIS ANALYSIS IS A CRITICAL ONE.
NO ONE SPEAKS FOR US. IDEAS OF ANOTHER WOMAN IS NOT OPPOSED TO SISTERHOOD.

And I just don't believe in getting
hung-up on one issue. I find the
world is full of one-issue people.
They've got tunnel vision."

This all sounds very convincing, of
course. I mean, who would dare say
that anything was more important
than peace? The fact remains, how-
ever, that women have been rail-
roaded by this line of reasoning
since the first voices were raised
in protest. "Let's get to the most
important things first and then
we'll work on your problems," say
the liberal male politicians and
others. That's just another side-
stepping tactic to keep us quiet in
and in “our places." Naturally, we
are all concerned about peace and
environment as well as many other
current issues, but how can we as
women always work effectively for
those issues when our very effective-
ness is already limited by the fact
that we are women.

Bella Abzug, the N.Y. Congress-
woman is involved with many contem-
porary problems, but women's issues
are usually a priority. Similarly,
Ron Dellums, the black Congressman
from California is working for a
great number of issues but black
concerns are of the utmost impor-
tance. That kind of identification
is not a display of “tunnel vision"
or of “one-issue candidacy." Ms.
Abzug, Mr. Dellums, and others know
who they are and just what it is
they stand for.

When Pat Schroeder was asked how
she came to be identified as a
liberal congresswoman, she said,
"Well, I've never really identified
myself as anything. I think so of-
ten you end up getting into a
psychological briar patch. . . And
I've tried never to really identify
with anything that way." And
responding to a question asking
whether she considered herself to be
a feminist, Ms. Schroeder replied,
"Oh, I've always identified myself
as a woman. Let me back up. To
some extent I've never really liked,
like the Women's Division of the Bar
because I've always figured that men
and women practice law the same. It
It's ridiculous. It should be an in-
tegrated bar. Theoretically, we all
do the same thing. In law school
once, they said, ‘Would you teach a
course in women's legal rights?'

And I said, ‘Well, no one's teaching
one in male's legal rights.‘ What
I think they should do is a bigger
picture in, let's say, discrimina-
tion. Do the whole thing. . . Don't
just do women, don't just do blacks,
not just Indians. And I think that's
the focus you have to keep on. I've
never tried to hide the fact that
I'm a woman. I think that any kind
of sex discrimination is just awful.
I'm not one of those women who say,
‘Gee, I've never found that.' Because
I certainly found it everywhere I