culture...

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 9

struggle

Women Working for

Vicki Piotter

I started this discussion on women, identity and culture six times. The first time the opening read: "The idea that we are building a women's culture is false," but that's too negative a way to start something you want women to read. Then it was changed to: "We toss out the word ‘revolution’ as if we really knew what we were talking about," but that's too cynical of an approach. The third time I wrote: "It is becoming more and more difficult for me to be in groupings of all white women," but as a white woman, that opening is unclear and misleading. The fourth beginning read: "Although it is repeated in feminist newspapers, in women's music, our literature and meeting spaces that our diversity as women is our greatest strength, I am more convinced that our diversity is our greatest weakness," but that's something I want to talk about later on, after having established some groundwork.

The fifth start was a description of a phone conversation (long distance) that I had last week with a woman I have known, and mostly loved, for seven years; for five of those years we worked together in collectives, participated in marches and actions (some of which we helped organize), got two feminist projects off the ground which are still in existence, saw a number of other projects fold, shared living space, at times just with each other, at other times with a number of women, and, as much as we liked to kid ourselves, were in what can only be described as a monogamous relationship for four years. In the context of a "women's community" we tried to give each other support, love and a sense of togetherness in our monumental struggle with what appeared to be the whole world. It appeared we would survive the stormy breakup of our relationship-- she was, and continues to be, one of the most important people in my life, a comrade in the truest sense of the word. Men often write about the relationships they develop with each other in experiencing the horrors of war; we, too, felt we had been "through hell and back" in experiencing the agonies and joys of the women's movement together.

But, the phone call didn't really say that (although I think it was unspoken). Instead, she told me that she would no longer be able to have any contact with me again and wished me luck with my work and my life. We did not survive and what she said affects so many of us: "I thought the women's community would be different than the rest of the world, but it's stupid to think that because I'm certainly not that different and neither are you."

We (women) have an ideal about how the world should be which is in direct conflict with the way things are, and so many times we get crushed behind the realization that in trying to change values and the way things work, we haven't really changed individually to meet the expectations we set for ourselves. We are all products of the very culture we are fighting. But, personal loss is no way to begin a discussion on women, identity and culture, although it is clearly a motivation to try and understand what they have to do with each other, because I am tired of losses.

The sixth attempt to get this discussion underway was clearly a backing off of getting "too personal" and instead posed a series of crisp questions: How is "women's culture" promoted? What's the difference between “women's” as opposed to "feminist" culture? What is the role of culture in revolution? What is the relationship between a subculture and the dominant culture? What is the dominant culture? Hey, just what the hell is culture anyway?

Instead, an article which was buried in the back pages of the Rocky Mountain News is the best place to begin, because it is a good example of popular (or dominant) culture.

The news article reported last week that in Japan, the current hit record is a song written by a 27-year-old bachelor entitled, "Your Husband and Master Proclaims." The man, speaking as ‘husband and master’ tells his bride that she'd better keep quiet and follow behind. The top selling single goes like this: "Before you become my bride, hear this. You will not go to bed before I do. You will not get up after I do. Cook nothing but good meals and always be neat. And keep quiet and always follow behind me." The newspaper account goes on to say that Japanese women don't seem to mind the message of the song a bit, and that, in fact, women in their teens, 20's and 30's flocked in mass to hear the man, Masashi Sada, sing the song in concert. After a Japanese daily printed a letter from a woman office worker saying that the song "is an insult to women,” the paper claimed to receive over 300 letters from women condemning the office worker, countering that the song is a beautiful statement to women, primarily because of the last lyric in which the husband and master tells his bride, "Don't die before me, you are my only true love."

What are we to make of this news article? Did the newspaper exaggerate the number of positive responses to the song, while ignoring, or refusing to print letters of indignation? This is probably true to a degree; wherever women "mind" what is being said or done about women, we do not have, and are denied access to places where we can voice our objections. But, the record is being bought (in more ways than one) by women, pushing it to the top of the charts. Although I seriously doubt the ratio is 300 to one in favor of the song's message when polling Japanese women, as the media would have us believe, I don’t doubt the truth of the statement that on the whole, Japanese women don't seem to mind. Am I saying that Japanese women are particularly masochistic? Not at all. The condition of "not seeming to mind” is not unique to Japan by any means. Bring it to this country, and then let's bring it to the women's community.

"Star Wars" is an example of popular American culture and is one of the most watched movies of the decade, having made a few people millions of dollars, mostly because millions of people (women included) haven't seemed to mind the message of the movie hidden behind the excitement of colorful space age adventure. "Star Wars" makes quite a statement on race, sex and class.

I am assuming most people have seen the movie: think about its message on women, people of color, and about “good" and "bad" in society. "Star Wars" is a movie, I too, paid four dollars to see, feeding the hand that hits me. All the while that I stood in line I was aware the movie I was about to see would probably insult every facet of my identity. So, why did I do it?

In taking a look at the top selling albums, there are such artists as Bad Company, who got together out of the desire to do “ballsy rock"; Firefall, a group that sets woman-hating lyrics to good harmony and a catchy beat (to which I find myself humming along with at times); a group that tells a woman if she wants money, she had better fuck on demand-- a message set to a very danceable disco beat (I know, I've danced to it more than once); and a group that complains of having nothing but ugly girlfriends and then tells us to watch what we say or we will be called everything from radical to crazy and fanatical. Two women currently have albums in the top ten, an unusual cultural occurrence: Donna Summer and Rickie Lee Jones. Sometimes their songs speak to women, but mostly their material is directed to men, and from a position of maintaining the power imbalance between women and men. (Both these albums are in my collection of records).

What does the best-seller list look like these days? Fiction is full of Harold Robbinish and Jacqueline Susannish accounts of sex, violence and the American way. Non-fiction, in the top five, has two books on diet and exercise, one book entitled "How To Prosper During the Coming Bad Years," and another called, "Restoring the American Dream.” One of the top selling magazines is TV Guide, showing, of course, how much it is a part of America to watch television. How does television contribute to the positive images of women and all people who are not white, male, heterosexual, and/or middle class? It doesn't. (Although I no longer have a TV, I remember enjoying episodes of "Laverne and Shirley,” "Good Times" and I was a "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman" junky.)

At work my job is to distribute the mail, which includes magazines, and I can't help but notice that more women subscribe to Playboy than Big Mama Rag, or Ms., for that matter. Is it true that women, on the whole, don't seem to mind the messages of our culture, as presented by the various cultural mediums (Culture) of books, music, art, newspapers, magazines, film, theatre, television, etc.?

A woman once said that women are like fish, unaware that the environment is wet. Women, and I am not talking about what is yet a small, small number who are actively working to “change the world," but the women who buy True Confessions, who keep the cosmetic industry alive, who scream for The Rolling Stones remain unaware of the "wet environment" because alternative attitudes and beliefs about women's identity go unimagined, and when they are imagined and even practiced, they aren't visible on the same scale as "Star Wars."

Ideology about women remains unconscious. This decade has been marked, as the best-seller list shows, by the idea that everyone should push to fulfill our own unique potential, free from the restraints of society's presumptions. But society's presumptions enter much earlier than we suspect-- how we are raised, our sex, race, and class, and with what means our parents or family grouping had to raise us. A woman, when presented with the choice between Redbook or Off Our Backs, (in my opinion one of the best feminist newsjournals in this country), will go for Redbook nine times out of ten. It's her free choice, right? I don't think so. Not only has society controlled the alternatives available to her, where a woman wanting Off Our Backs won't find it saturating supermarket checkout lines or laundry reading tables or hospital waiting rooms, but her motivation to choose what is available. Although we are all told we have a free choice in choosing how we live, what music we want to listen to, what clothes we want to wear, what jobs we want to work at, it is a complex system of patriarchal values and capitalistic structures that have predetermined our path. Culture defines that path and one of its functions is to tell us what we need. The extent to which we perceive that our needs are not being met in the society we have can cause us to either blame ourselves or to find that the fault lies with the society itself. The dominant culture uses Culture to ensure that people continue to see it as our own failure that we are unhappy with our “choices” in life and keeps us stumbling along that path which ensures the survival of a very few people as the dominant group that controls the wealth and direction of society.

What Is Culture?

Culture is confusing; it's a way of living built up by a group of human beings and passed on from generation to generation by means of Culture with a capital "C" (storytelling, literature, art, etc., etc.) Culture is mostly the active result of the economic and political activities of a society-- an expression of the kinds of relationships that go on in a society. Whatever may be the material conditions of a society, the society is the perpetuator as well as creator of culture. My understanding is that when people do things, it is not, in itself, culture, but rather the manner in which they do it or the motivation or reason behind doing it. Eating is not culture-- but the eating of rice and beans versus the eating of steak and potatoes is an expression of culture; or if one eats three well-balanced meals a day versus eating whatever one can afford, that is a cultural difference. Likewise, whether someone lives in a big house with a fenced-in yard, or lives in an apartment building with paper thin walls is a sign of economic as well as cultural difference. Power is not culture, but the unequal relationships to power and the myths and other expressions which perpetuate these relationships are culture.

If we were to look at the dominant culture as the total expression of who it is that lives in our society, we would believe our culture consisted of only white, middle class men. However, our society is rich with a variety of subcultures: there is a Black subculture, Chicano subculture, Jewish subculture, lesbian subculture, and other ethnic and religious groupings. When the dominant culture inhibits or discourages (in a variety of ways) the cultural activity on the part of a subculture it strengthens and protects the culture of the ruling class at the top.

It is no accident that the importance of women is not recognized in the dominant culture. Popular culture is supported by the mechanism that created it-- capitalist economy and patriarchy. Just as capitalism is dependent upon the exploitation of labor for survival, it also depends on the hierarchy of unequal relations between women and men. Suppose women and men were suddenly “equal” in our society; how could capitalism justify confining women to certain job categories, grossly underpaid, or kept out of the job market altogether to keep us doing the job of raising children (more workers)? If capitalism were not accompanied by a sexist and racist culture, ordinary men would have to face the reality of their own powerlessness and economic exploitation. Patriarchy is not men. Patriarchy is a set of values and structures used to keep the survival of men as the dominant group. It can work hand in hand with capitalism; both can work separately. Women, too, can be “patriarchs,” working to keep that set of values and institutions which have accepted them into “equality” without having had to change; a few women (or Blacks, etc.) can be accepted into the system or dominant culture without causing any real threat to its basic structure.