hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter  
Footbinding Next?  

Iran's new Islamic regime announced  
this month they probably will reinstate  
the practice of concubinage, or  
legal mistresses, as part of its con-  
tinuing effort to reshape marriage  

laws to conform with Islamic practices.  

A concubine is a woman who performs  
all wifely functions for a man, for a  
period of time and an agreed upon  
price; the money goes to her father.  

San Diego Union  

ANY SIDE EFFECTS...  
BESIDES THAT TWITCH  
IN YOUR LEFT EYE:  

LNS/cpf  

Danger: Women at Work  

Office workers, factory workers  
and others who work under fluorescent  
lights often suffer from severely  
bloodshot eyes, impaired vision and  
swollen eyelids. The flickering and  
hum can be very distracting, leading  
to eyestrain, fatigue and headaches.  
These symptoms are often dismissed  
as an individual's isolated problem.  

The glare of fluorescent lights can  
use up an excessive amount of Vitamin  
A, resulting in Vitamin A deficiency.  
Symptoms are night blindness, arm and  
leg numbness, blemishes, dry hair,  
insomnia and fatigue. Fluorescent  
lights also leak a small amount of  
X-rays.  

-Union WAGE  

bmr:  

Screwed Again  

At least two pregnant women employed  
at the Three Mile Island nuclear  
generating plant in Pennsylvania  
stayed off the job after the governor  
strongly urged pregnant women to stay  
out of the vicinity of the crippled  
nuclear reactor. Now, the plant's  
owners, Metropolitan Edison, are  
saying those women indeed are excused  
from work, but the missed days will  
either have to come off their vaca-  
tion time or out of their paychecks.  

-Hersay  

Grandma at 25  

"Hey, grandma! How do you like your  
new glasses?" Electronics workers in  
Hong Kong are called “grandma” after  
they reach the age of 25, since by  
this time they need eyeglasses. Asian  
women work in these factories only  
three to four years before they suffer  
severe eye damage. As a result, they  
often lose their jobs.  

-Southeast Asia Chronicle  

Great White Father  

The recently passed Indian Child  
Welfare Act directs that Indian tri-  
bal courts, not federal courts, are  
to have jurisdiction over the removal  
of Indian children from their natural  
mothers for placement in non-Indian  
families. But the new law is so full  
of loopholes as to virtually be use-  
less, said the American Indian Move-  
ment (AIM).  

One loophole is a provision exempt-  
ing the Mormon Church from compliance  
with the law, which was attached to  
the bill out of fear that Mormon oppo-  
sition would successfully defeat the  
bill. Mormon adoptive parents tend to  
select children from "good" families  
who are doing well in school on the  
assumption that they are better off  
in white families. An estimated 35%  
of Native American children have been  
taken from their natural parents.  

-Majority Report  

where we’re at  

Well, we're still here (where we're at). We're building enthusiasm,  
got some positive and negative criticisms of the last issue and we also  
got some great letters-- check them out. Keep writing them to us, we love  
and need it. If you'll notice on the letters page, we have a new graphic  
for Letters Home to Mama by Carol Arber-- thanks for thinking of Mama  

from your home in Massachusetts, Carol.  

This last month Big Mama Rag turned over her office to the Lakota Nation  
News in South Dakota and trained them in newspaper production-- their  
first issue. If all goes well for them, they will soon be set up with  
their own office and equipment. Good luck.  

There's going to be some changes in the collective: Beverly Sorensen will  
be leaving for Buffalo, New York after this issue-- her hard work and en-  
thusiasm will be greatly missed; Sue Goding, after a year and a half of  
“holding it together" above and beyond the call of duty, will be leaving  
the collective for two months to work on circulation for BMR (meaning she  
won't really be leaving). This leaves Fran Day, Lisa Gould, Constance  
Perenyi and Vicki Piotter to carry the paper through the summer. If you  
were waiting for a slight lull in the collective to come right over and  

join, instead of a desperate plea, we are here Tuesday and Thursday at 7pm.  

We've decided on the themes for the next couple of issues; they are...  
June-"Dissolution", July-"International Year of the Child", August-"Women  
in Traditional and Non-Traditional Jobs", September-"Women and Art", Oct-  
ober-"Aging," and some time later, “relationships”. The themes are what the  
bulk of the articles in one issue are about, but other articles on differ-  
ent subjects are welcome too. If you'd like to write something the deadline  
is the 15th of each month.  

And speaking of things we need, we need donations of tables, filing cab-  
inets and a good chair to sit on when typing (oh, my aching back). We are  
willing to trade donations for subscriptions. We also need typewriter rib-  
bon for an IBM Selectric II, and/or correcting ribbon for the same, liquid  
paper, pens, etc.  

Oh, yeah women-- nobody has correctly answered the Women's History Quiz  
question of how many issues Mama has published: so nobody wants a lifetime  
subscription? Send in your answers now-- contest ends May 31st.  

Marital Rape  

In Maryland, a bill was recently  
presented to the House Judiciary  
Committee which would allow a husband  
to be prosecuted for rape when it  
involves the use of a deadly weapon,  
the infliction of serious injury or  
the threat of death or serious harm.  
The bill's sponsor said, “We can no  
longer tolerate a relationship where  
a knife is pressed to a wife's throat  
demanding intercourse. The husband  
then has gone beyond his immunity  
privileges. He is now a criminal."  

The proposed bill has met resistance  
from some male committee members say-  
ing that men could be made the "vic-  
tims" of false charges. The sponsor  
said he would amend the bill to  
apply only to husbands separated  
from their wives if that's the only  
way to have it passed by the committee.  

-Through the Looking Glass  

Male Guards  

Repercussions are being felt at the  
Bedford Hills Correctional Facility  
following a court decision on a class  
action suit brought by the women in-  
mates regarding the presence of male  
guards in their living quarters. The  
decision provides privacy from male  
guards only during the night shifts,  
during the first count at 6:30 AM, and  
at the showers, with a provision that  
the men can go anywhere, anytime in  
an “emergency,” as determined by the  
administration. According to women  
in the prison, the administration is  
intensifying its repression in order  
to get the inmates to “act up" so they  
have an excuse for more male guards  
around for "better protection", which  
is becoming a national trend in women's  
prisons.  

-Off Our Backs  

Body Searching  

Two San Diego High School girls  
have filed a $200,000 civil rights  
claim as the result of being coerced  
into submitting to body searches by  
the police department. The search  
took place at Claremont High School  
during a class in which a student  
announced that $55 had been stolen  
from her purse. The police were cal-  
led and they did a pat-down search of  
the boys in the classroom and then  
dismissed them. A female officer then  
did body searches on the ten girls  
in the class. The missing money was  
found the next day in one of the  
boys' restrooms.  

-Hersay  

His Intentions  

Anti-abortion activist Harry Zain,  
24, said desire moved him to ask the  
West Virginia State Legislature to  
lower the age of consent so that girls  
as young as 12 might marry. He sup-  
ported a bill that, he said, incident-  
ally supported his intentions toward  
an 11-year-old female of his acquaintance. “She'll soon be twelve," he  
said.  

-San Francisco Chronicle  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 4  

If the Plate Fits  

About 100 people have turned in  
their automobile license plates in  
Davenport, Iowa because they don't  
like the three-letter prefix GAY. The  
State's license plates traditionally  
include a combination of three letters  
and three numbers, and this year near-  
ly 1,000 plates were issued with the  
letter combination GAY.  

Among the people returning their  
plates was a man who said the sides  
of his car were kicked in in Chicago  
because of his GAY plates.  

-San Diego UpDate  

Are You Legal?  

The March/April issue of the "Hast-  
ings Law Journal" will include a  
survey of the current legal status of  
lesbians and gay men in the fifty  
states. Reprints will be available  
for $3.00 postage paid from: Hastings  
College of Law, 198 McAllister St.,  
San Francisco, CA 94102.  

Call It Mississippi  

Last month the state of Mississippi  
again refused to enter the 20th cen-  
tury by defeating a resolution to  
finally ratify the 19th Amendment and  
symbolically, at least, grant women  
the right to vote. Shortly thereafter,  
the Equal Rights Amendment was, not  
surprisingly, defeated in the Senate  
Constitutional Committee.  

-National NOW Times  

Holey Justice  

Switzerland's all-male government has  
refused to support the passage of regu-  
lations that would force equal rights  
for women within the next five years.  
Employers reportedly argued that if the  
equal rights referendum was passed they  
would have to pay much higher wages to  
women, putting a dent in their profits.  
Several Swiss cantons (states) meanwhile  
claimed it would be too much of a job  
to organize all the laws that would have  
to be changed if the governing body  
assured equal rights to women.  

-Hersay  

Profiteers Prosecuted  

Feminists and others in the Los  
Angeles area concerned about decent  
quality in abortion care were happy  
to learn that Harvey Karmen and Merle  
Goldberg, who controlled and administ-  
ered the Community Women's Services  
Center for 12 years, have finally been  
indicted by the DA on criminal charges.  
Their abortion facility has been noto-  
rious over the years for its horrend-  
ous standards of care which included  
leaving high school women alone in  
the facility with only a few weeks  
training performing abortions. The DA  
decided to prosecute when a patient  
who was injured at the clinic because  
of neglect had the courage to come  
forward and testify at court proceed-  
ings.  

-Sister  

Judgment Day  

Although Lorenza Yzaguirre was found  
guilty of second-degree murder for  
shooting and killing her husband who  
had regularly beat her and shot her  
once, the Florida judge in her case did  
not impose the ten-year to life sent-  
ence. Instead, he put her on five-year  
probation with the stipulation she en-  
roll in a vocational training course  
in order to support herself and her  
children. Looking at this case and all  
the others where women are behind bars  
under similar circumstances, one sees  
how the lives of women can hang on the  
balance of the good and bad graces of  
the individual judge before whom she  
happens to appear.  

-Off Our Backs