The Economics Of War Making |

Janet Sergi

The Eighties started with a bang.  
The economy is in long-term bad shape.  
Living standards are declining. Carter  
is preparing for war. Women, minori-  
ties and children are the first to  
suffer. What's going on?  

We, as women, have been systematical-  

ly denied knowledge and control over  
our bodies. Since most of us have  
never taken a course in economics, let  
alone been given a radical analysis of  
economic reality, the pain of our  
daily lives caused by the internation-  
al economic system is not clearly un-  
derstood by us. The very terms that  
could clarify our pain sound to us  

as a male hodge-podge of abstract un-  

understandable words that have no mean-  

ing or value to us. We are just where  
they want us. We suffer but don't have  
the words to locate and define our  
enemies. We need to begin to under-  
stand our economic realities.  

The basic economic reality affecting  
our lives is the present crisis of  
capitalism. The following is a simpli-  
fied view of this crisis and its  
effect.  

Big industries of this country have  
sold their products at very high pric-  
es to make high profits. With these  
profits they have purchased other  
companies (merged or created conglom-  
erates) instead of either lowering  
prices or pouring the profits back in-  
to their factories in the form of new,  
more efficient equipment (recapitali-  
zation). Over the last twenty years,  
this process created lots of paper  
money without real goods to back it  
up (inflation). Also, this excess  
paper money has been lent to under-  
developed countries in Africa, Asia,  
and South America by American banks,  
such as Rockefeller's Chase Manhattan,  
at high interest rates to buy American  
goods that their respective upper-  
class use. Many of these American  
goods and technology are not appropri-  
ate to make these underdeveloped  
countries self-sufficient in food or  
other necessities (economic imperial-  
ism).  

At the same time, the U.S. has not  
developed our own domestic oil resour-  
ces. Rather, U.S. oil companies such  
as EXXON have conspired with Middle  
Eastern oil sheiks to pump their oil  
at artificially low rates. This in-  
creases the prices of oil. Thus the  
U.S. oil monopolies are the real cause  
of high oil and energy prices.  

Over time this lack of productivity  

in inefficient U.S. factories and  
artificially high priced gas and oil  
has created a world-wide shortage  

of goods, and an inflated international  

monetary system. Every country is in  
debt, jobs are scarce everywhere.  
There is a long term, world-wide eco-  
nomic crisis of capitalism.  

This is the background to understand why Carter wants to go to  

war. He says he wants to save the  
Middle Eastern oil fields from the  
Russians. The Russians have nothing  
to do with the U.S. overdependence on  
Middle Eastern oil. The U.S. oil  
companies created both the shortage  
and the dependence on that oil. Car-  
ter's answer to our slow, inflation-  
ridden economy is to prepare for an  
unneeded war. Defense spending is a  
temporary answer to a poor economy.  
Carter had to find an appropriate  
enemy and a distant land to scare the  
American people into this defense  
spending.  

The Russian stupidity in moving  
huge numbers of troops into Afghanistan  
supplied Carter with the immediate  
excuse for drumming up the present war  
hysteria. He also increased his chanc-  
es for re-election. The hostage situa-  
tion in Iran was also Carter's creat-  
ion. He admitted the hated Shah with  
Rockefeller's and Kissinger's advice.  
This shifted the focus of the American  
people from their daily economic  
plights of inflation, lowering stan-  
dards of living, unemployment, housing  
shortage, high-energy prices and the  
lack of social programs for children,  
the aged, the sick and the poor. In  
one fell swoop, Carter and the media  

Reclaiming A Tactic  

In recent months, the strategy of  
boycott has been co-opted and chan-  
ged by the Carter Administration as  
the President rallies support for  
his proposed boycott of the Summer  
Olympics in Moscow (supposedly to  
oppose Soviet presence in Afghani-  
stan). It was shocking to be told  
by a local labor organization that  
the only current boycott they knew  
of was that against the Olympics.  
It seems that Carter's real strategy  
to dupe “his people” and to divert  
the attention of workers from real  
problems - is succeeding.  

The principle of boycotting a pro-  
duct or a service is an obvious, and  
potentially an effective weapon of  
resistance against capitalism. By  
boycotting, the consumer refuses to  
consume, thus putting pressure on  
a company to change because it is  
losing money. Thus, for a boycott  
to work, it must be supported by  
a considerable number of people;  
and so, it is important for all of  
us to keep up with information on  
current boycotts, and to support  
those who have organized them by  
refusing to consume a product until  
the boycott is lifted. This is an  
indirect action, but one which can  
work eventually if carried through.  

On February 21, while the front  
page of the local Rocky Mountain News  
promoted the Moscow boycott, there  
was a story about the J.P. Stevens  
Tabor dispute quietly buried in the  
back of the paper. It was reported  
that, "Talks are quietly underway to  
settle the longest, most bitter  

unionizing attempt in U.S. labor his-  
tory - the drive to organize J.P.  
Stevens and Co. sources here say. The  
negotiations are being conducted  
through what are described as “back  
channels"...and are described as  
highly sensitive and far from reso-  
lution. However, bringing the giant  
textile manufacturer to the table,  
even privately, represents a major  
breakthrough for the union." The  
article also said that if negotia-  
tions proceed, Tabor organizers would  
in turn call off their well-publicized  
boycott of Stevens products.  

But, in a recent release from H ex-  
Say, there is information from org-  
anizer Crystal Lee Sutton that casts  
doubts on the nearness of settlement:  

"Labor Organizer Crystal Lee Sut-  
ton, otherwise known as Norma Rae  
in the film of that name which por-  
trayed Sutton's struggles against  
the J.P. Stevens Company, says work-  
ing conditions at the giant textile  
company's many plants are no better  
than they were in the ‘30's.  

"Sutton, a labor organizer for the  
Amalgamated Clothing and Textile  
Workers Union, is currently on a na-  
tionwide speaking tour in support  
of the J.P. Stevens Boycott. She says  
that five years after her activities  
won Stevens employees the right to  

union representation, J.P. Stevens  

has still not signed a contract with  
its workers. Stevens has been cited  
in 18 separate National Labor Re-  
lations Board decisions for unfair  
labor practices since 1963 and fined  
over $1.5 million.  

necessary to  

*Coors Brewery Beer  
*Dal-Tex Optical Company  

focused on foreign scapegoats, the  
Iranians and Russians instead of begin-  
ning to answer the needs of Americans.  
Meanwhile, the underlying crisis of  
capitalism is completely covered up.  
Men like Rockefeller and Kissinger un-  
derstand what's really going on and  
used Carter and the Shah to shift  
attention from their self-created  
crisis of capitalism.  

What all this means in our daily  
lives is of course constant and  
pressing money problems. Our personal  
relationships become shaky. Families  
tend to split apart. Daycare facili-  
ties are underfunded. There is increa-  
sed racial tension due to fighting  
over scarce jobs and housing. More and  
more people begin to develop neurotic  
behavior due to stress on the job and  
at home. Increases in violence, high  
crime rates, prison riots and general  
anti-social behavior are all indirect  
results of the crisis of capitalism.  
The following are some ways to fight  
back.  

POLITICAL WAYS TO FIGHT  

1. Oppose registration and the rein-  
stitution of the draft.  

2. Oppose defense spending.  

3. Demand social programs - defense  
expenditures are no excuse to avoid  
spending on social needs.  

4. Elect the most unwarlike officials.  
5. Learn more about the economic and  
new political realities of the ‘80's.  
6. Continue to demand feminist goals  
such as abortion, rape prevention,  
daycare, equality on the job, etc.  

7. Continue to fight for gay civil  
rights and the ERA.  

8. Form principled coalitions of  
Women's groups and Left groups on  
issues such as the draft, anti-nuclear  
work, solar alternatives, health care,  
daycare, jobs, income redistribution,  
etc.  

9. Begin to expand a radical analysis  
of both feminism, economics and poli-  
tics to fit the new realities of the  
'80's.  

10. Begin new projects that address  
the underlying problems of our world.  

PERSONAL WAYS TO FIGHT  

1. Develop a strong personality and  
belief structure to carry you through  
these hard times.  
2. Strengthen and form real and close  
ties with friends and sympathetic and  
supportive relatives for a life sup-  
port system.  
3. Avoid being a financial burden to  
others by getting your personal finan-  
ces in the best possible shape (excep-  
tions if you are on welfare or struc-  
turally unemployed.)  
4. Learn survival skills.  
5. Bury petty personal and political  
differences.  
6. Help friends who are suffering  
under monetary and other stress rela-  
ted problems.  
7. Realize this is a long term situa-  
tion. Be strong, patient and coura-  
geous as the feminist 70's taught us  
to be.  
8. Realize that the old political em-  
phasis of the 60's and 70's may take  
new forms. This may be scary - Don't  
be afraid of new tactics.  
9. Prepare yourself and your friends  
to grow in new ways.  
10. Prepare yourself and your friends  
for changes in personal lifestyles  
that may not be ideal, if things get  
much worse.  

BMR will provide a continuing forum for  
discussion of economics. In future issues,  
some of the points touched on in  
Janet's article will be explored more  

fully. Also, articles will analyze  
other issues in this area.  

Wanted: Theorists  

The Eighties are obviously going to be hard and complex times.  
BMR desperately needs and wants theoretical articles that  

explore the new forms and structures that sexism, racism,  
capitalism and imperialism will be taking in this new decade.  
Please send in any ideas, articles, criticisms or analysis that  
you think will help clarify our lives. Send to BMR, 1724  
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206.  

"Sutton reasons, however, that with  
assets of $955 million, it's cheap-  
er for Stevens to break the law than  
comply with a contract for its work-  
ers.  

"She says that today in the J.P.  
Stevens mills, 'People lose their  
jobs, work long hours and don't even  
get a lunch break. They get hurt  

on the job, lose an arm or a leg  

for life and then the company's  
through with them...So many people  
think this is something out of the  
1930's, but this is happening in the  
South today.'  

Therefore, it is important that  
consumers observe the boycott of  
Stevens' products until the boycott  
is officially called off by the org-  
anizers themselves.  

Boycotts  

Table Linen: Simtex.  

also now including all Beechnut Products:  
Taster's Choice, Nescafe, Nestle's QUIK, Nestle's Crunch, Nes-  
tea, Stouffer Products, Swiss Knight Cheese, Maggi Products.  

*AT1 Iceberg  
“Lettuce