10

Villains of the Vagina Unmasked

By Sharon Tolman, with help from Nancy
Wilsted

This column is presented by the women
of the Colorado Springs Women's Health
Collective, a full service gynecological
clinic. The clinic is staffed and oper-
ated by women who care about women and
their health needs. Suggestions for
future columns may be sent to them at
703 N. Weber, Colorado Springs, Colorado,
80907.

A fact of every woman's life is
that there is a normal vaginal dis-
charge. This discharge is clear,
white, or slightly yellowish, and has
a distinctive, but not offensive odor.
It changes in amount throughout the
menstrual cycle due to normal fluc-
tuation of hormones. Other factors
involved in increased normal discharge
are birth control pills, emotional
stress, ovulation, and sexual arousal.

Vaginal discharge is not normal if
it is painful or excessive. A cheesy
consistency is not normal, nor is an
unpleasant odor or a very yellow color.
Itching, burning, inflammation, and
sores or blisters in the genital area
are symptoms to watch for as well as
fever, chills, abdominal pains, and
night sweats. Discharge is not normal
if it is bloody at a time other than
the normal menstrual period.

If any or all of these symptoms
occur, seek evaluation at your clinic;
sexual partners are often infected,
and may also need treatment.

Vaginal infections are common and
unpleasant occurrences in women's
lives. There are three major categories
of infections. Each has different
causes, symptoms, and treatment.

TYPES OF INFECTIONS
(Yeast--fungus, monilia, candida)
Yeast grows in harmless quantities

Haemophilus vaginitis--bacterial in-

fection
Many of the normal bacteria that

ordinarily live in the vagina can be
potentially harmful organisms if
changes in the vaginal environment
occur. Changes in the usual acidic
balance of the vagina can be caused
by any infection of the cervix, the
use of chemical douches, ovulation,
menstruation, or pregnancy. Frequent
or constant irritation of the vagina
may damage the vaginal membrane; this
may be caused by deodorant tampons and
frequent intercourse. The condition

may exist long after the irritating

factor has been withdrawn.

In the vagina, rectum, mouth, and on 

the skin at all times. It is import-
ant to be able to differentiate be-
tween normal and abnormal discharge
for this reason. The excess growth of
yeast in the vagina is what causes the
discharge that irritates the sensitive
outer folds of the vagina and vulva.

There are certain conditions that
increase the chance of yeast growth.
Taking antibiotics, for whatever
reason, greatly reduces the amount of
organisms which are normally present
in the vagina, giving the yeast more
of a chance to grow. Pregnancy
changes the balance in the vagina,
lining and aids the growth of yeast.

A diabetic's situation also aids the
growth of yeast due to the extra sugar
in her urine which gets deposited on
the vulva. Taking birth-control pills
makes a woman more susceptible to
yeast because they alter the hormone
balance.

Usually these women have scanty
periods or even skip some periods al-
together. Since the flow is light, it
is not necessary to change tampons
often. Unfortunately, leaving tampons
in for more than six hours can cause
extra growth of organisms in the se-
cretions held in by the tampon.

The symptoms of a yeast infection
are itching, redness, and dryness in
the vagina and vulva. A white dis-
charge which can be light, but can
also be thick and curdy like cottage
cheese, is another symptom.

Monistat is commonly used as a
treatment for this infection. Other
creams and sometimes suppositories are
used for 10-14 days; it is important
to continue treatment during menstrua-
tion. One problem is that yeast re-
occurs often. Have a recheck after
finishing the treatment. Menstruation
changes the vaginal environment so you
may have a flare-up after your period.
Sexual intercourse while infected may
cause more irritation that may cause
the infection to spread.

If you cannot get to your clinic
right away, there are some things you
can do at home to help block the in-
fection. Certain douches may help.
For yeast, acidophilus, a type of yo-
gurt starter, makes the vagina more
acidic. Use 2 tablespoons of starter
to a quart of warm water, once or
twice a day for 2 weeks. Also, eat a
lot of natural yogurt and try to get
some sun on the vulva.

With this type of infection the
vaginal walls may be puffy with fluid
and covered with a thick accumulation
of pus. There may also be a greyish-
white discharge that appears whipped
and foamy, with a strong odor. The
bacteria may get into the urethra which
can cause a bladder infection called
cystitis, which causes frequent urin-
ation with a burning sensation.

Sultrin and Vagitrol are commonly
used in treating bacterial infections.
Treatment lasts from 4-14 days depend-
ing on the drug prescribed and the ex-
tent of the infection.

At the first signs of infection, use
a vinegar douche because it will make
the vagina less acidic. Use 2 table-
spoons of vinegar to a quart of warm
water. Do not douche 3-4 days before
seeing the people at the clinic.

Trichomonas

A trichomonad is a protozoan para-
site present in the vagina, intestine,
and rectum of many women but usually

NOW and The SWP (cont’d)

to include what feminism is to min-
ority women? Well no, Ackerman re-
sponds, But she argues that “it will
take time" and that the best strategy
revolves around having more minority
women's conferences where “we can
listen to what they have to say.” As
an example of relating to minority
women's needs in Colorado Springs
(where Ackerman lives), she cited a
conversation with a black woman who
wanted to do something about the de-
humanizing process of going through
a food stamp office. In response,
Ackerman said, the Colorado Springs
chapter is planning to do some sen-
sitivity training for the people who
work there.

Partly because Ackerman sees NOW
as being effectively committed to
minority women's rights already, she
is able to argue that dissension in
NOW is the result of SWP divisiveness
--despite the fact that many women
who were not in the SWP supported the
Defending Women's Rights resolution.

Ackerman's views echo The NOW
Times' ‘Parasitism' article, which
contends that many women signed the
resolution because it was the equiva-
lent of "motherhood and apple pie":
in the sense that it calls for actions
and statements of principle that NOW
believes it has always done.

To quote from the article: "The
ringer, however, (in the resolution)
is in ‘the call for a national
demonstration like the one held May
16 for the ERA, around all those is-
sues,’ coupled with the statement
that ‘we cannot sit back and rely on
either of the two governing parties,
the Democrats or the Republicans, to
give us our long overdue rights.’

"It's a ringer, not because anyone
advocates sitting back and waiting for
our rights to be presented to us as
gifts from the major political parties
(about which we have few illusions),
but because it is an attempt to have
us commit ourselves to an action that
by itself will get us absolutely
nothing."

That paragraph does begin to point
to where a major part of the issue
lies: the need to talk out strategies,
combinations of strategies, methods
of relating the struggles of other
oppressed people to the independent
women's movement. But instead of a
full discussion, both the article and
Ackerman's analysis of the SWP amount
to a rehash of the old “outside agi-
tator" theory, familiar to anyone who
did political work in the ‘60s.

Ackerman claims that NOW went into
the Detroit conference “more unified
than ever before." There are genuine
political and philosophical differences
she admitted, "but it didn't grow up
within NOW."

And it's for that reason, Ackerman
said, that she delivered her criti-
cism of the SWP at the Sept. 15
speakout in Denver, in which the
media exploited her statements just
as it had exploited Taylor's criti-
cisms at the press conference.

"I felt it was important to point
out that the trouble was coming from
the outside," Ackerman said.

In her speech, she mentioned that
in other parts of the country--name-
ly in Boston, Atlanta and New Orleans
--SWP members have attempted to
“take over" chapters, and failing
that, have started NOW chapters of
their own. She added that NOW has al-
ways been open to women of any poli-
tical persuasion, but that the SWP
presence should be “identified for
what it is. . .I don't know what their

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 8

motives are, but the feeling of ex-
ploitation is there."

Ackerman did not say that the SWP
was trying to "take over" in Colorado,
but the parallel was clear. SWP
members who are active in NOW in Den-
ver, have generally been involved
with the East Metro Denver chapter,
and now with the new Auraria chapter.
Both sponsored the speakout.

Neither Ackerman nor Taylor nor
Adley chose to say just how many SWP
members also belong to or are active
in NOW chapters in Colorado. All said
they didn't know--which is odd, consid-
ering how much of an issue this has be-
come.

Both Adley and Taylor refuse to use
the word 'split' in talking about NOW.
The red-baiting charges against the
SWP, they say, forces women to choose
sides based on name-calling, rather
than promoting a free and open exchange
of ideas.

To say that differences are coming
from the "outside," Adley said, "implies
that NOW is in isolation of the women's
liberation movement. These discussions
(about strategy, etc.) are going on
in the entire movement and NOW should
be in the forefront."

As for charges that SWP members can-
not be counted on to put feminism a-
bove party loyalty, Adley said, "If
you could abstract sexism from other
forms of oppression, you could say it's
a matter of putting one or the other
first. But if you're truly committed
to fighting sexism, you know a number
of institutions have to change.”

"We're not dictated to--that's bull-
shit," Taylor said. "We're feminists;
it's not a matter of dictation."
Adley and Taylor dismissed
Ackerman's comment that nearly all of

More on Page 12