~ jobbers.

culture. . .

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.9

Surviving the Scutwork

So, You Want To Publish On Your Own?

Alison Colbert

In November, 1976, I self-published
a book of poems, Let the Circle be
Unbroken, and was immediately faced
with the problem of distributing the
1,025 copies in my print run. I sat
in my apartment staring at boxes of
books, suddenly realizing that I was
totally responsible for distributing
all of them. In this article, I
would like to talk about what it has
felt like for me to be totally in
charge of the distribution of my own
book, as well as how this responsibil-
ity has affected my writing work sub-
sequent to publication. I would also
like to make some suggestions to
women considering self-publishing and
distributing, so that perhaps they
will be able to avoid some of the pit-
falls and problems I've lived through.

In addition, I've received a few univ-
ersity library orders, which also
create time-consuming paperwork. The
University of Texas Library, for in-
stance, required me to get a re-sale
number from the State of Texas, so that
I could sell them one book, total pay-
ment, $3.16. For all these reasons, I
have found dealing with jobbers and
libraries frustrating.

Because it was becoming clear to me
that women weren't buying my book in
the ways I'd expected, I started to
investigate ways to find new audiences.

to make this a possible strategy. I

also wondered if a book so blurbed is

regarded in the feminist community

as more important than other books,

its author more of a "movement person-

Here I had stumbled on a div-
isive contradiction between feminist
ideals and capitalist sales practices.
On the one hand, we want to believe
that all women writers are equal, sis-
ters. On the other hand, when one of
us has work, such as a self-published
book, to sell, she has to convince
women, through blurbs among other
methods, that her product is more
worth buying than that of other femin-
ist businesses. Becoming aware of
this contradiction made it much harder
for me to ask for blurbs. My own sol-
ution to this problem was to put off
asking nationally known women writers,
and instead to concentrate on asking
women whom I knew and felt comfortable
with personally and professionally.

So, armed with blurbs from such
women, I put together a flier. I used
this flier when people asked for in-
formation about my work, at book fairs
and in a mailing to out-of-town book-
stores. This flier probably helped me
get some orders in this mailing, and
helped people learn about the book,
but, like the reviews, has not been a
magic carpet enabling me to suddenly
switch my selling patterns from moving
myself as a personality along with my
work, seemed to create more enthusiasm
about my book. However, this endless
personality/selling was creating pro-
blems for me. For one thing, I was
developing a fairly standardized rap
about myself and my book, which became
tedious to repeat. In addition, I was
beginning to find that I was spending
far too much time shoving books at
people. I was suffering from an ad-
vanced case of extended arm, with my
mouth also frozen from saying, "My
work is important, buy me."

At this point, some depressing new
problem began to impinge on me. For
one thing, I realized that, while an
enormous number of feminist poetry
books had been published in 1975, '76,
and '77, at the same time, due to the
financial crunch, many women had less
money to spend on such books. Since
this was the case, how could my book
be made to stand out, to be more sale-
able than the others? One method fem-
inist press women have used to make
their books stand out is to ask for
blurbs from the most prominent women
writers possible, since the feminist
community seems to most respect and
buy books from "new" writers whose
work has been so supported. However,
at that time, I was not in close enough
contact with nationally known writers.

-Carol Clements, Althea Wai

selling copies through mail order and
at bookstores. I have continued to
just to keep my name in front of peo-
ple, to keep my “track record" going,
and, incidentally, to stimulate peo-
ple to buy my book after they see new
work. Knowing this has made it
harder for me to write and publish at
all. For instance, I've recently
found it much easier to scribble
journal notes, which I know will not
be published, than to revise poems
which may eventually be printed and
contribute--positively or negatively
--to my "reputation." In addition,
since I have been so heavily involved
in personality/selling, and my book
is very revealing of my life, I now
feel rather exposed to many people.
This has made it hard for me to con-
tinue the emotional and political
life/chronicle which was some day to
have constituted my second book. Re-
cently, I've gotten around the pro-
blem of being afraid to share more
personal material with readers by
starting a novel, written in the
third person, which fictionalizes
experiences I had at thirteen. Wri-
ting about a period so removed in
time may give me the distance I need
to write freely. However, since com-
mercial publishers rarely put out
first novels, and only one or two
feminist presses produce them, I
sometimes find myself wondering,
"Well, when and if I finish this,
who's going to publish it? Me
again?" If I do self-publish this
novel, I intend to utilize my past
experiences to avoid some of the
pitfalls I've encountered this time
around.

Self-publishing may have disadvantages, but,
for many women who have something to say,
the alternative is silence.

move books mostly through personal-
ity/selling at readings, book fairs,
and even at feminist events where I
often peddle copies to women who have
heard me read my poetry elsewhere.
Ultimately, I have found this de-
pendence on personality/selling
draining. For one thing, I have had
to keep hustling for readings, some-
times in periods when I wanted to be
silent. For another thing, since
people at readings tend to buy copies
of a book from which they have just
heard poems, I have continued to
read work from the book in public for
perhaps longer than I should have.
This has hardly been an inducement to
try out new work on listeners, or
even write it. In fact, both the
personality/selling and paperwork
needed to get the book sold have
taken energy away from my own writing.
Also, I now have a "reputation" to
maintain. Because Let the Circle
has been widely reviewed in the fem-
inist press, my name is now known to
many more people than it was before
I published my book. Sometimes I
feel that I have to keep producing
just to keep my name in front of peo-
ple, to keep my “track record" going,
and, incidentally, to stimulate peo-
ple to buy my book after they see new
work. Knowing this has made it
harder for me to write and publish at
all. For instance, I've recently
found it much easier to scribble
journal notes, which I know will not
be published, than to revise poems
which may eventually be printed and
contribute--positively or negatively
--to my "reputation." In addition,
since I have been so heavily involved
in personality/selling, and my book
is very revealing of my life, I now
feel rather exposed to many people.
This has made it hard for me to con-
tinue the emotional and political
life/chronicle which was some day to
have constituted my second book. Re-
cently, I've gotten around the pro-
blem of being afraid to share more
personal material with readers by
starting a novel, written in the
third person, which fictionalizes
experiences I had at thirteen. Wri-
ting about a period so removed in
time may give me the distance I need
to write freely. However, since com-
mercial publishers rarely put out
first novels, and only one or two
feminist presses produce them, I
sometimes find myself wondering,
"Well, when and if I finish this,
who's going to publish it? Me
again?" If I do self-publish this
novel, I intend to utilize my past
experiences to avoid some of the
pitfalls I've encountered this time
around.

So, if self-publishing has had the
pitfalls I've described, what sugges-
tions do I have to make this process
more painless for other feminist
writers? For one thing, I would sug-
gest first self-publishing a chapbook
(a stapled pamphlet of twenty-four
to thirty-six pages) in a printing of
several hundred rather than a per-
fect bound book in a larger edition.
A smaller book will be cheaper to
produce and thus have a lower selling
price, and you will not be sandbag-
ging yourself with the enormous
weight of distributing a large run.

I would also recommend that women
who live in the same area and have
manuscripts to publish join together
and form a shared-work publishing co-
operative. In such a co-op, each
woman puts in her own money to pub-
lish her book, but all members joint-
ly handle distribution, put together
fliers, and pay for ad space. In
this way, some of the isolation of
distributing your own book can be
lessened.

If isolation is one of the greatest
drawbacks in distributing a self-pub-
lished book, what can feminists do to
help end that isolation? First of
all, they can support women who self-
publish, by reviewing such books, sen-
ding away for volumes which they see
reviewed, or buying them in book-
stores. Also, they can donate time
to help out women writers embroiled
in the paperwork which self-publish-
ing and distributing a book creates.
Finally, women should realize that
feminist writers are now producing
manuscripts of poetry and fiction in
profusion. Commercial publishers
only put out a small minority of such
work; feminist presses cannot handle
it all, especially since many presses
tend to publish women already known to
them, from their own locality. For
these reasons, many feminist writers
have to self-publish, to take con-
trol of their own lives, to say: "I'm
not going to wait until I finally find
a press which will publish me. I'm
going to get my work out to women
myself, now." Self-publishing may
have disadvantages, but, for many
women with something to say, the al-
ternative is silence.