IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

-tditor's Note: The news media here in  
the U.S. have had a field day with  

Italy's perennial government crisis  

and elections and with the spectacular  
activities of the Red Brigades. But  
there has been little attempt to ex-  
plain the political and economic cir-  
cumstances which produced them - soar-  
ing unemployment particularly among  
the young; adjustments by industry  
which have included large-scale lay-  
offs and a shift toward much greater  
reliance on part-time and occasional  
workers; and a pattern of cooperation  
between many of the established unions,  
the Communist Party, the government,  
and industry, which has offered some  
protection to the regular work force  
while leaving out large sections of  
the population. Taken together, these  
developments have come to be called  
"marginalization" because of the way  
they push to the fringes of society  
large groups of the unemployed, the  
part-time laborers, and most notably  
the young (of the 1.5 million unem-  
ployed, 1.2 million are under 25, 60  
percent of them looking for their  
first jobs).  

Many European activists see "margin-  
alization" not only as a distinctive  
feature of present-day Italy but as an  
emerging pattern in other western in-  
dustrial nations, including the U.S.  
In the following article, translated  
from the French leftist daily Libera-  
tion, Jean-Marcel Bourguereau describes  
what the process looks like in the  
city where it may well be most ad-  
vanced - Naples, capital of Italy's  
impoverished South.  

Naples is a southern city at the  
hinge of Italy's two realities. It  
knows all the contradictions of the  
industrialized regions and all the  
tensions of the underdeveloped South.  
Clandestine work is a distinguishing  
feature of the city, because it is all  
you see, but it exists just as much  
in the northern industrial cities such  
as Milan and Bologna.  

NAPLES (LIBERATION/LNS) - The heavy  
beat of jackhammers in the hot air of  
the morning. The maddening clamor of  
car engines and horns. You have to get  
used to them.  

It is the noise of Naples that first  
strikes you when you arrive. The noise  
and the crowd that pours through the  
few broad streets that were opened  
during the last century after a cho-  
lera epidemic. But what are all these  
people in the street doing?  

"It's a reflection of Naples," a man  
explains. "In this city with nearly  
two million inhabitants, there are  
only a few thousand employees or work-  
ers in the strict meaning of the term,  
people with fixed hours like they  
would have in other large cities. The  
others work, but who can say what  
their hours are or what they do?  

THE WORLD OF THE GHETTOS  

Empty Marlboro cartons are spread  
all around. The packs of cigarettes  
are hidden in a corner of the wall.  

At the end of the chain of contraband,  
the old woman who is selling it sits  
at the corner as if at the border sep-  
arating the horizontal universe of the  
affluent streets from the world of  
nearly vertical alleys on the steep  
sides of hills down which the city  
appears to have spilled between the  
sky and the sea.  

...a half-open shutter offers —  
a glimpse not into a bedroom  
but into a factory.  

Along the alleys, families live in  
one room, occasionally with a tiny  
kitchen in the rear. French windows,  
of which the upper half is made of  
two shutters which are opened so that  
you can lean out or sit back and watch  
your corner of the universe. Space is  
used to the maximum. Bed, dresser,  
table and television can all be seen  
by the passerby.  

The life of the ghetto all seems to  
take place in the alleys. But the ap-  
pearance is deceiving. You arrive at  
the end of one alley and all of a sud-  
den a half-open shutter offers a  
glimpse not into a bedroom but into a  
factory. Ten square yards, no more,  
and a group of adolescents who laugh  
at seeing a stranger peering in.  
Scraps of cloth: on the corner of an  
old table or on their knees, they are  
cutting material. Another stitches  
them on a sewing machine. One of the  
kids can't be more than 10 years old.  
It is a "laboratory" as they call them  
here. You don't often stumble on them  
by chance. Because they are hidden  
behind ordinary-looking doors or down  
in the cellars, fearing an official  
inspector, a report. But you do see  
plenty of shops of artisans, women  
working at their sewing machines.  

Just wandering through the alleys,  
one could easily feel like the last  
witness of a backward artisan economy,  
a low-profit economy functioning on  
its own terms, living on little and  
producing little. That is the illusion  
of Naples - the image of a city with  
a dense and unproductive population  
engaged in parasitic enterprises. But  
economist Clara de Marco explains, and  
marshals statistics to provide, that  
the Neapolitan subproletariat has  
given birth, behind its rages of back-  
wardness, to a working class of a new  

type.  

The local artisanry has kept its  
outward appearance. The enterprises  
are tiny: while in Italy as a whole  
the average number of workers in a  
plant is about seven, in the Naples  
region the average is three. In shoe  
manufacturing, 73 percent of the local  
units employ just a single person as  
do 60 percent of clothing enterprises.  

These tiny establishments often take  
the form of work in the home. In the  
single room where people live, they  
also work; the space is divided by a  
curtain or a blanket. Sometimes the  
room is even divided into two floors.  
The density of productive activity in-  
creases the already high density of  
population: with nearly 150 inhabi-  
tants per acre (more than 90,000 per  
square mile) in its historic center,  
Naples is undoubtedly one of the few  
large cities in which the working  

class still occupies the heart of town.  

Behind this work in the home hides  
an elaborate industrial network -  
entire stages in the process of pro-  
duction that used to be carried out  
in factories. Entire neighborhoods  
have become outlying illicit factories  
for enterprises which themselves are  
obviously thriving.  

The number of officially registered  
artisans has swollen equally. Their  
activity is often no more than a link  
in a much larger chain which their  
role as artisans only serves to mask.  

Workers who wish to set up shop in  
their homes buy their own machines.  
They buy them from large factories  
which are selling old equipment in  
order to modernize and boost produc-  
tivity. All part of a restructuring  
which includes laying off many workers  
some of whom then start working in  
their homes. The circle is completed;  
the laid off workers go to work at  
home, often working without realizing  
it for their former bosses and even  
worse working on what may have been  
the very machine they worked on in the  
factory.  

The size of this network can only be  
deduced by looking at the size of the  
industries involved. Available figures  
only mention officially registered  
operations, leaving out the consider-  
able number of illicit enterprises.  
“We aren't able to reconstruct all  
the circuits of production," explains  
Giovanni who has studied the process.  
"Everything is done to keep even the  
workers themselves in the dark about  
who their boss really is."  

In the shoe industry in Naples, to-  
tal investments have shot up by 400  
percent in the last 15 years, while  
at the same time employment in the  
industry has declined officially. A  
decline made up for by the development  
of an underground job market.  

Child Workers in Italy  

At first glance, working with lea-  
ther could be taken for an unimportant  
secondary industry. Wrong. As far as  
exports are concerned Italy makes more  
money from its shoes than from its  
cars.  

Just in the production of leather  
gloves, 200 enterprises in Naples  
which employ almost entirely people  
who work at home (between 7,000 and  
8,000 of them) turn out 85 percent of  
national production, almost all of it  
destined for sale overseas.  

Bia Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 7  

home, earning about $3.50 a week.  

In the eyes of these children, it is  
fair that adults who do the same work  
should be paid more. "Because they  
have families to support." But they  
all regard their work experience as  
an advantage and schooling as a luxury.  

Going to school takes away time that  
can never be regained at the risk of  
missing a chance to get a job. The pre-  
cariousness of this work, however, is  

Her work involved cutting leather from  
nine in the morning until seven at night.  

CHILD WORKERS AT $5.99 A WEEK  

The kids leave the courtyard on the  
run, having just finished eating at  
the "Proletarian Children's Canteen,"  
created by left-wing militants several  
years ago at the heart of the old city.  
Bits of lentils on their plates, big  
grins for the camera, group photo-  
shot over and over in various poses.  
Three young girls take us into the  
neighborhood where they work.  

Another maze of narrow alleys, stair-  
ways, crowded dwellings, an old ab-  
andoned palace around a central cour-  
tyard. Tiny shops, displaying vege-  
tables, minuscule cafes, little shrines  
with religious statues. A man has ass-  
embled a tiny marketplace at the en-  
trance to his only room: chewing gum,  
Bic razors, charcoal.  

We want to see their "laboratory"  
but the girls are suspicious. "Why  
are you asking so many questions?"  
Antonia, 12 years old, explains that  
she went to school through the third  
grade. Her father works making shoes.  
She has six brothers and sisters, all  
much older. She worked in a “laboratory"  
in Santa Lucia with two other  
people. Her work involved cutting  
leather from nine in the morning until  
seven at night. "I stopped going to  
school because I wasn't good," is all  
she says. Since her family moved to a  
new neighborhood, she does housework  
in the mornings, all for less than $5  
a week.  

There are thousands of children like  
her working in the bars, as electri-  
cians or butchers' helpers, at drug-  
stores or bakeries. Many work in lab-  
oratories of varying degrees of legal-  
ity where they make leather goods,  
shoes, clothes. But a large number  
work directly in their homes, not  
having even the satisfaction of some  
degree of independence from their  
families. Some no longer go to school  
at all, others work on the side after  
school.  

clear to them, if only because some  
have already been laid off, like  
Sergio, 8 years old, who was unseated  
by a 12-year-old with work experience.  
Every time work gets scarce, they are  
the first to lose their jobs.  

Why do they work? Students question-  
ed by one sociologist emphasize that  
“work allows you not to become a  
thief,” “it keeps you off the streets.”  
Others say that it lets them “have a  
skill" to "make a future."  

A sharp awareness of unemployment:  
precocious entry into work gives them  
the sense of being able to escape it.  

A COMMUNITY THAT SURVIVES  

“The South has always been the grave-  
digger of revolutions and reforms,"  
comments Cesare, a Naples activist.  
"They always explain that that's be-  
cause of the domination of systems of  
control by the rulers over the masses.  
The right-wing in Naples has always  
said that it was because Neapolitans  
love life...Neither claim is totally  
false. It has been on the persistence  
of certain feudal structures and on  
the communal feelings in the ghettos  
that the right has always fallen back  
to repulse any chances."  

Manipulation? Servility? False con-  
sciousness? As sociologist Alain Medam  
says in a recent book about Naples,  
"The sub-proletariat, which clings to  
a precarious livelihood by expedients  
reinvented from one day to the next,  
clings at the same time to its privi-  
lege of independence, without any  
boss standing over it. And it judges  
itself as free as the birds."  

For Cesare, this ability to survive  
always has a positive side. As long  
ago as 1860, Naples was already a  
large city, before all the others.  

Since then its structure has not  
changed fundamentally. It has escaped  
the fragmentation of other cities.  

Going to school takes away time that  
can never be regained at the risk of  
missing a chance to get a job.  

An inquiry conducted in two junior  
high schools reveals that among 603  
children questioned, more than 30  
percent are working or have worked in  
the past. Most often they work in  
small shops employing between three  
and 10 workers, whose hours are stag-  
gered so that “they're hardly ever to-  
gether." Usually the chief of the lab-  
oratory “isn’t the real boss." As one  
student explains, "The small shop sup-  
plies a larger one, which supplies  
another still larger one, which sup-  
plies the stores of all Italy."  

Maria Rosaria, 13 years old, junior  
high school student makes toy dogs at  
her aunt's house. The pieces arrive,  
already cut by other people in other  
homes. She puts them together and  
stuffs them using a machine that al-  
lows a single person to make 300 dogs  
a day. Carmela, a 12-year-old, also  
a junior high student, makes handbags  
from 3:00 to 8:00 every evening at her  

the anonymity. That is why Naples  
hasn't exploded in recent years as  
justice has constantly predicted it  
would.  

"The people have kept their roots,"  
Cesare says. “If not, how do you ex-  
plain how this ghetto, the biggest in  
all of Europe, has not reached the  
level of deterioration you see on the  
outskirts of Milan. Here, someone will  
steal your purse, but they won't kill  
you. And if there were a blackout,  
there wouldn't be looting. To have  
that, you need to have 10 supermar-  
kets, not 55,000 tiny shops...Naples  
has been protected by its backwardness.  

And now, its very backwardness has  
spawned a pattern of production, under  
the guise of old-time artisanry and  
domestic production, that many obser-  
vers see spreading to the more modern  
industrial cities of the north.  

Editor's Note: This article was  
taken from Liberation News Service.