Noontime sun filters in through shirred  
curtains, across the pianos, back to back,  
and rests against the wall opposite  

“Let's go back to the beginning and try  
again girls. An-n-nd one. . .”  

On the window sill busts of composers  
stare, brooding and dignified, out into  
the room—a visual maze of wooden  
puppets and Wedgwood, portraits of  
friends, fresh flowers, hand-lettered sheet  
music, porcelain planters and overstuffed  
chairs.  

“Good, good. Now do you remember  
what you're to practice for next week?”  

Antonia Brico finishes a piano lesson.  

She puts her arm around each of the  
sisters. “These are T.P.'s,” she announces.  
The girls look up, shy and puzzled.  
“Teacher's pets,” she explains, then  
laughs and hugs them both.  

The first time I saw Antonia Brico  
conduct, high on her podium dressed in  
black, she was huge and regal. As the  
audience quieted and she signaled the  
orchestra with her baton, her upraised  
arms seemed to encircle the entire stage.  

Today, leaning on the piano counting  
time, with one eye on her student's hands  
and the other on the score, I find she’s a  
small woman. In her home, her studio,  
she’s not single-mindedly serious as when  
performing, but remains in benevolent  
command (of all but Carmen the cat who  
curls up where she will.)  

Always ready to tease; always ready to  
laugh, Antonia Brico is guileless and alive  
with unaffected enthusiasm. And her  
enthusiasm brims on one subject in  
particular: Antonia: A Portrait of a  
Woman, the new film chronicling her life  
and struggle as a woman conductor.  

Assembled by her former student, now  
folksinger, Judy Collins, and film editor  
Jill Godmilow, the documentary has  
received adulation from publications as  
diverse as the Village Voice and Time  
Magazine. Few have denied that the  
research, interviewing, filming and editing  
are sound and cohesive; that the movie  
is art. But none have denied that its subject,  
Antonia Brico, is a woman of talent and  
strength.  

Though she studied piano from the age  
of five and finally received a degree from  
the Master School of Conducting at the  
Berlin State Academy, her career as a  
conductor has been sporadic because, as  
the film reveals, she is a woman.  

In 1930, at the age of 28, Dr. Brico  
became the first woman to conduct the  
Berlin Philharmonic. She went on to  
conduct at the Hollywood Bowl, the  
Metropolitan Opera House in New York,  
even Carnegie Hall. She was well-received  
by all but boards of directors and  
managers of symphony orchestras. None  
would hire a female conductor. “We  
cannot sell a woman conductor,” they  
insisted.  

The hot/cold reactions to her conducting,  
or at least her saleability, were often  
emotionally draining. During a quiet,  
late-night sequence in the film, Dr.  
Brico’s eyes grow distant as she tells of  
crying all night following a successful  
performance in New York, not knowing  
when or if she would get another chance.  

But she also rages at the unfairness.  
“The orchestra is my instrument. How  
would you like to be able to play your  
instrument only five to six times a year  
when you're able to play five or six times  
a month?” she demanded of Collins in  
the film.  

In defiance of her discrimination, Dr.  
Brico began an all-woman orchestra in  
New York in the 1930s. And for a time,  
it generated a lot of publicity, good and  
bad, and filled auditoriums. But as the  
novelty wore off, crowds thinned and the  
orchestra was forced to disband.  

Elusive though they were, the periodic  
engagements as guest conductor for  
orchestras throughout the United States  
and abroad encouraged Dr. Brico to  
continue her struggle. Newspaper clip-  
pings in her carefully kept scrapbooks  
testify to the fact that whenever she did  
conduct, she was a success.  

Her travels, involvement in music and  
engaging personality led her into close  
friendships with many well-known artists  
and intellectuals. In the documentary she  

Story by Nancy Heine  

recalls times spent with Bruno Walter,  
Jean Sibelius, Arthur Rubinstein and  
Igor Stravinsky. But Antonia Brico’s face  
becomes alternately excited and melan-  
choly when she remembers Albert  
Schweitzer, whose large color photograph  
hangs prominently above the stairway in  
her home.  

I noticed a smaller framed photo of  
Schweitzer signed “Antonia, mit liebe,  
Albert” as I settled into a chair waiting  
for Dr. Brico to see her students out the  
door. Evidence of her own affection—for  
her students—lay on the coffee table in  

Photos by Glenna Booth  

front of me: a basket of suckers, neatly  
lined with a paper napkin, wood puzzles  
and magazines to keep impatient little  
pianists quietly entertained.  

When the students had gone, and  
Carmen, lying languidly across the top of  
the piano, had been indulged with a bit  
of petting, Dr. Brico sat down across  
from me. “Did you see the movie?” she  
asked.  

I said I had and told her I was as  
impressed as everyone else seemed to be.  
“But how do you feel about it?”  

“I thought it was marvelous how they  
put that together,” she said. “And  
marvelous how they unearthed that  

Fox Movietone (old film clip which opens  
the documentary) of me.  

"That was the Metropolitan Opera  
House stage. It was 1933. And it was  
such an event to have a woman conduct  
that the Fox Movietone made a newsreel  
out of it. I saw it in a theatre but didn’t  
know what happened to it. They found it  
in Los Angeles.”  
“Since it was such a personal film,  
didn’t you...”  

“I know it. I know it,” Dr. Brico  
interrupted, excited, “and that’s the  
thing that seems to have gotten people.  
And I think it’s because I wasn’t aware of  
it; I wasn’t aware that I was in the movies  
or that I was being taped.  

“I was just with a good friend. And  
then, she was clever enough to ask  
provocative questions that got me upset  
and wild. I would not have talked like  
that if I had really been aware it was for  
publication.  

“I don’t think I ever thought the movie  
was going to be such a big thing. I  
thought it was a personal affair between  
Judy and myself.”  

“When we made Time Magazine, I  
thought that was unbelievable,” she said,  
shaking her head and obviously pleased.  

I asked naively how Time could ignore  
the film when every major paper in cities  
it had played had praised it.  

“How could they ignore it!” she shot  
back incredulously, “I've been ignored a  
great deal, my dear.” Then raising her  
eyebrows and nodding she said again,  
“I’ve been ignored.”  

“What about the male musicians?” I  
asked. “Did they ever resent being  
conducted by a woman?"  

“No, never,” Dr. Brico protested,  
“They're musicians. They only want to  
know if the person up there knows  
anything about music. That's all they  
care about. I’ve never had any problems  
with musicians, and I've conducted in  
many capitals abroad.”  

For the past 27 years, Dr. Brico has  
conducted her own non-profit, semi-  
professional orchestra in Denver which  
performs four or five times a year. How  
was it, I asked, that she had finally  
settled in Denver.  

In 1940, she explained, she shared a  
manager with George Enescu, a well-  
known composer/conductor/pianist.  
When Hitler closed the Romanian  
borders, Enescu, a Romanian, was unable  
to fulfill his worldwide engagements. His  
manager tried to distribute the concerts  
to his other artists.  

In December, 1940, Dr. Brico conducted  
in Enescu’s place in Denver. “They were  
skeptical,” she said, “but they liked me  
enough to engage me for the next year for  
two concerts.  

At this time the Denver Businessmen’s  
Orchestra was forming as an alternative  
to the Denver Symphony Orchestra.  
Leon Minear conducted the new  
orchestra for a year, then found himself  
too busy with other projects to continue.  
He suggested Dr. Brico be named as a  
replacement. After conducting the group  
20 years, Dr. Brico was honored by  
having the orchestra named after her.  

Today, at the age of 73, Dr. Brico’s  
time is divided between rehearsing the  
orchestra, giving piano lessons in her  
home and occasionally guest conducting.  
(On Sunday afternoon, November 10, she  
will conduct the Denver Symphony in a  
free concert at the Auditorium Theatre at  
3 p.m.)  

The film, Antonia, has re-established her  
fame and generated fan mail from old  
students and new admirers throughout  
the world. The Brico Symphony coffers  
swell with profits from a recent benefit  
showing.  
The most important effect of the film,  
however, has yet to be realized. That is,  
whether it has an impact on sexist  
attitudes toward conducting.  

“Do you think it’s easier for women to  
conduct now?” I asked.  
“Well, yes,” Dr. Brico replied thought-  
fully. “There are some, a handful, of  
women being trained as conductors now  
and I'm sure they'll have an easier road.  
We'll see if this film brings others more  
opportunities than I’ve had.”