4  
Task Forces Being Formed  

Organizing for Colorado Begins  

Carol Lease  

Houston showed us the value of  
coalition politics, the tedious care-  
ful maneuvering of political process,  
of defining specific goals, figuring  
out how to get what we want and then  
doing it. Now it's time to put some  
of that hard-earned experience from  
that weekend in the South into prac-  
tice here in the West. The Colorado  
Plan of Action needs you! The state  
Plan of Action, passed by Colorado wo-  
men in June, 1977 at the International  
Women's Year conference in Boulder,  
has already begun to be implemented.  
The former executive committee of the  
state coordinating council gave $2,900  
of its fiscal surplus to the Commis-  
sion on Women to use to begin the im-  
plementation of the Plan. Since the  

Commission on Women has decided that  
putting the mandate of women into ac-  
tion is taking too much of its energy  
and time, a $50,000 grant has been  
written to help fund a staff and ex-  
penses. At this time it isn't clear  
just how the grant will be disbursed,  
which women who are working on its  
implementation will be funded.  

The original divisions of this wo-  
men's document have been retained:  
Arts and Humanities; Basic Needs;  
Education; Training and Awareness;  
Politics, Law and Civil Rights;  
Relationships; Work, Income and Home-  
making; and International Interdepen-  
dence and Peace. Each task force has  
its own priorities and leader, has its  
own meetings and generally meets with  
the rest of the task forces and the  
Commission on Women once every two or  
three months.  

where we’re at  

BMR is getting ready for spring with oodles of new women working col-  
lectively and helping out. We are struggling through new structures and  
bringing some changes into our process.  

Kathy and Mary are going to be leaving the collective soon after this  
issue comes out, but we've come up with enough new energy to keep things  
together. More women are always welcome, of course.  

Kathy and Mary will  
both be sorely missed, but will be going on to put their energies else-  
where in the community, so the loss is not total.  

Mary will be starting  
to work on the Relationships task force for the implementation of the  
Colorado Plan of Action. After a hectic two years of working in the com-  
munity, she plans to do a lot of long put-off reading and maybe finish the  
book she's been trying to write for the past three years. Kathy plans to  
work on improving her pool game and continue dropping hints to anyone who  
might be interested in organizing some feminist theater in Denver.  

We erred last month in not notifying Rocky Fuller, a local woman artist,  
that we were not using a graphic she did for our cover. Instead we sub-  
stituted a graphic she had done to illustrate a news story, but did not  
want used on the cover.  

We've since done a lot of criticism and self-  
criticism about our flaky process in dealing with submitted material. So  
we'd like to offer an apology to Rocky, and let everyone know about our  
new policy which is printed below:  

BMR needs articles, graphics and photographs for future theme issues.  
Some possible themes for the next months are class, rape, racism, the  
‘70s, health, labor organizing, pornography, civil liberties, a national  
feminist party (pro, con and alternatives to), community, ageism, feminism  
in other countries and strategies for organizing and financing projects.  
For our April issue, we are particularly interested in articles focusing  
on feminism internationally.  

Articles including analyses, investigative  
reporting or describing a community strategy are especially wanted. They  
need not necessarily be about Denver or the Midwest.  

Graphics, political  
cartoons and photographs are needed for the front page and for theme  
issues. Letters, ideas, helpful hints, cookies and hugs are also welcome.  

The new BMR policy on submitted material is as follows:  
Solicited articles and graphics will be specific as to content, so  
that writers and artists will understand what is being asked of them.  
Analysis and personal experiences will be edited only with the writer's  
approval.  

Non-solicited articles and graphics are always welcome.  
Accepted material may not appear in the month expected. Material may be  
needed for a future issue.  

Writer or artist will be notified of same.  

All material may be edited for length, but neither contents nor  
meaning will be altered without the writer's consent. If material is ac-  
cepted but needs additional work, the author will be notified.  

All articles and graphics for each month will be reviewed by BMR  
collectively at the monthly copy meeting.  

Material will be rejected if BMR members collectively feel that: it  
does not reflect BMR's stated politics.  

Women whose material is rejected by BMR will be notified by a member  
of the collective within a suitable time with a full explanation.  

We urge all contributors to be at the copy meeting.  
The copy meeting is open to all task force members, contributors  
and any other women working in any way with the paper. The meeting takes  
place at a monthly meeting at 7 pm at BMR about one week before production.  
All copy is due by the copy meeting, where all copy is discussed and de-  
cided upon. See schedule below.  

Photos and graphics will not be returned unless specifically asked for.  
Copy should be submitted in legible form, be easy to read and signed  
with a phone number.  

Copy deadlines and meeting dates are:  
February 20, March 20, April 17,  
May 22, June 19, July 17, August 21, Sept. 18 and Oct. 23.  

Note:  
By stated politics, we do not mean that every collective member  
need agree with every point made in a submitted article. We are looking  
for articles that affirm our struggle as feminists committed to radical  
social change. BMR's last political statement appeared in the September,  
1976 issue on the editorial page. Future statements will be forthcoming.  
September, 1976 issues are available through the BMR office.  

The state plan of action is the  
result of the same Public Law that  
funded the national convention in  
Houston. It is an attempt at identi-  
fying "barriers to the full equality  
of women in work, home and society  
because of their sex." Many of the  
recommendations are strictly legisla-  
tive in their approach to problems and  
solutions, but the issues are usually  
discussed in such a broad way that  
many forms of action could be used to  
draw attention to a problem and insti-  
tute solutions.  

The following are the specific task  
forces and the chairs, what they are  
generally doing in their area. To get  
a copy of the Colorado Plan of Action  
call or write the Commission on Women's  
office: State Services Building, 1525  
Sherman St., Denver, 80203. 892-2821.  

Arts and Humanities, chair Gwen  
Thoman, 364-7963. This task force  
plans to form a Women in the Arts or-  
ganization and sponsor a Women in the  
Arts conference as well as evaluating  
the status of women in the arts and  
humanities fields.  

Basic Needs, chair Cathy Ernst, 499-  
8918. Among the goals this group has  
is the development of mobile medical  
clinics to serve the medical and family  
planning needs of rural women; educa-  
tional programs about the problem of  
women alcoholics; the full implementa-  
tion of the legislation legalizing mid-  
wifery; encouraging labor and manage-  
ment to establish non-profit quality  
child care; and proposals concerning  
the special problems of older women,  
minority women and the mental health  
needs of all women.  

Education, Training and Awareness,  
chair Syble Seckinger, 377-  
elimination of sex stereotyping in the  
media and vocational education and wo-  
men in sports are the major concerns of  
this task force.  

Politics, Law and Civil Rights,  
Rhoda Baily, 750-8349. Encouraging wo-  
men to affiliate with a political party  
and take part in the political party  
process is one of the major goals of  
the implementation of this part of the  
Colorado Plan of Action. Also getting  
the Domestic Violence Act passed in the  
state house and aiding in the dissemin-  
ation of federal laws to women are the  
priorities of this task force.  

Relationships, Carol Lease, 831-9094  
and Syd Berry 94-4553. Goals include:  
researching the previously introduced  
decriminalization of prostitution  
legislation and having it re-introduced  
in the Colorado statehouse; passing  
legislation eliminating discrimination  
on the basis of sexual preference;  
supporting any and all efforts of pro-  
grams dealing with violence against wo-  
men in all of its forms; woman-batter-  
ing by husbands, lovers, pornography;  
identifying and evaluating all re-  
sources available to single parents in  
Colorado; researching Social Security  
and tax reform as it affects single  
people; child custody laws and communi-  
ty property laws in Colorado, specifi-  
cally as the Marvin decision relates to  
women's rights.  

Work, Income and Homemaking, Lynn  
Brown, 837-4138. On the job problems,  
job entry problems, setting up an "Old  
Girl's" network, flextime, job sharing,  
displaced homemaker support and other  
job-related problems are the research  
and action topics for this task force.  

International Interdependence and  
Peace, Diane Borgman, 66-0766. This  
task force is in the process of organ-  
izing itself and establishing object-  
ives, contacts and resources.  

This is just the beginning of the  
implementation of this plan. Call the  
chair of the task force that you may  
be interested in and get a schedule of  
their meetings. If a task force isn't  
working on a part of the plan that you  
would like to see being given attention,  
then get involved and do it yourself.  
Our diversity is our strength because  
it gives us a broader base from which to  
act and to acquire power.  

“Bluebird 5” Proceeds go  
to New Feminist Fund  

By Bobbe  

The Denver Feminist Bail Fund was  
set up Jan. 30 at a meeting of the  
Bluebird '5' defendants and defense  
committee. The fund, which will  
start with a $100 surplus from the  
Bluebird '5' defense fund, will be  
available to bail women out of jail  
who have been involved in a conscious  
feminist action.  

The money was raised in Denver's  
feminist community and through friends  
for the defense of the Bluebird '5',  
five women, arrested last October for  
pasting anti-porn leaflets on the  
Bluebird theater in Denver. Charges  
were dropped by the city in January.  
(See Feb. BMR).  

By the time charges were dropped,  
the Bluebird '5' defense committee had  
raised more than $650. Most of that--  
$500--was divided equally among the  
five lawyers who had been representing  
the defendants. At the Jan. 30 meeting,  
the defense committee decided to use  
$100 of the remainder for the new bail  
fund and $50 towards the defense of  
four Rochester, New York women who  
are facing trial on similar charges.  

The Rochester women--Sylvia Gasoi,  
Martha Gever, Margaret Hall and Lee  
Walker--were charged Nov. 4 with 3rd  
degree criminal mischief. They are  
accused of breaking a window of the  
Holiday Cine Theater, removing and  
destroying a poster advertising the  
current movie, Snuff, spray-painting  
“Holiday Inn Hates Women" across a  
glass door and window and chaining  
the main theater doors closed. Their  

trial begins March 8 and we wish them  
well. Right on sisters! Money for  
their defense can be sent to Roches-  
ter Women Against Violence Against  
Women, c/o New Women's Times, Inc.,  
1357 Monroe Ave., Rochester, NY.  
14618.  

The Denver Feminist Bail Fund is  
being kept in an account in the  
Colorado Feminist Federal Credit  
Union. Administrators of the account  
are Lori Bradford, Karen Martin and  
Bobbe Ross, who will be accountable  
to the community.  

In order to bail a woman out of  
jail, one of the women listed at the  
end of this article would have to  
be contacted and given full informa-  
tion. She then would have to con-  
tact five women who have worked with  
More on Page 11