Internationa

| News _

Big Mama Rag Vol. 9 No. 2

“From Meat To Liberty”: Women Workers In Poland

Newsfront International

Coverage of the strikes in Poland has been extensive. Much was written about the men who organized the general strike and fought for their union; the dock workers of Gdansk were given ample space in the Western press. Although Polish women also work in factories, organize unions, and participated in the strike, hardly a word about women workers, about the strikes they have organized, and not much on women's rights and demands could be found in the Western press. The name and picture of Anna Walentynowicz was printed, but she always appeared in the shadow of Lech Walesa, the male hero of the Polish working class.

It was the firing of Anna Walentynowicz that caused the Polish strikes of 1970, and it was she, together with Walesa, who organized the union movement. As for the other Polish women? Over five million of them are workers—they make up over 42% of the total workforce. Working in the docks, however, is a man's job, and since the shipping industry brings more money to Poland than do the textile workers, teachers, health workers, and bureaucrats, who are mostly women, one heard and read about the men only.

Poland is not only a country of striking men. In Lodz, Poland's second largest industrial town and the home of the country's largest textile plant, women textile workers went on strike to protest the disappearance of meat a month before the strikes in Gdansk. The slogan of those days was "From Meat to Liberty." Later, when the men in the shipyards decided to stop working, the machines in the textile plants were shut down too. The Gdansk strike committee added five demands to their original 16-point program only after women workers forced them to do so. Point 17 asks for better child care facilities for working mothers (working fathers in Poland do not have to worry about such things) and Point 18 asks for a paid maternity leave of three years.

A LOOK AT WOMEN'S LIFE SINCE 1945

In 1939 Poland counted 34 million inhabitants, but only 23 million were left at the end of World War II. Approximately 13 million were women, and more than half of the women over 25 could neither read nor write, having grown up on farms where there was never the time or opportunity to attend schools. The new Polish government, having decided to turn the country into a predominantly industrial nation, badly needed skilled workers. Most of the new workers were recruited among rural women, who were promised a brighter future in the cities and factories. Men and women have been equals under Polish law since 1952 and official publications often deal with the question of women's emancipation. However, these writings are limited to three main areas: women in production, in the family, and their role in society. There is hardly ever any talk of women's sexuality or theoretical discussion about feminism and self-realization or the political organizing of women.

WOMEN IN PRODUCTION

The enormous emphasis placed on providing education for women during the last 35 years has eliminated illiteracy among women; more than half of all Polish women have high school diplomas. But women still work mostly in fields that have traditionally been considered "female jobs." If they find work in other fields, it is usually in lower paying, lower prestige jobs. Men and women with the same educational backgrounds will end up at different steps in their careers: men as managers of the factories and representatives of the government, women as the workers. Women are supposed to look for social gratification primarily outside the workplace, and the family is still seen as the ideal place for women's self-realization.

WOMEN IN FAMILIES

The Polish state officially condemns the patriarchal family, claiming to have established a new kind of family based on a partnership in which men and women share the same responsibilities. A survey of young Poles made in 1977 showed that Polish youth cannot envision a future without a family, and that family is probably more the traditional type of family, based on a woman's double work day. Wives spend an average of at least four hours a day doing housework; only 60% of their husbands help even occasionally. The major burden of raising children also falls on women. The demands of the Gdansk workers reflect the fact that there is not enough child care available, and young mothers often have to go back to work because families cannot be supported solely on men's incomes.

Currently women can take a three-year leave to care for their children, but they are not paid for this time period. It is important that paid maternity leave for the first three years of child raising is being asked for, but it says something about the level of consciousness of Polish society that this paid leave will apply only to women.

WOMEN IN THE AUGUST 1980 STRIKES

Feminism was not the issue of the 1980 strikes. The issues were primarily economic hardship and the desire for a better life. Based on the coverage that appeared in the Western press, one would think this better life is available only to men. In 1976, when women took to the streets to protest increased food prices, 17 people paid with their lives. 1976 laid the groundwork for 1980. During the 1980 strikes women brought food to the factory gates, but this was not considered as crucial as sitting in meetings figuring out strategies for the strike. In 1980 the issue was food, and women recognized this, standing in lines to shop for their families every day. A strike in the shipyards is heroic and worth reporting in the press, but the many women who participated in the strike committees and the everyday efforts of other Polish women cannot be overlooked. During the strike female newspaper carriers stopped delivering papers. Their reason: Newspapers print only lies.

Abortion In Mexico

Newsfront International

In Mexico City's Sonora market, a woman with $4 can purchase a popular powder to help induce natural abortion. For another $5 she can buy 12 quinine tablets which vendors claim will remove the fertilized egg, or other occult potions advertised to "drive away the demon which has filtered into the holes left by the fetus." Since abortion is still outlawed in their country, poor Mexican women frequently must resort to folk remedies or risk infection and death by going to midwives who perform crude operations under unsanitary conditions. These are the only choices available to the 90% of Mexican women who cannot afford $200 to $750 for a covert abortion in a private hospital.

A 1976 study indicates that 1.2 million Mexican women (out of a total population of 65 million) seek abortions each year. Because only 10% are performed under safe medical conditions, an estimated 100,000 women die annually from complications arising from improper techniques.

Since its first demonstrations at the Chamber of Deputies in 1977, a large movement of Mexican women has pushed to legalize abortion. Although a "Voluntary Maternity" bill, drawn up by various feminist groups, was presented in diluted form to the legislature by leftist deputies in 1979, there has still been no action on it. But there has been intense debate, some say the most heated since the leftists were admitted to the Chamber in 1976.

The bill met strong opposition from the rightwing National Action Party (PAN) and from Catholic action groups. Recently, posters appeared on Mexico City streets with photos of the 12 Communist deputies who support the "Voluntary Maternity" bill, captioned "Here are the infant killers." They are signed "Youth for Life," an anti-abortion group known to have ties to far-right groups accused of attacking and maintaining hit lists of leftists. Excelsior columnist Manuel Buendia maintains that the names written beside each deputy's photo are expressly to enable fanatics to identify them on the street and to possibly facilitate their execution. The deputies identified on the poster are concerned for their lives. Similar posters appearing years ago with the faces of fugitive guerillas resulted in the death of an innocent look-alike.

While government health agency officials have repudiated these attacks, few have come out publicly in favor of abortion. Although Mexico's national health bureaucracy continues to run family planning programs, the Mexican Surgery Academy has come out flatly against decriminalization. Some doctors ingeniously take the stance that contraception is already available to prevent unwanted pregnancies, rendering abortion unnecessary.

Yet, reports from doctors who regularly perform abortions reveal the real situation. One surgeon who has practiced abortions for ten years said, "I would like to see the faces of those who publicly decry abortion and later—although belonging to the Order of Columbus (an anti-abortion group)—pad their own salaries with clandestine operations... Can you ignore the economic problems which one more child causes in a family struggling to offer a good home to the three or four it already has?" Another doctor said, "I have spent 20 years doing this and I've seen it all... It's a very curious issue. The authorities refuse to admit that sex is as much a symbol of the times as money. They prohibit abortion, but not pornography, the night centers, erotic films... But the authorities who make these decisions are the same ones who later send their daughters and wives to the clinics."

Voting on the "Voluntary Maternity" bill has been deferred until later this year. A pluralist committee of deputies has been established to discuss the matter with medical, legal, university, and religious groups. Due to the strength of the anti-abortion forces, and to their popularity in an overwhelmingly Catholic country, the bill's chances seem dubious. The government stance has been extremely negative with Lopez Portillo terming abortion "a criminal, abhorrent practice."

However, private clinics and hospitals continue to perform abortions relatively free of harassment due to the status of their small, wealthy clientele. And although representatives of the state express strong moral objections, economics seem to be at the heart of the issue. The real problem for authorities lies in abortion's widespread acceptance and practice, implying state responsibility for covering the costs under the national health insurance plan.