Kathy Kahn, Coors Strike Supporter

Woman Labor Activist Harassed

by Deb

Kathy Kahn, folksinger and labor
activist whose struggle for child custody
was printed in the last issue of BMR, is
now struggling against a television news
reporters' accusations that she is
connected with the New World Liberation
Front in Denver. The New World Liberation
Front (NWLF) is a radical group based in
San Francisco which has claimed
responsibility for several bombings of
Coors plants recently and for other
bombings over the past few years.

A federal Grand Jury is currently
investigating the New World Liberation
Front in San Francisco. Therefore it is
possible that this news investigation is
the first step in a process leading to
the calling of a Grand Jury in Denver
against labor, and possibly left and
feminist activists.

On September 23, 1977, on two T.V.
news broadcasts on Channel 4, KOA news
in Denver, reporter Pete Webb accused
Kathy of being the “Colorado contact"
for the New World Liberation Front.

He also said that “close police
scrutiny of Kathy is the only thing that
has prevented the NWLF from aiming
further bomb attacks against the Adolph
Coors Company in Colorado." He said
that if he could find these connections
through his news investigation, he was
sure that the police could also.

Kathy Kahn is not giving in to these
acts of harassment and personal attack. 
She is consulting her lawyers regarding
filing libel charges against Pete Webb
and Channel 4 News. She has the support
of friends and strikers.

On Friday, September 30, a support
group of Coors Boycott and Strike
Support Coalition members picketed
outside of Channel 4 News and held a
press conference. They called Kathy
"one of the hardest working members of
the (Boycott and Strike Support) Coalition."
They said "It is typical sensationalism
(of the news media) to spend tremendous
amounts of time on the useless actions
of the NWLF while ignoring such history
making events as the Labor Day March and
Rally in Support of the Brewery Workers
local 366. KOA diverts the public's
attention away from the issues of the
strike and nothing could be more in
the interest of Joe Coors."

Joe Coors, in fact, is supported by
and working with the FBI and the news
media. The FBI is training Coors
guards and Golden, Colorado police to
defend the Coors Co. against bomb
attacks. The Golden police have beaten
up and arrested several strikers and
supporters for "trespassing."

All the news coverage has avoided
the issues behind the strike. It is
significant that Coors Co. is a sponsor
for Channel 4 News. It is conceivable
that Coors was behind the investigation
of Kathy Kahn.

Know Your Rights

Do Not

1) You have the right to refuse to
answer questions and to refuse to
talk to the FBI and police. If they
come to your home or job, just say,
"Please leave. I do not want to talk
to you."

2) Do not tell the FBI or police
that you "Don't know." If this is
false you can be prosecuted for giving
false information to law enforcement
officials.

3) You can be prosecuted for giving
false information (perjury if a sworn
statement) if you make a mistake in
the information you give. It is
better to say nothing.

4) If you receive a subpoena to a
Grand Jury, you must respond to it.
Call an attorney immediately. Good
attorneys can be obtained through
Woman to Woman-320-5972, or the National
Lawyers Guild-320-4071.

It is felt that Joe Coors will try
to harass labor activists in any
way possible. He is known for his
violent hatred of labor unions; he
is trying to smash the union and the
strike and keep the union out of the
brewery. He has huge economic power.

If a grand jury is called in Denver,
it is felt that it will be focused on
labor activists more than at the left.
Joe Coors may be desperate because
the national boycott has been so
successful. In California, the sales
of Coors beer have dropped 20% since
the strike began last April.

There has been one bombing attempt
in Colorado since the strike began.
The bomb was placed at a Coors
distributorship (where beer is stored)
and did not explode. The NWLF claimed
responsibility for the bombing.

Kathy stated in a press release after
the news broadcast that "I am not now,
nor have I ever been the contact person
for the New World Liberation Front or
any other organization. It appears
that Pete Webb has joined forces with
Joe Coors and the FBI in an attempt
to destroy the effectiveness of the
strike and boycott against Coors Brewery."

Kathy's supporters say, “We will not
let this display of incompetent and
slanderous journalism get in the way
of the boycott...We demand equal time
to respond to these false accusations."

Kathy Kahn has been very active in
the strike against Coors. Since last
April when the strike began, she has
been a leader of the Coors Strike Support
Coalition. She helped organize the Texas
Boycott. She performs music on the picket
line and at rallies and has written
songs about the strike. She made a record
for the strike called "Coors Brewery
Strike Songs." It is available for $2
by writing to Struggle Records, 1601 E.
14th Ave, #8, Denver, Colo. 80218.

Talk To FBI

5) Remember that non-collaboration
protects you, your friends, and the
movement. The only way to stop Grand
Jury abuse, jailing of persons who
have committed no crime, is to refuse
to collaborate and thus make this tactic
useless to the state.

As a grand jury witness you have
extremely limited rights. A grand jury
has the power to force you to talk. If
you refuse to talk on the basis that
what you say may incriminate you
(pleading the fifth amendment) then
the DA can ask the court to give you
immunity.

Immunity means that what you say to
the grand jury will not be used against
you. If you are given immunity and
decide to talk, you may end up giving
the government information that could
put other sisters in jail. If you refuse
to talk after you have been given
immunity then the DA asks the court to
find you in contempt. If you are found
in contempt, you may end up going to
jail for the life of the grand jury
(grand juries are empaneled for 18
months).

In the long run, it is better not to
talk to the grand jury. The risk of
giving valuable information is too
high. The recent history of grand juries
over the last few years has proven
this to be true.

In front of a grand jury you are not
entitled to the protections accorded to
a defendant in a criminal trial because
you have not been charged with a crime.
You need not be told the purpose of the
investigation or even if you are a
possible target of the investigation.
You cannot have a lawyer with you inside
the hearing room, although the prosecutor
can subject you to unlimited questioning.
No judge is in the room to rule on the
legality of the proceedings.

All those present in the grand jury
room except the witness are sworn to
secrecy, but under an exception written
into the rules the prosecutor is allowed
to feed information to the government
memory banks and the FBI.

PETE WEBB
LIES ABOUT
KATHY KAHN

WHAT ELSE
DOES HE
LIE ABOUT?

The only defense against a Grand
Jury is to refuse to testify so that
they cannot use us against each other
in any way. Feminists have been harassed
by Grand Juries in many communities
around the country: Lexington, Ky, New
Haven, Conn., Seattle, Wa., etc. Women
have gone to jail for refusing to testify.
Grand Juries seem to pick on women in
the left who lack support in the community
or who have children who could be taken
from them.

If the Man does come down on us, we
must join together to support each
other. When women in Philadelphia
heard that there might be a Grand Jury
they united together in such determination
that the government saw that a Grand Jury
could not intimidate them and no one
was jailed. We can do the same in Denver.

IF THE FBI COMES, DO NOT TALK TO
THEM. TELL THEM TO GO AWAY!

Write to Kathy Kahn; she needs your
support. Write her at 1601 E. 14th Ave
#8, Denver, Colorado 80218.

Majority

“WE'RE FEMINISTS” Report
Eve Arroid Sally Maxson
Sonja Buliaty Barbara Morgan
DENA Suzanne Opton
Abigail Heyman Lida Raymond
Helen Levitt Eva Rubinstein
Mary Ellen Mark Sherry Suris

WOMEN—IMAGES BY 12 WOMEN PHOTOGRAPHERS,
1978 Wall Calendar, 12½" x 9¾". of all reproduction.
Hand-lettered, with plenty of space for writing.
Also available: 12 MASTER IMAGES — Bresson,
Burden, Cunning, Konece, Smith, Steiner.