Terra

Life today is crazy. Profit rather
than the fulfillment of the people’s
needs, is the driving force. Hierar-
chies of power lead to hierarchies of
reward and lifestyle—differentiations
which lead to greed and discontent.
With large concentrations of population
come more problems of interaction,
fear, and sensory overstimulation.
Traffic jams, meaningless, boring
jobs sap energy. Rapes increase.
Rapid changes in technology are echoed
by rapid moral and lifestyle changes,
with resulting confusion for many,
and conflicts between most.

Such a life creates or aggravates
certain needs. The need for personal
contact is aggravated by alienating
jobs, misinterpreted differentiations
between affection and sexual desire,
and the isolation of apartment com-
plexes. Emotional release becomes
more difficult to attain when we must
control our feelings towards bosses,
must be careful not to get too in-
volved in passing relationships, and
must speed from activity to activity.
The need to feel control over one's
own life becomes urgently important
after having been violated by rape or
robbery, or through having to do what-
ever we're told at work every day.

All of the changes happening leave
many with the need to reorder our
lives—changing jobs, acquiring or
leaving lovers, or facing the death
of someone loved. All of these added
hassles put even more importance and
strain on the need to deal with our
interpersonal relationships. Some
times it gets to the point of needing
to connect with some reality that we
can both live with, and still survive
with in today's world.

These problems may reach out-of-con-
trol proportions because we do not
take the time or know how to be aware
of our feelings. We may be hecticly
rushing or watching TV during all our
leisure hours.

Another reason a crisis may build
up is communications problems. Even
if we are aware, if we find it diffi-
cult to express what we think or feel
we are bound to have added frustra-
tion. Others of us may use inappro-
priate ways to express our feelings
which may alienate us from other peo-
ple or land us in jail.

Being aware and able to communicate
necessitates an accepting attitude
towards the feelings and thoughts we
might have, and enough self-esteem to
risk criticism or rejection for what
we may say.

Another necessity to meet our needs
is knowing of possible ways we would
feel comfortable fulfilling them.
This is why therapy is such a popular
solution to dealing with problems to-
day—it is well publicized and sanc-
tioned by authorities in our society.

Not believing that we can solve our
problems by ourselves or with the
help of friends (rather than profes-
sionals) is a key to how therapy works
and how it is often perverted. Al-
though studies have shown therapy to
be no more effective for "curing" peo-
ple than if they just live through
the problem, people believe that ther-
apists can help them more than other
people could.

Admitting that one has a problem can
be the first step to solving it.

Therapy Not Sole Answer

and a problem concerns several mem-
bers. But while dealing with inter-
personal problems face-to-face may be
scary, it may be the most honest and
effective method.

Those that don't have friends—that
is a problem in itself which might be
dealt with by one of the other alter-
natives. In a crisis when a friend
is not available, a crisis referral
line may be helpful as an immediate
help.

A variation on therapy may be another
way to attack a problem. Short-
term, specific classes where people
are taught skills to help them get
their needs fulfilled would avoid
heavy dependency trips and put more
of the responsibility on the individ-
ual. There are such classes already
available for such skills as problem
solving, expressing emotions, assert-
iveness, communication skills, and
special groups for transitions such
as divorce, mourning, and having a
new child. Specific classes would al-
so require that participants had named
a specific goal to work towards.
Another possibility is getting in-
volved in a community project. Polit-
ical projects may offer new definitions
of an individual's situation
which may help externalize bad feel-
ings, showing the origin of problems
to be the oppressive environment. Ex-
ternalizing problems may become dys-
functional however, if it results in
only complaining about being oppressed
and not doing anything to counteract
it. In this form, it can seriously
drag down the project.

Such thinking may also become just
another way to avoid responsibility
for making personal changes. However,
when concrete changes are worked to-
wards, the actual conditions that lead
to craziness in us all are grad-
ually eliminated. Such work also
offers the feeling of accomplishment
and pride in knowing we can do our
part in making important things hap-
pen, returning control over part of
our own lives.

Also included by some political pro-
jects is criticism/self-criticism.

Boulder WIT House Functioning

On October 1st the Women's Re-
source Center in Boulder opens the
doors on an Emergency House for wo-
men in crisis. Battered wives, wo-
men who are going through a crisis
of separation or divorce, rape vic-
tims, recently widowed women—any
woman who is in trouble or in need
or maybe just a bit lost may find
refuge at Emergency House.

The house, located in downtown
Boulder, is leased from the First
United Methodist Church of Boulder.
Funds for the Emergency Housing Pro-
gram were raised over the past
eighteen months by contributions
from individual businesses and or-
ganizations in Boulder and by a
matching grant from the Horizons
Project of the Colorado Centennial-
Bicentennial Commission. In addi-
tion, Bill Bowles of Flatirons Fur-
niture donated all the furniture for
the house, and the Boulder County
Community Design Group is working on
a remodeling plan to further enhance
its use.

Director of the House, Ms. Pam
Hamm says the haven will be tempor-
ary in nature, with maximum stays of
two weeks. Up to eight women and
three or four children will be able
to stay at one time. The refuge
provides room and board
(cost is $6 a day), support, and
some counseling. A full-time
counselor will live in the house and
“volunteer advocates" will be as-
signed to each resident to help her
get around to the human and social
service agencies she might need.

Day care services for her children
will be available. The house won't
accept women with drug, alcohol, or
psychiatric problems because they
can find help elsewhere in Boulder.
Neither does it encourage women to
stay while they look for employment
in Boulder.

Women who need temporary housing
of an emergency situation are di-
rected to the house by police, the
clergy, other social service agen-
cies, and a direct call to WRC's
main office at 1406 Pine St. (447-
9670). The philosophy of the Emer-
gency Housing Program is to deal
with the immediate crisis a woman
may be undergoing while providing
a supportive environment for her to
look around for long-term solutions
to her problems.

The program provided emergency
housing for over thirty women over
the summer months in another loca-
tion. One of the residents was a
young woman with an eight-month-old
baby who, battered by her husband,
had left him and was filing for di-
vorce. The WRC found her an attor-
ney and directed her to medical care,
birth control information, social
service emergency money, and food
stamps. Another, older woman had
moved in with her college-age dau-
ghter and her roommates and, when
all found the situation intolerable,

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 9

whereby interpersonal processes and
communications are discussed and
everyone has a chance to learn to im-
prove her skills in these areas. Such
a process would also guard against
personal problems impeding the project.

Just becoming educated in feminist
theory and women's history may be
helpful to a woman's self-esteem. By
doing so we realize that our history
has been hidden and perverted and
that women can do and have done impor-
tant things since time began.

Consciousness-raising groups also
help redefine what may be personal
problems to some into social problems,
and thus make them something to be
fought together rather than alone.
CTR groups usually make a point of
giving everyone the opportunity to
express her thoughts and feelings.
Thus they are also a good place to
practice communication skills.

Physical activity can be a good way
to release built-up tensions, to pro-
mote health and the awareness of our
bodies. Physical symptoms are important
reminders that tension is building
up and that the situation may lead
to bigger problems if not changed.
In the meantime, and for tensions that
can't be changed (such as a lousy but
necessary job), activities like danc-
ing, yoga, exercises, and massage help
keep tension from reaching the bursting
point, and make life more livable.
The attitude towards such activities
makes a big difference—if viewed as
another thing that has to be done, or
if a competitive or non-self-accepting
attitude prevails it may be just another
added stress.

Another helpful skill to release
tensions is meditation/relaxation
techniques. It's possible to get the
relaxation without big expense or un-
necessary patriarchal spiritual trips—
there are many books and magazine
articles describing how to get into a
relaxed, "alpha" state. There are
also classes and tape recordings on
relaxation techniques available, and

a woman-inspired technique called
domancraft. Such techniques are not
meant as ultimate solutions, but as
ways to release tensions to a point
where one may more clearly deal with
the situations leading to those ten-
sions.

Some women are gaining in self-awareness
and self-esteem by getting into
spirituality. Others gain it through
creative endeavors. Just as there
must be fifty ways to leave your lover
there must be as many positive ways
to deal with problems that would
otherwise build up into major mental
health catastrophes.

stayed at Emergency House until she
found a job that would support her
living alone.

Another of the short-term resi-
dents was a woman who claimed that
her husband tried to run her down
with their car. In fear for her
life she hesitated to call the po-
lice and sign a formal complaint.

Besides an Emergency House for wo-
men in crisis, the WRC offers em-
ployment counseling, support
groups, workshops and programs on
topics of interest to minority wo-
men and single parents, and infor-
mation and referral on social ser-
vice agencies in the area.

WOMAN'S NEWS

Martial Arts, Self Defense & Competitive Sports

subscriptions in the U.S. $1 year
institutions 2 years

9 East Sixth Street
New York, NY 10003