Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 5

struggle = Rape And Patriarchy

Fran Day

(Editor's Note: This month part two of a two-part struggle column, Rape and
Patriarchy will be printed. Fran will discuss The Judicial System and Strat-
egies Against Rape. Last month she discussed The Crime, The Victim, The Rap-
ist, The Police and The Medical Complex.)

The Law and the Courts

"What was the defendant wearing?" That was Ma. Freeman's Lawyer.
"I don't know.”
"You mean to say this man raped you and you don't know what he was
wearing?" He snickered as if I had raped Mr. Freeman.
"Do you know if you were raped?"

~Maya Angelou, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings

What does the law say about rape? Myth has it that America is the land of
liberty and justice for all. However, like the police and the medical com-
plex, the law is "rooted in the patriarchal system...masses of women have
fared disastrously in the courts." (Gager) Rape is the only crime where the
rights of the victim and the accused are reversed. The overanxious father-
cock attitude of the judicial system goes to great lengths to protect the
rapist. The victim, on the other hand, is forced to publicly prove her own
innocence beyond a reasonable doubt. Blatantly or through innuendo, doubt is
cast upon the victim; her behavior is often interpreted as being provocative
or wanton, or she is accused of lying or falsely identifying the rapist.

The laws governing rape differ from state to state and reflect regional
attitudes and prejudices. Feminists have waged active campaigns to change
laws and judicial proceedings. "Over half the states have made some reforms
in their rape laws, with the most frequent change being a restriction on the
admission of evidence about the victim's previous sexual history." (Deckard)
Oregon, New Jersey, Nebraska and Delaware are the only states that permit a
woman to charge her husband with rape. In the only case that has been tried
under this new law, the husband was acquitted. Admission of evidence about
the wife's, but not the husband's past sexual history, led the jury to this
incredible verdict. Rape laws and judicial attitudes in most states continue
to be encrusted with Biblical euphemisms, antiquated language and legal mumbo
jumbo. The racist attitude of the lawyer who said, “Rape is a way of life
with them--the Nigras and the Chicanos, I mean. Their women are fair game,"
(Gager) is prevalent.

Now REPEAT
AFTER ME

SWEET LAND OF LIBERTY
OF THEE I SING
LAND WHERE MY FATHERS
DIED, LAND OF
THE FREE

MOUNTAINSIDE.
LET FREEDOM RING.

The 1976 Colorado Revised Statutes have eliminated the word “rape” from
the Criminal Code and replaced it with three kinds of unlawful sexual assault.

1. Sexual assault in the first degree, the most serious, is defined as
sexual penetration (intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio, analingus, or anal
intercourse) of the victim if the victim's submission is caused by: a) phys-
ical force or violence, b) threat of death, bodily injury, extreme pain, fu-
ture retaliation or kidnapping, c) use of drugs or intoxicants against her
will. Sexual assault in the first degree is a class 3 felony and the penalty
is 5 to 40 years imprisonment. If the attacker is helped by one or more per-
sons, uses a deadly weapon or if the victim is seriously injured, the assault
is considered a class 2 felony and carries a 10 to 15 years penalty.

2. Sexual assault in the second degree is defined as sexual penetration
of a victim whose submission is caused by means other than those prohibited
in the first degree assault statute. Sexual intrusion (the insertion of any
object other than the attacker's tongue, mouth or penis into the genital or
anal opening of the victim) is also prohibited. Second degree sexual assault
protects a) the victim who mistakenly believes the attacker is her spouse,
b) the willing victim under the age of 15 years, c) the victim less than 18
years whose attacker is her guardian, d) the victim detained in legal custody
or in a hospital or institution whose attacker is her supervisor, and e) the
victim subjected to improper medical examination or treatment. The penalty
for second degree assault is an indeterminate sentence up to 10 years. The
recipient of an indeterminate sentence is eligible for parole immediately.

In practice, most convicted offenders serve nine months to several years.

3. Sexual assault in the third degree involves touching the victim's
breast or genitals without the victim's consent. This is a misdemeanor and
carries a sentence of up to two years in the county jail and a possible fine
of up to $5000. (Colorado, Revised Statutes Pertaining to Criminal Law)

Colorado rape laws consider the victim's prior sexual history irrelevant
except when: a) the history involved the rapist, or b) evidence such as
semen, pregnancy or disease is or is not traceable to the defendant. Colo-
rado has, as do most of the other states, the "marital exception" clause
which states that the sexual assault offenses do not apply to acts between
persons who are married, either statutorily, putatively, or by common law.

The legal procedure is exceedingly slow; some cases take up to five years
to come to trial. Victims have to appear in court time after time (some have
appeared as many as 20 times), prepared to testify. Postponement after post-
ponement understandably produces acute anxiety and depression in many victims.
In addition, victims are often plagued by threats or anonymous telephone calls
and letters; the rapist is often out on bail.

The trial itself is another nightmare in the seemingly endless series of
traumas the victim who decides to press charges must undergo. The impersonal,
ritualized court procedures, the voyeuristic spectators, the ambiguous legal
language and the accusatory atmosphere multiply the victim's ordeal. "...the
burden of proof in a rape trial is on the victim...the trial comes down to
a question of ...who does the jury or judge...choose to believe." (Gager)

Four major issues are involved in most states: consent, corroboration,
chastity and the past crimes of the defendant.

Consent: Rape is the only crime in which consent is an issue. The law
expects a woman to prove she did not consent by resisting the attack to a
point short of endangering her life. Insufficient resistance, the determina-
tion of which is highly subjective, means that the woman consented. Thou-
sands of rapists have been allowed to go free by police, juries and judges
who have decided arbitrarily that the victim did not resist ‘enough'." (Gager)

The myth that a woman cannot be raped has been perpetuated by such court-
room "greats" as Clarence Darrow, who “allegedly attempted to demonstrate
this in court by holding a cup in a mobile hand and instructing someone to
insert a pencil into the cup." (Russell) Diana Russell, feminist writer, was
subjected to the same "game" on a TV program in 1972. The demonstration
clearly overlooks the fact that it would be easy to get the pencil in the cup
if one used a gun or knife, beat the holder of the cup or threatened to kill
the person if they didn't allow the pencil to be inserted.

Corroboration: Corroboration includes: medical evidence and testimony,
injuries to the victim, promptness of complaint, emotional condition of the
victim and the rapist, conduct of the rapist at the time of arrest, lack of
motive to falsify and opportunity of the rapist to attack. The emphasis here
is on the victim's behavior and condition. Often there is no clear-cut corro-
borative evidence; this allows the rapist to plead consent and be acquitted.
The demands for reform by feminists have led all but eleven states to repeal
the discriminatory corroboration requirement.

Chastity: The question of the admissibility of evidence about the vic-
tim's previous sexual history has been debated for more than a century. Un-
til recently the opinion that had prevailed is as follows: “A sharp distinc-
tion should be made...between someone who has already submitted herself to
the lewd embraces of another and the coy and modest female severely chaste
and instinctively shuddering at the thought of impurity." (Gager) Even in
the states that have amended their chastity requirements, slick defense law-
yers frequently introduce questions designed to plant suspicion against the
victim... Most judges do not "use their discretionary powers to protect the
victim from irrelevant but prejudicial questions." (Clark) Even if the
prosecutor is alert and voices objection, the focus has been shifted from
the rapist's behavior to the victim's character. This unscrupulous court-
room behavior is especially rampant when the victim is a woman of color,
divorced, a prostitute, stripper, cocktail waitress or any other woman who
is viewed by the patriarchy as inferior.

Past crimes of the defendant: The fourth issue, past crimes of the defen-
dant, is also used in the rapist's favor. Evidence about other sex crimes
the rapist committed against another woman at another time is usually not ad-
missible. Thus, the jury is told about the victim's prior sexual history,
but not about the rapist's prior sex charges, even if they are identical to
the case in question. Rapists tend to repeat their crime using the same meth-
od of operation each time.

Nowhere in the patriarchal flimflam surrounding the aftermath of rape is
the aggrandizement of maleness more evident: the fathers are protecting the
son from the witch/devil/Amazon they fear in all women.

Only 3% of rapists are convicted; 97% of the victims have to live with the
knowledge that their rapists are free. Rape is the charge juries are most
likely to acquit. Harsh penalties work largely to deter juries from convict-
ing. A high percentage of men convicted of rape receive probation. Discrim-
inatory sentencing has resulted in the stiffest penalties going to black men
who were convicted of raping white women. (Brownmiller) Between 1930 and 1967,
405 of the 455 men executed for rape were black; two were from other minori-
ties. (Davis)

Jules Feiffer/Black Panther/LNS

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE