10

Iran/Afghanistan

CONTINUED PAGE 9  
Khomeini would have frequently  
enforced rules which arise from their  
own male consciousness and have no  
relation whatsoever to Islamic phil-  

the women  

of  

the republic  
the source  

as much as possible, women ought  
to be kept away from society (men’s  
remain in their proper places as  
babymakers and household slaves. Ac-  
companying this concept are all  
traditional justifications of God's  
will, women’s greatest contribution  
to society, what is natural, women's  
superior qualities as housekeeper  
and mother, women's inferior emotion-  
al and women's lack of ability.  
Such rationalizations, however, for  
only the sake of  

Underlying all these fairy tales  

the fundamental concept that every  
woman is regarded as the private prop-  
erty of one man, either her father,  
husband or brother. The man is the  
owner and the woman is owned. All  
efforts of the "legal system" of the  
Islamic Republic of Iran have been  
directed towards the maintenance of  
ownership, control and proper function-  
ing of that private property. Any  
apportionment of power between  

sexes would give legitimacy to the  
concept that women do in fact have  
rights. This, in turn, would threaten  
the entire system of male privilege  
which Iranian men have so long enjoyed.  
Male actions based on the projection  
of guilt (women are the source of evil)  
are subsequent to the concept of dom-  
inance over private property (social-  
ization), which appears as well to be  
subsequent to psychological organiza-  
tion resulting from male biological  
and physiological characteristics.  

The oppression of women must be under-  
stood in this context rather than by  
the inane rationalizations offered by  
the various institutions of the male  
power structure.  

While patronizingly praising our  
"lionhearted women" and "their glor-  
ious contribution to our revolution",  
revolutionary leaders have quickly  
swept away what meager rights Iranian  
women had attained. The nation was  
informed that proper dress for Islam-  
ic women ought to be the chador. This  
piece of clothing can best be descri-  
bed as a big black sheet draped around  
the body from head to toe with only  
the eyes and nose exposed. The reason  
for this mode of dress, we are told,  
is that it is necessary for women to hide  
their sexuality so as not to arouse  
sexual desires in men. Thus, a com-  
mon pattern, women are punished as the  
cause of “evil” thoughts and actions  
of men.  

Women are forbidden from “walking  
around half nude" in their bathing  
suits and so are forced to go bathing  
in full dress. Men have received no  
such restrictions on clothing, bath-  
ing attire or otherwise. Mixed bathing  
is prohibited by Islam, it is said,  
which will not allow men and women  
“to enjoy themselves in this evil way.  
As a result of this prohibition, ra-  
ther than attempt an equal division,  
nearly all swimming pools and beaches  
have been reserved for the enjoyment  
of men only.  

Segregation has created a far great-  
er catastrophe in education, however.  
All schools have been forced to segre-  
gate male and female students into  
separate sections. For female students  
in integrated settings, this has meant  
displacement from the regular educa-  
tional buildings and relocation into  
substandard buildings. Female students  

are forced to spend even at a  

cutting and styling hair  

Photography has  

2159, been  
it is preferred  
women not be seen at all. Women graduates of  
school have been refused recog-  

In fact,  

nition as judges. They were barred from  
the ceremony that their male classmates  
attended with hardly any notice taken  
by the new male judges. (So much  
for the future of law and justice in  
Iran.) The Islamic Republic of Iran  
stated that it considers women to be  
too emotional and indecisive to ful-  
fill such responsibilities and suggests  
that no more women consider the pur-  
suit of such careers.  

In nearly every case, women have  
received harsher punishments for  
“crimes committed" than men involved  
in the same activities. Two women were  
sentenced to life imprisonment for  
nothing more than “anti-Islamic, anti-  
revolutionary" activity of distri-  
buting socialist party leaflets. Their  
male companions remain to this date  
uncharged and unconvicted. Numerous  
women have been flogged for adultery  
and at least three women have been  
executed. Men, on the other hand, are  
allowed to have four wives and to ac-  
quire any number of "temporary wives"  
in addition. Women, denied such privi-  
leges, and even refused the right of  
divorce without the husband's consent,  
are being executed for adultery in-  
stead. Several women have been exe-  
cuted for prostitution, not to mention  
the numbers of severe prison sentences  
and the flogging. All the while their  
male customers have remained free as  
the wind.  

Such acts of repression officially  
sanctioned and viciously executed by  
the government have exposed once more  
the brutality of the "beast" hiding  
just below the surface of civiliza-  
tion. The adoption of such hateful  
and destructive attitudes and prac-  
tices towards women has, by proxy,  
approved a countrywide epidemic of  
vigilante activities and personal ven-  
dettas of hate against women. At work,  
women are harassed by bosses who are  
free to take it upon themselves to  
economically enforce any bizarre re-  
quirements, behavior, or scrutiny they  
personally deem appropriate. On the  
streets, women are confronted and  
attacked by any males claiming to be  
representatives of God involved in  
carrying out God's will. In the home,  

every woman is daily exposed to the  
idiosyncrasies of her very own male  
tyrant who often needs only such  
excuses as those offered by the gov-  
ernment to justify the release of a  
whole new torrent of abuses. Such  
beastly behavior has continued without  
prosecution by the law. Further, it  
has continued without even reprimand.  
It is rather as though the government  
has approved of such behavior whole-  
heartedly. Iranian women are without  
recourse. Women are at the mercy of  
whatever male they encounter. They  
remain totally outside of the protec-  
tion of the law.  

It might be said that the experience  
of the Iranian women is a bit extreme.  
It is not: Forms of oppression vary.  
Charades of justice are ritualized,  
but the results are nonetheless the  
same: the exclusion of women from  
power. Moreover, the pattern of be-  
trayal is universal. Women's help is  
needed in order to achieve victory  
in a battle of men against men. In  
order to secure women's help, males  
in both sides pretend to be concerned  
about the plight of women and  
promise to direct society towards  
equality for women. Once the battle  

is over, no matter which group of males  

wins, males assume all positions of  
power. Women are then offered token-  
isms, which in the reality of power  

are meaningless, for equality means  
only the equal distribution of power  
at every level of human existence;  
nothing short of that will do.  

Yet revolutions and wars cannot  
succeed without the support of women.  
Nor can any modern government continue  
without the implied support (the  
work) of fifty percent of its citizens.  
It is quite likely that women in many  
countries are dissatisfied with their  
positions, and yet they continue to  
support their governments. Surrounded  
by the structures of the male society  
and submerged in a sea of male propa-  
ganda, women have believed the lies  
of their inferiority and they too have  
imagined other issues to be more  
important than themselves. In succumb-  
ing to male propaganda, women are un-  
able to perceive their true condition  
or their commonality with other women.  
In supporting national integrity a-  
gainst attacks of real or imaginary  
foreign aggressors, for example, wom-  
en are unable to realize that a na-  
tional boundary is only a division  

of one patriarchy from another patriar-  
chy, both sides exploiting women to  
achieve the same results. In support-  
ing what they believe to be their re-  
ligion, women are unable to see that  
they are only defending one philoso-  

So I think it's essential that  
women pay careful attention to  
patriarchal politics, if only so  
that we are not taken in by fine  
words and empty promises. It hurts  
me to hear women extolling politics  
and politicians that oppress women,  
in the name of the "people" who turn  
out to be 99% male. But situations  
like this also reinforce my commit-  
ment to a feminist revolution that  
will free women and to a feminist  
politics that will create a world  

I want to live in.  

not. But neither have they taken the  
effort to perceive the opposite. Thus  
they and we are divided and confused  
about priorities. Women have consis-  
tently forfeited their rights to  

equality out of loyalty to the insti-  

tutions: to help the premises. In the February issue of Thursday's  

Child, Womancare responded to Bonnie  
Zimmerman's commentary, stating that  
the clinic supports the Iranian re-  
volution because as feminists who  
fight medical imperialism over wo-  
men's bodies, they also must fight  
U.S. imperialism that oppresses  
people of many third world countries;  

It may be argued that we have no  
control over the business interests  
that make government policy but we  
must recognize that our lives are  
dominated by the capitalist/imperial-  
ist policies of this country. We  
have a stake in imperialism. It is  
important to recognize this fact  

we may never realize how crucial  
our involvement in the struggle  
for the third world liberations.  

It is no longer reasonable for women  
to support the interests of men as  
their primary cause. The primary cause  
is justice, and there are few people  
in greater need than women. Hence-  
forth women must insist on clearly  
articulated, public documents of pro-  
posals before offering support to  
men, and we must insist on its immedi-  
ate implementation at the completion  
of conflict. We must be prepared to  
continue the conflict as soon as the  
promises are delayed and broken. There  
can be no timetable for justice.  

It remains feminism's greatest task  
to overcome the limits of the mind:  
to educate women to the broader org-  

Peters/Guardian/LNS  

Feminist Debate On Iran  

Vol. 8 No. 1.  

potential. We must not let  
potential go to waste. We must  
never allow ourselves to be pacified  
by piecemeal reforms or by appeals  
to our loyalty to male institutions.  

"Second Class, Working Class"  

And then by saying that: Westerniza-  
tion has often served as cultural  
imperialism, Womancare refutes Zim-  
merman's premise that the women in  
Iran are being oppressed by the  
current regime:  

The women in Iran also need the  
ability to decide for themselves  
the course of their lives, but we  
now know speaking with many of the  
women in Iran...that they have  
different ideas about dress and lit-  
eracy. As for the chador, they  
thought that the chador freed them  
from being thought of as sexual ob-  
jects. We also know from visiting  
Iran that women do speak out. This  
does not mean sexist boundaries  
do not exist, they do...But the  
methods and signs of liberation can  
not be decided on by western femi-  
nists. We can be supportive and in-  
formative, but cannot practice  
cultural imperialism in the form of  
feminism.  

This response concludes by acknow-  
ledging that there is no revolution  
currently without sexist male leader-  
ship, but Womancare asserts that  
the most dangerous patriarchy (cap-  
italism/imperialism) must be confron-  
ted no matter what, no matter who  
leads.  

In the same issue of Thursday's  
Child, Bonnie Zimmerman was given  
space to reply to the Womancare  
response to her initial article.  
In her reply, she restates her con-  
cern about putting women's issues  
second "-Later-after the revolution-  
after the "neatly" important issues  
are taken care of." Further, she  
questions the concept of cultural  
imperialism, asking where we should  
draw the line in support of revolu-  
tions, saying that the phrase “cult-  
ural imperialism" is used only against  
feminists.  

And finally, Zimmerman points out  
that the money to finance the trip  
to Iran was from the Health Center,  
"some of (the money) raised from the  
blood of women seeking abortions,  
by people who want self-help to teach  
more women.” And she concludes,  
after having condemned the financial  
losses of the Iranian trip by Womancare,  
by reiterating, "we continue to  
be upset by this so-called "feminist  
view of Iran.”  

(For more information on the Womancare  
trip to Iran, see Big Mama Rag,