Big Mama Rag Vol. 6, No. 7

inside )

Wendy Steele

Wendy Steele has been incarcerated in the Colorado Women's State Reformatory, Canon City, and the county jails of Adams County, Jefferson County, Dallas, Texas, and Kansas City, Kansas.

In retrospect, it seems as though I have spent most of my life in one form of prison or another. My pre-teen years were mostly spent in religious boarding schools, going to bed at 7:00 and getting up at 4:00 with the strictest discipline imaginable. And always I was being disciplined for not following the rules of the system. My teenage years, starting at 15, were spent in a prison of my own making: marriage. At 20, unable to stand this form of oppression any longer, I made the decision to take my two daughters and find a way for us to live. Being unskilled, never having had a job and never having been independent, I soon found myself in trouble with the law. My crime? Forgery; trying to survive, with my children.

All of a sudden, there I was in the County Jail waiting to go to trial and because I had no money, not even having a lawyer. There seemed to be nothing for me to do but wait. The Denver County Jail, at that time, was more like a security prison than many I have been in since. I had never been around any ethnic minorities because my father sheltered me from that supposedly terrible influence. I had never had to physically fight with another person, because supposedly the people that I knew were too civilized for that kind of thing. Now here I was facing both, and interestingly enough, very capable of handling both.

In the first two weeks the authorities decided that the only way to handle me and the things I was discovering was to put me on the drug Thorazine to help me stay calm. I was dosed three times a day with very generous doses and never did anything but get up for meals and sleep my life away. By the time I was supposed to go to court, which was five months later, I was so heavy and used to sleeping that I was almost totally withdrawn. In court, I was given five years probation and remanded to the custody of the sheriffs in Jefferson County.

There I had to wait another two months to get into court and have them give me concurrent probation with my other sentence. Then, on to Adams County Court where the same thing happened. Finally, after nine months I was released to my mother's custody. But I came out with knowledge that I hadn't had before. I knew every aspect of crime and knew exactly what I was going to do to get the money I wanted.

I immediately headed for the streets to find me a pimp. According to the way I was taught, that was the first thing that you had to have to get started. I was successful in finding what I was looking for the first night that I went out. Any woman would be successful if she knew where to go, especially since she would be a definite asset to any man in that business no matter what kind of money she could make. For the next ten years, the only life I knew was the streets, the prisons, and the jails. It seems as if I was in more than I was out, but not always for long durations of time. The longest time was 18 months and I did that time because of my original sentence of probation. Everything I did was almost in direct violation of my probation and they finally had me picked up again. I was sentenced to an indefinite sentence in the State Reformatory. With an indefinite sentence, from 1 to 14 years, you would meet the parole board in 9 months, usually, and if they decided that you were properly rehabilitated and properly sorry for what you had done, then you would be released with usually a year's parole. I don't know exactly what they expected as far as rehabilitation went, because there was no form of rehabilitation available. After the first 9 months, I had to stay another 9 months because I apparently wasn't sorry enough for what I had done.

Our life, at that time, consisted of getting up at 5:30 in the morning, eating breakfast in a common room of the dormitories that also housed the restrooms and bathing facilities. After breakfast almost every woman there worked in the laundry. The main purpose that I could see, of the laundry, was to make sure that the 1,000 male inmates and the staff had clean clothes and linens. It was very hard work, and you weren't excused very often. After lunch break, eaten in the same common room, we returned to the laundry to finish up the day's work. If we were done early, we were allowed some time to ourselves to play cards, listen to music, sleep and build relationships. After the dinner break, we did the same things that we had done that afternoon, and then the women were locked up in either the dorms or in maximum security, where I spent most of my time. (If you arrive at the jail with a record for being a troublemaker or a homosexual, you were always put into maximum security.) Lights were out at 9:00 with no visiting among the inmates. And the next morning you started all over again.

Any infraction of the rules brought a stay in solitary confinement. Most of us spent our leisure time trying to think up ways to get high. So to get what you want and need. The violence comes from this fact of being alone and claiming your very scanty rights and something of your own identity and space. On the streets as well as in the jails most of the violence comes from other women. If you were to survive the streets for even one day, you had to be able to take care of yourself and with any weapon that was available. In the jails there were fights about not getting your share of food, having to do more work than somebody else, over cards, over your lovers, and just because you didn't like somebody else. I think fear is a daily occurrence with any inmate. Mainly because you never know what you will have to do to even be able to be alive for one more day.

Very recently I heard a very strong lesbian/feminist say that she would like to get into a knife fight so that she could have one good knife scar to show. This kind of thinking and logic is probably the reason that a lot of us cannot relate very well to the lesbian/feminist community, or with the women's movement in general. You can ask almost any woman that has come from the streets or the jails and she can show you many scars. In my case I could show many scars from knives, from fights, one from a bullet, and many emotional scars that will probably never show to anyone but me.

The same struggles that a woman has coming from the penal system or the streets are the same struggles that many minority women have talked about. It just isn't easy to have to think of survival for yourself and possibly your children and time to think about other women and being kind and generous and understanding towards them. For any truly poor woman (not the ones who are playing at the game of being poor) the climb up from where we have been to where some of us (very few) are now has been totally without help of any kind. Probably not because we didn't need help or wouldn't have accepted help, but because we never knew where to find it. Our lives were so involved in our own struggle to survive in the life we had chosen, were born into, or had forced upon us, that we never even heard the voices of the Women's Movement calling out to tell us how wrong the things were that we did, how unpolitical our actions were, and we didn't even hear them tell us that their fight and their movement was to save us.

Mapp Fight Continues

Dollree Mapp is now serving a 20 to life sentence on drug charges and is an organizer of the Committee Against Life for Drugs. Her circumstances are a startling example of the uses the drug laws are put to. From as far back as the days of the civil rights movement, Dollree Mapp has been a name associated with justice and defense of basic human rights. She is the woman who, back in the sixties, took the police to the supreme court for illegal entering and searching of her apartment. She won the case in what became the famous “Mapp v. Ohio” decision which made evidence obtained without a search warrant inadmissible in court, thus enforcing the right to privacy (4th amendment) and the right to resist illegal search and seizure (14th amendment). Since that time, the system sought Dollree with vengeance; the police finally caught up with her.

MORE ON PAGE 17

Salvation Army Fights Union

Some workers for the Salvation Army in Denver have been organizing for a union for the last few months. They are currently in the process of preparing for a hearing before the National Labor Relations Board. They say the Salvation Army has engaged in unfair labor practices, which include harassment of those persons working towards getting a union, mandatory overtime for no additional pay, and transferring workers arbitrarily.

The workers originally had 5 grievances which they took to management: 
1.) Management wants all workers to take a polygraph test. 
2.) Workers are being transferred arbitrarily. 
3.) Workers must cover bad checks. 

MORE ON PAGE 17