hot briefs

Lesbian Degree

Lesbian culture is now a sub-
ject for a Master's degree at the
Goddard-Cambridge Graduate
School for Social Change in the
Feminist Studies Department.
Write the department at the
school at 5 Upland Rd., Cam-
bridge, Mass. 02140 or call (617)
492-0700.
— Off Our Backs

See How They Run

It has been known for some
time that daughters of women
who took DES (diethylstilbes-
trol) during pregnancy run a high
risk of vaginal and cervical can-
cer. Attempts to have the stuff
banned, however, have so far
been unavailing. New evidence
now indicates that sons of
women who took DES are more
likely than others to have repro-
ductive tract abnormalities, in-
cluding cysts and (horrors) small
testicles. This discovery has led
to a sudden rush of interest in
banning DES for once and all.
Let's see how fast they move
now, eh?

Rape Clearinghouse
A National Center for the Pre-
vention and Control of Rape has
been established. To get on the
mailing list write: Dr. Bertram S.
Brown, Director, National Insti-
tute for Mental Health; 5600
Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md.
20852.

Scene

Cops Are Losing It

Lead pollution from automo-
biles and smoke stacks seems to
be causing sexual impotence in
men, especially highway patrol-
men and toll collectors, accord-
ing to a University of Missouri
School of Medicine researcher.
— Earth News

Black Women’s Program
Black Women Organized for
Action is planning a program of
non-partisan political educa-
tion. For newsletter and addi-
tional information write P.O. Box
15072, San Francisco, Ca.
94115.
— Scene

Child Care Suit
In November, 1973, a group
called Child and Parent Action
successfully campaigned for a
San Francisco city ordinance,
called Proposition M, which
made it policy that “low cost,
quality child care be made avail-
able to all San Francisco child-
ren.” Since then, nothing has
been done about it. Last year
Child and Parent Action, to-
gether with Childcare Switch-
board, the Children’s Council,
and N.O.W., filed suit demand-
ing action. In December the
mayor and board of supervisors
of San Francisco were ordered to
“consider the enactment of an
ordinance,” i.e. Proposition M.
The results of their considera-
tions remain to be seen.
— The Militant

British Rights Laws

The Sex Discrimination Act and
the Equal Pay Act came into
force in Britain late in Decem-
ber. The laws prohibit adver-
tisements for employees of a
specific sex, men-only bars, re-
strictions on union membership
because of sex, refusal of a mort-
gage because of sex, and re-
quiring a male guarantor for a
woman opening a charge ac-
count. They also give Britain's 8
million working women rights to
promotion, equal training, trans-
fer and tenure. British women
now also have equal rights in
education. The Equal Oppor-
tunities Commission has been
set up to ensure the proper ob-
servation of the laws, and to ad-
vise women as to their rights.

Women's Art Environment

The Women’s Art Center in
San Francisco is putting to-
gether an environmental piece,
representative of all women
throughout the country. Women
of all ages, lifestyles and out-
looks are invited to submit
pieces in any medium, one foot
by one foot in size. Three-di-
mensional pieces should have a
one foot square base. Pieces will
be accepted through March 31,
1976. Send or bring to the
Women’s Art Center, 400 Bran-
nan at Third, San Francisco, Ca.
94107.

Women in Construction

Women Working in Con-
struction, a Washington D.C.
group, would like to hear from
other women who are working
in construction or would like to.
They try to provide individual
support to women seeking con-
struction jobs, information on
apprenticeship programs, legal
advice and other mutual assist-
ance. WWC's major goal is to get
more women into the trades.
Write them at P.O. Box 3045,
Washington D.C. 20010.
— Off Our Backs,
Washington, D.C.

Plexus Split
Three women have left the
collective which brings out Plex-
us, the Bay Area feminist paper,
after disagreements arising out
of editorial process.

Lesbian Feminist Conference

A national lesbian feminist
conference is being planned for
the coming summer, to take
place somewhere in the south.
For the name and address of the
coordinator in your area, write
Julia P. Stanley, coordinator,
Department of English, Univer-
sity of South Dakota, Vermil-
lion, S.D. 57069.

Herstorical Freebie

For up to 6 free copies of a 42-
page booklet called Women in
America, write to Sperry & Hut-
chinson Co., Consumer Ser-
vices Dept., 2900 Seminary
Drive, Fort Worth, Texas 76133.
The booklet consists of thumb-
nail sketches of women who
have achieved in a variety of
spheres.

Lesbian Health Information

The Lesbian Health Pamphlet
Group is compiling a body of
knowledge and procedures per-
taining to the specific health
needs of lesbians. If you want to
contribute, write them for a
questionnaire c/o The Women’s
Community Health Center, 137
Hampshire St., Cambridge,
Mass. 02139.

Grusse and Turgeon Released

On Friday, December 19, Ellen
Grusse and Terri Turgeon were
released from Niantic State
Prison, Niantic, Connecticut,
where they had been held the
last 7 months. No explanation
was given for the surprise re-
lease.

Both feminists were serving
their second term because of
their refusal to answer ques-
tions posed by a New Haven
Grand Jury seeking information
on Susan Saxe and Kathy
Power, alleged accomplices in
two bank robberies during the
Days of Rage protests in 1970.

Women’s Directory

The Freedom Feminist Feder-
al Credit Union is publishing a di-
rectory of women-produced
goods and services, which was
due out in January. Write Free-
dom Feminist FCU, 429 Gettys-
burg, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15206.

Wives Also Get Raped
A Newark, New Brunswick
man has been indicted in the
rape of his estranged wife. The
case may set a precedent for
rape cases involving spouses.

P & G Unreliable

Procter and Gamble have
been using Rochester area
women as guinea pigs to test
market their new tampon, Rely.
According to women who have
used it, you can rely on Rely to
produce severe irritation, to be
difficult and painful to remove,
possibly to cause cancer (it con-
tains polyurethane, a known
carcinogen), and even to dis-
integrate inside you. Women are
up in arms about it, but Procter
and Gamble insist the problems
users have experienced are
caused by factors other than
their tampon. The Empire State
Consumer Association is taking
steps to elicit a more responsi-
ble response from the company.
— The Monthly Extract

Rape Victims Shortchanged
A survey recently completed
by the Center for Women Policy
Studies for the Law Enforce-
ment Assistance Administra-
tion reveals what many women
have already discovered the
hard way: that most institutions
responsible for dealing with rape
cases are not prepared or
equipped to handle the cases or
be of help to the victims. Find-
ings include the fact that in-
vestigators often rely on their
memories rather than on sys-
temized files to identify rapists;
the least experienced prosecu-
tors are often assigned to rape
cases, and victims were vicious-
ly cross-examined in court after
having had to repeat their stories
many times to different people;
and that most victims end up
being treated at public hospitals
because hospitals are often re-
luctant to treat them.

More Pill-Cancer Links

FDA medical officers have re-
commended that three brands of
oral contraceptives — Oracon,
Novum SQ and Norquen — be
taken off the market after
studies indicated that they cause
cancer of the lining of the uterus.
Health officials in Ottawa have
already asked the makers of
Oracon to stop selling it in
Canada. The contraceptives are
the ‘sequential’ type, which
means that women taking them
ingest estrogen pills for two
weeks and estrogen-progesto-
gen combinations for the rest of
the cycle.

Training Awards
Soroptimist International has
an annual training awards pro-
gram for the mature woman who
needs to update job skills or re-
enter the workforce. Write: B.
Eager, Soroptimist Interna-
tional, 1616 Walnut St., Phila-
delphia, PA 19103.
— Scene, Northridge, Ca.

Tasteless Rapist
Left Speechless
A woman being raped in Phila-
delphia last June bit off part of
her attacker's tongue. He now
suffers from speech and taste
impediments.

Katy’s
Quality New
& Used

1312 E. Colfax

20% Discount
With this Ad

Struggle

a continuing forum

Vicki Piotter and Peg Hickox

Feminist separatism is a political strategy where women separate
themselves culturally, politically and sexually from men. In other words,
a feminist separatist is a woman who has gone on strike against men.
Last month we discussed the strengths of separatism; this month we
want to discuss some of the problems.

Leaving the Man's Bed

Separating from men in a society which perpetuates male economic
dominance is a difficult action and is intensified by women’s emotional
and sexual bonds with the male society. Different women have experi-
enced greater or lesser difficulties in adopting a separatist position.
These differences are based on objective life situations as well as the
internal motivations of individual women.

A woman with children and no marketable skills is going to face more
problems separating herself from her husband and the male culture
than a woman who has only her own welfare to consider. A woman who
already identifies herself as a lesbian can ease into the politics of
feminist separatism more readily than a woman whose emotional and
sexual ties are with men.

Separating from men is also complex for the black woman or Chicana
who finds herself fighting with the men of her racial community on
questions of race and then turns around and fights against them on
questions of sexism. The working woman who has to fight the sexist
practices of her male co-workers and then finds herself fighting along
side the same men for higher wages from the company faces similar
problems.

It’s Hard to Fight a War When the Enemy Has Outposts in Your Mind

While thousands of women have adopted a separatist position in
spite of these difficulties, the separatist community is still small, some-
what isolated, and tends to reflect a relatively privileged population —
young, single, white, middle-class women without children. Without
much input from women from different economic and cultural
situations, there has been a tendency for the community to develop a
smugness which mistakes its privilege for virtue. This results in
unrealistic attitudes toward internal and external situations which
affect the separatist community in a number of ways.

For example, it’s easy for some lesbians to criticize the woman who
has not yet gotten her divorce, while refusing to face the oppressive
sexual role playing that still goes on among women in the separatist
community.

It is easy for the woman who is economically independent to sit
around in her carefully casual Levis and make fun of the woman who
wears makeup and pantyhose when she, herself, does not have to face
a boss who will fire her if she doesn’t come to work dressed in an
appropriately “feminine” manner.

And it has been easy for some white separatists to ask the question,
“Why haven’t more minority women joined our movement?” while
continuing to ignore those issues of importance to minority women, so
that the movement does, indeed, remain “ours.” How many white
women would honestly be comfortable if most of the energy within the
feminist separatist movement came from Chicana or black women?

Separatism has already attracted women who form their own
comfortable groups where the idea of really struggling with sexism, be
it with men or women, becomes a ridiculous intrusion on their personal
complacency. For the lesbian involved in a pseudo marriage; for the
woman fortunate enough to be able to dress to her own comfort; and for
the white woman who has not yet taken her own racism seriously, it is
time we dealt with the privilege, sexism and racism within our own
community. If we fail to do so, the charge that feminist separatism is
nothing more than a social escape can easily become a reality.

The Avoidance Game

Another aspect which increases the isolation of the separatist
movement is inherent in the concept of separating itself. Separating
suggests “moving away from” which has been interpreted by some
women to mean “avoiding.” If feminists simply try to avoid men on all
levels we will find ourselves running in smaller and smaller circles and
trapped in our own avoidance patterns.

For example, if a woman found it necessary to cross the street every
time a man made a derogatory remark, she would end up going 20 miles
out of her way. Although she might say it was her choice to go those
extra miles, it was the men who controlled her path.

Women who use separatism for sheer avoidance are using a passive
approach to the problems of sexism. While going around men is
certainly easier than pushing our way past them, we must learn the
discomfort of direct confrontation if there are no other alternatives.

Feminist separatism does not mean total political isolation.
Eliminating sexism demands an active, forceful changing of the
dominant society, and in this context will certainly involve interaction
with men. This does not mean it is necessary to adopt the “humanist”
perspective where we work politically with men as our “brothers,” but,
instead, adopt the perspective of women collectively challenging men’s
power.

Feminist separatists have been involved in coalitions with other
groups (some of which have included men) to better achieve a common
feminist demand, i.e., Joanne Little. In joining such coalitions, if we
maintain our group identity as separatists, the chances for cooperation
are minimal.

The Arizona Desert Feminist Country Club

Some feminist separatists who refuse the ideology of political
confrontation with men have come up with a political justification
which we believe to be just another avoidance pattern.

These women support the theory that sexism is biologically based,
meaning that one sex is innately superior/good and its opposite is
innately inferior/evil. Men, posing as the biologically superior sex,
have used this as a justification for years in order to keep their privileged
position over women.

Now, women are reversing the theory and say that women are
innately superior and it’s men’s biological nature to be evil. This type of
reasoning implies that, since goodness and evil are innate, they cannot
be changed. Therefore, to struggle with sexism is to waste your energy.

Whatever sexism there is among women is assumed to be the product
of men’s distortions of women; only when women are separated from
men can we return to our natural, “pure” state. Separatism then
becomes the mechanism for gaining such freedom. Viewed in this way,
separating becomes an end goal in itself, instead of a strategy to

More on Page 14