```
On The Move

A walkout by 1,100 office workers
employed by the Blue Shield insurance
company is in its fifth week in San
Francisco. The workers see the ac-
tion as a fight for wages that will
keep up with the rate of inflation,
for health standards that will pro-
vide some protection from the pecul-
iar hazards presented by cathode ray
tubes in the workplace, and for job
security in the face of arbitrary
production standards. The strike's
outcome will set the tone for union-
izing efforts by the mostly female
and unorganized clerical workforce
in the Bay Area. In a city of some
200,000 unorganized office workers,
a clear victory for better wages and
working conditions at Blue Shield
would encourage union organizing ef-
forts throughout the insurance and
finance industries.

A Worker’s Gift

While workers' wages are declining,
corporate profits are not. How much
are they making from our work? Ac-
cording to Forbes magazine, Exxon
made $25,400 in profits from each of
its workers last year. Standard Oil
of California got $45,000 from each
worker. Citicorp, which owns Citi-
bank, pocketed $10,500 per worker
while Dow Chemical took $14,000.

Catch 22

The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) has gone into
federal court against a company that
told its women workers to be steril-
ized or be unemployed. Bunker Hill
Lead Co., a division of Gulf Oil,
refused to employ women in its Kel-
logg, Idaho lead smelter unless they
were sterile, after medical studies
done several years ago showed lead
harms a fetus. At least five women
at the plant went out and got steril-
ization operations when the new pol-
icy was announced. OSHA hopes that
if the Bunker Hill case is won, all
companies that have similar policies
will have to change them.

bnr:

hot briefs...

Sexual Politics

A labor arbitrator last month
threw out a woman worker's sexual
harassment complaint on the grounds
that she "invited it." The decision
stems from a grievance brought by a
male worker at the Godchaux Hender-
son Sugar Co. near Chicago. He had
been fired after the woman complain-
ed of his behavior to management.
The man challenged the discharge and
labor arbitrator Ralph Barnhart
ruled in his favor, saying that the
woman was "quite attractive, fairly
tall and well-proportioned."

Fundamentality

A fundamentalist Capitol Hill lob-
byist has come up with a plan he says
will completely end all the nation's
woes. Harry Zain is proposing legis-
lation that would lower the marriage
age of girls to 12 and of boys to 16.
Zain says his plan would “end promis-
cuity" and "be the center point of
our survival as a nation." He says
girls should be forbidden educa-
tion and should not work outside the
home. Zain believes that schooling
and careers for women have "made us
a nation of boys instead of men, and
a nation of boys," he adds, "is a na-
tion of slaves." He says his marriage
bill, if introduced and passed, would
change all that.

Vatican Roulette

A recent survey by a British doctor
shows Catholic women would rather
have an abortion, "committing only
one sin," than be sinning every time
they used artificial birth control.
The survey, conducted at the Bill
Baird Centers in Boston, between
April 1978 and August 1980, showed
that of 1162 abortions, 82% never,
or only occasionally used birth con-
trol. Baird, a long-time crusader
against the Catholic Church's ban on
artificial birth control, explains:
"Catholic youngsters tell me if they
use the pill for 21 days, that's 21
sins. But if they have an abortion,
that's only one sin." The study also
found that 71% of women who have a
second abortion are Catholic.

where we’re at

Last month in "Where We're At" we stated that the BMR collective, although
carrying on and publishing monthly, was in a state of struggle. We

said we were a "too-small" collective and needed women to work with the paper
on many levels. With that we invited women to attend our community meeting,
rescheduled because no one attended the one set for December.

At the community meeting January 17th we were overjoyed to see new women
who gave us good feedback and who committed to helping with tasks on a month-
ly basis. A few women who have known BMR a long time also stated their intent
to help out in whatever ways they could. We appreciate and depend on input
like this from women in the community.

BMR supporters, women who commit to doing something for the paper each
month, but who also work with the collective on the paper's process and pol-
itical direction, were at the community meeting. Long-time supporter Bobbe
Ross said she will continue in her supporter role; Judy Barlow, who recently
became a supporter after being a collective member for many moons, said she
would like to rejoin the collective as soon as her health allows; Constance
Perenyi, a collective member for 2½ years, is now a supporter. That leaves
Lori Bradford, Sue Goding and Liz Lewis, who will continue on as collective
members, while Vicki Piotter becomes a supporter with the next issue of BMR.
Three collective members means that BMR still remains a “too small" collect-
ive.

The community meeting was marked by the absence of supporter Kate Sharp and
collective member Eileen Bresnahan. This is an indication of our internal
struggle around process (or lack of process) the BMR collective has been go-
ing through the last few months. In January, Eileen was asked to leave the
collective. (Eileen stated she would no longer write for BMR. We will miss
her work; Kate stated she would no longer support the paper because of the
process involved in asking Eileen to leave. We regret her decision.)

A few months back the Big Mama Rag collective set
ourselves up in a commitment with Eileen, but we did not set up a structure
with which to follow through on those commitments. As a result, those commit-
ments failed and our process was indeed in turmoil. Our process and proper use
of constructive criticism had been slowly eroding to the point where trust
levels on the collective were practically non-existent. This made it extreme-
ly difficult and exhausting to publish under intense deadlines. BMR found itself
at a point of political stagnation as a group; after running ourselves crazy
and nearly driving the project into an early grave, we were forced to deal
with the actual situation of the collective. Our scheduled and unscheduled
political discussions, intended to help with the direction and growth of the
paper and collective, were not at all serving that purpose. The focus of meet-
ings and collective energies were repeatedly centered on one individual, re-
peatedly dealing with internal hassles.

All of us are to blame for letting the process and trust situation get out
of hand. None of us followed through on constructive criticism (although stabs
at it were made), and all of us let problems slide by for fear of rocking the
boat and possibly interfering with BMR's strict production schedule. We have
learned that decisions on what needs to be done must be followed by a struct-
ure to carry out those decisions. We've also learned that it is important for

women working together on an “intense” project that there be a basis of mutual
MORE ON PAGE 11)

Humanistic Garbage

The widely-acclaimed feminist
self-help health book "Our Bodies,
Ourselves" is the latest target of
right-wing evangelist Jerry Falwell
and his Moral Majority. In a letter
dated January 1, Falwell attacks the
book, which addresses issues of
women's health and sexuality, as
"immoral trash" and “out and out
humanistic garbage." He asks parents
to “examine your public schools'
libraries and textbooks for immoral,
anti-family, and anti-American con-
tent" such as that contained in the
book, and to “politely, but firmly,
take reasonable action where you
live" to have such books and other
materials removed. “The little bit
of this book that we have read is
not only disgusting, it is shock-
ing," the letter says, quoting pas-
sages on virginity in marriage, pre-
marital sex and masturbation. Also
included in the mailing was a leaf-
let quoting passages from the book;
references to parts of the body such
as breasts and vaginas, to menstrual
periods, and to orgasms were
crossed out with black marker.

Dead Law Speaks

The Criminal Code Reform bill
(s.1722) contains an amendment which
is of particular concern to abortion
rights. This provision would main-
tain as law an obsolete statute called
the Comstock Act which prohibits
the use of mails for abortion adver-
tising and dissemination of abortion
information. (This is the statute
under which Margaret Sanger was
jailed in the early 1900s.)
Although this provision is obsolete
and probably unconstitutional, and
stupid, given the present legality
of abortion, Sen. Edward Kennedy,
floor manager of the bill in the
Senate last year, permitted its a-
doption. The Senate didn't have a
chance to vote on this bill last
session, but will do so this time.

Secretary Schafly

Defense...'I would restore the Un-
ited States to a position of milit-
ary superiority.’ Building the B-1
bomber? 'That would be the first
thing, yes.' Developing the neutron
bomb? ‘Yes, yes," she said impatient-
ly. In a speech last fall, she cal-
led the atomic bomb 'a marvelous
gift that was given to our country
by a wise God.’ In an interview last
week, she said, 'I would do whatever
was necessary to give us superiority
over the Russians." -- Susan Page
interview with Phyllis Schafly,

New Found Freedom?

Fifteen women who left Cuba as
part of the "Freedom Flotilla" to
the United States, have sued the
Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice for incarcerating them in New
York's Metropolitan Correctional
Center without any hearing or notice
of the charges against them. None of
the fifteen has been told why she is
being imprisoned or for how much
longer it will continue. They have
not been allowed any visitors or
given any information about available
legal services. Habeas corpus peti-
tions have been filed on behalf of
each of the women by the New York
Civil Liberties Union, Lambda Legal
Defense and Education Fund, and
Brooklyn Legal Services. The peti-
tions call for their immediate re-
lease from the MCC.

Set Loose

A 32-year-old Ku Klux Klan member
who was convicted of shooting and
wounding four black women in an un-
provoked shotgun attack last April
has been released from prison, after
serving less than half his nine-month
jail term. Marshall Thrash was re-
leased early under a new Tennessee
law, which permits prisoners serving
less than a year to shorten their
sentences while working in prison.
Two other KKK members accused in the
shooting of the four elderly women
were acquitted of attempted murder
charges by an all-white jury,

"She would like to be Secretary of 7~

Big Mama Rag Vol.9 No.2

Virginity Battle

Ms. Kakar, the 32-year-old Indian
woman who was subjected to a virgin-
ity test at Heathrow Airport in Lon-
don in 1979, now lives in India and
never wants to return to Britain.
Her husband is bringing legal action
against the Home Office. The three
demands of his court case, filed on
behalf of his wife, are for compen-
sation, an apology from the British
government which he says he will pub-
lish in every newspaper in the world
“so they know what Britain is really
like," and full publication of the
Yellowlee inquiry. This inquiry was
ordered after the uproar over the
Kakar case, but the government pub-
lished only the conclusion. Immigra-
tion officials flatly denied that
virginity tests were being carried
out on Indian women coming to Brit-
ain until Ms. Kakar publicized her
own case.

LU)

-WARN Report 1/Matrix

Do-Gooder Problem

Janet McCloud, speaking at the
December gathering of the Northwest
Indian Women's Circle in Washington
state said that the difficulty of
organizing Indian women on a grass
roots level is "because there is no
grass growing on Indian women's
roots, they've been so trodden
down." She said that to organize
Indian women is quite a task--
racism, poverty and sexism often
make Indian women feel worthless.
Matrix, reporting on the gathering,
said Janet said that Native Ameri-
cans do need allies and help, but
only on the basis of mutual respect.
Trouble comes not only from the
right wing, but also from the left,
and white feminists ("we don't want
white goddesses either")-- historic-
ally it's been do-gooders who are
the most problem. She implored ev-
eryone to understand the oppression
of Indian people, especially women,
but not to impose programs on them.

Fighting Racism

The manager of the Duchess Club,
a New York City lesbian bar, has
offered a written apology to women
of color who charged that they had
been discriminated against at the
bar. This concession came after
some 50 lesbians picketed the club
chanting, "No racism in our commun-
ity" and "Free our sisters, free
ourselves." The protesters charged
that 15 women of Salsa Soul Sisters,
a third world lesbian organization,
were all asked for identification
when they tried to enter the Duch-
ess after one of their meetings.
After showing ID, they were told
that it wasn't good enough. At the
same time, many white women were
allowed to enter without showing
any proof of age at all. When they
protested this harassment, the
women of Salsa were asked to leave.
```