Womens Festival Committee Reports

Janie Hoback

A primary purpose of the Colorado
Women's Festival, held September 10
this year, is to provide a day and
place for women to get together to
share ideas and resources, and to cel-
ebrate each other and ourselves.

Two feminist groups, Artemis, Inc.
and Diana's Grove collective, organ-
ized the festival this year. To iden-
tify ourselves, Artemis, Inc. is a
corporation established to promote

|
|

Photo by Barb Coleman
women in any medium of the arts.
Diana's Grove collective formed for
the specific purpose of establishing
a women's center in Denver.

We share a political consciousness
in that we think it is important that
the women's community knows who we are
and what we accomplished. We have a
responsibility to share information,
give a financial statement, and offer
recommendations for next year. Be-
cause the festival is for the women in

this community, we feel we are accoun-
table to them... This report is pre-
sented in that spirit.

Our goals for the festival were
threefold, all in the established
tradition of the 4 year old event and
all equally important. We wanted the
festival atmosphere and activities to
celebrate the strength and spirit of
women. The festival would also enable
our groups to make some money. In
addition, we wanted to ensure contin-
uation and growth of the festival both
financially and by updating and docu-
menting the files. This will not only
help women who put it on next year
but also provide a herstory of the
tradition.

In presenting our financial state-
ment, we want the women who supported
the festival to know how the money in
the fund was spent, what the expenses
were, what we made and how the profit
was divided. It may also offer guide-
lines for next year's festival.

Artemis and Diana's Grove followed
the established tradition of adding
$100 to the existing festival fund,
which amounts to $600 after our con-
tribution. We chose to keep the fund

in an account in the Colorado Feminist
Federal Credit Union so that it will
help women who need financial assis-
tance throughout the year.

Problems are bound to arise in an
event of this type and we think it is
important to discuss them for several
reasons. First, we did not start or-
ganizing early enough. Despite ef-
forts to generate interest, by July
no one had offered to coordinate the
festival. Diana's Grove and Artemis
did not commit to plan it together un-
til about six weeks before the festi-
val. This led to obvious problems with
getting the word out, mailing booth
information and finding entertainment.

It also led to problems with finding
a suitable location. There were sev-
eral complaints that the First Univer-
salist Church was too far away from
Capitol Hill, where many women live and
where many of our activities take
place. We did check into other loca-
tions. Morey Junior High School said
it could not give us an answer until
Sept 1. The Denver School District
wanted to charge $700 to rent us East
High School. The First Universalist
Church charged $150, including the
damage deposit. Based on these cir-
cumstances, we chose the church. We
were aware that some women would have
trouble finding transportation to the
site so we posted a sign at Woman to
Woman asking women to form carpools
and sign up there for rides.

On another level, we feel it is im-
portant to think about expanding the
women's community in every sense. Cap-
itol Hill is not necessarily the women's
community. Rather, we would hope that
women find and build their community
wherever they choose it to be.

Another problem was access to elec-
tricity for women who needed it at
their booths. Although we tried to as-
sign these booths close to the building,
some women did not tell us they needed
electricity until they arrived. We specifically requested that
information on the registration form.
We would suggest that participants
make sure they advise the committee if
they need electricity and the committee
be explicit about requesting that in-
formation. Next year's committee might
also want to consider charging those
who use electricity a small fee for
extension cords since the cords are ex-
pensive to rent.

In connection with the booths, some
women were confused about the differ-
ent charges and our criteria for profit
and non-profit spaces. We charged $10
for booths where women only handed out
information or educational material and
did not charge for it. We charged $15
for women who sold products or services.
We made no exceptions. In addition, we
provided space at our information booth
for fliers and announcements that women
wanted to make.

We received two specific complaints
about men participating in festival ac-
tivities. First, a man was helping his
wife staff a booth. We spoke to the
man and he agreed not to sell her pro-
ducts there. We want to point out that
in the confirmation letter we clearly
stated we required that only women
staff the booths. However, everyone
should be aware that legally we can do
absolutely nothing to prohibit men
from renting booth spaces or staffing
them. We try every way we can, however,
to discourage their involvement.

Second, we required any entertain-
ment be by women only. However, men
participated in a women's self-defense
demonstration. We specifically told
the woman we would not allow men to
perform and she specifically told us
they would not. When she arrived
with the men, she told us the men
would only participate in attacker
roles and were necessary for the dem-
onstration. On this basis, we agreed
to let her go on. In fact, one man
announced the demonstration and an-
other performed an exercise. Unfor-
tunately, we had no control over the
situation.

And finally, for anyone who was con-
cerned about the sexual preference of
the women who attended, we received
several complaints that one, there
were not enough lesbians at the festi-
val and two, there were not enough
straight women at the festival. We
did not receive one complaint that
there were not enough bisexuals at
the festival.

The key to planning a successful
festival is beginning early. Ample
time to find groups interested in or-
ganizing the event, finding a suitable
location, renting booth space and
lining up entertainment can eliminate
many problems in these areas. Adver-
tising and notifying women’s groups
and centers so they have the informa-
tion and can spread the word is vital.

A successful festival also generates
more money and this is a factor we

1443 Walnut Street

303-443-9461

Lilith: Wo
230 Bookstore

Boulder, Colorado 80302

considered. Although we decided to
add a flat $100 to the fund to contin-
ue its growth, we discussed the pos-
sibility of changing this method in
the future. We recommend that next
year's planners consider adding to the
established fund based on a percentage
of the profits rather than putting in
a set $100. This would allow for flex-
ibility depending on how much money
is made. When the festival is partic-
ularly profitable, more than the $100
could be added. Conversely, in an
unprofitable year, the full $100 might
not be necessary.

Another recommendation that many
would drink to is having plenty of
beer available; the kegs ran out at
4 pm this year. This is a good source
of income for the festival. Organizers
should also remember to plan and ad-
vertise a rain date.

Anyone with access to a bulk mailing
permit and would be willing to volun-
teer it should contact the festival
planners. Mailings are an important
part of the planning but postage is
expensive and a permit would cut costs
considerably.

All of our work is documented in
greater detail in the festival files.

Photo by Barb Coleman
We were grateful for the records made
from last year; they were an enormous
help and made our job much easier. In
turn, we updated them and documented
everything we did this year. Next
year's organizers will not have to
start from scratch.

Women who are interested in helping
with the next festival or have any in-
put can contact members of Diana’s
Grove or Artemis to find out where
the records are. We will be happy to
share any other information that might
be helpful.

We want to extend special thanks to
those who donated their time, pro-