-Two Women Talk About CWCI

Susanna Smith : |

I talked with JoAnna Casto and Sherran Reynolds, inmates at Colorado Women's Correctional Institute, about their experiences there.

JoAnna Casto is serving an indeterminate to 3 years sentence for obtaining narcotics by fraud and deceit (forging prescriptions). According to her, she was illegally sentenced; her charge should have been a misdemeanor, as it was not narcotics, but a lesser drug, for which she allegedly forged prescriptions. She has no money with which to hire a lawyer to appeal her charges.

Sherran Reynolds is serving an indeterminate to 14 years sentence for forging a check. She was a state employee, and her boss, according to her, had embezzled thousands of dollars and got off scot-free. Sherran has to make retribution to the state in the amount of $23,000.

Both women are due for community placement, which means being transferred to a halfway house. Sherran is going to one in Boulder and JoAnna's placement has been delayed for some reason unknown to her. She has been offered a job working for "industries" in the maximum security section of the prison.

Sherran has been working in the women’s section as an accountant for the business class, doing correspondence, ordering for dietary, a little bit of everything. Other jobs available include industrial sewing, the steward's department (cooking, etc. for the inmates), laundry, janitorial work, yard maintenance, and general maintenance (plumbing, electrical work). Sherran says that the women do almost all the work in their own section of the prison, except for extremely heavy work or industrial wiring type jobs. They constructed a steel building, except for the foundation, painted the whole interior of their section, and put up all the fences. The pay for most jobs is 80¢ a day when a woman first comes in, and can go up to $2 a day. Some maintenance jobs pay up to $3.04 a day. Out of this must come money for basics such as shampoo and toothpaste, which are no longer furnished by the state, and cigarettes. There are no work release programs at this time. Classes are offered in business administration (typing, shorthand, etc.) and a pilot course in data processing. They used to have vocational and academic work programs, but according to JoAnna, "The men get everything. That's where all the teachers are going." She feels that the women are better learners and are more receptive to classes than the men, yet they aren't given the opportunities.

She says the data processing class is only a way for the man who is teaching it to make money off the women by training them and then having them come to work for him.

According to Sherran, the medical services at CWCI leave a lot to be desired. A physician's assistant, a dentist, and an MD each come to the prison one day a week. She says women with medical problems are not being given enough treatment; she herself has been on her period for 4 weeks, and nothing is being done for her. She still has major problems with her arm, which got caught in a machine a few months ago. The only female therapist at the prison may be forced out of her job by her boss, leaving 2 male psychologists. This would be very detrimental to some of the women there, Sherran says.

The physical set-up of the prison is OK, states Sherran. The emotional climate is what is hard to deal with. Some of the officers (mostly women) play inmates against each other. They learned here, it's patience. They can go home after their shift, but each one of the 65 women there have to deal with each other 24 hours a day.

According to JoAnna, some women just come in and do time. Others, like herself, question what goes on. She says, "If there's one thing I've learned, you've got to keep your cool."

Harris Tells Story of Prison Fire.

Emily Harris

I was one of the prisoners in the women's section of Santa Rita Jail, near Oakland, on the night of May 14th when it was destroyed by fire. Many women could have lost their lives in that fire because they came within a hair's breadth of being left locked in their cells with no way to get out.

It was an outrageous and frightening experience and I want to share it so at least people will know what happened and will understand better how prisoners' lives are threatened every day in a million different ways by the very fact that one class of people - the police - has been granted the power of a key that locks the door.

It all started about 4:30 in the afternoon when one of the police laid her hands on a prisoner. When other women jumped in to defend their sister, they got maced, clubbed, and sprayed with hoses. So the women started tearing the place up in protest - breaking windows, furniture, and setting small fires.

Santa Rita police are known for their sadistic practices - treating prisoners like dogs - and Santa Rita is equally known for its sub-human living conditions. Santa Rita prisoners - both men and women - have broken out in riots and organized strikes on several occasions. Santa Rita has been the subject of civil suits that have resulted in court orders for improvements in prisoner living conditions. News media have been denied access to the jail and have filed suit to gain entry in order to investigate allegations and inform the public of conditions there. So the events on May 14th were part of an ongoing process - when prisoners are brutalized day after day with physical assault and dehumanizing conditions, then they are bound to respond and keep responding in one way or another just to maintain their own humanity. On May 14th, women in the jail protested continuously for over four hours. Then about 9:30 pm, a fire was started in one of the large dormitories and got out of control quickly when the wooden walls and roof caught fire. In other parts of the jail, heavy black smoke was making it impossible to see or breathe. The lights all went out and the ceiling sprinklers came on. I was in one of the locked security cells. There were four other women nearby in other cells and quite a few other women down another hallway in locked security dormitories. I could hear women in the yard outside where they had escaped the fire, but the hallway outside our cells was deserted. We were yelling and screaming for someone to let us out, pounding on the doors and walls. I had this amazed, outraged feeling that the police weren't going to let us out - amazed that our lives were so insignificant to them; outraged because I'd known all along that this was true. There was a window in my cell, but it was completely covered inside and out with heavy iron grills secured by padlocks. I heard police yelling that they couldn't find the keys to the padlocks. I screamed at them to get inside to unlock all the doors, but they kept trying to pull the grills off my window even though they had no keys and no tools. We were all choking from the smoke, we were angry and we were scared. We felt so helpless. The police with the keys had left us trapped. There could be a lot of reasons why - complete lack of preparation and coordination in the event of an emergency situation, panic, waiting too long until the risk of going back in the building was too great, complete disregard for lives when those lives are prisoners', sadistic pleasure in leaving us to go down with the building. It was one and all of these and it doesn't really even matter what the reasons were because the results are all the same - women's lives were endangered in a very serious way that could have easily ended in death or injury.

The police never did unlock any of us, but we did get out because a courageous, beautiful sister - a prisoner - managed to get ahold of a set of keys in all the confusion and she wasn't going to leave her sisters locked in. She came back into the burning building and unlocked all of our doors. I'll never forget her - never! I grabbed my legal papers and came out of the cell, felt my way along a wall to an outside door about 25 yards away, and ran out into the yard. Outside there were no police to be found. I mean they were so unconcerned about getting us out, they were nowhere in the vicinity. But within 10 minutes the police discovered I was out and removed me and several other women to the men's jail where they put us in day-rooms to sleep on the tables. They took my legal papers from me and then claimed they had been lost in the confusion. The day after the fire the sheriff's department launched an intensive cover-up. That morning I was in court for a scheduled appearance with my husband, Bill. I told about the fire, about being trapped in my cell like other prisoners, about being rescued by a prisoner, not the police, and about having my legal papers seized and conveniently lost. When reporters tried to check out my experience in the fire, the police denied it and responded with nonsense like, "She wasn't treated any differently than any other prisoner" and "Emily Harris' life isn't any more important than that of any other prisoner." They claimed that police, not another prisoner, had rescued me. The sheriff praised police heroism and claimed the evacuation of the jail was handled in an orderly fashion. It all made me sick! To facilitate their cover-up and attempt to shut me up, the police told my lawyers in court that they couldn't meet with me afterwards because I was being immediately transported back to the state women's penitentiary in Southern California. Then they proceeded to take me back to Santa Rita and held me in total isolation in a strip cell while they completed spinning out their cover-up to the public.

The Santa Rita fire occurred just two days before the anniversary of the fire in Los Angeles that cost the lives of six women and men at the hands of police. For me, the memory of those six beautiful people has made all the more real how close women prisoners at Santa Rita had come to losing their lives too. I remember the fire last year at a men's jail in Tennessee where prisoners and visitors were trapped and died of smoke inhalation because police didn't unlock the doors. It could happen anywhere. It could be deliberate or an accident. Police are plenty quick to turn the key that locks someone up, but forget how to turn the key the other way in an emergency. And this constant threat to people's lives won't change as long as there are people who consider others as less than human and thus consider their lives as insignificant.