Concert Disruption From Page 3

tactics of intimidation employed by
these women demanding refunds. The
political analysis defies us...that
encourages women to attack and de-
fame a woman musician in the name of
supporting women musicians.

...if we had to do it over again,
we would make some appropriate an-
nouncement.

...Not only were all our main per-
formers female, they were also black.
Should we likewise grant black sep-
aratist demands for getting all white
people off the stage and out of the
audience...? ...Where does one draw
the line?

The 11th National Conference On
Women and the Law

—_—<—_—_ —

...In an audience of hundreds,
approximately thirty women took it
upon themselves to violently dis-
rupt the concert...

«..we cannot escape the reality
that racism, not sexism, was the
motivating force behind this dis-
ruptive, violent behavior...Would

this have happened at a Holly Near
concert?

...Women performers of color are
voicing loud and clear that the days
of "Miss-Annism" have passed and will
not be tolerated in the women's com-
munity.

Luisah Teish

The Women Writer’s Union
The S.F. Women's Building
Four Wheel Drive

Allison Jacobs

—_—— —

...Never in our memory has such
disregard and downright hostility
been shown to an audience by perfor-
mers who are supposed to be part of
our community.

«..To take a public position ag-
ainst sisters with just rage, in
support of a man, and in full view
of a mixed audience, was a slap in
the face of every woman present.

Judy Freespirit
Andrea Land

Rape Study

in her life, What's more, he has re-
peated access to her, so that the
victimization may be perpetuated.
There is also a long-standing pro-
hibition about a wife testifying
against her husband.

"Marital rape is the most secret,
the least recognized," Groth said.
"Little research has been done on
it." Further investigations are

From Page 3

planned, such as the one just begun
by D. Finkelhor of the Department of
Sociology and Anthropology of the
University of New Hampshire on for-
ced sex in marriage, "from the wom-
an's perspective.”

(Reprinted, with minor changes, from
New Women's Times.)

Sage Reports

planning to produce locally in
addition to nationally known per-
formers in theater, dance, and
keynote speaking as well as music.

5. We are a non-profit organiza-
tion; however, our intention is
not to lose money. To operate as
efficiently as possible we need
to make enough money to cover our
expenses on each concert and also
to have enough left over to meet
our ongoing expenses i.e. tele-
phone bills, postage, office sup-
plies incurred while working on
future productions. Additionally,
we need funds for front money for
these future events.

6. It is our desire to become a
valuable resource for this commun-
ity by providing the opportunity
to all women who have the interest
to learn the skills of producing.
We hope to build an organizational
structure that can withstand
changes in membership and still
operate efficiently.

7. It may seem obvious, but we
feel it necessary to point out
that we are producing women and
intend for this to remain our fo-
cus.

These seven statements comprise
our working guidelines, our inherent
politics. Our productions will re-
flect in form these ideas in prin-
ciple.

No one at Sage draws a salary. All
profits go towards producing more
cultural events. Our budget for a
concert including projected atten-
dance, provides the basis for the
price of donation. We use the term
donation rather than ticket price
because it enables us to be categ-
orized so that we are not assessed
a sales tax and seat tax. For our
first concert on February 18, 1980
with Teresa Trull and Julie Homi
the donation price was $5.00 and
projected audience was 300 women.
Our final budget was:

Expenses:
Performers Fee (main) 400.00
Performers Fee (opening) 50.00

Performers Travel Expense 200.00

Hall Rental 197.94
Int. for Hearing Impaired 15.00
Piano Tuner 30.00
Child Care/Food 4.00
Publicity/Phone 87.16
Producer Fee 200.00
Total Expenses $1396.00
Receipts
Total Ticket Sales 1340.00
Net Profit or Loss $ -56.00

From Page 8

Following a breakdown of our work-
ing budget for our upcoming concert
with Cris Williamson and her Fly-
ing Colors Tour budget is also in-
cluded. For this concert we are ma-
king available 66 work exchange open-
ings at half price. We felt we could
enable more women to afford the
concert at $3.75 donation price by
offering half rather than full work
exchange. We will offer full work
exchange in cases of extreme need
and are donating to Safe House 4
tickets to women in residence there.
For this concert our donation price
is $7.50 with a projected audience
of 800 people. We negotiated with
the Flying Colors Tour agent for a
$3000.00 performers fee rather than
a $4000.00 as is shown in the tour
budget. Sage Productions Working
Budget for Cris Williamson

Expense Projection:

Performers Fee $3000.00 +
See below
Hall Rental 500.00
Lights 100.00
Work Exchange 250.90
Piano Tuner 30.00
Child Care 20.00
Publicity 520.00
includes comps to ticket sellers $100
Telephone 100.00
Int. for Hearing Impaired 50.00

Performers Comps
Safe House Tickets
Producer Fee
Contingency Fee (Emergency) 500.00
Total Budget

**Flying Colors Tour 1980 -- Budget
for one concert (rough):

Sound 00.00
Transportation 350.00
Rooms 500.00
Food 200.00
Postage 15.00
Office Rent/Supplies 50.00
Phone 50.00
Xerox 35.00
Publicity (1000 posters) 150.00
Salaries 1500.00

(4 musicians, road and 3350.00
equipment managers, 2 bookers
1 promoter)

Contingency Fee of 20% 67
Total Budget

We hope you will find this helpful
and encourage you to give us feed-
back. Our address is:

Sage Productions

P.O. Box 49001

Denver, Colorado 80204
Women of Sage: Pat Dellin, Kathy
Duba, Jackye Dunn, Susan Fraser,
Carolyn Norblom, Debbie Ortiz, Tea
Schook, June Summers, Maree Trice.

13

Sexual Harassment From Page 6

work--not just the women directly affected. It is this commonality that makes
sexual harassment women's experience, not merely an experience of a series of
individuals who happen to be of the female sex. This is what makes sexual
harassment discrimination on the basis of sex.

Susan Blumenthal, an attorney for the NOW Legal Defense Fund, is currently
working on a sexual harassment case pending before the Minnesota Supreme
Court that challenges the right of an employer to ignore female employees’
complaints of harassment by co-workers. The case asks the court to find the
Continental Can Company liable for sex discrimination because it ignored com-
plaints of harassment by two female employees. Continental failed to direct
the harassment be stopped and one woman was subjected to sexual assault on the
job by a co-worker. After the assault she left her job to avoid further har-
assment. Lots of people are watching this case because it addresses the type
of sexual harassment frequently experienced by women workers, sexual harass-
ment by their male co-workers. Courts deciding the issue to date have done
so exclusively in the context of a supervisor or boss demanding sexual rel-
ations from a female employee in exchange for hiring, promotion, or not
firing her.

An important federal district court decision that significantly increases
the protection of working women against on-the-job sexual harassment was rec-
ently handed down in New Jersey. A district court judge ruled that
Kyriazi was subjected to "odious personal harassment" by male colleagues.

The court pointed out that three male co-workers made her work environment
intolerable by shooting rubber bands at her, loudly speculating on her vir-
ginity, and circulating an obscene cartoon of her. Kyriazi's supervisors
were well aware of the harassment, the judge noted, “but they chose to large-
ly ignore her complaints." Instead of complying with the company's ultimatum
that she seek psychiatric help, Kyriazi formally complained of discrimination,
and was fired. The court decision ordered her reinstated with full back pay
and benefits, and also ruled that she was entitled to damages of $1,500 from
each of the three co-workers and the two supervisors involved in the abusive
practices.

Another court case in Pennsylvania leaves it open for a woman to collect
unemployment benefits if she quits because of harassment, although the court
ruled against the particular woman involved. The court said that although
her quitting was prompted by repeated "sexual insinuations" and “physical
contacts" initiated by her office manager, she failed to inform the owner of
the company of the nature of the problem before she resigned. This ruling
seems to say if we document the harassment and try to get it corrected be-
fore being forced to quit, we are entitled to unemployment.

"It's the same old story," said Pamela Price at a recent press conference,
"Where sex is concerned, black women's accusations are considered lies and
white men's denials are believed." Pamela Price was talking about a sex dis-
crimination suit she filed against Yale University when her political science
professor offered to give her an "A" in the course if she would go to bed with
him, and gave her a "C" when she refused. Up to that point Price had been an
"A" student. Although the court said that Yale's lack of a grievance proced-
ure to deal with complaints of sexual harassment is sex discrimination, it
ruled against Price. She said, "The decision, if it says nothing else, tells
me and all women who have been victimized by sex discrimination to be quiet
and tell nothing of our outrage and suffering." Price is going to appeal the
decision. She said, "It must be clearly understood that women will not be
still or quiet."

There are lots of things we can do to try and get rid of the problem of
sexual harassment we face--not being quiet and silent is one of them. A
committee on sexual harassment formed out of the first meeting of the women's
caucus. The first thing we've done is put together this informational leaf-
let; we intend to do more and encourage all women to talk about sexual har-
assment, which only flourishes in secrecy. We are working with the union on
the problem and expect some sort of clause to go in the contract which will
state that sexual harassment will not be tolerated. We want to get with the
stewards to talk about the grievance procedures; we want to give supervisors
a statement in regard to putting an end to their harassment or potential har-
assment and get with the EEO committee to educate them on how sexual harass-
ment is sex discrimination. We intend to post more information on the prob-
lem by way of a newsletter.

Feminism

The Lives!

Demands of Women

demand control of our reproductive process
demand free, adequate health care

demand free, 24 hour day care

demand the right to the use of self-defense
demand equality in the job market

demand the right to guaranteed jobs or income

demand free and relevant education

demand an end to sexism in the cultural media

demand an end to the oppression of lesbians
demand an end to privilege based on race
and class

demand the end of defining people in terms of
their relationships to others

demand the right of self-determination for

all people
demand the right to use any means necessary
to eliminate male supremacy