more letters home

Herizons Cont.

holier than thou, 'correct' women who got to her, inten- sified her guilt, and in- spired the mea culpa we read in Mama did a lot of damage.

I'm not happy about the result. The death of Heri- zons and the political re- birth of Sue Doell leaves a piece of me bleeding on East Colfax. It is one more example of our community at its worst. Do we really want to keep wounding and destroying our own? Wouldn't it have been better to vent our righteous anger on B. Dalton's, Waldens or some other obvious appendage of the Patriarchy? So often we call pecking our sisters revolutionary action when it is only chicken instinct, the brutality of the powerless once first blood has been drawn. Are we proud of ourselves? Herizons is dead, one small act of petty vindictiveness and envy, who really thinks we are closer to equality? Was this the Decembrist revolution? Have the courage to own it; mark it as a holiday, tell the story with pride to our daughters and granddaughters. Forgive me if I pass, have your fireworks but don't expect to see me dancing in the street. Somebody may need to be hurt in the revolution but it could have been a man, should have been men. They aren't as vulnerable, that is what power is all about after all, just what did bringing down Herizons do to wound the patriarchy? Explain how crucifying Sue hastened the demise of Chase Manhattan Bank or ended the influence of the Moral Majority in the Reagan administration? Dance and rejoice—if you feel you should but I think I will take the time to mourn. Once there were Herizons, now there are none.

Tracy Collins

Kissinger Report

To the Editor:

The fundamental purpose of the Kissinger Commission's Report is to justify and escalate Reagan's military effort in El Salvador and Nicaragua. Contrary to the claims of the Commission, a harmony between the espoused dual goals of Human Rights and security are not reached in the report. The Commission requests immediate military aid for El Salvador with multi-year funding guarantees, yet certification language is shunted off for Congress to draft and see to it that it

VIOLATE. HUMAN RIGHTS?

AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES USING REPRESSIVE MEASURES TO COPE WITH INTERNAL PROBLEMS.

DR. KISSINGER WHAT ABOUT — WELL, FIRST WE MUST AID TO COUNTRIES WHICH DISTINGUISH BETWEEN...

TOTALITARIAN REGIMES BENT

AND HOW DO YOU MAKE THAT DISTINCTION?

is not pocketed by the President. Such funding guarantees seem to, by their very nature, lessen any leverage which Human Rights certification procedures might have. The report in fact, callously classifies death squad actions as a primitive method of counter-insurgency, which will be replaced by the U.S. model, "expensive", but "modern" and "enlightened". The report itself, as Robert Armstrong of N.A.C.L.A. commented, "is a counter-insurgency plan". As in Vietnam, "military measures are needed to shield economic and social programs."

The report is masterfully presented and insidious in its content. Aware of liberal dissent and issues where criticism has been sharp, as well as the strides of a successful albeit fledgling revolution in the region, the report anticipates and addresses important issues hitherto ignored by Reagan. Though dealt with in a perfunctory fashion, or in an ahistorical method of introduction, issues such as literacy, housing, hunger, medical care and judicial reform are addressed. Kissinger even draws out of the closet and dusts off the Peace Corps for revitalization (emulating the Cuban brigades). Yet fundamentally the program presented by the report is based on a model of military domination. A successful counter-insurgency effort is not a substitute for negotiation. But such an effort—the more rapid the better—is a necessary condition for a political solution." (nv. 97) The scenario projected is that the military shield will allow for another set of elections, which apparently have become tantamount to democracy in these times when words, concepts, 

Michael Scurato/LNS

and principles have become devoid of their meanings. Another significant double-think arena, is the assertion that the U.S. is not opposed to indigenous reforms or revolutions. Nicaragua, painted as the “stepping stone" for Cuban and Soviet efforts at insurgency in Central America does not fall into that category of indigenous revolution. Neither arms flow conjectures nor other cold war assertions are documented by evidence in the report or elsewhere. Unfortunately, all sections went on examining the indigenous causes for unrest, poverty, hunger, land dis-

Poverty from page 16

strategies which seek to unite women across the class spectrum while remaining oblivious both to the particularities of the conditions faced by minority and poor women and to the oppression suffered by minority and other working-class men have always doomed the women's movement to remaining under the hegemony of white women of the middle classes. The “feminization of poverty" analysis and strategy promises to be a repeat performance. The “feminization of poverty" will certainly be projected with greater frequency as the 1984 elections approach, as the guide to women's fightback in the 1980s and as the antidote to Reaganism. But this analysis should be treated with great suspicion by the left. It draws the class line incorrectly, ejecting minority and other working-class men from the fight against poverty while including women who are not threatened by poverty at all. It envisions no independent voice for working-class forces in the women's movement. It must be rejected as an analysis of women's condition and a strategy for women's liberation.

Big Mama

tribution are swept aside as irrelevant by a latter section of the report. "Whatever the social and economic conditions that invited insurgency in the region, outside intervention is what gives the conflict its present character" (p. 87) Nicaragua, inherently a threat to U.S. national security, becomes the target of intervention and possible invasion. Ironically enough, the section entitled "The Search for Peace" extensively develops an argument for continuing the U.S.-CIA contra attacks or “incentives and pressures of the Managua regime, holding firmly to U.S. models for the region, i.e. intransigence, ensuring that the Nicaraguans are “aware that force remains an ultimate recourse" (p. 119) hence, inducing Nicaragua to negotiate on U.S. terms.

Though the report states, "There is no self-determination when there is foreign compulsion or when nations make themselves tools of a strategy designed on other continents", (p. 12) apparently Kissinger would have us believe that nations from the same continent can impose their will and strategems with impunity.

Theresa Carr New Haven, CT.

This critique was reprinted from Discussion Paper No. 3-September 1983, the Alliance Against Women's Oppression. AAWO is a national multi-racial organization of women committed to reforging the US women's movement on a revolutionary, anti-capitalist and anti-racist basis.

For more information about AAWO and/or copies of this critique in its entirety, contact: Alliance Against Women's Oppression—

The Women's Building, 3543-18th Street, San Francisco, CA 94110.

Ngo Place

Presenting a 20-page annotated Mail Order Catalog of Lesbian, Feminist & Children's books, records & buttons

Send $1.00 with your name & address 425 S. Mill Ave. Tempe, AZ 85281 (602) 966-927

Rag, March, 1984 - Page 15