Me

Songs For The Holiday Season

By The Karen Silkwood Memorial Choir, Olympia, WA

The First Hard Sell Jingle Coins

The first hard sell comes sometime in June

When last season's Christmas cards take too much room  
So they put them out in an off-season bin  

For June they are getting their new shipments in  

The trinkets in our line are mostly from Hong Kong  

Where there's no overtime, and no one thinks it's wrong  
The labor there is plentiful and practically free  
Producing little ornaments to dangle from your tree  

Hard sell, hard sell, hard sell, hard sell! Oh, jingle coins, jingle coins, jingle in the till  
This is the Christmas that we know so well. Oh, what fun it is to sell and to call it all goodwill  
Jingle coins, jingle coins, jingle in the banks  

About midway through July all the lay-away plans  
Christ came to save the winter slump, and for that we give our thanks  
Make their laying away in the manger demands  
Now Christmas is the time to demonstrate your joy  
And installment plans begin their attempts to entice  
And generosity with those whom you employ  
You end up paying twice the original price. So what's a bonus now, a few bucks there or here?  
These are the folks you'll underpay throughout the coming year.  
Then early in the fall there's a preseason bluff  

To sell gift wrapping, ribbons and other such stuff  
Buy it now, the ads demand, if you don't buy it you  
Will discover we're out of it when you want to.  

By the time October comes every store's lined with snares  
Suffering Into War  

With the Halloween, Christmas and Thanksgiving wares  
What once were festivals that were simple and plain  

Have become mere excuses for capital gains  
Goddess rest ye merry amazons, let nothing you dismay  

Remember it is us ourselves who're going to lead the way  
But it's Christmas, after all, and who cares if you go  
To save all from the slow death of injustice every day  
All the rest of next year paying out what you owe  
We are turning our suffering into rage, strength and war  
While store presidents fly south spreading change and good cheer  
We are turning our suffering into war.  

To be back in good time to start early next year.  

We won't submit to male dominance nor racist, classist creeds  
We strive for a principled unity to satisfy all needs  

For kids, ourselves, the elderly, the earth and all she feeds  
We are turning our suffering into rage, strength and war  

We are turning our suffering into war.  

BOYCOTT COORS  

Joy for the rich and corporate elite, as their greedy fingers reach  
To all of us consumers, who can't ignore the rumors  

We must boycott Coors beer, we must boycott Coors beer  

We must, we must boycott Coors beer.  

Joe Coors delights in harassment of every worker there  
Practicing union-busting, so let's give him a dusting  
We must boycott Coors beer.....  

So in these days of holiday cheer, think twice when you reach for beer  
Standing up for workers’ rights is an all our fight  
We must boycott Coors beer.....  

Ruby The Red Star Worker  

Ruby the red star worker, worked each season dragging trees  
Making three bucks an hour, trying to feed her family  

Most of the other workers knew the job was pretty low  

But without the meager wages, they would have no place to go  

Then one rainy winter's day, Ruby rose to say  
"Workers, with some unity, we could end this misery"  

"We should go out on strike, deprive the company of their trees  
Expose this Christmas farce, and bring the bosses to their knees"  

So they all went out on strike, formed a picket line  
Once they proved that they could fight, soon there were no scabs in sight  

All of the striking workers started shouting out with glee  
"Ruby the red star worker, we'll go down in history"  
-New Women's Survival Catalog  

----------X-Word Puzzle----------  

Answers On Page 22  

ACROSS DOWN  

1. Bay area band (init) 2. 1st state to gain women's suffrage (abbr.)  
2. Dessie 3. photostatic  

9. Death notice 4. Living Lesbians  

11. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee 5. Overtime (abbr.)  

12. More Genocide in My Name" 6. Information  

14. Detect, notice 7. Large numbers of Third World  
15. Tellurial (abbr.) women are systematically and  
16. Deidre forcibly  

18. Substance used in rooting and paving 8. She fought back.  

19. Dregs 10. The man  

20. Trail (abbr.) 13. Sappho Was a Right Woman  
21. Germaine 14. The Big  

22. Teresa 17. Glint  

23. Associated Press (abbr.) 18. Sojourner  

24. A bold, lively woman 20. Delineate we  

25. Brink, border 22. Type of muscle  

27. Sonia 24. Small salmon  

29. Civil disobedience (abbr.) 26. Object of worship  

30. Ass (Cockney) 28. Twelfth letter  

31. The (Fr.) 33. Alternating current (abbr.)  
32. Mythical Greek figure loved by Zeus 34. Direct current (abbr.)  

35. Walker  
36. Sweet Honey In The