10

a column

Chocolate Waters

Cora the Traveling Bookmobile — Six industrious Canadian women
have been traveling around with a really unique and effective way for
disseminating information about the Women’s Movement. Cora the
Traveling Bookmobile is a big fire-engine red bus with the words
“Women’s Liberation Bookmobile” printed in foot-high letters across
the side. The bus is named after E. Cora Hind, a pioneer suffragist, and it
moves from town to town in Canada distributing books, pamphlets, and
plenty of information. The bookmobile has been very successful in its
first year and will be on the road again by April. Anyone with money or
materials to donate should contact Cora at 195 Seaton Street, Toronto,
Canada. (The Other Woman, Fall, '74; $3 a year, Box 928, Station Q,
Toronto 7, Canada.)

“Our Bodies Deemed Dirty — The women’s health book, Our
Bodies, Ourselves, was banned from a high school class in Gilroy, CA. ‘It
is one of the dirtiest, dirtiest books I've ever read,’ said one school
trustee. The trustees who made the decision also added that, ‘The
book is contrary to the predominant moral values of the taxpayers in this
community . . . it is a political document and propaganda for socialist left-
ism!” -Looks like these people not only know nothing about the
Women’s Movement, they don’t know anything about the left either!
(reprinted from Science for the People)

Really! — ‘The barter and sale that goes on under the name of love is
highly obnoxious” — Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, nineteenth century
pioneer.

Watt A Minute! — A Manager of the Energy Systems and Planning
program at General Electric claimed that Women’s Liberation is partly
to blame for the energy crisis. His reasoning was that industry and
government account for three-fourths of the electricity used and that
more women have taken jobs in industry and government, therefore... .
(fill in your own circuit). (Women In Struggle, May-June, '74.)

Dull Liberation ZZZZZZZ — in a purported interview with Blanche
Bland, a spokesperson for the Dull Liberationists, it was recently learned
that dull people can learn to accept themselves and lead relatively
dull lives. Ms. Bland, who is a member of the Daughters of Dullitis
(some people pronounce it Delete - us), talks about her involvement
with weekly rap sessions on being dull, raps for older dulls, and dull
mothers’ raps. She claimed that many famous authors were dull in-
cluding Theodore Dreiser and Fenimore Cooper, and for dull reading
she recommends Valley of the Dulls or the old classic Born Boring. To a
question about being dull and happy Ms. Bland said, ‘My new lover fills
me with confidence . . . I have to say she is the dullest person I've ever
met.” And to a question about what the Bible has to say about dulls Ms.
Bland responded, “We know the Bible accepts the dull for what they
are. In fact, many of us believe God is dull.’ (Focus, a journal for gay
women, Jan. '75; $6 a year, Daughters of Bilitis, Room 323, 419
Boylston St., Boston, Mass. 02116.)

And Not Just Judy Collins Either — October Smith, a disc jockey for
WOAX in Indiana, plays only music by women on her two-hour weekly
radio program. Smith, who encountered strong opposition from the
other d.j.’s commented, ‘They said people would be bored if we played
only music by women. This is a complete fallacy.’ She plays everyone
from Joni Mitchell to Susan Pillsbury to groups like Isis and Fanny, but
laments that there are still few women who are actually working on the
production end of music. (The Indiana Daily Student)

SOOO OOOO] o><><><>

RHINOCEROS

RHINOCEROS
c/o GAY COALITION, P.O. BOX 18501
DENVER, CO., 80218, (303) 831-8838

SUBSCRIPTION RATE

Individuals $5.00
Alternative Organizations $3.00
Institutions $8.00
Students & Military $3.00

Prisoners and Mental

Patients free

Chris and Margie
They Believe in Women’s Music

Chocolate Waters

Cris Williamson. Margie
Adam. Two women who believe
in music. Women’s music. And
they not only believe in it, they
write it, sing it, play it, and carry
it around with them like their life
blood. Which it is.

On the Sunday after they
played two concerts at the
Denver Free University, Margie
and Cris talked about women’s
music with as much enthusiasm
as they had displayed at their
Saturday night performances.

“Strong women’s music,”
said Margie, “affirms our own
sense of strength and validates
every woman in the audience.”
Both women agree that their
music is woman-identified, that
it promotes feminist values
while still being very personal
and often even dreamy.

Source of Confusion

Nevertheless, the political
aspects of women’s music and
what the connection between
music and politics should be is a
real source of confusion for the
two performers. Their primary
concern is to be proficient
musicians and to bring large
numbers of women together.
They feel a very definite commit-
ment to the Women’s Movement
as well. This commitment is not
always overtly expressed in the
lyrics of their music, but Margie
questioned “how political music
can get before it ceases to be
poetry and becomes polemics?”
Margie has temporarily stopped
composing because of this
problem while Cris is reluctant
to give up the dreaminess which
so many of her own songs ex-
hibit.

“Although they really want to
“encourage sisterhood and the

Profit Motive

Big Mama Rag

power of that,” they still feel un-
certain about what their role
should be toward encouraging
political action. “Women come
to concerts and get really high,
so we know we have tremen-
dous influence as musicians,”
explained Margie. “We don’t
want everybody just to go home
and make love. I think some ac-
tion should result,” she con-
tinued, “but I don’t know exactly
what to do with that yet.”

They freely admit that a lot of
their music is about two years
behind their politics, but as Cris
said, ‘We often feel like we’re
about six spaces ahead of
ourselves and moving all the
time.”

Cris and Margie both believe
that women’s music is probably
one of the most powerful unify-
ing factors in the Women’s
Movement. “Music seems to bring
about a tolerance for each
other's political views,’ and they
have found this to be true in the
concerts they have been doing
around the country. Cris and
Margie also talked about how
women’s music has been
mushrooming everywhere, and
about how women musicians
have been freely exchanging
and performing each other's
work. ‘Music is a good connec-
tor,” offered Margie, “because it
travels.”

Concerts Always Open

And reaching a lot of different
women is a goal which is ex-
pressed by the two performers.
Their concerts are always open
so that “no one will be left out,”
said Cris, but both women are
concerned that the audience
usually consists of 18-30 year-old
white Lesbian Feminists.

Margie and Cris, who are from
California, have reached a point
where they can almost support
themselves with their music.
Cris has been performing for
many years, but Margie, who
was primarily a songwriter, has
just started singing in the past
two years. Both are interested in
redefining the concept of
professionalism so that it isn't a
dirty word. They think that
women’s music is so important
that musicians owe it to
themselves and to their
audience to be as proficient as
possible.

Another area which concerns
them is the relationship of the
audience to the performer. They
lot has been
written about performers who
are on star trips and ego trips,
but that virtually nothing has
been said about the responsibili-
ty of the audience to the per-
former. Margie explained that
they want to make themselves
accessible to the audience dur-
ing a concert, but that this
accessibility cannot always be
translated into the reality of their
everyday lives. ‘There is a real
difference between who the
audience perceives you to be
and who you really are,” said
Margie. Women must remember
that we are people like
themselves and we just can't
relate on a personal level to
everyone all the time.”

Cris Williamson’s single, “‘If it
Weren't for the Music’ is
available for $1.80 from the
women’s music company, Olivia
Records (P.O. Box 1784, Main
City Station, Washington, D.C.
20013). Margie Adam's song
“Beautiful Soul” is going to be
released soon by the popular
singer, Dusty Springfield.

Radical Mastectomy Mutilates

The “operation women fear
most” — radical mastectomy for
breast cancer — is on nearly
every woman's mind these days.

The Women’s Movement and
a few doctors are gaining more
supporters for their contention
that the disfiguring and painful
radical mastectomy may be out-
moded and that simpler
operations often do just as well.

What is breast cancer? Dr.
Crile defines it as a “malignant
tumor which starts either in the
milk glands or in the ducts that
carry the milk to the nipple.” One
of the greatest dangers is that
the cancer can spread widely
throughout the body.

This year some 90,000
women will contract this disease
which is the greatest cause of
death among women between
the ages of 37 and 55. About
33,000 women will die of it.

A recent Gallup poll showed
that most women know nothing
about breast cancer and that
most doctors do nothing to help
them. The survey showed that
only 18 percent of women ex-
amine their breasts every
month; that 3/4 of the women
interviewed do not have a doctor
who examines their breasts at
every visit; and that among
women who see gynecologists
regularly, half said their doctors
don’t bother to check their
breasts.

The Gallup poll also showed
that the problem of not receiving
proper care and instruction “is
particularly severe among older
women, poorly educated low-
income women and Blacks.” The
doctors do only the minimum at
the cost of the very lives of their
patients. Naturally, the working
class, oppressed nationalities
and those on a fixed income bear
the brunt of this.

Every woman should check
her breasts once a month and
make sure her doctor examines
them. Ninety-five percent of
breast cancers are found in this
way, and the sooner they are
found and treated, the better the
woman's chance of surviving
and of undergoing the most
minimal treatment.

The mutilating radical mastec-
tomy performed in most breast-
cancer cases is the original
operation developed over a cen-
tury ago when very little was
known about cancer. This opera-
tion “seems to have been
designed to inflict the maximal
possible deformity, disfiguration
and disability,” says Dr. Crile.
For not only is the breast remov-
ed, but the overlying skin, the
two big muscles of the chest wall
and all of the fatty tissue and
lymph nodes in the armpit are
also excised.

In the last few years there has
been much evidence that this
radical surgery is not necessary.
In the Scandinavian countries
and Britain, the radical mastec-
tomy has all but been abandoned
and the results in treatment are
as good or better.

The National Cancer Institute
declared in September (ironically
on the day Betty Ford un-
derwent a radical mastectomy)
that the radical mastectomy
seems to offer no advantage
over the simpler operations that
have been developed. ‘We con-
sider this to be one of the most
important series of findings in
the history of cancer research,”
said the spokesperson.

“The chances of survival of
patients following simple
removal of the breast or removal
of the breast and axillary lymph
nodes are just as good as, or a lit-
tle better than, after the more
mutilating radical mastectomy,”
writes Dr. Crile.

The medical establishment
has strongly opposed doctors
who advocate and women who
insist on the simpler operation.

Many women have stated that
they believe that doctors would
not so jealously guard such a
radical surgery technique if the
operation were performed on
males.

Profits and male supremacy
are likely motives for continuing
to perform the radical mastec-
tomy. Dr. Crile writes that a ma-
jor “reason for the popularity of
radical mastectomy is that it is a
larger . . more challenging
operation than the simpler ones.
. . it is more satisfactory to do a
large operation than a small one.
And, in a free-enterprise system,
the fee for a large operation is
also larger...

“In short, the surgeon is paid
two to three times as much (by
insurance companies) for per-
forming a mutilating operation
than for performing one that
leaves the woman relatively in-
tact.”

Dr. Crile offers a sort of bill of
rights for patients: you don't
have to have a radical mastec-
tomy; lesser operations almost
never cause so much discom-
fort; if your surgeon won't con-
sider anything but a radical
mastectomy, find one who will;
seek treatment early; you have a
right to choose.

- guardian/community
press features