health

The Politics Of Psychoanalysis:

I have seen patients complain of side effects—refuse their drugs—only to be jumped on by as many guards as it takes to administer the drug by injection. Usually forced drugging is followed by some form of isolation or restraint. Isolation rooms are typically small rooms with barred windows or no windows. A rubberized mattress is sometimes left on the floor, sometimes not. Patients are stripped and placed in hospital garb or left nude. A single light bulb, protected by wire mesh, lights the room as long as there is a patient in lock-up. A small window in the door allows for constant observation by staff. You have to beg to get to the toilet—sometimes there is a "pot" in the room for defecating. I remember trying very hard to become part of the wall, in isolation, to avoid the eyes of the ever-watchful staff. Other alternative methods for control include leather restraints (which frequently leave the wrists and ankles of the patient bruised and bleeding), straitjackets, being wrapped in wet sheets or restrained in hot tubs. In California now there are investigations into well over a hundred deaths related to drug mismanagement (to put it nicely).

Women are drugged more, with less cause than might result in the drugging of males, in line with sex-role stereotypes that allow for more aggressiveness in men. Many drugs like lithium and thorazine are prescribed for life (this kind of lifetime drugging can result in an early death for the patient). The patient is convinced that she can live sane with drugs or insane without.

Two other major drugs that perhaps should be mentioned here, not covered in the article on phenothiazines, are Lithium and Prolixin. Lithium is not in fact a drug but a metallic element, and also a very dangerous chemical. Blood tests must be taken every day for the first few weeks the drug is administered, and monthly for as long as the drug is used. If there is too little it doesn't "work"; if there is too much the person becomes ill with nervousness, tremors, frequent urination, diarrhea, drowsiness, vomiting, ringing in the ears, blurred vision, a drunken walk. Unconsciousness and eventually death occur if the person experiencing these reactions is not hospitalized. The above may occur if the person on Lithium becomes sick and starts vomiting, has diarrhea, is not eating regularly, or has kidney disease. Even on the "right dosage" the thyroid gland may be disturbed with goiter. Other parts of the body may be damaged as well.

Prolixin is an anti-psychotic mind crusher that is given as an injection once every two or three weeks. There is no way to control the strength of the drug after injection. This drug, which has been deposited in your ass, will slowly seep into your blood system day...after day...after day. This drug solves the problem of getting psychiatric patients/prisoners to take their drugs. It's easy to give, saves time, and ensures complete con—

Through The Looking Glass

While drugs, shock, and surgery are the three worst forms of psychiatric care, we must remember that the whole system functions to dehumanize the patient, and somehow blunt the emotional responses of the individual to the society. There are several forms of therapy that sound good, like individual analysis or various forms of group therapies. These cures also require that the patients internalize their problems and accept the psychiatrist as an authority figure in the situation. And, women have suffered sexual exploitation/abuse at the hands of the individual therapist in the name of therapy. Drugs are still administered. Therapy is mystified in psychoanalytic language controlled by the therapist. Most psychoanalytic theories are based on classist, sexist, and racist assumptions. Although the lack of institutionalization lessens the blow, just as much damage can be done at the hands of an individual, as at the hands of an institution.

In the hospital, group therapy took place in a small room with a one-way mirror. One day when our group leaders were late we took over the room. We covered the mirrors, disconnected the microphone and blocked the door. There were a whole bunch of shrinks and staff on the other side of the mirror. We had apparently taken them by surprise. It made a hit with the other patients and pissed off the staff which resulted in our confinement to the ward and extra drugs.

Unseating

We—us in the little room—were just amazed with one another. It was like we had seized this power, and then there was nowhere to go with it. And we were terrified. And we loved it. After about 20-30 minutes we came out peaceably. One of us was later to comment that it was like Gotham City without Batman and Robin.

In some ways the takeover of the group therapy room and the sense of power that was coupled simultaneously with a sense of powerlessness, was similar to how I was responding to my therapy. I had learned a lot about myself that I had never known before.

I understood the roots of my depression and how I came to be suicidal...and this new insight gave me a sense of power. And yet I was still nearly immobilized because I did not have any idea how to use this information to change my life, and put an end to feelings of guilt that were not rightly mine. The ability to make real change in my life came not with my therapy, but with my political growth.

So finally we come to consider what happens when we apply feminism to all this stuff about therapy. Does it mean that we demand an end to sexism in therapy—and that that's enough? To end the psychiatric oppression of women (and our own exploitation in all other areas) is not that simple as women are also bound by class and race.

Most therapists are white males with middle to upper-class values. There are class distinctions in an understanding of attitudes toward work, home, professionals, and the medical community that most therapists do not acknowledge. The therapeutic relationship is a social one, not medical. The social interaction between therapist and patient is removed from reality—practiced outside the life of the patient, and yet this interaction is social and does not escape the classist societal values. Along with statistics that show women more institutionalized, drugged, shocked, and lobotomized than men—they also show that a study of “lower class" involvement with the psychiatric system demonstrates a similar trend.

People bound by race and class oppression are not able to afford or even have access to individual therapies and so are more often directly institutionalized, even though their problems are no more severe than those who have access to private treatment. Upon institutionalization minorities and the poor are given the more severe psychiatric labels. The upper class is eccentric while the "lower class" is schizophrenic or psychotic.

Upon making a re-entry into society from therapy or institutionalization race and class differences continue to control who will make a successful re—

health

The Professional Therapists

entry and who will end up back again, and again, and again in the hospital. The more severe diagnosis, the lack of access to education, lack of job skills, and a greater inability to hide one's background of mental illness ensure the failure of many patients of color and the poor. This cycle reinforces the white male bias of the psychiatric community which then views them as more seriously ill and further legitimizes the more extreme and destructive "psychiatric treatments." Political examination of the bias in society will not be confronted by its professionals.

To examine this statement from Dr. Walter Freeman, father of lobotomy in the U.S.; "My favorite patients were Black women, and women were always the predominant lobotomy victims" in a political context must cause an examination of a system that lists this man as a professional healer. Professional is the key word here. Professionalism says that there are a few of us who make theories about the rest of us. This is a fact of our society, not just in psychiatry, but in all aspects of our lives; like a boss who has never done our work, telling us how to do it. Psychiatric theory, then, is not built on, or based in our lives; but based in the abstract, in a conjectured understanding of only one half the picture—which, irregardless, is applied to the whole of society.

Power in this society, and in therapy, is based on the oppression of many for the benefit of a few.

It is through this whole social hierarchy that the medical community becomes a haven for, and the perpetrator of sexism, racism, and classism: a system through which capitalism can maintain social control to its benefit. Under capitalism, all those labeled unfit and dependent, i.e. women, children, lesbians, all minorities, all poor, those with “mental retardation," the psychiatrically and criminally institutionalized will be subject to exploitation—labeled as treatment, care, or support—until we all rise up together and say NO MORE!

Herein lies the potential alliance between the feminist therapy movement and the anti-psychiatric movement. A possible alliance that has been thwarted, in part, by the feminist therapy movement and their politics. According to liberal feminist therapy our primary "enemy" has been the socialization of men and women into strictly defined sex roles. The liberal feminist therapy movement then turns its energy towards: changing child-rearing to make it non-sexist, getting husbands and male lovers to take part in housework and child-rearing, fighting for civil rights—the ERA, supporting women in career aspirations, opening up greater choices for women, encouraging the view of women as whole persons—not as the "better half." Women are encouraged to consider another role besides that of wife and mother—that women don't have to get married, but could be fulfilled by their work (like men).

The first problem with this model is the presumption that all women have choices. Often a successful career choice would not include those jobs that are open to working-class women. This attitude reflects back to the acceptance of professionalism. Decisions to create a home life with shared responsibility between husband and wife for housework and kids; or to remain unmarried remain individual solutions. Working-class women have less of a chance for meeting their financial needs outside of marriage, the question of whether to marry or not to marry then becomes an issue of economics not just social convention.

Feminist therapy is no answer to psychiatric oppression, any more than the ERA is the answer to the oppression of women. Like the ERA, Feminist Therapy places a band-aid over a gaping wound in our side. The ERA which is proposed as a solution to equal employment opportunity and pay for all women, was long ago recognized by working-class women as a middle-class hype that does not address our needs. The Feminist Therapy Movement is a similar solution with similar problems; for individualized or group feminist therapy addresses the needs of only a few privileged women. This will oppress and alienate many women because of its implied classism, racism, and professionalism.

Feminist therapy fails to support women who are the victims of psychiatric oppression in several ways: The vision of feminist therapy remains focused on the development of a non-sexist therapy. Information and analysis have not been presented on the core of psychiatric oppression which occurs when women are institutionalized. We have learned to accept and support the woman who has gotten herself into feminist therapy and yet still pull away from women who are "really crazy." Feminist Therapy allows us to be co-opted in the belief that we can make the psychiatric system "be nice." We will never succeed in this goal, neither will we make the government (capitalism) be nice or the police be nice. That women are the primary victims of shock, surgery, and drugging, would seem to be the logical focus of a feminist movement against psychiatric oppression which would in due course confront sexist practices in all forms of therapy. The majority of professional feminist therapists are white middle-class women with middle and upper-class values. The liberal feminist analysis of who women are and what they need are built on the myths of individualism and free choice...that individual women can achieve liberation without altering the political/economic structures which keep women as a whole oppressed and exploited. Demands from a radical feminist psychiatric movement must include: an end to electroconvulsive therapy, an end to psychosurgery, an end to over-drugging and forced drugging, an end to involuntary commitment and treatment, an end to the term and concept of mental illness, an end to the control of alternative programs by professionals—true alternatives must be controlled by the people who use them. Alternatives include residences, drop-in centers, advocacy programs, consciousness-raising groups, psychiatric detox centers, support systems, crisis services, publications...etc., an end to the training of mental health workers that offers only a professional perspective, and this is only the beginning of radical demands that have a real potential of altering the horrors of the institution of psychiatry. Anything less is only window dressing. Being a radical feminist doesn't mean that I never get depressed anymore. I sometimes endure a great fear of losing the will to control my life and mind. Being political, however, has made it possible to put my “awareness" into actual personal and social change. This alliance of the personal and the political is essential to a perspective on feminist therapy. This politic allows women who are in therapy, struggling for their mental survival to be in political alliance with women who are demanding an end to capitalism and patriarchy; instead of seeing our struggle for change in opposition to one another. All levels of struggle are necessary for the liberation of women and an end to psychiatric oppression.

(All quotes in this article were taken from the Madness Network News Reader.)

Big Mama Rag, May, 1981 - Page 17