The Exciting Eighties

Janet Sergi

Happily the selfish seventies are  
drawing to a close. They need to be  
analysed. Introspection, hedonism, and  
cynicism reached new depths in the  
70's. The lifestyle changes of the  
sixties were coopted into the trendy  
mentalities of the 70's. What will  
the eighties be like? Hopefully exci-  
ting. This economic overview of the  
late seventies will sketch the econo-  
mic boundaries in which feminism will  
find itself during the coming decade,  
the exciting eighties.

Jerry Brown calls the coming decade  
the age of limits. His opportunistic,  
but skillful exploitation of trends  
serves to popularize a major motif of the  
late seventies: limits. We have reach-  
ed the end of "the sky is the limit."

Feminists must convince  
ourselves of the necessity  
to fight this enemy.

view of America. Just as the “endless”  
western frontier closed at the end of  
the last century, the economic "end-  
less" frontier begins to close now.  
The limitless frontiers of economic  
imperialism by the multinationals has  
been reached. The Third World symbol-  
ized by the OPEC oil cartel is begin-  
ning to fight back. We cannot have all  
the oil we want, at the price we want.

Due to the oil and auto industries’  
choices after WWII to base the Ameri-  
can economy on private cars and trucks  
we have begun to suffer the conse-  
quences of their gasoholic decisions!  
Present oil reserves are running low.  
The oil companies' choice of quick pro-  
fits - sell as much oil as possible as  
quickly as possible - meant necessary  
but expensive investment in efficient  
refinery capacities produced the pre-  
sent refined oil shortage. Some abso-  
lute loss of oil reserves only adds to  
the basic problem and gives some  
validity to high oil prices.

The American working people are for-  
ced to bear the burden of rebuilding  
the multinational oil corporations’  
refineries through high energy prices.  
This hurts not only at the gas pump.  
All goods and services will cost more;  
a pair of shoes will cost more to  
make, ship, store and sell. Oil profit  
will also be invested in uranium hold-  
ings and nuclear reactor projects  
owned by the energy companies. General  
mobility will be severely limited; i.e.  
fewer mothers received visits from  
their children on Mother's Day 1979  
due to gas shortages and high prices.  
Also moving from state to state and  
city to city will be limited due to  
the accompanying inflation and poor  
job prospects of a slowed down, reces-  
sion prone, energy short economy.

Inflation is tied to low productivi-  
ty; productivity is the amount of goods  
and services produced per woman-hour  
of work. Lazy workers and high union  
wages are not the problem. American  
industry did not invest in enough new  
efficient machinery since WWII. West-  
ern Europe and Japan did. Their goods  
are cheaper and more competitive. Am-  
erican corporate giants choose quick  
profits through advertising a wasteful  
consumer lifestyle. Corporate govern-  
ment chooses defense spending through  
deficit spending rather than increased  
taxation due to the political unpopu-  
larity of the Vietnam War. Government  
debt went up: an unbalanced budget.  
There was not enough money left over  
for housing, medical care, education,  
social welfare and a clean environment.  
All this made the American economy slow  
down; a recession reoccurs and at the  
same time inflation and unemployment in-  
creases. This means salaries don't keep  
up with prices, and strikes become in-  
effective due to the large labor re-  
serves of unemployed workers, especial-  
ly youths, women and minorities.  
Nuclear families need two jobs to meet  
basic expenses. People on fixed incomes  
such as the disabled and elderly have  
to choose between food or heat. Cheap  
or inflated dollars may hurt the aver-  
age American but they help corporations.  
They make American goods cheaper to  
sell overseas and make foreign goods  
more expensive here. So, the once cheap  
VCR now costs $6,000 while IBM Computers  
are cheaper and easier to sell abroad.

The stress of recession, inflation,  
and unemployment produce instability  
in family life, make relationships and  
friendships strained. Hostility is mis-  
directed to the people closest to you  
instead of onto the responsible multi-  
nationals. Despair, desperation and  
alienation increase in our lives. We  
take it out on ourselves. Since Ameri-  
cans are purposely ill-informed on  
economic matters, the complex causes of  
our own financial troubles are not un-  
derstood nor easily identifiable. We  
blame our lovers and friends for making  
"unneeded" purchases with our or their  
increasingly worthless dollars.

Another distressing fact, that part-  
time job of the sixties and early sev-  
enties doesn't pay the rent anymore.  
Therefore, feminist projects such as  
Mama Rag can't be staffed as easily.  
Likewise, the cost of paper, ink, print-  
ing and supplies are rising astronomi-  
cally. The bad economy is destroying  
the movement as no agent ever could.  
Still, we blame ourselves for each  
failure.

The bad economy is  
destroying the movement  
as no agent ever could.

As times get tougher, we need each  
other more. The women's community in  
which we once sought identity, comfort  
and social acceptability, now needs to  
become a survival support system. Al-  
ready weakened by ideological and per-  
sonal strife, this new economic burden  
could break the fragile community struc-  
ture. As women devote more time to  
their jobs, community energies will be  
sapped into the workplace. The economy  
of the eighties may doom our women's  
communities. The government knows this.

Jimmy Carter was astute to fire Bella  
Abzug when she questioned his economic  
policies. As the hand-picked president-  
ial candidate of the David Rockefeller-  
chaired Trilateral Commission, Carter  
cannot allow the corporate domain of  
economic policy to be attacked, espec-  
ially by a woman with a mass following.  
Bella began publicly to define econo-  
mic policy as a women's issue. Bella is  
right. The eighties will be exciting  
if we as feminists take up this battle.  
Feminists need to tackle the economic  
ramifications of our present condition.  
This means continued leadership in the  
anti-nuclear movement -- notice the  
amount of real power women have in it  
versus the subordinate role played by  
women in the anti-war movement.

The whole debate of hard/high techno-  
logy and centralized nuclear power vs.  
the soft/forgiving and decentralized  
technology of solar energy are the para-  
digm male/female views of reality. The  
feminist critique of the patriarchy  
with its aggressive and destructive use  
of rationality holds equally true as a  
critique of nuclear technology and its  
destructive probabilities. The feminist  
vision of a holistic and humane life-  
style is dependent on an ecological  
solar-based economy.

Regional planning and decentralized  
economy would automatically reduce the  
need to exploit other countries and re-  
gions of the world. Likewise, solar  
technology developed here could rapidly  
be used to bring the underdeveloped  
world to self-sufficiency at a decent  
standard of living without huge capital  
outlays a nuclear or oil-based economy  
would need.

The eighties have a chance to be the  
beginning decade of the humanization of  
the whole economy -- a truly exciting  
prospect. However, we, as feminists,  
must not succumb to the taunting of  
the New Right, who are now devouring  
themselves in hate: see Crane/Reagan  
cannibalization of each other in the  
primaries. The New Right is a pesky  
backlash to the real social victories  
of the sixties and early seventies:  
feminism, gay rights, and social pro-  
grams such as food stamps and welfare  
reforms.

The New Right is only one part of the  
ruling class. The monied Yankee estab-  
lishment who supports liberal reforms  
like welfare are another enemy of fem-  
inists. Jimmy Carter's bosses, the  
Rockefeller-led Eastern Establishment  
are the owners and creators of the high  
technological/nuclear-based, computer-  
run 1984 future.

“THEY ARE HINTING THINGS LIKE FE  
GOVERNMENT SHOULD NOT ACT TO MAKE OPPORTUNITIES FOR  
THAT ARE NOT FAIR. THE FEDERAL  
WORK AND POOR EXACTLY EQUAL *-~¢ cane

A minute and detailed analysis of how  
and why these multinationals run the  
world's economy must be made a feminist  
task. Feminists must convince ourselves  
of the necessity to fight this hidden  
but all-encompassing enemy. The fight  
will take the rest of this century. It  
will determine the course of human his-  
tory. The choices are a world-wide hum-  
ane level of existence or a world-  
destroying nuclear war. A war started by  
one big nuclear-armed power or the other  
over scarce resources such as a Middle  
Eastern oil field. The choice is ours.  
An ecological and just world with limit-  
less excitement or death.

Commercial message: Two readable pub-  
lications about the economy and the  
future are

In These Times

P.O. Box 228

Westchester, IL 60153  
$17.50/year, a weekly democratic  
socialist newspaper.

Dollars and Sense

38 Union Square, Rm 14

Somerville, MA 02143

$7.50/year, a monthly easy to read  
journal of economics.

As many of you may know by now, Colo-  
rado's first lesbian conference is be-  
ing planned for next September.

It's time we all meet one another,  
get to know each other, talk about our  
concerns, problems, interests, our  
differences. We intend to help create  
workable, long-lasting networks in  
the cities and across the state. These  
communication links would make it pos-  

To All Colorado Lesbians

who joined together late last year to  
organize the conference. We are: Ann  
Daniel, Linda Fowler, Jane Hoback,  
Carol Lease, Neirdre Reilly and Wood.  
Although we come from a variety of  
different political backgrounds and  
some of us are members of other groups  
and organizations, as members of the  
conference planning committee, we do  
not represent other groups or organi-  

LESBIANS~COLORADO  
OUR FIRST GATHERING

sible for women with mutual interests  
to be in contact with each other and  
set up a lesbian women's music network,  
for example. We want to affirm our  
lesbian feminist identities through  
our own culture and increase our visi-  
bility in this society.

The conference is set for a three-  
day weekend in September in Denver,  
although the exact dates and a place  
have not been chosen yet. The current  
schedule includes speakers, exhibits  
and lots of fun. We are asking the  
Denver lesbian community to help house  
women attending the statewide meeting.

The planning committee is composed  
of six lesbians from the Denver area  

organizations. Nor is the conference affili-  
ated with any other group.

Currently, we are organizing the  
structure of the conference, formula-  
ting policy, trying to raise funds,  
sending information throughout the  
state as well as making other outreach  
efforts, finding facilities and plan-  
ning workshops and entertainment. We  
are also soliciting entries from Colo-  
rado lesbian artists to design a com-  
memorative poster we will sell at the  
conference.

To implement our plans, we are set-  
ting up committees in seven areas;  
FACILITIES, OUTREACH/PUBLICITY, CON-  
TENT OF THE CONFERENCE, DOCUMENTATION,  

FUNDRAISING, PRINTING and VOLUNTEER  
COORDINATION.

But we need your help -- help to work  
on conference committees as well as  
help give us ideas, to make this a  
conference that meets your needs.

We have planned two community meet-  
ings to provide information, answer  
questions and get ideas and volunteers.

THE COMMUNITY MEETINGS WILL BE:  
June 27 at 8pm and August 8 at 8pm.  
Both meetings will be at the First  
Unitarian Church Library, 1400 Lafay-  
ette. Please plan to attend.

So far, we have held two benefits  
for the conference. We sponsored Kate  
Millett, who spoke on women in Iran  
in April and the 2nd Annual Leaping  
Lesbian Follies in May. But we are  
largely dependent on individual or  
group donations to help defray con-  
ference costs. So, if you can, please  
send some money along.

If you know of any other lesbians  
or groups that would like to receive  
conference information, or if you  
could act as a contact for your coun-  
ty, city, town or bend in the road,  
let us know. All names and addresses  
are confidential.

If you would like to volunteer to  
work on a committee or if you cannot  
attend the community meetings and  
would like more details, please call  
831-9094 evenings.

WE ARE EVERYWHERE.

CONFERENCE PLANNING COMMITTEE

LESBIANS COLORADO, Our First Gathering  
P. O. Box 18767

Denver, CO 80218