Four Immigration Counselors Arrested

Women Are Charged With “Aiding Aliens”

Jeanne Busacca

Four community women in Tucson, Arizona face twenty-five criminal counts and a total of 166 years in prison for counseling aliens in their rights. They will be in Denver for four days beginning February 28, to seek support for their defense.

Three of the women, Margo Cowan, Cathy Montano, and Margie Ramirez, are staff members of the Manzo Area Council of West Tucson. The Manzo Agency is a community action agency founded in 1968 as part of the War on Poverty, and funded by the Committee on Economic Opportunity and private sources. Understanding that the poor of West Tucson needed access to everything from youth programs to food stamps to job counseling and home repair services, this agency was set up to serve seven Tucson neighborhoods.

Several thousand poor, predominantly Chicano families have worked with the agency, and in 1975, Manzo began doing immigration counseling in response to their tremendous needs. American immigration law provides a number of ways to obtain a permanent resident visa allowing an alien to live and work in the United States. One may obtain such a visa based on one's relationship to an American citizen, a permanent resident, or one's special job skills. Few lawyers do immigration work, and those that do generally charge exorbitant fees. And, the immigration service has never been known for its helping hand. Therefore, Manzo began to counsel those people who could qualify for a visa on how to do it. The local immigration office approved of the establishment of the agency and had periodic consultations with it. Countless such community immigration counseling operations exist around the country.

On April 9, 1975, suddenly a daytime raid was made on Manzo by INS agents accompanied by Assistant U.S. Attorney William Vogel. They seized almost 800 files, less than half of which involved aliens, and many of which were records of people receiving drug, alcohol, or other agency services. The raid was based on suspicion that Manzo was helping undocumented aliens get food stamps and welfare. A search warrant had been issued to seize all evidence that Margo Cowan and/or Manzo had harbored "illegal aliens," assisted them in entering the U.S., and conspired to defraud the U.S. All files were studied and no evidence regarding improper applications for food stamps or welfare was found. Yet, still after court battles, only some files have been returned and some 200 are magically unaccounted for or lost. But, the deportation of some 150 of the aliens makes it clear how the files have been used.

Obviously, the seizure of the files alone has made people reluctant to use Manzo services because there is no assurance of confidentiality. Now as few as one person a day comes for services in contrast to an average of 20-30 prior to the raid.

After the raid, the women were charged with twenty-five counts, including “aiding and abetting" aliens to elude detection, “transporting" them, and knowingly aiding “felons," that is, people here "illegally." Margo Cowan, indicted by a grand jury on all 25 counts, faces 77 years in prison and $98,500 in fines. “Many charges are far-fetched. For example, the transporting charge is based on the fact that a 4-year-old Mexican girl was driven to a Juvenile Court hearing where she got permission from the Judge to marry an American citizen. Vogel says if a person transports an alien even five feet, unless it is to take them to INS, it's in furtherance of their illegal entry.

The consequences of the charges and prosecution are devastating. All work with undocumented aliens would be jeopardized from organizing to counseling.

Aliens would be isolated from citizens and visa holders because of fear of prosecution for harboring, transporting, etc. Aliens would not have access to counselors to help them initiate their lawful visa applications and procedures, and the confidentiality of other community counseling would be jeopardized as well.

The full political implications of the Manzo situation extend even beyond the immediate dangers it has created for the Council itself, the poor of Tucson, and immigration counseling in general: In recent years, both the Nixon and Ford Administrations, as well as various state governments and sectors of the business world, have sought to blame the nation's high unemployment rate and rampant inflation on the “welfare cheats" who milk the public treasury and the undocumented workers who rob decent Americans of job opportunities.

This thesis, which serves to justify social welfare cutbacks and other government-induced austerity measures, is entirely false. And as far as “illegal aliens" in the labor market, the study concluded that:

1. The current federal estimate of the number of “illegal aliens" in the U.S. is inflated by at least several million.

2. Less than 5% of those surveyed were using government services such as unemployment compensation, welfare, food stamps, and schools.

3. Approximately three-fourths of those surveyed were paying federal income and Social Security taxes.

Despite these facts, however, scapegoating of the foreign-born (both those whose status is legal and those whose status is illegal) continues, in Tucson and throughout the U.S.

This case goes to trial in Tucson, March 8, 1977. Because Tucson is politically and geographically isolated, has a low profile, and intense anti-alien and racist prejudices, it has been picked to test such charges. It must be stopped. Your defense support is needed.

Margo Cowan will be speaking about the Manzo case Monday, Feb. 28 at CU Boulder, Auraria Higher Education Complex, DU, and other locations.

On Tuesday, March 1, there will be a benefit cocktail gathering with a cash bar, $1.50 admission. Please contact the Colorado Immigrant Council for details on times and places. Call 837-1911, ask for Carolyn Rose or Conni Kester.

CGH Administrators Deny Role In Closure

Phyllis Kadison called both the clinic receptionists and central appointments to find out just what was going on. Both sources informed me that there were no Family Planning Services offered nor other gynecology services for any woman who practiced birth control. On calling Makowski, chairman of the Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, the second week of February, to find out why and how this could all happen, his response was a flat "no, it didn't actually happen," and that the information I had was false. He told me that he would personally get me any kind of appointment I needed. The next day he told the Clinic staffers not to tell any patients about the cuts. The fact remained that Makowski lied, as Family Planning was effectively non-existent after the cuts. The only services the hospital does offer in Family Planning are for those women who are postpartum, who have miscarried, or had therapeutic abortions.

In the wake of all the cuts, the Head Nurse, Marilyn Phillips, decided to quit. She had obviously had enough cuts in her staff and enough of the blame for not covering positions which had actually been cut. Two Family Planning Nurse Practitioners spoke to Makowski many times requesting information as to what was actually happening. Each time Makowski acted as if he didn't know what was going on. The blame started to turn to Colorado State Nursing Services who had agreed.

As it stands now, the Family Planning Clinic does not exist (except for those postpartum, miscarriage, and abortion patients) and women who call the hospital are being referred to Denver General and the local clinics. The staff at D.G. had no response when asked about how they were going to handle the overload.

In the past nine months the Colorado General's quality team-nurse maternity Clinic has been phased out, and now the Family Planning Clinic has been cut and other gynecological services reduced. The hospital administration has ignored the needs and requests of the women of Colorado. In addition to these problems, an informed source said that in the next few months the Clinic's only pro-abortion doctor is quitting. This will leave anti-abortionist head Makowski in total control of hiring other anti-abortionists. Colorado General is going to have to answer its responsibilities to the women of the City and County of Denver and Colorado. We are presently organizing to protest these cuts. For further information call the Women Everywhere Radio Collective at 388-9085 or 399-7809.

In a still unexplained move, Colorado General Hospital, the state's only welfare hospital, closed its Family Planning Clinic, and has greatly reduced other gynecological services.

In mid-January the Family Planning Clinic suffered shortages of staff. Two nurses who had been assisting in the clinic since July as unpaid volunteers finally decided to stop working in the Clinic for free. When faced with the problem, the Hospital Administration, particularly Dr. Edgar Makowski and Nursing Services, ordered the patient load cut from 100 to 75 women. What Makowski ordered was literally impossible. There was just one Family Planning Nurse Practitioner available who could handle no more than an average of 30 patients a week, so, what actually happened was the sanctioning of the elimination of the Clinic. Even though both Makowski and Nursing Services knew that the Clinic was barely functioning, they both denied authorizing the cut.

Since it was impossible to get an appointment for gynecology service, I was referred to the original cut. According to one of the Clinic staff nurses, Nursing Service is not committed to progressive nursing, only "ok" nursing, and as long as the patients are getting in and out they couldn't care less what services or care were offered. The blame for the cuts is bouncing between Makowski and Nursing Services, when in actuality both hold the responsibility for the decision.

Ann Meredith, a senator, introduced Bill 268, which would require infants born alive during an abortion to be given immediate medical care. She was one of many who feared a "chilling effect" on a woman's ability to get an abortion. The senate committee tied at a 4-4 vote; however, the bill can be recalled again at any time.