Emory vs. C.U. Medical School

In the Fall of 1971, 333 women  
and 2,524 men applied for admiss-  
ion to C.U. Med. School. The  
school accepted 18 women and 117  
men. Women made up the 14% min-  
ority and men made up the 86%  
majority of the 1971 class.

Ms. Emory was one of the 315  
women who were not accepted, and  
she did not sit back and view her  
rejection with apathy. She filed a  
Sex Discrimination Suit against the  
University of Colorado Medical  
School.

The suit came to trial in the Fall  
of 1972, Judge Mitchell B. Johns  
Presiding, with Martin P. Miller  
representing Ms. Emory in the suit.

Two months later Judge Johns  
had finally reached a decision.

His verdict echoed almost  
word for word C.U.’s Defense Stat-  
istics and Logic used in the trial.  
He admitted that women are under-  
represented in Medical Schools,  
but said that C.U. Med. School has  
a better representation of women  
than most schools.

An interview with another psychologist  
proved to be favorable for her admission  
to Medical School. The report of the  
favorable interview has been conveniently  
“lost," and the psychologist who inter-  
viewed Ms. Emory is no longer on the  
board of admissions.

Although Judge Johns has ruled against  
Ms. Emory, the case will no doubt be  
appealed to a higher court. The local  
courts have bowed to the political pressure  
and bigotry which rules the Medical Profess-  
ion, including C.U. Med. School. A woman  
of the caliber of Ms. Emory will fight all the  
way to the Supreme Court and win.

Racial minorities. Most courts today  
refuse to recognize it as a basis for  
racial discrimination.

"Equal Rejection" is based on  
separating the number of applicants  
into different groups, i.e. black,  
white, male, female. C.U. Med.  
School separates their applicants in-  
to groups of male and female. The  
figures they use are the percentage of  
applicants accepted from each group.  
C.U.'s statistics show that out of  

Angela (another B.M.R. reporter)  
and I, interviewed Ms. Emory follow-  
ing the trial. She had several things  
to say to us in regard to the trial.

2,524 male applicants, 107 were accep-  
ted, a percentage of 4.24 acceptance  
of male applicants. Out of 333 female  
applicants, 18 were accepted, a per-  
centage of 5.4 of the total female  
applicants.

One of the most important things  
she pointed out was the use that C.U.  
Med. School made of the "Equal  
Rejection Theory." The "Equal Rejec-  
tion Theory" was used through the  
courts for many years; it was used  
as a basis for discriminating against  

Maureen Prrzef

When the class make-up is viewed  
in this manner, the real class make-  
up of 14% women and 86% men is  
obscured.

DENVER WOMEN'S THEATRE is  

now one year old. The member-  

Ms. Emory was also subjected to  
interviews at C.U., where questions  
were asked about her children's care.  
She was asked (about her housekeeper)  
"Is she mentally capable of taking care  
of your children?" Another woman app-  
licant was asked "Who'll be the Chief  
Cook and bottle washer if you go to  
Medical School?" Ms. Emory wondered  
how these questions could possibly  
affect their qualifications for entrance  
to Medical School.  

Ms. Emory was also interviewed by  
two psychologists as part of her entrance  
requirements. (It is questionable whether  
male applicants are submitted to these  
interviews.) One hour long interview  
provided C.U. with a negative psychol-  
ogical assessment of her potential suc-  
cess in Medical School. A second hour's