Sisterhood Shines  
in New Mexico  

Sandia  

Have visions before you sleep  
at night of the most beautiful  
experience you can imagine.  
This is what women will create  
as they join together to celebrate  
Summer Solstice for the third  
year in New Mexico, the land of  
the enchanted sun.  

Last year women came from  
all over the country to ex-  
perience what was for many of  
them one of the high points of  
their lives. This year 10 days  
have been reserved at the Paliza  
Campground where women can  
share in music, health and body  
workshops, magic circles  
around the campfire, political  
taps, theater, body painting,  
sports, discussion of media,  
poetry, and all the other joys that  
free women in a free space can  
possibly create.  

The Solstice Committee has  
forwarded some suggestions to  

sisters who will be coming for  
the full time or at least for June  
21st, which is the actual date of  
Solstice. Certain areas of the  
campground will be set aside for  
specific interests like those  
mentioned above and including  
an area for childcare. Money is  
needed for butcher paper, first  
aid supplies, printing and mail-  
ing costs, etc. (fliers will be  
available later). They suggest a  
donation of $2 though “if you  
ain't got it that’s cool and if you  
can afford more that’s cool, too.”  

Women are reminded to  
please BRING ALL PROVISIONS  
BEFORE COMING TO THE  
CAMPGROUND (in Albuquer-  
que or Santa Fe.) Do not plan on  
getting supplies in the small  
surrounding towns. Bring big  

pots and pans so community  
meals can be fixed. Bring paints,  
sports equipment, cameras, in-  
struments as well as your per-  
sonal camping gear. The camp-  

ground has stoves and outhouse  
facilities as well as running  
water. Clean-up is up to us!  

Solstice will be the result of  
every woman's input. Send any  
ideas to  

The Solstice Committee  

1202 Clancy N.E  

Albuquerque, N.M. 87112  

(505) 298-8665  

Send any donations you can  
muster to  

Solstice Sisters  

Tucson Women’s Center  

912 E. 6th St  

Tucson, Arizona 85719  

Below is a map for sisters  
Send copies of the paper to any  
woman anywhere in the country  
that can walk, ride, hitch or bike  
to it, for when the spirits visible  
and invisible converge, Summer  
Solstice, the longest day of the  
year, is when the biggest and  
most conscious gathering of  
women will all happen.  

/ "  
¢ w E  
re  
fa-a9 ©  
id >  
/ .O  
ss ?  
& ig sae s  
i>—__ ey ee  
2 a ee  
/ — fe) 3 miles PALIZA  
¢/ ri e ?  
o/ CAMPGROUND  
SANTA FE  
* Junction 4 \ re  
——— 25 miles —— >  
44 West  
16 miles  
CALIFORNIA  
—  
Rt. 40  
a ALBUQUERQUE  

16 miles north of Albuquerque on Rt. 25 take Rt. 44 West (Cuba, Farmington) follow Rt. 44 (past Zia  
Pueblo) for 25 miles. At San Ysidro take right at Junction 4. Pass Jemez Pueblo and take right at Ponderosa  
at Junction 290 (6 miles after the right at San Ysidro). Go through Ponderosa and road becomes dirt. 3 miles  

later is Paliza Campground. Home.  

NEWS  
FROM AROQUNI  
Cou :  

pee  

ee,  

Chocolate Waters  

That's Nothing to Clap About — A woman taking birth control pills has  
100% chance of contracting gonorrhea if exposed to the disease. (from  
a flier for the Emma Goldman Clinic for Women in Iowa)  

A Rose is a Rose is $35,000 — Anti-abortion groups spent $35,000 on  
roses alone while lobbying on Capitol Hill in January of last year. (Off  
Our Backs) Wonder where that kind of money could be coming from?  

Pornography: A Woman-Hating Preoccupation — Eighty percent of  
pornographic subject matter depicts some form of violence to women,  
according to a recent study made by women in the Nashville Rape  
Prevention Crisis Center. (from the Feminist Alliance Against Rape  
Newsletter) Rape, sadism, and murder seem to turn the men on the  
hardest. Remember that the next time someone tries to convince you  
that our society doesn’t hate women.  

Health News — Planned Parenthood of Mass. has a new toll-free  
number for anyone interested in information on contraception,  
sterilization, VD, or abortion. The number is 800-342-3928. Anyone  
interested in information about how to avoid all four should call my  
number.  

Ten Commandments of Love — Thou shalt always defer to thy  
husband's wishes. Thou shalt always be available to thy husband. Thou  
shalt never argue with him. Thou shalt never challenge his decisions.  
Thou shalt be a “Yes, let's” woman. Thou shalt never clean the house  
when he is home. Thou shalt not talk on the telephone after 6 p.m. Thou  
shalt not sew, bake, or read magazines in the evening. Thou shalt not  
act bored when he is talking. Thou shalt never keep thy husband  
waiting. (from the Total Woman course by Mrs. Joni Fisher) My sources  
are checking to see whether Mrs. Joni Fisher might really be a husband.  

A Tale of Two Masters — 1. When a still photographer resisted the  
advances of Warren (Beady) Beatty while working on the set of one of  
his films, he responded by firing her. First, however, he humiliated her  
to tears by publicly zipping down her slacks on the set. (People, April 14,  
‘74) 2. Alexander Rattley was fined $11.50 for hitting his wife's face —  
but he could have smacked her bottom with impunity, a magistrate said.  
Magistrate George Mackay told Rattley, 26, “It is a well-known fact that  
you can strike your wife's bottom if you wish, but you must not strike her  
on the face. I believe that reasonable chastisement should be the duty of  
every husband if his wife misbehaves.” (Reuter-Kinghorn, Scotland)  
And these are our masters, ladies . . .  

A Lesson Not Too Late for the Learning — According to the research of  
a San Francisco psychologist, Lesbians scored higher than hetero-  
sexual women in autonomy, spontaneity, orientation toward the  
present and sensitivity to their own needs and feelings. Other studies  
showed Lesbians to be more independent, resilient, bohemian, self-  
sufficient, goal-directed, and self-accepting. (Psychology Today, March  
75) Personally, I don’t give a hangnail about what any psychologist  
thinks about dykes or heterosexual women, but I thought somebody  
else might be interested.  

Arizona Art Fair  

It Felt So Good!  

Pamela Ann Foley  

Sisters sharing, sisters giving  
people growing. It happened!  
Where it happened was at the  
Women’s Art Fair held recently  
at Encanto Park in Phoenix  
Arizona. The purpose of the Fair  
was to focus on the talents and  
contributions that women artists  
are making to the art world and  
to lend emotional support and  
encouragement to the com-  
munity of women artists.  

The result was a joining  
together of women artists from  
the valley to create an ex-  
perience of “total togetherness”  
for two great days in April. We  
have yet to come down from the  
high it created here in the com-  
munity.  

Over 4000 people basked in  
the sunshine and the talents of  
over 90 different women artists  

and performers. The feeling of  
sisterhood grew to a crescendo by  
Sunday afternoon, as we shared  
the enjoyment of people giving  
to each other.  

“A spontaneous happening”!  

Dancing, singing, sharing ideas,  
and loving each other. Families  
arrived planning an isolated  

picnic and instead were drawn  
into the feelings generated by  
the Fair.  

The weekend was sponsored  

N.O.W. and coordinated by the  
Women and Arts task force.  
Some of the performers in-  
cluded INDAVANA BLUZ  
WOMEN’S ROCK BAND, a well-  
known Phoenix Rock Band that  

truly electrified the Fair. The  
Black Theatre Troupe Inc. in-  
volved the entire audience in a  
vibrant and versatile per-  
formance of dance and move-  
ment. Leslie Judd’s fine perfor-  
mance of her own original and  
contemporary music with guitar  
and vocalization was also well  
received.  

Becky Switzer enjoyed talking with many people about the potter's wheel as she  
created some unusual ceramic sculpture and basked in the Arizona sunshine.  

Even children shared in the  
enrichment as they tried their  
hand at painting, drawing and  
pottery in the “Children’s Area.”  
The Equality Balloons and get-  
ting your own clown face done  
were both big hits with the kids  
and added to the festive quality  
of the fair.  

INDAVANA BLUZ Women’s Rock Band led on to a large crowd singing,  
dancing and clapping. Performing many original music charts, they amazed  
the audience with their versatility and talent.