Sued:

COLUMNS ___

News from Around the Country

Chocolate Waters

New York-- Women on a State
University of New York campus told us
they were having trouble getting funds
from the male-dominated student
organization until they finally sent in a
sheet of paper with one word:
CASTRATION. Their funding came
through. (The Monthly Extract, An
Irregular Periodical), Vol. 3, Issue 2,
May/June

0000

First Women’s Bank on the Way--

“When the First Women’s Bank found

its future headquarters in the old
Pavilion restaurant near one of New
York's most fashionable corners, the
three bank presidents on the other

three corners came forth to welcome

the women bankers-to-be. (We wonder
if they felt trepidation about female
competition.) The bank already has a
capitalization of $4 million and its
president, Madeline McWhinney, had
been an economist with the Federal
Reserve Bank. Bank doors, however,
cannot open until its charter is granted
- which should be very soon.

How will it differ from traditional
male banks? Although there are a few
male board members, the majority are
women, and all other personnel will be
female. The number of shares (at $20)
will be limited, and 40,000 shares have
been set aside for sale to low-income
women in small quantities (even
single shares). Efforts will be made to
recruit the business of companies
which have made a lot of money out of
women, and special attention will be
paid to financial problems and needs
of women through counseling, loan
practices, etc. For a prospectus sent
to: First Women’s Bank, 1501
Broadway, Suite 909, New York, N.Y.
10036. (Prime Time, May, 1974)

Piggy Prize Award-- Women, a
Feminist news-journal from Lenox,
Mass., awards a certified Piggy Prize in
each issue for “willful or abusive
offense to women.” The most recent
award went to Mr. Paul J. Gibbons Jr.,
President of the Southern Berkshire
Babe Ruth League, who said,
“Personally, I don’t care if the girls try
out - as long as they don’t
participate...”

Lesbian Music Festival-- The
Amazon Music Project of Santa Cruz,
CA, is planning a Lesbian Music
Festival for this month. If you write
music, play music, or listen and dance
to music, please come. Childcare and
housing will be provided as possible.
For more information write to:
Amazon Music Project, 529 Chestnut
St., Santa Cruz, CA 95060.

Indiana Women Protest Sex Dis-
crimination in Bar Exam -- Women law
students in Indiana are considering
legal action to protest sexism in the
July 1973 bar examination. One
appalling section reads: “At a
state-owned and operated university
in the Middle Western United States,
Clytemnestra Toris is the only real
thorn in the side of Mr. Strait Mouth,
Dean of Students. Ms. (of course!)
Toris, a career student, who recently
has been ‘pursuing’ a graduate degree
on ‘Mind-Leveling,’ publishes and
distributes on campus a newspaper
‘devoted to the elimination of all men.’
Despite many counseling sessions,
she insists on calling the newspaper
‘The Daily Dildo.’ The U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights is
reportedly “looking into the charge.”
(The Spokeswoman, June 15, 1974)

Not Just A Hole in One! Straight
women beware of men bearing a
Peacock Redi-wet Hygienically Lubri-
cated prophylactic. The FDA seized
eight cases (containing 13,824 pro-
phylactics) because they had holes in
them.

How Confidential Are Your Medical
Records? If you ever signed a form
authorizing an insurance company to
have access to your doctor or
hospitalization records, chances are
that the information may be on file
with the Medical Information Bureau.
The MIB, reportedly a medical CIA
which keeps files on 13 million
Americans for its 760-member insur-
ance companies. So if you let one
company have your records - all 760
may have them. “If by doctor error or
oversight or if a condition no longer
exists, your rates will be higher than
they should be or you may be refused
health insurance altogether.” Recom-
mendations to reduce the impact of
the MIB are now before the Senate
Consumer Subcommittee. (From
“How Confidential are Your Medical
Records?” by Sidney Wolf, M.D. as
reported in Marin Women’s News
Journal, June 1974)

A AEE RN RN

15

Women and Health

Pat Sexton

Itching, scratching, burning... va-
ginal infections are a pretty common
happening for most women. Not only
are they physically irritating, but they
can also cause premature bankruptcy
if you have to plunk down $25 for a
check-up and $7 for a prescription
every time they come up. All the more
reason to learn to diagnose and cure
them yourself! The following informa-
tion is designed to familiarize you with
the three most serious infections (not
including syphilis and gonorrhea,
which are serious!), their diagnosis
and ways of curing them (both through
prescribed medicine and so-called
“home remedies”).

In order to diagnose your own
infection you will have to have a few
items: a speculum (the instrument a
gynecologist uses to spread open the
walls of the vagina for a look inside;
get one through your local self-health
clinic or through a medical supply
house), a mirror, a flashlight, some
clean cotton swabs, a glass slide (or
you can use the mirror’s surface),
and... if you really want to get
technical, you can have a microscope
on hand.

Taking the speculum in one hand,
holding the bills closed, and spread-
ing the lips of the labia with the other,
slowly insert the bills into the vagina.
If this is hard or uncomfortable put a
little K-Y surgical jelly on the blades
(NOT Vaseline which can alter the
environment of the vagina and allow
infections to occur).

Using the Speculum

After the blades are in, turn the
speculum so that the handle is facing
up. Now find the thumb press lever
and push it in and down until you hear
it click. The speculum will then be
open. Using the mirror with one hand
and flashing the light on the mirror
with the other, so that light is
reflected into the vagina, you can now
see the interior of the vagina.

Using one of the cotton swabs,
scrape off some of the secretion
inside. By smearing this onto a slide
or the mirror’s surface, you will be
able to gauge the texture, color, and
consistency of the secretion and
hopefully tell what type of infection
you have.

Let’s start with a description of what
normal mucus looks like. Your normal

discharge will be transparent or
slightly milky. When it is dry it may
look yellow. This discharge causes no
inflammation or irritation and varies in

amount throughout your cycle. It will
either have an inoffensive smell or no

smell at all. The normal vagina is acid
and contains many types of bacteria
which keep out harmful germs. If you
douche too much or use vaginal
sprays and deodorants, these can
destroy the bacteria and upset the
natural balance of the vagina.

Now for the infections. We'll start
with:
1. Yeast - fungus, monilia, or candida.

Symptoms: You will find itching
and inflammation of the vulva and
outer vagina, which will just about
drive you nuts! The discharge, when
spread out on the slide, may be light
or very heavy and thick like cottage
cheese and stringy (this is more
common) and will smell rather yeasty,
like baking bread. There will be white
patches of the yeast on the walls of
the vagina, and if you scrape them off,

there will be red raw patches
underneath.
Treatment: In order to relieve the

itching on the outside, you can paint
the whole area with gentian violet. It's
a mess but it relieves the pain. The
best and fastest way to get rid of yeast
is by using Mycostatin suppositories,
but these can only be obtained with a
prescription (which means you will
have to go to a doctor, who will
probably insist that he check you over
before he writes the prescription,
therefore costing you mucho bread). If
you have any friends who are doctors
or druggists, have them get it for you.
The suppositories should be inserted
in the morning and at night for a full

ten days to make sure that you

completely get rid of the infection.
Other Remedies

There is also a jelly called Propion
Gel that you can put in once a day with
an applicator. If the infection is not
large you can sometimes cure it by
putting in a tablespoon of plain yogurt
(the type you can buy at the market). I
have also heard (although not
personally tried) that tea douche made
from two herbs - osha root and golden
seal - will sometimes completely cure
a yeast infection. I would be interested
in hearing from other sisters about
other herbal remedies.

Circumstances that can make yeast
infections easier to get:

1. Diabetes - causes sugar in the
urine and extra carbohydrates in the
vaginal walls, both of which provide
good food for the yeast and help it to
grow.

2. Antibiotics - when used anywhere
in the body to fight infection, they
also kill the bacteria in the vagina.

3. Pregnancy, birth control pills,
bad diet, obesity.

4. Wearing nylon underwear keeps
the vulval area warm and moist and
yeast love warmth!

ED. Note: See next month's column for
symptoms and treatment of Trichomonas and
non-specific vaginitis.

Pat Sexton is a free-lance writer from New Mexico. She has no
B.S., M.S., Ph.D., or any other such documents to make her real.
However, she learned a lot at the San Francisco Women’s Health
Clinic, and has been learning and sharing it all with her sisters
ever since.