Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 7

Interview with Holly

On April 28, singer Holly Near presented a concert in Denver sponsored by the
Rocky Flats Action Group; and on the following day, she sang at the rally to
close and convert the Rocky Flats plant. The following is from an interview
taped the day of the rally. In the fall, Holly will begin a cross-country
anti-nuclear tour and will be in Denver again on October 7. 
Watch BMR for details.

Clair Kaplan
edited by Constance Perenyi

Wood: What I'd like to hear you talk about is how you see the connection be-
tween feminist politics and anti-nuclear politics.

Holly: First of all, I think women in the women's movement have done an incre-
dible amount of work in trying both to teach women that we have potential, which
has been taught out of us for generations, as well as to give women power and
support to go and be our best.

We are doing work across the board against racism, class, drugs, alcoholism,
oppression of disabled peoples, and we aren't all good at doing all those
things all of the time. We aren't perfect organizers, but there are women who
focus on all these different things, all of which have to do with the quality
of life for women. So, I'm not suggesting that we stop doing these important
things; but I do feel that we have to incorporate anti-nuke information, con-
sciousness and activity into whatever we're doing because we're not going to
last too much longer with things going the way they are. What good will it do
to create quality of life organizations for women if we all die of leukemia or
the world blows up?

With nuke stuff, the information has been so kept from us that we don't rea-
lize how urgent it is. There are reputable scientists who think we have a few
years to get our act together and turn this thing around or we'll be in big
trouble. That's one point - it's just out of survival.

Second of all is that women, if they give themselves the room and time to
practice it, have an incredible, instinctual understanding of life. I don't
know whether it's because we are potential child bearers, because we have a
life cycle every month, or because our oppression has protected us from being
the pigs we might have been if we'd been in power - I don't know what the an-
alysis behind it is, but I do know that we have a spirituality, a power that
once acknowledged and given room to grow is very powerful. And I've noticed
in talking to women of different cultures that in almost every one, women take
a leading role in the spiritual development of their people. So, if we can fi-
gure out how to take our political and economic knowledge, our understanding of
life, and our instincts and intuition, all those things we have been “accused”
of in a negative way, and we use them, I think we can turn this thing around.

I have to believe that and I don't think it will happen without women.

“Holly Near with pianist J.T. Thomas at April 29 Rally at Rocky Flats.
photo by Constance Perenyi

Wood: So you see the feminist movement not necessarily being autonomous, but
feeding into the anti-nuclear movement as an added strength?

Holly: Yes. There are women who like to work with men and women who don't. I
don't think anyone has to change what is right; but they should incor-
porate anti-nuke sentiment into that as a majority. Here you have a rally
that it's important that women have been here. It's not that we all work together all
the time, but what if, in the lesbian community, we really educated ourselves
about anti-nuke stuff and incorporated it in whatever we do, we could affect
thousands. We don't have to stop what we're doing; we just have to add this
consciousness to it.

Clair: Consciousness is a first step. But where does it go beyond that? It's
such a huge monster we're dealing with.

Holly: I think that is left in the hands of the people who are trying to cre-
ate tactics and organize, and that would include scientists and political peo-
ple all together. But I remember getting in touch with how awful the Vietnam
war was, or how huge imperialism is - and I know it's enough to defeat anybody.
You want to say, "Why? Why bother to try to turn what was going on in Vietnam
around?" It seemed hopeless - but we did it. I don't know how it happened,
except that it was constant persistence. The other part of it was that people
who won had survival and spirit on their side which goes a lot farther than
need. It’s sort of good against evil, which sounds simplistic... But I don't
know what to do about this plant (Rocky Flats) over here. I don't know whether
we should be sitting so close to it and if there's an element of martyrdom
about that; but there's really no place to go, and maybe we couldn't even solve
the problem if we closed down all the plants today. But I can't go through life
thinking it’s over. I have an incredible amount of faith and it would be a ter-
rible state of affairs if people gave up. There may not be a way out, but we
have to keep trying right down to the last minute.

Wood: It's basically a lifetime struggle.

Holly: Yes, and it always will be. Even if someone gave us a perfect world to-
day - no racism, sexism, classism - the struggle would begin at that point to
maintain it.

Wood: Last night at your concert I noticed that your pitch was mostly to women.
I've had to deal with this myself as a performer wondering how many men are
being alienated, whether this is an issue I should deal with. Do you come
across that as a problem?

Holly: I think any man who felt excluded from that concert last night has de-
veloped a complex over the years from having been the center of attention all
his life. There were songs there that spoke to people in a real broad way. The
fact that the heroines I write about are women should not make it impossible
for men, or for women who relate to men, to see the purpose of those songs.

“I have an incredible amount of faith
and it would be a terrible state of
affairs if people gave up.”

As soon as men accept that they can learn from women, they won't feel so ali-
enated. So, I feel that we as performers need to be clear and make sure that
what we are saying is positive. I don't like to do anti-man songs because it
gives them a lot of power. I want to sing, even about struggle, from a posi-
tive place because there's enough negative energy in the world produced by
the people who oppress us without adding to it ourselves. But, when men are
ready to go off and create their own songs, just as when straight women are,
there won't be a feeling of “What about me? Sing for me!" There's so much
energy in lesbian culture that everyone is looking to us instead of learning
from us and creating their own culture as well, so that they can make a contri-
bution too.

I think there was a lot in the concert last night, and the people who could
not hear it are just in a certain place in their own process. And I don't
think that I should accommodate where they are. It is better to challenge them
and hope they will grow into a place where they can appreciate that music.

Wood: I've heard you describe yourself as a cultural worker, and I've thought
about how it must feel to you to be able to sing your political music, main-
tain your political integrity, and be getting more and more successful. Is
that a concern for you in any way?

Holly: If I had my druthers, everyone in the world would know my music, and
nobody would think I was famous. That would be ideal, but it's not realistic,
is it? What you come to feel is that on one hand, there was something very
nice years ago about sitting in a nightclub and singing with fifty people.
But on the other hand, the more thousands of people who come to an event, the
more we're reaching. The private party is over.

In Boston, for instance, the first time I sang there was in the basement of
a bookstore, to a hundred people at most; and the last time we were in Boston,
they sold out 2,000 seats in seven days. Now, some people who were at the
earlier one probably missed the intimacy of that concert; but at the same time
they were celebrating the fact that the numbers of people who are coming to
hear the music represent work that was done not just by me, but work done by
organizers in the community. Also, people would not come to my concerts unless
they were ready to; so to have huge numbers of people come to progressive ev-
ents is good, positive feedback to local organizers, and to our movement.

We make compromises for sure; but I always try to weigh in the compromise
if what we lose is more than what we gain. For instance, I might someday de-
cide to try it again on a show like Merv Griffin or Mike Douglas, and there
would be a lot of compromises involved in that. It would be real hard, but the
fact is that my music would go into the homes of millions of people. And you
could tell anyone who was interested to write to you care of the station, and
then you could send them catalogues and information about women's music. You
would have them - they would have written and made contact. You could answer
back and start your own work with that audience.

But, to find the audience, someone from the women's community may have to go
and do one of those television shows. And I don't think that would be a com-
promise. I think that tactically it would be a very good thing to do.

Clair: Related to that, where do you see the women's music network headed in
the next 5 or 10 years?

Holly: I think that's a question the network is asking itself. Economically,
the network is not supporting itself very well; there's just not enough money
in the women's community itself to support everyone involved. Also, what's
happening is that as the kind of music made expands, the women participating
don't have the same politics. We have commonalities, but we don't have unan-
imities.

For myself, I would like to continue to be true to my politics and write pol-
itical songs; but I feel that I would like to move in circles not just within
the women's community. The style of the concert I do makes that possible.
I would like to develop enough trust within the women's community, as well as
with the left, so that if I decide to go places that are not traditionally
political, people would trust that I was doing it for a reason.

For instance, there are women who are starting to get in touch with their
own politics by virtue of their own oppression at work - but they're coming
into their own at a different time than other women did. And I feel like the
women's movement and women's culture have to make room for us all to come in-
to our own at different times, and we keep coming into our own. You hit a pla-
teau and then something new happens in your life, and you open up again. We
need to figure out how to be flexible enough that we challenge each other and
not be wishy-washy, but at the same time make room for people who are coming
in at different times without being too hard on each other. Otherwise we
end up scaring each other away.

The role of culture to me, when done at its very best, is a powerful, non-
threatening, as well as threatening experience where we can really give back
to people their lives in a real way as opposed to the way we get it over AM
radio. Politically, I would like to see women's culture continue to facilitate
that, continue to give songs to women that empower us, that teach us about
each other, and about racism and class so that we stop screwing each other over.