Migrants Stranded in Colorado

Mary Daly, with help from Tep Falcon and Deb Taylor

Migrant farmworkers are arriving in Colorado in great numbers. They usually start coming in May and work through the summer. This year is different though. Many migrants were rained out of Texas and the snow and frost drove them out of Florida. The result is that there are many more migrant workers here, and at an earlier time of the year.

Usually when a family arrives, they have enough money to buy food stamps. But this year, when they came to Colorado, they did not have the $40 or $50 they usually have.

Now the migrants are finding that the drought here will reduce the number of jobs available to them here also. For example, Great Western Sugar Co. just closed three processing plants, and the big money maker in Colorado in the past has been sugar beets.

Right now, the farm workers are living out of cars in parks. Their home base is Texas and they travel from farm to farm all summer. They usually go to the same farms year after year.

None of the farm workers in Colorado are organized as they are in California. The farms are small and spread far apart so that communication is hard.

I spent last summer working with the Colorado Migrant Council on the health needs of migrant farmworkers as a nurse. Most of the farmworkers came from southern Texas and spoke no English. They were therefore unable to even ask for what they needed; while those that did were usually refused.

The communities in which the farmworkers live were hostile to them.

The local governments were racist.

For example, they provided me with a ticket booth and gymnasium vestibule for me to set up a health station for migrant children. Babies and young children suffered temperatures of 100° with measles and strep throat in a room that rarely dropped below 85°.

The racism of the medical profession was masked by the excuse that they were afraid that they wouldn't get their money. But there was government funding available. Local doctors refused to see migrant children and pharmacies would not fill prescriptions. Sometimes the hospitals would refuse to x-ray a broken leg.

Immigration officers used to follow me and the other nurses when we made home visits. They were constantly on the search for illegal aliens. Families live in chicken coops or trailers provided by the farmers. It is not unusual for four or five families to share a run-down trailer. This housing was usually infested with cockroaches and lice.

When going to the homes, I would often find that everyone slept on the floor. Some were lucky enough to have a mattress on which the entire family slept. Many families had to carry buckets of water from a river to prepare their food and bathe in.

They became sick from the water and itched from the lice in the floorboards of the housing provided.

School buses brought children into the school from as far away as 65 miles every day. When a group of families were too ill to even leave their houses, the best communication device they had was to ask the bus driver to send help.

Migrants are hired by intermediaries who negotiate their salaries before they come to Colorado from Texas. Their pay is based on the number of acres (if working with sugar beets) or the number of bushels or truckloads (if working with fruit) that they pick. That is why the children help in the fields. Anyone aged eight or nine years old usually helps in the fields.

A typical child is Marta who is nine years old and in the first grade again. She can't go back to school until the family finds work and a place to live. And then she will have to help her family make money to survive.

The following items are desperately needed: jobs, food in the form of cans and dry goods, clothing for children, bedding and furniture. If you can help with any donations, please deliver them to the Colorado Migrant Council, 665 Grant St., Denver, or call them at 837-1911 and they will pick them up.

It is expected that the term machismo will arise in discussions throughout the 1977 Chicana Conference. The term has come to carry connotations of hyper-masculinity, sexual promiscuity, and overly enlarged genitalia for men, especially Spanish-speaking men.

Machismo has escaped its original meaning, become a vulgar term, and is used as a racist stereotype of the Chicano. Both the Chicano and the Chicana have suffered from this socially imposed stereotype.

The conference proposes to define the term, discuss how the stereotyped version has evolved and harmed the Chicano population, and whether or not to continue to use the term or redefine its meaning.

It is my contention that “machismo" has been vulgarized and changed in definition through use in the dominant society. The University of Chicago Spanish-English Dictionary defines the word "macho" as "m. male; he-mule... abutment; pillar; stupid fellow; sledge hammer... am. to halt or repress a person; adj. masculine, male, strong."

This definition dehumanizes our males and makes them appear animalistic, stubborn, and insensitive.

Chicano movement and that it is just beginning to occur to Chicanas that they are victims of sexism and racism. "I've been asked whether racism or sexism takes priority. I don't feel there is a priority. These are two issues that the movement should concentrate its efforts on in a dual fashion.

Sexism is a Chicano issue, not just a Chicana one. It is an issue that touches all our people,” she said.

Conference organizers noted that other than Chicanos, few people offered support for the conference. At the institutional level, CU provided minimal financial support, so the Chicana Conference relied heavily on personal donations to get off the ground. One woman said it was indicative of the racist and sexist practices of institutions like CU.

More surprisingly, however, was the lack of attendance from people of different communities. Of the 400 participants, 3%, or 12, were non-Chicano. Of that 12, 3 at most were from the radical feminist community. One conference organizer was asked to comment on the lack of Anglo feminists at the conference. She said, "By not being here, that is an action. It is a racist insensitive action. We put a lot of time and energy into extending ourselves to various feminist organizations-- they did not attend. We've done our responsibility in trying to reach these women. They negated their responsibility to also come to us. It showed to me a lack of commitment to overcome racism as well as sexism."

The women who participated in the 1977 Chicana Conference expressed the seriousness of working on both sexism and racism on their jobs, in their community organizations, at school, and in their homes during the coming year. Some women have already started work on the planning of la Conferencia de la Chicana 1978. In the meantime, Anglo feminists need to discuss within our groups and projects why we did not attend in 1977.

These issues have been with us for years, and they will continue to engage us.

So far, the FEN women have been unsuccessful in attracting a mass base. They lack an adequate propaganda machine and they are attempting to remedy that by allying with the Women's Press Collective, Chrysalis Magazine, and Olivia Records. The Detroit building was a fiasco, but they were smart enough to avoid bankruptcy and will learn from their errors.

In the long run, I can't imagine how a mass movement based on a fascist variety of lesbian feminism could be successful in America. German nationalism could attract the majority of Germans; but the majority of Americans are not lesbians. Nevertheless, FEN can wreck the institutions we have built up over the last decade. It can destroy people's lives, damage friendships irreparably, and further isolate white from Third World women. To the extent that it succeeds financially, it will create a class of female capitalists who have expropriated the labor of other women.

Lastly, it will discredit feminism in the eyes of most women who we still hope to reach.

If you would like a copy of Martha’s article on FEN, please send her $1.50 to Martha Shelley, 451 Wayne Ave, Oakland, Cal. 94606.