| bmr: where we're at

This month's Where We're At is a difficult one to write.  
We find ourselves confused by mixed feelings regarding the  
last issue Racism and Anti-Semitism: Part I, and also re-  
garding this one, Racism, Part II.

We had not initially intended to extend this theme for  
two months. But as frequently seems to happen, we filled  
up the pages—with articles we liked and wanted to put  
out—only to sit back and recognize that the overall pic-  
ture being put out may be unbalanced, incomplete, and  
unfocused. We don't dislike the last issue. But as an is-  
sue on racism and anti-Semitism, we found it came up short.  
And many of the same imbalances are present in this is-  
sue—specifically, both issues have been heavily weighted  
in the direction of articles from other countries, while  
leaving gaping holes in dealing with racism against Blacks,  
Puerto Ricans, Iranians, Chicano-Mexicanos, and Native Am-  
ericans in this country that takes its ultimate form in  
genocide against these peoples.

While it is often true that the same messages shine  
through articles from many different countries, we do ag-  
ree with the criticism that it is essential that as a U.S.  
journal and a journal out of Colorado, we ought to be  
stronger in our coverage of national and statewide news  
and dialogue.

The criticism has also been brought up that we are not  
as visible a project locally as we could/should be...that  
our connections and ties with different political groups  
(feminist groups, papers, liberation struggle support  
groups, etc.) are stronger nationally than they are local-  
ly. This kind of balance (or imbalance) doesn't make for  
a very strong foundation off of which to spring...leads  
to us being rather insulated and theoretical...

So, towards changing this, we are recommitting ourselves  
to the priority of being more of a presence locally and  
statewide. BMR supporters met this week to talk about mak-  
ing the paper more accessible to our local community. And,  
individually, we are trying to find more ways to get out  
of our basement office and go to more local events. Of  
course, we have always had an ideal in our heads that it  
would be nice if there were enough BMR collective members  
that we could be working on other projects as well (hint,  
hint), keeping the paper more rooted and more useful.

oops!

printed from the Freedom  
Socialist.

The book review on page 9  
was on a book entitled Black  
Women: Bringing It All Back  
Home by Margaret Prescod-  
Roberts & Norma Steele. The  
review was written by Bobbe  
Ross.

Last month, we forgot to  
credit the Daily World for  
the article on feminism in  

Jamaica (p. 19).

The interview with Nellie  
Wong and Merle Woo (pp. 12-  
13) was bylined "information  
from" instead of "re-  

COVERS Yolanda Lopez, reprinted from Connexions.

collective:

Bobbe Ross, Sue Goding, Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford  
Supporters: Arretta Caliardo, Wendy Highby,  

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Judy Barlow, Kim Womantree  
contributors: Aco Stone,  

Elizabeth Moffat, Priscilla Canney, Kay Young,  
Kathy Riley, Vickie Barriga, Clara Kaplan,  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by  
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will be  
announced each month in "Where We're At"—it's generally  
the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a stamped  
self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsi-  
bility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the  

right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates  
are $6/year (11 issues) for individuals, $12  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, December 1981

Last month's issue was entitled Racism and Anti-Semitism:  
Two Sides to the Same Coin. Never did we go into an ex-  
planation of why we put the two together—how we see them  
being two sides to the same coin, and how they are differ-  
ent.

Partially, our choice was a response to these two issues  
being raised simultaneously in recent community con-  
frontations (see BMR, July ‘81, p. 3). We are finding that  
frequently racism and anti-Semitism arise out of the same  
sources in the feminist community—ignorance of other  
than mainstream cultures, intolerance of diversity, and  
the attitude that one race can be superior to another.

The history, not too far behind us, of the religious/ec-  
onomic persecution of Jews in Germany that became mass  
murder of a race of people, is not dissimilar to the form  
white supremacy is now taking in this country against all  
people of color and Third World peoples—genocide through  
forced sterilization, imposed poverty, police brutality,  
and legal and institutional repression. And the recent  
upsurgence of the extreme right wing and the KKK targets  
not only people of color, but Jews, homosexuals, and  
Communists. We feel it is important to have an analysis  
which recognizes that poor people of all colors are the  
targets of oppression. While white supremacy is obviously  
something we must fight, our fight must also include  
the goals of an end to class oppression, and the patriar-  
chy.

The American Jewish population today in general main-  
tains a higher than average income. Obviously, this fact  
separates issues of anti-Semitism from issues of racism,

MORE ON PAGE 2]

about the cover artist

Artist Yolanda Lopez lives  
in San Francisco's Mission  
district. She works as a lecturer in Chicano Studies at  
the University of California, Berkeley and as the mother of  
a 19-month-old boy. She is continuing her studies on La-  
tin American Women in the United States.

The drawing on the cover  
is one of a series of four  
portraits of the artist's  
grandmother at different ages.  
The series appeared with a  
statement by Lopez in the  
fall 1981 issue of Connexions,  
and we have reprinted from  
there:

Experience in contemporary Am-  
erican culture is the lack of  
positive visual representations  
of Latin Americans as  
normal, intelligent human be-  
ings. This omission and the  
continued use of such stereotypes as the "Latin bombshell"  
and the passive, long-suffering wife/mother negate the  
humanity of Raza women.  
The use of familial models  
has brought to the surface  
many aspects of my personal  
history and heritage I would  
like to further investigate.  
One such aspect is the inti-  
mate and cultural relation-  
ship between women of differ-  
ent generations.  
-Yolanda Lopez.

A common Chicano/Latino ex-

inside BMR:

Where We're At... Hot Briefs......  

Racism  

National Racism in the Movement...  
Unbound Feet III.....  
Haydee Torres.....  
Weather Underground....  
FBI Tactics.........  
Interview...  
Classifieds & Ads........  
Garment Workers......  
Resources...  

outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $18 to  
all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated in  
prisons or mental institutions. BMR is on file at the New  
Alexandria Library for Lesbian, Women in Huntington, MA, and  
is available on microfilm (Oct. 1972, Vol. 1, No. 1 through  
May 1980) directly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is index-  
ed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. BOX 7229, Balti-  
more, MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010, we have  
a phone message machine.