14  
Pornography Conference  

The class implications of porn-  
ography also needed more discussion--  
the fact that different groups of  
women are affected by it so differ-  
ently. Pornographers’ abuse of women  
includes the college student who  
collects $100 for appearing in a  
stag film; the "nude model" who gets  
busted in every political crackdown  
on massage parlors; the street-  
walker who may view herself as having  
little or no choice about how she  
makes her money; the call girl who  
works with less risk in prostitution  
than she might find in marriage,  
and the Argentine woman who may be  
killed in the next snuff film.  

The issue of pornography and  
racism was examined in one workshop,  
although it wasn't really dealt with  
in the conference as a whole. The  
workshop leader,  
talked about some of the reasons why  
black and other minority women have  
not joined the white women's move-  
ment against porn. In one example,  
she explained that the black woman  
who sees her male lover bring home  

a copy of Playboy showing pictures  
of white women with black men, will  
not be likely to identify with the  
women, since the racism will be  
obvious: once again, white values  
stamping out black.  

Although the conference could  
have dealt better with the issues  

Rights "79 From pg2  

etc. are forthcoming.  

Once we arrive at the Civic Center,  
there will be a political rally, in-  
cluding planned speakers (possibly  
Henry Hay) and an open microphone (be  
thinking about what you'd like to  
say); an improvisational theatrical  
group (Ain't I A Woman) will be in-  
vited. It was agreed that the Civic  
Center offers a better sound system  
and viewing for the rally and, most  
important, it is a "straight" power  
center.  

It was further decided that no beer  
or alcoholic beverages will be served  
during the rally (ice water and soda  
will be available). We expect to have  
good media coverage at the Civic Cen-  
ter, including television and news-  
paper. We also recognize the high rate  
of alcoholism among the Lesbian/Gay  
community. Besides, we don’t want to  
distract from the "natural high" or  
the political purpose of the rally--  
bias: Shed tears and showing our  

From pg3  

we hold in common with the Left,  
there was also a good deal of mer-  
ited criticism of how the Left as  
a movement has treated pornography.  
Susan Brownmiller, in her work-  
shop on pornography and politics,  
outlined the special connection  
between porn magazines and New Left  
writers. When establishment publi-  
cations (i.e. Harpers, Atlantic)  
refused anti-war and anti-government  
articles in the '60s and early  
‘70s, writers found ready accept-  
ance in Playboy and other mags  
anxious to look literary and respec-  
table. That connection has continued  
to this day, solidified by the iden-  
tification of the New Left with  
sexual liberty--and its failure to  
recognize pornography as violence.  
By the end of the conference, I  
found that many of my old confusions  
had been replaced by new questions,  
as mentioned throughout this story.  
Yet probably more than anything,  
the conference experience convinced  
me that just because I have doubts  
about the First Amendment/porn law  
issue, about how much of a priority  
fighting porn should be for me--  
that doesn't mean that I should put  
a stop to any further thinking  
about this issue. Like any other  
feminist struggle, pornography needs  
the benefit of thought--if not  
action--from all of us.  

strengths and pride.  

We hope that the large number of  
Lesbians, Gays and their supporters  
will be a strong political statement  
in itself.  

From the rally we will proceed to  
Cheesman Park via car pools (more  
later) and buses for an energizing  
afternoon of beer, food and fun.  

We hope this excerpt furnishes  
enough information to entice you to  
join us at the next discussion meet-  
ing, which is scheduled for Monday,  
March 5, 7:30 p.m., at the Gay Commun-  
ity Center, 1436 Lafayette. We will  
be discussing fund raising and publi-  
city for the March (you are encourag-  
ed to bring sample posters), and the  
events and agenda for Gay Pride Week.  
If you do not come, your particular  
concerns may not be voiced!  

Watch your Lesbian/Gay publications  
for further details.  

-Debra L. Slovak, Kim Womantree,  

Susan Stantejsky  

NEW HOURS: 7 DAYS 10am- 7pm  

2023 E. COLFAX 320-5972  
SkeSebootereoodsooese sees  

| Methodist Church at West 3th Ave.  

- EVERY TUESDAY - L  

g Mama Rag  

_ FEMINIST CALENDAR  

jan Alcoholics Group - t. 7:30. For more  

~8650.  

ail 831  

information «  

EVERY WEDNESDAY - Women Against Nukes. 1520 Euclid, Boulder. 7pm.  

EVERY WEDNESDAY -  
Lafayette St.  

Every Woman's Coming Out Group. Gay Community Center at 1436  

FEB 22-MAR 11 - Bridedoll and Coke Dreams.  
Evangelista. Changing Scene Theater. 15273;  
7:30pm, For more information call 893-5575  

2 one act plays by Teresa Marfie-  
Champa St. Thurs-Sat. 8:30pm. Sun  

THROUGHOUT MARCH = KGNU-FM (88.5) and KUNC-FM (91.5) will feature women folk  
artists such as Malvina Reynolds, Rosalie Sorrels and Claudia Schmidt. Fri-  
days at 11am on FUNC-FM and Wednesdays at 8pm on KGNU-FM.  

MAR 3 - Woman to Woman Coffee House. This month it is being held at the Asbury  
and Vallejo. Performers will be Pat Wagner,  
Marilyn Mendelson, a very fine singer and songwriter, and  
a very fine poet, and  

5pm. Free.  

MAR 5-9 -  
or Woman to  

International Women's Week at the University of Boulder. Call them  

Noman, 329-5972, for more information.  

MAR 7 - The Anti-Crime Task Force will present the movie: "Mugging - You Can  
Protect Yourself" and explain the new escort service available to women on  
campus. Bring a lunch. St. Francis Interfaith Center at Auraria. 12:10-1:10.  
MAR 8 - INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  

MAR 9&10 - AIRHART at the Velvet Hammer. 9pm. $3 at the door.  

MAR 10 - Workshop on sexism in education - Strategies for Change. UMC, Univ-  

ersity of CO.  

MAR 14 -  
at Auraria.  

"Harassment on the Job" Bring a lunch. St. Francis Interfaith Center  
12:10-1:10.  

MAR 17 - AIRHART, a live band benefit dance for the Gay Community Center at  
the Continental Denver Hotel at Speer Blvd. and I-25. 9pm-1am. $3 at the door.  

MAR 19 - BI MAMA 74C COMMUNITY MEETING at Woman to Woman, 2023 E. Colfax.  
7:30pm. All women welcome, childcare provided.  

MAR 21 - Death and Dying will be discussed by Bobbi Furer, a therapist formerly  
with the Gestalt Institute. St. Francis Interfaith Center at Auraria.  
Bring a lunch. 12:10-1:19.  

MAR 23 - MUSIC, MAGIC & MISCHIEF at the Velvet Hammer. 8pm $2 at the door.  

MAR 23 - Program on Prostitution, at the D.U. Law School, 299 W. 14th Ave.  
Will have film, "Ain't Nobody's Business" followed by panel with Carol Lease,  
Madeline Holdorf, and women from the film. 8pm.  

MAR 28 - "The Women's Room".  
presentation based on Marilyn French's novel.  
at Auraria. Bring a lunch. 12:10-1:19.  

Judy Blowers will lead a critique and a dramatic  
St. Francis Interfaith Center  

MAR 29-APR 1 - National Conference on Women and the Law, San Antonio Convention  
Center. Write Women's Law Caucus, U of Texas School of Law, 2509 Red River,  
Austin, TX 78705.  

MAR 31 - Better Jobs for Women is holding a workshop, “RIGHTS-ON". 9:30am-  
3:00pm for women either employed or enrolled in vocational programs in blue  
collar skilled trades. 1938 Bannock, Denver  

MAR 31 - KAY GARDNER, an evening of contemporary and classical flute music,  
one night only, 8pm at Gove Jr. High (14th and Colorado Blvd.) Denver. Pro-  
ceeds go to the Colorado Springs Women's Health Service Clinic. Tickets avail-  
able at Peaches and Woman to Woman in Denver and at Budget Tapes and Records  
in Boulder. For further information call 320-5972.  

APR 6-8 - Southeastern Conference for Lesbians and Gay Men - 4. Write CGA,  
Box 39, Carolina Union. Chapel Hill, NC 27514.  

APR 26&27 - Interdisciplinary Research Conference on Menopause. Sponsored by  
Women Studies and the College of Nursing at the U of AZ. Registration limited,  
register by April 5. Write: Women's Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson,  
AZ 85721, (602) 626-4477.  

MAY 4&5 - National Lawyers Guild will be presenting a seminar on the special  
problems facing lawyers who represent women. There will be four separate half  
day sessions. The topics are: Women and Economics, Women and Health, Violence  
Against Women, and Women on the Job. Seminars are open to workers in related  
fields, such as health care workers, labor organizers, crisis center personnel,  
etc. Contact the National Lawyers Guild, 1764 Gilpin St., Denver, CO 80218,  
(303) 329-4971 for more information.  

Doris From pg11  

And she didn't want to hear anything  
more. At this moment I wanted to sep-  
arate myself from her, I didn't want  
to attach myself with her death any-  
more, which would definitely distance  
me from her, I didn't want to accept  
her words of life for they gave me  

an independence I didn't want and  
that I hated.  

I think I tore my body and emo-  
tions from her hands and ran as far  
as the window. I ran into the street  
without knowing how far I should run  
and went in search of I don't know  

what...And till today I am still some  
what confused about this. Sometimes  

I think I died that evening, some-  
times that I left Doris, but that I  
didn't remain there in death and came  
back here another time, in the street  
to see if she also returned.  

In death we were separated from  
each other and from everyone. I think  
that she also doesn't like it there  
and I'm certain that she will return  
someday...  

Translated by Maria Engels