Lesbian Harassed

A court case involving much more  
than simple charges of jaywalking  
and disturbance against M.J. Lallo  
will be heard November 3, 4, 85 in  
Court Room A, Denver County Traffic  
Division. The case, to be heard at  
this time by Judge Close and six ju-  
rors has been heard twice before, at  
which time discriminatory enforce-  
ment against homosexuals by the ar-  
resting officer was charged.  

It began September, 1975 when  
Lallo was issued a jaywalking ticket  
while crossing the street from the  
Broadway Bar to a parking lot. At  
the same time approximately 20 other  
people were given jaywalking tickets.  
When apprehended Lallo questioned  
Officer Buster Snider as to why he  
was not patrolling Capitol Hill for  
burglars or rapists rather than giv-  
ing out jaywalking tickets. She al-  
so questioned him as to whether he  
was prejudiced against homosexuals,  
since the Broadway was known as a  
gay bar. Officer Snider then order-  
ed a paddy wagon and Lallo was sent  
to jail. She was released on $100  

bail.  
The case was first heard as a class  

action suit based on discriminatory  
enforcement of the law. A profes-  
sional statistician testified that  
89% of Snider's tickets were given  

between the hours of 1 and 2 a.m. at  
the Broadway Bar location. Even  

though Gerash reiterated this point  
during closing remarks, Judge Close  

ruled that there was no evident dis-  
crimination against patrons of that  
bar.  

In the second trial held in June,  
Judge Close ordered that the word  
"homosexual" or anything implying  
sexual preference could not be used  
in court. This ruling curtailed  
Lallo's freedom of speech, thus dis-  
posing with the 1st Amendment of the  
Constitution. However, during ex-  
amination, a witness for the defense,  
Phyllis Coontz, was asked by Gerash  
what Lallo was discussing with Of-  
ficer Snider that angered her so  
much. Coontz replied, "She asked  
Officer Snider if he was prejudiced  
against homosexuals." At the men-  
tion of the word "homosexual", Judge  
Close declared a mistrial, reprimand-  
ed Gerash for going against court  
orders, and ordered that the cost of  
the trial be charged to the defen-  
dant.  

Gerash and Buechler made a motion  
to have another judge hear the case,  
but Judge Close refused to do so and  
will hear the case again Nov. 3rd.  

As of this date Lallo's attorneys  
Gerald Gerash and Ruth Buechler  
have incurred $7,000 worth of bills,  
plus $700 worth of bills for trans-  
cripts and copies of Snider's work-  
sheet. The defense was also ordered  

to pay Snider for his time in figur-  
ing tickets he issued at the Broad-  
way.  

Quebec Jury Acquits Morgantaler  
Of Illegal Abortion Charges  

LNS -- Applause and cheers exploded  
in the quiet of a Quebec courtroom  
September 18 as the jury found Dr.  
Henry Morgantaler not guilty of char-  
ges of performing an illegal abor-  
tion. The verdict was Morgantaler's  
third jury acquittal on such a charge,  
his second in this particular case.  

Morgantaler served 10 months of an  
18-month sentence in 1975, after the  
Quebec Court of Appeals overturned  
the jury acquittal on his first charge  
of performing an illegal abortion.  

The Appeal Court's unprecedented de-  
cision was upheld by the Supreme  
Court of Canada.  

While in jail, Morgantaler was or-  
dered to face trial on a second illeg-  
al abortion charge, which also ended  
in a jury acquittal. The second ac-  
quittal was upheld by the Quebec Court  
of Appeals, and the Supreme Court of  
Canada refused to hear an appeal by  
the government prosecutor on the case.  

The latest trial, on this same  
charge, was ordered last January by  
the Canadian Justice Minister.  

Following the verdict September 18,  
the prosecutor did not say whether the  
government would appeal the acquittal.  
But he requested that Morgantaler be  
ordered to appear in court again Nov-  
ember 2 to face eight similar charges.  

"He's acquitted one minute, but the  
next minute he's ordered before court  
to face eight other charges," said  
Morgantaler's defense attorney.  

"Even the establishment media, which  
is not pro-abortion, is beginning to  
say that this is not prosecution but  
persecution," said one woman at the  
Montreal Women's Information and Re-  
ferral service, a group which does  
some abortion referrals.  

"It becomes less an abortion issue  
now," she continued, "but rather the  

government going after this one guy  
who thumbed his nose at the government  
and performed abortions openly in a  
clean clinic with trained nurses,  
rather than back street butcher abor-  
tions."  

Although legal abortions are avail-  
able in Canada, they are frequently  
difficult to obtain. Abortions are  
performed only in hospitals, and legally  
a woman or her doctor must convince  
the hospital's standing committee of  
three professionals that she will suf-  
fer physical or mental harm if she con-  
tinues the pregnancy.  

According to women's abortion groups,  
some committees grant most of the re-  
quests, but in other hospitals, commit-  
tees are very strict and refuse many.  
"Depending where you live, it can be  
easy or difficult," said a women's  
Information and Referral Center member.  

In addition, hospitals are not re-  
quired to have a committee. Many don't  
have one and so don't perform any abor-  
tions at all. This is particularly  
a problem in predominantly Catholic  
Quebec.  

Statewide Women’s Resource  
Directory Available November  

Cristine Soliz  

It used to be that when you were  
down and out in Colorado and, for  
one reason or another, needed a hu-  
man resource, making the connection  
involved a lot of searching.  

Not anymore. At the beginning of  
November, through the concerted ef-  
fort of a lot of women and women's  
organizations, a 300-page directory  
called Colorado Women's Resource  
Book will be ready for distribution.  
As the title implies, it is a comp-  
ilation of several hundred human re-  
source services available to women  
(and men) throughout the state.  

The project was originally funded  
on a $7,500 grant from the Centen-  
nial-Bicentennial Committee (CBICC)  
through the YWCA, which acts as  
sponsor. Jeannie Canney, a YWCA  
Board member, said many women's  
groups decided such a directory was  
needed and Marilyn Muir and Constance  
Shaw took on the task of seeing it  
through.  

How to Get One  

One thousand copies of the finished  
product will be available, free of  
charge, by writing to: Women's Re-  
source Book, 607 South Clarkson,  
Denver 80209. Auer and Shaw said  
they plan to distribute copies for  
public use to various public libra-  
ries throughout the state, to wo-  
men's resource centers and to Wo-  
man to Woman Bookcenter and Together  
Books in Denver. Many copies will  
also go to individuals who have help-  
ed compile the book.  

The project has gone through seve-  
ral changes before being set at a  
1000-copy press run, and distribut-  
ing free of charge. After a success-  
fully received article in the Rocky  
Mountain News about the directory it  
was decided by Shaw and Auer that  
the number printed should be upped  
to 3000.  

However, funds for that number were  
insufficient, so a charge of $5 per  
copy was decided upon. This drew  
some criticism, as some people felt  
that charging that amount would  
greatly reduce the book's availabil-  
ity to low-income women.  

Then, the people commissioned to  
translate the directory into Spanish  
decided that it was too big of a job  
for the time or money allotted them.  
Printing and paper costs had also  
doubled since their original esti-  

mate. With the change, a chaos devel-  
oped which resulted in the final de-  
cision to use the money allocated  

for translation to help pay printing  
costs for 1000 copies and then to  

give them away free--though only in  
English. (Any checks which may have  
been already received are being re-  
turned.)  

Despite any past confusion over  
exact cost and number of copies, Auer  
and Shaw promise the directory will  
be a professionally laid-out and in-  
teresting book, unlike the generally  
staid, run-of-the-mill catalog pub-  
lished by government agencies. They  
hired, at reasonable prices, Auer  
said, the top-notch services of art-  
ist Denise Sogin of the Design Den.  
In addition, seventy volunteers de-  
voted 5000 hours of work - among  
them Kim Womantree, Lenzie Lawrence,  
Yoland Grey, Madeline Holdorff, Jane  
Bergquist, Paula and Rene Dubeau,  
and Virginia and Gloria Auer.  

State-wide Information  

The resulting book is a “technical  
listing of things that are available,  
in that they are there, they say they  
do something. Whether they do it or  
not you have to find out by approach-  
ing that particular service," accord-  
ing to Auer. It covers around 80  
cities and towns, and is divided into  
quadrants, each quadrant being a sec-  
tion of the state. There are 30 cat-  
egories, among which are general wel-  
fare services, mental health clinics,  
emergency cash, minority organiza-  
tions, and feminist centers.  

Listing the programs and services  
of conventional and grassroots  
groups, according to Auer and Shaw,  
advertises the programs in the best  
way possible. They said a problem  
with human resource groups was that  
usually they didn't know how to ad-  
vertise their services effectively,  
which they hope could be done in the  
Resource Book. Many people also see  
the directory as a means to pool the  
resources and energy of groups which  
are performing identical services  
but are unaware of each other's ex-  
istence. Brenda Miller, of Loretto  
Heights College, for example said  
that, "one of the reasons we donated  
money from Loretto Heights was for  
this very reason: that perhaps it  
would help avert duplication of ser-  

More on page 14  

Lawyers Explore Feminism  

Carol Lease  

The Sixth Annual Western Regional  
Conference on Women in the Law, this  
year called Feminism in the Law, was  
held at the Regency Inn last October.  
Past conferences have been focused on  
providing lawyers and law students  
with technical skills that could help  
improve the status of women. This  
conference, however, focused on two  
major themes: using the legal system  
as a political tool and discussing the  
issues that divide us, racism, class-  
ism, lesbianism and professionalism.  
Planners designed the conference to  
appeal to a broad spectrum of women  
including welfare mothers, lesbians  
and minority women as well as to women  
in the legal profession. If half of  
what was planned had happened it would  
have been a good conference.  

Inadequate local and regional publi-  
city kept many women from attending  
the conference. Poor planning preven-  
ted much real discussion of the issues.  
Although the women's law caucuses at  
the two area law schools knew that  
they would be hosting the conference  
last November, planning didn't begin  
until early summer and only a few stu-  

KATHY PRITCHETT  
(303) 572-4906  

723 E. 17th AVE,  
DENVER, COLO. 80203  

dents, who normally have to squeeze  
extra hours out of the day for study-  
ing, were involved in the planning.  
Workshops were canceled because panelists  
didn't show, and one workshop was closed  
because the audience did not show.  

However, the conference did provide  
the feminist community with the oppor-  
tunity to hear feminist speakers from  
other parts of the country, notably  
Catherine Roraback, a trial attorney  
who has defended both Erika Huggins  
and Susan Saxe, Clara Fraser a socia-  
list-feminist, Marta Corterra, a na-  
tionally known Chicana feminist, and  
Rita Mae Brown, a lesbian feminist  
author. The Boulder socialist-femin-  
ist theatre was a highlight of the  
conference with their guerrilla thea-  
tre about the lesbian scare, working  
women and unions and coming out.  

Organizers attributed the low atten-  
dance at the conference to the fact  
that lesbianism was a central theme,  
but admitted that it wasn't publicized  
very well either at the local law  
schools, and little effort was made to  
explain to women law students why dis-  
cussion of lesbianism is important.  
Organizers also realized at the eval-  
uation session at the end of the con-  
ference that having a cross-section  
of community women on the planning  
would help to have more women come and  
participate in the conference.  

Certainly, the women's community in  
Denver needs to have more than just a  
passing awareness of the legal system  
that is daily used to our disadvantage.  
This conference provided an opportun-  
ity for political dialogue among law  
students and lawyers, but little for  
the non-law student/lawyer.