NOW and The Socialist Workers Party: a difference in

ideas, or a question of the

By Kathy Riley

Ever since the National Organization for Women held its national conference in Detroit in April of this year, an open split has surfaced between the NOW national leadership and NOW members who are also members of or politically sympathetic to the Socialist Workers Party (SWP).

During the closing hours of the Detroit conference, delegates passed a resolution charging that the SWP has “used” NOW to present its own political agenda before the public and thereby "exploit" the feminist movement.

The SWP is a national Trotskyist organization which publishes a national newspaper called The Militant and operates a bookstore and office locally at 912 Broadway in Denver.

NOW delegates in Detroit who opposed the anti-SWP resolution saw it as a red-baiting tactic designed to obscure the real issue: to what extent is NOW becoming an electoral pressure group dominated by white, middle-class women to the exclusion of visible actions aimed at organizing around the oppression suffered most by minority and working-class women.

The SWP presence should be identified for what it is... The feeling of exploitation is there... --Peg Ackerman

Until recently, dispute over the NOW-SWP relationship in Colorado has been pretty much confined within NOW; however, it's been there. According to State NOW Coordinator Peg Ackerman, probably all of the 20-member Colorado delegation to Detroit (with the exception of four SWP delegates) would have voted for the anti-SWP resolution had they not been on their way home when the vote was taken.

A similar resolution was introduced at a Colorado State NOW board meeting in June; but Ackerman ruled it out of order. At the time, she felt it did not apply to the situation in Colorado.

The NOW-SWP conflict became public in Denver Thursday, Sept. 15, when the East Metro Denver NOW Chapter and the newly-formed Auraria chapter co-sponsored a speak-out on defending women's rights. At a press conference three days earlier, the city's print and broadcast media were encouraged to attend the event; it was to feature several speeches focusing on threats to our rights in the areas of abortion, day care, affirmative action, and lesbianism.

However, that's not the way it came out in the media. On Tuesday, the Rocky Mountain News captioned its story of the press conference as "Dissatisfaction with NOW leaders."

The story quoted Marilee Taylor, of the Auraria chapter, who is also a member of the SWP.

In answer to a reporter's question, Taylor had criticized the national NOW leadership for not being “as strong as it could have been" in defending recent attacks on women's rights. She also noted that the national leadership doesn't have the support of the entire membership, which should have come as a surprise to no one.

Ackerman, who had been scheduled to talk about "Why NOW supports lesbian rights” at the speak-out, didn't attend the press conference. But she read about it the next day. And when her turn came to address the 150 or so people who came to the speak-out, she delivered a surprise of her own.

Speaking only briefly of lesbian rights—which a number of lesbians had come expressly to hear—she spent most of her speech defending NOW's record, particularly on the abortion issue. Then came the clincher:

“I’m not saying members of the Socialist Workers Party are involved in a national conspiracy," Ackerman said, but "whenever there have been accusations that NOW is interested exclusively in white middle-class women's issues, they have been directly traceable to (NOW) members who are members of the Socialist Workers Party."

She charged that SWP members in NOW "are taking an awful lot of their ideas from party tracts," adding, "We welcome those of you for whom feminism is your priority; but if your priority is the SWP first, it won't work."

Ackerman also criticized Taylor for airing her complaints to the straight press instead of to the leadership, of which she (Ackerman) considers herself a part.

Ackerman's charges were duly picked up by the Rocky Mountain News on Thursday under the heading, “NOW leader attacks schism." Taylor was quoted as saying the accusations amounted to red-baiting. And so the dispute became public.

Recently I interviewed Peg Ackerman to find out her reasons for criticizing the SWP at the speak-out, how she feels about the ideas SWP members have urged NOW to adopt, and how she feels SWP members have been responsible for divisiveness in NOW.

Marilee Taylor and Sue Adley, NOW members who are also in the SWP, were interviewed separately.

Ackerman handed me a copy of an article printed in the May 1977 issue of The NOW Times called "SWP: A Study in Political Parasitism," which had been circulated at the Detroit conference and at the speak-out in Denver.

Among other things, it charges that the SWP, by advocating large demonstrations by NOW or other groups, is looking to the crowds and the media for fundraising and recruiting opportunities it "could never gather in its own name."

The article continues, "A show of force in the streets is no substitute for the exercise of political power in the next elections, and that's where we need to put our money, our time, our energy, and our organizing efforts for the foreseeable future."

Ackerman basically subscribes to this view. Referring to the failure of Illinois to pass the ERA despite a large rally held in Springfield in 1976, she said, “The Illinois experience indicated that demonstrations aren't going to work. If we could get 3,000 to 4,000 women to turn out in every city, we could see it happening. But we have only 2,000 members in the entire state (Colorado).

NOW leaders, including Ackerman, say they have always favored rallies, speak-outs, and so forth along with electoral politics and lobbying. As one example, Ackerman cites the demonstrations at HEW offices in 11 cities (including Denver) on August 11. In Denver, about 20 women participated by presenting the government with a box of coat hangers.

Supporters of the Defending Women's Rights resolution counter that they favor many strategies as well: that NOW is ever to attract the large base it needs to become an effective national organization, it will have to involve itself in the struggles most important to women who see their oppression as women tied to their oppression by class and race.

To say that differences are coming from the outside implies that NOW is isolated ... These discussions are going on in the entire movement...

--Sue Adley

Taylor and Adley argue that demonstrations do work, although they do not advocate them as a single strategy. “Historically, one demonstration has not proven a great deal," Taylor said. "The important thing is that many women joined NOW as a result of that public activity (Springfield). We need to do a variety of tactics; it's not just a question of doing one or the other."

Ackerman's views support the direction adopted by the NOW leadership at the Detroit conference. A major decision made there was the setting up of a Political Action Committee, which would distribute NOW funds to selected candidates. Ackerman said she will work for a similar committee in Colorado, for which the main focus would be abortion. State funding for Medicaid abortions is in jeopardy here, and should Gov. Lamm get the issue on the 1978 legislative agenda, the vote breakdown would provide the base for NOW to back or oppose legislators up for re-election next year.

At the Detroit conference, delegates opposed to NOW's electoral strategy—including SWP members and many others—favored a "Defending Women's Rights" resolution, which because of "poor" or "deliberate" scheduling, never made it to the floor for discussion. The resolution called on NOW to recruit minority women in large numbers by placing priority on their needs and to organize a large demonstration in Washington this fall for the purpose of protesting all attacks on women's rights.

For delegates opposed to the resolution, the call for a demonstration was the major problem. At the conference and since then, each "side" has proceeded to accuse the other of back-

Analysis: There's a lot more to the story ...

By Kathy Riley

The article above deals with the conflict between the NOW leadership and the Socialist Workers Party members in NOW mostly on the basis of opposing theories and strategies. It also talks about charges that SWP members are trying to impose the party's “hidden agenda" on the women's movement. Yet, the issue of why so many feminists have trouble with the SWP goes way beyond that.

As anyone who's been around the movement for a while knows, it's possible to agree on political basics with a woman, yet not be able to work with her. And this is the case for a number of women in this community, women whose feminism includes a socialist analysis, yet who cringe at the idea of working with a woman who belongs to the SWP.

On one level, there's still a basic mistrust of any woman who calls herself a feminist, yet chooses to work in a mixed group with men. That mistrust should be put away. Any woman who is committed to fighting sexism with a consciousness of class and race oppression ought to be acknowledged as a serious feminist.

And to label her—because she belongs to the SWP or some other group—as an outside agitator or tool of white socialist men, is simplistic and just plain wrong.

But then there's the whole question of process. Especially in the lesbian-feminist community, women who've had contact with SWP women have much to say about the experience. The first category of complaints amounts to personal style: that SWP women will talk you to death, that they won't listen, that they're dogmatic and inclined to dominate any project they're in. As applied to individuals, any or all may be true.

Yet, these are also the same charges men have always leveled against any woman who is strong about her politics. SWP women do have a point when they say that it's impossible to "take over" a project: either convince other women that your ideas are right or you don't. However, it's also true that an SWP woman—because she has a strong political commitment and analysis already—knows exactly why she's going to be active in NOW when she makes the decision to join, as opposed to some women in NOW who are less clear or who join a chapter because they want to "do something" for feminism. In group dynamics, that can be a considerable advantage. Yet the NOW-SWP takeover dispute is not being talked about on those terms.

The word I've heard most often from non-SWP women who have had contact with the SWP is “sneakiness." Hardly a great beginning for political analysis, but there's a lot behind the word.

Part of it is inherent in the politics of the SWP. Their perspective is that social movements, whether feminism, black nationalism, or unions, will only become strong enough to challenge the most powerful ruling class in history through unified, effective national organizations. With that perspective, it's only logical that a feminist in the SWP would work with NOW—a national organization—rather than forming her own group or joining the local women's center.

But then the confusion sets in. Just where do her priorities lie? Is she an SWP member who happens to belong to NOW or a NOW member who also supports the SWP? Just as any NOW member who “happened" to be an office holder in the Democratic party should have her ideas scrutinized more closely than a NOW member with no credentials in another group, so should an SWP member be challenged more closely than a woman who calls herself a socialist-feminist but has no commitment to a separate political party.

This is not to imply that SWP women are dupes of a rigidly-imposed party line. Like anyone else, they think for themselves. Still, while you can read all about the politics of the SWP by picking up a copy of The Militant, the process of the SWP is hidden. Its structure is parliamentary, not collective. How are decisions made? Who makes them? How... 

More on P. 14