Harpies Bizarre

Rita Williams as Rinso White.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 2 No. 7

Sharon Niederman expounds upon welfare motherhood.

“We wanted to hit them pow, pow, pow, pow,” explained one of
the performers, relaxing and still out of breath following the
rehearsal. And Harpies’ Bizarre, which played at the Changing Scene in
early April, did exactly that. *

Comprised of eight brief segments, the play barraged its audience
with statements about women and women’s roles.

The performance of Harpies’ Bizarre marked the debut of the Great
Grand Daughters of the American Revolution (GGDAR). The group,
made up of local feminists Marilee Long Saxe, Sharon Niederman, and
Rita Williams, wrote, directed, and performed the play.

Costumed in vibrant hot pink leotards and multi-colored
patchwork skirts, the trio sang, danced, and presented their poetry to
Denver viewers. With action that ranged from straightforward to
highly stylized, they focused first on one woman’s problems then on
another's pride.

Mother and daughters, wives and waitresses expressed themselves
through Harpies’ Bizarre. Three monologues, “Welfare” by Nieder-
man, “Waitress” by Williams, and “Mothers” by Saxe, provided
glimpses of disillusioned women who were either out of work or
bitter about their jobs.

Relying on a minimum of props and a maximum of energy, the
segment “Rinso White” became effective satire on women as
girlfriends, mothers, and housewives.

Somewhat more abstract, the “Ashgrove” and “Hist ye Gossips”
explored woman through poetry. These segments dealing with the
moods and sensitivities of women seemed somehow to wrap the
others into perspective and the play into an aesthetic, cohesive whole.

Harpies’ Bizarre, GGDAR explained in a Denver Post interview,
consists of “our own thoughts and views of the world.” But even
more, they emphasized, the play is an example that women can create
successfully together.

The group indicated that they are available for performance,
though they do require payment.

story by Nancy Heine
photos by Glenna Booth

Marilee Long Saxe relaxing for a moment before the play.