IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

sia accused ae fi Sr :

when the | 3 diene eee ern ins ag omer
Aenea” hs sictiniieeitiiccnninii into a car at knife-point, driven to a

22 RAPE

HELP

From Page 18

High Street Community Center is a
neighborhood action program which
has recently instituted a Rape
Awareness and Control Program
through the efforts of Clarence Brisco,
the program director of the community
center. Women from the community
went to Brisco about their assaults
and were reluctant to report them to
the police. He hopes that the program
will encourage women to report rapes
to the police so that rapists can be
taken off the street.

“Women don't want to go through
the traumatic experience of reporting a
rape. We have set up a procedure with
Denver General Hospital that allows
us tentative access to the emergency
room with the victim.”

A woman who lives in the High St.
area would be more likely to call a
northeast Denver phone number to
talk to someone and to get help from
another member of the community
than she would be to call a strange
number. The police have changed, but
the past is still there and it will take
time to get community people to use
community and city-established facil-
ities.”

The Rape Awareness Program is not
in full operation yet because a federal
mini-grant that had been “programati-
cally approved” but has since been
denied due to bureaucratic mishandl-
ing of funding in Washington, D.C.
has slowed down the organization of
the program a bit. “We were only
asking for a measly $6,000,” Brisco
says. The hotline that was to be
financed by this grant has been taken
care of by having a community dance.
When the money raised by the dance
has run out then the center will
sponsor another one.

awareness Prog g
fund it for a year. This money provides
for two paid staff, no equipment and
no hotline. “We're the only program in
Northeast Denver that deals with rape
- we should have some priority in
funding,” states Brisco.

“Chicanos, Indians, Orientals, Ang-
los and Blacks live in this area. We
don’t turn anyone away who wants to
help,” continues Brisco. “We're sick
and tired of seeing women being raped
and being afraid of reporting because
of fear of the traumatic experience of
going through an investigation. We're
disgusted with the lack of under-

standing of women from their
families.
Ann Caldwell, who is on the

steering committee of the Denver
Coalition on Sexual Assault, and
Judith Nugaris, a psychiatric social
worker, coordinate the Rape Aware-
ness Program. Men are directly
involved in the counseling program to
present a male point of view especially
when a husband rejects his wife who
is a victim.

“There is a reluctance to go to
Denver General because it's a big,
impersonal place,” Ms. Nugaris says.
“The victim is uneasy and I hold hands
a lot. When a woman has been raped
she needs a friend - a nonjudgmental,
noncritical friend who is supportive.
This rape counseling program is
particularly sensitized to minority
people who might be less trusting of
other institutions in the city.”

Any persons who would like to learn
more about the program, would like to
become a volunteer, or have some
input for the program are invited to
attend a Monday night meeting at the
Center at 3401 High Street at 7:30.

SPIRITS RUNWAY

Spirits Runway is a “landing place
for youth" located at 29th and
Sheridan in west Denver. Jenny
Madrigal, a member of the staff at the
youth center announced that a rape
counseling program has just begun.
“We became aware of the scope of the
problem through the director, Father
Mollison. We went through the
training program at the Southeast
Denver Neighborhood Services Bureau
with Mary Stage. She does a terrific
job. Damn, is she good!

“Now that we have this training we
can work with rape victims. We are the
only center on the west side of Denver
that has this service, even though the
government has other agencies over
here they don’t do anything for a
woman or child who is raped.

“We can’t get any federal funding
for the hotline or any extensive rape
counseling service because we also
advertise that we do spiritual
counseling here and the federal money
agencies don’t like to have that a
public aspect of any program that they
fund.

“Three of us do the counseling now
and the rape counseling hotline will be
open from 10 to 5 on weekdays. The
number is 455-9036.”

The youth center is open for all
people to come to let off steam, talk to
somebody, relax.

TRIAL

The trial of accused rapist Gary
Creed Howell has been reset for
August 19th in Court Room 12 of the
City and County Building. The first
trial ended in a hung jury.

secluded alley and raped. The rapist
apologized, explaining he did it
because his wife was pregnant.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 2

RAPE HELP

Southeast Denver Neighborhood Ser-
vices Bureau 24 hour victim crisis
line, free and confidential assistance,
informal counseling, professional
psychiatric help available, referrals for
long-term help and private physicians.
321-8191 227 Clayton

High Street Rape Awareness and
Control Program Hotline listening
service, informal counseling, victim
will be accompanied by a volunteer
from her own neighborhood if she
wishes. 255-2765 3401 High Street
Northeast Denver

Spirits Runway rape counseling,
referrals, and spiritual counseling.
455-9036 between 10 A.M. and 5 P.M.
weekdays 5138 W. 29th West Denver

Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault
self-defense class in the fall,
victim-rap groups meet as the need
arises, counseling. A volunteer
program for women and men who wish
to do something about rape in Denver.
Counseling, Speakers Bureau, Legis-
lative, Health Care, Mass Media Task
Forces. office hours 9-5, 321-8192

Aurora Self Protection classes
366-1511 ask for Mary Perrott.

Westside Action Center possible
victim counseling service soon. 1312
Santa Fe Drive 534-5141.

Women Against Rape [WAR] call the
Big Mama Rag office 322-2010.

Violence Research Institute Dr.—

of rape victims or ‘women who aborted
rape attempts. 623-8252.

Rape Offenders [Treatment Program to Begin

The beginnings of an evaluation and
treatment program for sex offenders is
being instituted by Dr. Harry Chapman
who has recently become a part of the
Violence Research Unit at Denver
General Hospital. Dr. Chapman has
worked on an offenders treatment
program in recent years and now has
had a part of it funded.

An offender can be treated three
distinct ways by the court, according
to Dr. Chapman. After he is
prosecuted and is found to be guilty of
a sex crime he can be sentenced to
Canon City or Buena Vista where he
will receive little if any treatment or
rehabilitation. The second alternative
is for the judge to sentence him under
the Sexual Offenders Act which will
give the convicted offender a sentence
span of one day to life, with the intent
to provide treatment and rehabilita-
tion.

The decision by the judge is made
after an evaluation hearing at which
two psychiatrists and anyone else the
court deems necessary will testify as
to the mental condition of the
offender. The Department of Institu-
tions, not the court, will make the final
decision as to which facility to send

the man if he is sentenced under the

Sex Offenders Act - whether to the
State Hospital or to Buena Vista.

The third way a defendant pleads
not guilty by reason of insanity is that
he is given the psychiatric evaluation
which will determine his sanity. If he
is found insane he will be placed in the
State Hospital until the hospital staff
renders him safe to society and he is
released. Whenever the offender is
deemed “safe” is determined by
whatever process the staff at the
hospital uses for sanity. “We need a
systematic set of evaluation proces-
ses,” says Dr. Chapman.

Dr. Chapman feels that one way to
treat sex offenders is to have half-way
houses in the community where
offenders would live and return to after
holding jobs in the community. “But
no one wants a half-way house in their
community and the offender's behav-
ior needs to be evaluated in the
community. He needs community
experience. The rapist doesn’t fit into
any usual pattern of illness or mental
health. He is not the usual psychiatric
patient.”

He also feels that a possible reason
for this society’s sexual behavior is
that sexual activity is not taught to
children. “Children are taught that a
stove is hot but they are also taught
that it has other good uses - it cooks
food. But there is no teaching of
sexuality. It is not talked about except
in prohibitions. The family doesn't
teach it, the church and school don’t
teach anything good about sex. So
kids learn from peer groups. With
males it is typically self-centered, but
with females it is dealt with more in
terms of seduction: me-thou rather
than being personally centered. Social
mores require that the man is
aggressive and the woman passive.”

In Dr. Chapman's proposal he would
like to set up a program of evaluation
in order to discriminate between
rapists and sex offenders as to just
how dangerous (meaning how likely to
repeat their behavior) they are in order
to provide appropriate treatment.

“We will use clinical interviews of
the family, friends, associates and
psychological test batteries. Men who
volunteer for the evaluation will be
aware that we have a gentleman’s
agreement with the D.A. and the
Public Defender. None of the data can
be used by the defense or the
prosecution in court.

“We would like to provide part of the
overall treatment rehabilitation pro-
grams that would be available to
Canon City State Penitentiary, Buena
Vista Reformatory, or on the streets
with therapy, or in the community
setting for sex offenders. However,
the ultimate jurisdiction is with the
parole board and the courts. If they
decide that a particular offender
shouldn't be in a program they can
remove him.

“This way there would be some
evaluation prior to release from an
institution and some basis for
assurance of what's going on with the
offender.”

Some possible means of treatment
would be psychodrama, bio-feedback
which is effective in teaching people
how to control certain aspects of their
functions. An offender with poor
impulse control needs to be more
effective in thinking of himself.
Bio-feedback will teach him that he
can control functions that he thinks

are purely automatic. He will learn that

“I want...” is the cue to thinking “I had
better hold back...” Behavior modifi-
cation is another means of treatment
and it is a touchy subject. Dr.
Chapman sees it as putting someone
in control of their own behavior,
because if he doesn’t control it,
somebody else will.

“At this point there is some
research literature on what we're doing
- lots of speculation - at the beginning
stages of this there is enough data to
suggest that the kinds of things we’re
doing work. We are just gathering data
at this point. We want to be able to
discriminate among offenders.”