hot briefs

Left With Sexism

It is an understatement to say that  
Margaret Thatcher, England's prime  
minister, is not well liked for her  
Tory policies by feminists, trade  
unions and other progressives in that  
country. But the mounting attack on  
Thatcher's government by the left-  
wing has jolted feminists to protest.  
Socialist papers, carrying headlines  
like "Poison: She Dishes It Out"  
with "Meet Margaret Thatcher, the  
Witch of Westminster," show an ob-  
session with hatred of Thatcher as  
a woman. Another, "Ditch the Bitch,"  
an anti-government comedy, infuriated  
women who saw it not as an attack on  
the government, but an attack on  
Thatcher, as a woman. The theatre  
performing "Ditch the Bitch" agreed  
to change the name but the "humorous"  
violence of their leaflet, showing  
Thatcher's face being sliced off with  
a hammer and sickle, remained. In-  
sults like these have moved Fightback  
for Women's Rights, a new campaign  
within the labor movement, to send  
an open letter to trade unionists.  
“Drop these slogans," they demand.  
"Sexist abuse such as bitch, cow and  
other less printable epithets make  

-many trade unionists feel they are  
outsiders in a movement that has  
such feelings of hatred towards  
Thatcher purely as a woman."

What A Drag

Confused London police thought they  
had arrested England's famous anti-  
gay crusader, Mary Whitehouse, for  
stealing a newspaper to read about  
the events of a gay pride parade. At  
the police station, a woman officer  
was called to search her. The embar-  
rassed police soon learned they had  
arrested Robert Airton whose drag  
impersonation of Whitehouse was quite  
convincing.

Transsister

A transsexual's application to be-  
come an Anglican nun has been turned  
down in Toronto. Mother Frances Joyce  
of St. John's Convent said she "had  
enough problems without taking that  
on."

Party Perversion

The Socialist Workers Party, which  
decided last year to bury its in-  
volvement with the lesbian/gay move-  
ment, recently forced the resignation  
of its only transsexual member, accord-  
ing to a report from the Lesbian/Gay  
Rights Monitoring Group. Dave Frank-  
el, an SWP leader, is credited with  
claiming, “The SWP is not a party of  
social rejects," and should therefore  
force the transsexual to resign. Sam  
Manuel, SWP organizer in New York,  
confronted the member with a choice  
of either resigning her membership,  
or being expelled for her "lifestyle."  
The charge Manuel was to bring against  
her in trial was her violation of the  
SWP's dress code, which prohibits any  
form of cross-gender dressing.

Best Not Good Enough

The executive council of the AFL-  
CIO named its first woman member last  
month, Joyce Miller, president of  
the Coalition of Labor Union Women  
and a vice president of the Amalga-  
mated Clothing and Textile Workers.  
At present, the 35-member council  
has only one black member, Frederick  
O'Neal, president of the Associated  
Actors and Artists of America. Asked  
if the AFL-CIO was embarrassed that  
it has such a low female and minor-  
ity representation on its executive  
council, Tom Donahue, executive sec-  
retary replied: "We are better than  
most other institutions in American  
society."

-Lampiao/Body Politic

More than one thousand people marched  
through Sao Paulo, Brazil's largest  
city, last summer protesting a wave  
of police violence against prostitutes,  
transvestites, and unemployed people  
in the city center. The demonstration was  

organized by a coalition of feminist, black and gay groups. Thousands of people  

drift into Sao Paulo each year searching for work. “We need to get these vaga-  

bonds, pederasts,  

faggots and prostitutes out of our streets,” said Jose Wil-  

son Richetti, who coordinated the extensive combined military/police "clean-  
up." More than 1500 people were arrested during the first week of the roundup.  
A number of women said they were tortured and a prostitute attempted suicide  
by leaping from the window of a police station. “Laws? Constitution? Rights?"  
said one prostitute. “Unless a person can prove otherwise you're a suspect.  
But they are right. It's much more ‘peaceful’ in the center of Sao Paulo now.  
That's because there's no one in the street except gangs of cops."

Women Breadlosers

According to the Labor Department,  
women who support their families  
earn less than half (46.9%) the  
amount earned by male breadwinners.  
The data shows that husbands who are  
sole family wage earners averaged  
$322 per week or $16,744 per year,  
while wives as sole earners averaged  
only $151 per week or $7,852 a year.

Kill The Movie

A coalition of feminist groups in  
Los Angeles are organizing protests  
against the movie "Dressed to Kill"  
and its hard-sell advertising cam-  
paign. In a recent statement the co-  
alition noted that "Dressed to Kill"  
links sex and violence, perpetuating  
the myth that women are appropriate  
targets, that women ask for and are  
responsible for their own abuse, that  
a vulnerable and victimized woman is  
entertaining and erotic, and that  
sexual violence is entertaining and  
erotic.

Boycott Material

Another movie begging for a femin-  
ist boycott will undoubtedly be  
“Looking for Rachel Wallace." Movie  
producer Michael Douglas has taken  
the option to film the book written  
by Robert Parker. Set in Boston, the  
private eye novel is about a straight  
male detective's attempts to protect  
a famous lesbian feminist writer,  
who is having an affair with a "beau-  
tiful" model, from someone who is  
threatening her life. Can't you see  
the script already?

Half A Heart?

Sex twice a week is just not enough  
for men, according to a judge. Spare  
Rib reports that the judge found Sar-  
ah van der Vord guilty of “unreason-  
able behavior" in refusing her hus-  
band's advances, accused her of lacking  
the right “whole-hearted attitude"  
towards her marriage, and awarded her  
husband a judicial separation.

Standing Up

Dorothy Height, addressing the al-  
ternative women's conference in Cop-  
enhagen, Denmark this summer, cited  
a remark she heard from an Alabama  
woman following the civil rights  
struggle. The woman said she "didn't  
stand up for my rights as a black  
person to sit down on them as a  
woman." Height added, “Now we have  
to address the global sphere. Unless  
we deal with the double discrimina-  
tion of race and sex, the black woman  
and woman of color will not have  
their needs met...Unless we deal with  
the race problems of all women, the  
goals of this conference will never  
be realized.”

Taxing The Problem

As of July 1st, residents of Indi-  
ana filing for divorce are paying an  
extra $10 on the former $32 filing  
fee. The additional $10 is for a  
special fund to help prevent and  
treat wife abuse. The Indiana law  
is similar to others recently passed  
by the states of Ohio and Florida,  

“where the fee is attached to the  

cost of a marriage license. The aim  
is to provide extra money for shel-  
ters and programs benefiting the  
victims of wife-beating, while at  
the same time, making the connection  
between getting married and the vio-  
lence that can follow.

Soybean Protection

Research by a Swedish scientist  
suggests that the natural hormone  
estradiol, derived from soybeans,  
may be an effective contraceptive.  
Professor Birger Astedt tested his  

new birth control pill on 200 Swedish  

women; during a two-year period end-  
ing last year, none of the women be-  
came pregnant. The study also con-  
firmed earlier findings that estra-  
diol does not cause the increased  
risk of thrombosis associated with  
birth control pills now available to  
women, however it did produce other  
side effects such as headaches and  
weight gain. Another pill to watch  
and watch out for.

Suit A Shoe-in

A 19-year-old student, dismissed  
from her job in a shoe store because  
she was "distracting" a young sales-  
man, has won $529 in damages from  
Father and Son shoe store on Long  
Island. Cindy Shapiro was dismissed  
by the store manager after a week of  
work in which she sold a large number  
of shoes. The manager claimed that  
Shapiro's presence distracted the  
other clerk, Joseph Deland, so that  
he was "not up to par." The Nassau  
County Human Rights Commission re-  
turned the decision in Shapiro's fav-  
or.

-Laurie White/Madness Network News

Indian Inequities

A Maliseet Indian woman who lost  
her legal status as an Indian because  
she married a non-Indian has appealed  
to the United Nations for help in her  
fight against Canada's Indian Act.  
Sandra Lovelace hopes that UN in-  
volvement will embarrass the Canadian  
government into repealing the inter-  
marriage provision of the act, which  
allows Indian men to marry non-Indi-  
ans and keep their Indian status,  
while denying legal status to women  
who do the same. Lovelace, a native  
of the Tobique Reserve in New Bruns-  
wick, married a non-Indian in 1970  
but was divorced six years later. She  
moved back to the reserve with her  
son, but has been denied housing, the  
right to work, vote and own land on  
the reservation.

A Furious Fix

London restaurant owner Edward Mus-  
toe says he will not hire a woman  
with children. "Why should I when  
there are plenty of good single girls  
around without these extra problems?"  
This opinion was accepted as evidence  
where Ursula Hurley lost her sex dis-  
crimination suit against Mustoe.  
Mustoe fired her the first night on  
the job- he knew at once she was a  
mother. He said he had seen her over  
the past year, wearily shepherding  
her children up the street outside.  
In his opinion women with children  
were generally unreliable. Ursula  
of course is furious- "The ruling  
means I'm totally unemployable be-  
cause I have children.” Meanwhile  
Mustoe insists it has nothing to do  
with sex discrimination- "I'm not a  
chauvinist." He feels mothers are  
"in one hell of a fix- it's a pro-  
blem that's been with us since the  
pyramids.” But, “it's not up to me  
to solve their problems- that's what  
husbands are for."

Electrifying Victory

A key anti-sexist job discrimina-  
tion case was upheld last month when  
a federal appeals court ruled in fav-  
or of a group of women who sued West-  
inghouse Electric Co. (See BMR July  
1980). The suit charged that job  
categories filled mainly by women  
were paid at rates lower than similar  
categories filled mainly by men. The  
ruling is important because the  
courts had earlier held that discrim-  
ination in pay rates was illegal only  
if men were paid more for doing iden-  
tical work. The Westinghouse decision  
says that unequal pay for work of  
comparable value is also illegal.

Up to 10,000 women workers at West-  
inghouse alone are affected by the  
suit.

Dvorsky/Makura/Kinesis