6

Speculum Reporter

Big Mama Rag Vol 5, no 6

Herpes is a Venereal Disease

(This column is the first of many
from the Women's Health Service Col-
lective in Colorado Springs. We are
a full service gynecological clinic,
staffed and operated by women who care
about women and their health needs.
We will be discussing our problems,
our collective process, and all as-
pects of women’s health. We hope
this information will be helpful and
pertinent to your lives. If you have
any suggestions for future columns,
please write to us at 1703 N. Weber,
Colorado Springs, CO 80907.)

By Susan Langdon, RNP
of the WHS collective

Herpes simplex virus, type 2 or
genital herpes is rapidly becoming the
country's most common venereal disease.
Gonorrhea remains first. Herpes is
the most frequently seen serious in-
fection in the Women's Health Service
Clinic, and its frequency prompted
this column.

WHAT IS IT? Herpes is a virus that
causes fluid filled blisters to appear
on any part of the body, usually the
genitalia, including the cervix,
labia and urethral (urinary) opening.
The outbreak may be extremely painful,
accompanied by fever and irritability
or it may be only mildly annoying.
This is essentially the same virus
that causes "cold sores." Before oro-
genital sex blossomed, it was consid-
ered that type 1 virus caused "cold
sores" and type 2 caused lesions be-
low the waist. Now either type can
be found on any part of the body. One
can have both types at the same time.

HOW IS IT SPREAD? Herpes is trans-
mitted primarily through sexual ac-
tivities (especially orogenital); i.e.
intimate touching of wet, infected
surfaces. Once infected a person
becomes a lifetime carrier, although
it is thought by some that the disease
can be transmitted only during recur-
rences. The virus remains in the body
indefinitely, retreating into nerve
cells when inactive. A summary of 3
studies showed that 15% of randomly
selected males who had no symptoms

Panic time has passed, but the realization that Cheryl's and Vicki's names
will not appear in the BMR collective box after this issue had the collectives
threatening a variety of crazed acts. The thought of holding Vicki and Cheryl
as hostages until the community met our demands of providing BMR with two new
women was certainly the most creative. However, Cheryl has been accepted into

yielded the virus from their genito-
urinary tract, while 2% of women
without previous history or symptoms
showed the virus on a culture of
their cervical secretions. Symptoms
can recur with menstrual periods and
increased sexual activity. Occasionally
severe emotional experiences
activate the virus. Some people ac-
quire antibodies to the virus after
puberty although it does not make
them immune, only less likely to have

severe primary or recurrent episodes.
Symptoms associated with recurrent
episodes are much milder than those
in the first infection. One study
showed approximately 50% of patients
seen with first infections developed
recurrences within a six-month period.
WHAT ARE SYMPTOMS? Fluid filled
blisters appear initially, rapidly
changing to shallow ulcers that are
very painful. There is often fis-
suring or cracking that develops in
the vaginal tissue, including the
area around the clitoris and the
urethra. Frequently there are initial
symptoms of pain and burning with
urination, primarily due to the ul-
cerations being bathed with urine,
perhaps even in the urethral canal
itself. Men often have only the
blisters on the shaft of the penis
but may have small groups of blisters
that appear on upper legs and lower
abdomen. Male symptoms are usually
less dramatic and less severe. Eighty
percent of females exposed to males
with evidence of the virus (i.e. a
blister on the penis, etc.) subse-

1
U

law school on the West coast and will be moving in a few weeks, and we cer-
tainly do not want to hold back a promising feminist lawyer. Vicki's new
venture, on the other hand, consists of taking a few months to catch up on
some of the rest and relaxation she's been trying not to miss her past years
of movement activity. We wish them well, despite our cries of, "Please don't
leave", and want them to know we've valued their work in more ways than just

“bodies for the line".

Clair Kaplan boosted our spirits this month when she solidified her commit-
ment to the paper by joining Kathy, Deb, Mary and Tea as the fifth collective
member. For many months, Clair has enlivened our production weeks with hard
work, words of wisdom, and chocolate chip cookies. She has also served as a
Big Mama "good will ambassador" on her various travels. We know Clair will
continue to provide valuable input in her new role as collective member-at-

large.

We don't want the rush of commitment to the paper to stop with Clair. If
you don’t have the time to get involved on the collective level, (at least
10 hours a week), there are a variety of ways to plug in: review a new book
you feel other women should know about; take one day a month and do a car
distribution route, or solicit stores to carry the paper or advertise with
us; cover an event you are involved with; help with typing, layout and past
up the last week of each month; the list goes on.

When you decide you'd like to contribute to the paper, the only immediate
foreseeable problem is the ability to get a hold of us at the office. As
you've probably figured out, we don't keep regular office hours-- we all work

“outside” jobs for survival during the time the office should be staffed. The
best time to reach us is late hours or weekends, but again, it's a hit or miss.
This month we will actively search for a solution to the problem so

affair.

we can start surprising women when we answer the phone.

It is beginning to get to the point where we are even lucky to have a phone.
Well, it's not quite to that point yet, but the bank balance is starting to
get a little red. Camera, printing and mailing expenses have gone up, while
the summertime has always been a lean period for the paper. So, if you are
unable to contribute your time, your money is always welcome, and even en-
couraged, no questions asked!! Just to give you an idea, it costs us $50
a month to rent the typewriter and buy the ribbon to get this down on paper.

A recurring criticism of Big Mama Rag

is that she's too serious-- she has

no sense of humor. Much to our dismay, our “four in the morning faucet-humor"
did not please Constance Theodoran. (See letters section). Really, Constance?
Well, have you heard the one about....

quently develop the disease. Symp-
toms usually appear 3-7 days after
exposure. Primary (or initial) in-

fections may last up to 3 to 5 weeks,
while recurrent episodes usually last

from 7 to 10 days, although this
varies.

WHAT DOES IT HAVE TO DO WITH
CANCER? Studies show that women
with cervical virus infection are 8
times more likely to develop cancer
than those not infected, with 6% of
infected women showing early signs
of cancer within 5 years. Some be-
lieve that the virus itself might
transform cervical cells from normal
to cancerous. Others believe that

the change results from the long-term

presence of virus particles on the
cervical tissue. The accumulated
evidence linking the virus to cer-
vical cancer is not conclusive but
is certainly quite suggestive.

HOW IS IT DIAGNOSED? A fluid
sample can be taken from the blis-
ters if they are still intact and
the virus can be identified in the
laboratory. However, most clients
come for help when the infection has
progressed to the point where clin-
ical findings (i.e. the appearance
of the lesions) and the history is

enough to substantiate the diagnosis.

HOW CAN IT AFFECT THE NEWBORN?
Women infected with herpes who wish
to have children may have serious
problems. If the woman has an ac-
tive infection at the time of deliv-
ery, there is a 50% chance that it
can be passed to the newborn as it
comes through the birth canal--with
devastating results: 85% of the
newborns infected will be severely
damaged or killed by the disease.
The incidence of spontaneous mis-
carriage in a herpes victim is con-

POOH MISO SMO SEER

Ellis, Charlesworth

Continued From Page 1

could not possibly have been found
guilty of anything more than involuntary
manslaughter, and her husband would

have to share in that guilt.

"But as I was saying, there is an-
other aspect to this case: Once the
Public Defender has filed the State
Supreme Court appeal and it is denied,
as it surely will be, the Immigration
and Naturalization people will insti-
tute deportation proceedings against
her, and she will be deported back to
Korea. They have already informed
some of the corrections people that
this is their intent as soon as her
appeals have been heard. The Public
Defender will not carry her appeal any
further than the state courts--and then
she will be sunk. I wish I could do
more for this lady, but it's hard for
me to even make arrangements to talk
with her, and I have nothing near the
necessary legal materials with which
to assist and advise her."

Manier said he would like to set up
a meeting with himself, Sun Ellis, a
lawyer and interpreter, and the coun-
selor at the women's prison who first
brought the case to his attention. The
counselor also believes Sun Ellis has
been wrongly convicted.

The case of Sandra Charlesworth is
similar to Sun Ellis‘:

"(She is) an American citizen and
there is little doubt that she did, in
fact, cause the death of her 22-month
old child. She too, has been con-
victed of second degree murder, and her
term of confinement has been set at 12
to 17 years in the state penitentiary.

"Again, I do not believe that this

lady is actually guilty of murder in
the second degree, and I feel that any
form of adequate counsel would have
defended her to a much lesser degree
of murder--manslaughter at the very
most.

"Ms. Charlesworth entered a plea of
guilty to the second degree murder
charge, but it is my sincere belief
that she was not of the mental ability
to understand or realize what she was
doing when she entered that plea.

considerably high, as is the possibility
of premature delivery. C-section is
recommended to prevent newborn in-
fection if there is active maternal
infection at the time of delivery.

WHAT IS THE TREATMENT? No ef-
fective cure is available at present.
Pain medication should be prescribed
as should medication for drying up
the lesions. Black tea bag poul-
tices, cooled and put on the lesions,
will relieve the pain somewhat. The
most severe complaint is usually
pain with urination which can be
helped considerably by rinsing the
external genitalia with lukewarm
water at the time of urination.

WHAT SHOULD A WOMAN DO ABOUT
HERPES? 1. Suspect an infection if
you had any of the symptoms mentioned
and watch for recurrences. Check
with your partners about symptoms.

2. If you know you've had an in-
fection, tell your health care pro-
viders so they can keep you informed
of research developments and possible
new treatments.

3. Have pap smears every six
months and tell your provider so the
information can be noted by the per-
son who reads the smear.

4. If you plan a pregnancy and
have a past history of infection,
discuss the possible problems with
your provider.

5. Avoid orogenital contact with
people affected with “fever blisters”
and avoid any sexual contact when
signs of infection are suspected.

Herpes genitalis is a very frus-
trating and painful disease to have,
and its victims need support and un-
derstanding from friends and lovers.
If you have any questions, please
contact the collective at the Women's
Health Service Clinic.

WIAP Founders

Deb Taylor

The Women's Institute for Alternative
Therapy (WIAP) in Boulder, Colorado is
currently undergoing a major organiza-
tional crisis. WIAP is an educational
institute for feminist therapists funded
by a large federal grant. For the past
two years WIAP has offered continuing
education to practicing professionals
in the form of workshops and conferen-
ces. This year WIAP began advertising

a "graduate program in alternative
psychotherapy with a choice of the
PhD, PsyD and/or M.A. degrees.

WIAP Co-Directors Phyllis Chesler,
author of Women and Madness, and Mari-
lyn Webb, feminist writer and educator
resigned from their positions on May
26th and June 7th. Also six of the
nine Core Faculty and other staff mem-
bers have resigned. The doctoral pro-
gram has been postponed for the time
being since funding and accreditation
of WIAP's program are in serious doubt.

Phyllis Chesler wrote in her letter
accompanying her resignation, "I do
not want to be a part of any Institu-
tion that, in my personal opinion, will
at best be an elitist Feminist Echelon:
non-accredited, non-intellectual, and
non-professional; manipulative of
student and patient alike, exploitative
and intimidating to women desperate to
be part of anything "alternative" or
"feminist".

An analysis of the situation at WIAP
will come in the next issue of BMR.

Further, I do not believe that she had
the mental capacity, at the time of
the crime, to form the necessary in-
tent to constitute second degree mur-
der. She is 30 years of age and has
never participated in any form of crim-
inal activities before this conviction.
Manier said that both women --Sun
Ellis and Sandra Charlesworth "have
come to trust me at a time in their
lives when I wouldn't blame them if
they never trusted another man. . .I
am merely a jailhouse lawyer who sees
what I believe to be a gross miscar-
riage of justice and I want to do some-
thing to right the wrongs that have
been done to these two individuals."
Manier can be reached at #40372,
P. O. Box 999, Canon City, CO 81212.
Women who wish to organize around
these cases can write to BMR and we
will put you in touch with each other.