music

by Susan Wilson

If God had wanted people to go out every
night, She wouldn’t have created the home
stereo system.

Movie costs have gone up. Dining prices
grow more prohibitive daily. The “legitimate”
theatre was never so dubbed for its
ticket prices.

Enter the stereo, the technological
wonder most likely to dominate home
entertainment — and maybe all entertain-

have more power, less distortion, and lower
prices than those of a decade back. And with
good care, a decent system will last you a
minimum of ten years.

With all the confusing brand names,
component names, “specs” (“spec” in
stereo speak refers to specifications, feat-
ures, doodads, etc.), faddish paraphernalia
and the rest of the lingo that goes with it —
how do you determine which hi-fi system is
best for you?

(perfectly fine if your listening room is small
to medium in size, or if your musical tastes
are soft), and a loss in the lowest octave of
audible sound. As your dollar expenditure
goes up, you'll get added bass response,
plus more volume capacity with clarity.

The break-off point between excellent
fidelity and frivolous extras geared to the
connoisseur comes somewhere around $600
in a component system. From $600 on, you'll
get a lot more meters, knobs, and lights —
plus a general “spaciousness” in your
music. Lovely if you can afford luxuries.

Before you go out stereo shopping,
determine your price maximum. Then
calculate the cubic volume of your listening
room (height X width X length), and keep a
note of this for your salesperson. Note also
room furnishings, such as sound-absorbing
rugs, curtains, or other furniture. All of this
will be important in choosing loudspeakers,
both for physical size and for volume
requirements. If you have a favorite type of
music, bring one or two LPs along.
Aerosmith aficionados will undoubtedly be
looking for different specs than Joan
Armatrading fans.

Really fine speakers have better imaging
ability. A good speaker should allow you to
tell which instruments are playing on the left
or right. An excellent speaker, however, can
even differentiate front from back sounds.

Consider loudspeaker placement in the
store and your listening room as well.
Speakers in a corner or on the floor have
more bass. Treble is highlighted from
speakers placed in front of you or on higher
shelves.

When your speaker needs are met, you
can move on to the stereo receiver, and then
to turntables and luxury additions such as
the ever-popular tapedeck.

The specifics of receivers (or separate
amplifiers and tuners) are complex and
potentially confusing. Your main concern is
that the receiver be compatible with your
loudspeakers, and meets your volume
demands. Among the specs you'll want to
question the dealer on are: signal-to-noise
ratio (S/N), sensitivity, capture ratio, AM
suppression, selectivity, and image/IF rejec-
tion. Ask your salesperson to explain these
features and again lean on your ears for a
final decision.

convenience and creativity in cassette or
more elaborate and expert reel-to-reel tape
systems. Taping records, record segments,
radio broadcasts, and your own music are
but a few of the ways tapes allow you to put
yourself into your music. But the tapedeck
option is another long story to be told at a
later time.

A few warning signals for those of you
ready to go shopping for a stereo system:
When putting together a component system,
make sure the separate parts are assembled
because they sound good together, not
because the dealer couldn’t sell the parts
separately. Brand names are safer bets at all
times. The reputation and longevity of a
manufacturer will be very important later on
— in servicing and, above all, for resale
value. Avoid “house brands,” which are
particularly plentiful in the loudspeaker
field. The know-how, parts, testing abilities
and time needed to produce the finest sound
equipment are simply not available even to
the largest audio chains.

Be wary of unfranchised dealers. Specifi-
cally ask if products have been, or are soon

Listen, Listen, Listen

There are two basic stereo types. For
under $200 you can purchase a plastic
all-in-one compact, a “complete music
system” or console. If music matters, you'll
discard this option immediately. Your $200
might better be invested in a minimal
component system — created by mixing and
matching speakers, receivers and turntables
to your particular tastes and needs. In
general, component systems provide better
sound, longer warranties, greater expansion
flexibility, and higher resale value than the
all-in-one types.

But since stereo systems often go for
$500, $1000 or even more, what can you do
with $200? In the $200-$400 range, you'll
find two deficiencies: minimal volume ability

Once in the store, use your ears above
all. Specifications don’t mean a thing if the
sound doesn’t satisfy you. So with your
musical story and financial situation clear,
have the salesperson proceed to the loud-
speaker section.

Fortunately, loudspeakers — while the
most critical stereo decision — are the
easiest component for the layperson to
evaluate. Check various speakers’ frequency
range — the clarity of the electric bass at one
end and flutes on the other. Frequency
balance — whether or not you want equal
tones in your bass, midrange, or treble
sections — is another consideration.

Your first condition in choosing a
turntable is stackability. Do you want or
need to stack your records? A fully
automatic, stackable turntable will do all the
work. A manual (one-at-a-time) turntable
allows the audiophile to change her taste
after each disc or mid-disc.

Your record platter should turn smoothly
— without “wow and flutter” or “rumble.”
And the tone arm should be checked for
proper “tracking force,” “tangency,” and
“anti-skate compensation.” Ask, ask, ask
until you understand...and hear.

The debate over whether tapedecks have
less fidelity than turntables will go on for
some time. What isn’t debatable is the

to be, discontinued. “Dumping” of discon-
tinued products often ends up being a bad
deal for the consumer, no matter what the
initial cost savings. Question any salesper-
son who badmouths one brand and overglor-
ifies another — certain brands may offer
more sales commission! Never take home a
component crate that hasn’t been opened
and checked. Fun surprises, like missing
parts and non-functioning components are
harder to argue about if you’ve taken them
home already.

Enough said. May good music be with

you and your new stereo till debt do you
part.()

Sound

Advice
- by Mary Rogier

Tuesday Aug. 29, Wed. Aug. 30
Gypsy, Jacks
Friday, September 1
Lucky Southern, Eliot Lounge
Wednesday, September 6

16

Patty Larkin, Eliot Lounge
Carol Rowley, Pooh’s Pub
Thursday, September 7
Barbara Williams/Columbus
East, Allegheny Saloon
Molly Malone, The Idler
Friday, September 8
Molly Malone, The Idler
Saturday, September 9
Alix Dobkin, Amaranth
Sunday, September 10
Ina Mae Wool, Springfield Street
Saloon
Monday, September 11

Equal Times September 11, 1978

Ina Mae Wool, Springfield Street
Saloon
Jade and Sarsaparilla, Jonathan
Swift's
Tuesday, September 12
Jade and Sarsaparilla, Jonathan
Swift's
Susan Hansen/ Strings Attached,
Springfield Street Saloon
Wednesday, September 13
Susan Hansen/Strings Attached,
Springfield Street Saloon
Barbara Williams/Columbus
East, Eliot Lounge

Thursday, September 14
Trombone Madness, Pooh’s Pub
Pam Bricker, Springfield Street
Saloon:

Friday, September 15
Pam Bricker, Springfield Street
Saloon
Barbara Williams/Columbus
East, Blackburn Tavern/Glou-
cester
Gloucester

Saturday, September 16
Pam Bricker, Springfield Street
Saloon
Barbara Williams/Columbus

East, Blackburn Tavern/

Gloucester

Janie Barnett, The Idler
Wednesday, September 20

Patty Larkin, Eliot Lounge
Thursday, September 21

Patty Larkin, The Idler
Sunday, September 24

All That Glitters, Somewhere
Tuesday, September 26

Gypsy, Jack’s
Wednesday, September 27

Gypsy, Jack’s