more letters home

New Wave from pg 2

upper class and have at least one PhD from some- place very Eastern and ex- pensive. In my heart of hearts, I feel that until the women's movement truly places its emphasis on the talents and opinions of each woman who is expressing herself and her struggles, instead of the words and talents of an exclusive group of mostly very privileged women, the movement will lack real revolutionary power and vitality.

And when these writers speak in "intellectualese", women without that higher level university experience (masters and PhDs), like me, find it difficult to decipher the message without feeling one-down.

There is an unwritten taboo (or perhaps just lack of interest) on the expressions of mental patients and strong taboos against madness as "craziness" or "being very un-centered". The feminist movement cannot call itself a movement of women, when most feminist publications (excluding

Big Mama, of course) disregard the torture of 10% of the female population in mental hospitals, i.e. psychiatric prisons.

In struggle,  
Rose

Movement Issue

Dear Sisters,

I am writing this letter with a few points in response to some of the articles in the August BMR on "the State of the Movement." Let me say at the outset that I think that BMR is making an invaluable contribution within the Women's Liberation Movement by so seriously eliciting and encouraging this discussion; never was the dialogue around the perspective of a revolutionary feminism more essential than now.

(1) I want to take issue with the perspective presented in the article by the Women's Committee of the New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican Independence and Socialism (WC, NMSPRIS). I wholeheartedly agree with their statement that "...no true women's liberation will be possible without the destruction of US imperialism." But why continue to repeat the slogan of "anti-imperialism" -- meaning, it is quite clear from the article, only anti-U.S. imperialism -- as if in

1981 that points the direction out of all contradictions, and -- with a little feminist consciousness added in, against "male supremacy” -- opens the pathway to Women's Liberation?

Isn't “anti-imperialism" precisely the slogan used by Khomeini ever since he came to power in Iran and began moving against Women's Liberation, the first revolutionary movement in the country to openly challenge him? Isn't it a fact that the "Left" -- whether within Iran itself, or Arafat and the PLO, or here in America -- was so anxious to also shout so loudly against "U.S. imperialism" that they continued to follow Khomeini even when he was murdering the Kurds, when he closed down the universities, moved against the workers' shoras (councils) -- and even after he began imprisoning and executing revolutionaries who disagreed with the "Islamic Republic"?

How does it help us clear our heads to confront those contradictions -- that there can be a counter-revolutionary anti-imperialism -- when a lengthy article such as the one by the WC, NMSPRIS repeats "anti-imperialism" over and over as if that "solved" the problems of "naming our enemy"?

And what about those countries such as Russia, China or Cuba that call themselves "socialist" (and which I, from a Marxist-Humanist perspective identify as state-capitalist)? It's clear to me from the article by WC, NMSPRIS that the authors do consider one or all of those countries to be "socialist" -- so why not state that explicitly? That is not a minor question for revolutionary feminists to discuss; it has everything to do with not only what we are against -- capitalism-imperialism -- but also what we identify as the "socialism" we are striving for.

(2) I appreciate the

Page 16 - Big Mama Rag, October, 1981

historical parallels that Gate Gilles draws (in "Women and Fascism") between Nazi Germany and the current rise of the New Right; but how is it that in her discussion of the German Women's Movement of the early twentieth century she makes no mention of the great woman revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg, her closest comrade Clara Zetkin, and the massive revolutionary women's movement that Zetkin organized -- associated with the Marxist German Social Democratic Party (SPD), but constantly working out the question of its own autonomy?

It was Zetkin who first proposed the celebration of an International Women's Day, and it was the women's paper she edited, Gleichheit, that became the world center of radicalism and anti-war propaganda and activity -- not only before World War I broke out, but after 1914, when the leadership of the SPD betrayed. It was the women internationally who were the most active in the illegal anti-war work.

I would agree that Zetkin's and Luxemburg's "answers" to the "Woman Question" do not meet all of our needs today, nor answer all the new questions we have raised as Women's Liberationists in this age; but how will it help us if we cover up what were the tremendous revolutionary contributions of Luxemburg, and the contributions of the movement?

Furthermore, how can Gilles possibly so totally rewrite history as to list "four major factors which silenced the women's movement," and include "Germany's defeat in the war, which heightened and accelerated the already existing movement toward the right of the political spectrum" but make no mention of the fact that in Nov. 1918-Jan. 1919 there was a revolution in Germany, of which Rosa Luxemburg was the acknowledged leader? That German Revolution was bloodily crushed, and Luxemburg murdered by the Freikorps, precursors of Nazi storm troopers; the failure of the German Revolution -- in no small part due to the counter-revolutionary class collaborationism of the SPD, now in power -- has everything to do not only with the "silencing" of the Women's Movement, but the open path to the rise of Nazism.

(3) I consider the statement by the BMR Collective, “Renewing a Commitment to Feminism" as one of the most serious articles in the issue, as you attempt to grapple with fundamental, difficult questions facing the Women's Liberation Movement. As I’m sure you know, not all feminists who do see a need for revolution think that the "proper response" to Reaganism is a deepening of our revolutionary perspectives; there are some who are arguing for stronger alliances at the time with "liberal feminists," not excluding “critical support" of the Democratic Party as the “bulwark against fascism" in America. (Yes, we want a revolution and will probably have to go into the streets, but in the meantime we have to write a lot of letters to legislators.)

I think however that the task we need to confront is not only the question of alliances and coalitions with other revolutionaries, that you mention. Rather, as basis for that, is the task of developing a historically-rooted philosophy of revolution that expresses the fullness of all freedom movements, and all that is new in our age. Such a philosophy could give direction within the opposition to Reaganism, that would open a path to that opposition's own self-development into a movement for full social revolution, the creation of a totally new human society.

To help us in this task, we in Women's Liberation News and Letters Committees are currently studying the recently completed (and soon to be published) book by the Marxist-Humanist philosopher Raya Dunayevskaya, Rosa Luxemburg, Women's Liberation and Marx's Philosophy of Revolution. I would be very happy to submit a discussion article to BMR developing some of these points in greater detail, if you so wish.

Yours in revolutionary sisterhood,  
Mariana Louise

Women's Liberation News and Letters Committee

2832 E. Grand Blvd, Rm 316  
Detroit, MI 48211