Native Children Victims of Genocide

Shelley A. McIntire

Women of All Red
militant organization
in the United States, has
taken up the theme of the Year of the
Child as one of their projects for this
year to expose the terrors faced
by Native children in
the US and to break through the
silence and pronouncements of the US
government on this subject. Lorelei
Means, a founding member of WARN, stated
that the Year of the Child is crucial for
the struggles of Indigenous peoples in the US.
"To us, the Year of the Child is a
struggle against the violence and
genocide that have been carried out
against Indian people," Means said.
When asked about why WARN has decided
to organize around the issue of chil-
dren, Means cited the lack of decent
health care, poor nutrition, sterilization
abuse, and poor education as just
some of the problems that Native chil-
dren in particular face.

(WARN), a
militant organization of Native women,
has taken up the

issues affecting

our children.

"The reason that WARN is focusing on
the Year of the Child as one of its
projects this year is that we now have
an international forum to expose what
is going on, not only in this country,
but in the whole hemisphere."

In discussing the atrocious health
care facilities for Native peoples,
Means pointed out that after hundreds
of years of colonization, Native peo-
ple had become totally dependent on
the health care provided by the In-
dian Health Service on the reserva-
tions. "The statistics on the deaths of
Indian people that are caused by the
pure ignorance and neglect of doctors
is extremely high." She also cited

the infamous practice of forced steri-

lization used against many Native
women.

In discussing the educational fa-
cilities provided by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs on the reservations,
Means traced the history of the mis-
sionary boarding schools as "the first
step in carrying out genocide against
us." She explained, "The Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA) made these board-
ing schools mandatory, forcibly re-
moving children by the thousands from
their homes and placing them in board-

ing schools where they were punished
for speaking their own languages."

Means pointed out that many of the
American Indian children are taken away from
their families by the courts and placed
in foster care or given up for adoption.
These children grow up alienated from their identities.

She cited the passage of the Indian Child Welfare
Act by Congress as another tool being
used by the government to take away
Native children. "This bill looks
good on paper," she pointed out, “but
the courts are using it in our communi-
ties to take away our children. We've
lost seven Oglala children to non-
Indian families in the three months
since that bill was passed."

WARN, along with United Indians of
all tribes, held a conference in June
in Seattle to deal with these problems
and to expose the US government's
hypocrisy on the question of improving
conditions for children. Native peo-
ple from the entire hemisphere attend-
ed to represent the struggles and
aspirations of the 80 million Native
peoples of the Western Hemisphere. The
conference dealt with the Native peo-
ple's past, their present struggles and
their plans for the future.

The conference was quite different
from what President Carter and his
administration had in mind when they
endorsed the UN plan for the International
Year of the Child. It was a step to-
ward heightening the struggle for
Native children and all children a-
gainst the racism and genocide that
the US government really stands for.

Editors Note: The information for
this article was taken from an article
by Naomi Cohen in Workers World
Features, March 30, 1979.

International Year of the Child continued from page 8

The cost of one US nuclear-powered
aircraft carrier would feed quality
food to nearly 1 million children or
pay the annual salaries of 80,000
teachers. Our national priorities
are certainly not child-oriented!

Under the gloss of IYC confer-
ences, resolutions and studies, the
multi-nationals are hiding the ugly
reality that children of every age
and class are being exploited and
deprived. Further, the power con-
glomerate is attempting to cover up

the fact that not only do they intend

to slash social services by $15 bil-
lion. This affects food stamp bene-
fits, school lunches, welfare allot-
ments, housing programs, aid to pub-
lic schools, day care and health
subsidies.

IYC literature is full of quotes
such as "...children are a nation's
greatest resource, the future of
humanity on this planet." But are
children as important as oil? Not
according to our national priorities.
Only a system based on people, not
profit, can solve the myriad of
problems confronting children. When
will children have a decent life?
The answer lies in the eradication of
the oppressive, distorted values and
institutions that sustain capitalism,
in the destruction of domination and
inequality.

Children are among the most vul-
nerable of all minorities. They do
not vote. They have no political
constituency, no specific speaker to
voice their grievances or present
their petitions. They have no way to
insure their rights or guarantee
their survival. They depend pre-
cariously on adult responsibility and
far too often their dependence is
betrayed. It is imperative that the
public conscience be awakened to the
realities of the plight of children.
The people must work together to
overthrow oppression and build a
society where children and all minori-
ties can enjoy well-being and happi-
ness.

REFERENCES

Durkin, Kathy.

Workers World
Features.

(March 30, 1979),

The Right

to affection, love, and understanding.
to adequate nutrition and medical care.
to free education.
to full opportunity for play and recreation.
to a name and nationality.
to special care, if handicapped.
to be among the first to receive relief in
times of disaster.
to learn to be a useful member of society
and to develop individual abilities.
to be brought up in a spirit of peace.
to enjoy these rights, regardless of race,
color, sex, religion, national, or social
origin.

UN Declaration of the Rights Of The Child