Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No

Rape and Patriarchy...continued from pg 7

FREEDOM FROM RAPE

Remember the dignity of your womanhood. Do not appeal, do not
beg, do not cower. Take courage, join hands, stand beside us,
fight with us.

-Christabel Pankhurst (English suffragette, 1880-1958)

Being able to defend ourselves is only half the battle. Being
willing to defend ourselves is the other half. Unlearning to
not fight is equally as important as learning to fight.

~Diana Russell

What hope is there that women will be free from rape in the future? What
solutions are there to a problem that is inextricably tied to a social system?
Any solution to a complex problem must be multi-faceted. Many women, con-
vinced that our patriarchal society is never going to even deal with the pro—
blem, much less solve it, have taken the matter into their own hands. Through
support groups, crisis centers, resistance, precautions, analysis, research
and agitation, women are struggling to survive until the day when they can
overthrow the patriarchal system. The values, the structures, the processes
must change; "to achieve this end will require the most total revolution for
which people have ever struggled". (Russell)

Many emergency measures designed to help women survive the atrocities being
waged against them have been initiated by the women's movement. Rape crisis
centers have been set up in large cities to offer immediate, basic services to
the rape victim. Telephone counseling and information on medical, police and
legal procedures are provided by the centers. Some centers offer escort ser-
vice to the hospital, police station and courts, provide rap groups, public
education and self-defense workshops. Court watchers provide moral support
and legal advice to the victim and put pressure on defense attorneys and
judges to avoid insinuations, badgering and partiality.

Women working against rape demanded and facilitated a climate in which the
conspiracy of silence surrounding rape was broken. Speak-outs, consciousness
raising and media information are shattering the taboos against discussing
rape. Marches to Reclaim the Night, organized in cities around the world, in-
cluding Denver, have mobilized women to actively demand an end to violence a-
gainst women in all forms. Groups such as Women Against Violence Against
Women (WAVAW) and Women Against Rape (WAR) are agitating, pressuring and edu-
cating for change.

Women, individually and in groups, are rapidly growing more distrustful of
and impatient with the patriarchy. Many are taking matters into their hands;
many are deciding that self-defense is their only recourse. They are forming
self-protection units, armed and unarmed, and are providing neighborhood
watches, a service police fail to provide. Individual women are taking self-
defense courses, learning to use guns and other weapons and carrying mace or
pepper spray. Police departments have published a multitude of “Preventions"; al-
though many of these place women in a restrictive and inhibiting position,

some are common sense precautions that should be heeded. Reliable locks
and hitchhiking with women only are essential to women's safety.

As the next-to-last resort, some women are considering castrating rapists.
However, castration would not remove the male's drive to subjugate women;
much of rape does not even involve male genitalia, but is done with fingers,
tongues, bottles and other objects. In fact, a number of rapists are impo-
tent. Since rape is not a sexual crime, castration would not solve the pro-
blem.

The last resort is killing the rapist/murderer before, during or after the
assault. The risks are high, especially with a corrupt, misogynous legal
system to “back” the act of self-defense. A number of women have elected to
use this method to deal with their attackers. Joanne Little, a Black woman,
killed her white jailor/rapist. She was charged with first degree murder;
later this was reduced to second degree murder and voluntary manslaughter.
The racially balanced jury of seven women and five men acquitted Little after
only 85 minutes of deliberation. Nevertheless, Little is still serving time
in jail, stemming from a prior breaking and entering charge, and later an es-
cape attempt.

Inez Garcia hunted down, shot and killed the man who had held her down
while another man raped her thirty minutes earlier. A jury of five men and
seven women found Garcia guilty of second degree murder; she was sentenced
to five years to life imprisonment. That verdict was overturned and she was
later acquitted.

Dessie Woods, a Black woman, shot and killed the white man who attacked
her and her friend, Cheryl Todd. When he attempted to shoot Todd, Woods
struggled with him for the gun and shot him. Woods was convicted of man-
slaughter and armed robbery and sentenced to a total of 22 years. Subse-
quently she sought a court review of that verdict by filing for a writ of
habeas corpus. It was denied. According to press reports, she has suffered
torture in prison and has been denied visits from her family.

Yvonne Wanrow, a Coleville Indian woman, shot and killed the man who had
earlier raped her friend's seven-year-old daughter. Wanrow had requested
and been denied police protection. When the rapist threatened Wanrow's son
and her friend's younger daughter, and then broke into Wanrow's house at 5 AM,
she shot him. Wanrow was convicted of felony murder by an all-white jury and
sentenced to two twenty-year terms plus a five-year sentence for the use of a
deadly weapon. An appeal resulted in the decision that she had been tried un-
fairly. In a landmark decision, the Appeals Court ruled that the use of a
weapon as a means of self-defense for women had to be considered in light of
the circumstances; in other words, it was not unreasonable for a woman of
slight build--on crutches at the time--to rely on a gun for self-defense a-
gainst a man twice her size. Also at issue in the original conviction was
the use of a tape of Wanrow's phone call to police following the shooting. Be-
cause Wanrow sounded "calm" and not hysterical, it was alleged that the shoot-
ing must have been a deliberate act. Despite the landmark Appeals Court ru-
ling, Wanrow was to have been tried again this spring. However, the trial was
cancelled; Wanrow pleaded guilty to lesser charges. (See story on page 3 and
the March and May issues of BMR.)

Another tactic developed by women's groups in an attempt to cope with
sexual assault is confronting the rapist. This tactic is designed to encour-
age the victim and the people who know her or the assailant to confront the
rapist, either vindictively or compassionately. The message intended for the
rapist is that the women know who they are and what they did, that they are
responsible for their actions and that they have the responsibility to change.
(See BMR, "Struggle: A Continuing Forum", April, 1977) The rape victim is
encouraged to make the decisions about the confrontation and to participate
in it. This allows her to take an active, powerful role instead of the pas-
sive route of reporting the rape to the police.

An intriguing version of confronting rapists was presented in Sister Gin,
a novel by June Arnold. Rapists, who had never been brought to trial or who
had been acquitted, were found nude, frightened but alive, tied to large
pieces of plywood in the town square.

Other solutions to the rape problem that have been suggested are heavy
prison sentences, capital punishment and rehabilitation of the rapist. The
first two suggestions would just lead juries to acquit more often or to use
the severe punishment in a racist way against only non-white men. Further-
more, getting rapists off the streets would not solve the problem either.
Prison culture, much like that on the outside, is incapable of changing ra-
pists. "Prisons don't deal with the roots of the problem, they only add to
the causes." (McDuff) Efforts to rehabilitate the rapist are based on the
myth that he is different from “normal” men. Even if rehabilitative efforts
were successful, they would be used only on the 3% of rapists who are con-
victed.

Federal legislation has set up the National Center for the Prevention and
Study of Rape. Operating within the National Institute of Mental Health, the
center is set up to study: (1) rape laws, (2) social and legal attitudes, (3)
treatment of victims, (4) root causes, (5) actual incidence of rape, and (6)
rape control effectiveness. (Gager)

Women

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE