Forced Sterilization Case Goes To Court

The case of Norma Jean Serena, a Native American woman who was sterilized without her consent or knowledge in 1970, is finally being heard in US Federal Court in Pittsburgh, PA, after nearly eight years of inaction. Her case against the Armstrong County Child Welfare Services, the Board of Public Assistance, caseworkers from both agencies, Citizens General Hospital, and Doctors Houston and Carter, will be decided in the next few weeks by an all-white jury of six men and two women.

—In August of 1970, Serena had her fifth child in Citizens Hospital.

Unknown to her, two caseworkers from the county's welfare services had asked doctors to have Serena sterilized and to take her newborn child away. Based on information from the caseworkers, the doctors argued that they “found from observation and examination of Norma Jean Serena that she is suffering from the following ailment or condition...socioeconomic reasons...and that another pregnancy would, in our opinion, be inadvisable. Therefore, we are of the opinion that it is medically necessary to perform the sterilization."

The caseworkers originally visited Serena when they received an anonymous complaint that she was living

New Sterilization Guidelines

The Department of Health, Education and Welfare’s new regulations on federal funding of sterilizations are the result of a concerted effort by women, health care activists, and third world communities to curb sterilization abuse by Medicaid.

HEW has paid for approximately 190,900 sterilizations, involving some 190,900 women every year. Documentation shows that a highly disproportionate number of these women are Black, Native American, Chicanas, and Puerto Rican women who were sterilized involuntarily. A major drawback to these new regulations is that there are no monitoring or enforcement provisions to back them up. The guidelines, as they read on paper, are effective this February and include:

- HEW-approved consent forms clearly describing the nature and consequences of the procedure, in a language the patient understands and explaining alternate methods of birth control
- A thirty-day waiting period (rather than the previous 72 hours) between consent and sterilization
- Consent may not be obtained from women in childbirth, under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or seeking or obtaining an abortion
- Federal funds may not be used for sterilization of women in prisons, mental hospitals, or other institutions
- The ban on Medicaid sterilizations of minors will continue
- Federal funds may not be used for hysterectomies performed for sterilization purposes, or for other hysterectomies unless patients are advised orally and in writing that sterilization will result
- Federal funds may not be used for vasectomies in men
- The restrictions apply to HEW-funded family planning programs and public health service hospitals as well as to Medicaid funded operations

Hot briefs ...

Feminists Attacked

Right-wing terrorists burst into a Rome, Italy radio station earlier this month, firing submachine guns at women who were participating in a live feminist program about contraception. Four of the women, all members of a leftist feminist group, were wounded by gunfire. A fifth was burned by a firebomb. Program listeners said they heard sounds of gunfire and one of the women scream, "They're trying to kill us." Hundreds of people poured into nearby streets calling for revenge. -Rocky Mountain News

Coal Company Coughs Up

The Consolidated Coal Company, one of the largest in the nation, has settled a job bias complaint by agreeing to pay $370,000 to 78 women. The company agreed to award back pay to women who had sought underground jobs as miners, but were not hired, between 1972 and 1976, due to their violations of equal employment opportunity rulings and discriminatory hiring practices. -Gay Community News

The Poor Daughters

Fourteen nuns are suing a geriatric institute in Mantua, Italy, where they used to work as nursing sisters, for $250,000 in severance pay (compensation money because their pay was so low they were forced to leave). The nuns, aged 40 to 80, some of whom had been with the institute since 1935, want their severance pay to be based on their last annual wage, multiplied by the number of years each nun has worked. The institute says it never considered the nuns “employees" since their order, the Poor Daughters, have always traditionally worked there. The case, however, is now before a labor claims court. -Women's Report

Best Man For The Job

Italian Premier Giulio Andreotti has appointed Ines Boffard, a militant Roman Catholic who campaigned against divorce and abortion, as cabinet undersecretary for women's affairs. -National NOW Times

The “Negro men” and that it was for neighborhood children going. Propelled by such racist ideology, county officials acted to remove Serena's children from their home.

The Welfare Department took Serena's children away, declaring them ill, although according to a medical affidavit by Dr. Thomas Rosenberg, there was nothing wrong with the children.

Serena discovered that she had been sterilized when she overheard a conversation in her hospital room, several days after the operation. Serena had to fight for nearly three years before her children were returned to her, and has had to wait eight years for her case to be heard.

According to Karen Stamm, of the Committee to End Sterilization Abuse, with the new federal guidelines for sterilization which become effective February 6, “the government is establishing a policy that it considers such things like what happened to Norma Jean unacceptable." She warned, however, that “the guidelines will not be worth the paper they are written on without the closest kind of monitoring of both state and federal officials."

Industrial Sterilizing

Five women employees of an American Cyanamid Corporation plant in West Virginia told reporters last January that the chemical conglomerate told the women to have sterilizations or they would be transferred to lesser-paying jobs in other divisions.

Two other women, who did not agree to the operations, reported that they were transferred out of the Willow Island, West Virginia plant's pigment division into lesser-paying janitorial jobs.

“They told us we could go to the janitorial department, but that if there weren't enough jobs there some of us might have to leave," Betty Moler, one of the sterilized women, was quoted as saying.

The women said they underwent sterilization because of company pressure and the potential loss of several thousand dollars in overtime if they shifted jobs.

The company has stated its policy of shifting female employees out of positions at the plant (where workers earn the highest wages) where exposure to lead could harm unborn children, but claim they do not encourage sterilization.

The women and their union, the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union, are going to make the case a national issue. It is expected that many women in other industries will come forward with information on how companies subject their employees to unsafe working conditions, while using potential dangers as another means to keep women workers out of high-paying industrial jobs.

Boycott SmithKline

The Alliance for the Liberation of Mental Patients is demanding that the production of Thorazine and Stelazine be halted immediately. A nationwide boycott of SmithKline's other products includes: Contact cold capsules, Love Cosmetics, Sea and Ski products, Allergy Relief Medicine, and Sine-Off nasal spray.

Every day Thorazine and Stelazine are forced on psychiatric “patients”, prisoners, nursing home residents, and other institutionalized people, with side effects that include: dizziness, lethargy, blurred vision, impaired thinking, hallucinations, sexual dysfunction, and death. -Harrisburg Area Women's News

-Science for the People