national

Electroshock Ban Undermined By Gov't

Jenny Miller

Twenty members of the Coalition to Stop Electroshock attended the City Council budget hearing on May 17 to let the

confrontation

council know their opposition to the inadequate funding the city has allocated for the legal defense of Measure T, the ordinance passed last November banning electroshock in Berkeley. A member of the Coalition read a letter from the Coalition's attorney, David Ferleger, outlining the need for a minimum of $21,600 to cover the cost of depositions and expert witnesses for the upcoming hearing on the legality of the measure. As of a week before the budget hearing, the city attorney, Natalie West, had only allocated three to five thousand dollars for the defense of Measure T. The most recent word from the city attorney's office is that West plans to tell the Council in a closed executive session that she

Psychiatric Legacy

don't get caught.

So after 11 years - just in general - I don't let anybody know everything about me. I've learned to be sneaky - even when I'm not doing anything wrong.

Talking to you today Doctor, you asked me if I was a "member of the labor force." I wanted to tell you the truth - that I own my own business. I am proud of that you know. But don't you see doctor that I had to lie. You would have only been able to see that within your limited definitions of success. You would not care about my reasons for running my own business. You would not care that it means I must compromise on my political beliefs. You would focus on the success & not deal with that in the 11 years since I've been out I've had - well 16 jobs that I can vividly remember - there's bound to be even more. You would not hear what I'm trying to tell you that I am not able to work with other people. You would never ask

believes the $21,600 figure to be "not unreasonable." West has not established a new estimate herself of the cost of the defense, although she has indicated that the original figure will probably have to be revised upward due to the difficulty of finding expert witnesses to testify for free.

The Coalition met with David Ferleger, a well-known patients’ rights attorney from Philadelphia for three days in the week prior to the budget hearing. Ferleger is best known for the Pennhurst case, which he argued recently before the U.S. Supreme Court, involving the right of children labeled retarded to be cared for in community residences rather than warehoused in large institutions. He has argued numerous other cases involving the rights of psychiatric inmates, including the right of inmates to refuse drugs, the right to be exempt from slave labor, the right of children to have a hearing and their own lawyer prior to psychiatric commitment, and the right of inmates to talk with ex-inmate advocates on hospital grounds. In addition to meeting with the Coalition to help plan their legal strategy, Ferleger talked with the assistant city attorney Manuella Scott, who is in charge of the city's defense of Measure T, and Natalie West. In his letter

Gaining Ground Collective

to Scott and West which was read at the budget hearing, Ferleger pointed out that the city's “interest in a vigorous and successful defense goes beyond the usual interest of a government in its enactments. If the plaintiffs (the Northern California Psychiatric Association and the American Psychiatric Association) are successful, the

I looked at what my choice was in the outside world I didn't find much reason to keep living. At fifteen years old Doctor I could only talk in vague terms about the world - and pain & suffering. Now 11 years later doc I could - and do - tell you

the same thing about what I see, only now I know the right language to use. Dear doctor, it's called OPPRESSION - it's called racism, anti-semitism, classism, ageism, homophobia, capitalism. Dear doctor it's called ABUSE - abuse of privilege, of money, of food, of education. Dear Dr. it's called white male middle/upper class POWER - power to decide who gets to starve, who goes to war, who is crazy, what is normal & acceptable.

So dear doctor how has life been these past 11 years? It's hard. Real hard. Fucking hard. Lots of times I don't cope according to your rules. But you'll never get me again. I served my time. Oh - am I making it sound like I was in a prison? Yes - that is

Big

city will be obligated for substantial attorneys' fees for both the local and the Washington, D.C. attorneys. The litigation will require extensive fact development from present and former victims of ECT, administrators and line staff at Herrick Hospital, experts on both sides, citizens and politicians regarding the legislative intent and in other areas as well..." After itemizing the other costs involved, Ferleger stressed that his estimate of $21,600 is “quite conservative...it is my opinion that a budget below this amount would not permit a serious defense and would invite both loss of the suit and your liability for the other side's costs." Five members of the Coalition spoke at the city council hearing. Ted Chabasinski stated that it would be politically inadvisable for the council members to "write off" the supporters of the electroshock ban, since the measure had passed with such a high percentage of the vote. Council member Andrea MORE ON PAGE 17

what I am saying. I got locked up - for not doing anything to anybody. I got locked up, when it was the people around me who were wrong - and this oppressive painful society.

So Doctor does it sound to you like I need more “help?" I readily admit I don't cope, that I am unhappy. I was institutionalized for 14 months I was in “therapy” for a total of seven years. I finally escaped & quit trying to play your game. My personal life sucks from all the help you've given me doctor. But as long as I can do something on a political level doc - I'll keep getting up tomorrow. And I know, better than you will ever be able to admit, that if you lock me up again, you will take even that from me. You would destroy what little is left.

Let me never be guilty of being happy, content and well-adjusted amid all this pain.

Rag, July, 1983 - Page 9