Childfree Should Not Mean Carefree

The Feminist Responsibility In  
Childcaring and  

Kim Womantree  

You have all been at a meeting with  
the "crying baby" syndrome. It goes  
like this: the meeting is progressing  
when one or more kids start to run in  
and out, cry loudly and play destruc-  
tively. Everyone gets uneasy and  
looks to the mother, or else the kids  
may go directly to her. No one else  
tries to help, or if they do, it's  
ineffective. "I want my Mommy!"  

"Er, she's wet, uh...why don't you  
take her?" Eventually the embarrassed  
mother leaves the meeting to deal  
with the problem and everyone breathes  
a big sigh of relief—except the  
mother.  

Or the case where people neatly get  
out of providing organized childcare  
for an event or meeting—“well, let's  
see if any mothers are coming, then  
we'll worry about childcare." Natural-  
ly enough, the meeting or event goes  
on as scheduled, with the mother  
home taking care of the children.  

Both of these are examples of what  
happens in the feminist (and left)  
communities when childcare is "left  
up to mama." Aside from the oppres-  
sion of the mother, it is a loss pol-  
itically because the mother's unique  
perspective, her problems and solu-  
tions are lost to the group. And,  
most of the members of the group miss  
the chance to experience being with  
children.  

Sacred Motherhood  

I myself enjoy kids. Their minds  
are fascinating to me. Of course,  
they can be a pain in the ass at  
times. I am trying to get past the  
point of handing the kid back to  
Mama at these times ("you take her,  
she's wet"). I am also a childfree  
woman and may stay unchildrened for-  
ever. There are plenty of chances to  
share others' children.  

Our society oppresses mothers and  
kids by glorifying Sacred Motherhood  
on the one hand, giving impossible  
standards of saintliness to live up  
to, while offering practically no  
concrete support, and punishing her  
by taking away her kids whenever she  
steps out of line. Alcoholism and  
child abuse are just two of the  
effects of this tremendous pressure  
forced upon mothers and kids in an  
intensive, monogamous relationship.  
We (feminists and childfree women)  
contribute to that pressure (oppres-  
sion) by doing nothing.  

Helping Out  

My concern in this article is to  
show ways that we can help to take  
the pressure off of mothers, and ben-  
efit politically and personally in  
the process.  

One real important way is for women  
to inform ourselves of and support  
childcare struggles at work. The wel-  
fare monster ekes out pennies to  
raise children with while putting  

mothers through all kinds of humili-  
ation. These institutions must be  
reformed or destroyed in order to  
meet our needs, and non-mothers  
should take an active part, or at  
least do childcare, so that mothers  
can be active.  

The other part of this struggle is  
in building up alternatives to wel-  
fare and state-controlled childcare,  
and here again, the childfree woman  
cannot sit back and "leave it to  
Mama." Forming childcare co-ops and  
child sharing networks, and seeing  
to it that EVERY meeting, demonstra-  
tion and movement activity has organ-  
ized childcare, is everyone's respon-  
sibility, and everyone benefits in  
the long run. Mothers benefit by hav-  
ing more free time and more choices.  
Kids benefit by being exposed to dif-  
ferent people and not having to try  
to get all of their needs met by one  
person. They usually get more atten-  
tion. The movement and community ben-  
efits 1) by increased participation  
of mothers 2) by having to deal with  
the realities of child-raising, we  
become more knowledgeable about our  
society, and 3) child-sharing binds  
a community together, makes us feel  
and act more like a community.  

Childcare co-ops are controlled by  
their members. Kids also have input.  
One or two are usually operating in  
Denver. The one I know of has about  
thirty members and uses a "point  
system" with a rotating secretary to  
keep track.  

Co-parenting is an idea that some  
people in Seattle and other places  
are doing. Co-parents take on finan-  
cial responsibility for a child as  
well as making a long-term commit-  
ment to child-raising. As with any  
kind of non-monogamy, there's bound  
to be some problems, but it seems to  
be worth it to the kids, co-parents  
and natural parents.  

Building Networks  
Involving Everyone  

Child-sharing networks already ex-  
ist informally in our community.  
Some lesbians are "other mothers,”  
and straight feminists, too, share  
their kids whenever they can. Femin-  
ists can't take credit for the idea  
of child-sharing, though. Working  
class mothers have been trading kids  
back and forth and depending on rela-  
tives for as long as there has been  
nowhere else for the working mother  
to go for childcare. Feminists can  
learn from this long tradition and  
add something unheard of—childfree  
people taking on responsibility for  
kids.  

A group of feminists and leftists,  
friends, men and women, started a  
more formal child-sharing network  
last year. We compiled a list of  
mothers and kids and their needs in  
childcare, plus a list of childfree  
people who were interested in taking  

-Babs Nash/BMR  

Child Sharing  

kids on outings, overnight, etc. The  
list still exists, but has not been  
used as much as it could be. We need  
to meet again and re-energize the  
idea; anyone interested should call  
355-7131 and ask for Marty.  

I believe that all of the above  
things will be important parts of  
freeing mothers and all women and  
children. But we have to get more  
organized in developing cooperative  
childcare. Mothers see a need for it,  
those of us non-mothers who appreci-  
ate children want it, and kids them-  

selves, though inclined at first to  
be monogamous and run to Mommy only,  
come to like the extra attention and  
chances they get from looking to  
other people.  

When non-mothers see their self-  
interest in this, and mothers get  
more militant, we will get rid of  
the crying-baby-disrupts-meeting  
syndrome, the "where are all the  
mothers?" syndrome, and we will all  
move forward as we begin to take  
responsibility and joy in the child-  
ren in our lives.  

10. What are the medical  
11. Find out about how the center is funded, especially the life of the fund-  

-Su Friedrich/LNs  

Today, more than 12 million mothers are either working or seeking employment.  
Nearly 5 million of them have children under the age of six; statistics from  
the Women's Bureau of the Department of Labor show that only 11 companies in  
the United States provide daycare for their employees. The number of working  
mothers with preschool children is expected to reach 6 million by 1985; yet,  
with the exception of Head Start, statistics show that licensed facilities  
for group care accommodate fewer than 750,000 children, at unrealistic cost to  
the working mother. It is a gross understatement to say that the daycare sit-  
uation in this country is inadequate.  

Types of Childcare  

Listed below are some definitions of the types of programs available a woman  
is likely to come across in the search for daycare outside of the networks  
we are beginning to build. Also listed are some questions to keep in mind  

if the first question, "How much do you cost?" hasn't turned you away.  

FAMILY DAY CARE usually means that a person is licensed to care for up to  
six preschoolers including her own, in her own home, and is under supervision  
by a local service agency. Usually, only two children under the age of two  
are allowed in a family day care home. Family day care offers flexible hours  
and is frequently used by women who work swing and graveyard.  

HEAD START PROGRAMS are federally funded centers administered by the US Of-  
fice of Child Development, providing early education and group care for the  
children of low-income women. These centers answer only a minimal part of the  
need of poor women.  

NURSERY SCHOOLS offer educational programs similar to day care centers but  
usually for fewer hours. Accepting children from the ages 3 to 5, they are  
open about half a day and closed during summer. Some nursery schools are  
parent cooperatives, sponsored, planned and sometimes staffed by parents un-  
der cooperation with community agencies.  

PLAY SCHOOLS offer mainly recreational facilities and after-school programs  
for part of the day or week. Sometimes they are administered by city recrea-  
tion departments, or conducted in cooperation with public schools.  

DROP-IN CENTERS provide occasional, part-time care for preschool children.  
They are found in shopping areas as a convenience to customers, or in a  
school, outpatient clinic, or community center.  

AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS for older children from 6 to 12 are set up in a few  
public schools and a few day care centers. They are designed for children  

of working parents to get supervised recreational activities.  

DAY CARE CENTER means a facility that is set up for all or part of the day  

to care for more than five children under the age of 16. They can be sponsor-  
ed by social agencies, churches, community groups, or private companies ready  
to cash in on the demand for day care. They are set up to be with the  

child on a day-long, year-round basis, serving meals, providing adequate in-  
door and outdoor space, as well as educational and recreational materials.  

Important Questions  

1. What are the goals for the children? What do the adults there want the  
children to learn?  

2. What is the ratio of children to adults?  

3. How do teachers deal with conflict among the children, or among the adults?  
4. What are teachers' attitudes toward sex play?  

5. How do teachers deal with instances of racism and sexism?  

6. How are the decisions made, such as hiring or firing? How much control do  
the parents have?  

7. What kind of activities happen, i.e., music, movement, dramatic play, langu-  
age arts and other curriculum areas?  

8. What kind of food do they serve?  

9. How many and what kind of trips do they take?  

10. What are the medical services?  

11. Find out about how the center is funded, especially the life of the fund-  

12. Parents should spend an entire day at the center and trust their instincts—  
see if that's where they want their child to be.