16  
Sandy Hagen  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 1  

Lesbian’s Manslaughter Conviction to be Appealed  

A defense committee had been formed to raise the money necessary to appeal the manslaughter conviction of a New York lesbian who shot her roommate's boyfriend. The incident occurred in the early morning hours of August 5, 1978, when Sandy Hagen came home to the apartment she was sharing with Debra Kenney in Brooklyn, New York. When she entered the bedroom which she shared with Debra, Sandy found a man, Gilbert Rivera, sleeping in the bed with Debra.  

It is important to note at this point that Sandy and Debra were not lovers. In late summer 1978, Sandy moved in with Debra because she needed a place to stay and because Debra needed help with the rent. They shared the only bed in the apartment—a fact the prosecution placed great weight on.  

Sandy says that Debra did want a romantic commitment from her, but Sandy was reluctant to get involved with her until Debra was completely off drugs (she was in a methadone program).  

Gilbert was Debra's old boyfriend. He had beaten her during their relationship, but Debra told Sandy that he was out of her life.  

On July 7, however, Sandy and another friend rushed to the door of Debra's apartment because they heard Gilbert beating her up. They knocked on the door, hoping to divert his attention. Gilbert (6'2" and 240 lbs) opened the door, picked up Sandy (5'2" and 103 lbs.), and threw her across the hall "like a rag doll." The police came but refused to arrest him.  

Sandy was still suffering the pains of this assault when she came home on the night of the shooting and found Rivera asleep in her bed. She turned on the bedside lamp, awakening Rivera who jumped out of bed. A few words were exchanged and Sandy got the impression that he was high on something.  

Suddenly, he rushed around the bed toward Sandy and hit her over the head.  

Sandy thought she saw something in his hands. She reeled back and then, as he moved to attack her again, she kicked out hard, hitting him in the knee.  

Rivera fell, dropping a gun to the floor. They both grabbed for it, but Sandy reached it first, and as he came at her again she shot him. He kept coming and she fired until he fell to the floor.  

In court, the prosecutor insisted that Sandy and Debra were lovers.  

He told the jury of 10 men and 2 women that Sandy killed Gilbert in a jealous fury. He accused Sandy of owning the gun, and of having bought it for the sole purpose of killing Rivera.  

Debra took the stand against Sandy and testified that Sandy did not live in the apartment with her—despite the fact that Sandy had rent receipts and keys. She also said that Sandy shot Rivera as he slept in the bed, even though the coroner found no trace of blood on the sheets and Gilbert had fresh bruises (including a large one on his knee) indicating a struggle.  

The jury found Sandy Hagen guilty of first degree manslaughter (a deliberate killing under extreme emotional disturbance) and possession of a deadly weapon.  

At sentencing on October 19, 1979, Judge Sybil Kooper sentenced Sandy Hagen to seven years on the manslaughter conviction and four years for possession of a deadly weapon, the sentences to run concurrently.  

Sandy is currently in the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility north of New York City.  

The defense committee believes that Sandy shot Rivera in self-defense and that her sexuality had nothing to do with her actions. If you believe in a woman's right to self-defense, please give Sandy Hagen your support.  

The Sandy Hagen Defense Committee needs money for attorneys’ fees, postage and other expenses incurred in appealing the case. If you wish to send contributions, the address is Box 1200, 164 W. 21st Street, N.Y.C.,  

Sexual Harassment  

Court of Appeals. Equal Rights Advocates of San Francisco are filing an Amicus brief in her case. Women Organized Against Sexual Harassment (WOASH) at the University of California at Berkeley, where Price is now a law student, also affirmed their support. “We believe that racial and sexual prejudice resulted in the court ignoring overwhelming evidence that Pameta Price was a victim of sexual harassment and that Yale University failed to protect women students from such harassment."  

Price concluded, “The decision, if it says nothing else, tells me and all women who have been victimized by sex discrimination, to be quiet and tell nothing of our outrage and suffering. We have decided to appeal because it must be clearly understood on the threshold of the '80s, that women will not be still or quiet."  

In other sexual harassment cases, charges brought by women students at two San Francisco Bay area universities have resulted in the dismissal of one male faculty member and the suspension of another.  

Phillip Jacklin, an associate professor of philosophy at San Jose State University, was fired on Jan. 2 after five of his former students accused him of immoral and unprofessional conduct. The five students told university officials that when they went into Jacklin's office in the fall of 1977, the professor attempted to touch them, embrace, kiss, fondle and proposition them.  

Elbaki Hermassi, an assistant sociology professor at the University of California's Berkeley campus, was suspended without pay for one academic quarter. Hermassi was accused last February by 13 women who said the professor had attempted to embrace them and had made sexual proposals to them. The women who accused Hermassi of harassment have protested that the university's suspension without pay for a quarter "will do nothing whatsoever to stop sexual harassment."  

Chancellor Albert Bowker from the Berkeley campus said the university settled on the suspension because the professor's conduct had changed after he received a reprimand from his department.  

(Info from Hex Say and Union Wage.)  

"For six and a half months I had no locker at all," said Linda Riviera. "Finally I got a locker...they call it a locker. There's mice, there's rats, there's fleas, there's roaches. There's garbage piled all over, no toilet paper, the place is filthy, and when one woman is taking a shower, another woman standing at the sink combing her hair gets all wet because the shower sprays her."  

And, Riviera pointed out, walking a mile or more to her locker during the winter was next to impossible. "Sometimes they don't get the snow cleared away and I walk through two-foot drifts with that wind off the lake cutting at me." South Works stretches for 20 blocks along Lake Michigan in South Chicago and winter temperatures get down to 50 below zero from the icy northern winds blowing off the lake.  

"Let's face it," steelworker Julie Putterman told the picketers, “U.S. Steel has hired us in greater numbers only because they were forced to.  

"They may have thought we'd get pregnant and quit; they may have thought we'd give up under all their harassment...but we're still here.”  

"Lockers and showers are our right, not a privilege. And we'll fight for that right as well as for child care, decent maternity leave policies and decent contract provisions."