Hard-Won Civil Rights Jeopardized

By Mary Wadding

(Editor's Note: Information for the
following article was derived from
articles in The Militant, Harrisburg
Area Women's Newsletter, and the
Rocky Mountain News. Much of the
information on the abortion segment
was written by Gale Shangold.)

On June 20th, the U.S. Supreme
Court ruled that state monies need
not be directed to pay for abortions.
This ruling has bolstered the anti-
abortion movement that threatens the
right of women to exercise control
over their own bodies.

With the Hyde Amendment coming up
before the Senate, having passed the
House 201 to 155 on June 17th, this
decision furthers the drive by the
anti-abortion forces.

The Hyde Amendment would deprive
women of federal funds by which to
obtain an abortion. With the excep-
tion of the endangerment to a wo-
man's life, federal funds could not
be used. The amendment would leave
funding up to the states' discretion
without federal reimbursement.

The June 20th ruling now says
that the state is not to be held
responsible for providing abortion
funds, unless there is legislation
specifically designating such monies.

What is becoming apparent is that
after all the strides made in recent
years supporting the rights of women
to determine their lives, there is
now a tremendous surge of energy
working to rescind all progress.

States are beginning to seriously
consider legislation that attacks
abortion rights. Fortunately not all
of the legislation is passing, though
the number of bills that fail is small.
Such legislation includes:

---The Texas House voted on May 11
to restrict abortions after the
first twenty-two weeks of pregnancy.
---On April 21, a New Jersey Supreme
Court justice issued a temporary in-
junction barring a woman from having an
abortion. The court order was at the
request of a man who said he was the
"father." Arguments were not heard as
the woman had already had the abortion.
---In South Dakota a law passed that
makes having an abortion evidence
that a woman is unfit to be a mother
in child-custody suits.

---From January to April of this
year, fifteen anti-abortion bills
have been introduced in Maryland.
One of the two that passed requires
a doctor to notify a woman's parents
before an abortion if she is single,
under eighteen, and lives at home.
---In Florida legislation is pending
that requires a doctor to notify a
woman's parents or husband before
an abortion. If the doctor doesn't,
he can be charged with a felony and
face up to five years in jail.
---Six anti-abortion bills were up
for adoption in California this
year. Five were defeated, and one
was never voted out of committee.
---The state legislatures in Illinois
and Wisconsin are each considering
three bills to restrict abortion.
---Pennsylvania Representative
Martin Mullen has proposed House
Bill 71, calling upon Congress to
convene a Constitutional Convention
for the purpose of drafting an
amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
guaranteeing the right to life for
the unborn fetus from the moment of
fertilization. Mullen, termed
"the leading idiot when it comes
to legislating public morality," by
one of his colleagues, noted a sign
in the House audience reading “Right
to Choose." He commented that women
can choose whether or not to become
pregnant, obviously overlooking the
failure rates of contraceptives.

If they don't choose to become preg-
nant, he said, "Let them choose to
be sterilized."

The importance of Medicaid fund-
ing for abortions is seen through
the number of poor women and teen-
aged girls who cannot afford the
cost of an abortion nor the burden
of an unwanted pregnancy. It is the
poorer class of women that will
initially experience the ramifications
of the anti-abortion legislation.
"The most successful attacks have been
on poor women's right to abor-
tion," said Ellen Leitzer, head of
the ACLU's Reproductive Freedom
Project. "A lot of middle-class
women don't see their right to
abortion being jeopardized. They
don't see that attacking poor wo-
men's rights is only a stepping
stone to their rights. It's a chip-
ping away."

On a federal level, the anti-
abortion faction of Congress is
being led by three senators who have
been recognized as liberals; Rich-
ard Schweiker (R-Pa.), Thomas Eagle-
ton (D-Mo.), and William Proxmire
(D-Wis.). The senators have sent
out letters urging for a vote in
favor of the Hyde Amendment.

Citing the "strong feeling" among
constituents who do not want tax
dollars used to provide for the
"killing of innocent human beings,"
the senators also claim a favorable
vote would lend a great deal of
support to the case when it comes
before the Supreme Court.

Appearing before the House Appro-
priations subcommittee, Rep. Parren
Mitchell (Chairperson of the Con-
gressional Black Caucus), urged
opposition to the amendment. Mit-
chell warned that the only altern-
ative would be “to have an unwanted
child, or obtain an unsafe abortion
performed by a nonphysician."

Abortion has joined the ranks of
legislation that has taken a turn
toward conservative values.

Recently, there has been a ruling
that the seniority system of unions
will remain in effect without con-
sideration of affirmative action
requirements. The seniority system
provides for the laying off of the
least senior workers before those
with more seniority. As women and
minorities have only recently been
hired to fill positions, they are
the ones who have the least senior-
ity and the first to be laid off
during any economic crisis.

In its 7 to 2 decision, the court
ruled that even where past discrim-
ination has been proved, seniority
systems that perpetuate its inhuman
effects are not necessarily illegal.

If there was no “intent” to
discriminate, the court said, such
seniority rules are not in violation
of Title VII of the 1964 Civil
Rights Act outlawing job discrimin-
ation.

Willie Mae Reid of the Socialist
Workers Party called the ruling a
“severe setback to the Black and
women's movements. It lays the
basis for a full-scale attack on the
principle of affirmative action."

The National Student Coalition
Against Racism commented on the
ruling saying the decision will
"prevent even more Blacks from gain-
ing access to needed employment
opportunities, and will worsen the
plight of Black workers facing dis-
criminatory layoffs."

NSCAR urged a national conference
to reach out to women's organiza-
tions, trade unions, and student
groups that would be called by the
major civil rights organizations.

In further example of the recent
trend of conservative legislation,
is the Bakke case, where a minority
admissions program at a California
medical school was accused of prac-
ticing "reverse discrimination."

Allan Bakke, a white engineer, was
not admitted to the UC-Davis Medical
School.

The university has a long history
of fighting against its affirmative
action program and now finds itself
in the position of having to defend
it. At present, the school is not
fighting a strong battle to support
the non-admission case. By losing
the case, the school will be permitted
to return to the practice of admitting
white male students, without making
any significant effort to recruit wo-
men and minority students.

The battle is important to the
continuance of the affirmative
action programs on any level. Many
civil rights groups have filed Amicus
briefs supporting the non-admission of
Bakke. (Amicus briefs are filed by
interested parties as "friends of the
court." The purpose of the briefs is
to give information to the court that
would probably not be brought out by
those actually involved in the case.)
Third world students claim that if the
Bakke decision is upheld, the minority
enrollment at universities throughout
the country would be gutted.

Students at UC have staged a protest
against the University's lack of a
strong defense and its unwillingness
to attempt a strong defense.

Thus, the conservative legislation
and the current conservative trend in
confronting the rights of women and
minorities has brought to the struggle
three primary examples of what can be
expected in the near future--more set-
backs and fewer human rights.

Tallahassee Women Face Stiff Penalties

By Kathy Riley

Four feminists charged with crim-
inal trespass during an inspection of
maternity practices at a Tallahassee,
Fla. hospital were convicted and
dealt harsh sentences May 21.

Ginny Cassidy and Carol Downer
were sentenced to 60 days in the county
jail with a $1,000 fine each. Linda
Curtis and Janice Cohen each received
sentences of 30 days in jail and $500
fines.

County Judge Charles McClure cited
Downer and Cassidy's entry into the
nursery as the reason for their harsher
sentences. However, in pre-trial hear-
ings, McClure prohibited the defense
from presenting any testimony as to
the harmlessness of people walking
into a nursery without scrubbing and
gowning.

In light of McClure's rulings, the
State's Attorney took every opportunity
to make inflammatory and damaging
statements about the inspection. Like-
wise, McClure stated during sentencing
that the harsh sentences resulted
from the "threat" the defendants had
posed to mothers and babies.

The inspection took place March 6
during a national convention of WATCH
(Women Acting Together To Combat Har-
assment). It was called as a way
of calling attention to dangerous
birth practices that have become a
routine part of hospital maternity
care. (See June 6 MR).

Mandela Kept Under Watch

Winnie Mandela, a Black nationalist
leader in South Africa, is under
intense attack from the government.

Last month the apartheid regime
exiled Mandela from her home in
Soweto, a Black township outside of
Johannesburg, to the small and remote
village of Brandfort in the Orange
Free State.

The 2,500 Blacks in Brandfort work
as farm laborers, as domestic ser-
vants, and in some small shops. A
large Black prison outside the village
provides labor for street cleaning,
the flour mill, and the apple harvest.

The 2,000 whites there--mostly re-
tired farmers and civil servants--
live in relative comfort as a result
of the exploitation of the Black
population.

Mandela's “home” is a three-room
house with no running water or
inside toilet. Her prospects for
employment are limited to being a
cleaning woman or “nanny.”

Mandela is confined to Brandfort.
She cannot meet with more than one
person at a time, and is under house
arrest at night, on weekends, and
during holidays.

She is also under constant police
surveillance. When Mandela's sisters
stayed overnight recently, she was
charged with violating her restric-
tion. She could face a three-year
jail sentence if found "guilty."

The police try to stop other Blacks
from talking with Mandela. "They're
dead scared," she told a reporter.
"Some of them come when it's dark, and
express their solidarity in whispers.
But most of them stay away."

The South African government has

more on page 11

Feminists from across the country
came to Tallahassee to attend the
trial. In a statement issued afterwards,
WATCH members said, "Regardless of all
the obstacles imposed by the judge and
the State, the defendants and counsel
presented an eloquent and moving defense.
. .The conviction of these women signifies
a violation of the basic rights of women,
consumers, and citizens. The right to
inspect a public facility has been
abridged. The right to document and
disseminate information about harmful
practices in public facilities has been
abridged. The right to a fair and
unbiased trial has been abridged. The
right to justice within the legal system
has been abridged."

The inspection focused on the
use of unnecessary medical inter-
vention in normal births. At Talla-
hassee Memorial Hospital alone, the
Caesarean section rate has nearly
doubled in the past five years since
the routine use of fetal heart moni-
tors has been instituted.

For more information, call WATCH
at 1017 Thomasville Rd., Tallahassee,
FL 32303.