Calls for polygraph boycott  
Coalition For Victims Rights Forms  

"Coalition For Victims Rights (CVR)"  
has just received a grant of $1,000  
from the McKenzie River Gathering  
(MRG) to help sponsor the national  
Boycott of the Polygraph which is now  
in effect. CVR, formally "Oregon Co-  
alition For Change Of Rape Laws  
(CORL)" is located in Milwaukie, OR.  
It was incorporated in July, 1979 to  
protect victims of crimes, in pre-  
trial process, for litigation. CVR  
started the national Boycott as the  
result of the Henderson v. Johnston  
case in Portland, OR. (See BMR Vol.7  
No.3, April 1979) In that case an  
accused rapist sued the woman who had  
been raped for malicious prosecution,  
after she failed a polygraph test.  

CVR is asking all victims of all  
crimes to refuse to take polygraph  
("lie detector" tests). CVR believes  
it is an invasion of privacy and could  
be self-incriminating. The presump-  
tion behind the machine is that a  

person is guilty until proven innocent.  

In some counties, across the United  
States, the district attorney will  
threaten victims who refuse to take a  
polygraph test, that the case will be  
dropped and that they (the victims),  
in turn, can be sued by the accused.  
If a victim fails this test, she can  
be prosecuted by the district attor-  
ney and/or police or sued by the  
accused for malicious prosecution  
only on the basis of the test. Also,  
if a person fails the test---it can  
follow her the rest of her life. She  
may be classified as an “unreliable  
person", which might hurt her chances  

of employment if it were to come out.  

CVR has challenged the Clackamas,  
Multnomah, and Washington County  
Oregon District Attorneys pertaining  
to the polygraph on: (#1) The poly-  
graph's inaccuracy; (#2) That victims  
are under the impression that they  
are required to take this test and  
are not told of all their options  
pertaining to their constitutional  
and state rights concerning this test;  
(#3) That victims are subjected to  
this test even when there is suffi-  
cient evidence; (#4) That a release  
of liability is usually not put in  
as part of the condition to the dis-  
missal of a case, leaving the victim  
unprotected and open to prosecution  
and civil action for malicious prose-  
cution if she fails this test. CVR  
received no response whatsoever from  
Clackamas and Washington County  
District Attorneys. CVR did get a  
letter from Multnomah County Chief  
Deputy District Attorney, John Ray,  
but it was not very helpful nor did  
it answer any of the challenges.  

When D.A. John Ray appeared on the  
CBS TV Mid-Morning Show, Sept. 25,  
1979, to talk about the polygraph test  
Ray stated that he doesn't trust the  
test, has no confidence in it, and  
that the end results of this test can  
be easily influenced by alcohol or  
drugs taken beforehand. Yet, poly-  
graph examiner Detective Maunau of  
the Portland Police Department stated  
in an interview with The Vanguard, a  
Portland State University newspaper,  
Dec. 4, 1979, that "a good share” of  

people who take the test have taken  
something to calm themselves, either  
drugs or alcohol. He stated that the  

test still works under these condi-  

-Credit Lost-  

tions. CVR has talked with the manu-  
facturer of the polygraph machine and  
they too admit that the outcome of  
this test can be influenced by drink-  
ing or taking drugs prior to the test.  
Polygraph tests are being used for  
the advantage of the accused, leav-  
ing the victim unprotected. In Yakima,  
Washington, 60% of rape victims are  
failing this test, even with suffi-  
cient other evidence that they were  

raped. Innocent persons have been  
convicted of crimes they did not com-  
mit on the basis of the polygraph  
test.  

To date, CVR has had 53 contacts  
from across the United States concer-  
ning the Boycott of the Polygraph.  
Victims are refusing to take this  
test, and as a result, their cases  
are not being prosecuted although  
there is sufficient evidence. CVR is  
receiving and gaining support from in-  
mates in various prisons across the  
U.S. Again we have been told person-  
ally of persons serving in prisons for  
crimes they did not commit on the  
basis of the polygraph test. In a few  
cases, persons were released for crimes  
they did not commit after someone else  
came forth on the crime.  

CVR is going to promote the Poly-  
graph Boycott by publishing a monthly  
newsletter consisting of victims'  
rights pertaining to the polygraph,  
studies done, cases lost because of  
the polygraph, and cases of victims  
being prosecuted or sued by the accus-  
ed for "having given false informa-  
tion” as determined on the basis of  
this test. CVR is currently distribu-  
ting "Polygraph Questionnaires" for  
victims and "Data Requests" for organ-  
izations to later publish the results  
of this study.  

Organizations interested in support-  
ing and/or sponsoring the Polygraph  
Boycott, please contact CVR at the ad-  
dress below. Donations to help promote  
this national Polygraph Boycott are  
needed and will be appreciated---and  
are tax-deductible. CVR encourages  
victims of all crimes who have had un-  
favorable results in pre-trial process,  
because of the test, to please contact  
CVR: Coalition For Victims Rights,  

P.O. Box 22525, Milwaukie, OR 97222.  

Guidelines  

The EEOC will deal with the question  
of whether a particular action or  
incident establishes a purely personal,  
social relationship without discrimi-  
natory effect on a case by case. It  
will be based on the facts as a whole  
and at the totality of the circum-  
stances; the nature of the sexual  
advances and the context in which it  
occurred.  

The new guidelines also state that  
an employer is responsible for the  
actions of its supervisors or agents,  
regardless of whether the actions  
were authorized or forbidden by the  
employer and regardless of whether  
the employer knew or should have  
known of the acts.  

The EEOC will determine whether an  
individual acts as an agent or a sup-  
ervisor on a case by case basis, exa-  
mining the circumstances of the par-  
ticular employment relationship and  
the job functions performed by the  
individual, rather than accepting a  
title as the controlling indication.  
However, if the company can show that  
it took immediate and appropriate cor-  
rective action it can refute the  
charge.  

The EEOC is soliciting responses to  
these new guidelines. Comments submitted  
by June 11, 1980 will be taken into  
consideration as the commission makes  
final revisions on the rules. Send  
comments to: The Equal Employment  
Opportunities Commission, 2401 East  
St., NW, Room 4096, Washington D.C.  
20506.