voices from our lives

Developing An Identity As Jewish Mother

(Reprinted from Broomstick)  
Mickey Spencer

For most of my life, I ignored the re-  
alities of anti-Semitism even when they  
were thrust rudely under my nose.

anti-Semitism

Speaking of noses, my mother insisted  
that I have my nose "fixed" because she  
said I looked just like my father with  
that “big beak." Yet, after her divorce,  
she kept, and wants me to keep, the  
name Spencer which my father took in-  
stead of the Rosensweig he was born  
with.

These two paragraphs are related.

I was raised to recognize my Jewish-  
ness but to avoid being "too" obvious  
about it, so non-Jews wouldn't react ne-  
gatively to me. I was expected to have a  
successful career and to marry a nice  
Jewish boy who could also assimilate e-  
nough to "make it" in the non-Jewish  
world my family immigrated to. To do  
this, I had to learn to ignore anti-  
Semitism because to object to offenses  
would be to flaunt my Jewishness. My ef-  
forts to adhere to these requirements  
tended to mute my Jewish identification;  
I felt no particular kinship with other  
Jews since I rarely thought of myself as  
Jewish and even more rarely admitted it  
in public.

I also learned to believe that if I  
thought of failure as a result of my be-  
ing Jewish, there was nothing I could do  
about it. If I was to have any hope of  
success, I had to see failure as result-  
ing from some flaw in myself, which I  
could then try to discover and correct.  
I have since learned that either/or sit-  

uations like this one -- I fail either  
because I am inadequate or because I am  
Jewish -- are set-ups. There IS a way  

of avoiding either of these: to recog-  
nize the anti-Semitism and to fight it.  
But that gets me ahead of my story. I'm  
still back where I was denying reality  
like crazy (and it is crazy-making).  
Just as I ignored anti-Semitism, I al-  
so remained unconscious of the sexism in  
my life. Of course, when I was growing  
up, we didn't even have the word for it,  
but the reality was there. I, and most  
of my sisters, just didn't want to know  
it. YET.  
It was the combination of sexism and  
ageism that finally got through to me. I  
entered the Univ. as a Ph.D candidate  
at the age of forty, just as the Women's  
Liberation Movement was gathering momen-  
tum. Here I was accused of not being  
sincerely committed to the program be-  
cause I occasionally paid attention to  
my children (which is sexism) and I was  
also required to prove that I was strong  
enough to do what the younger students  
did by doing more than they did (which  
is ageism). I noticed that fathers of  
young children and older male students  

were not similarly harassed.  
It took ten years of fighting sexism  
and ageism before I began to understand  

the effects on my life of being Jewish.  
During that time I met active feminists  
who proudly acknowledged their Jewish  
identity and steadfastly refused to al-  
low even subtle anti-Jewish put-downs to  
go by without comment. I was both  
frightened and fascinated by their atti-  
tudes and even more by their behavior.  
Words such as "strident" and "pushy"  
flashed through my frightened mind.

By listening to these women, I began  
to see that there are many convenient  

stereotypes that combine anti-Semitism  
and sexism: the Stand-Up Comic, the Ang-  
ry Woman, the Intellectual, and the Loud-  
Mouth are a few that I have experienced.

I now see that I have both acted out  
these stereotypes and had them put on me  
by others. I act them out when I feel  
my style is too expressive for the com-  
pany I am in -- for example, when I'm  
with a group of non-Jews. Then my beha-  
vior becomes distorted, as I try to hide  
my feelings by acting the Comic or the  
Intellectual, or fail to hide them as I  
act angry or "loud."

On the other hand, I realize now that  
I often get these roles thrust upon me,  
and that my style is labeled with these  
distortions just because it is different  
from the Protestant “norm.”

People of Eastern European and Mediter-  
ranean origins (who are not primarily  
Protestant) tend to have a broader, more  
expressive style than do Northern Euro-  
peans and Americans of Northern European  
descent (who ARE primarily Protestant).  
And, since Protestant Northern Europeans  
have dominated the world economically  
and politically for the last 100 years  
and more, their more subdued, imperturb-  
able style has become the model of "cor-  
rect" behavior for all of us. Books of  
etiquette are the most explicit expres-  
sion of the imposition of this model.

What is not accented in our society is  
that there is nothing inherently BETTER  
about one style or the other. It isn't  
RIGHT to be inconspicuous and unemo-  

tional.  
It isn't WRONG to express one's  
feelings -- it's just different from the  
way many people in this country behave --  
and, more important, it is different from  
the way social norms say we SHOULD be-  
have. Our society has not accepted this  
difference, and in fact the self-effac-  
ing style IS better -- for our oppres-  
sors. It is designed to preserve the  
pecking order by keeping us meek and  
mild, by keeping women of different  
cultures from working together, and even  
by invalidating the power of elite women.

If everyone obeyed the “shoulds," we  
would achieve assimilation and conform-  
ity. This social goal of the early 1900's  
under the name of the "great melting pot"  
is now rejected, at least by progress-  
ives, because it is destructive of the  
culture, language, and personality of  
all but the members of the dominant  
group. But when I was a child, it was  
still in full force. My mother, a  
first-generation American, insisted  
that I be quiet and ladylike in public.  
Even though other girls giggled and  
chattered on the subways and buses,  
she insisted that I "behave" - “People  
shouldn't think Jews are loud and pushy.”

This fear of calling attention to my  
Jewishness has been one of the biggest  
obstacles to my growth towards under-  
standing my identity as a Jewish woman.  
I fear anti-Semitism at a deeper, gut  
level than I do either sexism or ageism.  
This fear is physical as well as emo-  
tional. (It probably has its roots in  
my learning as a child about the brutal-  
ity being perpetrated against Jews in  
Germany in the '30s and '40s). I once  
blocked the path of a man much bigger,  
stronger and younger than me, because  
he had been extremely rude to another  
woman. He retreated and went back to try  
to right his wrong. I acted on impulse -  
I don't think I would have had the  
nerve to do it if I had stopped to  
think first. But I know I would never  
dare to do such a thing in an anti-  
Jewish situation - no impulse could be  
strong enough to overcome my fear.

Still, I have grown. Watching myself  
getting older and becoming stronger and  
more self-reliant, and seeing how the  
rest of society was fighting this  
growth in me, I gradually began to put  
it all together - and for me it came  
together in my identity as a Jewish  
mother.

Older Jewish women have unique exper-  
iences. Through centuries of oppression,  
ghettoization, and extermination, Jews  
developed a family structure in which  
the ideal male was a scholar who carried  
out the religious duties and the ideal  
female coped with all the practical as-  
pects of living from which the husband/  
scholar must be protected. (I am not  
suggesting that Jewish family structure  
was not patriarchal, only that the sub-  
ordinate role of women was defined dif-  

MORE ON PAGE 18”

Big Mama Rag; August/September 1983 - Page 13