page 55

The Mother - India’s Spiritual Leader

Pavita

It is said that when you need her, the mother will manifest and embody the transcendent feminine principle. On February 21, 1878, Mira Alfassa was born into an aristocratic Parisian family. She began meditating alone when she was five, and had visions and out of body experiences at thirteen. Mira was an accomplished artist, musician, and writer, whose salon in post-impressionist Paris was the center of radical discussion and occult investigations. With her husband, a French diplomat, she traveled the world, and while in Japan she was an active feminist. “It is true that as soon as great events and works are in question the custom is to relegate women to a corner with a smile of patronizing contempt, which means, ‘this is not your business, poor, feeble, futile creatures.’”

Around 1914, Mira separated from her husband and returned to Pondicherry, South India, to live and work in the presence of Sri Aurobindo, an Indian revolutionary and philosopher, considered by thousands to be the greatest saint of this era. Sri Aurobindo named Mira the Divine Mother, said she shared his consciousness completely, and entrusted her with the organization and guidance of ashram life. In 1950 Sri Aurobindo died and the mother became sole leader of the largest spiritual community in the world. Her special enterprise is the formation of Auroville, “city of the dawn” outside of Pondicherry: an evolving community which aspires to be free of religious, social, monetary and sexual conventions, where “We want precisely to introduce into the world something that is not there... The argument that ‘it has always been’ is not enough. We don't want to obey the orders of nature, even if those orders have millions of years of formed habit behind them.”

Notes of a High Priestess

Z. Budapest

I am a high priestess of Diana, the Virgin Goddess, Huntress of the Night, Defender of Women, and Mother of all that’s alive. This might sound a little far-fetched to modern ears, but the concept of the triple Goddess is very ancient, and is coming back into public consciousness.

On Europe’s map, you find Diana’s name immortalized in the names of rivers: Duna, Don, Danube, etc. She was known by ten thousand names, which is proof of her once universal worship. What happened to her? For a long time, her shrines went unchallenged. Simple folk gathered together on her Sabbath nights. Women were the expressions of this powerful deity on earth. Then, somebody came up with the idea that there is a god who is self-created and therefore owes nothing to women for his life. With this revolutionary patriarchal concept, the seeds of our sexist society were sown.

Today, what wishful fancy (self-created male without mother), has become a vehicle to vent male anger on the entire female sex. Male hatred is incorporated into laws, customs, and church practices. Women are meticulously excluded from the priestesshoods which are their oldest profession (not prostitution, as common male myth has it). This male monopoly of spirituality is also followed by non-Christian faiths. In the Orient, for example, women are not taught magic. Most witchcraft books are even written by men.

The ancient law of woman's wisdom (the Wicca) said, “power shared is power lost.” In 1974, I most emphatically demand, what power??? Women have very little power. Now, that law must change into its opposite. Power shared is power multiplied. Blessed be.

Today, the idea of a male god is thinning. At the Feminist Wicca, where I finally came into my own profession, I sit at the heart of the streets: Women come in for help who never come near a women’s center. I have opportunities to read the Tarot with a feminist interpretation for completely straight women. My advice to them is not, “You gonna meet a handsome young man and all your troubles are over,” but rather, “You better start digging yourself, loving yourself, standing up for your interest, enlarge your world, women, stop competing for men.” When people’s lives run onto rocky shores, society leaves them only the witch to come to as a last resort. Unfortunately, witches themselves are socialized, and their help is often like the blind leading the blind. Being a political witch is the only way to fulfill one’s obligations toward sisters who need us.

We have taken charge of our bodies, let's take our sweet souls back from male gods. Let’s make women’s religion a major bond among ourselves. Let's establish witches' covens from coast to coast. Let our culture-makers write songs for us, let's recapture our old dances, and let's practice being free.

Goddess worship will make us proud, powerful, and effective. Diana, the first aspect of the Goddess, is a lesbian Goddess. She never consorted with men, but hung out with sixty ocean nymphs and twenty river nymphs. No man was allowed to violate her privacy. Once, when she took a bath, a man was found in the vicinity—the poor schmuck had fallen asleep and was left behind by some hunting party. Diana turned her dogs on him to tear him limb from limb. Can you imagine what this Goddess has in store for rapists?

The craft isn't just religion, it's a lifestyle. Our calendar differs from the Christian one; our holydays are the Sabbaths which are solar happenings—solstices and equinoxes. We know the herbs, we know the spells, we know how to cure, bless, and curse. All of this is every woman’s heritage. All women should have more control over their lives, health, love affairs, and enemies. We have dedicated ourselves to spreading this knowledge, to teaching and to helping. Women are afraid of witchcraft because of the image given to it by male public relations. Don’t buy it anymore. Think of your mothers and their mothers, were they evil? The separation of women by the enforcement of male standards has worked against witches very well—after the burnings of eight million sisters and four hundred men, hardly any literature mourned the women. Big silence.

I mourn for those wise women every day, but I also get very strong with anger. The spiritual leadership of a rising tide of humanity is women’s religion. You, woman, are the natural mystic, healer, and spell-maker. Kept in ignorance, your powers are being eaten away by the rust of time. But your third eye, the mystical pituitary gland, is much larger than a man’s—it acts every month, triggering your moon cycle, triggering conception, triggering magnetic fields. For a change, biology works in our favor. Are you ready to accept the responsibility to overcome the world’s spiritual starvation? Diana is beckoning, she never bucked a good fight. Religion is the highest of politics. As in heaven so on earth. May She stand tall in your dreams. Blessed be.

From The Lesbian Tide, Oct. 1974

Mother's Message of April 2

“For centuries and centuries humanity has waited for this time. It has come. But it is difficult.

“I don't simply tell you we are here upon earth to rest and enjoy ourselves; now it is not the time for that. We are here to prepare the way for a new creation.

“The body has some difficulty, so it can't be active, alas. It is not because I am old, I am not old. I am not old. I am younger than most of you. If I am here inactive, it is because the body has given itself to prepare the transformation. But the consciousness is clear and we are here to work... rest and enjoyment come afterwards. Let us do our work here.

“So I have called you to tell you that. Take what you can, do what you can, my help will be with you. All sincere effort will be helped at the maximum. That is what I say.

“It is the moment to be heroic.

“Heroism, not as commonly known; but to be fully united... and the Divine help will be always with those who have resolved to be heroic in all sincerity. There it is.

“You are here at this moment, that is to say on the earth, because you have chosen it at this time... you yourselves don't remember anymore, but I know it. It is for that that you are here. Well, it is necessary to be at the height of the task. It is necessary to make an effort, to conquer all the pettiness and all the limitations, and above all say to the ego: ‘your time has passed.’ We want a new race which does not have ego. That is what we want: the Divine Consciousness which will allow the race to develop itself and to give birth to the Super(wo)man.

“Something to say?

“If there is in your hearts a sincere yes, you will satisfy me completely. I do not need words, I need the sincere adhesion of your hearts. That is all.”

(Writings by and about The Mother, and the work in Auroville, are available through Matagiri, Mt. Tremper, N.Y. 12457.)

Ferrette Music Service 777-5714

82 South Broadway

Denver