Update From The Woman To Woman Collective

The Woman to Woman Collective

Racism is finally being dealt with within the feminist movement. In Denver, this struggle surfaced in the old Woman to Woman collective, and resulted in the formation of a new collective.

Feminism as practiced by the old collective had been white feminism, which was racist and exclusionary. This exclusion manifested itself through a shelf list which disproportionately expressed concerns of white women to the exclusion of Third World and Jewish perspectives. Tokenism, one of racism's many faces, was practiced by depending on the views of one Third World or Jewish woman and assuming that that one view was all the information needed. As racism occurred, the burden of proof as well as the burden of solution was left to the woman of color or Jewish woman involved. When she expressed specific concerns, she was responded to (and effectively silenced by) trivia about "political correctness" and “process." This ignored differences in modes of expression and effectively forced the burden of proof to come through white perspective to be considered "proof."

Spoken English has many different cultural idioms within it and to demand that that expression be funneled through white English is racist.

In addition, outreach was not done towards Third World communities for events and social activities. When only white women attended these events, no questions were asked, and the events were considered valid feminist experiences.

The new collective believes that multi-cultural feminism is the only valid feminism. To this end, we have taken an active anti-racist stance and have required collective membership to make that stance their feminist priority. Also, we require that all workgroups have the same priorities: anti-racism, anti-classism as well as have a feminist perspective.

The new collective is going to the community instead of waiting for them to come to us. We do this through having lit tables at events, resource sharing with other organizations and expanding our shelf list to include books by and for Third World and Jewish women. The community takes part in reviewing books, and we respond to community input regarding what books are ordered.

The most "revolutionary"—also the most difficult—thing we are doing is bonding with one another. We do not know each other well, so we strive to become familiar with our different ways of speaking and being. We are committed to actively listening to one another and to hearing how our words and actions affect each other.

In order to make "crit/self-crit" more effective, we have changed the name to “Compliments and Criticisms" and accordingly, have changed that process: it is ongoing throughout the meeting and done in a caring manner. We try to avoid one member invalidating another member's responses and reactions (called "shutting someone up") and we encourage each other to check out assumptions and hunches. We have instituted a policy of never criticizing without complimenting; never merely telling someone what they've done that was wrong without also telling them how it could be done better.

This collective is only six weeks old; we have no perfect method of doing anything. However, we are committed to trying different things—and if they don't work, we are just committed to changing them to something else, to make Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter a healthy, effective feminist project.

If any woman in the community has questions or concerns, please don't depend on rumors—come and talk to us.

(coll. note: We respect the open door attitude and feel it should continue, but it relies too much on the individual seeking out information from a collective that is still very much in process. We feel that more complete information should be printed and available for women to read and that would give them a better basis for discussion with the collective.

The general community knows certain things: a purge of 5 women happened but it has not been explained to the community why.

There is a controversy shelf. The demands stated a procedure for that shelf. Has it

MORE ON PAGE 29

bmr: where we're at

Well, to tell you all the truth, the prospect of a month off is looking pretty good to us right about now. Again, don't worry when you notice you haven't received a September issue; we promise you'll be seeing BMR again come October. The November issue will be a theme issue on Racism.

Other themes coming up are Organized Religion and Spirituality in January, and an issue on women in prison and mental institutions soon after. If you feel inclined to write on any of these topics, please do—the deadline for copy is the 19th of the month before.

As far as the state of Big Mama Rag is concerned... This is the last month for Vicki and Connie as supporters. They will be moving, and we hope that we'll continue to receive input and contributions from them in the form of writing and artwork. They have both been involved extensively with BMR for a long time—Connie as a regular writer, creator of wonderful covers and graphics and the main organizer of the new layout format. And Vicki has contributed extensively as a writer, has for a while now been the tender of our books and finances, has sunk many thankless hours into increasing our advertising business. Thanks. We only have an inkling of how much we are going to miss them as working partners and as friends. Good

PAGES 2-5-4

Which leaves us with some holes.

Kim Womantree, who has been helping regularly with production, will be starting as a supporter in September. The role of the supporter seems to be in a constant state of overhaul (i.e., it is flexible), but basically it consists of a regular monthly commitment of one sort or another, helping out in production, and attendance at the monthly critique, which allows for political input.

We have been surviving as such a small collective, only because of lots of help from women who show up during the month to do typing, and during production weekend to do proofreading, and mailing. If you're thinking you might like to get involved in BMR, coming down to the office and helping out with production is a good way to see what it's like. Call down and connect with us if you're interested (322-2010).

Our joint benefit with Woman to Woman was a lot of fun, but it sure was a small crowd, and that was discouraging. We criticize our local community for its lack of support. If BMR and Woman to Woman are meeting your needs in some way, we need to hear it, and be supported to continue. If they aren't, we need to hear why and how we can be more effective. We say this a lot—we need more input from our community—Denver women and non-local subscribers—in the form of money, articles, coverage of news, actions, theory, personal struggles, feedback on articles, on our priorities (in terms of what we cover and what we don't), in the form of

TSLCGEs.

We are planning a community meeting/potluck for October 10 (we'll let you know where) to get feedback on BMR, set up contact with new women, and talk about our structure, finances, effectiveness as a political project, and connections with other political projects. It's a ways off, but put it on your calendar.

Big Mama Rag, August, 1981 - Page 5