denver

county courthouse

Big Mama Meets: the

PRESS ROOM

I asked myself why I was so enraged, and so profoundly embarrassed, by the photographs of the interior of the press room at the County Courthouse. I have seen pictures of nude women before, in what I consider to be degrading and humiliating poses. And I am

certainly no longer surprised to find instances of sexism in every aspect of our society. Why, then, does this example of overt male chauvinism affect me more deeply than some others? I think it is because of the specific circumstances—first, because it was in the county courthouse, a place where both men and women work all day, go in and out, etc. What does a woman feel who has to work in such an atmosphere? Secondly, these degrading photographs were in the press room, a place where people intimately involved with the media and news coverage work. It makes me cringe to think of what these men think of me, as a woman, and then to expand that to think of what the attitude of this country's media network is toward women in general. The same men who put up those pictures are the men who have, at their fingertips, access to the news media that can sway public opinion to a great degree. The tone and/or bias of their reporting can help to make or break the women's movement.

I ask myself why feminism is

Press,

Carof

always distorted by the media, why half-nude women are on T.V. selling shaving cream or toothpaste, why the women's movement is portrayed as a bunch of howling, bra-burning, castrating women. Now the answer to that question becomes clearer—just look at the

men who are writing those stories!

Photos

My mirror reflects more than my image

Your cheekbone casts the only shadow that I've allowed myself to rest in, for some time now.

And the shade of your mouth, as it speaks, umbrellas my thoughts... and my life becomes a turned down turned round inside out umbrella drowning in its own secretive joy.

My most unspoken thoughts have sought refuge in the folds of your expression and I've spent many estranged nights in the negative space against your neck.

I say to myself, in defense, of course I'm only resting here—just for a time you understand... 
Resting 
here 

in the shadows of your being

And perhaps I should have told you I was here.

Linda Diborenzo

Putting away... picking up ~
Annihilating grease, pT.
Specks of dirt, smoothing cream: ©
Getting my satisfaction

From creating order out of chaos.
Strangely unnerved

By a glass on the floor

Or a book upside down

Or a towel out of place,

Brooms are my companions
Walls are my friends

I feel so alone.

When all my life I've just wanted to shout
To another woman—

Young or old—stranger or friend,

My mother even—

Sister, Sister, can you hear me?

I love you.

Because you are you.

Blood and bone.

Soul of my soul,

We’re ONE: Tiana Rubenstein