*

not  
hey Cannot  

The Women's Community Health Center  
collective in Cambridge, Mass., has  
issued a position paper strongly cen-  
suring the Feminist Economic Network  
(FEN). The Health Center collective  
criticizes FEN on the basis of that  
corporation's approach to the issue  
of power; its handling of the Femin-  
ist Women's City Club, and its lack  
of accountability to the feminist  
movement.  

Also under fire from the Cambridge  
collective are two institutions whose  
leaderships have been closely linked  
with FEN's: the Detroit Feminist  
Federal Credit Union and the Downtown  
Detroit Women's Feminist Health Cen-  
ter.  

The position paper charges that  
FEN's “structure and concepts...have  
seemed dangerously predisposed to tra-  
ditional capitalism." It claims that,  
by charging a $100 membership fee,  
FEN has made it impossible for econo-  
mically disadvantaged women to benefit  
from the Feminist Women's City Club,  
and that workers at the Club have  
been oppressed in that they have not  
been allowed to maintain control over  
their working situation.  

"Questioning and feedback from other  
women has," stated the Health Center  
Collective, "been met with anger and  
hostility rather than a sincere de-  
sire to clarify misunderstandings or  
alter structure where necessary. To  
facilitate growth and analysis in the  
area of accountability, feminists and  
feminist institutions are urged to  
come together to share definitions of  
accountability and to determine for  
what and to whom we are accountable.  

. branch).  

Feminist Group Decides  
Give Support To FEN  

The Detroit Feminist Federal Credit  
Union is challenged regarding its ef-  
forts (since called off) to extend its  
charter to 13 midwestern states (wher-  
eby any feminist credit union in those  
states would have to be a Detroit  
Such an arrangement, accor-  
ding to the collective, would amount  
to "colonialism". The Cambridge wom-  
en also ask that the Credit Union  
consider demanding the resignation of  
those directors involved in granting  
large loans to members of FEN (for the  
purchase of the Women's City Club  
Building).  

The Downtown Detroit Women's Femin-  
ist Health Center is censured for its  
appropriation of a name similar to  
that of the Detroit Feminist Women's  
Health Center. The position paper  
contends that the founders of the  
Downtown Detroit Center chose the  
name "in order to build on the good  
reputation of women with whom they  
were in fundamental disagreement."  
The Detroit Center's response to the  
charge of racism (levelled at them by  
the Downtown Detroit Center), on the  
other hand, “reveals much naivete  
about...institutional and societal  
racism."  

The Cambridge collective concludes  
that it "cannot support FEN," and  
urges all feminists "not to invest in  
FEN or FEN businesses, and not to join  
the City Club."  

The position paper summarized above  
to be read at the Big  
For copies and informa-  
Women's Community Health  
? Hampshire St., Cambridge,  

Mama off  

tion writ  

bmr:  
Ww  

Yes, yes, we have changed the format of Big Mama.  
We could not afford to pay for typesetting the news this month.  
We have had to cut corners all ‘round to bring you this month's edition.  
We are now typing the entire issue and renting an IBM Selectric to do so.  
Fortunately, for our self-image if nothing else the paper looks so awkward.  
We will have our own typesetting machine in a few months.  

While we're on the subject of simplifying our bills, one thing that would  
really make our bills go away would be for our readers to send money. There  
is nothing like money to make old debts wither. Once again, we make the ob-  
servation that if every one of our subscribers were to send us one dollar,  
we would be far out of debt, and our coffers would overflow.  

Big Mama is full of overflowing needs. One really pressing need (almost  
more than money, if you can believe that) is for new collective members.  
We will be losing Wood in August, Kate in September, and Eileen in December.  
We've also been thinking of expanding the collective to seven members. There  
are simply too many jobs for five people to do, and not enough hours in the  
day to do them. So we want women to come to us and be helpful in any way.  

Even if you don't want to become a collective member, we need your input and  
energy.  

Our vacation was hardly energizing.  
the grindstone and all that.  

But here we are, back again, nose to  
And aren't you glad to see us?  

Wom :  
ani * Come Celebrate *  

» Woman to Woman's  

First Birthday  

OPEN HOUSE  
Saturday, August 14th  
noon to 8pm  

Food, drinks  
music, conversation  

and a GIGANTIC feminist  
birthday cake !  

x  

Big Mama Rag Vol.4 No.7  

struggle  

a continuing forum  

Just as struggling with racism and class issues are part of feminist aw-  
areness, the fight against ageism is also essential to radical conscious-  
ness. The subject of ageism, however, is one seldom brought up among fem-  
inists--possibly because they associate in groups of women of similar age.  
This segregation, which is a reflection of the larger society, has allowed  
the avoidance of the problem of ageism. If there are not women of varying  
ages working together in the movement we must ask ourselves why, just as  
we question the causes of its racial and economic composition.  

Ageism is unfair discrimination against people on the basis of their age.  
While there are real differences related to different stages in the aging  
process, many differences are exaggerated, created, and/or reinforced by  
the present capitalist, consumer society. Attempting to separate real dif-  
ferences due to age is like trying to determine the real differences be-  
etween the sexes. While there are obvious differences of size, mobility,  
physical condition, and amount of life experience between people of differ-  
ent ages, the contribution of psychological, social, nutritional/activity  
and economic variables to the importance of such differences is inseparable  
at this point. The most positive and human approach would be to find ways  
to compensate for or eliminate the differences that may keep people from  
participating in society as they wish and apart from one another, rather  
than limiting their life options or isolating them into institutions.  

The beliefs and feelings connected with aging in our society are very  
much part of the whole socioeconomic structure. Some reforms are possible  
which would improve conditions but a major part of the problem of ageism  
has to do with the dependent economic status of children and old people. A  
major change of the economic structure will be necessary to really elimin-  
ate discriminatory conditions more totally. Fully productive, fully employ-  
ed and well paid older and younger people would put the same kind of burden  
on our economic system as full employment for women would.  

Both ends of the age spectrum are cursed by stereotypes and discrimina-  
tion. The stereotype of the cute kid and the kindly grandmother are simi-  
lar to the pedestal stereotype of women. Even those of us in the middle of  
the age continuum fall prey to stereotypes about how we “should act our age  
and the idea that getting older means becoming more conservative in our  
views and politics. In this column the ageism related to old age will be  
the focus. Next month the focus will be on childhood.  

Terra  

IWS  
Discrimination Against the Elderly  

The good luck of living to an old age may be accompanied by physical de-  
terioration. Difficulty in performing fast movements can be especially lim-  
iting in a fast-paced city. Hearing and seeing difficulties can result in  
communications difficulties that may further isolate people who have already  
been isolated by the death or loss of family, friends, and whole ways of  
life. Such people often end up in nursing homes where strange unhomelike  
rooms and routines, and overworked staff people may only contribute to their  
loneliness, depression, and bewilderment.  

Instead of institutionalization, an organization called the Gray Panthers  
has proposed a model for comprehensive community care for those who need it.  
The implementation of such a plan would allow most people who are physically  
disadvantaged to continue living in a non-institutionalized environment.  

Most old people don't end up in nursing homes. Other areas of discrimin-  
ation exist for them--employment discrimination, forced retirement, housing  
and transportation difficulties. Again, many of these difficulties could  
be avoided if living conditions were planned with these people in mind. The  
situation of being poor and living on a fixed income plagues most old people also.  

The Gray Panthers  

A group dedicated to fighting these problems is the Gray Panthers. It  
grew out of the struggles of six older people facing the common problem of  
their retirement. They are social-change oriented and have a loose national  

More on page 14