The First Of A Two Part Feature

Struggle Continues For Women In Chile

(The following interview is with Carol

Andreas regarding her experiences in 

Chile and the changes that have occurred for women in that country.)

BMR: Carol, what was it like to be in
Chile under Allende and how did this
affect the progress of Chilean women?
Carol: I was quite amazed at how many
immediate benefits women derived from
the Popular Unity Government, even
though they had not specifically
struggled for those benefits immedi-
ately prior to the victory of the
Popular Unity. For instance, laws
requiring child care centers to be
established in all the factories and
businesses where 20 or more women
worked, laws which required equal pay
for equal work were progressive laws
that had been on the books for some
time in Chile but had never been im-
plemented. With the coming to power of
the Popular Unity Government (PUG),
these programs were immediately put
into effect and factories were forced
to close down if they didn't comply.

Many of the factories that were
taken over by the workers were the
first ones to make those kinds of
changes.

Women became active in managing
production, rotating jobs, creating
new production priorities. They were
able to be freed from many of their
double duty limitations simply because
of the child care programs and educa-
tional programs which enabled them
to take time off from work to improve
their education.

Women were able to get hot meals
at the factories, to get transporta-
tion to and from work, and to take
semi-prepared meals home at nominal
cost. They could get maternal counsel-
ing services which included how to
get abortions, although abortions were
still illegal because the parliament
never acted on it. Women received
free legal services at the factories,
family counseling services, family
health examinations, and their children
could be brought to the factory nursery.

The women initiated safety programs.

The conditions of work were vastly
improved when the workers took over
management of the plants. These kinds
of things happened without a specific
struggle of women as women, but they
were benefits which affected women
much more than men in factory life.

Because women did not organize
specifically as women around their
own demands, there was never a con-
certed effort to break down the ideo-
logical images of women as mothers,
as sexual objects, etc. Women were
caught up in those images of them-
selves and played coquetry games with
men; they would also be very indepen-
dent at work, and then go home to be
very subservient to their husbands.

They met a lot of oppression from
men within their own political groups
which they didn't deal with in an
organized way, nor were they encour-
aged to do so. These things were
handicaps to the process.

State Court Reverses Yvonne
Wanrow’s Murder Sentence

On January 7, 1977, the Washington
State Supreme Court reversed the
second degree murder conviction of
Yvonne Wanrow, a Colville Indian
who shot a known child molester
when he burst drunkenly into the
house at 5:00 AM. He had attempted
to molest Wanrow's son the after-
noon before, and had previously
raped her babysitter's seven-year-
old daughter, infecting her with
venereal disease.

Wanrow was convicted on Mother's
Day, 1973, but her conviction was
overturned by the state Court of
Appeals because a tape recording
of her telephone conversation with
the police immediately after the
shooting was used at her trial. The
prosecution used the tape to support
its theory that the shooting was
deliberate by claiming Wanrow's
voice seemed calm. The prosecution
appealed the reversal and the case
was argued before the State Supreme
Court in February, 1976.

The Supreme Court upheld the lower
court's decision on the inadmissi-
bility of the tape recording and
also reversed on the additional
ground that the trial judge's in-
struction to the jury concerning
self-defense did not make clear
"that the defendant's actions are to
be judged against her own subjective
impressions and not those which a
detached jury might determine to
be objectively reasonable."

In a landmark statement the Court
noted: “In our society women suffer
from a conspicuous lack of access
to... the means of developing those
skills necessary to effectively
repel a male assailant without re-
sorting to the use of deadly wea-
pons."

Regarding the trial judge's
persistent use of the male gender
in defining self-defense to the
jury the court said: "The impression
created -- that a 5'4" woman with a
cast on her leg and using a crutch
must, under the law, somehow repel
an assault by a 6'2" intoxicated
man without employing weapons in her
defense... violates [her] right to
equal protection under the law.
[She] was entitled to have the jury
consider her actions in the light of
her own perceptions of the situation
including those perceptions which
were the product of our nation's
‘long and unfortunate history of sex
discrimination.’ Until such time as
the effects of that history are
eradicated, care must be taken to
assure that our self-defense in-
structions afford women the right to
have their conduct judged in light
of the individual physical handi-
caps which are the product of sex
discrimination. To fail to do so is
to deny the right of the individual
women involved to trial by the same
rules which are applicable to male
defendants."

The Center for Constitutional
Rights will represent Yvonne
Wanrow at her trial if the State of
Washington decides to reprosecute
her.

The first time women had the vote,
they actually helped to defeat the
Popular Unity Coalition. The fact
that women were a conservative force
in the elections changed after the
PUG came to power and women began to
see the very real improvements the
government brought to them. But women
were still not in support of the PUG
to the same extent as men. They were
also more conservative than men in
realizing the limitations of the PUG
in terms of its ability to retain
power by pacifist, legalistic means.
Women, up to the end, were planning
huge demonstrations in support of
the PUG with banners saying, "No to
Civil War," which was a very reaction-
ary position for revolutionaries to
take at that point. There had already
been an attempted coup by the right.
It was very clear that there was
going to be another attempt, that
there was going to be a military show-
down. The only alternative to civil
war was, effectively, just what hap-
pened--a rightist, successful coup.

Women, in supporting the idea of
legal transition to socialism, rather
than having the political conscious-
ness to see the necessity for armed
struggle, the necessity for a civil
war, had to do with the roles that had
been imposed on them as mothers,
conservers, socializers of children
in accepting legalistic, authoritarian
ways of acting. Because women did not
rebel against the image of themselves
in those roles and begin to make
their own demands on the PUG, rather
than simply accepting the benefits
coming to them--that really hurt the
Popular Unity Government itself in
the end.

BMR: We've been discussing the pro-
gressive legislation which was imple-
mented under the PUG in terms of the
workplace. Was progress made in terms
of laws regarding the family?

Carol: Regarding the family in Chile,
they were very backward. The parlia-
ment that continued to exist during
the years of the Popular Unity wasn't
in the mood to even so much as pass a
divorce law. The only progressive
legislation that went into effect was
the legitimization of children born
out of wedlock. However, the parties
on the left implemented their own
spontaneous programs to liberalize
the situation in the family. For
instance, they officially encouraged
people not to marry so that they
wouldn't be bound by the repressive
laws that existed.

Communities were also encouraged
to set up family courts where domes-
tic problems would be brought before
the community for discussion and
solution, so that people wouldn't
have to go before the bourgeois court
system. Family court was something
that never really developed on a
large scale, but was in the beginning
stages, especially in the shanty towns
on the outskirts of the cities.

There was an anti-puritanical spirit
among people in terms of sexual
repression, especially among young
people. Young people were not neces-
sarily encouraged to maintain their
virginity until marriage or until
they chose a partner, and they were
given free contraceptives.

Some of these things were very
experimental in Chile, so it was very
interesting for me to observe this
process and wonder where it might have
led.

BMR: In the United States, the esta-
blishment press did report on women's
movement activities in Chile. We've
since learned that these were primar-
ily sponsored by the CIA and were
used to defeat the Allende government.
Where were the women who were involved
in these activities, like the
pots and pans demonstrations, coming
from?
Carol: Women used the slogan "Woman-
power" simply because it gave them
prestige in reflecting something
that was going on in the US. They
were, of course, the kinds of people
who wanted to identify with the cul-
ture of the US. However, they had
no feminist emphasis whatsoever. The
slogan "Womanpower" had nothing to
do with the power of women to deter-
mine their own lives. It only meant
the power of bourgeois women to
assist their husbands in taking back
power from the PUG.

BMR: Although there hasn't been an
organized women's movement, do you
feel that women have developed more
of a sense of themselves as a group
through organizing in left politics?
Carol: Yes. The dialectic I saw
going on was leading in the direction
of developing a women's movement.
For instance, in the countryside,
the parties of the PUG organized
conferences of farm women in order
to hear their complaints and to have
workshops around the questions that
especially affected women. They wanted
to bring women face to face with
government officials in the Ministry
of Agriculture who needed to be con-
fronted with the reality the farm
women would express to them. This
was probably the first time most of
these farm women had ever been out-
side their home communities and away
from their families. It was a very
stimulating experience.

I participated in organizing some
of these events and found it was a
way through which women gained a
consciousness of their power. Once

More on Page 18 =

subscriptions-$6/year
institutional-$10/year

9 East 48th Street
New York, N.Y. 10017

Martial Arts, Self Defense & Combative Sports

Alicia’s

Mexican Restaurant

278 So. Downing 777-9904
“Good Home Made Food”