Lesbian Press Troubled

Sandia

Our respect for the written word
and its power to link women together
is reflected in the recent flower-
ing of print and media in the move-
ment. This renaissance is noticeable
not only in terms of new presses
and publications appearing, but
is also apparent in our ability to
sustain and nourish the voices that
have been around struggling to main-
tain the energy and vision over a
period of time.

Already, in the span of a few
years, we have a tradition and a
revered past. Ain't I A Woman and
The Furies aren't around anymore—
but they are. The Iowa women are
still nourishing that spirit in
new forms, and The Furies have be-
come Olivia, WIND, Quest, etc.
Susan Rennie has moved from
The New Woman's Survival Sourcebook
to Chrysalis. The women of The Lad-
der went to Naiad Press. The lives
and localities change, but it is
clear that our commitment to an open
press and to the women who work at
supporting these efforts is as
strong as ever.

And where a few years ago a cer-
tain few publications like Amazon
Quarterly seemed to dominate, now
there is a divergence and expansion.
There are too many women who have
brought their writing out of the
closet along with themselves and the
word is crying to be heard. The
few "known or major" women's presses
such as Daughters or Diana or the
Women's Press Collective in Oakland
can't possibly meet the demands nor
would it be desirable for them to do
so. The fact of different women
with different tastes and philoso-
phies ensures a vitality and climate
of openness that strengthens us.

Given that rainbow picture, how
do we react when we hear that one of
these presses and the women behind
it are needing extra energy at this
time in order to survive? What
kinds of actions befit the idealism?

The Naiad Press is still a small
scale venture whose name does not
automatically come to mind. Its
mailing address, which had been in
Nevada, is now in the process of
being changed to Missouri (20 Rue
Jacob Acres/Bates City, Mo 64111)
where Barbara Grier, one of the key
women behind the press, lives.

Barbara, known to many women as
Gene Damon, helped begin The Ladder,
the first lesbian publication in
this country—no easy task given the
attitude toward homosexuality twen-
ty years ago and the fact that there
was no movement. More recently, she
has helped compile Lesbiana, book
reviews from The Ladder since 1966.
Though her life has been one of con-
tinuous dedication to women, Barbara
finds it more fun to be a living
person rather than a living legend.

Anyda Marchant and Muriel Crawford,
the founders of Naiad, see the func-
tion of this small operation to em-
phasize the novel and lesbian writer.
The novel form, which in its incep-
tion had women like the Brontës,
Jane Austen, and George Eliot for
midwives, is continually evolving,
and the press feels the need to en-
courage innovations and the lesbian
artists working in the tradition.

In addition, they have also pub-

* lished the first translation of the
lesbian poet Renée Vivien, a bio-

~ graphical novel called A Woman Ap-
peared to Me, translated by Jean-
nette Foster, a woman who has also
been a long time in being recognized.

This year, Naiad has released two
books, one a novel by Valerie Taylor,
author of numerous 50's paperback
dyke novels, called Love Image, her
first in ten years; the other The
Muse of the Violets, a selection of
Renée Vivien's poetry, translated by
Margaret Porter and Catharine Krogen.

The success of these two books may
well affect the future of Naiad.
While we may not choose to read
these particular two books—for we
cannot realistically buy every book
put out by every press—there are
still some kinds of energy we can
extend.

The success of most publications
depends largely on publicity and
distribution. We can make a deter-
mined effort on an individual basis
to see that these books are talked
about, that information on them is
available, that local bookstores are
carrying them, and that they are
being reviewed in our press. While
the politics of different books may
not fit the prevailing ideology in
the movement, we must extend to the
diverse presses and the women whose
individuality we are trying to fos-
ter, a real sense of credit or “ear-
nest" so that even though we may
not personally be into the material
they are writing, we can let them
know we support the right of their
voices to be heard, materially as
well as philosophically.

Quoting from Virginia Woolf's
brilliant essay "A Room of One's
Own," for it underlines the impor-
tance of our writing in the clearest

"Intellectual freedom depends
upon material things. Poetry de-
pends upon intellectual freedom:
And women have been poor, not for
two hundred years merely, but from
the beginning of time...that is
why I have laid so much stress on
money and a room of one's own...I
am by no means confining you to
fiction. If you would please me—
and there are thousands like me—
you would write books of travel
and adventure, and research and
scholarship, and history and bio-
graphy, and criticism and philos-
ophy and science. By so doing,
you will certainly profit the art
of fiction. For books have a way
of influencing each other. Fic-
tion will be much the better for
standing cheek by jowl with poetry
and philosophy. Moreover, if you
consider any great figure of the
past, like Sappho, like the Lady
Murasaki, like Emily Brontë, you
will find that she is an inheri-
tor as well as an originator, and
has come into existence because
women have come to have the habit
of writing naturally..."

For myself, I feel the debt to
women who beat through the under-
brush in the male world of print
long before I was aware of my woman-
ness. There is always someone who
was just ahead of us, and someone
soon to follow.

As I prepare my own works to send
to women publishers I am mindful of
what they had to do to get there
themselves. I hope we can offer
them all, Naiad included, our keen
and our practical devotion.

HOT = the PRESSES

Andrea Chesman

There is in existence a feminist press far larger than most women imagine.
This press consists of over one hundred magazines, newspapers, newsletters
and journals. Additionally, there are almost one hundred presses, large
and small, publishing full-length novels, plays, how-to-guides, poetry, chil-
dren's literature, information and philosophy.

Allow me to introduce myself: I am a part-time writer, a part-time library
student and a full-time proselytizer of the feminist press. During this past
year, I co-authored a book about feminist publishing with Polly Joan. We call
this book Guide to Women's Publishing and Dustbooks will have it out in Novem-
ber. But one book doesn't begin to contain all the information about feminist
publishing, the exploding star of the women's movement.

While political changes come so slowly, while the main effect of radical fem-
inist politics seems to be to push the middle of America just slightly to the
left, feminist publishing is one clear, bright symbol of what feminists are
really thinking and doing. However, feminist publishing is faced with enormous
problems of financial survival.

There is a real urgency to this situation. Feminist presses need money to
survive, and their money has to come from sales. There are so few books which
speak to us as women that it is terrible to know that many good books threaten
to waste in cardboard boxes. It is true! Everyone has at least heard of (and
probably read) Rubyfruit Jungle by Rita Mae Brown, yet not many know of Taxi!
by Helen Potrebenko, another novel which combines political analysis, working
class sensibilities and personal experience. Women who read poetry know of
Adrienne Rich, yet not enough have read Joan Larkin, author of Housework. The
list of excellent but little-known books is endless: There are Helen Garvey's
book, I Built Myself a House, The Toilet Book by Helen McKenna, Rites of Ancient
Ripening by Meridel Le Sueur, to name just a few.

Of all of the problems that feminist presses face, the most unfortunate one
is that they haven't been reviewed and publicized enough. One cannot honestly
fault feminist publications for this lack. Like Big Mama Rag, most feminist
newspapers give top priority to reviewing feminist press books, but the scarcity
of review copies stymies them. On the other hand, many presses simply cannot
afford to send off hundreds of review copies, as is common among the male es-
tablishment press. What reviewing publications need is more review copies.

What readers of feminist literature need is more information, perhaps an anno-
tated bibliography of the feminist press.

Short of this definitive bibliography, what I propose to write is a series of
articles on the feminist press. In the future I will look at presses individ-
ually, talking about their politics, their policies, and providing short reviews
of their books. Next month, I plan to interview Barbara Grier of Naiad, a
lesbian press. I hope to follow with an article on feminist presses in Canada
and their brand of socialist feminism. I invite comments, suggestions, and
especially review copies.

Although there is no bibliography that deals exclusively with feminist press
books, there are a few books which have come out of the feminist press that are
extremely useful guides to women and literature. Three excellent bibliographies
are The Lesbian in Literature, Women and Literature, and Women Loving Women.
Published by Naiad Press, The Lesbian in Literature

contains approximately 2000 titles published—every book that features a lesbian
character, or has some manner of lesbian content, although these books are not
all written by lesbians. In fact, many are written by men. Included in this
bibliography are novels, poetry and other expressive forms, and a substantial
body of non-fiction works dealing with lesbianism. The Lesbian in Literature
does not describe the books it lists extensively, but information is provided
about the type of book (e.g. novel or biography, etc.). A rating system by the
authors tells the reader the degree of lesbian content and whether it is of su-
perior, average, or less than average interest. A few books are labeled as trash.

Just before the 1974 Lesbian Writer's Conference, Marie J. Kuda came out with
Women Loving Women, A Select and Annotated Bibliography of Women Loving Women.
It was reprinted in 1975 and, hopefully, it is still available. There are few
titles in Women Loving Women not found in The Lesbian in Literature; but women
looking for more depth of information about a book will enjoy the brief descrip-
tions in Women Loving Women. Focusing on fiction, poetry, autobiography, and
biography, this book identifies approximately 200 books written by women which
deal with lesbians. It is a selective bibliography, slanted to reveal as many
positive works as possible. But recognizing that social mores often prevented
the positive lesbian novels from reaching the public, the book includes many
different genres: the boarding school relationships, women in prison, in the
army, etc.

Women and Literature does an excellent job of identifying women writers from
all over the world, 18 countries in all. In the space of 200+ pages, they an-
notate 819 books, concentrating mainly on novels. Short paragraphs accompany
each entry, giving the reader an idea of the plot and the reviewer's gentle
opinion. The only one of the three books to provide an index, it is well or-
ganized. The book is divided by time periods and countries. A subject index
directs the reader to books which received substantive treatment on topics such
as colonialism, lesbianism, madness, supernatural, etc. Because the books are
listed alphabetically by author, the book would be improved by including a title
index as well as an author index.

The collective process which brought about this book results in certain
strengths and weaknesses. Different members of the collective specialized in
different areas of research, and some areas are better covered than others. Of
particular merit are the selections on black writers, and the 1920's and 1930's
novels of the labor movement. Most disappointing to me is the scarcity of lit-
tle-known feminist press books. However, I have reliably taken this book with

More on page 14

Meg's
2nd album!

FACE THE MUSIC