IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Conference Ignores

Lesbians

to the Mexican Press,

Carol Lease

When lesbian-feminists from
all over the world met in Mexico
City at the International
Women’s Year Tribune, they did
what all good feminists do:
they formed a group, put up
signs and started taking action.
They also formed the Inter-
national Lesbian/Feminist Task
Force that sponsored workshops
on lesbianism and
lesbian/feminism that provided
the first opportunity for Mexican
women to discuss lesbianism in
public.

Lesbian-feminism “came
out” at IWY when Frances
Dougherty of the National Gay
Task Force used some open
microphone time at the end of
plenary sessions to announce to
the women present that she was
a lesbian, that IWY had ignored
lesbians and the issues of
lesbian/feminism and the op-
pression that women who
choose to be lesbians face had
been non-existent at the Tribune.

Mexican lesbians approached
her after her speech and a secret
meeting was set up so that
Mexican homosexuals and
lesbians from other countries
could talk. In Mexico, anyone
can be sentenced to 7 years in
prison just for encouraging a
positive attitude toward
homosexuality. There are no gay
groups in Mexico and therefore
no visibility for lesbians and no
communication.

The fear and paranoia of
Mexican lesbians is justifiable.
The police can and do kidnap
people in Mexico and have
tortured prisoners until they get
what they want. One homosexual
said that a friend had recently
written him to ask him about
the gay activist who was shot to
death in Vera Cruz, which is a
Mexican state near Mexico City.
No one in the city had heard
anything about the shooting.
None of the papers had carried
any information about what
happened.

Most lesbians in Mexico City
are “terribly afraid of what the
government might do” and what
a super-macho society would do
to them with the blessings of the
Mexican government.

One Woman Movement
A notable exception, in fact.

Nancy Cardenas, Mexican journalist,

Photo by Carol Lease
lesbian-feminist talks.

The only exception to the closed
lesbians in Mexico City is Nancy
Cardenas who has been a public
dyke and has survived because
she is a well-known journalist
and theatre producer whom the
police wouldn't dare arrest. She
has her share of “non-
supporters” in the macho capital
of the world.

After a workshop on
lesbian/feminism sponsored by
the task force, a group of Mex-
ican women picketed the Tribune
calling for the death of
Cardenas, an investigation of
her work, and the removal of
lesbians from Mexico. The
women didn’t even know who
Cardenas was. They were paid
by a city official, a homophobic
clerk for theatre licenses. The
same man was instrumental in the arrest of 300
homosexuals who thought that
they had bribed the police and
government with enough money
to ensure a private party. They
were arrested, given big fines,
and kept in jail 15 days.

Cardenas is a strong woman.
She says that being a dyke isn't
dangerous for her anymore, “but
if Mexico becomes more
repressive then I could be in a
very bad position — you never
know.”

Workshops

The International
Lesbian/Feminist Task Force
sponsored two workshops after
the first one had to turn away
over one hundred women who
couldn't find seats. The disrup-
tion at the workshops came from
the members of the press who
insisted on photographing the
audience after they were asked
not to do so. Many women
congratulated the women who
spoke on the panel and wanted
more information about
lesbian/feminism. Many were
curious to see lesbians and talk
to women whose primary com-
mitment is to other women.
Women were grateful that the
subject had been brought out of
the closet in Mexico but
wondered when they would be
able to talk about lesbianism in
public again. That was one
question that the task force
didn’t have an answer to.

FEMINIST QUARTERLY OF WOMEN'S ART & POLITICS

ARTICLES, FICTION, GRAPHICS, POETRY

IWY Co-opted

Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 7

Conference Short on Feminists

Linda Fowler

The Tribune of International
Women’s Year (IWY), staged by
the United Nations in Mexico
City, provided the forum for
battles that were, perhaps,
designed to be the death blow to
the feminist movement in any
and every country around the
world. That feminism survived
and even made progress (see
other articles in this series) is as
attributable to the in-fighting of
her opponents as it is to the unity
of her champions.

While the established
governments of the world’s
countries were boringly going
through their motions at the
“official” conference, those of
us who had been shuffled off to
the “alternate” conference, the
Tribune, were forced to live and
work in an atmosphere of confu-
sion, competition, ridicule and
disruption. An atmosphere most
often not of our own making.

Fighting for the Honors

Feminism’s opponents, which
is almost everybody, were falling
all over each other for first place
in doing us in. It was sometimes
hard to tell just who was taking
which punch. By week's end it
had become clear: confusion
and competition were supplied
by the UN; ridicule was provided
by the media; disruption came
from that time-honored
institution, male-defined socialism.
Although the strategies
varied, the goals of all groups
were the same: disrupt women;
discredit feminism; save the
world for whichever brand of
patriarchy you favor.

The UN, in order to avoid
demonstrations and confronta-
tion at the official conference,
and in order also to avoid being
forced to address the issues of
feminism, set up a conference
for dissidents. The Tribune was
complete with simultaneous
interpreters and a daily
newspaper. It all looked good,
but the illusion didn't last.

The UN was, in fact, doing
what it could to make the
conference ineffectual. It was
also leaving undone those
things which would have aided
the work feminists wanted to do.

The agenda for panelists was
selected without regard to many
of the real problems women face
around the world. Panelists
were carefully chosen by their
respective governments. These
panelists knew each and every
government line and could call
up the appropriate one at a
moment's notice.

The United States panelists,
ranging from ludicrous to
damaging, are one example of
structured disruption. Betty
Friedan managed such succinct
analysis as saying that we are
fighting only a “system” while
ignoring that men both create
and maintain this system. She
was also able to discredit U.S.
women to feminists from other
countries by her classic im-
perialist insistence that she and
other “recognized leaders”
could take to the UN the
recommended amendments to
the World Plan of Action: via open mics, at the end of each
discussion of crimes committed
against women around the world, such as rape, no discussion
of the torture of women as
political prisoners, no discussion
of the right to choose birth control
or abortion and thereby control
one’s own body. Though the
period assigned for questions,
the format included no dis-
cussion, was kept brief, it was the
most interesting aspect of
events in the central meeting
room. When, on several oc-
casions, this period threatened
to become constructive or con-
troversial, microphones con-
veniently failed to function. There
were, of course, no failures
during official sessions.

The UN also controlled the
availability of documents, the
production of the daily
newspaper, Xilonen, and the
availability of interpreters. All
UN documents relative to IWY,
which included the World Plan
of Action (the format for UN
activity concerning women for
the next 10 years) were available
predominantly in English and in
limited editions.

The daily bi-lingual paper was
inadequate. The editor, herself
sympathetic to the needs of
women at the Tribune, was
limited by the controlled small
size of the publication and the
lack of interpreters to rewrite
stories in either English or
Spanish, as need be. Through
these devices, the UN left her to
make uncomfortable, if not im-
possible, choices.

Panel sessions were supplied
with ample, though inadequate
interpretation. Workshops
where the real work of the
conference happened were not
similarly supplied. The plenary
committee, whose job it was to
decide yea or nay on requests for
workshops, was chosen by the
UN. Feminism, however, is
widespread. Sympathizers on
the committee gave okays for
many valuable workshops. But
since they could not supply
interpreters, we had to find our
own if we wanted to talk to one
another.

Molested by Media

Whether media worked its
disruption within the conference
via design or stupidity is a moot
point. That its images conveyed
to print were intended to belittle
and ridicule is unquestionable.

Media presence during panels
and workshops, particularly
those which lend themselves to
sensationalist coverage, such as
the one on Lesbianism, rendered
workings difficult to impossible.
Press would not refrain from
shining bright lights, remove
themselves from the area of
dialog, nor even make room for
participants to work. Published
reports included such gems as
one British weekly’s headline,
The Hum of Thousands of
Vibrators, or the flippant Time
magazine article entitled “Ms.
versus Macho in Mexico.”
Lyrical, eh?

The Socialist Contribution

What was left undone by the
above two groups was ade-
quately handled by the socialist
faction of male supremacy.
Trotting in and out at appropriate
moments, this group managed,
with the prodding of many hefty
male voices, to shout down, out-
chant, totally disrupt, and
generally horrify more than one
gathering. Lacking the courage
to go to the official UN con-
ference where the real im-
perialists were, they focused
instead on the Tribune where
women from all over the world were
sincerely attempting to establish
dialog and to understand each
other's situations. Perhaps they
understood that though they can
live with imperialism, the equal-
ity of women would spell their
doom.

At any rate, plans for disrup-
ting the Tribune began early in
the session. An anti-imperialist
meeting was called theoretically
for the purpose of dealing with
the plight of Mexican women
who wanted to attend the
Tribune but were not permitted
to register by the UN.

It soon became clear that this
issue was merely an excuse for
disruption. The feminist caucus,
too, had been concerned with
this problem and took steps to
solve it. The anti-imperialist
group refused to work with the
feminist caucus in any way or to
even acknowledge the reality of
certain success made by the
caucus in solving the problem.

The atmosphere at this
meeting was both hostile to
feminists and imperialist
structure, being chaired by two
white American women, being
conducted in English only (it was
30 minutes before the chair
asked if anyone did not speak
English and asked it in English)
and discussing methods and
times for disruption rather than
solutions to the problems. The
intent clearly seemed to be to
polarize and disrupt; not to solve
problems. Actions that were
taken were taken in instances in
which third world women were
conducting meetings.

To illustrate: during a press
conference called by Mexican
women and panelled entirely by
third world women, this group
staged a demonstration which
effectively destroyed dialogue. At
the appropriate signal, group
members who had been
scattered in the audience walked
out. They returned with a
banner written in poor Spanish,
about imperialism. They shouted
down, with bad Spanish, a
Japanese woman, two Mexican
revolutionary women, a black
woman and several others.
These women were all feminists
who dared to be vocal about the
shortcomings of every political
system including socialism.

They seemed content to jack-off
rather than communicate.
The Lesson Learned

By the end of the Mexico City
conference it had become ob-
vious that the existing power
blocs of patriarchy, regardless of
their differences, are all
threatened by the women’s
movement. And well they might
be, for every socio-economic
political structure, regardless of
how its theory reads, depends, in
fact, on the subjugation of
women in order to function.
Organized feminism is a threat
to every existing political
system.

It is time socialists,
imperialists, capitalists and dic-
tators took their proper place
beside each other, among the
patriarchs of the world. That is
what it will take, and no less, to
disrupt and defeat a feminist
consciousness that is creating a
revolution so radical no form of
oppression can stand against it
in theory or in fact.

The banner that anti-feminist socialist groups, that were dominated by U.S.
imperialism, women and men, used in their disruption originally said
“Women against imperialism,”
but was swiftly changed to "Women and IWY Commentary."

U.S. Feminists Need
Anti-Imperialist Analysis

Carol Lease / Linda Fowler

The Tribune of International Women’s Year, held in Mexico City this
summer, gave attending women from all over the world an opportunity
to dispel cultural and national stereotypes. During these two weeks
women got to know each other as women who share many common
problems, but who also experience differences in oppression. Despite
inadequate United Nations planning, feminists initiated and sustained
dialogue that had little use for rhetoric while providing real communica-
tion among women from radically different backgrounds and ex-
periences.

By talking with feminists from third world countries, women from the
United States recognized once again the urgent need for the
development of a socialist-feminist analysis. Economically poorer, less
developed countries tend to be adversely affected by their economic
relations with richer, more-developed countries. This situation is often
referred to as imperialism. This word has been part of leftist rhetoric for
so long that its use is usually misunderstood in one way or another.

Imperialism comes from the word “imperium,” which means empire.
It describes the policy and practice of a government that struggles for
the control of raw materials and world markets. In addition to economic
control, the imperialist nation must also have some social and political
control in order to maintain its dominance and influence in that country.

Multi-National Corporations

Traditional imperialist powers, European countries and the United
States, continue to be kicked out of their colonies and deprived of their
influence. Although, lately, the U.S. has had to cut back on some of its
more overt actions, it has maintained full momentum in the area of
multi-national corporations. Multi-national corporations are huge
conglomerates of business that operate in many countries
simultaneously. They owe no allegiance to any particular political
dogma or country — only to their ever-widening profit margins.

Not All Imperialists Are White

Citizens of foreign countries in which the multi-national corporations
operate are absorbed into management positions, constitute the rising
middle-class of the country, and have a stake in the existence and
growth of the multi-national. Thus, overt government controls (either
national or international) are often unnecessary. The desire to fatten
the dividends paid to the stockholder and the wages of nationalist
management personnel is compatible with further expansion of the
multi-national through the exploitation of the country’s workers and
resources.

IWY showed that women are the world’s most brutalized victims of
economic exploitation; an exploitation most frequently carried out by
multi-national corporations. The success of national economies rests
on the unpaid labor of the housewife, the underpaid labor of the person
of color and of the indigenous or minority people of the country. Sexism,
racism, and classism are as native to exploited countries as they are to
imperialist countries.

In theory, socialism says that the community should own and operate
the means of production and distribution of goods and services. The
system would work in the interests of the people as a whole, not for a
wealthy or influential few as capitalist economics do. In practice, it does
much less. Its practical functioning has revealed its dependence on the
psychological (if not social, political, economic) subjugation of women.

Most established socialist groups in the U.S. (and in the world, we
discovered at IWY) that deal with the problem of the multi-national
corporation are anti-feminist. This is understandable, as socialist
theory is male dominated. It has developed in terms of male-identified
and male-led revolutions. Revolutions that, in effect, only moved
money from the pockets of one man to those of another. Feminism
recognizes that men, as a group, oppress women as a group. This
realization is a threat to established socialist groups because socialism,
in practice, still relies on the subjugation of women to function. Women
from socialist countries, such as Yugoslavia and Cuba, who were not
official delegates reciting the government line, talked about the
oppression that women in socialist countries really face. Women are,
we are told, strongly encouraged to marry, are kept in the home and are
discouraged from having careers.

Yellow Springs Disruption

Because socialist groups are anti-feminist does not mean that
socialism itself is anti-feminist. This summer feminists called a
conference at Yellow Springs, Ohio, for the discussion, analysis and
writing of socialist-feminist theory. According to women who attended
the conference, anti-feminist socialist