local

Woman To Woman: Project In Struggle

Bobbe Ross

Denver's feminist bookcenter, Woman to Woman, disbanded the existing collective on June 11, 1981. The center had had a hard time staffing and remaining open, and the collective felt that changes had to be made. Women had left the collective feeling excluded and that the collective had acted in a racist and anti-Semitic manner.

A meeting was held on June 14 which included women who had worked in the most recent collective, as well as women who had worked at/with the center before. At the beginning of the meeting, a group of women, made up of women of color and Jewish women and supporters, presented the below listed paper and demands. As of this date, the demands are still being revised and are not to be considered final.

To the Woman to Woman collective:

We are a group of women who have put a lot of energy into the store and have felt in various ways pushed out and isolated by the racist, clique-ish and insensitive conditions which exist here. We are committed to working for positive changes which will make this a welcome place for all women. We have tried to be heard many times in the past and we can no longer wait for discussions which never lead to change. We are no longer willing to be pushed out.

Being pushed out is particularly painful because the center has so much potential for being a positive force in women's lives. We recognize the efforts that have gone into the store. We acknowledge that much work has been done, but it is not enough - maintaining the store the way it is, or making minor changes, perpetuates racism and isolation.

Because the store has concentrated on so few issues, it has served to further isolate women as opposed to helping women come together in our struggles. We will illustrate how this operates through the example of racism, understanding that the exclusion extends to women of various sexual preferences, economic backgrounds, physical abilities, education, and women working in other liberation struggles.

Woman to Woman has failed in its responsibility to provide an anti-racist environment within the women's community. Lack of responsibility in personal interactions, book-ordering procedures, and political priorities has consistently excluded Third World and Jewish women, and those truly committed to the struggle against racism. Many women of color, Jewish and white have come to voice concerns and suggestions in each of these areas. In response, Woman to Woman has neglected to back up its so-called "priorities" with substantial action that might provide space for unity within the women's community.

The collective looks for easy solutions, and when they are not found, throws up its hands with "we don't know what else to do." Expecting the women who've been excluded to be solely responsible for initiating discussion, and providing and implementing solutions is intolerable and racist.

In addition, there appears to be a growing defensiveness toward those who are speaking out, expressing pain, disappointment or outrage at the hypocritical attention the collective is giving this issue. Discussions of racism within the collective have been, for the most part, self-indulgent, focused on the "safety" of white women in the context of a white definition of prejudice. An accompanying unwillingness to really listen to what Third World and Jewish women have been saying and a refusal to accept their lead in determining what is racist displays a hateful defense of the ego-centric, anglo-centric view of the world. Racism need not be understandable through white perspective to be racist.

Up to now the burden has been on us to either present an analysis of racism in ideologically perfect and morally convincing ways, or to get so angry that we have to come with threats in order to get heard. If Woman to Woman is to live up to its responsibility to individual women and to feminism as an ideal, each and every collective member must not ignore her responsibility to make a personal commitment to learn for herself what she and the store must do to become a safe and relevant place for all women. Defining feminism in white women's terms cuts out many women and invalidates feminism. Woman to Woman must make massive changes to make the store a place for all women. In this way only can Woman to Woman become valid womanspace; until then, it will remain as it is, anglospace.

In struggle.

Demands made to Woman to Woman Feminist Center

1. The collective as it now functions has to be disbanded. The consensus process has served as a conservative force to stifle change and growth. The "come and go as we please" attitude cannot be part of a center that is providing information, services, and crisis counseling.

Decisions can be made by: 1) reaching for consensus and encouraging all women to talk about their ideas and feelings; 2) if consensus cannot be reached, mediation would be encouraged if there is time; 3) voting would be used as a final measure. This procedure would enable us to take positive action. A statement would be made available to the community of how decisions are reached. This statement would include all minority opinions.

2. All policies need to be reevaluated; some of these need to be changed. The policies we choose need to be implemented quickly and made available to the community.

3. Priority must be given to a non-racist and supportive environment. Each collective

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Feminist Newsjournal

Subscribe

$6 Year

$12 Outside USA
$12 Plain Brown Wrapper

$18 Institutions
$50 Lifetime Sub

1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206

Name
Address
City
State

Big Mama Rag, July 1981 erage: 3