Judge Overturns Ban

Vicki Piotter

The federal law barring Medicaid payments for abortions was overturned October 22nd in Brooklyn by US District Court Judge Dooling.

The judge ruled in the case of Cora McRae that a low-income woman is entitled to government reimbursement for abortion just as she's allowed financial help for childbirth. Cora McRae had filed a class action suit so the ruling applies to all women involved with the Medicaid program.

The day before Dooling's ruling, District Court Judge Sirica had given the go-ahead to the

Finda Clinic or Doctor Underage Lose 2 Turns CAN'T While PLAY! Looking

Bella Abzug and Shirley Chisholm were among the "liberal" members of Congress who voted in favor of the allocations bill cutting off Medicaid funds. Both women joined the reasoning that a compromise on the abortion issue was the only way to pass the bill containing important social legislation.

Court Action.

The denial of Medicaid abortions was scheduled to go into effect October 1st. However, both Dooling and Sirica issued temporary restraining orders preventing the immediate enforcement of the ban on federal funds by lifting a temporary restraining order which was issued October 1st.

The original denial of funds came in September when Congress gave into the pressures of the Catholic Church by attaching a provision to a social services appropriations bill. The provision read, "None of the funds contained in this act shall be used to perform abortions, except when the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term."

President Ford vetoed the bill, not because of a change on his abortion stand, but because the bill provided for social service programs.

challenging the measure's constitutionality.

In Washington DC, Sirica heard from lawyers on behalf of women who planned to obtain Medicaid abortions. The lawyers said that by providing Medicaid for other pregnancy services, the denial of abortions to women with low incomes was in violation of the right to due process and equal protection under the Fifteenth Amendment. They pointed out the Supreme Court had ruled on two occasions that the decision for abortion is a private matter to be left to the woman and her doctor. They said the right to privacy as guaranteed by the Fourth and Ninth Amendments was violated by this law allowing government intervention.

The opponents further argued that the measure was in violation of the First Amendment by effectively imposing the views of a specific religious group on others.

At the district court hearing October 12th, Sirica heard testimony that the provision was inherently racist whereby a disproportionate number of poor women are Black, Chicana, Puerto Rican and Native American who would be turned away because they couldn't afford the $125 - $325 for an abortion.

The government testified that Congress's failure to provide abortion funds was no indication that any woman's opportunity to get one would be threatened.

Sirica chose to dissolve the restraining order October 21st. He said he was not ruling on the merits of the constitutional challenge, but that the opponents had failed to show that Washington DC or Virginia would cease paying for abortions from their own funds and that they failed to show there was a substantial likelihood of "injury" to Medicaid recipients.

Decision Reversal

Taking precedence over Sirica's judgment, Dooling ruled October 22, 1976 that the US Department of Health, Education and Welfare "will provide reimbursement for all abortions provided to Medicaid-eligible women by certified Medicaid providers on the same basis the Department pays reimbursement for pregnancy and childbirth related services."

The issue of Medicaid abortions will also be in this session of the Supreme Court. They agreed in October to hear a test case involving a Pennsylvania state law prohibiting Medicaid abortions except to save the mother's life. Pregnant welfare women challenged it and the Third Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in their favor saying state funds must pay for any abortion if the state provides any other form of maternity services in its Medicaid plan.

The Ford Administration has argued that nowhere in the Constitution or federal law is a state Medicaid program required to pay for abortion and is asking the Court to overturn the lower court decision.

In another case concerning economic discrimination, women from Connecticut are asking the court to rule that cities must provide free abortions to women eligible for public hospital care.

Rejected was a plea to put into immediate effect a Massachusetts law requiring minors to obtain parental or court consent before getting an abortion. The Court said they had already ruled earlier this summer that such requirements are unconstitutional.

On Medicaid Abortion

Despite the overturning of the law prohibiting Medicaid abortions, the minority movement to push women back to "coathanger solutions" is stronger than it was three years ago in fighting the original Supreme Court decision.

The fact that certain members of Congress put into law that low-income women do not have the same rights to an abortion as wealthier women is only one indication of anti-abortion influence.

The Catholic Church is exerting pressure on all aspects of society, from its own constituency to the two major presidential nominees. The Church hierarchy held "Respect Life Sunday" October 3rd, preaching to congregations the "moral imperative" of backing an anti-abortion amendment to the Constitution. They required all "good Catholics" to get active in the anti-abortion movement.

Even though the majority of Catholic voters dislike the Church's role in abortion politics, the Church succeeded in making abortion a campaign issue. Both Carter and Ford are "personally" opposed to abortion, (which one woman took to mean that if Carter or Ford ever became pregnant, neither would "personally" choose to terminate their pregnancy,) and neither approves of the use of federal funds for abortion services. Ford favors a constitutional amendment allowing each state to decide the issue for itself. Under his plan, if all but 10 choose to outlaw abortion, women from the other 40 states would flock to the 10 in order to get safe, legal abortions. Except, of course, low-income women who would have to contend themselves with other methods.

Despite abortion being a woman's legal right to choose, the fact remains that only 20% of public hospitals are providing abortions to those who ask, heavily affecting the lives of predominantly poor and rural women. Many doctors and hospitals are still refusing to perform abortions on minors and women without the consent of their parents or husbands. Most significantly, the relatively small anti-abortion movement has succeeded in bringing anti-abortion measures before most state legislatures and court systems across the country.

Women's relative silence and inactivity since 1973 has allowed the voices of a specific religious group to dictate to lawmakers an opinion the majority of people in this country disagree with. We should carefully heed the warning from the National Abortion Rights Action League that the threat to outlaw legal abortion is indeed a serious one. (For a report on abortion in Canada see page 11.)

DGH Keeps Parental Veto Policy Fifteen Year Old Denied Abortion

Vicki Piotter

In Denver US District Court a fifteen-year-old girl was denied the right to obtain an abortion at Denver General Hospital without her parents' consent. October 20th, Chief Judge Fred Winner refused to issue a temporary restraining order against DGH on behalf of the girl who does not want her parents to know about the abortion.

She filed suit after her pregnancy was confirmed at DGH September 27th and was refused her request for an abortion because of their "parental veto" policy.

In his refusal, the judge cited the Supreme Court's ruling that a Massachusetts case should first be decided by the state rather than the federal courts because it involved an ambiguous state law. (Colorado's own parental consent statute was declared unconstitutional last year.) Barbara Kelly, the girl's attorney, said her case isn't like the Massachusetts case because DGH's policy of requiring parental consent isn't ambiguous. She said the Supreme Court, in the case in question, supported the right of a mature minor to obtain an abortion without her parent's OK.

Barbara Kelly further cited the Supreme Court decision that parental consent cannot be required during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Kelly said the girl is within the first 12 weeks and the hospital's refusal to give her an abortion violates her constitutional rights of privacy and equality.

Judge Winner said the case contained no real controversy, because the girl's parents had not denied her an abortion. The girl said she strongly desired not to tell her parents of her pregnancy and that she had the right not to inform them. Winner said he would hold a full hearing on her case at an unspecified future date. Meanwhile, the girl said she is financially unable to get an abortion elsewhere.