- Resources

Conferences

The 12th Annual International Conference for Human Rights and Against Psychiatric Oppression will be held in Pueblo, Colorado, June 1st-5th. The Conference begins on Friday afternoon and ends on Tuesday afternoon. You can attend part or all of the Conference. The cost per person for the whole conference, including meals and housing, is $70.00. We are trying to raise money and seeking donations to help sponsor ex and current inmates to attend the conference. 

The open conference is to all current and ex-psychiatric inmates/"mental patients." Anti-psychiatry activists are welcomed if sponsored by an ex-inmate group. 

Pueblo is the "home" of Colorado State Hospital and is not very far from Canon City, where the state's maximum security prisons are located. We hope that having the conference in Pueblo will allow us to confront psychiatric atrocities that are everyday occurrences in both prisons and psychiatric institutions; i.e., shock "treatment"/torture, forced/uninformed drugging, oppressive behavior modification programs, just to name a few. We also come together to give each other support in our personal lives and for our political struggles to end psychiatric oppression. 

For information or to get a conference registration form, call or write (303) 393-7026. Write to the 12th Annual Conf. Comm., P.O. Box 61307, Denver, CO 80206. We need people in the Denver/Pueblo area to help with the conference organizing and fundraising. DONATIONS NEEDED! Please be in touch.

A call to all ex-inmates and current inmates in psychiatric institutions and prisoners and ex-prisoners who are incest survivors and/or recovering alcoholics and/or drug addicts. 

The therapeutic state is systematically setting us up for violence. 

Your subscription expires each other. I.E. incest survivors are men who committed incest because of her fear of long reprisals from society which decided to testify against them. A high percentage of people incarcerated either in prisons or psychiatric institutions are a result of alcohol and/or drug addiction. Recovering alcoholics and/or drug addicts are intimidated with the threat of their imminent death, "something much worse--insanity."

What are the conflicts for recovering people within the ex-inmate's movement? Is the issue of incest survival and/or drug addiction/alcoholism an outgrowth of the therapeutic state? Are those issues separate from each other? Can ex-inmate's incest survivors and recovering alcoholics work within the movement? We need feedback on these issues. Please share with us your struggles/conflicts around incest survival and/or drug addiction and/or alcoholism and incarceration in prisons and psychiatric institutions. 

Please write to us and/or come to the 12th Annual International Conference for Human Rights and Against Psychiatric Oppression to confront these issues. If you are unable to come to the Conference, please write to us about these struggles. Linda Lane and Barbara Wisn, 1232 Gaylord St. #4, Denver, CO USA 80206.

CAPRA PRESS is pleased to announce the 1st Annual Rhodora Prize for Women's Literature. The prize is $500.00 and a standard publishing contract from Capra Press. Submissions must be a minimum of 50,000 words in novel, story, essay, or memoir form, etc. Query letters must be received by May 1st '84, manuscript by invitation only by June 1st. The winner will be announced by October 1st to be published in Spring 1985. Write: Rhodora Books, Marilyn Yalom, editor, Box 10197, Stanford, CA 94305.

Paz Press, a small Third World women's publisher, sponsors a Prison Reading Project to make reading material available to incarcerated Third World women, most of whom identify as lesbians. Women on the outside are needed to maintain ongoing contact and send reading material to women in prison. Old issues of feminist magazines and periodicals, textbooks, paperbacks, social-issue as well as lesbian and Third World materials are welcome. Let us know what you have and we'll send you the address of a woman who'd like to receive it. You'll need to write first for any mail restrictions, but this is the way it usually works--most prisons accept publications only from a publisher, bookseller, or book club, and the return address must identify you as such (for instance, Paz Press instead of Juana Paz). Some prisons limit the amount of publications received per month or accept only new books, though newer looking ones usually make it. Books can be mailed special 4th class for $1 to $2 per package of several.

If making a one-time or occasional contribution of books or postage through Paz Press, we will distribute your donation. However, we encourage women on the outside to communicate directly with women in prison. For more info, write: Box 3146, Fayetteville, ARK., 72702-3146.

ACHE, a black lesbian journal, is now seeking submissions for publication. Reviews, interviews, essays, journal excerpts, letters, fiction, dialogues, graphics, political analyses, poetry, etc., composed by black lesbians. All submissions should be accompanied by an SASE and graphics should be camera ready. Black lesbians are generally in a position of invisibility in every political and/or ethnic group outside our own. As a tool of self-definition, ACHE will contribute to the development of a network specifically for, by, and about black lesbians. It is not designed to promote a "party line" but just to get a "feel" for some present concerns, lost herstories, and future ambitions. This is a black lesbian publication and all submissions must be by black lesbians. No pieces about black lesbians composed by men, transsexuals, heterosexuals, bisexuals, or non-black persons will be accepted. In fact, all submissions will be assumed to be by black lesbians unless otherwise indicated, and respect for this black lesbian only space is solicited. Send all inquiries and submissions to ACHE, a Black Lesbian Journal, P.O. Box 11469, Oakland, CA 94611-1469.

My work in theatre and my personal research into lesbian literature brought me to a not so surprising realization: an anthology of women's theatre designed to present lesbian experience has never been published in this country. A supportive publishing company will join with us to develop such an anthology.

I am interested in seeing any theatre piece--ranging from a monologue to a multiple-act play--preferably unpublished, which focuses on lesbian life. I need to receive material by June 1st, or the sooner the better. If you want your manuscript returned, please include a SASE. Send manuscripts to: Kate McDermott, 401 Altivo Ave., La Selva Beach, CA 95076.