letters

Give Me A Break

(Following is an edited copy of a
Letter to the station management of
KWBZ Radio in Denver).

I'd like to take this opportunity to
inform you that I--along with many,
many of your former listeners--will no
longer support you, your station, or
your program in any way. Since I feel
that enlightenment can lead to improve
ment, I have listed my complaints
below.

First I was totally astonished and
completely appalled by the fact that
you "entertained" a representative
from Coors on Gaybreak. I can think of
no other speaker who could have raised
the insult and injury level any higher
insofar as the gay community goes--
with the exception of Anita Bryant,
perhaps. We listeners know what
Joseph Coors stands for: Why don't
you give air time to those of us who
have (1) not been hired (2) been
fired or (3) been harassed on the
job because of alleged, suspected or
known homosexuality?

Secondly, I do not understand how
your employees had the unmitigated
gall to accept the loan of a bar--

The Velvet Hammer--free of charge, in
order to sponsor a benefit for a rad-
io program that showed complete insen-
sitivity toward and disregard for the
politics of that particular bar. The
Velvet Hammer has boycotted Coors beer
since it opened; and by having a Coors
representative on your show the very
same day that you used (and I mean
that word literally) the bar showed
complete disrespect for the beliefs

of others; and furthermore, this com-
bination of politics served to stretch
the already expanding credibility gap
among the various factions in the gay
community--the very factions that you
purport to be attempting to unite!

INSIDE BMR

Gay Community Center..........-.- 1
Colorado Abortion... 2.8. ..eee. eee 1
LALCOUS cc crak ccsine 36 verve rate eee 2
National Abortion......-....-..«-

Women Prisoners.....-++se+eeeeees
Where We're At.......seeeeeeeeeee
HOE Orde ES cpt cand vinvisg esse eee
Collective Childrearing..........
Houston Report....-..-..0e
Health News and Features. :
GUT CUPS ssa cicada se eee eo tees

COLLECTIVE

Office
Clair Kaplan

CONTRIBUTORS

Vicki Piotter
Pandora Carpenter Val
Dona Calacone

Phyllis Kadison

Monday through Saturday

Kathy Riley

Distribution
Kathy Riley

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by Big
Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
must be submitted to 2724 Gayford, Denver, Colorado 80206. (Note: At this time
we no longer accept poetry submissions.)
Deadline is the fifteenth of each month. Please enclose a stamped, self-
addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted
for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all material.
Subscription rates are $6 per year for individual subscriptions in the
U.S., $10 in Canada and overseas, and $12.00 to institutions. BMR is
free to women in prison and in mental institutions. This publication

is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago
and is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. The staff

of BMR no longer keeps regular office hours. If you must reach us by
phone, leave a message at Woman to Woman Feminist Center (320-5972)

10 am to 6 pm. Advertising information is
available from Kathy. (571-5134 days) or (837-8405 eves).

come to mama

My third--and perhaps most import-
ant--reason for withdrawing my sup-
port from radio station KWBZ is based
on the discrepancies in the philos-
ophy expounded on Gaybreak. Modera-
tor Jan Grimm expressed the gay com-
munity's need to unite; and yet she,
by her expression of anger and hate
toward and for the Velvet Hammer, has
created an intermingling of constants
and variables that can only disrupt
whatever cohesiveness exists in the
community as a whole.

If necessary, affidavits can be
produced from members of the gay com-
munity to attest to the fact that per-
sons of the staff of Gaybreak have
said that they would “see the Velvet
Hammer destroyed." Since that particu-
lar bar is the only feminist bar in
Denver (or perhaps in Colorado), I be-
lieve that its closing would close cer-
tain channels of communication com-
pletely, and destroy--with absolute
and total finality--the cohesive solid-
arity that now exists, uniting inter-
dependent community factions.

--Kris Field
Denver

Nurses Do It Again

Dear BMR:

The nurses’ organization has done
it again. A major problem has always
been one of unity and this year is no
different. This year the annual Amer-
ican Nurses' Association (ANA) con-
ference is to be held in Hawaii. Many
nurses will not attend because of the
phenomenal costs (approximately $500
for hotel and airfare).

A much more reasonable proposal
would be a midway point in the con-
tinental United States. Housing could

REAR ARER ERR ARR REAR ARERR REET

Editor's note: The continuation
of last month's stories on "The
Gerry Four" and "Only a Striker's
Wife" will appear in the next

issue of BMR.
REKREAE EARS RE RR E ERASE REAR RRR KEES

National/Int'l News Culture Advertising
Deb Taylor Mary Wadding Kathy Riley
Finances Local News Photography
Mary Wadding Clair Kaplan Deb Taylor

Member-at-Large
Bobbe Ross

Andrea Chesman

Susan Langdon
Sharon Tolman

Tea Schook Chelsea
Beverly Renick Jane Hope
Dan Peggy Shannon

and work may
Deadline for the receipt of

be provided for nurses who could not
afford hotels, by local nurses in the
city hosting the conference.

This is clearly an issue of class.
Many excellent nurses have deliber-
ately chosen jobs which pay very
little and in addition, volunteer.

I'm afraid we are beginning to
look like the medical profession in
offering needed annual conventions
only for those who can afford it. We
must not allow this to happen.

--Romey Rainwater, R.N.

Inside Porn

(Editors' Note: The following article/
letter was sent to us recently; it
originally appeared in Woman Rising,

a feminist paper in Phoenix.)

At the risk of being “politically
incorrect," I'd like to share with you
some of my experiences from a 9-month
stint in a local porno store. I sup-
pose there might be some curiosity
about how I justified the job with my
politics. Well, it wasn't easy, but
I managed and this is how it went.

Money was the prime factor. I was
broke when I hit Phoenix and decided
I'd take any job, preferably legal, to
get on my feet. The porno job was in
the job bank at the state employment
agency. It paid more than waitressing,
had insurance benefits, paid holidays,
commissions and bonuses.

Politically, I applied the "Robin
Hood" theory. I would be spending mon-
ey in the women's community that I
earned from men, selling porno that
they gained from men buying porno. It
was a chance to invade no-woman's land,
to observe the male species in an ex-
clusively male setting. (At that time,
I was the only woman employed in a

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 7

porno store in urban Phoenix.) The job
was a chance to infiltrate from within,
the dream of any old leftist radical.
And the writer in me was curious.

There was an element of challenge
to getting the job. From the man at
the job bank, who asked me no less than
ten times if I understood what "adult"
bookstore meant, (it means adult male),
to the job interviewer, (could I refrain
from blushing and hustling tricks in
the arcade), it became clear that wom-
an/object couldn't do the job but wom-
an/person could. And I did.

Some observations: The men who
came into the bookstore could look at
pictures and films of women, about
things being done to women, buy sex
toys to use on women, but had trouble
buying them from women. Looking me in
the eye was like facing their mother/
sister/wife/daughter and they felt
guilty as hell...

No one ever hassled me on the job.
As a waitress/barmaid, I'd been patted
on the ass, propositioned, an open tar-
get for lewd remarks, but in the midst
of all this porno, the height of sex-
ist propaganda, I was left alone, even

More on Page 10

SPAGHETTI NIGHT!
WEDNESDAYS-- All you can eat for $1.50

A FEMINIST BAR FOR ALL WOMEN

38th & CHESTNUT --: DENVER

HOURS:

M-F 5pm-2am
Sat

Sun

2pm-2am
2pm - Mid.