6

‘No More Silence’

A Night of Energy, Strength, Anger

Janelle Lemken and Kathy Riley

Calling upon ourselves to fight all
forms of violence against women, more
than 350 women and some men marched
down East Colfax in Denver, July 29 in
a Saturday night march to reclaim the
streets.

The first half of the march ended in
an hour-long rally and speakout down-
town at the Civic Center, which was
followed by a sidewalk march back to
our starting point. For Denver, this

was the first night march by women
and the first to focus specifically on
the issues of violence against women.

Although there was some heckling --
particularly as we went by Sid King's,
a porn bar.

Leaflets in Spanish and English, ex-
plaining the major demands of the
march, were passed out to spectators.
(See leaflet reprinted below.)

Energy was high as we reached the
Civic Center, where WAVAW member Pan-
doura Carpenter gave a brief opening
speech, expressing the anger and sense
of woman-strength which grew through-
out the rally. Ronna Keil performed
a mime piece, accompanied by Paula
Sperry reading from Claire Raulerson's
script, "Heartsease." After a few

short, superficial and inaccurate
(i.e. the turnout was underestimated
at less than one-third of what it
was). When women complained to the
Rocky Mountain News, it was suggested
that had we had an afternoon march, 
the reporter would not have had a
deadline problem. (He had
phoned in the count when women were
still assembling prior to marching).
Other night-time news doesn't seem to
pose the same deadline problem, how-
ever. Another paper, Westword, a
“counter-culture" weekly, "covered"
the march by interviewing one of the
organizers later. While the story

This was also the first project of
Women Against Violence Against Women
(WAVAW), a group of about 15 women who
have been meeting weekly since May.

We felt the march would be a strong,
visible action for all women at a time
when rape and harassment on the
streets and in our homes runs particu-
larly high.

The march began at East High School
and proceeded down Colfax -- one of
Denver's main commercial streets which
includes a number of porn shops and
theatres. By 8 p.m. women began ar-
riving at East, where we met friends,
chose banners and signs, put on arm-
bands (red for marshals and white for
women who had been raped or sexually
harassed. Almost every woman wore a
white one.). Many of the signs in-
spired chants during the march -- “Wo-
men Unite, Take Back the Night, Self
Defense is Our Right", "My Ass is My
Own,” and “No More Silence About Vio-
lence." The procession included two
vehicles for children and handicapped
women, and several women carried a
heavy black coffin with the sign, "In
memory of our sisters who have been
victims of violence."

As the march continued down Colfax,
many women in cars and on the street
cheered and waved. There were no con-
frontations from men along the way,

brief notes, the mic was opened to
any woman who wanted to tell her
story: Women spoke of incest, child
abuse, job harassment, street harass-
ment, rape, beatings -- violence by
men -- whether fathers, brothers, bos-
ses, lovers, husbands or strangers.
While it was clear that anger, shame
and fear have been our legacy as vic-
tims of violence, women also spoke of
our strength to make things change.

As the rally drew to a close, Kim
Womantree and Carol Stern led a ren-
dition of "I'm Tired of Fuckers Fuck-
ing Over Me." Just as the group was
assembling to march back, a male spec-
tator boomed out, "You have forgotten
God." However, after some booing and
shouting, he was promptly forgotten.
We began our walk back to East High
through a residential neighborhood,
before turning back onto Colfax.

The second half of the march took
place on the sidewalks because a city
ordinance prohibits street marches
after 10 p.m. Transportation back to
East High was provided for those who
wanted to ride, but most walked back.
Free childcare had been provided by
several men at Woman to Woman Feminist
Bookstore during the march and rally.

The march drew one of the highest
turnouts ever seen at a women's march
in Denver, and a number of new women
have expressed interest in working
around the issues of the march
throughout the year.

Among the reasons for the success of
the march, WAVAW felt, were the good
working relationships among the women
in the group, an extensive leafleting
effort before the march, good organ-
ization and preparation by the mar-
shals, and the fact that the issues
of the march directly touched the
lives of so many women.

Coverage of the march by the
straight press was poor to non-exis-
tent. None of the media showed up
for a press conference scheduled a
few days before -- although reporters
had turned out in droves when the
Bluebird Five (5 women arrested for
pasting up anti-porn leaflets on a
local theater) held a press confer-
ence before their trial date earlier
this year. Only one of the two daily
newspapers in Denver covered the
march itself: the resulting story was

was not unsympathetic, it said little
about the march itself or the issues
behind it; rather it focused on whet-
her or not WAVAW planned to do any-
thing illegal, in view of the Blue-
bird Five case, which apparently is
considered better copy by newspaper
editors. In addition, the story was
accompanied by a picture which many
women felt to be in very bad taste--

a line drawing of a nude woman tied
down with her legs apart.

At the WAVAW critique meeting held
a few days after the march, it was
suggested that had we had an “impor-
tant" keynote speaker, we might have

gotten better coverage. However, the
group agreed that our original deci-
sion was a good one: that press
coverage of big names tends to be
just that -- coverage of the name and
not the issues. And at the same time
an "important" speaker would have
undercut one of the basic political
points of the march -- that we are
all important and have something to
say.

Other criticisms of the march were
that WAVAW had too little time to do
outreach to other political and
social service groups in the city and
too little time to talk out among
ourselves (the organizers) the poli-

Big Mama Rag, Vol. 6, No. 8

tics of our demands. The march and
rally were organized in an amazingly
short time -- six weeks. Although
WAVAW had set aside a full day meet-
ing to formulate the demands of the
march, there was too little time at
subsequent weekly meetings to follow
them up well.

WAVAW had originally decided to ask
endorsements of the march by other
groups as a means of encouraging
their participation and beginning
some dialogue on violence against
women. Yet while endorsements were
obtained from ten groups, mostly by
phone, the endorsements did not serve
their intended purpose. Planning
meetings were open to all women, but
no time or energy was put into going
to meetings of other groups or en-
couraging any kind of coalition ef-
fort. WAVAW agreed that a longer
planning period would have been a
good idea.

The group is continuing to meet

weekly, every Tuesday at 7 p.m. in the
basement at Woman to Woman Feminist
Center, 2023 E. Colfax. No new pro-
jects had been planned as of mid-
August; however, members of the group
are talking about several possibili-
ties: organizing self-defense classes,
a speakers' bureau for high schools,
workshops, street theater, support for
the national boycott of records promo-
ting violence against women, and
confrontations with rapists (such as
in picketing their homes, workplaces).