a column

Bourge Miller

advertise vb 1: INFORM, NOTIFY 2a: to announce publicly esp.
by printed notice...b: to call public attention to esp. by
emphasizing desirable qualities so as to arouse a desire to buy or
patronize.

Very simple, it would seem. And years ago it was. A simple
handbill or two, a barker in the market place extolling the virtues
of his wares. These were sufficient means to convey the supposed
worth of a product or service. But that was, indeed, years ago.

Today, advertising is a complex, major multi-billion dollar
industry in itself. And it has grown immeasurably in reach,
sophistication and subtlety. It utilizes virtually every known form
of printed and electronic media. From brochure to billboard. From
product label to company letterhead. From your car-radio to that
big 21” color tube in your living room. It is estimated that an
individual is bombarded by over 1,500 advertising messages, in
one form or another, each day. And so, because of its virtually
limitless reach, its relentless ability to pervade even the most
private aspects of our lives, advertising wields an enormous power
in this country today. A power which we, as women, would do
well to analyze, to understand, and when necessary, to challenge.

We can by no means put a blanket stamp of “evil” on all
advertising. It has been, and will continue to be, a provocative tool
for social and political change. It can also, however unwittingly,
be the prime instrument for the perpetuation of social and sexual
stereotypes.

In the months to come, this column will attempt to analyze
and/or bring to your attention those ads which specifically relate
to women in this manner. Particularly those in which the
stereotyping is most subtle. But for openers, let’s take a look at
one not too subtle example.

Moving That Tail

Continental Airlines had a problem. Some bright young soul
in the marketing department discovered that they were less well
known than the bus people over at Continental Trailways. In fact,
a marketing survey revealed that only about 10% of the flying
public knew about them, even though the airline boasts the best
on-time record and is acknowledged by its competitors to be the
best.

A further discovery: their five year old slogan, “the Proud
Bird with the Golden Tail”, was more well known than the
Continental name itself. Which was fine, if they could get a yellow
pages listing under “P” for “Proud Bird”. Which, of course, they
couldn't.

So, what to do? What to do? Somehow their advertising had
to generate quick name awareness and better associate that name
in the public’s mind with the best service.

Benton & Bowles, the ad agency, had a solution. You've
seen and heard it. Cheerful faces, stirring music, snappy lyrics.
And a rousing “At Continental Airlines, we really move our tail for
you!” Terrific! An absolute natural! Everything was there. Name
recognition, plus capitalization on a phrase that has traditionally
implied good service which, at the same time, cleverly
incorporated the already successfully established “tail” theme.

Unfortunately, some confusion arose as to just whose tail
was moving. Continental claims it meant to convey that it was the
symbolic Proud Bird's tail. The male flying public, given to its own
peculiar brand of symbolism, thought otherwise. The result: a lot
of CA stews who wished they were flying United’s “Friendly
Skies” instead...and an advertising campaign offensive to both
CA women and the female public alike.

A recent issue of New Times magazine reports that a union
official for the Steward and Stewardess Division of the Airline
Pilots Association “informed the airline that the slogan
represented ‘a movement back years in time... to a period when all
flight attendants were unfairly held out as sex objects.’ ”

No, no, protests Ms. Diane Levine, staff Vice President, CA
Public Relations. Smugly pointing out that the TV spots depict
both male and female employees, and that the outdoor advertising
features a stylization of their aircraft's famous “Golden Tail”, she
insisted to a group of Denver ad writers that the campaign was
conceived in utter innocence, with no intention of creating
suggestive innuendos. “The Continental Proud Tail is moving,
nobody else's. This is not to be construed any other way.”

Yet the New Times article further reveals: “To add insult to
injury—the company prepared a film to help stewardesses cope
with what it admitted might be one result of the ad campaign,
suggesting witty retorts to any provocative questions. For
example:

Passenger: ‘Will you move your tail for me?’

Stewardess: ‘Why, is it in the way?’ ”

Not to be construed any other way, huh? Oh come now,
Diane, really?

Postscript: The airline, already saddled with a record of
discrimination against women in the area of credit extension,
dismissed complaints by the union about the campaign as just
a lot of agitation by some “hard core women’s libbers”. They
charged that the women were using the issue as a grievance to
gain more leverage in contract negotiations. Leverage is needed, it
would seem. Recently, a California judge ruled in favor of a CA
stewardess who had filed a discrimination suit against the airline.
She had finally been fired, after having been suspended seven
times over the past year for being overweight...sometimes by as
much as half a pound.

Reader comments and contributions are encouraged.
Remember that the most effective way to put a stop to ads that are
offensive to women is to 1. Complain directly to the advertiser and
if possible to the advertising agency involved. Ad agencies must
be held equally, if not more, responsible for the quality of
advertising. They are, after all, the creators and originators of the
advertising which their client (the advertiser) may accept or reject.
Then 2. boycott that product or service...again, let the advertiser
know you're doing it. And why. Often, the advertiser simply isn't
aware of the offensive nature of the ad. A lot of consciousness can
be raised with one letter or a phone call.

Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 3

Have to Survive

Casse tried to fight the
system but was under a lot of
pressure simply to survive. “I
had to put my monetary
needs, feeding and clothing
myself, before my art. This is
the kind of thing that happens
all the time; mine is simply a
specific situation.”

So Casse left the straight
record industry, tried the club
scene, which turned out to be
pretty much the same thing,
i.e., the “show-a-little-more-
tit-baby” attitude, and is now
working to create a woman’s
musical culture with the help
of her “womanger” Spotts-
wood. Why a “womanger”?
“The word ‘manager’,” says
Casse, “is derived from and
implies to ‘manipulate’; to
turn someone into a purchas-
able product.” This definitely
is not the relationship that
Casse and Spotts have. They
both put full time and energy
into getting Casse’s music out
to the public. Spotts takes
care of the business matters
and Casse works on her
music. Their expenses come
off the top of any income and
the rest is split 50-50.

Feels Great Now

How does Casse feel now
that she is performing her
music for women? Great! “In
the straight music industry, if
you're writing about anything
other than ‘my man is here
and I’m happy and satisfied’ or
‘my man is not here and I’m
miserable and blue’ you don't
have a market. Supposedly.”
Casse is finding her new
atmosphere highly supportive
and energizing. Women, she
has found, are open to and
eager for a whole new area of
women’s art; one which
expresses their own feelings
and struggles.

Her audiences have, in fact,
been so supportive that Casse
is planning a new album for
the fall of this year. One that
will be on her own label,
Sweet Alliance Music.

Through Casse’s efforts to
politicize and unite women
with their art she is giving us
the soul of woman, moving
freely out of her own life and
struggle. It is a beautiful and
brightly shining soul, and full
of smiles.

DENVER,
FOLKLORE
CENTER
NEW AND USED MANDOLINS

THOUSANDS OF BEADS
BLUEGRASS AND
FOLK ALBUMS

SATURDAY NIGHT
EXCELLENCE
MUSIC

608 E. 17th Ave.
831-7019