Politics of Health

Therapy: A Dangerous Option

Deborah Taylor

Psychotherapy is a dangerous insti-
tution for women. It offers help and
a “cure” for our pain. However, the
medical model of an individualized,
internal cure is not useful and can
perpetuate our oppression. Our suf-
fering is not caused internally, but
by society and other people's reac-
tion to us. Only by uniting with o-
ther women to fight and win control
over our lives in the real world can
we change the conditions that make
us suffer.

In this article I use the masculine
pronoun for therapist because 89% of
psychiatrists and 75% of psycholo-
gists are male. Conversely, 60% of
all psychiatric patients are female
and so I refer to the patient as she.

Women go into therapy because they
think they have failed, rather than
seeing how society has failed them.
We are told and believe that there is
an individual solution waiting for us
(peace and happiness in the same ad
or, as middle-class therapists tell
us, a nice niche as a doctor or law-
yer.) We go into therapy to adjust,
improve ourselves and succeed where
we have failed. But in therapy, wo-
men can't win, just as they can't in
the rest of society. Psychotherapy
is a male-identified, middle-class
institution that shares the failings
of all of the other major institu-
tions in this capitalist-patriarchal
system.

Therapy is a big business. In 1968
21 billion was spent on mental health
and it is one of the largest indus-
tries in the country. More than two
million people go to outpatient cli-
nics a year, one million enter mental
hospitals, and half a million are in
private therapy. Half of all hospi-
tal beds are for mental patients.

Like any other commercial enter-
prise, therapists are paid for promo-
ting the existing social order, not
for leaving their offices to protest
societal conditions. Therapists sell
themselves by convincing people that
they need them. Psychiatrists see
pathology and potential customers
everywhere. Everyone who hasn't been
analyzed is sick. Women, poor and
powerless people are especially prone
to this sales message because they
feel pain.

A therapist is a socially sanctioned
“healer” who interprets and gives
explanation for a person's suffering.
Therapy has a mystical power; its
historical roots are in magic and su-
perstition. Therapists are the new
priests in this society and therapy
is a pseudo-religion. There is a
hard core of believers; only 5% of
the people using outpatient clinics
are beginning treatment and 95% are
repeaters.

Today we believe in science as we
once believed in religion, and psy-
chotherapy is "scientific" because it
is allied with the medical profession.
Therapists are supposed to know the
"truth" about people, but like a god,
only the therapist has access to this
"knowledge." He uses diagnostic cate-
gories which are vague, inconsistent,
unfounded and merely serve to confirm
his prejudices. They cannot be ob-
jectively verified and no one can dis-
pute them. Diagnostic labels are
dangerous weapons which can poison
someone's life for a lifetime. It is
like being accused of witchcraft;
proof of the existence of the "devils"
inside lies in his interpretation of
the events which are not harmful in
themselves.

Therapists have tremendous socially
sanctioned power. They can decide
who can be employed and who cannot
and who can love and who cannot. Also
we give them power because we go to
them when we feel weak, helpless and
lonely. A woman who thinks she is
suicidal and depressed will see her
therapist as a savior and give him
permission to change her: "Take me a-
part and put me back together better,
please."

Therapy is an agency for social con-
trol. There are more people in mental
hospitals than in jails. In the tur-
bulent sixties when people became dis-
affected with the system, the therapy
business expanded rapidly. The num-
ber of people seeing psychiatrists
has doubled since 1955. You cannot
focus on the external and the inter-
nal at the same time.

95% of psychotherapists identify
themselves as upper-class and their
values reflect their position in so-
ciety. They consider the ideal cli-
ent to be middle-class, youthful, at-
tractive, verbal, intelligent and
successful. Psychotherapists do not
relate to the problems of oppressed
people and are conservative or a-
political.

Therapy is oppressive to people who
are not male, white, middle-class,
young and heterosexual. There are
different standards of mental health
for women and men, young and old,
homosexual and heterosexual. The di-
agnosis, kind of treatment, institu-
tion, and length of treatment time all
depend on these factors. The poor and
old are diagnosed psychotic and placed
in state hospitals where they re-
ceive custodial care, shock treatment
and lobotomies. Middle-class, young
whites get private, expensive thera-
py, are classified neurotic and at
the most are treated for short per-
iods of time in private hospitals.

In this society poor people have
so many unmet needs and problems that
they tend to break down emotionally
more than more wealthy people. The
highest economic class which makes
up 3% of the general population is
only 1% of the psychiatric population
whereas the lowest class which is
18.4% of the general population makes
up 38.4% of the psychiatric popula-
tion.

The types of mental disorders are
different for rich and poor. The
upper class goes to shrinks because
of feelings of inadequacy, guilt and
anxiety about interpersonal relation-
ships (neuroses). The lower class
goes because of schizophrenia, psy-
chosis, and sociopathic rage.

State mental hospitals are dumping
grounds, "Indian reservations" for
the powerless outsiders of our so-
ciety. A typical picture of a state
hospital is smashed windows, filthy
excrement-covered walls and women
lying asleep on hallway floors from
overmedication or begging for the
barest necessities from their keep-
ers. (Quest, Vol. 1, #2, Fall, 1974)

Modern institutionalized psychiatry
is like the Inquisition in the 14th
and 15th centuries when witches, Jews
and other undesirables were tortured.

Phyllis Chesler in Women and Mad-
ness says that madness is considered
in our society to be acting out the
devalued passive, female role or the
total or partial rejection of one's
sex role stereotype. Men who are de-
pendent, passive, fearful, inactive,
or who, like women, choose men as
their sexual partners are labeled
crazy.

All women are considered crazy by
male standards. This is true both
when they act out the female role
(depressed, incompetent, frigid, and
anxious) and also when they reject
the female role (hostile, successful,
and sexually active, especially les-
bians.)

Hospitals treat patients like women
- as helpless, dependent, sexless and
unreasonable. All portraits of mad-
ness by psychiatrists and novelists
are primarily of women. Women fulfill
society's expectations through acting
crazy. Today women are voluntarily
sacrificing themselves, instead of
being forcibly tortured, as witches
were 400 years ago. Perhaps as our
role in the family becomes more de-
valued and we are more expendable, we
express our discomfort by going crazy.

The only way slaves can revolt or
go on strike is by collapsing in ex-
haustion, not directly challenging
the master. One way working-class
women can get a vacation where they
can satisfy their need for nurturance
is to go to a state hospital. It is
interesting that the more children a
married woman has, the greater the
chance of her being committed. Mar-
ried women are hospitalized more than
single women.

Women also accept treatment because
they want to be punished for reject-
ing or feeling ambivalent about the
standard female role. Lesbians often
look to the traditional female insti-
tution of psychotherapy to ease their
pain. A woman who is rejected by her
parents as socially unacceptable may
seek out affirmation for herself from
the straight world, which the psychi-
atrist represents. Studies show that
lesbians seek psychotherapy and get
depressed just as frequently as he-
terosexual women. But since lesbian-
ism is so oppressed, lesbians tend to
stay in mental hospitals much longer,
attempt suicide and drink alcohol
more than straight women.

As casualties of the patriarchal
system, women suffer more mental ill-
ness than men. Women (Black and
White) experience more nervousness,
insomnia, trembling hands, nightmares,
fainting spells, headaches, dizziness,
and feel more impending nervous break-
downs and psychological inertia.

Even according to the profession's
own standards, therapy does not work.
Many outcomes of therapy studies have
shown that the improvement rate from
analysis is 44%, from intensive psy-
chotherapy 62%, and from no treatment
at all 72%.

Studies have also shown that no one
method or school of therapy is better
than any other or better than life
experience for overcoming disordered
or inappropriate behavior. So it
doesn't matter which brand we choose:
Gestalt, bioenergetic, Primal, Reich-
ian, etc.

feminist
bookcenter

2023 E. Colfax, Denver
(303) 320-6972

Therapy can cripple us emotionally
as well as politically. Dwelling on
the past and negative interpretations
of oneself may undermine our confi-
dence and self-esteem, and this de-
terioration may be self-perpetuating.
Therapy fosters self-involvement in
a "flight from life" in which the
client concentrates on motives rather
than consequences, and takes more in-
terest in irrational fantasies than
in developing better judgment. End-
lessly analyzing what to do excuses
us for not doing anything.

Being in therapy is like being im-
prisoned because therapy isolates and
overprotects us. Like in an institu-
tion, it infantilizes us and makes it
hard to make normal decisions, take
risks or expose oneself to anxiety.
When we get in anxiety-producing
situations, we tend to freak out and
think “I can't handle it; it must be
something from the past, etc."

I use the pronoun “we" because I
have been a “victim” and therapy
junkie for eight years and only in the
past year have I weaned myself of
this dangerous habit. I find that
I still tend to discount my own per-
ceptions and sanity and I still tend
to analyze rather than act.

This society lacks a climate where
people can discuss their feelings o-
penly, and it is hard to find people
with whom we can be real. Many of
our relationships are "protection
rackets" where we protect each other
from the truth. Paying for therapy
is like buying a friend who we hope
will be truthful. When I used to
need a shrink (when I didn't trust
myself as much as I do now), I would
shop around, make lots of phone
calls and fire questions at prospec-
tive therapists to see if we shared
values, goals and life experience.
Talking on the phone equalizes the
power relationship and doesn’t cost
anything emotionally.

I think friends are the best
people to talk to when we are con-
fused because we know them per-
sonally and politically. They will sym-
pathize, offer useful, concrete sug-
gestions on what to do and be real
with us. There is no secrecy, shame
or huge power imbalance in this
relationship. We know that our
friend is weak and human like us and
she has seen us in our good times as
well as our bad. To do this exchange
means accepting that we are not
Superwoman and also, most importantly
that we see our problems in a poli-
tical context. We must see that we
share the same problems, and that
they are not our fault, but originate
in a corrupt, oppressive society.

Our self-love and respect will
only grow as we learn to trust our-
selves and our political, feminist
community. We will gain confidence
when we start to do something about
our oppression in the real world.

More on Page 15

PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH, & THE NEWBORN

a manual for rural midwives,

Leo Elvesser, Edith Galt & Isabel

Hemingway, $3.00,

FEMINIST BOOK OF LIGHTS & SHADOWS

Z. Budapest, $5.00,

| WOMEN FOLK,

ni