supreme

On January 22 the U.S. Supreme Court
ruled 7-2 that in the first three
months of pregnancy the decision of
whether to have an abortion is be-
tween a woman and her doctor; in
the next six months, the state may
regulate the abortion procedure in
ways that reasonably relate to ma-
ternal health. Only in the last 10
weeks may a state ban abortions
except where they are necessary to
preserve the woman's life or health.

The decision firmly recognizes a
woman's right to control her own
body as a part of her fundamental
right to privacy, and was seen as a
victory for the women's movement.

Not until March 5, however, did
the Colorado Supreme Court, basing
its ruling on the January decision,
strike down the state abortion law's
restrictions as unconstitutional.
The Colorado law, which previously
had been considered "liberal,"
contained certain "requirements"
which the U.S. Supreme Court spe-
cifically stated were unconstitu-
tional, namely, 1) that there be a
residency requirement; 2) that a-
bortions be performed in hospitals
accredited by a private agency; 3)
that applicants be screened by a
hospital committee; or 4) that in-
dependent doctors certify the po-
tential dangers of a pregnancy to a
woman's physical or mental health.

In addition, the Colorado deci-
sion guaranteed the civil rights of
those hospital employees who refuse
to participate in abortion proce-
dures by stating that such refusal
may not be a basis for any disci-
plinary action against that employ-
ee. The decision also stated that
any hospital can refuse to admit a
patient for an abortion.

Denver citizens demonstrate at
recent abortion rally.

According to members of the Moun-
tain States Women's Abortion Coali-
tion (MSWAC), which has been inves-
tigating the implementation of the
new rulings in local hospitals,
most hospitals are changing or have
changed their procedures to comply
with the ruling. Some of those
hospitals providing abortions with-
out restriction during the first tri-
mester are General Rose, Beth Israel,
Denver General, and Colorado General.

On March 12 the U.S. Supreme
Court, ruling on the Illinois abor-
tion law, and declaring it uncon-
stitutional, concurrently issued an
order that all state governments

court rules pro-abortion

must comply with the original Janu-
ary decision and will no longer be
allowed to procrastinate in creating
new laws.

"One thing I'm worried about,"
said Nancy Stern, a lawyer for the
Center for Constitutional Rights,
commenting on the January 22 deci-
sion, “is that women will now say,
‘OK, it's all over. Now I can get
an abortion if I want one and that's
that.' But there's a real possi-
bility that a state pressured by
anti-abortion forces will pass abor-
tion laws, under the guise of pro-
tecting a woman's health, which will
actually succeed in restricting her

right to an abortion."

BMR Editorial

by Bourge Miller

“While the January 22 Supreme Court decision concerning abortion
brought welcome and hard-fought-for relief to millions of Americans,
concerned women must face the reality that the decision is not at
all the total victory sought in the fight to control our own repro-
ductive lives. Rather, it is only the first step, although a very
meaningful one, in that direction. The ruling has removed many
barriers, but has left or erected others.

Some painful issues still pending and some points to be vitally
aware of are these:

1) The ruling places no restrictions on abortion during the
first trimester, except the requirement that it be performed by a
licensed physician. However, beginning with the second trimester,
states are still free to regulate abortion procedures "in ways that
are reasonably related to maternal health." Legislative action in
this area must be carefully monitored to ensure continued protection
of our rights.

2) The Supreme Court ruling makes no reference to the age at
which a woman may obtain an abortion. Legislation will most cer-
tainly take place in this area. Must our younger sisters still
face the red tape of parental or spousal consent? Do these women
not also have the right to privacy as guaranteed by the Constitu-
tion?

3) Although the high court has just recently issued an addition-
al order directing states to bring themselves into full compliance
with the new ruling, it is clear that some state legislatures,
state attorneys general, hospitals, etc. will most certainly at-
tempt to impede the implementation of the decision. Those in the
abortion rights movement must continue to press for speedy imple-
mentation of the ruling until all have complied.

4) “Right-To-Life" forces have responded to the ruling with
moralistic indignation and irrelevant appeals to emotionalism that
do not deal with the constitutional issues at hand. They have also
introduced two bills into Congress (See page 8 - this issue).

5) It is extremely important to note that the ruling leaves open
a possibility of the passage of total repeal legislation either on
the state or federal level. The abortion rights movement should
press for the passage of the Abortion Rights Act of 1973 which
would take the question of abortion out of the state criminal codes
altogether.

With the above highlights of still existing problems in mind,
it should be clear that the battle women have been fighting to
gain full control of their own reproductive lives is far from
over. Much still needs to be done to protect and ensure these
rights for all women. The abortion movement is and will continue
to be challenged on all fronts and at all levels. That challenge
must be met with even greater efforts and determination than before.

Bourge Miller has been involved in the abortion movement for a
year and a half. She was at one time active with MSWAC, and is
vitally concerned with women's right to control their own bodies.