Effecting Change Through Choice

Pat Wagner

To have a free world, you must grant others freedom.

This is obvious, perhaps, but I have run into too many women who think they can free themselves by means of guilt, intimidation, and extortion. I don't think I am exaggerating. Socialist politics, legislated morality, and martyrdom are not going to create a place where a woman can achieve what she wants—whether that woman is a dyke separatist or a traditionally oriented housewife.

I have seen, in the recent past, three approaches to bringing the feminist viewpoint to the community.

The first approach uses pain and guilt. A group puts together a project they think the community should have. When the community does not respond, either because they don't know about the project or are not interested, this group whines, "You don't want this? You better, or you won't get into feminist heaven when you die." Women are enticed into the project with the same tactic my grade school art teacher once used on me.

"This is good for you, and since you don't want it, something is wrong with you."

The second approach, which involves the mass use of tax money and the glorification of an ideal socialist state, is the friendly extortion plan; what are taxes, anyway? I am asked to pay, on penalty of imprisonment, for projects I might not have the slightest interest in, or projects which are harmful to my life. It feels so righteous to cry about the use our current government makes of our money; it is so simple to decide who should get what, isn't it? Ask yourself this: if you paid no taxes, if no one made you put your money in any project, to which feminist projects would you voluntarily allocate part of your income? How much would you spend? Is it the same amount as your best friend, your lover, your neighbor would spend? Could any government make the right decision for you? Would you make the right decision for others, knowing you could send a woman to jail if she did not agree with you? The implication of our willingness to use tax money is a little disturbing; it also reinforces for me the feeling that we think so little of our worth and our values that we find ourselves unable to compete with disco bars and Arby's for feminist money and energy.

The third track, intimidation through legislation, is along the same lines. That money you and I are forced to pay, literally at gunpoint, also pays for the gun. The tragedy of political activism in this country over the last 50 years is that the more laws we write, the worse the situation gets. Laws to guarantee minimum wages force black teenagers and other unskilled labor out of the job market. Laws to protect our health add a minimum of 30 percent to health care costs and create a gold mine for drug companies and traditional medical practitioners. Laws to protect the worker tie small businesses up in knots with regulations, and make sure it is almost impossible to compete with big businesses. Affirmative action, as we know, is a joke, as is most of the civil rights legislation of the last twenty years. I want those rights for everyone, damn it, but no one has yet shown me how passing a law is going to change anything. The economic gap between blacks and whites is growing; women's wages compared to men's are dropping.

What does this have to do with how Colorado feminists go about the business of establishing a free world for women? I think the answer, although it is not an easy one, is choice. To show you how this works, I would like to use my own business as an example.

I saw for years a need in the community for someone to help non-profit organizations and small groups learn more about printing and public relations. I suppose I could have set up a collective, found grant money, and hoped I would have survived long enough to do some good. Instead, I looked at what I had to offer and saw that I was offering something of value, at least as important as 3.2 beer and work boots. So when folks came to me for help, I asked them to pay, knowing that they were taking away with them something that could be of great value, both financially and emotionally.

I now have four women working out of my office on a part-time basis. Each of them sought me out because they liked my work. Three of them are training here, not in some hyped government program, but informally and formally. We share, we offer good inexpensive services to the community, we work for whom we like, and I pay them well. I tried to create a place that would attract the kind of person I wanted to work with, and I have set up my pricing so that just about anyone can use our services, through money or trade. No one has ever put any money into Eggplant who had to. If people don't like us or our work, they don't have to deal with us. We don't ask anyone to agree with us, either. The politics in the office range from those of a lesbian separatist to those of a liberal straight woman. We use all the devices we can borrow and steal from big business and advertising to succeed. We believe in our work and in each other.

It is not a collective. My ten years of experience means there are some things I can do better; however, everyone in the office has strong opinions and talents, and we learn from each other every day. It feels great when a woman comes in from a feminist organization and we can help her. As our business grows, I know the women who work with me will be paid well, through money voluntarily given. We have an expanding workshop program; eight women have already received training.

The social service agencies who are our clients complain about grants and funding; we help them wean themselves away from the grants through sound business practices and voluntary fundraising programs. I have learned that the profits of my business can be put to good use. If the creep down the street drives around in a Cadillac, polluting the air, underpaying his help, that's his business. What I can do, which literally is my business, is to help his workers find better paying jobs, aid his customers in finding a better store to do business with, and build public opinion against his filthy car, through information. My idea of stopping war, famine, murder, rape, pollution, robbery, torture, and degradation of the human spirit may be different than yours. Both our solutions may be necessary. I would hope that many people go along with my ideas, but I would persuade them, not force them.

Three concrete notions come out of this tirade.

1. Feminist concerns should consider making it a rule that all money and resources are put there voluntarily. Persuading people to work with you, through advertising and education, becomes a prime concern.

2. Feminist projects should consider working in the marketplace and making enough of a profit so that the women working in the project do not have to volunteer their time. Let us say goodbye to the 90 hour-a-week burn-out, goodbye to the kind of subtle discrimination that forces women with financial burdens out of the women's community.

Saying profit is evil is as silly as saying corporations are good. What people do with the fruits of their own labor and how it affects other people's lives is what is important. I am proud of the fact I can pay people well; that women in my company work for wages as good or better than any man doing the same job. If I wasn't planning to make a profit, I couldn't do it.

3. The idea that everyone should agree on or should be forced to follow a certain kind of behavior makes life very complicated. Coalitions form readily around intense, short-range concerns, but fall apart quickly when long-range goals are set. Why is it so hard to work side by side with someone you disagree with—why the terrible concern that everyone should agree on everything? I do not feel somehow soiled by dealing with women I don't agree with—on the contrary, my resources and information increased dramatically the day I started listening to people outside my circle of friends and workers. It really made my own life much simpler; I found my world was much larger than I thought. I also learned, coincidentally, that if I was to convince people I disagreed with about anything, that it would have to be through the example of my own life, more than rhetoric and manifestoes.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 5

Ruth, one of the women I work with, asked me to add a fourth issue, that of leadership. Leadership, she said, has been given bad press, as if there was something inherently wrong with one person being more skilled than another. It is only the prestige and power we allow leadership that makes it “bad.” It is simply another task to perform in getting things done, and in itself is no more important than any other. Taking the mystique away from the idea of someone directing an operation may make it easier to deal with. Too much of the collective energy involves talking about how to take action; in a crisis, it can be fatal.

Obviously, I have not offered any easy solutions, perhaps nothing at all but a personal way of looking at the world that others might find interesting. The difficulties of effecting change through choice and the marketplace are enormous; how, for example, do we protect ourselves from violent crime without a police force—how do services with great value but little commercial appeal get their money? I believe if you have an idea that you have faith in, you should be able to develop a way to make other women as delighted with it as you are. Otherwise, we are back to that gun.

Connie Apasoywich

If anyone is interested in talking about these ideas, presented rather sketchily here, please call me at 831-1442.

Pat Wagner is the owner of Eggplant Printing Consultants. In her own words, she has been politically incorrect for years, and is probably a liberal. Depending on the definition, she really doesn't know if she is a feminist.