8  
Politics of Health  

Mama Rag Vol. 5 No.  

U.S. Government Supports Psychosurgery  

Deb Taylor  

Editor's Note: The information for  
this article came from a leaflet and  
press release put out by a group in  
Boston called the Ad Hoc Committee  

to Stop Psychosurgery. This group  
formed in March to educate people  
and organize a press conference about  
the recent government endorsement of  
psychosurgery. After the press confer-  
ence on March 28th, 1977, the group  
eventually disbanded.  

The quotes from the doctor  
came from Majority Report, May  
14-27, 1977 in an article entitled  
"H.E.W. OK's Federal Funds For  
Lobotomies."  

Psychosurgery is an operation that  
isolates and destroys healthy brain  
tissue for the purpose of controlling  
and changing a person's behavior.  
Psychosurgeons claim that no substan-  
tial physical risks are involved and  
that the operation will make a person  
"better adjusted" to society.  

Follow-up studies of patients months  
after psychosurgery have proven that,  
in fact, the ultimate results of the  
operation are usually confusion, mem-  
ory loss, uncontrolled seizures, and  
disability—in some cases death.  

70% of all psychosurgery is per-  
formed on women. These women do not  
usually conform to their expected  
social roles and psychosurgery is  
used to make them obedient. The  
main targets are aggressive, acting  
out women, rebellious housewives,  
and depressed, middle-aged women.  
(See letter on this page.)  

In March, 1977, a government ap-  
pointed commission endorsed psycho-  
surgery as a "potentially beneficial  
therapy" for people suffering from  
"psychiatric and behavior disorders,  
prisoners, involuntarily confined  
mental patients, and children."  

If these recommendations are signed  
by the Secretary of the Department  
of Health, Education and Welfare  
(HEW), this endorsement would encour-  
age the widespread use of lobotomies,  
cingulotomies, and other psychosur-  
gical operations.  

The National Commission for the  
Protection of Human Subjects of Bio-  
medical and Behavioral Research  
based its recommendations on two  
meager empirical studies with a total  
of only 61 patients.  

Historical View Of Psychosurgery  

Though the Commission itself re-  
ports that these studies are "not  
sufficient in themselves to establish  
the safety and efficacy of...psycho-  
surgical procedures," it is neverthe-  
less promoting the use of psychosur-  
gery not only for further experimen-  
tal research but also as a positive  
therapeutic practice for unspecified  
emotional and behavioral "disorders."  

Though the Commission's report also  
includes recommendations that would  
protect the rights of people who  
would be operated on, such guidelines  
have never ensured the actual self-  
determination of incarcerated people  
and minors in the past.  

Perhaps the most startling of the  
Commission's recommendations is the  
support it lends to psychosurgery for  
children, despite the fact that it  
admittedly has not investigated in  
any way the effects of psychosurgery  
on children and "has not reviewed  
data that would support the perfor-  
mance of any such operation on chil-  
dren at this time."  

Widespread criticism of the dangers  

U.S., Nazi Germany Use Psychiatric  

Miriam Greenspan  

A speech delivered at the Press Con-  
ference in Boston March 28th, 1977  
against the recent government endor-  
sement of psychosurgery.  

I want to take this opportunity of  
the National Commission's recommenda-  
tions on psychosurgery to raise a his-  
torical reminder which is hardly known  
in this country and that is the role  
of psychiatry in Nazi Germany with re-  
spect to the treatment of what this  
Commission is calling "psychiatric and  
behavioral disorders." It was German  
psychiatrists who engineered the tech-  
nology of the gas chamber and the cre-  
matorium and who first used these to  
murder hundreds of thousands of so-  
called mental patients, including  
many children, years before Hitler  
borrowed these tools from the psych-  
iatrists to implement the "final so-  
lution of the Jewish problem."  

It was German psychiatrists who man-  
ipulated the trust of the German peo-  
ple in "the wisdom of the experts" to  
persuade the public that this mass ex-  
termination was justifiable as a prog-  
ram of "mercy" for people suffering  
from mental diseases.  

Today, psychiatrists who would abhor  
this shameful period in the history of  
psychiatry are still largely blind to  
the ways in which American psychiatry  
and psychology are used as institu-  
tions of social control and repression.  

In Nazi Germany, people trusted the  
good intentions and expertise of doc-  
tors who undertook their destruction  
of patients in the name of mercy.  
Here too, neurological and psychiatric  
experts are considered to be the final  
arbiters of such matters, all for the  
good of the patient. These parallels  
are more than simply alarmist.  
Historically, victims of psychosurg-  
ical violence in this country have been  
prisoners, black people, and involuntar-  
ily confined mental patients; that is,  
people who are angry at and/or victims  
of American society.  

Cecilia Gonzales  
Political Support Essential  

Deb Taylor  

The tortures and brutality at State  
Hospitals are known and feared and  
whispered about much like the  
concentration camps were in Germany.  

Most women know someone who has been  
in a mental hospital or have been in  
one themselves. The State Hospital is  
a threat hanging over all of our heads  
if we step too far over the line into  
unfeminine, socially unacceptable  
behavior. (Too depressed, too sloppy,  
or masculine, disobedient, etc.)  

It is usually working class and  
Third World women who end up in the  
State Hospital.  

Cecilia Gonzales is a 20-year-old  
Chicana lesbian who is in Pueblo  
State Mental Hospital in Pueblo,  
Colorado.  

Cecilia is not drugged or receiving  
shock treatments or undergoing psy-  
chosurgery because she has been lucky  
to get the support of women and friends.  

Also, she is politically aware of her  
situation and is articulate about it.  

Cecilia is only one out of over 200,000  
women currently living in a State  

of psychosurgery have come from many  
quarters, including the scientific  
and psychiatric communities, prisoners'  
rights groups, ex-mental patients  
groups, and civil libertarian organi-  
zations.  

Dr. John Sealy, an internationally  
respected professor of psychiatry at  
the Charles R. Drew Post Graduate  
School of Medicine in Los Angeles,  
charged that such recommendations are  
dangerous and unscientific: "We don't  
know that much about the brain to make  
that kind of entry surgery safe, and  
we don't know that much about any  
particular person." He adds, "It's  
morally abhorrent to take that kind  
of risk without having done the  
underlying scientific work, and  
that's a good decade or more away."  

Many are concerned that psychosur-  
gery is not only medically but morally  
and politically indefensible. The  
long-range effects of destroying  
irreplaceable brain cells in people's  
brains are hardly well documented.  
There is evidence to believe that one  
of the most immediate results is the  
repression of social and political  
dissidence.  

When Ken Kesey wrote his book  
One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest, in  
which the main character, a rebel-  
lious mental patient, is given a lobot-  
omy, psychosurgery was in its heyday.  
An estimated 50,000 people were  
operated on at that time (1950s).  

Now there are only about 500 psycho-  
surgeries performed yearly because of  
the widespread opposition to the pro-  
cedure from so many groups in the  
country. But the Commission's report  
makes a favorable climate for psycho-  
surgery once again.  

The people to be operated on will be  
the institutionalized, the poor, the  
black, the young. In the past, the  
threat of psychosurgery has been used  
against these people to make them  
submit to a racist, sexist, and clas-  
sist system.  

In the early 1970s, psychosurgeons  
were in the forefront of the effort  
to set up programs nationally to  
"detect violence-prone" people through  
neurological experimentation, using  
the argument that ghetto riots and  
anti-war protests were signs of brain  
disease. As attested to by psycho-  
surgeons themselves, the major result  
of the operation is one of social  
control and pacification of protest.  

More On Page 14  

Torture For  

In Nazi Germany, psychiatrists  
called people who demonstrated "dan-  
gerous" ideas about the Reich mentally  
diseased. Today, the leading American  
psychosurgery advocates are Boston  
doctors who have been pushing psycho-  
surgery for "violence-prone" individ-  
uals whose brains are also seen as di-  
seased.  

No amount of institutional review  

To Mental Patients  

Mental Hospital in this country. Her  
experience is only unique in that she  
has strong political ties on the out-  
side.  

The Cecilia Gonzales Defense Commit-  
tee is trying to help Cecilia get a  
sanity release hearing as soon as  
possible. They are in touch with a  
feminist lawyer and are raising money  
to pay for psychiatrists to visit her  
and testify in the hearing. They are  
trying to raise $1,000 to pay for  
these doctors.  

Most women don't have this kind of  
support. They stay in hospitals for  
years because their husbands, fathers,  
and society want them there. Drugged,  
shocked, and their minds destroyed,  
they can rarely offer resistance.  

Cecilia was lucky in being outspoken  
and politically aware when she was  
sent to the hospital three years ago  
in connection with a shooting inci-  
dent when she was 17 years old. (See  
BMR article in May 1977 issue).  

A year ago she escaped and went to  
live in San Francisco with her lover.  

More On Page 14  

Lesbian  

Sues  

Neurosurgeons  

Editor's Note: The following letter  
was printed in the April 1977 issue  
of Lesbian Connection.  

Lesbians! I need your help. In July  
of 1974, when I was a 19-year-old  
lesbian, after a series of 50+ elec-  
tro-shock "therapies," administered  
to me against my will, I was coerced  
into having a cingulotomy, which is  
experimental psychosurgery. As a re-  
sult of this surgery and electro-  
shock, I have had one major and many  
minor seizures, find myself in gener-  
al poor health, have lost the con-  
tents of my high school education,  
and find it difficult to hold a job.  

I am in the process of filing suit  
against the several doctors responsi-  
ble—but a malpractice suit against  
practitioners of psychosurgery (which  
is the "new wave" of lobotomies, and  
which is directed, incidentally, main-  
ly against "maladjusted" women and  
minorities) is going to be long and  
expensive.  

My financial resources are very li-  
mited. If you can contribute to the  
money the case will take (between $5  
- $10,000—which is not for lawyers’  
fees, but for travel expenses for  
witnesses, subpoenas, etc.), I would  
like to hear from you soon (I need  
to file in the next couple of months  
because of the statute limitations).  
You don't have to commit yourself to  
a specific amount of money right now—  
mostly I need to know if there are  
lesbians out there I can count on as  
the case unfolds.  

Also, if there are any lesbian neur-  
ologists or neurosurgeons out there  
who are interested in, or know some-  
thing about, the long-term effects of  
cingulotomy—I would really like to  
hear from you. For more information  
about the case, or to send contribu-  
tions, please write: Marty Kapp, 38  
Hawley St., Northampton MA 01060.  

Social Control  

Boards can safeguard against the abuses  
of psychosurgery because the members of  
such review boards (psychiatrists,  
neurologists, and other medical men)  
are the very same people most likely  
to diagnose as psychiatric and behav-  
ioral disorders what are really social  
evils. No amount of pseudo-scientific  
"evidence" can prove the safety and  
efficacy of drilling holes in people's  
skulls and implanting electrodes which  
burn out brain cells. This violence is  
indeed effective for the purposes of  
controlling the behavior of anyone they  
choose to think of as "deviant."  

It is not people with brain disease  
who are violent—the real violence  
lies with those who advocate as thera-  
peutic treatment the rape of people's  
minds.