photo by Barbara Coleman

Tea and Terra

On September 18, the Third Annual Women's Festival was held at the First  
Universalist Church, 4101 E. Hampden Ave. Festival planners Womanquest  
and Emerging Woman Press had carefully organized the festival: assigning  
booth spaces to individuals and groups that wished to display wares, co-  
ordinating the entertainment that continued throughout the afternoon, and  
generally being available to assist with any problems that anyone had.  
They also provided childcare.

There was some dissatisfaction over the location chosen, which was rela-  
tively far from the usual center of activity in Capitol Hill. The reason  
the Festival was not held at East High, former site of the Festival as  
well as the Capitol Hill People's Fair, was that the cost had risen to  
over $700, and a confirmation on the Festival date requested would not  
have been given until late August, much too late to have allowed for the  
acquirement of a new location if the need had been such. Instead, the  
planning committee attempted to neutralize the out-of-the-way location by  
offering special bus service to and from the fair.

It was a beautiful day for an outdoor festival. Women were giving away  
beer for a donation. Stained glass windows turned faces into rainbows.  
The Rachel Yaseen Defense Fund collected quite a bit of money in donations  
from passing women. The Lesbian Task Force of NOW sold "dyke punch." Many  
food booths were present, selling all sorts of edibles. Children painted  
their faces and became clowns. Macramé, pottery, plants, jewelry dec-  
orated the scene. Workshops were also offered from belly dancing to silk  
screening.

To help cover expenses, the Festival committee had an ongoing raffle of  
various items donated by women's groups in the area, which netted about  
$100. Some lucky devil won a free subscription to Big Mama.

Entertainment consisted of skits, singers, poets, and assorted unique  
acts. After a minor bit of trouble with the sound system, the show went  
on two hours behind schedule. The emcees for the first half of the pro-  
gram were Cheryl Peake and Marquitta, with Clair Kaplan and Judy Barlow  
taking over until the program was rained out.

A wonderful time was had by all. Women enjoyed each other's presence  
and there were constant smiles all around. Children were free to be inde-  
pendent and be themselves. Women and children, all, took this time away from  
the patriarchy to celebrate their strength and the spirit of women.

A meeting will be held by the Festival planners to evaluate their pro-  
cess and the resulting festival, making it a learning opportunity as well.  
Seed money from this year's profits will, besides providing some money for  
fledgling projects Emerging Woman Press and Womanquest, be set aside for  
next year's planning committee.

Anyone interested in working on next year's Women's Festival would do  
well to contact those who have done the work for this year to gain from  
their experience.

— >

photo by Barbara Coleman:

THIRD  
ANNUAL  
COLORADO  
WOMEN’S  
FESTIVAL