Little

On a hot summer night in a small southern town, an old, fat, bespectacled jailer got an icepick from his desk drawer, took off his shoes, and went into a woman prisoner's cell. He wanted sex; she refused. He cornered the woman, felt her breasts with his big, awkward hands. The woman started to cry. He pulled up her gown and put his hand between her legs. He took off his pants and sat on the edge of the bed. Putting the icepick to her head, he demanded she perform oral sex. The woman refused. He threatened her life, and she did what he wanted.

As he climaxed, he loosened his grip on the weapon, and it fell to the floor. He went for the icepick, but she got it first and stabbed at him, not sure if she hit him. He grabbed her wrist, moving behind her. She struck at him over her shoulder. The man slumped on the bed; blood was on his face.

She dressed, fled the cell, found keys to the doors, and ran to her cousins’ house.

The jailer lay slumped on the cell cot, dying.

Within an hour, the dead jailer was found by deputies and a radio dispatcher who were bringing in a drunk woman. A womanhunt complete with dogs and shotguns began in the poor black part of town. White men were looking for a 5'3”, 110 lb black woman prisoner, Joan (pronounced Joanne) Little, 20, who had occupied the half-naked, 6' body of Clarence Alligood, 62, a white night jailer who was found.

These few minutes in which a black woman prisoner was raped and defended herself initiated a chain of events that (1) culminated in the formation of a national publicity campaign that raised over a quarter of a million dollars for her defense; (2) led to the recognition by the courts, for the first time in the South, that attitudes were so racist and sexist in one area that a change of venue was needed to ensure a fair trial; (3) showed that, although the defense and the JLDF included the word “sexism” in their verbiage about the case, the sexist aspects of the case were virtually ignored; (4) showed that the principle political organizers and publicists for the JLDF had little or no awareness of rape as an issue and, in fact, discouraged local feminist participation, support, and influence in decisions of and direction for the fund.

Making Contacts

Little hid in her cousins’ house for six days. She concealed herself between two mattresses during four searches by police. It was either through Golden Frinks, an organizer for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, or through an eastern North Carolina lawyer that Jerry Paul, a liberal white civil rights attorney from Durham, was contacted and agreed to represent Little.

Paul and Art Finn, a University of North Carolina professor of medicine, who later became chairman of the board of directors of the Joan Little Defense Fund (JLDF), drove to Washington, N.C. at night on September 1, 1974, picked up a bewigged Little, and took her to Chapel Hill, N.C., a distance of 250 mi. She left Beaufort County because she could get no protection from police if she turned herself in there. In addition, she was in danger of being declared an outlaw which, under N.C. law, would allow anyone who saw her to shoot her on sight.

For three days, Little stayed in the Chapel Hill area while friends and lawyers tried to raise money and support for her defense. She surrendered to Charles J. Dunn, director of the State Bureau of Investigation in Raleigh, N.C. on September 4, 1974.

The FBI agreed that she would not be returned to the Beaufort County jail, but would be held at the women’s prison in Raleigh. There were two other conditions for her surrender: that her trial be moved from Beaufort County and that conditions faced by women prisoners in that jail be investigated. The FBI had no jurisdiction to change the location of her trial, but did begin to interview present and former women inmates of the Beaufort County jail.

All-White Indictment

On September 11, 1974, Little was indicted for first-degree murder by a grand jury from Beaufort County. Later research by the defense showed that the jury pool for this grand jury did not accurately represent the population of Beaufort County “because blacks, women, and young people are initially underrepresented on the source lists used (property tax list and voter registration list), and because of the unchecked power of the appointed all-white Jury Commission to cull the list, taking off anyone they deemed mentally or physically incompetent.”

An innovative step was taken in the courts when the defense showed why it is important to include women, blacks, and young people in the jury pool. People were randomly selected and asked questions about capital punishment, race stereotypes, rape and rape victims, police, authority, jury service, and Little's situation.

Responses varied substantially by sex, race, and age. For example: 58% of whites and 81% of blacks disagreed with this statement, “A black woman who is raped by a white man has probably tempted him into it.” To the question, “Do you believe Joan Little killed Clarence Alligood in self-defense?” 58% of whites polled, but only 1% of blacks, answered "NO."

The defense showed that the exclusion of groups of people also excludes their values, attitudes, and opinions. It asked that the court quash the indictment against Little since the jury pool was non-representative of the community and was therefore false. The motion was denied.

Little was put in the women’s prison in Raleigh (the scene of inmate protests last June; see story this issue BMA) and held without bail for six months. The state claimed it was unable to decide whether to set bail for her since, at the time of the killing, she was awaiting appeal on a breaking and entering conviction and had not posted bond in that case.

Bond was eventually set at $115,000; $100,000 for the murder charge and $15,000 for the breaking and entering charge. The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) of Montgomery, Alabama raised the money and Little was freed on February 26, 1975. For the next four and one-half months, until her trial began on July 14, she spoke to groups around the country about racism and the situation of women prisoners, and raised money for her defense.

How Much Money?

By the time Little was freed on bail, her defense had been established and functioning for five months. The JLDF was incorporated as a non-profit organization on the last day of September, 1974.

There are conflicting figures in just how much the JLDF has raised. According to Marilyn Edwards, who has been the accountant for the fund since late spring of ’75, the fund raised about $181,000 as of July 30th. But the Detroit Free Press, in a July 27th story, reported that the fund had accumulated over $300,000.

This discrepancy could be accounted for if one figure includes the $115,000 the SPLC raised for her bail and the other does not. As of this writing, there has been no comprehensive statement issued about JLDF expenditures.

Everyone connected with the defense effort was paid except Paul and Karen Galloway, a young black lawyer with Paul's firm. Expenses included $33,000 for the fair jury project, $20,000 to a private investigation firm, fees for five of the seven attorneys who represented Little, travel expenses for defense fund political organizers, multiple court fees, and an average budget of $4,000 per week of the trial for accommodations for the defense team.

Under North Carolina law, corporations must file a financial report at the end of their fiscal year. This would require the JLDF to make public its accounting by September 30, 1975. If the fund dissolves itself before this date, it will not be legally accountable for its expenditures.

Although there has been no evidence of mismanagement of funds, as of this writing there has been no comprehensive accounting for JLDF monies, in spite of repeated requests made by the press.

Moving the Trial

The defense, meanwhile, organized the Joan Little Fair Jury Project which not only tried to have the indictment quashed, but also provided information to support the motion for a change of venue. The prosecution wanted the trial moved to an adjoining county; the defense wanted it moved to Raleigh, some 200 miles west of Washington, N.C.

To support the idea that Little could get a fairer trial in Raleigh, an extensive opinion survey was conducted in each of 23 counties surrounding Beaufort. A similar poll was taken in Orange County, similar in population to Raleigh. “In the interest of justice,” a change of venue was granted for the first time in the South, because “attitudes in one area were so prejudicial to a young, black female defendant that she could not get a fair trial in that area.”

Picking the Jury

At the start of the trial, jury selection took two weeks. The defense had a selection team that included a psychologist, an expert on body language, a psychic, and computer-calculated data on attitudes to determine if a potential juror’s attitude would be damaging or receptive to Little's case.

Both the defense and the prosecution had a specific number of preemptory challenges that could be used to ban any person from serving on the jury. The prosecution excluded blacks from the jury; the defense, whites. The final jury had 8 women, 3 of whom were black, and 4 men, equally split racially. The average age for whites was 29; for blacks, 57. Included were a woman tobacco worker, a vegetarian cook, a waitress, a housewife, a lawyer, a machinist, a retired farmer, and a grocer.

Although 8 said they were opposed to the death penalty, all said they would return a guilty verdict if warranted by the evidence. Three of the jurors thought Little was guilty. One black woman said, “In my opinion, she ain't guilty.” Another woman said Little would have "been a fool to stay down there (in Beaufort County) and be lynched.” One black juror said he thinks a woman has the right to kill a man who tries to rape her.

After the jury was selected, the defense withdrew its challenge to how jurors were picked in Raleigh. Although privately ecstatic over the jury, they were subdued and careful in public statements so, if Little were convicted, they could challenge the jury selection. "We think we have a pretty good jury,” was the official defense statement.

Cast of Characters

The state was represented by Beaufort County District Attorney William Griffin, Assistant Attorney General Leater Chalmers, who once represented the Ku Klux Klan, and John Wilderson, a private attorney hired by Alligood’s family as a special prosecutor. The court allowed him to remain as counsel for the state, even though he had previously represented Little on shoplifting charges. Griffin, the wiry, short-haired “underdog” type who headed the prosecution, consistently shrugged his shoulders, seeming generally confused with the defense requests and objections. He shook his head a lot. Wilkerson liked to babble with reporters, showing checks private citizens sent him as donations for his work.

Among defense team members were Jerry Paul, Karen Galloway, Morris Dees of the SPLC, Marvin Miller, an ACLU attorney from Virginia, and two private general practice attorneys.

Prosecution: Comedy of Errors

The prosecution opened its case with three days of testimony from eight witnesses who established that Alligood was indeed found in a jail cell dead, and had died of either suffocation or, more likely, a stab wound in the heart. Medical experts said that he had apparently engaged in sexual activity just before he died and that his ejaculation was not the result of a traumatic death.

The trial dragged on with a highlight being the ouster of Morris Dees by Judge Hamilton H. Hobgood. Dees is the self-made millionaire founder of the SPLC which made substantial contributions to Little's defense. Dees was kicked out and felony charges, later dropped, were brought against him for allegedly encouraging a witness to lie on the stand.

The witness, Beverley King, night radio dispatcher at the jail, gave different testimony under oath than she had previously given both prosecution and defense investigators. Originally, she stated it was unusual for Alligood to ask if all the deputies had gone home for the night unless he needed their assistance in some manner. The defense wanted this link to show that Alligood, when inquiring about the deputies, was making sure he would not be disturbed while raping Little.

King claimed that Dees wanted her to lie on the witness stand. Dees said he only insisted that she tell the truth. Dees’ subsequent dismissal seems to have been the major judicial blunder by the judge. Area newspapers, which tend to be conservative, and the N.C. Bar Association felt that neither the evidence nor Dees’ behavior warranted his dismissal. Despite appeals to have Dees reinstated, he was banned from the third floor of the Wake County Courthouse, scene of the trial, for its duration. According to the defense, his absence hurt them because Dees had been primarily responsible for interviewing witnesses and for courtroom questioning.

The prosecution, for its part, proved over and over, with its own witnesses, how Beaufort County deputies and state investigators destroyed, misplaced, or mishandled criminal evidence. For example, the icepick that was found clutched in Alligood’s hand wasn’t examined for fingerprints, but stuck in the back pocket of the “chief” investigator. Bloody sheets, clothes, and other evidence were all stuffed into a pillowcase. The cell was scrubbed down by jail officials before detectives could examine it. The quality of photographs of the dead man and of the scene were so poor that a criminologist testifying for the defense said he would fail any student of his who did such shoddy work.

The state tried to prove that Joan Little planned to escape by luring Alligood into her cell with an offer of sex, then killing him. According to the state, Little had access to and got the icepick that was used to clean drains and kept in the jailer's drawer while he was making a phone call that night. The state offered no proof for its theory. Even notes Little had made in crossword puzzle books that the state said proved she wanted to escape to be with the one she loved were criticized by the judge as being “much ado about nothing.” The state couldn't even prove if the handwriting in the books was Little's.

After the prosecution rested its case, the judge reduced the charge from first-degree murder to second-degree murder or voluntary manslaughter. The state hadn't presented any evidence of premeditation. No one was surprised. At that point in the long, drawn-out trial, if the judge had ruled to drop all charges, few would have been surprised.

The defense presented evidence that showed Little expected to be released on appeal from her breaking and entering charge soon and would not have wanted to attempt escape.

The most powerful testimony the defense presented was from Little herself. She told of defending herself after Alligood raped her, said she didn’t think at the time that she had really hurt him, and testified that she didn’t intend “for him to stay there and die.”

The often brutal cross-examination failed to alter her story. The court restricted questions about Little's lover at the women’s prison and also about venereal disease, saying they were “irrelevant.” She pleaded the fifth amendment, which protects against self-incrimination, when asked about the breaking and entering charge.

The defense rested its case; final arguments were heard. Paul told the jury that God had chosen the Joan Little case to end the domination of Southern black women by white men. The state told the jury that Little's flight proved her guilty and, quoting the Bible, said, “The wicked flee when no man pursueth, but the righteous stand as bold as a lion.”

The jury was out for 85 minutes before acquitting Little of all charges. The jury foreman said, “A woman has a right to defend herself.”

Women’s Prisoners Suit

Little also filed a class action suit in North Carolina asking the federal courts to protect all female inmates from sexual abuse by male attendants at the Beaufort County jail in Washington, N.C. Originally the suit asked for $1 million dollars in damages from the Alligood estate, but this part was dropped because the defense didn’t want the public to think that they were after money.

The suit points out that women inmates “are confined in such a manner that male trustees, jailers, and other male persons given free run of the jail expose their genitalia... and make vulgar and obscene remarks and gestures against the will of and beyond the control of the women inmates.”

Since the suit was filed, the Beaufort County jail has hired a matron and allegedly stopped using 24-hour T.V. monitors in women’s cells.

Racism, not Sexism

Support around the Joan Little trial mushroomed from that of a few civil rights workers and liberal attorneys in the South to be a national and even international chain of Joan Little Defense Committees.

Because Little is black, was in jail in the South, and was raped by a white jailer, her case has been portrayed as one dealing primarily with racism — not sexism. According to Karen Galloway, a defense attorney, the trial was about racism. Sexism was “intertwined,” but not an issue. Galloway also said that if a white woman had done the same thing, she would never have been indicted.

This analysis of the crime of rape seems to say that it was only Little's blackness that caused Alligood to go into her cell that night and rape her. The painfully obvious fact that she is a woman and was raped because she is a woman was not seen as part of Little’s situation.

Star Gazing

A parade of “stars” sat in the courtroom during the trial — some for a few hours, some for a day or two. Julian Bond came to Little's trial because he wanted to meet Little. He held a press conference and left the same day. Angela Davis, who came in support of Sister Joan, said the case was racist and weak and made statements to the press. Dick Gregory attended the trial. William Kunstler ducked into the courtroom long enough to be thrown into jail by the judge for contempt and still catch his return afternoon flight out of the city.

Black Panther members “directed” demonstrations outside the courthouse, issued orders to marchers, were ejected from the courtroom for swearing at the judge, and handed out leaflets saying “Save Our Women” (italics ours).

NBFO-NOW

Local feminist involvement at the trial was almost non-existent. During the trial, the Raleigh chapter of the National Black Feminist Organization (NBFO), which was only six weeks old, was part of a concerned group of women who held silent vigils outside the courthouse in support of Little and protesting the coverage local news media had given to them and to the trial.

Judith Parker, a member of NBFO, said they wanted people to know that NBFO is a viable organization.