ee ag 4

Four Years of Litigation  
Tallahassee  

After four years of litigation, the  
Feminist Women's Health Center (FWHC)  
of Tallahassee, Florida, has won the  
right to bring an anti-trust suit  
against six physicians. A trial  

date has been set for March 4.  

The women are charging the phys-  
icians with attempting to restrain  
and monopolize health care in the  
Tallahassee area. To bring the suit  
this far, the FWHC had to first es-  
tablish the doctors' liability under  
the Sherman Anti-trust Act. The  
defendants in the case include five  
obstetrician/gynecologists and  
also the Florida Board of Medical  
Examiners.  

The suit stems from an incident  
in June, 1975, when the center had  
been open just over a year. Linda  
Curtis, a founder of the center, gave  
an interview to a local newspaper in  
which she detailed the philosophy of  
the center. She emphasized the self-  
help nature of the facility, wherein  
information is freely shared so that  
women can make knowledgeable dec-  
isions related to their own health  
care. As Susan Griffin, one of the  
staffers at the center, has put it:  
"Ninety percent of what happens in a  
gynecologist's office women could do  
for themselves." Curtis also empha-  
sized the need to make health care  
available at a reasonable cost.  

According to Frosty Grey, the  
physicians in Tallahassee “...hadn't  
been particularly supportive of the  
clinic since it opened." However,  
the interview with Curtis widened the  
already existing gap by pointing up  
not only the difference in fees be-  
tween the clinic and private doctors,  
but also by accentuating the differ-  
ence in beliefs around knowledge  

1.U.D. Gives  

Over 1000 lawsuits are currently  
pending against the A.H. Robins  
Company of Richmond, Virginia, manu-  
facturers of the Dalkon Shield  
intrauterine contraceptive device.  

The suits charge that the Shield,  
once touted as a safe, effective  
alternative to birth control pills,  
was neither.  

Additionally, 800 cases have been  
settled out of court and the company  
had on file another 180 written com-  
plaints about the Shield.  

Many of the suits stem from what  
court documents called a "wicking  
action" of the string which trails  
from the IUD into the vagina to tell  
the wearer the device is still in  
place. Medical experts say this  
string became a highway for bacteria  
to enter into the uterus, resulting  
in inflammations which could cause  
sterility and death.  

The device also had a habit of  
puncturing the uterus and floating  
around in the abdomen with obvious  
negative health effects.  

To date the largest amount awarded  
a woman injured by a Dalkon Shield  
went to Carrie Palmer of Denver.  
Palmer was awarded $600,000 in com-  
pensatory damages and $6.2 million  
in punitive damages against the com-  
pany, as the result of an emergency  
hysterectomy she had to undergo in  
1973 when she became pregnant and  
ultimately miscarried while wearing  
a Shield.  

The Dalkon Shield went on the  
market in 1971, and within months  
reports of its adverse effects were  
reaching the manufacturers, A.H.  
Robins. In spite of these reports,  
or perhaps because of them, sometime  
in 1972 Robins decided to expand its  

exports: the company offered the  
Office of Population within the Agency  
for International Development the  
shield in bulk packages, unsterilized,  
at 48% off. AID accepted and began  
shipping boxes with 1000 shields  
but only 100 inserters (adding to the  
risk of infection) to 42 countries  
including Ethiopia, Malaysia, and  
Paraguay.  

By 1974 there were reports of 17  
deaths in the United States clearly  
attributable to the Dalkon Shield.  
Reports of pelvic inflammatory disease,  
blood poisoning, pregnancies resulting  
in spontaneous abortions, tubal preg-  
nancies, and perforations of the ut-  
erus resulted in a moratorium fin-  
ally being declared on the use of  
the Shield in 1974. With the Shield  
considered too dangerous for domes-  
tic use, AID issued an international  

recall, but there are no statistics  
available on the carnage that occurred  
here and internationally between 1972,  
when Robins should have known the  
Shield was dangerous, and 1974 when  
it was withdrawn from the market.  

According to W. Gage, a lawyer  
for two Detroit women who are suing  
Robins, when the adverse publicity  
on the Shield began to grow, Robins  
conducted a follow-up study. The  
results indicated that the proclaimed  
99 percent contraception rate was  
overstated, but Robins continued to  
distribute information boasting of  
its effectiveness, Gage said.  

-Science for the People  

Articles in magazines such as  
Good Housekeeping were presented as  
independent informational pieces but  
actually were produced by Robins,  
the lawyer added.  

"It would appear to be just a news  
article about a new product,” says  
Gage. "We consider that unethical  
promotion.  

The Dalkon Shield was developed  
in 1968 by Dr. Hugh Davis of Johns  
Hopkins University in Baltimore.  
Robins paid Davis $750,000 for man-  
ufacturing rights, plus 10 percent  
royalties and a $20,000 consultant's  
fee, according to Gage.  

A spokesperson for Robins said  
that Robins discontinued production  
of the Dalkon Shield in 1975 even  
though "we had FDA approval to go  
back to market with it...We felt that  
with the adverse publicity and pro-  
blems the product had, it was not  
viable to go back to market."  

(Some of the information in the  
above article was taken from Mother  
Jones.)  

According to Grey,  

FWHC Wins Right to Sue  

Grey, however, points out some pos-  
itive aspects of the ordeal. She  
feels that these instances have a  
tendency to unite the FWHCs nation-  
wide and to provide a forum through  
which their philosophy can be relayed  
to the general public.  

Some women involved in the women's  
health movement see a pattern of har-  
assment as other FWHCs are attacked  
in various ways. In Chico, Califor-  
nia, the FWHC suffers a problem simi-  
lar to Tallahassee, with physicians  
refusing to work at the clinic. In  
other instances, women active in the  
self-help movement have been arrested  
on trumped-up charges (see related  
story this page). Some clinics have  
had to submit to restrictive reg-  
ulations which are selectively en-  

forced.  

Carol Downer Jailed  

Carol Downer, a founder of the  
Los Angeles Feminist Women's Health  
Center, was jailed in Tallahassee,  
Fla., January 3, 1980, because a  
judge angered by her trip to Tehran  
to show support for returning the  
deposed shah to Iran, revoked her  
bail and ordered her to serve a 60-  
day trespassing sentence unrelated  
to the overseas journey.  

She and several other women had  
been convicted of trespassing after  
she and about 30 others entered the  
Tallahassee Memorial Regional Medi-  
cal Center in March, 1977, for a  
consumer inspection of the maternity  
ward and a nursery. They said they  
believed pregnant women were rec-  
eiving inadequate care at the hos-  
pital.  

Downer had been free on bail  
pending appeal of the conviction.  
Leon County Judge Charles McClure  
revoked her bail after learning  
from stories in a Tallahassee news-  
paper that she had been outside the  
country.  

McClure refused to say whether  
he disagreed with Downer's reasons  
for going to Iran.  

Downer checked into the jail  
Friday after flying to Atlanta from  
California and driving all night to  
Tallahassee.  

Florida didn't have the power to  
extradite her from California for a  
misdemeanor but, she said: "I don't  
really care to be a fugitive from  
justice. I always hoped to be able  
to move freely in the United States,  
including Florida."  

Behind bars, Downer said in a  
telephone interview that she met  
with government officials during her  

(reprinted from Gay Community News.)  

“campaign against pornography  
may draw upon  
racist and classist attitudes.”  

(This is a copy of the Leaflet referred to in the Letter from Marjory Ackerman,  
Quinn Bevan, Cathy Cockrell, Eileen Kane, Doris Lunden, and Marty Pottenger  
printed on page 17 of this issue. The Leaflet has been edited for length.)  

To some feminists, Times Square may represent pornography. But to most  
people, Times Square is a symbol of immorality and to them, prostitutes,  
lesbians and gay men are “immoral,” therefore pornographic. To rich investors  
Times Square represents a valuable piece of real estate.  

We fear the march on Times Square (See page 7 of the November 1979 issue of  
Big Mama Rag) represents an attempt to channel feminist energy away from the  
grassroots feminist efforts (such as 'Take Back the Night' marches) into a  
campaign against “immorality." That can only serve the interests of rich  
investors.  

Women Against Pornography has received $10,000 from the League of NY  
Theatre Owners and Producers and $2,500 from New York Off-Track Betting. The  
42nd Street Redevelopment Corporation, at the request of the Midtown Enforce-  
ment Agency (part of the New York Police Dept.) has provided free office  
space. A substantial portion of WAP's funding comes from such sources.  
Why are these groups contributing to Women Against Pornography?  

In an article in the New York Times, January 31, 1979 entitled "A New Plan  
for W. 42nd St." it was revealed that “a group of planners... working on a  
$500,000 grant from the Ford Foundation, has come up with a plan to take over  
the entire block, condemn it as a city urban renewal project and erect an  
elaborate structure that would contain theatres, studios, exhibitions and  
multi-media displays." The article goes on to quote City Planning Commission  
Chairman, Robert F. Wagner, Jr., who described the $175 million project as  
something that "could spark one of the most dramatic changes in land-use in  
Manhattan in this century.”  

"Our means and ends may not be exactly the same," said Cal Weisbrod, director  
of the Midtown Enforcement Agency, "but the issue of pornography is obviously  
a matter of concern to both the city and feminists." He said that the city  
needed all the help it could get.  

It's obvious that the city plans a "clean up” of Times Square. We fear a  
march on Times Square will lay the groundwork for sweep arrests of street  
prostitutes in the area. The last time an attempt was made to “clean up"  
Times Square (at the time of the 1976 Democratic Convention) an anti-loiter-  
ing law was passed allowing police to make sweep arrests of prostitutes in the  
Midtown Area. Feminists showed solidarity with the prostitutes by loitering  
in the Midtown area and circulating petitions against this unconstitutional  
law. This time feminists appear to be calling for the clean up.  

Focusing on Times Square may also contribute to the oppression of Third  
World people. Because many women and men of color work in the Times Square  
area, along with other poor people, a march on Times Square perpetuates racist  
stereotypes which see all women of color as “immoral“ and all men of color as  
greater sexual threats than white men. In this way, attention is deflected  
from rich white men who are the primary perpetrators and benefactors of  
violence against women. Feminists should be aware that some of the enthusiasm  
generated by their campaign against pornography may draw upon racist and  
classist attitudes. MORE ON PAGE 18  

Why  

/  
|  
|  
j  
|  
|  
|  
|  
‘  

|  

|  

4  

|