Electronics Companies Capture New Workers

The Exploitation Of S.E. Asian

Electronics is the fastest growing
industry in South East Asia. Virtually
all the major electronics companies
have sought cheap labor to do the
repetitive, semi-skilled, labor
intensive part of their operations.
They have found that cheap labor in
Asia, where women assemble the tiny
components of products ranging from
digital watches to multi-million
dollar computers.

For the women on the production
lines, wages are often below subsistence,
even though these women are expected to
contribute substantially to their families.
For the first six months they are called
apprentices, and paid less even than the
legal minimum wage, even though they learn
the job in a week, or at most two.

Instead of paying proper wages,
companies use bonuses as a means of
putting pressure on their workers.

To get the bonus, a worker must have
perfect attendance and punctuality,
and fulfill all the production quotas.
A single absence in a month, or any
breaking of company rules, means loss
of the bonus.

In Malaysia, where wages and living
standards are better than in most of
these countries, electronics workers
live in boarding houses. Four to
eight women usually share a room. In
a typical hostel, each individual
possesses a bunk space and a two-foot
cube of cupboard. The kitchen, outfitted
with 19 kerosene stoves, is shared by
50 women.

-LNS

A photograph of the inside of an
electronics factory is striking
for its sense of immaculate order:
a spacious well-lit room with rows
of women dressed in white leaning
over gleaming microscopes. A photo-
graph does not show the sickening
smell of the chemicals, or how
looking through a microscope quickly
brings on dizziness and headaches.

"Hey, Grandma!” Young women
greet their slightly older co-
workers at the factory gate. In
Hong Kong most workers over 25 are
called Grandma because they wear
glasses. In 1975, just three years
after the first electronics plant
opened in Penang, nearly half of
the workers complained of deteriorating
eyesight and frequent headaches - the
result of microscope work. Most workers
suffer at one time or another from
conjunctivitis, a painful eye infection.

"After some time we can't see
very clearly; it's blurred. We'll
be looking into the microscope for
over seven hours. We have to work
with these gold wires, very thin
like your hair." Virtually anyone
who stays on the job more than
three years must eventually wear
glasses. Companies usually refuse
to pay for the glasses - although
they require 20-20 vision when
they hire.

Caustic chemicals, all poisonous
and many suspected of causing cancer,
sit in open containers beside
many workers. They include TCE,
xylene, and MEK, all dangerous
acids and solvents used extensively
through the production process.
Workers who must dip components
in acids and rub them with the solvents
frequently have serious burns, nausea,
sometimes even losing fingers. It will
be ten or fifteen years before the
possible cancer-causing effects of these
chemicals will begin to show.

On pay day the factories arrange for
sellers of cosmetics and costume jewelry
to come in during lunch break. Clothing
salesmen are not allowed in, because
try-ons would take more than the half-hour
lunch break. Whatever we do, we don't
disrupt production time," explained a
personnel manager.

A great deal of effort has been
put into developing a whole battery
of methods to manipulate and control
the women workers. These methods
combine rigid discipline with sophisticated
human relations techniques to prevent
unionization, because it would raise
wage costs and "rigidify" the size of
the workforce. The industry wants to
retain its ability to hire and fire at will.

The arrival of the electronics
industry has dramatically expanded
opportunities for young women to
play independent economic roles.
While the families welcome their
daughter's income, it is often difficult
for them to accept her greater independence.
This tension becomes acute when she flaunts
the alien lifestyle so actively encouraged
inside the factory.

The Western manners and consumption
patterns often make it difficult for
women workers to fit into their communities:
when their period of employment in the
electronics factory ends, many will find
it difficult either to get another job
or to marry. Many have found no alternative
but prostitution to support themselves.

Despite all the obstacles, the
lack of unions, the divisive management
techniques, resistance is beginning.
Regular reports of protests, sit-ins
and work stoppages come in. Not for
very much longer will personnel managers
be able to say: "We hire girls because they
have less energy, are more disciplined,
and are easier to control."

(This article is reprinted from
Upstream, a Canadian feminist publication.)

INDONESIA (2)

Electronics assembly plants with parent
companies in Santa Clara County, Calif.