bmr:

where we're at

First month after vacation, and we're back, somewhat re-
freshed, and now a collective of five. Susanna Smith, the
newest member is not by any means new to the project, having
been a member back in '78, and a supporter more recently
since October, ‘81. We are thrilled that Susanna and Deb are
on the collective. We have changed our meeting night to Sun-
day since Deb is working nights, and hope that will work out
for everybody. It is great to have five women, though we
are still earnestly missing Sue.

We would like to briefly comment on our last issue, as it
was a difficult month. We are feminists who are against im-
perialism. How do we incorporate the concept of anti-imperial-
ism into feminism? Attending the National Conference Against
Repression collectively and covering it in BMR was one way
we've started to integrate these new political ideas. But it
is not clear cut -- we know that there are political differ-
ences between BMR and the politics of the National Liberation
Movements expressed at the conference. We ended up having a
very rough production, what with millions of meetings around
the conference coverage. We are curious to hear from women
how BMR conference coverage and other discussion of the po-
litics of National Liberation Movements, are or are not work-
ing for you.

The supporters group is working on a new local BMR fundrais-
er. They have organized a raffle, have lined up three great
prizes, and are selling tickets at $1 each. The goal is to
catch up our rent payments, which are three months behind.
Also, concerning this topic, please notice and if possible,
respond to the sustainer letter enclosed in your paper this
month. We are in a consistently desperate financial state,
and really need some ongoing support from those of you who
can do it. Last issue (Aug.) many of you probably noticed
that your BMR arrived late. We simply were that broke that
we couldn't mail out the paper, so it sat here all sorted
and bundled, until enough money came in to cover the P.O.

So that's the way it is...

The dialectic lives...

Us.

oops

Last month, included in
the coverage of the Confer-
ence Against Repression was
a response by Kim Womantree,
p.20. The article was drastic-
ally edited, and we should
have stated that. If you are
interested in receiving a co-
py of the article in its en-
tirety, write us and send a
SASE.

Last month's (Aug.) article on the RTD strike read
(col. 1, p. 3) - wages--
Union proposal is for 1st
year - complete freeze, 2nd
and 3rd years - cost of liv-
ing and wage increase up to
12% by the end of the 3rd
year. This was meant as 5-7%
increase in the 2nd year and
5-7% in the 3rd year.

inside BMR:

International
Grenada..........++--5,68&7
Panama.............<--a)<ln ei neice
US ee ort one ee ee

Culture
Book Review......-+++«se15

MOFerOnws deta, «ep Opidiaee

CALGRART 6: Wisis's ¢ 6's:4lb eps wilde ee

CTAasstes/AAS: . + <..085 seueenes

RESOME CEH ss se + lee ieiaenaeete alee

Where We're At... ...s. eee ek

National
Peltier/Whiterock........3
BRGY CHO da eraas igieta-Srace w 5a gece
America Held Hostage.....3
Michigan Festival....10-13
Drug Death scmis «xscscs ss A
CLARA AMIE Y:. > yiezs buses oa ONL

CERO LS in oa pw BN idcee Jae SAT

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.
funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA
and is available on microfilm (Vol.1#1 Oct. 1972 through
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is index-
ed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010.