Living in the

Billboard

Linda Gryczan, Olga Nada, Rose Mesec

Last January, three Seattle women were arrested for throwing paint on a sexist billboard (see BMR March, 1989). The advertisement so defaced pictured a chorus line of scantily clad women, smiling and kicking a leg to sell entertainment at Harrah's Club in Reno, Nevada. Although two of the women arrested faced a maximum penalty of a $500 fine and 6 months in jail (the third woman was released for lack of evidence), all charges were dropped by Ackerly Communication, the nationwide agency and the owners of the offensive billboard.

This was not accomplished easily. The month and a half following the arrest was filled with writing a report, letters and flyers, endless phone calls, conferring with attorneys, preparing for radio shows, and attending meetings and events several times a week. The women arrested would like to share their experience with publicity, the court system, and security to help other women through similar encounters with the law. Their story follows.

Publicity

Our original decision was to not deal with the straight press, but upon leaving jail, they contacted us and we were faced with condescending and insulting articles in Seattle's major newspapers. (Some titles read: "Meaningful Protest or Lesbian Prank?," "'Painted' Ladies Jailed After Sign Defaced," and "'Sexist' Billboard Finally Too Much For Olga.") At one point, one of us granted an interview to a local columnist who then wrote a highly stereotypic article about lesbianism. Attempts for less biased coverage were met with bureaucratic buck passing until after the charges had been dropped; one of us approached the papers, press release in hand, demanding a woman reporter.

Of course, the most helpful publicity was within the feminist movement. We had not planned on getting caught, but since we did, we used the situation as an opportunity to gain support and to encourage further action. We wrote flyers explaining the case, listing other sexist displays in Seattle (but applicable nationally—"Windows," tire-stores, etc.), and made connections with advertising, violence, and other forms of oppression against women. This information was taken to meetings and events within the feminist community and broadcast on feminist radio shows. We encouraged people to write letters to the advertisers, the billboard company, the prosecutor, the judge, and local newspapers to demand that charges be dropped. We also xeroxed sample letters for people to sign when time and energy were not available for an original letter.

The Legal System

Attorneys, prosecutors, and judges are part of a self-proclaimed professional elite in a system designed to place power in their hands. Knowing this, one of the women wanted to represent herself, with legal advice on the side, realizing that no attorney could defend her politics as well as herself. In interviews with woman attorneys (all charging $40 per hour), we found out not only that we could not afford them, but that all of them discouraged self-representation as well. (We feel that "feminist" attorneys function under constant conflict between their feminist beliefs and the patriarchal law system; as their fees reflect (no sliding-scale or exchange of skills were offered by these attorneys) their alliance to the legal system may prevail.

We applied for a public defender. First, they assigned us a male attorney (although we specifically asked for women public defenders) who was so blatantly sexist that we refused to work with him. After about two weeks of bureaucratic shuffling around, finally, we were assigned a female public defender.

The last five weeks were especially trying. The energy output of the last five weeks was taking its toll and we were concerned that our refusal to pay fines or restitution would result in jail time. At this point, we prepared a special report, connecting sexist advertising with violence against women. Our intention was to at least make people aware of their prejudices. This report was delivered or mailed to the prosecutor.

In the meantime, we were checking out the possibility of getting off on the pre-trial diversion program, but a male counselor told us that the amount of damages was too high, well over $200, and Ackerly wanted to persist with charges in court. When we met with our public defender, she said that she supported our cause and offered us to co-defend ourselves together with her. Moreover, she agreed with us that the number one priority was to have all charges dropped, after we informed her about two other cases where charges were dropped (the Madison Billboard Brigade and the Bluebird Five (see BMR February, 1978)).

Security

It is important that others learn from our mistakes around security. Some information that needs to be published should be done anonymously.

We received criticism for suggesting better ways to deface a billboard on a flyer that listed the phone number of a local service organization—this could have affected their funding. (Ed. note: this kind of timidity on the part of funded organizations is one of the primary problems of funding.)

Watch out for revenge—a woman who was our main support system in New York City mailed some letters using envelopes with her employer's address. Although she crossed out the employer's address and wrote her own, Harrah's Club called her boss stating that only lesbians deface billboards (she is just in the process of coming out), and in two weeks, she lost her job.

Also, each time our names appeared in the newspapers, we received a series of obscene phone calls.

Conclusion

It's important that you have all information that concerns your case, and that you make the decisions. Blatant classism/professionalism is more the rule than the exception in the court system, combined with all the other forms of oppression.

The last few days before the trial made a difference. The judge, the prosecutor, our attorney, Ackerly, Harrah's, and we believe it had an effect on subsequent developments.

Our attorney made a strategic decision herself not to contact people involved in the cases where charges had been dropped (to learn about strategies that have already been tried and found effective). Instead, she immediately began to communicate with the prosecutor, who refused to drop the charges (for reasons our attorney insisted were confidential).

For the next ten days, our attorney refused to let us know what she was negotiating for, and about the decisions she had made for us. Three days before the trial and 24 hours before the charges were dropped, our attorney insisted that we accept a deal with the prosecutor—one year on probation and 50 hours of community service, which she considered a victory.

At this point, the billboard company still had not been approached by our lawyer. At our insistence, she arranged a last-minute meeting with them, where they agreed to drop all the charges. The company is concerned with its image in the community (they are fighting environmentalists, city government, as well as the feminist movement) and they did not want any more bad publicity. (A follow-up meeting is scheduled on April 9th with Ackerly representatives, us, members of the feminist community, our attorney, and a couple of female reporters—the last two invited themselves—to demand that all sexist advertisements on billboards be removed.)

Their attitude shows that national pressure has had an effect.

We would like to thank all those who have helped us since our arrest with verbal support, phone calls, letters, and money (we spent it on mailings and printing). Your support has made a difference. But our work is far from finished. There are many avenues of action and we strongly urge all people to continue the fight against sexist and violent depictions of women in the media.