14° -
Credit Union. es From Page 6

On to revive the want S m.

To educate women to reject capital-
ist principles is to ask them to
fail by those standards, reinforcing
the widespread loser self-image
traditionally internalized by women.
Thus the “cynicism about women"
mentioned in Principle Eight, quoted
earlier.

The CFFCU represents a marked
departure from previous financial
institutions, in that its organizers
are determined to hold their polit-
ics as their priority, and to make
them define the service they provide,
rather than allowing the service to
define the politics.

Somewhere in there, though, the
question of survival must be con-
fronted. Although the organizers
originally intended to challenge
biased federal regulations in the
practice of their policies, they
have been forced to shelve such
plans, at least for the time being.

During its first year of operation,
the credit union must concentrate its
energies on membership drives,
extending its field of membership
and increasing its assets so that as
many women as possible will benefit
from its existence.

Political purism has proved, as it
so often does, unworkable in terms
of providing a federally regulated
service, and one where much of the
organizers' energies must necessar-
ily be channeled into simply keeping
the project together and growing.

What the CFFCU is doing, then, is
pushing its charter to the limit as
far as striving for radical feminism
in practice.

Fighting Discrimination

The group is committed to provid-
ing services to the credit union's
members "without regard to race,
creed, color, national origin, sex,
marital status, sexual preference,
ancestry, or handicap," and are
attempting to overcome such barriers
through their policies.

The issue of age discrimination,
mentioned elsewhere in the Statement
of Principles and Goals, is a sticky
one for credit unions.

Loan protection insurance is
issued by CUNA Mutual, an insurance
company for credit unions. Most
credit unions take out blanket insur-
ance policies which insure loans made
to people no older than 65, since
the credit union must pay higher
rates per loan made if they wish to
insure older borrowers.

CUNA Mutual will not insure any
loan made to someone over 75, the
philosophy being that the borrower
might die, thus defaulting on her
loan.

The CFFCU has taken out a policy
insuring its borrowers up to the age
of 75 - this means that they must pay
a higher premium on every loan made,
regardless of the borrower's age.

It will make loans to people over 75,
taking the risk of default upon
itself.

But another contradiction is felt
here: the insurance industry is
motivated by profit, and the CFFCU,
like all credit unions, is dependent
on insurance companies to protect
itself as a business.

Feminist Economic Analysts

The CFFCU is concerned that minor-
ity women should have access to its
services. The organizers are looking
for a Spanish-speaking staff member,
and encourage minority groups such
as the National Black Feminist Org-
anization and Hembra to join their
field of membership. Board and
committee members are also soliciting
speaking engagements so as to spread
information about the credit union
as widely as possible.

The credit union plans to establish
a Feminist Fund, whereby women may
make tax-exempt donations for women's
use. This money will be distributed
in the form of grants or emergency
no-interest loans. The organizers
are looking for women who will commit
themselves to administering this
fund.

In implementing their policies and
through the medium of study groups,
some of the credit union's directors
plan to work on developing a feminist
economic analysis. Ideally, the
credit union would serve as a vehicle
to implement and evaluate such an
analysis, as far as is possible given
the stringent regulations limiting
its operation.

The group as a whole is working on
a series of papers researching
various aspects of credit union
history and approach, which they
expect to publish in a national
feminist journal.

The question of accountability is
an important one to the credit union.
The group holds regular criticism/
self-criticism sessions at Board
meetings, and will have monthly open
community meetings. Board meetings
are open to members who notify the
Board of their intention to attend
24 hours beforehand.

Board decisions are reached by
consensus wherever possible, and
otherwise by majority vote. When
there is dissent, the women holding
a minority opinion are given an
opportunity to state their case more
clearly, either at the next meeting
or later during the same meeting, if
an immediate decision is necessary.

To give substance to the organ-
izers' desire to communicate fully
with other feminist credit unions
and, hopefully, to act as a model
for operating a truly feminist
financial institution, the CFFCU
subscribes to the Feminist Economic
Alliance, and will strive to attend
national feminist economic confer-
ences organized by the Alliance.

Political Connections

The CFFCU is the first feminist
credit union to confront the contra-
dictions in operating both within a
capitalist structure and within an
anti-capitalist movement. Its
major obstacle, right now, is the
tension created by the necessity of
making certain compromises in order
to ensure survival and growth.

A question often asked of the
organizers is: “But how do you ex-
pect to attract savers if you don't
offer competitive dividends?" Their
answer is that feminists must begin
to understand the ways in which
capitalism divides women from each
other, must begin to make class
connections.

Very few credit unions are able to
offer dividends which are competit-
ive with the interest paid by savings
banks. The CFFCU, rather than trying
to do so, prefers to challenge its
members to put their money where
their movement is.

NCUA regulations forbid the credit
union to lend more than 10% of its
assets in any single loan. At
present, it has $10,000 in savings.
This means that no loan may exceed
$1,000, and the number and size of
all loans granted is accordingly
limited. Unless women save their
money in the credit union, there
will be none available for loans.

CFFCU vs. Feminist Businesses

In assessing the impact of the
CFFCU on the community, and in the
light of recent dialogue, it is
important to understand how it
differs from a feminist business.

One major difference is that none
of the organizers receive any profit
from the operation of the credit
union. In fact, it is illegal for
any member of the Board to receive a
salary for her work as a director.
Credit unions are structured so that
all profits are turned back to the
members.

Another difference is that no com-
modity is being offered; it isn't
necessary to convince consumers that
they need whatever is being sold.
The need exists, and the credit union
functions to meet it.

And the Future

Thus the CFFCU is in the position
of being bound to a system, of
manipulating a structure which it
exists to accommodate. At its best,
it can challenge contradictions, as
the CFFCU is trying to do, and can
educate its members to understand the
economic structure, and thus avoid
being oppressed even more by it
through ignorance.

At its worst, it can serve to
accommodate big business, perpetuate
class and other inequities which
flourish under capitalism, and ins-
pire women to support economic
exploitation.

One obvious setback to the vision
of the CFFCU's organizers is the
fact that they may be elected out
next year, when the members vote for
a new Board of Directors.

Hopefully, those women who join will
do so because they endorse the present
policies, and will elect to continue
the experiment.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 8

Struggle...

From Page 5

Children, as well as adults, should be able to decide between alternative
living arrangements and such alternatives be made available to them. Adults
may choose their roommates. Often the only alternative that there has been
or that children knew of was institutionalization. Leaving home without par-
ental consent is a crime for juveniles. The possibility of not living with
their children should be open to parents also, without the guilt usually
associated with “giving them up."

With the present breakdown of the family in the United States some alter-
native situations are developing, but more on a mandatory level than a vol-
untary one. With the high divorce rate many children have the possibility of
two homes, but both homes are not always accessible to them. The emergence
of group homes to deal with “problem children" is a possible alternative
which at the present time is not open as a choice but as a sentence.

What Schools Teach

Besides the family, the major institution of control of children is the
school. Children are forced to go to school no matter how irrelevant or in-
sufficient it might be. Schools segregate them from the processes of society,
into narrow age ranges which limit their sources of information a great deal.
The content of most educational programs includes nice, patriotic (racist)
interpretations of history, and competitive sports (training for
nationalism). The structure is authoritarian and competitive, definitely not
conducive to independent thinking and individual social responsibility.
While some children are privileged to go to schools where independence is
encouraged more, even these children are ultimately forced by law to attend,
thus making a mockery of the name “free school."

Legally, children are subject to the juvenile court system, which was
designed to protect them, but as with many protective measures, it may be
more unfair to them than the adult system. Juvenile courts are a strange
mixture of courts and a social work agency. They base their decisions on
"the best interests of the child" rather than on legal facts or justice.
Through this "protective system" children can be held in jail for actions
not considered a crime if an adult does them. It is no small problem. One
out of every nine children will go through this system before the age of
eighteen.

Another area of oppression for children is in the area of sexuality.
Children should certainly not be taken advantage of sexually anymore than
anyone else should be. They should also have access to information and as
much sexual freedom as adults. By keeping children ignorant about sex, depen-
dent on adults, and encouraging them to accept affection indiscriminately,
adults are placing children in a much more vulnerable position than if they
were independent and knew what was going on.

To admit children into the decision-making processes that affect their
lives and somehow grant them the right to earn their economic necessities
would certainly be more conducive to the development of responsible, self-
confident human beings. However, an economy inflexible to the demands of
employment for all adults certainly will not suddenly amend its operations
to include children. Child labor laws, which are necessary to protect chil-
dren from exploitation by private enterprise, make them economically depen-
dent on and subject to parents or the state.

Children's Liberation: From Privilege to Necessity

The call for children's liberation is definitely a product of a priv-
ileged way of life. For most of the world, finding a way for children to es-
cape death and the early warping of body and mind from malnutrition is
much more relevant. Changing insufficient nutritional habits and the dis-
tribution of food is an essential part of children's liberation.

Though a product of privilege, the establishment of children’s rights is
an important step in building and maintaining an egalitarian society. As long
as children grow up as the property of their parents, bound by custom and
economic necessity to follow the dictates of others, social justice and
individual political responsibility cannot reign. Children taught to do what
they are told, sit quietly in rows, and to interpret poetry (and history) the
way the teacher does, will not suddenly become critical thinkers upon reaching
the age of maturity.

One of the greatest difficulties in working for children's liberation
is that adults are oppressed as well. Just as women being allowed equality
in an exploitive job market does not constitute liberation, children's lib-
eration requires that conditions for all people are improved to such a level
that no one questions that children could be equal members without harm to
themselves or the community.

Anti-ERA Forces Curtail
Ratification Efforts

Stop ERA forces, led by Phyllis
Schlafly have succeeded in curtail-
ing efforts by the National Commis-
sion on the Observance of Interna-
tional Women's Year to aid ratifica-
tion efforts of the Equal Rights
Amendment. The groups filed suit on
the grounds that lobbying by a gov-
ernment-funded commission is a vio-
lation of federal law and U.S. Dis-
trict Court Judge Robert D. Morgan
agreed.

The Commission had previously sta-
ted in a unanimous resolution that
"as our main commitment to the ob-
servance of IWY we pledge to do all
in our capacity to see that the ERA
is ratified at the earliest possible
moment."

While 34 states have already ap-
proved its inclusion as an amendment
to the U.S. Constitution, four more
states must add theirs also by 1979
before it will be final. Feminists
working for ratification must not
only spend time educating people as
to the benefits of the ERA but also
counter the anti-ERA propaganda by
such groups as Stop ERA which are
funded by vested interests who stand
to lose money by having to conform
to the provisions of equality for
women.

Not only do the Stop ERA forces
hope to restrict lobbying by the Na-
tional Commission, but also seek to
include ERA opponents on it. The
hearing on that issue was not set.

Luxemburg...

From Page 8

Her health was ruined, her hair had turned
grey and her days were numbered.

She continued to work feverishly
throughout the November Revolution in
Germany and was an important contrib-
utor to the Rote Fahne (Red Flag), a
communist newspaper that had taken
over a previous nationalist mass-
circulation newspaper. But as events
moved inexorably on, the noose grad-
ually closed around her and her com-
rades. Counter-revolutionary networks
were closing in and there was a price
on Rosa Luxemburg's head.

On May 31, 1919, her body was
washed up from the Landwehr Canal.
Months earlier, on January 15, she
had been taken prisoner and interro-
gated. Her skull had been smashed by
a rifle butt, her almost lifeless
body flung into a car and later un-
ceremoniously dispatched with a shot
in the head. Two months later, Leo
Jorgiches, her friend and fellow
revolutionary, was shot to death
"while trying to escape."

Whatever the merits of her theory
and practice, Rosa Luxemburg was, in
addition to being a forceful, coura-
geous and dedicated revolutionary, a
kind and sensitive woman. In part,
she was typical of those women rev-
olutionaries who become leaders in
their own right in that she abhorred
senseless violence, and preferred con-
crete action to empty intellectual-
ism.

Her motto reflects much of what
she stood for, her intense involve-
ment and love of conflict: “Man must
always live like a candle burning at
both ends."