19

Women’s Music Festival - Talent, Variety, and Sharing

Deb Taylor

The Sixth Annual National Women's
Music Festival in Champaign-Urbana,
Illinois was held from June 29 - July 3 on
the University of Illinois campus.
As usual, it was a stimulating, ener-
gizing and enriching experience for
the approximately 300 women attend-
ing (my guess). The performers were
of exceptional quality, variety and
talent. It was my first festival, but
I was amazed at how well organized
the festival was.

Some of the performers were fami-
liar "stars" on the Women's music
circuit: Holly Near, Alive, Berkeley
Women's Music Collective, Izquierda,
Kay Gardner and Baba Yaga. These wo-
men alone would have been worth the
price of admission ($6 per concert
or $30 for the entire five days).

It was wonderful to hear these
women in a good acoustical concert
hall with elaborate sound equip-
ment and excellent technicians from
all over the country. They stayed
there for the whole five days giv-
ing workshops on technique and skills
they have acquired over the years. I
felt a little like a groupie when I
danced with Holly Near at the local
gay disco bar one night.

But the festival is not about star
power. In fact, the organization
of the festival is consciously poli-
tical: turning stars into ordinary
women who you brush shoulders with
in workshops; introducing a variety
of third world perspectives in every
concert, and allowing the audience
to participate with an open mic.

The workshops are a unique feature
of the Champaign festival. They give
the musicians a chance to learn
from each other. Women who are just
beginning in music can ask questions
and get turned on to different
instruments and ideas. Workshops
provide space for interaction of all
levels of experience around music and
politics. (My only criticism is
that there were more musical work-
shops than political ones.)

At the festival there were many
third world performers, many of whom
I had never heard before. Jane Sapp
sang her own material in a rich,
powerful voice that burned
into your heart and soared above
the audience with intensity. Suni
Paz sang beautiful, haunting songs
that spoke of her native Chile and
Argentina; she played classical gui-
tar and was accompanied by a cellist,
thus giving the music a rich blend
of musical traditions.

Jane Sapp at the piano
photo by Lisa Gould

The festival was dedicated to
Elizabeth Cotten, the famous Black
songwriter from North Carolina, aged
86, who actually came to the festival
and performed. A film about her life
was shown before she played. Cotten
is best known for her song "Freight
Train," for which she never received
royalties, and which she wrote at
the age of 12. A self-taught musician,
she was discouraged from playing
her own blues and told to disguise
her music. At the age of 15 she mar-
ried and gave up her music for the
next 50 years while she raised her
family. Finally, in her 60's, while
serving as a house cleaner for the
Pete Seeger family, she was redis-
covered as a musician and the rest is
history.

There were many women performers
from all over the country, and rep-
resenting a broad range of talent
and style. Therese Edel from
Cincinnati, a very personable les-
bian who sang chilling lyrics (my
favorite was "Survivor" about batter-
ed women); Robin Flower, who played
violin in her own bluegrass style;
Marie Rhine, who stunned the audience
with her fiddling of old Appalachian,
Scottish and Irish tunes, and on and
on. Interested women should write
to festival organizers for the pro-
gram or the taped highlights of the
festival.

Kay Gardner and other dedicated
classical musicians from all over
the country put together a fantas-
tic concert with only three days to
practice together. There were also
several choirs and choruses ranging
in style from modern feminist tunes
to Renaissance pieces written by
unknown women composers. These were
open to participation by all
at the festival.

The variety of music was overwhelm-
ing: This festival opened the
world of music through, by and for
women.

I have a few criticisms of the
festival. I wished that there had
been more space for musicians to jam
together, where less known musicians
could perform and play with other
women. There was too clear a demarca-
tion between performer and audience.
Beginning musicians needed a chance
to perform as well. Sometimes I got
tired of being a member of the audi-
ence and wanted to express myself,
and so I liked the square dancing and
Saturday night dancing to Baba Yaga
and Breakwater where I could let go
of some of my energy.

I also disliked Robin Tyler's imi-
tation of Johnny Carson and other
male comedians when she emceed for
two nights. It seemed to me she re-
placed egomaniac male, sexist jokes
with egomaniac lesbian jokes which
objectify women almost as badly. How-
ever, the audience loved her and all
other performers who focused on the
lesbian lifestyle. It seemed almost
a knee-jerk reaction when the audi-
ence cheered when anyone said “dyke."
I am a lesbian, but I am a feminist
first, and I felt off, especially
when Robin was introducing the
subdued, humble Elizabeth Cotten.
To each her own...

All in all, the festival was a
fantastic cultural event. I hope
you can go next year, or to the
Michigan Music Festival, August 23-
26. Call Woman to Woman for more
information.

Photo by Lisa Gould

Square dance called "Coming Out"

Scraps From Mama's Table

Troubadour Troopers Travel Trustingly

Chocolate Waters

(Editor's note: Comedienne Katie
O'Brien and performance poet, Choco-
late Waters, went on tour from April
2 to May 15th. In a period of six
weeks they performed shows in 16
different cities from Idaho to Wash-
ington to Oregon to California, Ar-
izona and Texas, traveling nearly
5,000 miles.

This column is the third install-
ment of their road notes and obser-
vations about the different women's
communities they visited and perfor-
med for.)

After the energy which Eugene re-
quired, we are delighted to spend
a day-and-a-half along the Oregon
Coast with Nancy Clark and her friend
Charlotte Mills (who we at first
think might be a paper factory). Al-
though Charlotte is not into being a
factory, she is into paper or more
specifically, into publishing. She
and Nancy are in the process of build-
ing a home and an office for their
women's publishing venture, North-
west Matrix, and we spend many en-
joyable hours exchanging small press
information before heading out to
sightsee the rest of the Oregon Coast.

Stopping only for a "moment" to
browse through a bookstore in Florence,
Katie discovers a book entitled
What Men Don't Like About Women. A
notation attached to the cover reads,
"The most insulting put-down about
women that I've ever seen. NOT FOR
SALE!" Naturally, Katie immediately
tries to buy it. The bookstore owner,
a 52-year-old woman we'll call Eileen,
resolutely refuses to part with the
book, but we are so enchanted that
we persuade her to come and have a
few drinks with us.

She takes us to a little place
called Fisherman's Wharf, where the
loggers hang out. They are very
brusque and brutish looking and all
seem to have faces resembling flat
tires. We make them invisible to hear
that Eileen's hubby of 30 years, whom
she refers to in clipped syllables as
"Mis-ter Big-gie," was once a big businessman
in Washington. Eileen, however, persuaded him to sell
everything so that she could open
the bookstore in Florence. "He's a
feminist," she pauses. "He says."

She stops. "It's a little shaky."
Before settling down with the shop,
Eileen and Biggie rent a boat and
take a grandiose tour of the Pacific.
"But he wanted to be captain all the
time,” she reports dryly. "That did
not work out so well," she continues.
"Mis-ter Big-gie," she says again,
rolling her eyes. By this time Katie
and I are rolling on the floor (maybe
you had to be there). Nevertheless,
Eileen is particularly interested in
our show and suggests we do a per-
formance at the wharf that night; we
respectfully decline.

By the time we are able to tear
ourselves away, it is night time and
we end up driving the entire length
of the spectacular Oregon coast in
pitch blackness. Eileen herself is
in the process of moving back to
Washington state where she will seek
out a chapter of NOW, her first ven-
ture into the women's movement. We
only hope they realize what a gem
they're getting.

Since gas is impossible to get at
night, we stop at a motel called, im
interestingly enough, the Beaver Inn.
We have to pay cash for the room
and by the time we arrive at Santa Rosa
for our next gig, we don't even have
enough money to buy a pack of cig-
arettes. We do our performance at
the Moonrise Cafe, a pleasant and
attractive space for women. Our au-
dience is small, but appreciative;
our check is also small, but we are
appreciative.

Driving around lost in Santa Rosa
the next day, irritated that we
never know where we are, third gear
suddenly makes a low growling noise
and decides to go to heaven - or
wherever it is that third gears hang
out. This time we can't thank the
goddess that it's someone else's
car, as we did in Vancouver. Instant
karma. "Hoping for the best," as they
say, we are not relieved to learn
that Katie's VW is being held
together by a wad of bubblegum.
It needs an entire new transmission,
among other things. $450 later with
relaxyou'vegotmastercharge, the
car turns into what it was originally
supposed to be - a working machine.

In the meantime, we have a show in
Sacramento at the Crescent Moon. It
takes us two buses, five hours and
16 American dollars to get there.
"Aww, let's just blow it off," I
suggest, but Katie will have none of
this and decides we will be nominated
later for the intrepid troubadour
troopers of the month award. Arriv-
ing in Sacramento with only the
clothes on our backs (and three boxes
of Katie's props), we give our
best performance yet and congratul-
ate each other on how amazing we
are.

Absolutely exhausted from the e-
vents of the day, we take refuge
with the owner of the women's bar
where we did the show. She is a wo-
man in her late 30's with incredibly
striking salt-and-pepper hair whom
we refer to affectionately - but not
to her face - as Heroin Angie. Her-
oin walks around, or rather we should
say slides from space to space, wear-
ing a parrot named Sassy on her shou-
lders. In addition to the parrot
she has two cooing doves who ruffle
their feathers and coocoocoocoo all
night long. At 7 a.m. I, who never
arise before noon if I can possibly
avoid it, bolt upright and announce,
"Let's get the fuck out of here.”
Blaze, who has been sleeping on a
sectional couch and retrieving her
butt from the middle of the rigor
all night, immediately agrees.

Our next stop is San Francisco,
where we're scheduled to do our show
at the Women’s Building. Meg Christian
is giving a concert produced by Olivia
in Oakland on Saturday night and there
will probably be 1,000 women there. Again, we have
not been as well produced as we would
like to be, so I decide to try my
luck about getting an announcement
about us on her show. I ignore the
previous unpleasant experience with
the Wallflower Collective in Eugene
and hope that Olivia women will be
more supportive. (At this point I am
still naive about California). Ap-
proaching Ginny Berson, the woman in
charge, I explain that we are not
well-known in the Bay area, but that
we're good and we want women to come
and see us. "I'm sorry," she in-
tones, “Our collective decision on
that is that announcements must be
submitted three months in advance.”
She continues in the same monotone,
"If we did announcements for every-
body we would spend an hour-and-a-
half at every performance just do-
ing announcements." I tell her I am
glad there are so many women's events
in the Bay area, but that I'm not
familiar with their collective poli-
cies and couldn't they possibly make
an exception? She remains unimpressed.
"Look," I say in desperation, "We're
doing this tour and we haven't been
well-produced in a lot of places.
Our car just broke down and it cost
us $450 to fix it. We don't have much
money and a short announcement about
our show would really help us out."
She stares at me as if I am an idiot.
"I'm sorry. Our collective policy
on that...etc." I stifle the urge
to interrupt with "this is a record-
188 I mean, the woman is so cold,
I think perhaps she is a refrigera-
tor. Since I am a "good girl" how-
ever, I refrain from doing some-
thing totally unsisterly like pun-
ching her in her collective mouth.
Consequently, five women show
up for our show on Sunday night; we
don't do a performance and are out
$50. The experience does not make us
feel good about the Bay area and
Katie decides not to be a distributor
for Olivia after all.

Come next month if you're still into
it.