Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 2

Summer Solstice

Pat Sexton, Chocolate Waters

The longest day of the year. That's what June 21 was.  
Summer Solstice. From sol - the sun, and sistere - to cause to  
stand still. And sisters from Albuquerque, Tucson, Denver, Min-  
nesota, Missouri, New York and various locations in between kept  
arriving throughout that long day, celebrating the solstice. Mak-  
ing that weekend stand still in a peaceful out-of-the-way camp-  
ing area in New Mexico.

A place marked with pine trees and swimming holes,  
streams, water fountains here and there, campfires, children, two  
hundred women with their hands joined singing: “We are one  
in the spirit, we are one in the soul, and we know that unity will  
some day unfold, and we know we are sisters by our love.” The  
sounds of women telling fortunes, reading poems to each other,  
the freedom of women together - in various stages of dress and  
undress and body paint and bare skin. The seeds of a world some-  
day guided by the power and love of women.

On the evening of the Solstice there was music and  
dancing until the sun set. Maureen shaking the tambourine. Judy  
and Sharon strumming homemade bass drums, fashioned from  
wash tubs and rope and broom handles. Gail plucking a banjo.  
Congo drums of bone and hide. Guitars, whoops. Shouts.

Chants. Dancing in circles. Dancing hand-in-hand. Alone or to-  
gether, hugging the earth with our feet and our bodies. Not the  

Photo by Pavita Miller

kind of music you'd see in a bar, but dancing that came from some  
place deep inside each woman's soul. Fishtailing, spiraling out-  
ward, sketching patterns on the sky with arms and hips and knees  
moving back and forth steadily - slow or fast but always in time  
with the music each woman heard herself.

Strong Amazon voices, singing the songs that tell  
the story of woman. Sharing our evening meals together. Bathing  
together in the small pool under the waterfall. Tai Chi, movement,  
Yoga, massage. Women with their speculums, seeing their  
cervixes for the first time. “Smile if you're a Lesbian.”

A peyote ceremony underneath the pine trees.  
Psychic Feminism; feeling in tune with the Great Goddess  
and with our Indian sisters who once roamed the ground where  
we stayed. Attempting to call down our sisters in outer space,  
sighting their spaceships. Talk of the matriarchy and of its return,  
of parthenogenesis, of Amazon culture.

Feminist astrology, learning about herbs for our own  
health. Walking arm in arm. No one can walk up to each other  
without hugging, smiling, laughing. Happiness is contagious!

Women together without men can do anything.  
Amazon nation here in the mountains. If only for a short while,  
a precursor of what is to come!

Photo by Chi

the society is such that we must deprive our readers of photographs which  
depict women’s bodies naturally and proudly.

Photo by Pavita