struggle

A Feminist Issue-- Fighting Psychiatry

Rose

In the March '83 issue, Big Mama
printed an article by Batya Sunwandra
about her view of the Michigan Music
Festival planners' anti-madwoman action
of sending a woman over to the shrinks.

confrontation

Batya says she offers her vision as a
path of healing the split between women
who actively come out as ex-mental
patients and the feminist community. On
the contrary, by calling our experience
“non-feminism" and from that implying
that we are not committed to women's
struggles, she seriously misrepresents
our feelings.

I got a call from Batya one evening
several months ago. My friend, Jenny
Miller, gave her my phone number, being
that we are both Jewish women writing
about anti-psychiatry issues. We talked
a lot about feminist identity. I told
Batya clearly that I identify as the
kind of feminist who believes that the
feminist movement must be challenged to
struggle and confront ruling-class
values and oppressive power trips within
the core and fiber of the feminist
movement. I told her that I'm a "Big
Mama Rag-reading" type of feminist, that
I feel feminist theory must be a forum
for all women who care to express their
struggles.

I explained that I come out to almost
everyone as an ex-mental patient who is
very angry about having been tortured
with shock treatments and drugs. Espec-
ially because my physical energy and
health have never recovered from the
“treatments," the issue just always
comes up when I relate to people. The
reaction I get in the general feminist
community is very disheartening. When I
first came to San Francisco eight years
ago and didn't have such strong mental
patients' consciousness, a whole lot
of women were interested in getting to
know me. But in recent years, I get
talked about behind my back for being
negative. When I bring up psychiatric
torture in discussions, I am either
ignored or told that I'm reacting in-
appropriately. If I call someone on her
labeling another woman as schizophrenic
or crazy, I get treated like I'm "men-
tally ill." So I rarely go to meetings
or conferences. Not only do I feel of-
fended by women who still accept mental
health lies and labels, but I actually
feel afraid.

This year the only women's gathering I
went to was the Jewish Feminist Confer-
ence. I mention this as a typical react-
ion to coming out as a mental patient.
I went to the Conference one day to par-
ticipate in a workshop of Jewish psych-
iatric inmates. I found out the workshop
was to be held later than I thought, so
I went to another workshop before it.

Most of the women were talking about how
difficult it is to come out as lesbians
and Jews. I said that I always come out
as Jewish and a lesbian, but the most
intense reaction I get is when I come
out as an ex-mental patient. I got no
response, so I talked about it some more,
just after that, a woman was talking about
some man who made an anti-Semitic remark
to her, and that the unusual thing was
that he didn't even look "off-the-wall
or anything." When I let her know that
her assumption that anti-Semitic people
look “off-the-wall" offended me, and
that at least coming out as a Jew and a
lesbian we are backed up by the support
of so many others who are open and proud.
Coming out as a mental patient, even
though we are at least 10 percent of the
population, is lonely and isolating,
because there is so much shame attached
to it, that people don't come out. I was
making everyone uncomfortable. The next
woman accused me of doing a “more oppres-
sed than you" number on them. I felt so
much fear and anguish and naivete that I
could have in any way expected sister-
hood with women who don't understand the
feeling of waking up in a locked ward.
Afterward, waiting in the hall for the
anti-psychiatry workshop, a woman who
was at the earlier workshop came up to
me and told me that she had shock treat-
ments years back and she couldn't under-
stand why I was making such a big deal
of it.

This sort of thing happens every time
I come out to feminists, trying to awaken
their concern for incarcerated women and
trying to find friendship and support.
So I avoid getting close to anyone who
isn't a mental patient or supportive of
our struggle.

You see, I feel that the label "femin-
ist" does not have meaning and power if
the women identifying themselves as fem-
inist continue to oppress each other and
close themselves off to struggles which
are difficult and threatening. It is not
that feminists are more oppressive than
other people; it is that I would like to
feel that the feminist community is my
home and hope. With all the energy put
into good political consciousness, fem-
inists still avoid issues like psych-
iatric torture...issues which challenge
the deep conditioning of the oppressors’
values, which people in this country are
force-fed.

I know there is a terror about identi-
fying with those of us labeled "mentally
ill." That is the terror of a hypodermic
needle full of thorazine, injections of
death.

Batya mentioned the "non-feminism" of
the anti-psychiatry movement. I wonder
if she has read Madness Network News.
For years now, the primary input of Mad-
ness has been by women who are very com-
mitted to fighting women's oppression.

A number of women I know, including my-
self, have been trying for years to in-
fluence the feminist movement to make
fighting psychiatry an acknowledged fem-
inist issue. We write, send letters, write
send letters, talk to women, but very
little that we send away gets printed
(except of course by Big Mama Rag). If
it weren't for Big Mama Rag's commit-
ment to being feminist, as in feminist
open to growth and struggle, we women
fighting psychiatry would rarely ever
be heard. You have no idea how many
years we've challenged papers like Off
Our Backs and Plexus before we managed
to get anything in print.

I'm basically a matriarchalist, so I
don't give up on the women's community.
I'm also very stubborn. My participation
in the mental patients' liberation move-
ment has been mostly through writing
and coming out to people. I haven't

Blount/Broadsheet

wanted to get involved in committees etc.,
mainly because I haven't wanted to work
with men. Last year, though, my younger
brother started calling me up in the
middle of the night all set to kill him-
self. He was in so much pain, suffering
so much from hating his life. It made me
realize that in a certain way, I have
more in common with a man who has been
tortured by psychiatry than I do with
anyone, even another lesbian or a femin-
ist, who is unconcerned with those of us
locked up and tortured in psychiatric
institutions. Or with anyone who puts
pressure on me to play the game of what
is normal behavior.

I feel much more acceptance and freedom
in the company of other psychiatric in-
mates. Most people are so controlled by
what psychiatrists have established as

MORE ON PAGE 21
Big Mama Rag, May, 1983 - Page 5