hot brief

Compiled by Vicki Piotter

Soho Sixteen

Six of the “Soho 16" have been acquitted after being tried in London Court for activities stemming from their walk through Soho, protesting male violence last October. The walk was peaceful until large numbers of police arrived and began hitting out wildly, causing many injuries; they also arrested 16 women. Ethel Findlay, who was charged with obstructing police, produced a photo of a policeman hitting her with a club while she was on the ground. This led the magistrate to cite one policeman for "not only giving untrue evidence, but deliberately lying." The six women so far acquitted are considering civil action against the police for assault, wrongful arrest and malicious prosecution. The ten still to be tried are asking the charges dropped.

-Kinesis

Sticky Tactics

Marcia Womongold who received a year's probation for her .22 caliber rifle attack on an “adult" bookstore earlier this year, has adopted new tactics. She now marches into porn places and squirts sticky dishwashing liquid on offensive publications and defaces others with marking pens. Womongold said, "I won't tolerate porn. All over the city, wherever I happen to be, I trash it. Afterwards, I feel a tremendous sense of freedom, joy and relief."

-New Women's Times

Useful Publication

In compiling Hot Briefs, we often make use of the Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media News page, for interesting stories on how women are fighting back. They, too, need financial help to keep up their work against violence in pornography and the media. You are encouraged to subscribe to their news page, which is published monthly.

A year's subscription is $10; make checks payable to WAVPM and send them to PO Box 14614, San Francisco, CA 94114.

No Mystery

There appears to be a mysterious corporate ailment going around; business is calling it "The Secretarial Shortage." According to a recent issue of Forbes, a business magazine, a shortage of "qualified clerical help" has reached epidemic proportions, particularly in the banking industry. The variety of remedies the banks have tried is amazing. The only one they have missed is money. Forbes notes that banks usually pay employees in such jobs "about $125 a week."

-Working Women Newsletter

A motion to declare Artificial Insemination (AID) unethical for lesbians was narrowly defeated at the annual British Medical Association meeting. Had the motion passed, any doctor allowing AID for a lesbian could have been expelled from the profession. Doctor John Happle told the Association that homosexual love could be more intense than “ordinary love" and pleaded that doctors be fair to all patients. The BMA was persuaded to reject the motion since its defeat would still not imply actual approval of AID to lesbians.

-The Body Politic

No Lesbians Crossing

Less than two weeks after the INS supposedly changed its policy prohibiting lesbians and gay men from entering the US, at least 120 women attempting to enter the US from Canada for the Michigan Women's Music Festival were stopped at the border and not allowed entry. One woman, according to a member of the Ithaca Feminist Radio Collective, had "sexual deviant" stamped on her passport.

In August, the INS announced that it would no longer attempt to exclude visitors to the US on the basis of their sexual orientation, supposedly putting a halt to a 1952 law passed by Congress which could deny "psychopathic personalities” (among them homosexuals) entrance to the US.

-LNS

WELL..IF I WERE PREGNANT, I CERTAINLY WOULDN’T HAVE AN ABORTION

where we’re at

We are in fine shape, financially. The benefit garage sale netted us almost $550. Combined with this month's income we are set up for a couple of months, at least. Next month, friends of BMR will be giving a Halloween party as a benefit for us.

Many thanks to the women who are sending donations and/or well wishes. We need them to keep going.

These past months bookstores have been increasing their orders or ordering from us for the first time. We are making headway in increasing sales so that we become self-sufficient. It is an uphill climb. Right now, we are still in need of donations and benefits. Almost one third of our subscriptions go out free, mainly to women in prisons.

We are taking the month of December off to work on our processes. Therefore, there will be no January issue. Some of the things we need to deal with are as concrete as rearranging the office procedures, others as subtle as what and how to cover as a news story. We have been working hard to make each issue comprehensive and stimulating; we hope to make the work less hard by our discussions and changes in procedures.

You can help us. We need articles and/or information more than anything else. If you could send us clippings or notes that could be worked into an article, it would be so appreciated you could hardly guess. Complete articles are very much welcome.

Our next issue will concern technology's effect on us as women. Copy deadline is October 15th.

This month we featured culture. For the past one and a half years we have been expanding culture from book, record and movie reviews to examining women's culture. We hope to continue this kind of analysis.

We moved 2 of the 5 newspaper boxes. The box that used to be at Rainbow Grocers is now at the Safeway on Josephine and Colfax. The one that was at 16th and Stout is now temporarily in front of the Women's Bank. We are looking for suggestions for a good downtown location. By good, we mean lots of people go by and there is something to chain it to, a lamp pole, etc. The others are permanently located at: 9th and Corona (King Soopers), the Auraria Campus, and Genesis Grocery at Washington and I-25.

The office is finished being painted. It is now yellow with white trim. Also this month a couch was donated. As Vicki said, “Now we can sleep at the office."

See you at the Halloween party.

Abortion Update

Four provisions of Akron, Ohio's restrictive abortion ordinance, used as a model by 11 states, were struck down this month by a US District Court Judge. Judge Contie struck down provisions that would have required minors to obtain permission from a parent or guardian before undergoing an abortion; doctors to inform a woman prior to the abortion of the procedures to be used and the possible physical and emotional complications; and periodic city inspections of records of abortions. Right to Life groups plan to appeal.

-New Women's Times

Money Talks

According to a recent Harris survey, a substantial majority of people support the legalization of first trimester abortions. Even Catholics, who disagree with the majority in the country, oppose legalized abortion by a narrow 50% margin, with 48% of Catholics interviewed favoring a woman's right to abortion. And yet, the Senate approved a provision to a Labor-HEW appropriations bill restricting federal funds for abortion to cases of rape or incest, or instances where the mother's life is endangered. Does Congress really listen to the wishes of the people? Obviously not; it's apparent that their ears become sharper when listening to well-financed pressure groups.

-Sourceline

Popeycock

During his recent visit to Poland, the Pope put the Church's unrelenting attack on abortion in a fascinatingly sexist perspective when he proclaimed: "If man's right to life is violated at the moment in which he is first conceived in his mother's womb, an indirect blow is struck also at the whole of the moral order which serves to ensure the inviolable rights of man.”

-National NOW Times

Just Rewards?

A woman who said her husband put her on a demerit system, ordering her to turn over an hour's pay for each demerit, was recently granted a divorce. Once, when she left the patio door open, she was disciplined with 40 demerits. The woman, Susan Crop, also said she helped put her husband through school, in which she also typed his papers, cleaned the house, maintained the family and did an assortment of other tasks.

In recognition of these efforts, the judge ordered the woman be awarded $24,000. The judge also ordered a similar award to another woman who had financed the bulk of schooling for her husband. “These are very clear cases of a woman putting a guy through medical school and wanting some goods back for all their years," the Minneapolis judge said this month.

Rape Conviction

A Massachusetts jury convicted a man this month of raping his estranged wife, the first conviction of its kind in the state. He was sentenced to 8 years in prison.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 9

Dutiful Doctor

A West German physician is using her duty as a doctor—her pledge “to preserve life, to protect and restore health, and through care, to keep human beings from suffering" required of all West German doctors—as a defense against a lawsuit over her refusal to pay that part of her electric bill earmarked for nuclear power.

Doctor Bya Spiller is being sued by the Hamburg Electric Company for her refusal to pay 10% of her electric bill; Spiller says that paying for nuclear power would violate her duty as a physician since doctors are bound to "prevent the exposure of human beings to harmful radioactivity.”

-Upstream

Media Muck

The news media reported last month on a growing problem for the West German Republic: the vast army of female typists, file clerks, secretaries, researchers and executive assistants on the government payroll in the capital city of Bonn.

The media reported that “many of these German women are lonely, sex-starved creatures in their 30's who devoted much of their youth to their careers. Now they crave love, affection, and a man of their own. All this makes them particularly vulnerable to the blandishments of Communist spies—superstuds who addict them to sex, companionship and promise of marriage.” In the past 18 months, the paper says, there have been so many “sex and espionage" cases that the government has issued a cautioning poster that warns: "There is a code word which opens safes—it is 'love.'"

Love Hurts

The male-dominated Kenyan parliament has voted down a bill which would have desegregated that country's marriage laws, formalized polygamy, established an age of consent and instituted marriage counseling.

The greatest opposition, however, was to the section of the bill which would have outlawed wife-beating.

An MP from rural Kenya told parliament, “if you do not slap a woman, you will note that her behavior will not appeal to you. Just slap her, and she will know you love her. This is when she will call you ‘darling.'"

-Upstream