Arizona Rape Laws...

From Page 6

Although the rape laws as they now stand attempt to define the differences between sexual intercourse and rape, the courts and juries trying these cases find it difficult or impossible to distinguish whether there was intercourse by mutual consent or the man forced himself upon his partner. This was particularly true in the Carstensen case because of the peculiar circumstances under which the alleged assaults occurred — i.e., in a medical office during the course of a gynecological examination or procedure. Rape, in the context of this case, involved the portion of the present law that states ‘where the female is at the time unconscious of the nature of the act and this is known to the accused,” a circumstance which, through lack of foresight, has been eliminated entirely from the proposed legislation.

Reasonable Doubt

In the course of final instruction to the jury, “reasonable doubt” is defined as a doubt that would cause a reasonable person to give pause in the conduct of his/her everyday affairs. As one lawyer put it, “It's more than a fantasy, but not a certainty — it's somewhere in between.” The concept of reasonable doubt becomes an issue if the jury is not sure one way or the other, and the fact that the jury in this case did not reach an immediate verdict indicates that their impression was that there was reason to doubt what facts had shown. They might have asked themselves whether Carstensen should suffer the consequences of conviction when the proof did not quite rise to what would be termed a reasonable standard.

The unusual circumstances surrounding the incidents made it possible for the defense to claim that a misunderstanding had occurred between the doctor and the women. While the main thrust of the defense argument was that the women's perceptions were inaccurate, the consent issue arose indirectly, and it undoubtedly created “a reasonable doubt” in the jurors’ minds regarding the women’s credibility. Because the women could only indirectly perceive what occurred, the accuracy of their tactile perception was linked to each individual's degree of sexual experience or lack of it, both as to intercourse and pelvic examinations.

The way this argument worked was that if the woman was experienced she was “unchaste” and had already lost what she had to lose before the incident, but that if she had limited sexual experience she would not be able to differentiate between a penis, one or two fingers, and a speculum by mere tactile perception; the fact being that none of the women could see what was penetrating them because of the drape used during the examinations.

“Two-Finger Defense”

This argument circulated in the legal community and was jokingly referred to as the “two-finger defense.” Regardless of the perception relative to penetration in the rape charges, it was admitted in expert testimony by Dr. Robert Oliver testifying for the defense and Dr. Diane Settlaege for the prosecution that direct clitoral stimulation is easily discerned.

During the Carstensen trial the prevalent myths and attitudes, which can be summed up as “women want to be raped” came across vividly. In reaching a verdict of “not guilty” on all three charges, it is difficult to see how the jury could disbelieve the factual testimony of six women against one man.

According to the Arizona Revised Statutes, Criminal Code, Article 33, Section 13-611, first degree rape is defined as follows:

A. Rape in the first degree: an act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a female, not the wife of the perpetrator, under any of the following circumstances.

1. Where the female is incapable through lunacy or other unsoundness of mind whether temporary or permanent of giving legal consent.

2. Where the female resists but her resistance is overcome by force or violence.

3. Where the female is prevented from resisting by threats of immediate and great bodily harm accompanied by apparent power of execution or by an intoxicating narcotic or anesthetic substance administered with the privity of the accused.

4. Where the female is at the time unconscious of the person committing the act and this is known to the accused.

5. Where the female submits under a belief that the person committing the act is her husband and this belief is induced by artifice, pretense or concealment practiced by the accused with intent to induce such belief.

Article 13-612 further states:

The essential guilt of rape consists in the outrage to the person and feelings of the female and any sexual penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete the crime.

Rape, in the context of the Carstensen case, involved the portion of the law numbered “4” stating that the defendant must be aware that the woman is unconscious of the nature of the act, in other words unaware of what is being done.

ARS 13-662 the statute prohibiting lewd and lascivious conduct refers to an act willfully committed in an unnatural manner with the body or any part thereof of another person where the person who commits the act has the intent to sexually arouse either of the parties involved.

Women

Flushing the Mayor

The Women’s Coalition to End Pay Toilets (WCEPT) filed suit in January against the City and County of Denver and the Nik-O-Lok Company under the Public Accommodations Act of Colorado alleging sexual discrimination against women regarding toilets at Stapleton International Airport.

The WCEPT says that there are still more pay toilets in women's restrooms than in men’s. As of last December, according to director of aviation Robert S. Michael, who is also being sued by the women, only 27% of women’s toilet fixtures at Stapleton are free, whereas 73% of men’s fixtures are available without charge.

Last summer the coalition conducted a survey of the airport's pay facilities and relayed their findings to city officials. The city took no action. Then, following an October demonstration at Stapleton protesting pay toilet inequity, representatives of the coalition met with Mayor McNichols to attempt to remedy the situation. The mayor approved a plan by the airport to reduce women’s pay toilets by 50%. However, even with this reduction, women’s pay fixtures will still outnumber the men’s 46 to 32.

The women feel that regardless of any proposed adjustments, they have already suffered discrimination and want compensation for that discrimination.

The coalition women are asking for $500.00 each as well as court costs and intend to put any money awarded them by the court into a fund to be used for future legal suits in such areas as prison reform and rape legislation.

Support Our Advertisers They Help Support Us

Rants & Raves

For Women Who Want to Get Involved

Lois Lane

Hi there. Every issue you'll be hearing from me about all kinds of interesting entertainment. I'll cover everything from artists to nightspots. Once in a while, an interview with local or not-so-local “celebrities” and non-celebrities will appear. Of course, much of this will be from the feminist viewpoint. I will also attempt to provide women with information on how we can get our creativity into media. So many of us are intimidated by the media “SUPERSTRUCTURE” and “QUALIFICATIONS” that we must fill to become the tiniest “screw” in a large institutionalized wheel, that we forget that many present day monopolies were started by small, poor individuals with big dreams, aggressive ways, and big mouths. This column will give occasional insights into where to peddle your work and where to learn to work your peddle.

Most of the time, I'll tell you a month in advance what my next topic will be. This will provide you with time to send suggestions to Lois Lane c/o BMR, 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Co. 80206, of what you would like reviewed. Is there a book, a restaurant, an undiscovered artist, or a play you'd like to review or see reviewed? Please let me know. I cannot see and do everything in Colorado, let alone Denver, and I'd appreciate help, hints and criticism.

Because this is being written at the last minute, I'm going to try and give a brief overview of the sources available to women who are interested in doing something creative in media on a local level. Obviously, from the print standpoint, here we are, BMR. Really, anything within reason, can and will be printed in our magazine. We welcome creative contributions. This is your magazine! Use it!

The only radio station in the area that caters to women (and I use the term caters loosely) is KCFR. Unfortunately, it is associated with the University of Denver, but this does not hamper their feminist inclined activities. Specifically, Women Alive is a program presented by Marty Durlin and Beth Sheker. Marty can be reached at the station at all hours and is always open to suggestions on programs. However, if you want to be a deejay, you'll have to get in touch with Bob Stecker and I’m sure he'll be glad to help. For news, Susan (Sookie) Levin will give you any information you may want or contact news Director John Stark. Previous experience is totally unnecessary. KCFR is located on South York Street about a half-block north of Evans. Their phone number is 753-3437.

For video-tape fanatics, there’s always Denver Community Video Center. They're located in the basement of the Unitarian Church at 14th and Lafayette. Elissa Meyer is the woman to get in touch with. For free or at least cheap you'll get training and free use of their equipment. They encourage outside inexperienced participation. The group has been in progress for several years and has produced a number of feature length tapes. Their phone number is 832-3683.

For not-too-free film training, get in touch with Bonnie Trumble at Sebastian House. The program is rather costly to we impoverished souls but is excellent in depth and breadth of training. Sebastian House is located around 16th and York. The phone number is 377-0575.

For those of us who really want to stick our necks out, we could go down to our local radio or t.v. stations and attempt an interview. If you don't have previous experience, forget it. If you do, try anyway. Find out why you don’t qualify and then consult your local EEOC representative. If there was an opening and you're qualified but aren't shapely or sexy or “feminine” enough for that station, don’t fuck ‘em, file against them. But beware, once you've filed you may be privately blacklisted by every “straight” medium in town.

Well, for an overnight attempt at a column it’s not too bad. Next month, I'm going to hit night music... everything from your local radio stations to the Broadway... if I can stand it. Send me some suggestions.