movement

All Feminists Pay The Price

Bobbe Ross

(Collective Note: Information for this article from "Playboy Funding In The Women's Community: Who's Getting Ripped Off?", ed. by Carla Kaplan in Black Maria, Vol. 4 No. 2, P. O. Box 25187, Chicago, IL 60626; Feminists in Alternative Business, press release, spring, 1981 (same address as Black Maria);

"To Respectability and Back:

stood and approved of. A Board of Directors, with accredited people heading the list, credited with college degrees, social position and business interests; a director who measured up with schooling and degrees, and paid staffers usually had to have some credentials, schooling and/or experience that was recognized as okay.

The goals of the group had to be expressed in such a

funding for projects

A Ten-Year View of the Anti-Rape Movement", by Anne Pride, published in Fight Back! Feminist Resistance to Male Violence, ed. by Frederique Delacoste and Felice Newman, Cleis Press, P. O. Box 8281, Minneapolis, MN 55408; and "Playboy's Strange Playmates," Ann Marie Lipinski, Chicago Tribune, 3-30-81.)

During the 1970's, one of the most talked about subjects I heard was whether groups that were working for social change should take government money. The only alternatives were foundation money, church money or going directly to the people and asking for contributions.

The government money ranged from the federal through to city funds. In order to qualify for any sort of government money, a group had to consider the funding agency's requirements, which weren't necessarily the requirements the individual groups wanted. Many groups--social agencies, social reform programs and political groups--needed funds desperately in order to continue to exist, or in fact, be born. It was no easy thing to get grants, but if you knew what agency or foundation had funds available and what the requirements were, you could find someone who knew how to phrase the request so that somehow your group might be in the running. The agencies and foundations had everyone under their thumb, and a new profession was started, that of grant writing.

The structure of the group requesting the grant had to measure up to the usual hierarchical structure that government and foundations underlay in such a way that it was palatable to the funding agencies. Proposals had to be detailed on how to achieve these goals and a time element had to be written in.

If the grant was cooperated with Sheriff and jail officials. They bucked the officials at times, but for the most part, toed the line. In time, the group received LEAA funding (Law Enforcement Assistance Administration), and paid staffers were hired as social workers. The paid staffers were Black women who were going to a community college for their 2-year certificate and were paid through CETA. Record taking was escalated, and paperwork was of prime importance. LEAA had to have records made available to justify the grant.

Friction between board members, director, volunteers and staffers became an ongoing situation. The goals of given, then the director and/or board had to constantly be looking towards the next funding deadline, either to prolong their program or to adapt to new needs.

I worked with the Prison Service Committee in Camden, NJ in the '70's. The group never had any political position other than jails are inhumane and that minority people made up the jail population because we live in a racist society.

The group was funded provisionally by the American Friends Service Committee with small donations from several churches. The directors of Prison Service had been liberals, with college degrees, and the board was composed of “Heads of" probation, Social Services, United Way, etc., and merchants and some concerned community people. They all

Page 12 - Big Mama Rag, February, 1982

-Kim Womantree/Big Mama Rag

all those people differed. Some of us were political and were working for more open political change; some were trying to hold on to their jobs (Camden has a high unemployment rate); some just wanted the group to continue without making waves.

The jail got its own funding from LEAA for their own social services program, and Prison Service was out of a job. When the funding ran out, the group tried to get more LEAA money, but since the jail was doing the same thing, Prison Service had to write a new proposal. From their original goal of helping prisoners, they changed to wanting to help victims of crime. They were refused by LEAA and the State of New Jersey, and the group went out of existence.

Politically conscious groups talked endlessly on how you can use the government's money while all the time opposing the government. The dangers of keeping files available to the government (whether it be federal or state--it's the same) and giving them information that should not be in their hands, and also making them look good in that they are helping grassroots projects change the social scene, is not helping the project. The argument was that no one trusted the government, but the government had the money.

In my own situation with Prison Service, the government money reinforced the hierarchical structure, gave the board and the director power, but cut out the workers' input. When the going was rough, the goals of the group changed, and funding became all important. Of course, the group was not "political", but whatever they did had political significance, especially to the prisoners. In our case, the government didn't have to do anything, it was co-opting the goals and the liberals did the rest.

Foundations were close in the running of giving grants. Many of these foundations, like the Ford or Rockefeller Foundations, started with wealthy families setting up foundations to make themselves more respectable, and incidentally, to get huge tax write-offs. All these boys that head the foundations have a definite "in" with the heads of the U.S. government. None of these families could have gotten such large bundles of money except through the exploitation of their workers, over a period of many years. That all sounds like rhetoric, but it is a honey of a truth.

As an example, presently the Coors Foundation in Colorado is funding things through ads and endorsements in the Chicano community, while all the time, it has kept Chicano people in lower paying jobs at its plants. Coors has been boycotted for years, starting with their hawkish attitude during the Vietnam war and more recently, for their hiring practices: discriminating against people of color, homosexuals, use of lie detectors and ignoring seniority.

Coors has succeeded in union busting, and has a long history of financially supporting right wing groups. The big boss, Joe, is a friend of Reagan, and recently he and their friend, Jerry Falwell (Moral Majority) have been raising funds for the needy president.

Church funding is just as hazardous. In Pittsburgh the Catholic church gives grants to grassroots organizations, but only if they sign a statement saying that they will never, under any circumstances make a referral for an abortion. The Quakers push for non-violence, which places us back on Square 1 when it comes to self-defense. Other churches may support “reproductive choices" but will not speak out on sterilization of people of color and many "love" the homosexual but feel the "act" is despicable, and are willing to counsel to change but want us out, out and away.

When feminists have organized projects and shown skill what better way for this patriarchal society to control us but through the purse strings. Men have been doing that for years in the nuclear family, now that control has been extended.

Feminists have raised issues and projects have arisen such as the anti-rape movement and the rape crisis centers, the battered women's movement and the safe houses, government and foundation grants are made available and in the end, who profits? Feminist theory and practices are pushed out as well as the feminists themselves and the women who should benefit, the raped or battered woman is treated in an institutionalized way.

Rape centers were established by feminists coming from many political bases, with the help of LEAA and foundations like Playboy they have been “legitimized" into the law enforcement areas and they have conformed to the established society. Where once they were based on the feminist movement questioning the authority and rights of men to treat us as disposable possessions, the programs have been turned into professional services administered by the pigs and middle-class counselors with degrees, not for the benefit of the women but as a controlling measure to pacify an element of our society.

Anne Pride, director of Pittsburgh Action Against Rape, has recently lost a case in which the right to legal confidentiality of the rape victim/rape counselor relationship has been denied.

The Pennsylvania State Supreme Court ruling allows the courts, on behalf of defense attorneys, to view rape counselor's notes of conversations with their clients—to look for "inconsistencies" or "evidence" of "consent" to sexual intercourse. Fucked over again.

The battered women's movement that produced safe houses has gone through the same evolution, they have been funded by government, business foundations and church—and they are being closed down all over the country, some are being resurrected to provide services to men as well as women and children. Where once the action was to take care of women and children, now the services are extended to those who batter and commit incest.

Playboy has been championing itself as a crusader and help-mate of the women's movement by funding many women's groups, including feminist groups and groups that identify themselves as Negro women. If you had been in Chicago on Saturday, Oct. 20, 1979 you could have (for $50 per person) gone to the Playboy mansion and had an evening of cocktails, dinner, disco dancing and swimming, all in support of a woman's right to choose—proceeds to go to the National Abortion Rights Action League and the Illinois Pro-Choice Alliance.

Playboy Foundation, since 1965 has “provided extensive support for groups striving to advance human rights and freedom. Its priorities are to assist organizations concerned with reproductive freedom, women's rights, drug-law reform, sex-law reform, government surveillance, police spying, capital punishment and the first amendment freedoms".

In 1979 the National Coalition Against Sexual Assault held its first conference, General Mills (who had been boycotted) and Playboy were two of the many corporations or foundations who were asked to donate funds for the conference. They were the only ones that responded, Mills gave $1000 and Playboy donated printing and postage for the conference brochure, $135. Some women pulled out of the conference and out of the coalition. Playboy foundation gives grants and information from the foundation. It has been disclosed that it has funded such groups as rape crisis centers, women's self-help groups, NOW, women's prison organizations, women's legal and research groups, women's credit unions, women's theatre and art groups, women's magazines and the Ms. Foundation, the grant giving arm of Ms. Magazine. Margaret Standish, the executive director of the Playboy Foundation has been quoted as saying "Playboy's support of women's projects has probably promoted a debate inside every women's group that's ever taken our money." I bet it has and provoked and promoted divisions and split groups.

Playboy typifies the exploitation of women. The images on their pages show us as sub-human beings, to be used, posed: wet lipped, wet cunt, large breasted—exposed. With sub-humans you can do anything—sub-humans don't feel like "regular" human beings. The same line was used regarding Black people years ago—"They don't feel like us (Whites)." It was a good line then to use to ease white people's conscience when they sold and separated slave families or given the worst jobs in society for little pay. Playboy's humanitarian line and concern for women's rights thrills me no end, while all the time objectifying us denies their words. Publicly treating women as objects, ignoring the real status of women and making money off the fantasies of men will never convince me that they are not riding the

MORE ON NEXT PAGE

Big Mama Rag, February, 1982 - Page 13