14 COLUMNS

BMR CLASSIC REPRINT

Resistance to CR

Irene Peslikis

Thinking that our man is the exception and, therefore, we are the exception among women.

Thinking that individual solutions are possible, that we don't need solidarity and a revolution for our liberation.

Thinking that Women's Liberation is therapy. This, whether or not you belong to the organization, implies that you and others can find individual solutions to problems, for this is the function of therapy. Furthermore, the statement expresses anti-woman sentiment by implying that when women get together to study and analyze their own experience it means they are sick, but when Chinese peasants or Guatemalan guerillas get together and use the identical method they are revolutionary.

Thinking that some women are smart and some women are dumb. This prevents those women who think they're smart and those women who think they're dumb from talking to each other and uniting against a common oppressor.

Thinking that because we have an education privilege and can talk in abstracts we are somehow exempt from feeling oppression directly and talking about it honestly and, therefore, think of personal experience as something low on the ladder of values (class values).

Thinking that women consent to their own oppression (or that anyone does for that matter). This is a statement which puts the blame on the oppressed group rather than on the oppressor class which ultimately uses brute force to keep the oppressed where they are. It is an anti-women and anti-people statement.

Thinking that only institutions oppress women as opposed to other people. This implies that you have not identified your enemy, for institutions are only a tool of the oppressor. When the oppressor is stopped he can no longer maintain his tools and they are rendered useless. Present institutions and our feelings about them should be analyzed in order to understand what it is we want or don't want to use in the new society.

Thinking in terms of them and us. This implies that you are setting yourself off or apart from women (the people). In doing this you neglect to recognize your own oppression and your common interests with other people, as well as your stake in revolution.

Thinking that male supremacy is only a psychological privilege with “ego” benefits as opposed to a class privilege with sexual and economic benefits. The former implies a considerable amount of individual variation among men, therefore permitting you to find an individual solution to the problem.

Thinking that the relationships among men and women are already equal and thus immersing yourself in utopian fantasies of free love in spite of the fact that the objective conditions deny it. Love between men and women, free or unfree, is millennial, not real, and if we want it we will have to struggle for it.

Thinking you can educate the people. This implies that you are educated and you will get a revolution going by teaching other people what you know. Education does not bring on revolutions; but consciousness of our own oppression and struggle might. Unfortunately, formal education and political consciousness do not usually coincide.

Even formal education in Marxism-Leninism tends to make people think that they know more than they really know. When we think of what it is that politicizes people it is not so much books or ideas but experience.

Reprinted from Voices of Women’s Liberation, Signet Books, 1970.

ladies > ae ae

aC

’

hig
MESNO

| Ame

HSH

=)
‘

Commercis
Za Ne?

The problem of sexual assault is one which affects us all, whether directly or indirectly, no matter what our age, race, or life-style might be. Sexual assault is not limited to the rape of young women, but includes attacks on infants as well as senior citizens. The following information was collected from various resources. These facts are not pleasant, but it is important that we all become familiar with them.

* Denver now has the highest reported rate of forcible rape in the country (52.1 per 100,000 population — FBI Uniform Crime Report.)

* The majority of victims are single, Anglo females between the ages of 16 and 34 (71% Anglo, 15% Black, 11% Chicano — Denver Anti-Crime Council, The Crime of Rape.)

* There has been a 121% increase in the number of forcible rapes that occurred from 1960 to 1970. In 1970 a forcible rape occurred once every 14 minutes in the United States (FBI Uniform Crime Reports.)

* The true rate of rape may be three to four times higher than police figures show because of the reluctance of many women to report the crime (National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago.)

* Most rapes in Denver are stranger to stranger. In 67.1% of the cases studied between July, 1970 and June, 1972, the victim and the offender were total strangers to each other (The Crime of Rape in Denver, DACC.)

* According to the DACC report most victims (50.4%) attempted some sort of resistance, the most frequent being physically frightening off the attacker or verbally trying to dissuade him (The Crime of Rape in Denver.)

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 2

A Woman's Place

Janet Sergi

Unfortunately, there are two forms of rape: physical rape and mind-rape. These two man-made inventions serve as political terrorism over every woman in this patriarchy. They keep every woman in her place, that is in the shadow of every man.

Physical rape is when any man has intercourse with any woman without her total and free choice. It can and does occur at any time, in any place, by any man, friend, lover, husband, father, neighbor, or stranger.

From early childhood, every girl is socialized to forget herself and serve the interests of all males in her family. This conditioned response of submission of the female to the male sets the stage for physical rape. This background of female submission is the first and most pervasive form of mind-rape. A girl child in the patriarchy has no independent self-definition.

Thus she is the perfect prey for the rapist. She is mind-raped out of a consciousness of self.

So to go one step farther, most acts of sexual intercourse are rape: the submission of the female without free self-consciousness choice. So most men are rapists, and all women are rape victims.

Mind-rape is the permanent violation of our woman soul in the patriarchy. When we walk down the street and think of the danger of physical rape, we may avoid their occurrence, but in the process we are being thoroughly mind-raped. This second form of mind-rape occurs when we spend our psychic energy thinking about men, i.e., the rapist, instead of thinking about our woman soul, or our self-created identity. Mind-rape is the impingement of a male identity on the female consciousness.

Mind-rape is the loss of the freedom to be ourselves. Freedom for women equals our women friends, our art projects, our pets, our children, our lovers, our developing woman's culture, our poetry, and our mother earth. We are the unconscious participants in our own mind-rape when we unthinkingly look to men for our sense of self-worth, or as a source of income, or for protection, or as the only source of sexual intimacy. Mind-rape is the search for male approval.

Here is the precise point where we can begin to stop the patriarchy’s cycle of physical rape and mind-rape. If we stop looking towards men to protect us from their own institution, physical rape, we kill two birds with one stone. We take into our hands the task of education and defending ourselves against the traditional rapist on the streets. When we very consciously choose when and whom we make love to — we stop the cycle of automatic submission to males. When we develop our own culture, we begin the task of undoing the patriarchy. When we create our own self-definitions we begin to define a woman's place.

Our woman vision is of that place where the mental or physical dominance of one sex over the other is unthinkable. In a woman's place, the bodies and souls we are born with will be honored, not violated. In a woman's place, we ourselves will create who and what we are. A woman's place is simply everyone's place.