women take to stage in porn protest

In one of the few times women have  
actually entered a theater to stop  
the showing of pornographic films,  
women from the NYU Women's Center  
recently staged a demonstration  
against the showing of some films at  
New York University.

The films shown were "Happy Days"  
and "The Erotic Film Festival," which  
is a collection of clippings from  
several pornographic films.

P - Off Our Backs  
Rachid Burg

The women went up on the stage,  
after passing out leaflets, ten min-  
utes after the films started, carried  
a banner stating “Pornography Pro-  
motes Violence Against Women," linked  
arms and began chanting against porno-  
graphy and violence.

The women remained on stage for  
approximately two hours. Toward the  
later part of the showing the women  
began blowing a whistle and the films  
were finally stopped.

At least half the audience had pre-  
viously left and were offered ticket  
refunds. The women were escorted out  
by several police officers for their  
own protection. Throughout the demon-  
stration audience members both physic-  
ally and verbally threatened the  
women on stage.

After the action, several hostile  
editorials and letters appeared in  
NYU newspapers about the demonstra-  
tion to which the women involved  
responded:

"Several members of the NYU Women's  
Center held a demonstration on the  
stage of Eisner and Lubin Auditorium  
to protest the showing of pornograph-  
ic films. In order to clarify our  
reasons for staging this demonstra-  
tion, we need to show the connections  
between pornography and increasing  
violence against women.

Although the films were billed as  
an “Erotic Film Festival," there are  
crucial distinctions between erotica  
and pornography. Erotica concerns sex;  
pornography power. Pornography's emph-  
asis is on domination, not recipro-  
city. It defines sex as male aggres-  
sion and the female body as a target  
for conquest.

The power differential between  
women and men is not always as overt  
as whips and chains but can be ex-  
pressed more subtly-- women are often  
shown naked while men are fully  
clothed; sexual positions which imply  
female subordination and male domina-  
tion are the norm; situations in  
which two or more women sexually ser-  
vice one man are common; scenes in-  
volving one woman and many men gener-  
ally depict the victimization of the  
woman; pornography portrays subservi-  

ance and childishness as "sexy."  
Women are portrayed solely as men  
would like them to be for their own.

At this point, one out of every  
three women can expect to be raped  
at least once within her lifetime and  
other crimes of violence against wo-  
men have been increasing during the  
last ten years. During this same time  
pornography has grown from a small  
time, low budget business into a  
multi-national, multi-million dollar  
industry. Even if the cause and ef-  
fect between pornography and violence  
is not always immediate and blatant,  
upon analysis, the relationship be-  
tween the two becomes clear.

The Washington Square News editor-  
ial on the demonstration stated that  
“to deny one group the right to seek  
entertainment in favor of another  
would make a mockery of the basic  
freedom we take for granted." First  
of all, when considering the issue  
of freedom of entertainment, it is  
important to consider that women  
have very little access to the media,  
it is almost totally controlled by  
white males-- 1st amendment freedoms  
often amount to the ability to buy  
those freedoms. Secondly, pornography  
promotes and reinforces the severe  
restrictions of freedom all women  
suffer under-- the freedom to walk,  
speak and act as free individuals  
without fear of harassment and retal-  
iation for transgressing the limits  
of a socially defined role.

We have to wonder whether accusa-  
tions that we interfered with the  
audience's free choice of entertain-  
ment would have been made, if instead  
of a film depicting the degradation  
and the implicit violence in the ob-  

jectification of women, there was in-  
stead a film showing shuffling and  
subservient blacks or glorifying the  
sadistic pleasure in gassing Jews.  
Would they call this entertainment?  
Would they question the rights of the  
groups involved to protest the show-  
ing of these films? It is unfortunate  
that we again have to draw parallels  
to other oppressed groups.

Women's oppression is such an inte-  
gral and basic part of our culture  
that we're often blind to its impli-  
cations and manifestations without  
analogy and comparison. Because of  
this pervasiveness of sexual violence  
in our society and the unquestioning  
acceptance with which it is usually  
met, we felt the need to bring this  
issue before the entire campus comm-  
unity. We therefore decided that we  
could not allow ourselves to be paci-  
fied by sitting quietly in a room  
discussing the issue with members of  
the Program Board. Settling this be-  
hind closed doors, even assuming that  
it could have been settled in this  
way, would not have salved the pro-  
blem but would only have temporarily  
hidden the issue from the people  
mostly affected by it, namely the  
women on campus."

another woman  
found guilty of  
self defense

Bernadette Powell will be sentenc-  
ed on May 19th in Ithaca, New York  
for the shooting death of her ex-  
husband, Herman Smith. An all-white  
jury of nine men and three women  
found the young black woman guilty  
of second degree murder in what her  
defense committee calls a total de-  
nial of the rights of battered  
women and the right of all women  
to defend themselves against attack  
by men.

The prosecution claimed that Powell  
planned Smith's murder and had bought  
a gun for that purpose. The defense  
showed that Powell did not own a gun,  
and after she had been kidnapped by  
Smith at gunpoint, the gun went off  
when she removed it from his belt  
after he fell asleep.

Bernadette had every reason to fear  
for her life in the presence of an  
armed Herman Smith given the history  
of violence and abuse that he contin-  
ually inflicted on her throughout  
their six year marriage, which Powell  
ended with divorce in 1977. At one  
point during her marriage, an order  
of protection was issued by Family  
Court, which Smith subsequently vio-  
lated.

The prosecution's insensitivity to  
the plight of battered women was  
blatantly displayed during the trial.  
He tried to tell the jury that the  
reason Bernadette did not end her  
marriage sooner was that she enjoyed  
the physical violence. To discredit  
the seriousness of wife abuse, at  
one point he asked if Family Court  
didn't give out orders of protection  
to any woman who has a complaint,  
no matter how slight.

A defense fund has been formed to  
help Bernadette Powell. To fight the  
power over the lives of those who are  
neither white nor men, the defense  
fund needs both financial and legal  
help; they are currently working to  
appeal the case. Donations and cor-  
respondence can be sent to: Berna-  
dette Powell Defense Fund, c/o the  
Tompkins County Task Force for Bat-  
tered Women, PO Box 164, Ithaca, NY  
14851.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 4