international

Nations Clash Over Feminist

Mallica Vajrathon

(Mallica Vajrathon, a program director for United Nations Fund for Population Activities, UNFPA, is from Thailand) When some feminists from the developing countries got together before the Copenhagen Conference, we asked ourselves what we really wanted to have come out of this global get-together of thousands of women and men after what we had been through five years ago in Mexico City. Some of us working in the United Nations, and those of us who work with our governments, had more chance to be involved at an early stage of the planning for the Copenhagen Conference than we had in the planning of 1975 in Mexico, where many of us met each other for the first time.

It was different this time. The Secretary-General of the conference, Lucille Mair, was a feminist from a developing country. A large number of the consultants she engaged for the preparation of the documents and the strategy of the conference were feminists from the developing countries who had been working with one another during the last five years. This time, the views of feminists from developing countries were incorporated in the conceptualization and in the strategic planning of the Copenhagen Conference and not only as participants during the conference.

What we wanted first of all, was to have a balanced agenda. The three main themes of the conference—equality, development and peace—should be looked at from the point of view of women from developing countries as well as women from industrialized countries. We wanted to be sure that the issues of peace, equality and development would be viewed in terms of justice between nations as well as between men and women, and not looked at in a vacuum which would not relate to the social and historical backgrounds of developing countries and nations. We wanted to have the agenda cover all issues of the inequality of nations, classes, races and sexes, the unequal development between countries and peoples, and the issue of building long-term peace, self-determination of countries, and national liberation as it relates to women's struggle for equality.

We wanted the Copenhagen Conference to look at the issue of women's political, economic and social participation, not only at decision-making levels of receiving equal benefits from development, but also as part of the processes of change in the political, economic and social structure itself, in order to accommodate both masculine and feminine equality in a well-balanced way inside the home and outside at the workplace.

Besides the topics to be discussed and the agenda to be prepared, feminists from the developing countries wanted to find ways to establish future networks with feminists from Europe and North America, but without letting them dominate or lecture us on "what feminism is and is not", "what are women's issues and what are not", and how the conference "should not be politicized". For a change, this time, we thought feminists from North America and Europe should listen more and learn more from us than in the 1975 Mexico meeting. It was our hope from the beginning that the Copenhagen Conference would be "our turn" to put the concerns and the aspirations of women from the developing countries in prominent places on the agenda and in the discussion topics.

From my observation at the conference, it was clear that feminists from Europe and North America wanted to be the only people to define what were “women's issues”. This separation of what is called “women's issue" and what is called “political issue" existed only in the minds of European and North American feminists, because historically the leaders of the feminist movement there came from middle-class backgrounds and operated outside the political and economic structure of their countries. The situation of feminists in the developing countries is quite different; women, and many of feminists, work in the government, in the judicial system, in professional organizations and business enterprises, and they do not separate "women's issues" from political and economic issues. Many of the women from the developing countries were puzzled when they were accused of "politicizing the conference". They asked, "Why is the politicization of the conference such a bad thing? Aren’t we supposed to participate in politics; and who said that the issues that are of concern to women are not political; and that political issues should not be discussed at the Conference on the Decade of Women?"

-New Directions For Women

If you were a black South African woman working as a laborer having to live separately from your family in a quarter set up only for black workers, and not allowed to participate in how your country is organized and run, wouldn't you consider elimination of the system of apartheid your issue as much as the issue of being discriminated against because you were born female? And living in an apartheid situation, could you contemplate how you could call a well-to-do white South African woman your "soul sister" in the struggle for equality in the women's liberation movement? How could there be solidarity between women who benefit from the apartheid system and women who suffered from it? Wouldn't it be more important for you to join your black brothers to fight "racism" first and then solve the problem of "sexism" later?

As for the issue of national liberation, in Copenhagen, feminists from industrialized countries said it was not a “women's issue". Why is the issue of transformation of society not of any concern to women when they composed half of the citizens of the society? It is dangerous indeed for the feminists to limit the issue which women should be concerned with only to the issue of discrimination on the ground of biological differences and leave the issue of national formation and international politics only for men to talk about.

If you were a low-skilled worker in one of Asia's free trade zones operated and controlled by multinational corporations, exploiting the availability of cheap female labor in order to maximize their profits, wouldn't you say that the bringing about of the New International Economic Order is very much your issue, and that you would not like to limit yourself to fight only on the issue of equal pay for work of equal value with the male establishment within your society?

It is more complicated to be feminists in developing countries because we have to fight against all forms of domination at the same time, whether on the ground of race, sex, political domination or economic exploitation. At a certain point in time, some of us might even have to choose which one of these four evils we will have to tackle first as a priority for immediate action.

From these perspectives, throughout the conference in Copenhagen, I found many feminists from Europe and North America to be insensitive to the struggle of feminists from the developing countries—quite often many of them did not even want the feminists from the developing countries to define for themselves what issues were important to them.

For most feminists from developing countries, the key priority issue for women is economics—the availability of food and a job, which is closely linked with the attempt to restructure the patterns of international economic growth, through a transformation of the unequal eco—

More on page 18

Big Mama Rag, April, 1981 - Page 11