Interview ~—

Minority Women’s Task Force on Prisons

Carol Lease

In March, the Minority Women’s Task Force of the Denver chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW) decided to leave the nationally recognized women’s rights group and become an independent organization, retaining its original name while working on issues directly related to minority women in Colorado. Accounts of the incident were published with an anti-feminist, anti-woman bias. The issues and the ideas of the women involved in the separation were ignored. The following has been written about the split after conversations with Corina Aragon, chairperson of the Minority Women’s Task Force (MWTF), and Charlotte Hebeler, president of the Denver chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW).

The Minority Women’s Task Force was formed to research and act on problems that often disproportionately affect minority women rather than non-minority women. The Woman's Prison at Canon City is currently one focal point for action. Some women on the Task Force were members of NOW and others were not. The committee itself was open only to minority women (although any woman could participate in the activities of the Task Force) because the presence of non-minority women usually precipitated problems with control and decision making that “happened so many times” in other committees with mixed minority and non-minority membership. “Minority women wanted their own identity. They wouldn’t have it with white women telling them what to do,” according to a present member of NOW.

There was considerable argument over the issues of exclusive involvement of minority women in only minority-related issues and the exclusive control of all Task Force decisions by minority women. “Perhaps that’s right,” says Corina Aragon. “Maybe minority women need to work on issues relevant to ourselves and our lives so we can develop our own strengths and self-confidence. Then we can extend ourselves to other women-related issues.”

Task Forces report in at Board meetings of NOW and according to Charlotte Hebeler, each Task Force “bases its own strategy on its own wisdom but must be willing to change strategy if the Board suggests it. This control was unacceptable to the women in the Minority Women’s Task Force.”

Task Force Leaves NOW

The final decision to leave NOW came after a wine and fondue meeting lasting almost 3 hours. Remaining within the nationally recognized organization included the advantages of retaining the clout that NOW wields, using its resources of lobbying, expertise, and working with and influencing attitudes of non-minority women.

Disadvantages included the continuous problem of insensitivity among many non-minority women, “and we didn't want to spend our time” in arguments and discussion about why the Task Force wants to do certain things and why minority women feel the way they do. When I called NOW the next day to tell them our decision, the woman who answered the phone said that “we are sort of sorry to hear that.”

“Well, I was very sorry to have to say that we had voted to leave NOW. I did not vote to do it but I don’t regret the decision to leave. If I were in the white woman's position,” continues Corina Aragon, “I would have attended the Minority Women’s Task Force meetings, humbled myself, shown concern for minority women’s problems, and tried to work it out.

“It seems that the real problem was a lack of communication, sincere communication from woman to woman. I hope that we can get back to the point where we can really communicate.” Charlotte Hebeler’s feeling was that the Task Force needed “to accomplish what they needed to accomplish on their own...to grow, develop their own wisdom, their own strategy, to make their own mistakes. There was some sort of feeling that even if we do it wrong, at least we do it. But it was a very amicable split... we still communicate...many of us in NOW have had the same kinds of feelings about doing it on our own. It's sad in a way to lose their knowledge and wisdom but in another way it’s kind of neat when somebody says we're going to do it on our own.”

There is currently no Task Force in NOW that deals with the minority woman's problems. The minority women that are presently in NOW seem to be involved in and committed to other things.

Sociologist’s Nightmare

NOW is a “sociologist's nightmare,” says Ms. Hebeler. “We are constantly getting new people with varying levels of consciousness to minority problems. Some members are probably racist and will remain so all their lives - but they are not turned off by this Denver chapter because there are so many things to do in the organization. There is concern on the Board to have strong minority participation in NOW...we need to find that minority person to come forward to the Board to do this...we have an informal, personal connection with our minority members, so it’s not a threatening thing but a growth-enhancing thing. Most of us see minority women as women only, not as women and members of a minority. We realize that minority women have special, unique problems that require continuing processes of consciousness-raising in this group and we will continue to do it.”

Meanwhile, the Minority Women's Task Force is continuing to focus its attention on the Women’s Prison at Canon City. On July 5, they will help to produce a filmed documentary on women prisoners called “The Hidden Minority” to be telecast on Denver NOW on channel 2, KWGN-TV.

Target: Canon City

“Sexism in the Colorado prison system is unbelievable, shocking,” Ms. Aragon reports. Before the Minority Women's Task Force visited Canon City, federal and state funds provided rehabilitation and pre-parole programs that were exclusively for men. Of course, this is a blatant violation of the law, but I suppose that the wardens and...

More on Page 12

Petition Alleges Discrimination; Sparks KOA Boycott

Carol Lease

A coalition of women and minorities has filed a petition with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to deny KOA its broadcast license renewal because of alleged discrimination against women and minorities. The coalition is instituting a boycott to give their petition a financial bite.

The coalition is comprised of the Colorado Committee on the Mass Media and the Spanish-surnamed, the National Organization for Women (NOW), the Mass Media Task Force, Sundiata, Inc., and the American Indian Movement (AIM).

The controversy centers around the under-utilization of and discrimination towards women and minorities in positions at the station and discriminatory programming concerning women and minorities.

The coalition is asking all people to support their boycott of General Electric products and of companies advertising with GE broadcasting stations KOA-TV, KOA-AM, and KOAQ-FM radio until an acceptable agreement can be reached.

The coalition is also asking people to write letters to the management at KOA encouraging the station to settle the dispute.

KWGN-TV Agreement

The coalition also filed a petition of denial of broadcast license with the FCC against KWGN Television, channel 2. An agreement was reached on May 22 that resulted in the withdrawal of the petition.

More on Page 12