Bouquet of Flowers

Please send the amount of $____, which is to be applied for a year’s subscription to BMA (at the special rate of $4.50) and the balance for a bouquet of flowers for the staff. I've been impressed with your publication for a long time, especially enjoying the analysis of the Joan Little Defense tactics.

In sisterhood,  
Renee C. Hanover

Sybil-Child

Sisters,

I just finished reading your January Big Mama. I was interested in your critique of Sybil-Child partly because I had a poem in it but mostly because of the depth of your criticism. It occurred to me that you might be interested in a booklet which a writing group I started has brought together. We did the book mainly for our own area in order to demonstrate the process of what happened as well as the poetry which flowed out of the experience. I have been particularly frustrated by the problems of competition which seem to plague support groups. The lack of tolerance simply boggles me.

Another point we wanted to make is an example that didn’t ooze with feminist rhetoric. It seemed to us that the fact that we are feminists is a part of our work but not a distraction to it. It seems to me that one of the reasons that support groups or magazines that stick to rhetoric risk being seen as not feminist enough.

Coming up was an experience that I had in a new shape experiment in a workshop. It was/is unapologetic for its power and warmth. Copies are few but we thought you might enjoy it and share it with the other women at Big Mama. Please show it to Chocolate in any case.

Incidentally, we published it under Women Writing Press so now have a couple of books as a press. We may have another one soon if all goes well.

Keep Big Mama coming. I pass on my copy and we all enjoy it. Warmth from the snow country in upstate N.Y.,

Polly Joan

Veronica Vigil

Companeras,

As you will see from the information packet we send to your organization, we Chicano people have in our hands one more issue to fight oppression. Added to the everyday problems we, as a people, have to face in order to survive in this system of abuse and corruption.

The case of Veronica Vigil is indicative of how the forces of fascism, disguised under the banner of law and order, move to silence those who dare oppose its crimes.

The isolation that compañeras like Veronica Vigil must endure can only be minimized by...

Inside BMR

News

Anti-Abortion Activity ..........-

Shackling of Child Abuse Cases  
Veronica Vigil

Lesbian Mother Denied Custody  
Women In Transition House

CU Affirmative Action  
Sterilizations

Int'l Tribunal on Crimes Against Women

Columns

BMR: Where We're At  
WOUGHMOIG. 6.55 cha ike co euiee  
Features

International Women’s Day  
Politics of Health

Speech by Miriam Greenspan

On The Arts

Emily Dickinson  
Woman's Evolution  
No Apologies  
Lesbian Body

Collective

Production  
Eileen Bresnahan

Office  
Kate Sharp

Feminist Therapists Conference

National-International News  
Woodwoman

Local-Regional News  
Tea School

Advertising Coordinator

Terra

Contributors

Lori Windle  
Donna Good  
Carol Hille  
Carol Lease  
Elisabeth Green  
Linda Fowler  
Janet Cooper  
Babs Nash

Peg Hickox  
Morey Antebi  
Pam Scooros  
Bourge Miller  
Glenna Booth  
Dorothy Child  
Jackie St. Joan  
Vicki Piotter

Cover photo by Glenna Booth

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for the women of the West by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Colorado 80206. The deadline for the receipt of material is the twelfth of each month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all material. Subscription rates are $6.00 per year to individuals in the U.S., $8.00 in Canada, $10.00 overseas, and $12.00 per year to institutions. BMR is free to women in prison or in mental institutions. This publication is on file at the Women’s History Research Center, Inc., 2325 Oak St., Berkeley, Calif. 94708, and at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women, 3523 N. Halsted, Chicago, IL 60657. BMR is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. Office hours are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. M-F. Call us at 322-2010. All materials are copyright 1976 by Big Mama Rag.

Break this system exactly where Veronica Vigil chose to go around the oppressor and go around ‘free.’ Nevertheless, an injustice is perpetuated in the person of Veronica Vigil, and in the persons of the many victims of the “legal” system of this nation. Whether a Grand Jury is used, or simply plain fascist witch hunts are carried on against the people, the fact remains the same: our daughters and sons mean to the oppressor nothing but stuff to be thrown into its degrading dungeons. Our request from your organization is to have this issue out in print in as many ways and places as it can be done. The fact that this compañera finds herself behind bars should not make us sad, for her will is stronger than our pity, and her commitment a lesson to us all.

In Solidarity,  
V.V.D.C

Lights and Shadows

Hello Sisters,

Hello, Hello. I'm very grateful for BMR; you are doing fine, concise, and blessedly-needed work.

In your February issue, Woodwoman reviewed the Feminist Book of Lights and Shadows. Where can one find this book? I'd like to mail-order one, but don't know where.

If you can send me an address, I'd appreciate it. Thank you.  
And light to you all.  
In love,

Barbara Thomas

Ed. note: The Feminist Book of Lights and Shadows is available from Feminist Wicca, 442 Lincoln Blvd., Venice, California 90291. The price is $4.00.

Congratulations

Dear Big Mama,

Because I criticize you vociferously when I think you are off the track (fat and lesbianism as political issues), it is only fair that I be equally vocal in praising you when you deserve it.

You certainly deserve it for the last issue. It was the most uniformly well written, well edited, well photographed, and laid out issue I have ever seen. Lee A. McDavid's column captured some of the whimsy and a little of the humor so profoundly lacking in the women’s movement. The articles on racism were well done, and the photography added lots. The local approach to the ERA and pornography was good. Naturally, I have to rely on you to keep me informed about the nonsense with the Bare Tit. Certainly, the popular press isn't going to think it a pertinent issue.

My special thanks to you for the gutsy analysis of “Swept Away.” Your comments on the typical male communist’s real lack of social conscience where women are concerned sure hit home. I think that may be part of Wertmuller’s thesis. Lots of right-on rhetoric, not much right-on behavior. It is at once exciting to see a proficient woman director and devastating to see another woman abused and have so little control over her own destiny. I kept wishing she would figure out how to kill a rabbit and feed herself. As women, I guess we have to concede that the director remains within the framework of the character she creates by not having that happen. As a woman, there is no way you can see the film without experiencing a painful approach/avoidance conflict. It would be hard to prove the man emerges a happier, more fulfilled character.

I am enclosing some of my poetry, though it is not particularly...

2023 E. Colfax  
Denver, Colorado

Woman  
Feminist Book Center

Urges your support for

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY

March 8, 1976

In 1919, 8000 Bell Telephone Operators walked off their jobs to protest post-war unemployment and lagging wages. The six-day strike ended in complete victory for the women.

GAIA’S GUIDE, 1976  
for Gay Women  
Annual pocket size international bar guide and directory

2000 listings: escorts, book-nail order and publishing houses, resources  
$20 only from WOMAN TO WOMAN  
E. Colfax in Denver. Or write:

GAIA’S GUIDE  
115 New Montgomery Street  
San Francisco, California 94105

Bicycles

Sales — Info — Repairs  
319 East 17th Avenue  
Denver  
573-1177

“We cater to women’s needs”  
No Rip-Off!!