education

Women’s Studies: A Class Act

We plowed through as many Boston area college catalogs as we could find, looking for
women’s study courses to tell you about. We left out courses considered “of interest” to
women, and zeroed in on some of the designated women’s study topics. This list is not
complete, but should give you an idea of the range of courses being offered.

around the area this fall.

HISTORY &
SOCIOLOGY

American Women

Study of feminist development in America.
Changes in social roles, work patterns and
participation in reform movements. Govern-
ment involvement in these changes will be
discussed.

Mondays 7-10 pm

Framingham State College

Mail registration until August 30

Walk-in registration until Sept 5

Women in European History Since 1700
Examination of the many roles of women to
consider, the contradictions between
women’s lives and work in theory and
actuality. Topics will include: women in
intellectual movements; women and work
pre- and post-Industrialization; women in
political movements and social upheavals:
Suffrage, the French and Russian revolu-
tions, the World Wars.

T, Th 7-9 pm.

UMass/Extended Day

Harbor Campus

287-8100

Women in American History

Examines position and influence of women

from the Colonial period to the present.

Images of creating the reality of women’s
lives in areas of work, politics, education,
sexuality and the family.
MWF Days

Suffolk University
Registration until Sept 8
Classes begin Sept 9
723-4700 x 266

Women in Contemporary Society

Critical analyses of theory and research
related to socialization, roles and social
participation of women in society.

MWF Day Class

Suffolk University

Registration until Sept 8

Classes begin Sept 9

723-4700 x 266

Women and Society

An introduction to Women’s Studies. Lec-
tures, readings and discussions to examine
origins of women’s oppression; female and
male sex roles; women workers at home and
in the labor force; marriage and the family.
MW 6-8 pm

UMass/Extended Day

Harbor Campus

287-8100

Women at Work

Problem of women’s cultural values in the
competitive work world. Readings on women
in varying work experiences; images of
women in film, literature and art.
Metropolitan College/BU Continuing Ed
Classes begin Sept 6

Weeknight registration until Sept 5
353-3000

LITERATURE

Contemporary American Women Poets
Taught by poet Ruth Whitman, the course
will examine the emergence of women poets
into the mainstream of contemporary litera-
ture, particularly in terms of the innovations
they have brought to the poetic tradition,
their relation to the feminist movement and
the great variety of their subject matter.
Tues 1-3 pm
Radcliffe College/Radcliffe Seminars
Registration until Sept 8
495-8600

Images of Women in Literature
Will explore such questions as: to what
extent our literature has been written from a
cultural perspective where male point of
view is the norm and consequences of this
view on plot and character. Comparisons
between work of male and female writers.

UMass/Extended Day Division
MW 4-6 pm
Call 287-8100

PSYCHOLOGY

Topics in the Psychology of Women

A series of presenters actively working in the
fields of psychology and psychiatry will
discuss topics on the psychology of women.
Issues will include: women in families,
issues of classical psychoanalytic theory
revisited, adolescence and young adulthood
and aggression.

Thurs 10-12 noon

Radcliffe College/Radcliffe Seminars
Registration until Sept 8

495-8600

Psychology of Women

Examines the multiplicity of lifestyles
women find themselves in or have chosen as
alternatives. Course moves between tradi-
tional and radical perspectives on women
using both theoretic and experiential learn-
ing dynamics.

Lesley College/Graduate Division
Registration begins Sept 5

492-1700

ALTERNATIVE BUSINESS TRAINING

The New School for Democratic Management, a San Francisco-based organization, has
developed a Community Business Training Program designed specifically for community and
worker-controlled business. The courses and workshops will be co-sponsored by the Boston
Community School and The Policy Training Center from October 15-20.

If you work with groups like Housing and Food Co-ops, Neighborhood Clinics, Credit
Unions, Women’s Organizations, Community Newspapers and Radio Stations, Community
Development Corporations, Minority Enterprises, or Intermediate Technology Groups,

these courses can help.

A sampling of the courses offered at the seminar are:
* Organizing to Protect and Develop Your Community
* Democratic Management
* Women in Business
* Management of Co-ops
* Community Economic Development Strategies

For further registration and course information, contact The Policy Training Center at (617)
547-4473.

EQUAL TIMES September 11, 1978

The Woman Alone

Interdisciplinary study of widowed,
separated, divorced, and unmarried women.
Issues concerning the single parent, creative
aloneness vs. loneliness.

Metropolitan College/BU Continuing Ed
Classes begin Sept 6

Weeknight registration until Sept 5
353-3000

Women’s Lives: A Seminar on the Relation-
ships and Transitions Throughout the Life
Cycle.

This seminar encompasses such universal
events as romantic love, motherhood and
daughterhood, the marital relationship,
loneliness and friendship. Class discussions
will be enriched by social science and
psychiatric literature, novels, short stories
and autobiographies.

Thurs 10-noon

Radcliffe College/Radcliffe Seminars
495-8600

WOMEN &
PROFESSIONS

Status of Women in American Higher
Education

Study research findings on recruitment and
careers which document the nature and
range of discrimination against women in
academia.

Evening class

Lesley College/Graduate Division
Registration begins Sept 5

492-1700

Do you know that after sundown
you can brighten your day, earn
a college degree, advance your
career and enrich your life?

How? By taking advantage of UMass-
Boston’s convenient new Extended
Day, and enrolling now for the upcom-
ing Fall evening sessions. We offer
more than 150 credit courses at 5:00,
6:30 & 8:00 pm at either our Harbor or
Downtown Boston campus.

There's a broad choice, suited to your
particular interests. We can’t list all our
course offerings here, but surely one
or more will appeal to you—or prompt
you to call our Admissions Office at
287-8100 for further information.

Classes begin September 6,
with late registration until
September 12.

You can earn a degree in these areas:
Community Change & Housing, Com-
puter Science, Economics, English,
History, Human Growth & Develop-
ment, Legal Education, Management
Studies, Political Science, Psychology,
Sociology. And there are individual
courses in many other areas: Account-
ing, Literature, Public Administration, Urban
Studies, Women's Studies, Writing.

Women in Design

Taught by Deborah Crossley

The intent of this course is to
provide a forum for a dialog and for
the open exchange of ideas through
a series of workshop/presentations.

Continued on page 20

SPECIAL SESSION

Boston College is offering an interesting
group of seminars weekday mornings and
evenings this fall. “Programs for
Women” include a number of career
planning and skills courses; “Women
Unlimited: Getting the Job You Want,”
“Self Management Skills for Women,”
“An Introduction to Public Relations”
and “Personnel: how to do it.”

There are also some unique academic
offerings, including: “Images of Women
in Hebrew Scripture,” and “Mothers and
Daughters.” The “Women in the Doctor-
Patient Relationship” seminar traces the
history of women in medicine as patient
and as practitioner.

Two “Words and Print” courses
are offered, an introduction and practice
course in publishing. And four writing
and publishing clinics will be held in
manuscript editing, academic writing,
self-publishing and book production and
design.

Registration deadlines and beginning
dates vary. For information, call 969-0100
x 4435.

While you're at it, ask about our pre-
admissions counseling service. Com-
pare our low tuition of $66 per course
(plus modest student fees) with other
colleges and universities. And when
you arrive, what will you find? Modern
facilities. Small classes. Experienced,
stimulating teachers. Classmates who
share your interests. New friends.

What else will you find? Free shuttles.
Ample safe parking. Cafeteria. Library.
Bookstore. Gym. Advising. Placement
Special Events. And most of all, our
interest in you.

Let our nights brighten your days.
There is still time to join us.

Just call Admissions at 287-8100

University of Massachusetts
at Boston

Boston, Massachusetts

02125