Good Daycare -

Fighting For It, Getting It, Keeping It

Editor Kathleen Gallagher Ross  
Womens Press  

$7.95/hardcover  

This Canadian based book is a series  
of articles concerning many different  
aspects of daycare, from the social  
responsibility of childrearing to  
setting up a daycare center. The art-  
icles are easy to read as well as  

Liberating Masturbation  

written and published by Betty Dodson  
$4.00/paper  

In many ways, Liberating Masturba-  
tion, first published in 1974, was a  
cornerstone in the women's sexual  
consciousness raising movement. Sub-  
titled, "A Meditation on Self-Love,"  
it was a first-of-a-kind in its open  
language and unbridled enthusiasm.  
Author Betty Dodson admits in the  

beginning that her long-standing love  

of masturbation is unusual - many wo-  
men never experience such self-know-  
ledge and satisfaction, and if they  
do, it is usually limited and inhib-  
ited by guilt and embarrassment. In  
its permissive, anything-goes style,  
Liberating Masturbation probably o-  
pened doors for a lot of women (while  
shocking many others, no doubt); and  
in that, the purpose of the book is  
validated.  

But there are problems as well, be-  
cause Dodson also opened the door to  
pure and unadulterated “cunt worship."  
At first, this may be exciting, and  
even liberating - but it wears out  
fast. A lot of the book is laced with  
sex therapy jargon and ideas (Dodson  
is a therapist as well as an artist,  
writer, and masturbator); and in this,  
the solutions seem simplistic over  
the long run. Like; if you do not  
have orgasms, learn to say (with  
your mouth, not just your mind) "I  
love myself." Learn to look longing-  
ly at yourself in the mirror, draw  
your vagina, etc., etc. And lo  
and behold, happiness and the elus-  
ive orgasm. This may work for a  
while, and even be a good beginning  
at learning to like ourselves and  
our genitalia, but in essence it re-  

Getting Clear  

Anne Kent Rush  
$5.95/paper  

In much the same way that Libera-  
ting Masturbation was a first, Anne  
Kent Rush's Getting Clear, first pub-  
lished in 1969 was a step for women  

trying to integrate their bodies and  
minds. But, many of the same critic-  
isms applied to Dodson are relevant  
to Rush as well. Here again, there  
is a heavy reliance on therapy - this  
time the tenets of Gestalt therapy  
with all of its pillow-punching and  
internal conversations.  

Another problem with the book is an  
apparent avoidance of lesbianism.  
There is a chapter entitled "Women  
with Women" that does not deal with  
women in primary relationships with  
each other, but with issues like  
consciousness-raising groups, choos-  
ing a therapist, and (platonic) mass-  
age. On the other hand, the section  
on "Women with Men" deals with sex-  
uality, choosing partners, jealousy  

being full of valuable information.  

All types of daycare are examined,  
including workplace daycare, govern-  
ment controlled daycare, and cottage  
daycare. The good and bad points of  
each type of care are looked at in  
depth, and suggestions are given to  
improve most systems. This is a good  
book for anyone interested in starting  
a center or for anyone looking for  
good daycare.  

sembles behavioral modification and  
the affected changes are merely su-  
perficial. These methods stop work-  
ing when a woman starts analyzing  
the real reasons for sexual hang-ups.  
Even if Liberating Masturbation  
falls short in a number of ways, we  
do owe Betty Dodson a debt of grati-  
tude for her own masturbatory experi-  
mentation because, after all, she  
did invent the first, and possibly  
the best vibrator for women. If Lib-  
erating Masturbation is the theory,  
then the Prelude Vibrator is certain-  
ly the practice.  

and communication. Many of the check-  
points for a good working relation-  
ship between partners are equally  
valid for women with women, if we can  
make the transitions that Rush seems  
to resist.  

Of value, though, are sections on  
abortion, childbirth, and aging. And  
perhaps the most developed article  
is on food awareness, in which Rush  
and nutritionist Lillian Pearson dis-  
cuss the problems of traditional  
dieting. Instead of the self-torture  
methods of denial, they advocate sen-  
sitive food awareness, giving oneself  
guilt-free permission to tune into  
natural cravings and eat whatever one  
wants/needs.  

Getting Clear seems dated in some  
ways, but it does give a lot of ba-  
sic information to introduce women  
to body work and some of the concepts  
of self-health. It is not a political  
book by any means, but for many women  
new to the concepts of body/mind in-  
tegration, it has been, and probably  
will continue to be, a start.  

The Hidden Malpractice  

Gena Corea  
Doubleday Books  
$1.95/paper  

In The Hidden Malpractice - How Am-  
erican Medicine Mistreats Women, Gena  
Corea presents a historical analysis  
of how medicine and healing were ta-  
ken from women and put in the hands  
of men. She relates how this male dom-  
ination of medicine has affected the  
health care women receive and how the  
women's health movement is working  
for change.  

This book takes the reader through  
the nightmare of women's subjugation  
by the male medical community. Corea  
relates case histories to demonstrate  
how the health care system is guilty  
of gross negligence and is responsi-  
ble for much needless suffering and  
intimidation.  

Just as the cover of the book says:  
"Any woman who assumes her doctor has  
her best interests at heart had bet-  
ter read this book.” She will never  
have blind trust in her doctor again.  

Getting Stronger - Women Workers  

Organize the Abortion  

Red Sun Press  
$3/paper (order from Red Sun at 33  
Richdale Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02140)  

Published in 1978, Getting Stronger  
deals with three important issues:  
women's health, workplace organizing,  
and the strong connection between the  
two. The pamphlet (actually a small  
book) outlines the attempts at union-  
ization at two Boston area abortion  
clinics, the Charles Circle Clinic  
and Preterm, Inc. in the early 1970s.  
Underlining the text of these accounts  
is the recognition of the many contra-  
dictions in women's health care: the  
fact that population control has long  
been a goal of the ruling class; that  
once legalized in the United States,  
abortion was immediately capitalized  
on by those with the capital, and that  
clinics are controlled by wealthy doc-  
tors looking for profitable invest-  
ments; and that the energies of fem-  
inists (who have been long-involved  
with abortion issues in their own  
communities) are exploited by their  
bosses.  

It was in the face of worsening  
clinic conditions - for both workers  
and patients - that women employed by  
Charles Circle and Preterm started to  
push for more control of their jobs.  
They clearly linked their employers’  
profit motivation to the speed-up of  

For Her Own Good  

Barbara Ehrenreich and Dierdre English  
Anchor Press/Doubleday  
$3.95/paper  

For Her Own Good - 150 Years of the  
Expert's Advice to Women is a concise  
yet detailed history of the oppression  
of women. The book details the role of  
women in the history of American medi-  
cine and psychology, as well as her  
masochistic role in childrearing. This  
book penetrates American social and  
cultural history by examining how we  
have all been brainwashed by the ex-  
perts. It shows how the ideology of  
the ruling class is like an invisible  
source governing and influencing even  
our most basic assumptions about our-  
selves and the world.  

Unfortunately the publisher (Double-  

young, gay & proud!  

Alyson Publications, Inc.  
Boston, Massachusetts  
$3.50/paper  

In the introduction to young, gay  
and proud!, a short book full of in-  
formation for young women and men  
coming out in high school, the edit-  
ors state that their intention is "to  
even things up" for all of us who are  
"sick of the fact that books used in  
school assume that all young people  
are straight." They go on to say that  
this will be hard because a lot of  
things need changing first; and on  
that premise, they encourage their  
readers not to blame themselves for  
being different, but to examine the  
whole system, starting with education.  

Perhaps the most impressive aspect  
of this book is the way it deals with  
lesbians as “getting stepped on  
twice." It pushed young women to see  
their oppression as women as well as  
lesbians, and even suggests that a  
good way to meet other lesbians is  
by getting involved with women's cen-  
ters and feminist projects. young,  
gay and proud! also has two chapters  
on sexuality - one for young men and  
the other for young women - that  
treat the "how-to's" with tact and  
honesty.  

The principles behind this book  
make it an excellent means of broaden-  
ing sex education in high school. It  

makes a lot of connections, and even  
states that the Church is largely re-  

Clinics  

clinic procedures and to the fact  
that their patients could no longer  
receive quality, individual atten-  
tion because there was not time or  
space. The workers stated, "The fight  
for decent conditions for health care  
workers is a fight for decent health  
care."  

Getting Stronger details the strug-  
gle of organizing a workplace - from  
the difficult decision to try for  
union representation, to the over-  
whelming challenge of sticking out  
the divide and conquer tactics of  
management. The pamphlet clearly ex-  
plains this process and in itself can  
serve as an introduction to union  
procedures.  

But most important is the determin-  
ation of the workers to make the po-  
litical connections between their  
plight and the plight of women seek-  
ing abortions. The organizing push  
was not successful in either clinic,  
and in both cases, a lot of women  
suffered the consequences of their  
actions and convictions. They all  
learned the hardest way possible, and  
one of the results - Getting Stronger -  
is a realistic documentation of  
their experiences. It is an exciting  
book - a solid introduction to the  
politics of women's health care and  
workplace organizing, and is as rele-  
vant in 1980 as it was eight years  
ago.  

day) seems to be trying to bury this  
radical book. The title is misleading  
because the book is more broad-reach-  
ing and important than the title sug-  
gests. And the final section of the  
book, the Afterword, where the authors  
give us their analysis of the current  
struggle of women in America seems  
chopped up and censored.  

For Her Own Good points out that wo-  
men in America are offered the choice  
between the "romantic" solution of  
the "sunbelt suburbs" and the "ration-  
alist" supposedly feminist, solution  
of the paperback, self-help shelf.  
Neither choice is acceptable.  

(This is a severely edited version of  
an excellent review by Deborah Taylor  
which was published in BMR's January,  
1979 issue (Vol. 7 No. 1). Please refer  
to this review for more information.)  

sponsible for keeping people in place  
and promoting fear and hatred of les-  
bianism and homosexuality. It also  
promotes sexual sharing and the abo-  
lition of oppressive sexual stereo-  
typing. Young people need more books  
like this, and so for that matter do  
all of us who, as high school stud-  
ents, found our education sadly lack-  
ing in information about our own  
sexuality.  

- young, gay and proud!