Cynthia Pearson  
for the Federation of Feminist Wom-  
en's Health Centers  

Did you know that Planned Parent-  
hood employs over sixty people whose  
daily work directly oppresses women  
in other countries? These sixty  
people are employees of Family Plan-  
ning International Assistance, an  
agency that is attached to Planned  
Parenthood Federation of America  
(PPFA) which is, in fact, funded and  
controlled by the Agency for Inter-  
national Development (AID). Most of  
us know about AID, how it has been  
responsible for shipping dangerous  
birth control devices and other drugs  
banned in the US to countries in the  
third world. AID is the part of our  
government that publicly says its  
goal is to sterilize 25% of all women  
in the world! So what is the connection  
between AID and Planned Parenthood?  
Are the goals of the two agencies the  
same? What about Planned Parenthood's  
reputation? The organization was  
started by a feminist, Margaret Sanger.  
It provides birth control for women,  
something we had to fight very hard to  
get, and it seems to be a community-based  
organization, using volunteers who are  
concerned about women's lives. So  
how does all this fit together?  
Planned Parenthood Federation of  
America had its annual meeting in  
Denver this year. Two women from  
the Federation of Feminist Women's  
Health Centers, Cindy Pearson and  
Lisa Todd, went to the conference. It  
wasn't the first time that women  
from FWHCs had gone to Planned Parent  
hood conferences, but we decided it  
was important to go again to find  
out what Planned Parenthood was up  
to. And, also, we wanted to make  
connections with feminists working  
with Planned Parenthood. The confer-  
ence was attended by several hundred  
people, mostly Executive Directors,  
Board Presidents, and physicians  
from local Planned Parenthoods. It  
was a very slick production, six days  
long, at the Denver Hilton. The theme  
of the conference was Planned Parent-  
hood: On the Move. Most of the  
people there were upper-middle class,  
almost without exception white and  
mostly male. We got the sense that  
this conference was organized to let  
most of the people attending it have  
a good time, socialize, go to workshops,  
etc. The real work of the conference  
was actually being done by just a few  
people, and as  

we were to find out—behind closed  
doors.  

When we first got to the conference  
we knew that we wanted to find out  
what Planned Parenthood of America  
was doing internationally. The  
International Affairs Committee meet-  
ing looked like the best place to  
start. We already knew that this  
committee ran Family Planning Inter-  
national Assistance (FPIA), an  
exclusive project which spends millions  
of dollars each year funding  
family planning programs all over  
the world. We thought we could find  
out more about what types of programs  
were being funded and the overall  
goals of Family Planning Internation-  
al Assistance. Well, we couldn't  
even begin to find out what was going  
on in that committee because we  
were told to leave the meeting be-  
fore it even started. Todd was told  
by the chair of the committee that  
they were planning to discuss policy  
and would have to change their  
agenda if we stayed in the room. We  
were also told that all committee  
meetings were closed to everyone  
including people from local Planned  
Parenthoods. This secrecy made us  
very suspicious, and we set out to  
find out as much as we could about  
Planned Parenthood's international  
activities.  

Our first source of information  
was a fact sheet, “Foreign Aid and  
Family Planning” written by the Alan  
Guttmacher Institute. In it, it says  
that Family Planning International  
Assistance received $16 million from  
AID in 1980, the largest grant given  
to a private foundation. Clearly,  
Planned Parenthood is a big part of  
our government's strategy to control  
population growth. And what is our  
government's goal in spending money  
for family planning programs in  
other countries? "The major question  
asked is not whether government  

Women Beware:  

funding will make it possible for  
individuals to bear the number of  
children they want regardless of  
the demographic consequences, but  
rather the question at issue is  
whether AID-funded programs will  
positively encourage people to have  
smaller families (although through  
voluntary choice)..." What countries  
does this affect? Ten countries in  
Africa and half-a-dozen each in East  
Asia and South Pacific, Latin Ameri-  
ca, and South and West Asia. Planned  
Parenthood Federation is very proud  
of this international involvement.  
At their membership meeting later in  
the week, they made special mention  
of the fact that Planned Parenthood  
of Nicaragua was open even after the  
revolution. According to Planned  
Parenthood, Family Planning  
International Assistance is especially  
strong in Mexico. This all fits in  
very well with the US government's  
attempts to preserve its domination  
of the resources of the entire world.  
Mexican agriculture is rapidly being  
taken over by huge agribusiness  
companies, many of them based in the  
US. Peasants are being driven into  
the cities creating huge problems for  
the government. Now, everyone realizes  
that this is a problem. In fact,  
during the membership meeting, we  
heard a report of a UN sponsored  
conference that predicted by the year  
2000, one half of all the people in  
the world will be living in cities.  
But what is our government's response  
to this? Population control so there  
are fewer people, not solutions like  
land reform.  

Our government's involvement with  
population control did not suddenly  
appear out of nowhere. It was  
lobbied for, very persistently, by  
several wealthy families, the Rock-  
efellers foremost among them. When  
Margaret Sanger began her work to  
make contraception legal and available  
to women, she ran up against a  
lot of opposition. For help, and to  
make the idea of birth control seem  
acceptable, she allied herself with  
individual doctors. As time went on,  
the medical profession had more and  
more control of the birth control  
movement. The American Birth Control  
League, which Sanger founded in 1921,  
became Planned Parenthood Federation  
of America in 1942 after a merger  
with a eugenics organization. In  
the early 1950s, population control  
and Planned Parenthood became one of  
the pet projects of John D. Rocke-  
feller. Rockefeller and other  
wealthy families like the Mellons,  
Carnegie, and Kellogg began to in-  
vest large amounts of money in various  
population control agencies. Now,  
these people don't necessarily believe  
that small families are best for  
everybody. John D. III is from  
a family of six and he and all of  
his brothers have between 5-7 child-  
ren. Their interests are in preventing  
poor, non-white women from having  
babies. In 1961, the lobbying  
effort paid off, and the government  
established the Agency for Inter-  
national Development. These same  
families continue to spend their  
money on population control activities.  
But now, the government is picking  
up part of the tab.  

We learned about another agency  
very active on the international  
scene, International Planned Parent-  
hood Federation. For the record,  
Planned Parenthood of America is  
merely an affiliate of the inter-  
national federation. But actually,  
PPFA donates money to IPPF. So  
does AID. So does FPIA. And AID  
and PPFA both give money to FPIA.  

If this seems confusing, don't feel  
bad. Even some Board members don't  
get it. And if Board members of the  
organization don't understand, then  
we sure don't have much chance.  

But we were able to find out a  
little bit more about the International  
Federation. Lémel Valdevia,  
Director of Education for Inter-  
national Planned Parenthood Federa-  
tion attended the conference. Planned  
Parenthood has a very bad reput-  
ation in Latin America for diverting  
the various governments' efforts from  
real development. Valdevia admitted  
that they knew they had this reput-  
ation and were doing a lot of work  
to improve their image. The way  
they are doing that is to spend  
over 80% of their education budget  

Big Mama Rag  

Planned  

Vol. 8, No. 11.  

“We need to develop an injectable  

form of birth control because  

no woman in the world  

is  

more than a few kilometers away  

from somebody with a syringe.”  

in Latin America on sex education  
programs designed to keep young  
women from having babies.  

Another aspect of the conference  
that provided us with a lot of  
information and insight was the meet-  
ing held by the Association of Plan-  
ned Parenthood Physicians. Their  
meeting overlapped with Planned  
Parenthood Federation, and many of  
the same people attended it. The  
physicians were meeting to hear  
papers on abortion, pregnancy tests,  
sterilization, teenage sex education,  
research being done on new methods  
of birth control, and the safety of  
methods already being used. As a  
woman, it was absolutely horrifying  
to listen to what these doctors were  
saying, “Sterilization is the num-  
ber one birth control method in the  
world today." "Depo-Provera is a safe  
method of birth control." "We need  
to develop an injectable form of  
birth control because no woman in  
the world is more than a few kilo-  
meters away from somebody with a  
syringe." One man, Gerald Zatuchni,  
talked about the contraceptives of  
the future and it was like being in  

a nightmare while you are awake. His  
plans for women included birth con-  
trol shots that would last for 90,  
180, or 365 days, injecting tissue  
adhesive through the cervix to block  
the tubes, and IUDs with chemicals  
that would permanently scar the  
uterus. What these people were talk-  
ing about was population control  
plain and simple. Birth control at  
any cost.  

The connections were crystal clear  
to us by this time. Planned Parent-  
hood Federation of America, which is  
so proud of the fact that it pro-  
vides services to nearly 2 million  
people in the United States in 1979,  
shipped 15 million cycles of pills,  
300,000 IUDs, and 2000 sterilization  
kits to third world countries in the  
first eight months of 1980. Planned  
Parenthood of America in all probab-  
ility kept more women in other count-  
ries from having babies than it did  
in the US this year. We cannot  
ignore this fact. Planned Parenthood  
is not a women's health organization  
with a small, minor, unimportant  
involvement in "international assist-  

Parenthood Is On The Move  

ance." Planned Parenthood is popul-  
ation control. There is no separating  
the two. For those of us here  
who are fighting to control our bod-  
ies, we know that as long as popula-  
tion control exists, no woman can  
control her life. They see us as an  
obstacle to their unrestrained dis-  
tribution of birth control. Planned  
Parenthood knows that feminists have  
identified it as part of the forces  
that are fighting against us. In  
1973, feminists attended the Planned  
Parenthood conference for the first  
time and confronted the inventor of  
the Dalkon Shield. The next year  
when feminists again attended the  
conference, they were thrown out  
after offering self-help literature  
to women. Planned Parenthood's in-  
tent is to shut us out, shut us up,  
and put us down. To use their own  
title for the conference, Planned  
Parenthood is On The Move, only it  
is moving against feminists.  

Not only did they close meetings  
to prevent outsiders and even their  
own members from attempting to learn  
about their international activities,  
but individual doctors were incred-  
ibly defensive about their own role  
in population control. At the end  
of the physicians' meeting, we con-  
fronted Dr. Robert Hatcher after he  
made a public statement about the  
Women's Health Movement. Dr. Hatch-  
er works at Grady Memorial Hospital  
in Atlanta, Georgia. Hatcher is one  
of the major authors of a widely  
used book on birth control, Contracep-  
tion Technology. In his statement,  
Hatcher was trying to influence  
the Women's Health Movement, telling  
them (us!) to stop opposing Depo-  
Provera because he knew it was a  
safe method of birth control. We  
stood up and reminded Hatcher and  
the rest of the audience that the  
goals of the Women's Health Movement  
and the goals of the Planned Parent-  
hood physicians were not the same.  
They want to help women to get birth  
control and we want to control our  
bodies. After this confrontation,  
the meeting broke up and we were  
immediately surrounded by a dozen  
angry doctors. These physicians  
consider themselves well-meaning.  
Many of them have taken some suggest-  
ions of the women's health movement  
and incorporated them into their  
practice and some have even written  
books about women's health. However,  
after hearing our statement, the  
doctors were all competing with us  
over who had done the most for women.  
One doctor, a male, claimed he had  
done his first self-help clinic nine  
years ago! We feminists were flab-  
bergasted that doctors who claim to be  
trying to help women were so angry  
when they were told by an actual woman  
what women wanted. But there is  
more going on at Planned Parenthood  
than the attacks of individual doc-  
tors and feminists getting kicked  
out of meetings. Planned Parenthood  
has a plan to defuse and co-opt the  
grassroots women's health movement.  
It is easy to see how the plan works  
within the organization because it  
has already turned the Women's Cau-  
cus, formerly a relatively activist  
group within Planned Parenthood, into  
a token body. The Caucus meeting  
we attended was basically run from  
above. The woman chairing the meet-  
ing, Eloise Whitten from Detroit,  
Michigan, really prevented there  
being any discussion during the meet-  
ing and any time anyone made a sug-  
gestion of substance, she diluted it.  
Interestingly enough, she is a member  
of the International Affairs commit-  
tee. And the next chair of the  
Caucus is Kate Rand Lloyd, editor of  
Working Woman magazine, a magazine  
that presents women's struggles as  
solely around issues of equal pay  
and advancement in traditional busi-  
ness. Whitten did relate an experi-  
ence she had had being confronted by  

Glossary:  

countries.  

as American Birth Control League.  
standards and policies  

INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION (IPPF)  
international organization, headquartered in England, with affiliates in 95  
countries. Funded largely by wealthy families and governments of Scandin-  
avian and English-speaking countries.  

PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION OF AMERICA (PPFA)  
186 affiliates which abide by national standards and policies. Headquarters  
in New York City.  

a woman physician from Columbia  
about being a population controller.  
Whitten's answer was yes, dangerous  
methods of birth control were being  
used here, so it really wasn't popu-  
lation control!  

How is Planned Parenthood working  
to co-opt grassroots feminists? By  
publicly supporting abortion rights  
in a very right wing way. The theme  
of this conference was Planned Par-  
enthood: On The Move. What is "On  
the Move"? - According to Planned  
Parenthood, it means speaking out  
publicly in favor of women's rights  
to abortion and birth control. And  
how are they doing this? By media  
campaigns, financed nationally and  
locally, that are unmistakably right  
wing. Some of their slogans are  
“helping build a strong America by  
helping build strong American fami-  
lies", "Pro-family, pro-child, pro-  
choice," and the worst "keep govern-  
ment out of your bedroom." These  
slogans are carefully thought out to  
be able to represent both sides.  
Nothing in them would be a threat to  
a Reagan administration, for instance.  
The frightening thing is, we  
believe Planned Parenthood is trying  
to take leadership in the fight a-  
gainst the anti-abortionists. Many  
of their workshops emphasized build-  
ing coalitions and recruiting pro-  
choice people to join the organiza-  
tion Friends of Planned Parenthood.  
They are even going so far as to  
sponsor conferences on the New Right.  
This has the effect in different  
cities throughout the US of divert-  
ing activists and having them work  
under Planned Parenthood's leader-  
ship. We're certainly all for organ-  
ized groups fighting anti-abortion-  
ists and the right wing, but Planned  
Parenthood is not fighting for women's  
right to control their own bod-  
ies. Planned Parenthood is fighting  

for its right to control women's bod-  
ies. On the first day of the con-  
ference, we were shown a video titled  
Planned Parenthood On The Move. It  
was a history lesson—first man con-  
quered nature and tapped its resour-  
ces, then he conquered new lands (no  
mention, of course, of the people  
already living on that land) and fin-  
ally the birth control movement made  
it possible for man to conquer the  
last resource, women's bodies. Plan-  
ned Parenthood supports colonization  
of women's bodies. It does so inter-  
nationally through population control  
and here in the US by trying to derail  
the women's health movement that is  
fighting for the right of all women  
to control their lives. Planned  
Parenthood really is "on the move"  
and women had better watch out. We  
can't stop Planned Parenthood, or  
shut it down, but there are ways we  
can stand up for our rights. Women  
have already made some progress to-  
wards controlling their bodies. The  
self-help clinic was developed so  
that women could learn how to do  
vaginal self-examination and have a  
place to share experiences they have  
had with