tlt

2

Iran/Afghanistan

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 2

Revolutionary Russian

Eileen Bresnahan

Things seem somewhat explosive in the
world right now, particularly in the
Middle East. As the TV ticks off the
days for the hostages in Iran ("Amer-
ica held hostage: day 106," intones
the announcer), we are daily confronted
with a popular revolution that
installed a government seemingly less
favorable to women than the former
despotic regime. Russia, a supposed
Marxist state, invades Afghanistan,
another supposed Marxist state, repla-
cing one socialist president with an-
other.

What's going on? How are we, as
feminists, to make sense of it all?
What are the lessons to be learned
from these failed revolutions?

Questions, all of which have been
going through my mind, practically
without pause lately. What's going
on is somehow the easiest and the
hardest to answer. It seems that a
straightforward account of the happen-
ings should be fairly easy to come by,
but from whom are we to get it? All
the news available from establishment
sources is certainly heavily biased.
And it is hard to put much more trust
in the national and international soc-
ialist press. Both have a heavy pol-
itical axe to grind, and though they
might not directly lie particularly,
they each pick and choose what they
do and do not report. So what follows
is simply what I think probably hap-
pened, based on what I've seen, heard,
and read from many sources—filtered
through a feminist analysis and common
sense.

For the past several decades, until
several months ago, Iran was ruled by
shahs. The shah, a hereditary ruler,
has from the start been supported in
his rule by the American government
through arms shipments, financial aid,
“cultural aid” bailouts, and techni-
cal assistance (the CIA). By all in-
dications, the shah was a bad-to-mon-
strous ruler. His secret police,
SAVAK, have left a legacy of hundreds
of eyeless, limbless, scarred people
to give testimony of others who are
among the nameless dead. That he had
no respect or love for his people is
an understatement.

Despite this, or because of it, his
government pursued a policy of “bring-
ing Iran into the twentieth century."
And one of the by-products of this
cultural midwifery was greater free-
dom and opportunities for women.

Now the shah didn't do this because
he wanted all the best for women, or
men, or anyone not himself or of his
class. He did it because in order to
solidify his rule, it was necessary
that he diminish the power of the
religious leaders. To convince people
that Western ways, his ways, were sup-
erior to the ways of Islam was abso-
lutely essential in this effort. (We
may also infer that with the CIA pres-
ence in Iran, and the volume of Ameri-
can bucks flowing into Iran, that the
regime was under great pressure to
"Americanize" the country. This is
the method of American imperialism in
creating allies, and, mostly, markets
for American consumer goods abroad.)

So his motive in attempting to "lib-
erate" women was to remove them from
the control of the religious leaders
and their husbands, so that he might
have more influence over them. But
despite his motives, the changes were
indisputably good for women.

The religious leaders, because they
wanted to maintain their power over
many of the people, told the people
that the changes were bad. And many
people believed them: some because
they believed everything the religious
leaders told them; but many more came
to distrust the changes because they
were mandated by the hated shah and
represented Western imperialism in
their country. When fighting actually
began, some of the combatants were no
doubt motivated by religious zeal, but
I believe that the majority, including
most women, were driven by hatred of
the shah—plus the firmly held convic-
tion that it was either get him or
he'd get them.

Many men, however, really were wor-
ried that the shah was trying to take
their property, the women, from them.
Male privilege is certainly significant
enough that many men are willing to
fight to maintain it. These men no
doubt were glad to have religious jus-
tification for what they wanted any-
way—to maintain a master/slave rel-
ationship with "their" women.

Now we come to the Marxists (under
which category we will include all
leftists). The Marxists hated the
shah, too, because his police were
killing people and because they saw
clearly American imperialism gobbling
up their country's wealth. They had
been agitating against the shah, too,
but of course wanted to replace him
with a socialist rather than Islamic
state.

The Marxists made a previous error,
however. When they saw people rally-
ing behind the religious leaders, they
chose to make coalition. Thinking, they
are attempting to do—in their
(The shah’s) secret police, SAVAK, have left
a legacy of eyeless, limbless, scarred
people to give testimony of others
who are among the nameless dead.

no doubt, that no government could be
worse than the terror already exist-
ing, Marxist women donned the barbaric
dress demanded by Islam, and all ral-
lied together to present a united
front against the shah.

They should not have done this.
Emphasizing unity at all costs, and
uniting with right-wing forces, they
supported their own and the people's
enemy. In effect it was a situation
of a counter-revolution concurrent
with a revolution: Differences be-
tween the Marxists and the masses op-
posing the shah were contradictions
among the people (because they all had
a mutual interest in the revolution
and didn't want to exploit each other).

The religious leaders behind whom
they rallied, however, were enemies of
the people, who wanted to rule as much
as the shah had. As upholders of both
patriarchy and religion, their policies
on women's place in society were ob-
vious and should have tipped the Marx-
ists off that they were exploiters of
the people, even if nothing else did.
By helping to catapult them into power,
the Marxists aided counter-revolution-
ary forces and sold out women.

Why? The Marxists apparently did
not see patriarchy as a real enemy.
Like Marxists everywhere, indeed, their
own hearts, minds, and structures were
rooted in patriarchy. They knew the
religious leaders supported the con-
tinuing oppression of women, but they
thought that the "woman question" could
wait until after the revolution.

(Sound familiar?)

What it boils down to is that the
Marxist leaders were patriarchal men.
The religious leaders were patriarchal
men. The shah, ditto. When the Marx-
ists lost out in the post-revolutionary
power struggle—the biggest losers
were women. It is women who have been
executed as adulterers and prosti-
tutes; it is Marxist women who have
been jailed for "counter-revolutionary
activities" while Marxist men go free
(see BMR, December, 1979). Women were
pawns all along, in a revolution they
helped to make, with men always direc-
ting the decisions that sealed their
fate.

Things might have happened differ-
ently—if the Marxists had refused to
compromise on the rights of women. If
this had been the case they would have
found Khomeini too odious to rally be-
hind. Perhaps the contradictions among
the people could have been resolved in
a principled manner in the struggle
that would have followed a Marxist
refusal to coalesce. Perhaps another
leadership would have emerged. What-
ever happened, it is hard to see how
any outcome could have been worse for
women. Even if things had gone no dif-
ferently for Iran, but that the Marx-
ists had not abandoned women, the rest
of the women of the world would not
now be left with the uncomfortable
feeling that socialists are as willing
to enslave us as religious fanatics.

And what of the hostages? They are
certainly far from the peace-loving
methods and the merit of their claims
against the US, the shah, and the
world—it makes me truly sad that they
cannot see that they make themselves
brothers to their enemies by their
oppression of Iranian women.

Afghanistan

At first glance the situation in Af-
ghanistan seems like a whole different
can of worms, but if we look at the
worm more closely we find that some
of them are from the same can.

Afghanistan had a socialist revolu-
tion about one year ago, at which time
a man named Amin was installed as pres-
ident. This new Marxist government de-
cided to continue reforms that had been
instituted by the previous regime.

These progressive measures were sim-
ilar to those instituted by the shah of
Iran, including a drive for female lit-
eracy. But instead of implementing
them in the proper way, through educa-
tion, organization, and mobilization of
the rural masses; the government tried
to force these reforms on people, just
as the shah had. And when the people
resisted, Amin reacted just as the
shah had, with terror.

The first full-scale rebellion against
the government, according to the
Guardian, a socialist newspaper, took
place when army officers ordered some
troops to fire on noncompliant members
of their own villages who had refused
to allow women to attend literacy
classes. The troops turned their guns
on their own officers—less, I'm sure,
because they believed in Islam, than
because they didn't see any sense in
killing their families and friends.

The Islamic counter-revolution in
Afghanistan is certainly less a reac-
tion to progressive changes than to
the brutal method of their implemen-
tation. These repressive measures are
incorrect. To quote Mao:

All attempts to use administra-
tive orders or coercive measures to
settle ideological questions or
questions of right and wrong are not
only ineffective but harmful. We
cannot abolish religion by adminis-
trative decree or force people not
to believe in it. We cannot compel
people to give up idealism, any more
than we can force them to believe in
Marxism. The only way to settle
questions of an ideological nature
or controversial issues among the
people is by the democratic method,
the method of discussion, of criti-
cism, of persuasion and education,
and not by the method of coercion
or repression.

What are we to think when we cannot
distinguish between the methods of so-
cialists and of hereditary monarchs?
Does it sound like Amin's government
had any more respect and love for the
people than the shah's?

And then the Russians borrowed the
modus operandi of the US, as in Viet
Nam, and "entered the country at the
invitation of a friendly government"
(one they had just installed).

The US reaction to Russia's invasion
of Afghanistan has ignited the biggest
spectacle of sabre-rattling since the
"Cuban missile crisis." With inflation
rampant both at home and abroad, the
rush to war appeals to many Americans,
both in and out of leadership, as an
ultimate way to "restore America's
standing in the world community" (read
“expand US imperialism").

War speeds up the economy, both by
creating (temporary) new jobs, and by
removing large numbers of young people
from the labor pool through forced
conscription. Already the stocks of
major US military contractors are show-
ing a sharp upsurge as a result of
the anticipated increase in defense
spending. Oil companies and other
multinational companies also benefit
from such crises through higher prices
and, in the event of war, new markets
and new populations and resources to
exploit.

Russia no doubt believed that Amin's
government was so seriously destabil-
ized by the counter-revolution its
methods had inspired, that its fall
was imminent. But still Russia's
methods, if not Russia's motives, seem
more than a trifle imperialistic.

And, to cap it off, Karmal, the man
they installed, is a rightist who em-
phasized “respect for the sacred Is-
lamic religion" in his initial ad-
dress.

What can we learn from all this
mess? What does it mean to women who
believe in socialist revolution? Sev-
eral things, I think, the biggest be-
ing that before we fight in anybody's
revolution, women had better be damn
sure that we're not going to be sold
out after the shooting's over. We
can help ensure this will not happen
by demanding that:

—male supremacy (patriarchy) must
be acknowledged as an enemy equal to
capitalism by those we will fight al-
ongside. If we cannot get this con-
cession before the shooting starts,
when we're desperately needed, how
are we going to get it after the war
is won? Revolutions cannot be won
without the help of women, a fact that
gives us tremendous potential power
to demand full equality.

—women must have equal representa-
tion in the leadership of all revol-
utionary groups. It is possible that
the Marxist men of Iran didn't see the
danger of Khomeini because he wasn't
talking about oppressing them. Woman
leadership is vital to safeguarding
the interests of women.

—women must refuse to work with
any group that does not attack male
supremacy directly. The time to re-
solve these contradictions among our-
selves is now, before there's shoot-
ing in the streets. But it's not our
duty or in our interest to breast-
feed feminism to anyone. Revolutionary
groups have been anti-feminist for
so long, and have been so unwilling
to even consider the subject of pat-
riarchy, that they must show signif-
icant signs of improvement before
any woman can work with them in her
own self-interest.

As long as women willingly work
with groups that refuse to deal with
their own patriarchy, they won't deal
with it, and then we've all got a
problem—one that won't just go away.

—we must aggressively attack the
idea that to deal with sexism in rev-
olutionary groups is divisive. It is

MORE ON PAGE 18

LN LL A A is ELSES N DAN 2 CEES TSE IS CSET IE ELE ECL ERE LOLI ANE OO LE LE RI LL I LEE IEE IESE LIT I EN ME I LT a TE LO I LE