local

Local Rape Hotline Is Connected With

Susanna Smith

The Rape Awareness and Assistance Program (RAAP, a recently formed organization in Denver) held a community meeting on August 17 to talk about the organizing that was done and community responsibility/accountability.

A large part of the community meeting focused on RAAP's referral of rape victims to therapists, or therapist-led organizing against rape, a Take Back the Night March, to be held on Sept. 24, which they were sponsoring. Approximately 30 women from all segments of the Denver women's "community" attended the meeting. Carrie Lindblad, program director for RAAP, opened the meeting by introducing RAAP as basically a hotline and referral service for rape victims. They raise money through door-to-door canvassing. Canvassers are given a certain number of addresses to go to each evening (they work 2-10 M-F) - they explain what RAAP is and collect donations, of which they receive 37%. The rest goes to RAAP to pay salaries for the 3 director positions, supplies, rent, etc. At the date of the community meeting, RAAP had $28,000 in the bank, after paying canvassers, salaries, etc., out of perhaps $90,000 raised through canvassing. Linda Lane, a member of the Women's Psychiatric Inmate Liberation Front (WPILF), then read a list of questions concerning both the politics of RAAP and of the Take Back the Night March. The questions concerned RAAP's cooperation with the police, referrals of rape victims to therapists, politics toward women considered by society to be "unrapeable," which includes prostitutes, women who are or have been institutionalized, drug-addicted women, lesbians, women of color, wives by their husbands, women who are not where they “should" be, are wearing the "wrong" clothes, and so on... The questions also asked about RAAP's outreach and services to Spanish-speaking women, since there is such a large Spanish-speaking population in Denver. Questions concerning the Take Back the Night March included the bringing of "superstars" (Flo Kennedy and Andrea Dworkin) to Denver, the kind of outreach done, who the march is really for, how support groups, and their use of a therapist for hotline "counselor" training and consultation. The therapist consultant, Carolyn Agosta, will soon be replaced by a new full-time salaried RAAP position of crisis counselor.

Why is RAAP so intimately tied up with therapists and therapy? Referring rape victims to therapy takes rape out of a political context and puts it into a "seemingly" personal one. By referring rape victims to therapy, RAAP is saying that there is a “correct" way to react to rape and if a woman doesn't react that way, she needs counseling. Psychiatry, therapy, individualizes people's problems - saying that the problem stems from within them and can be worked out through a talking process with this authorized figure, the psychiatrist, the therapist.

Rape is used as a means whereby men keep all women (who live under the constant threat and fear of rape) subjugated and intimidated. It is one means used by the white ruling class to keep Third World people "in their place." It is one of the "spoils" of war. It is an act of war. Referring women to therapy totally takes rape out of that political context.

Therapy has been/is used as an instrument of social control, to adjust people to the oppressive conditions under which we live - making us "good" workers, "good" housewives, etc.

Yet, up to this point, therapy or talking to a hotline “counselor" (or nothing) have been the only options for a woman who calls the RAAP hotline. Lindblad stated at the community meeting that RAAP does not "funnel" women into therapy, but when RAAP is so closely affiliated with therapy and therapists, when much of their hotline training is led by a therapist, when the people who answer the rape hotline are called "counselors" - when the only options offered women have to do with therapy and professionally led groups, what is that if not "funneling" women into therapy? Not "telling" women what they should do doesn't mean that RAAP's work is not biased - in therapy the "bias" of the professional is always there, whether admitted or not.

During the community meeting, WPILF pushed the connections between referring rape victims to therapists and those same therapists ever committing rape victims to institutions for maybe having "too much" or "inappropriate" anger. Coming up with alternatives to therapy kept being pushed onto members of WPILF, though if WPILF did have alternatives, Lindblad said that RAAP would be glad to add those to their referral list. It was pointed out to RAAP that they have a responsibility to come up with alternatives to therapy - at least to start leaderless, peer support groups for rape victims - to spend as much or more time developing victim self-help alternatives as to researching therapists to whom they refer (At the Take Back the Night March, it was announced that RAAP had set up a leaderless, peer support group for rape victims.)

Lindblad stated at this point in the community meeting that RAAP is a "mainstream" organization, not a "radical fringe" group. They will be using therapists as referrals and are not out to destroy the psychiatric system - that's for "your group" to do (referring to WPILF). (RAAP finally said they would take a stand against rape in institutions!)

I think that "single issue" organizing ("we work on rape, you work on destroying the psychiatric system") is dangerous in that it leads to collaboration with the system and ignores the connections between all our oppressions. For example, if rape is your main focus, you need to be aware of the fact that rape occurs in prisons and psychiatric institutions - not just incidentally; but built into the power imbalance between guard and prisoner, between doctor or attendant and psychiatric inmate. The only way to eliminate that kind of imbalance is to eliminate the institutions that perpetuate it. You can't be out to eliminate rape without also working to destroy prisons and psychiatric institutions. As another example, "illegal immigrant" women are regularly raped by men who bring people across the border from Mexico and by Immigration and Naturalization agents who send those same people back. There is no legal recourse for "illegal immigrants" - they are considered open targets; “unrapeable." There is no help for them from a rape hotline which doesn't have Spanish-speaking volunteers and encourages women to report rape. You can't be out to eliminate rape without recognizing the ties we have with Mexico (since the Southwest was stolen from Mexico in the 1848 war) and whose land this really is (Mexican and Indian). Rape is more than violence done by men against women, it is also used to terrorize occupied peoples.

There was also discussion at the community meeting concerning RAAP's encouragement of women to call the police. Lindblad stated that RAAP wants statistics to reflect the real incidence of rape - initial reporting doesn't mean that the woman has to go through the whole legal process of prosecuting her rapist, though RAAP will support a woman who chooses to do so.

RAAP distributes a business card which has the rape crisis hotline number on it, along with a 5-point list of "what to do if you've been raped." This list is 1) Ensure personal safety, 2) Seek medical attention, 3) Call the police and/or the Rape Crisis Hotline, 4) Do not bathe or otherwise disturb evidence, and 5) Stay calm and write down the details of the assault. Points 3, 4, and 5 tacitly assume and encourage that a woman call the police. In our society, the function of the police is to maintain the status quo - to serve the rich and protect private property. They serve as an occupying army in Third World communities; they participate in rape. Encouraging women to call the cops in order to get "accurate" rape statistics is illusionary. We know how common rape is, and how commonly unreported it is. Women don't report rape for very real reasons - in order to really be believed, the woman should preferably be white, middle-class, and heterosexual. The majority of women are not considered able to be raped (i.e., make good evidence in court), for reasons which were stated earlier.

Going to the cops is like reliving your rape again and again - first for the initial report, then for a detective, then for a lawyer, the judge, the jury, the courtroom. If a woman lasts that far, maybe her rapist will be convicted. But at horrible, degrading, voyeuristic cost to her.

Some women decide to report rape and to press charges against their rapist, one reason being that if a woman is poor and needs medical treatment, it won't be paid for unless she reports. It is also really pushed in this society that the only option for a woman is to report rape - the police are the only ones who can do anything at all about it. Some women are found unconscious or are hurt so badly that they end up in a hospital emergency room and have no choice about reporting their rape.

I would support a woman who needed to/was forced to go to the cops, but I would really try and let her know what she was in for. Packing the courtroom with supporters and picketing the courts are ways to give support to women going through the system. Have no illusions that the courts will give a woman satisfaction. If her rapist is convicted and sentenced, will he come out of prison "rehabilitated?" Which brings me back to "single issue" organizing. When the vast majority of rapists who are prosecuted, and then perhaps convicted and sentenced, are Third World and/or poor men, what does that mean about encouraging women to report rape? The police and the courts uphold a white supremacist system and will go after Third World men and those who can't buy their way off.

What are the alternatives right now? Certainly learning self-defense. Posting leaflets describing a rapist, or warning women in a certain neighborhood if a number of rapes occur is something we can do.

A local lesbian was attacked by a man with a hammer when jogging in the morning. She reported the attack and subsequently found out that the cops knew that this man had attacked five other women previously, yet it had not been publicized at all. They didn't want to "scare" women. A man had been attacking and raping women in the Washington Park area over a number of months and the police were denying any knowledge of similarities between the attacks. They again didn't publicize the rapes because they didn't want to scare people. We don't need to be scared, we need to be warned and aware. Leafleting is a good way to spread around our knowledge of particular rapists. We can also expose rapists who we know.

We can picket their homes, harass them on the phone anonymously - but let them know they're being watched.

During the community meeting, Lindblad often called RAAP a "mainstream" organization, which is why they refer women to therapists and encourage reporting to the police. I interpret "mainstream" to mean that RAAP is not out to change the system, only to "help" rape victims. How can you help rape victims unless you are out to change the very system which perpetuates rape? You can't collaborate with a system which perpetuates violence against women and expect that system to change. Our society has a very strong investment in keeping women down, both economically and psychically. Single issue organizing can never make fundamental change in society, only nebulous reforms, which are allowed to keep us having faith in the system. Rape and violence against women will not stop unless we join with other women and oppressed groups to overthrow a system which exploits and oppresses us all.

Approximately 5-600 women met on the steps of the Capitol on September 24 for a rally to start off the Take Back the Night March. The Still Ain't Satisfied Feminist Singers started the rally, including in their set Holly Near's song "Fight Back." Andrea Dworkin spoke next, making connections between

MORE ON NEXT PAGE

Big Mama Rag, October 1983 - Page 5