14  
Nancy Boyd  
1 + 7 = 3. Eternal duality is in the motion of becoming trinity. Two  

things joined become what they always were, the third thing being the  
unity, the whole. We are aware of only two things: opposites. But the  
seeds of anything that is seen as opposite (good/evil, light/dark, etc.)  
is in reality only the essence of its original possibilities. 1 + 1 = 3.  

Woman As Phoenix  

Women are earth-mothers. As earth is a life-force, a vital force, so is  
woman. As woman cares for the earth, so does earth care for woman.  
Woman is constantly the life-giver, as is earth. What male technological  
society has done to the earth, it has done to woman. Man has taken and  
has plundered, damaged and raped, and he has given nothing in return.  
So has he done to woman. We as women can no longer permit  
ourselves to be used until we and the earth are used up. The earth con-  
tinually strives to replenish itself; woman can and must do the same.  

Women are ever symbiotic to the life-force of earth: we nourish it and  
are nourished by it. It is a woman's right and necessity to restore herself  
with life-force, as she gives so much of it. As the phoenix rises from its  
own ashes, so is woman reborn from her own pain; so does woman rise  
from centuries of oppression to create new life for herself, with and for  
the earth. Man merely tinkers and ends up tinkering the earth to death;  
woman, in her wisdom, preserves, protects, and nourishes the earth.  
She is one with it in a way few men can ever be; she is fruitful as the soil  
and is as full of promise and hope. As she gives to the earth, so can she  
receive.  

Regeneration, a rising from the ashes of pain, begins with loving the  
greatness and power of the life-givingness inside. This life-force is so  
strong it bubbles constantly like a hearty laugh; it only awaits our  
awareness of it. To be in touch with the life-force within is to be in touch  
with self-worth.  

This life-force flows within us like a current; it surrounds us like a  
comforting womb. Women are naturally attuned to this life-force; we  
need only to recognize it within ourselves and learn to nourish  
ourselves from the ever-present source around us, to recharge our own  
individual currents from the greater currents surrounding us.  

The Regeneration Process  

Two basic steps in the process of regeneration are first, some method  
of getting into a relaxed, receptive state, and second, visualizing  
positive energies flowing into you.  

For the first step, any method that works for you will do; some  
suggested ways are yoga or meditation. If you do not know these  
methods, try taking some slow, deep breaths with your eyes closed, and  
concentrate on systematically relaxing your entire body. Do this in a  
time and place where you are alone and relatively free from distractions  
or interruptions. It is also helpful to be outside in nature, where you can  
more easily relate the life-force of the world around you to the world  
within.  

For the second step, there are many possible methods. One is to take  
a deep breath and fill yourself with the life-force around you. Actually  
feel it flowing in with your breath, until you are revitalized and recharged.  
You may experience this life-force as a physical sensation such as a  
pleasant tingling, or it may be more of a sense of exhilaration and  
lightness. You can do this at any time, any place. If this method does not  
work for you right away, work up to it through one of the two following  
ways. (The important thing, in all the methods, is to see the energies  
coming into you, with your mind.)  

This next method works through the four elements (or any one of  
them). Choose something representative of one of the four elements  
(sky, water — even the water in your bath or shower will work — soil or  
plants, or a candle flame or fire). Be imaginative; you'll be surprised how  
deeply you can relate to some “commonplace” thing around you.  
Whatever you choose, look at it intently. Get a good view of it from the  
surface. Then really go into it with your mind and be part of it. Closing  
your eyes at this point might help. Be that element and feel its life-force  
within you. Realize that you are part of all things, and all things are a  
part of you; enjoy this feeling of unity with nature. Feel the joy of the life-  
force within.  

These words may help you get into it:  

— I am free as the wind. I breathe the breath of life into myself. The  
light-force of air comes into my being and fills me with its life-essence.  

— I am vital as the flame. I light the fires of truth within. The constant  
vigil of truth-light burns, warms, cleanses, and fills me with its life-  
essence.  

— I regenerate as the earth. I merge with the soil and stand firm in its  
solidness. The light-force of earth takes shape within my spirit, im-  
movable and impenetrable, and fills me with its life-essence.  

— I am fluid as water. I drink deeply of the waters of life. My river  
flows with the light-force of water, and I am filled from the sea of its life-  
essence.  

Another method is to close your eyes and mentally see yourself stan-  
ding with your arms stretched out to the side. See yourself in the center  
of a circle of golden light that surrounds you completely, like a bubble.  
See this golden light as life-energy which has been stored up in you  
from the life-forces around you; see it as bright and warm as direct  
sunlight, and feel it flowing through you, giving you energy and warmth  
and joy. Feel hearty and healthy and completely relaxed inside this cir-  
cle of golden light. When you feel completely restored, open your eyes  
and physically stretch. Remember that you have created this circle of  
light with your mind, and you can create it again with your mind any  
time you need or want. It is your circle, your source of energy. And it is  
there for you any time you close your eyes and ask your mind to create it  
for you.  

Future Directions  

Ideas we want to explore in future columns include ways of sharing  
energy without depleting our own reserves, ways of giving energy to  
help others, using energy for problem solving, and more ideas on relax-  
ation methods. We still have very few answers; we are just getting to a  
point where we have many questions. If you would like to be a part of  
this journey, or if you would like to share your questions, get in touch  
with us in care of this column. We are thinking of forming a larger group  
(without leaders) to cover more of this vast territory of the “Unknown  
Within.”  

Big Mama Rag  

Vol. 3-A No. 3  

From Page 12  

NATIONAL  

$$$ For Microfilm  

Alameda County, California  
has allocated $10,000 in  
revenue sharing funds for the  
Women and Law Microfilm Pro-  
ject of the Women’s History  
Research Center. To get the  
grant the center must raise the  
remaining $30,000 of the pro-  
ject’s budget in contributions or  
standing orders. Contact WHRC  
at 2235 Oak St., Berkeley, Cal.  
94708 for further information.  

Academic Feminists Question  
Relevance  

The Barnard College Women’s  
Center will hold an academic  
conference entitled “The  
Scholar and the Feminist II:  
Toward New Criteria of  
Relevance” on April 12. The  
central focus of the session will  

be the relationship between  
feminist ideology and the  
research process. Contact:  

Women’s Center, 100 Barnard  
Hall, Barnard College, New  
York, New York 10027.  

Declaration  
of Interdependence  

It's not revolution that’s in the  
air in Boston but re-revolution.  
The Women’s Coalition for the  
Third Century has announced  
the drafting of a Declaration of  
Interdependence which it hopes  
will take into account new  
lifestyles, new laws, and new  
forms of community.  

The first draft of the Declara-  
tion reads in part, “We are in-  
terdependent with the good  
earth, with all people and with  
Divine Reality... We will set  
each other free, call each other  
forth and commit ourselves to  
one another. We will ensure  
justice in the systems that ser-  
vice humanity.”  

The founding member groups  
of the Women’s Coalition are:  
Federally Employed Women,  
The Grail, the National Com-  
mittee on Household Employ-  
ment, The Leadership Con-  
ference of Women Religious,  
The National Coalition of  
American Nuns, the National  
Organization for Women, the  

National Women’s Political  
Caucus, the National Black  
Feminist Organization, the  

Women’s International League  
for Peace and Freedom, the  
Women’s Equity Action League,  
and the United Presbyterian  
Church, U.S.A., Council on  
Women, and its Church and  
Church Employed Women.  

Patients Rights  

The Medical Committee for  
Human Rights received a grant  
to establish a National Patients  
Rights Clearing House, a com-  
munication network for in-  
dividuals or groups concerned  
with the rights of mental health  
patients, prisoners, elderly,  
children and others.  

They affirm these rights: to  
adequate treatment, to quality  
care at an affordable price, to  
consent to or to refuse treat-  
ment, to access to information  
about your diagnosis, to refuse  
to be a part of an experiment or  
research.  

If you have information, need  
information, or want to become  
a part of the network, they en-  
courage you to write for more in-  
formation, National Patients  
Rights Clearinghouse, 203  
Oakland Ave., P.O. Box 7155,  
Pittsburgh, Penn. 15213.  

Philly Archdiocese Kicks  
Out Renegade Girl Scout  
Council  

PHILADELPHIA (LNS) — The  
Philadelphia archdiocese has  
announced that church  
buildings will now be off limits  

for the 8,000 Girl Scouts who  
used to hold their meetings and  
programs there.  

The church’s withdrawal of its  
sponsorship is the result of a  
Scout Council proposal that in-  
struction on contraception,  
abortion, rape and female  
anatomy be rewarded with “To  
Be A Woman” merit badges.  
And the last straw was when a  
local Scout leader announced  
that sex education workshops  
would take the place of former  
programs.  

The church has now switched  
to the Camp Fire Girls, whom it  
hopes will operate in a more  
“Christian context.”  

Ghastly Operations  

Operating room workers are  
subject to higher than normal  
rates of cancer, spontaneous  
abortion and birth defects  
among their children, apparently  
as a result of breathing  
anesthetic gases, a study done  
by the National Institute of Oc-  
cupational Safety and Health  
and the American Society of  
Anesthesiologists has revealed.  

A survey of 29,000 doctors,  
nurses, anesthetists and  
technicians revealed far higher  
rates of cancer and miscarriages  
than expected among women,  
increased rates of liver and  
kidney disease among both men  
and women, and increased rates  
of birth defects among children  
born to both men and women  
operating room workers.  

The two groups that spon-  
sored the study are now seeking  

to establish criteria for safe  

operating room conditions.  

Women's Music by Mail  

Bread and Roses, an anti-  
capitalist, collectively run record  
store in Washington, D.C. has  
organized a mail-order service  
for women’s and other political  
music. Artists include: Willie  
Tyson, Meg Christian, Holly  
Near, Barbara Dane, Lavendar  
Jane, Mary McCaslin. 1724  
20th St., N.W., Washington, D.C.  
20009.  

Film on Single Parents  
Chris and Bernie is a personal  
documentary about two twenty-  

five year old women, both work-  

ing and divorced with young  
children. Through a combination  
of verite footage of their daily  
lives, music montage and stills  
from the past, the film explores  
the problems they are facing, the  
solutions they have found, and  
their hopes for the future. It is  
the first film to focus on the  
special needs and problems of  
single parents. Color, 16mm, 25  
min., rental $35; from Pandora  
Films, 200 Riverside Drive, New  
York, New York 10025.  

Midwives Legal  

In California it is now possible  
for nurses to be certified as  
midwives after special training.  
Midwifery, once the common  
practice, was banned in Califor-  
nia in 1949. Certification is still,  
however, not open to other than  
registered nurses.  

Sears Facing Legal Action  

The Equal Employment Op-  
portunity Commission is nearing  
legal action against Sears,  
Roebuck & Co., the largest retail  
corporation and second largest  
employer of women in the U.S.  
Sears has a poor past record of  
upgrading job opportunities for  
women.  

A study by the Civil Rights  
Commission found that women  

hold about 83% of the traditional  
low paying sales and clerical  
jobs. Also, the corporation  
refuses to post job openings for  
women who wish to advance  
within the company, maintains  
separate job categories and pay  
scales for the same work, and  
channels women into dead-end,  
entry level positions.  

The EEOC Sears investigation  
is one of five being conducted by  
the Commission and is on par  
with its suit against American  
Telephone & Telegraph. AT&T  
was fined $45 million in back  
wages to women and minority  
employees.  

Women’s Press Conference  

Jackrabbit Women’s Press of  
Eugene, Oregon and Olive Press  
of Portland, Oregon will sponsor  
a conference of women printers,  
typesetters, book publishers,  
distributors, and all women in-  
terested in the printing media on  
Memorial Day weekend, May  
25-26 in Portland, Oregon.  

Workshop ideas include: shar-  
ing skills and knowledge /people’s technology; buy-  
ing supplies co-operatively; set-  
ting up a distribution network,  
establishing small shops, work-  
ing collectively; women working  
in commercial shops/union  
issues, hassles; anarchism in  
printing; political goals and im-  
plications of women’s print  
media; other workshops to be  
established.  

Registration is $5/woman to  
cover food and supplies. Contact  
Jackrabbit Press, 454  

Willamette St., Eugene, Oregon  
97401.  

Nana, Mom, and Me  

A new film by Amalie R.  
Rothschild (her third) based on  
her own life experience as a  
woman. Ms. Rothschild runs her  
own film production company,  
Anomaly Films, and is a member  
of the Board of Directors of the  
newly established Association  
for Independent Video and Film-  
makers, Inc. She makes films  
about women. Film is 16mm,  
color, 47 minutes; available from  
New Day Films, P.O. Box 315,  
Franklin Lakes, New Jersey  
07417.  

Ten Double-Session  
Workshops Will Be Part  
of AWRT Convention  
April 23 - 27  

The 1975 convention of the  
American Women in Radio and  
Television will be held in  
Chicago April 23 through 27.  

Members interested in atten-  
ding workshops should contact  
Cecilia Odziomek, Arthur &  
Wheeler, Inc., 166 E. Superior  
Street, Chicago, IL 60611.  

Writer's Center to Open  

The Women’s Writers’ Center,  
an independent institute located  
at Cazenovia College,  
Cazenovia, New York, will open  
on September 11th, 1975.  

Transferability must be  
arranged by the students  
through their own institutions;  
however, a list of colleges which  
accept credit earned at The  
Women’s Writers’ Center will be  
forwarded on request.  

The Women’s Writers’ Center,  
while autonomous, shares the  
facilities of Cazenovia College.  

For further information or  
applications write:  

The Women’s Writers’ Center  
Williams Hall -  
Cazenovia College  
Cazenovia, NY 13035