health

Abortion Rights - Fighting Back

Lori Bradford

It has often been questioned by the Lesbian Rights Movement whether or not abortion is an issue that must concern lesbians. And yet the laws against abortion seem to be an attempt to confine the sexual expression of women to situations in which procreation is desired. If procreation is not desired (or possible) then the sex act should not take place. Under this analysis, lesbianism, sex outside of marriage, masturbation, birth control, abortion, and anything but the nuclear family are attacked simultaneously. The radical left insists that “the women problem" can wait until after the big enemy "IMPERIALISM" is dead. Pacifists, who are often affiliated with more liberal groups such as the Mobilization For Survival (MOBE), Prolifers For Survival, or the anti-nuke movement are coming out anti-abortion. An anti-abortion stance in the anti-nuke/anti-war/pacifist movements is seemingly a logical extension of their work for world peace, for environmental safety, from saving babies of endangered species to saving human unborn babies.

The abortion issue is then further undermined and charged with emotion as individuals such as the anti-nuclear spokeswoman Dr. Helen Caldicott speak impassionedly that women are natural members of the anti-nuke movement. Environmental hazards are naturally a women's issue because women are tied (the umbilical cord lives!!) to nature in a political vision of the woman as earth-mother syndrome. Abortion is suddenly violence against women in the pacifist analysis.

Sojourner, a Christian pacifist, feminist magazine argues, "abortion is the domestic side of the nuclear arms race." An introductory editorial is as follows:

Both the left and the right have linked abortion and women's rights together and made support for abortion a crucial test of support for women's liberation. In this issue of Sojourner are committed feminists who radically dispute that twisted logic and see abortion as yet another form of violence against women.

Funny thing is, is that I thought that attacks of rape or incest against all women often result in unwanted pregnancies was more the stuff to be labeled violence against women. Instead they tell us that a woman has no right to control her body after being assaulted, after rape, after incest, that all women must carry full term no matter her health or situation. I fear it harms an important part of feminist organizing when we associate the long-held demand "Stop violence against Women" with the politics of the anti-abortionist/Pro-Life/Family movement.

All hesitancy by "political organizers" on the issue of abortion seems a real failing in using a self-definition of the word radical. The radical roots of the abortion issue is the demand of women to control our own bodies and the health care of them. To determine when and if we will bear children. We choose our life, the life of all women over the life of the fetus.

The present attack on the right of women to control their bodies is part of the mobilization of the New Right. No matter if attacks on abortion seem to be coming from less than conservative factions, the politics of the Right Wing lies at the core—not a new understanding of the "mother nature" or "violence." This attack threatens the quality and safety of all women's lives and disregards the quality and safety of the life of all children after birth. This is brought home in a quote from Paul Brown, head of the Life Amendment Political Action Committee (LIPAC), an anti-choice, anti-ERA organization. "If women have equality, what will happen to the unborn child?" It is a small minority of rich white men who are using the abortion issue to solidify their power both as men in domination over women and also as powerful political leaders in the New Right.

Paul Weynich, another leader of LIPAC and the co-founder of Moral Majority stated in response to a survey that showed 88% of registered voters supporting the right to choose: "It doesn't matter what the majority of the American people think on a poll. What matters is the perception the members of Congress have about your issues and their futures."

In fact, laws concerning abortion have never occurred in a vacuum. Laws around abortion have always developed in response to economic, moral, and religious dictates. In the late 1700s in the USA, a woman's right to abortion before "quickening" was common law and not punishable as a crime unless the woman died during the operation. Abortions were commonly performed by local midwives and healers. Women were the backbone of the health movement. Quickening was defined as the first movement of the fetus within the body, about four months along, when it was thought that "rational soul" entered the fetus. Before that, most accepted the theories of Aristotle—that the soul entered the fetus forty days after conception for a male and eighty to ninety days for a female. The movement away from this common law practice was due not to changing attitudes around abortion, but rather medical, economic, social, moral/religious, and legal changes which produced a change in the attitude towards abortion.

In this country, the first abortion laws were passed in the 1820s, in theory, established to protect women from the hazards of surgery (which was avoided if at all possible), especially unskilled abortionists. Change came also because of the need to keep the woman as breeder and child rearer—filling growing labor needs. It is in this period of expansion that the element of the "mystery of life" becomes a part of the anti-abortion laws. One 1850 court decision branded abortion "a flagrant crime because it interferes with and violates the mysteries of nature by which the human race is propagated and continued." More and more states passed laws which made abortion a crime except to save the life of the woman (although some maintained the concept of the right to abortion before "quickening"). The Post-Civil War period produced even greater restrictions on abortion veiled in a morality of sexual repression. The ideology of the legislation of morality, stamping out sins through the court system, was born. In an effort to make the moral, legal, everything to do with sex (even talking) was banned. This created an aura in which abortion is equated with sex (an attitude we battle constantly today) and that both should be repressed, for the protection of the family...a Godly institution defended the loudest by the Catholic Church.

The 19th Century brought about a change in the Catholic Church's attitude toward abortion. The "industrial revolution" caused developed nations to search out new sources of labor and raw materials by colonizing the rest of the world, which involved both church and State. The Vatican recognized early on that forced pregnancy increases church membership at a time when the primacy of Catholicism had been threatened.

For a hundred years the battle for women's right to abortion has continued in the same vein. The state at times has granted women limited access to abortion but not once conceded that the demand for abortion was not at least a sin if not a crime. In 1973 when the United States Supreme Court decided in favor of a woman's right to choose in the case of Roe vs. Wade, we were lulled into a sense of self-control. Yet a closer look at how the legalization of abortion was in practice meant finding many states that never once complied with the law. Where you lived determined your access to abortion, and if federal funds did pay for your abortion, less than 20% of city and county hospitals provided for them. By June of 1977 legal backtracking had already begun from the liberalized abortion laws. Meanwhile the federal government pays for 90% of sterilization costs for poor and minority women.

In the same year in response to pro-choice advances the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC) was formed. Birthed by the Catholic Church's "Family Life Division" organized since 1966 to oppose the legalization of abortion, and stand against sex education in school, government-sponsored child care centers, and government-financed contraception. By 1978 the NRLC had flourished into a well-budgeted organization (to the tune of $3 million annually) with eleven million members. Also flourishing were racist anti-busing groups and militant pro-family groups who organized against women's rights.

A clever tactic of the New Right has been the formation of what seems to be a variety of single issue groups, like one for prayer in public schools, another for right to work (anti-union) laws, others for increased military spending and capital punishment just to cite a few of the favorites among the conservatives. These groups then connect to certain individual political candidates drawing votes into the conservative parties issue by issue, without revealing a total politic. If they can't defeat pro-choice candidates then they elect the anti-abortionists—and eventually they get enough leverage to influence candidates already in office.

Behind closed business offices, however, we would find that all oppressive issues presented by the New Right are connected through their financing, publicity methods using Rich Viguerie's new computerized direct mail systems shared by several right-wing groups and their overall goal of a “conservative revolution." What seems to be single issue organizing is in fact the clever expression of a total politic that must be examined and confronted as such. It is naive and dangerous for any faction of the radical movement to gloss over these connections. Anti-feminist politics in any radical movement will limit the power of our politics by supporting the oppression of women through denying us our right to control our bodies.

To ignore the demand for control of our reproductive processes which includes abortion is a step towards co-opting our movement with a more blatant racism and classism than we must already struggle against. It gives approval to the Pro-Life Movement's image of a woman who wants an abortion as: a woman of "low morals," a woman who threatens the security and sanctity of the American family, a woman who—in the labor force—steals jobs from men who really need them to support their families. A woman who doesn't deserve the right to decide for herself because she should have thought of that before getting pregnant.

The perpetuation of this stereotype paved the way for the next step now in progress—the Human Life Amendment that defines all abortions as illegal, as murder, to be punished through the court system. The abortion issue must be connected in our politics with other threats to reproductive rights; sterilization abuse, inadequate and dangerous birth control and birthing methods, unsafe workplaces, and last but not least an entire health care system long based on sexist, racist, and classist assumptions.

Abortion rates increase not because of a sinful morality, but occur in a social context. As birth rates decrease, abortion increases due to factors not under the control of the individual. Changes in industrialization, in sexual norms, in the availability of birth control methods (none are 100% effective), economic conditions, unemployment, and the presence of women in the workforce, all alter the face of the abortion issue.

While this does not mean that feminists can't organize a pro-choice demonstration or that we do not have responsibility to engage in grassroots organizing, specifically addressing abortion, but rather that our political understanding of a radical feminism be Pro-Choice for all women. To quote from Women Organized for Reproductive Choice in Chicago, "We believe that we must have the freedom to choose how to live our lives—this is what we consider the right to life."

Big Mama Rag, June 1981 - Page 13

Laurie White/Big Mama Rag

Sources:

Women Under Attack: Abortion, Sterilization Abuse, and Reproductive Freedom by the Committee for Abortion Rights and Against Sterilization Abuse. CARASA presents a fine historical and political analysis of the threat to Women's Reproductive Freedom and the movement response—an excellent resource. Copies are available from CARASA, 17 Murray St., 5th Floor, NY, NY 10007. Copies are $2.50 each or ten or more copies prepaid are $2.00 each.

The New Right Vs. Women's Rights is by members of: Women Organized For Reproductive Choice. This is an interesting booklet full of all kinds of information that you wish you didn't have to know, and yet gives a political analysis of Right Wing Anti-Feminism. Good reading! Copies are available from Women Organized for Reproductive Choice, P.O. Box A 3423, Chicago, IL 60690 for $2.00 each or ten or more for $1.50 each prepaid.

Rebirth of Feminism by Judith Hole and Ellen Levine is published by Quadrangle Books, Inc. This is a good comprehensive look at the women's movement with a good chapter on the abortion rights movement, among other things.