IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Soccer Bias Suit Is  
Set For March Trial  

V. Piotter  

A sixteen year old high school girl  
took the Colorado High School Athle-  
tic Association (CHSAA) to court  
in October in an effort to get rein-  
stated on Golden High School's jun-  
ior varsity soccer team. The issue  
was not resolved so a date was set  
in March for the trial which will  
determine whether or not Donna Hoover  
can play soccer at Golden.  

The court action did result in a  
temporary compromise whereby Donna  
is now allowed to practice with the  
team, but may not participate in ac-  
tivity where there is “possibility  
for collision contact." The attor-  
neys for CHSAA had wanted to bar her  
from all soccer practice, including  
running and other non-contact drills.  

Donna Hoover had been with the  
junior varsity team a year and a  
half until September when the asso-  
ciation and school officials barred  
her from practice sessions and scri-  
mage against Green Mountain High  
School. Golden High School soccer  
coach, Tracy Fifer, was placed on  
probation for allowing her to prac-  
tice with the team.  

With the assistance of the Ameri-  
can Civil Liberties Union, Donna  
took her case to Denver District  
Court October 12th on a charge of  
sex discrimination in violation of  
the US Constitution. At this hearing  
she testified that Golden High School  
refuses to allow a girl's soccer  
team and that she has the constitu-  
tional right to play soccer if she  
can perform as well as other members  
of the team. “If we had a girls'  
team at Golden, I wouldn't even think  
of going out for the boys’ team,"  
she said.  

The association and school board  
said that girls should not be allow-  
ed to participate in sports that in-  
volve “high physical risk". (The  
four sports reserved for boys in Co-  
lorado because of CHSAA rules are  
soccer, football, hockey and wrest-  
ling.)  

Golden's soccer coach testified  
that the only soccer injuries heard  
of in school competition have been  
sprained ankles and bruised shins.  
Fifer also testified that Donna isn't  
appreciably smaller than the average  
junior varsity player. Donna is 5'4"  
and 118 pounds while the team aver-  
ages 5'6" and 120 pounds. In Fifer's  
words, the best player is 5'1" and  
106 pounds.  

The school board and the associa-  
tion continued to maintain the reason  
for the boys only rule is to protect  
her from injuries, and that they  
should not be forced to risk liabil-  
ity by allowing her on the team.  

At the lengthy hearing, Donna's  
lawyer, Joan Bret, argued that Donna  
needed the practice with the junior  
varsity team in order to build her  
soccer skills before trying out for  
the varsity team next year. Donna,  
wanting to get in as much practice  
as possible, signed the temporary  
agreement with the CHSAA because the  
soccer season ends this month.  

Donna Hoover said that although  
she was displeased with the results  
of the hearing, she is looking for-  
ward to the trial March 18, 1977.  
She is confident that this time next  
year she will be playing varsity  
soccer at Golden High because she  
knows she has the talent.  

News Project  
Is Underway  

A feminist news service is a step  
closer to reality following a re-  
structuring effort at the Women in  
Print Conference held in late August  
in Omaha.  

Initial planning began a year ago  
at the National Radical Feminist Con-  
ference, where women discussed the  
need for rapid, efficient and accur-  
ate dissemination of news to feminist  
media.  

In Omaha, workshops focused on  
setting priorities and creating  
task forces for research. Areas of  
study include the structure and form  
of the news service and the needs of  
the feminist media.  

More information is available  
from the Feminist News Service, c/o  
Carol Lease, 1220 E. 16th Ave. #4,  
Denver, Colorado 80218. A news-  
letter is available.  

Those of you who read last month's Big Mama are probably still wondering  
about the incredible number of typographical errors you saw in that issue.  
We offer our deep apologies to all who tried to struggle through the arti-  
cles.  

To balance that apology, we want to explain how it happened.  

Since our salary stipend expired at the end of last year, collective mem-  
bers have been struggling to hold down survival jobs while putting the pa-  
per out every month.  

In the course of that struggle, we have made several  
pleas for help and feedback from the community, but very little has been  
forthcoming.  

A few women have responded; even fewer have actually come into  
the office and worked. While we greatly value those women's contributions,  
we feel largely left to struggle alone.  

Occasionally, someone will criticize us, and although such criticisms  
are often valid and necessary, they become discouraging when not balanced  
out by recognition for what we do manage to achieve.  

Working thus in a vacuum, we have burnt out.  

We have been aware for some  
time that the deterioration of our process would eventually show up in the  
paper itself. Last month it did.  

We realize that Big Mama is in a crisis, and we are devoting the entire  
weekend of October 23 and 24 to dealing with it.  

New collective members  
Vicki Piotter and Kathy Riley, collective members and women who now work  
or who plan to work on the paper will learn from the present collective  
what is involved in putting out a newspaper.  

New forms and processes will  
be discussed, and plans will be laid for restructuring and reorganization.  
A report on the weekend will appear in next month's Where We're At.  

Our new collective members have arrived just in time to replace members  
of long standing who have finally and irrevocably burnt out.  

Kate Sharp  
left in September; Woodwoman and Terra will have gone by the time you read  
this.  

The collective still needs a lot more energy, and the paper needs  
help outside of the collective, too.  
Please call the office and let us  
know where we can find you, if only for a few hours’ typing a month.  
We owe an apology, not only to our readers, but to the writers whose ar-  
ticles were rendered illegible by typos last month.  

In this issue, we  
have reprinted the three articles which were worst affected and most thor-  
oughly researched. These are Debbie Taylor's piece on the struggle to  
keep the ERA in Colorado and Terra's feature on alternatives to psycho-  
therapy.  

We can't go on working in a vacuum. We need feedback from our readers.  
Write a letter home to Mama.  

Rice Paper Labor Dispute Ends  

Vicki Piotter  

The eight-woman strike against  
Rice Paper Box Company has ended in  
bitterness for the women involved  
and victory for the company's owners,  
Eugene and Elliot Rice.  

The women, who were box makers at  
the shop, decided to walk off the  
job in mid-June after the company  
refused to negotiate their request  
for higher wages, a guaranteed work  
week, a pension plan, health insur-  
ance, sick pay, and other benefits.  
The women, represented by the Print-  
ing Specialties and Paper Products  
Local 625, felt nothing but lack of  
support from their union, which let  
their six year contract expire in  
June before starting renegotiations.  

All of the women had been employed  
at Rice Paper for at least 14 years,  
while one woman, now in her 60's had  
worked there for 28 years. The wom-  
en felt that the pension plan was  
most important since many of them  
were to retire in another 10 years.  
Their previous contract, which cover-  
ed the past six years, included only  
one benefit of vacation pay, while  
freezing their wages at 3.04 per  
hour, much below the wage other box  
makers had been earning in Denver.  

After the contract expired, Elliot  
Rice flatly refused all of the re-  
quests and told the women the only  
way they could come back to work  
would be through preferential rehir-  
ing and with the same contract they  
had before. The women unanimously  
voted to walk and set up a picket  
line, with four women picketing in  
the morning and four in the after-  
noon. Within three days, Rice was  
employing scab labor; all of the  
scabs were relatives and friends.  

Strikers are not allowed to physi-  
cally stop scabs from crossing a  
picket line, however, the women were  
not hesitant to use verbal harass-  
ment whenever they could. The union  
told the women to stop this practice  
on the picket line, that if they were  
patient, they would have a new con-  
tract and would be back to work with-  
in a couple of weeks.  

Union An Ally?  
After ten weeks of walking, receiv-  
ing only $20 a week in strike pay, and  
watching their union repeatedly give  
in to the company's demands for no  
pension, no health insurance, no sick  
pay, the women began to wonder just  
whose side the union was on. In  
fact, one of the workers said she  
just found out the union told their  
mediator from the National Labor Re-  
lations Board not to show up for any-  
more negotiations, because Rice Paper  
felt the mediator was too identified  
with the workers.  

In September the union secured a  
new mediator, and without consulting  
the women, signed a contract with  
the company which included only a  
17¢ hourly increase. The new con-  
tract also included a clause allow-  
ing preferential rehiring, a clause  
allowing Rice to fire anyone they  
felt responsible for harassment  
while on the picket line, and a  
clause which said the women could  
not file any grievances against Rice  
for actions taken against the women  
during the strike. The women were  
shocked at the agreement and all  
eight voted to reject the contract.  
At this time, the union told the  
women there was nothing more they  
could do for them.  

Dorothy, one of the women involved  
with the strike, expressed nothing  
but bitterness towards Rice Paper,  
the union and the National Labor Re-  
lations Board. She said the union  
and NLRB were in favor of the com-  
pany all along, that the union knew  
most of the women would be unable  
to get another job, and that they  
were just stringing them along until  
they absolutely could not support  
their families on $20 a week.  
Dorothy said that since the strike  
has ended, the unemployment office  
and other agencies are giving all of  
them the run around and that only  
two of them have found new jobs.  
Dorothy said she would probably be  
forced to go on welfare because the  
state of Colorado has done all it  
can to keep her from earning a de-  
cent living.  

Rice Paper Box Company is no long-  
er a union shop and Dorothy wonders  
how much the company had to pay the  
union for this to become a reality.  

IN HER DAY  
Rita Mae Brown, $4.50.  
LOVER  
Bertha Harris, $4.50.  
OPPOPONAX  
Monique Wittig, $4.50.  

YOU CAN HAVE IT WHEN I'M  
THROUGH WITH IT.  
Betty Webb Mace, $4.00.  

Open  
Monday-Saturday 10AM-8PM  
OPEN MONDAYS  
UNTIL THE FIRST  
OF THE YEAR!