NEWS

An Open Letter to the Women’s Movement

ED. Note: The following open letter to the Women's movement concerns a lawsuit which was brought against Robin Morgan, Random House, and Vintage Books by Lucinda Cisler because of allegations that her bibliography was plagiarized in Sisterhood is Powerful. This lawsuit is depleting the money in the Sisterhood fund which ordinarily goes to women’s groups. At the beginning of this month Big Mama Rag attempted to contact Ms. Cisler by writing to her and asking if she wished to tell us about her side of the story before we published any of the criticism concerning her action. She did not respond and so we can only print one

Sisterhood, we say, is powerful. It is springtime, and while the male politics of the sixties grow less relevant in their rhetoric to people’s lives, women move on. This is a period of rapid expansion and outreach for the Women’s Movement as Feminism finds form in new health centers, community women’s centers, women’s studies programs, rape crisis lines, and similar projects which are opening and thriving in every city in the country. As we resurrect/create a female culture, so we find ourselves continuing to walk the tightrope above a crevice of self-destruction. We live constantly with the internal threat of that “woman-hating” characteristic to which we all are socialized, infecting and ultimately destroying all we are trying to build. The often vicious internecine warfare of the Women's Movement is still a present enemy.

But SISTERHOOD IS POWERFUL; it is our strength; it is the title of an anthology that introduced thousands of women to the Women’s Movement; it is a Fund—or rather, it was a Fund. It was an access to money for women’s projects supported by all the royalties from the book Sisterhood is Powerful. The Fund was established by Robin Morgan, who compiled and edited the anthology, to provide financial support for Feminist projects and actions. There are women who have grown rich on the movement. Robin Morgan is not one of them. Rather than profiteering from Feminism, she gave an effective example of real sisterhood in creating the Fund.

It was the first such Feminist “foundation,” and for four years it has given money to a wide spectrum of women's groups. Many of you reading this will know from first-hand experience that funding has gone to women’s centers and health projects, newspapers and anti-rape groups, Lesbian groups, welfare mothers, women’s cultural projects, third world Feminist groups, abortion campaigns, and more. The book royalties to date have approximated $40,000, yes, forty thousand dollars. And there has been no male-style “politicking” in the form of dissemination—groups requested funds, and the checks went out.

Only one example: Two years ago, when the Los Angeles Feminist Self-Help Health Clinic was busted, the Sisterhood Fund sent $2,000 for their legal defense. But two months ago, when three midwives of the Santa Cruz Birth Center were busted also for “practicing medicine without a license”—which will mean a heavy court case challenging the California law against midwifery and the concept of childbirth as a disease—the Sisterhood Fund could do nothing. Because the Fund is being destroyed through a lawsuit brought by a woman, Lucinda Cisler.

Contending that the bibliography at the back of Sisterhood Is Powerful was plagiarized from her “Women: A Bibliography,” Cisler is suing Robin Morgan, Random House, and Vintage Books for a minimum of $300,000. (One might ask: Will she turn it back to the Movement as Robin Morgan did the royalties? But then, again, who ever heard of plagiarizing a bibliography? Many women all over the country compiled bibliographies before or at the same time Cisler did. Similarities in all these bibliographies abound, as anyone doing research in Women's Studies well knows—so the question is really rhetorical.) In addition, Cisler is attempting to get an injunction to stop the printing of Sisterhood is Powerful. The standard book contract requires that all legal fees in such a suit against the publisher are to be absorbed from royalties. Morgan and the fund are powerless to stop this. So, while women in Santa Cruz are fighting to survive the man’s courts, the lawyers hired by Random House are depleting our fund at the rate of approximately one hundred dollars an hour because Cisler is suing.

Robin Morgan, when first faced with the suit, offered Lucinda Cisler the opportunity to settle this within the Women’s Movement, by the establishment of a Feminist court, or by Feminist mediation. But seeking to play a male game by male rules on male turf and with a male lawyer, Cisler proceeded on her original course.

As a result, legal fees for the suit have presently depleted the fund until at least 1976, and if Cisler persists into court the fees will destroy the Fund utterly. And, if Cisler is successful in stopping the printing of Sisterhood is Powerful, the book, a substantive part of the literature of our new and growing culture and a basic women's studies text will go out of print.

Some large questions beg to be answered:

Why?

Why did Cisler wait four years to take this action?

Why did she never approach Morgan personally?

How on earth is it possible to plagiarize a bibliography?

Why is such an apparently futile action being taken when its only effect can be to destroy part of us—the Women’s Movement?

If sisterhood is powerful it must be beyond self-destructiveness. If this case cannot be terminated very soon, the fund is not merely depleted for two years but destroyed permanently, a valuable book will be lost, and another sister will have been taken to the stake by one who claimed to be our own.

We have written this open letter for two reasons: We thought the Women's Movement has had a right to know what is happening with our sister, our book, and our fund. We would also welcome support, including any ideas or statements of solidarity. They can be sent to: Kathy Barry, 2327 J Street, Sacramento, California 95816.

It’s a long way from the self- and sister-lacerating realities of today, to our Feminist vision. But Sisterhood can be powerful, if we dare make it so.

Kathleen Barry, Women’s Advocate - Mary Daly, Feminist philosopher - Adrienne Rich, Feminist poet - Joan Hoff Wilson, Feminist historian.

P.S. The Cisler bibliography is available for $.50; write to Lucinda Cisler, 165 West 91st Street, New York, New York 10024.

A. A. VILLAGE STRIPPER

1403 SO. BROADWAY DENVER, COLORADO 80210 (303) 744-9911

FURNITURE STRIPPING & ANTIQUES PAINT AND VARNISH REMOVED FROM WOOD & METAL RICHARD S. HERMAN

LET’S TRY PULLING TOGETHER FOR A CHANGE.

NWPC Cont. . Evokes Response

Libby Denham

The events of the National Women’s Political Caucus conference held June 27-29 in Wichita, Kan., brought strongly to mind a Happening at a Michigan college I once attended.

In both instances, the depth of understanding of each participant was the measure of the benefit received. The good listener at the conference must have deepened her awareness of the female plight and some of the ways to alleviate it. The good speaker would have enjoyed the satisfaction of having influenced the thinking of a group.

At a national conference, such as this, no legislation can be enacted but some 600 delegates can, and did, express themselves in all the areas of the struggle for women's rights.

The ordinary functions of sleeping, eating and drinking were temporarily suspended as participants attended workshops designed to “awaken, organize and assert” women's political power, responded to intense discussions of Feminist issues from sisters from all over the country and then heard the broader issues of Women's Liberation defined anew by Congresswoman Bella Abzug, Ms. Editor Gloria Steinem and others. A lot of mileage can be gotten from hot baths instead of hot dinners, cheese, crackers and coffee cake.

In the worst tradition of group action, the present financial plight of the National Caucus was left unresolved, unless a miraculous generosity develops among state caucuses — and soon. The national body says it should have 60 percent of its budget financed by membership dues — and suggests at least $10 per member. A determined group of “grass rooters” wants the organization to continue to distribute its political expertise for only $1 per member, citing benefits of broader membership. NWPC has been able to pay only salaries and postage for the past two months —.

The better aspects of group function, I thought, were demonstrated on the day of the shooting of Mrs. Martin Luther King Sr. on the last morning of the meetings.

Chairman Sissy Farenthold made the announcement at the plenary session. The full details of the tragedy were not known and most assumed the civil rights leader's mother had also been a victim of a racially-motivated radical.

An adjournment was announced while a Caucus formed to prepare an expression of sympathy. Consensus was hampered by the earnest desire of one member to make specific reference to racially-motivated violence.

After time for discussion of this point ran out, the objecting member was given responsibility to present the statement expressing sympathy and stressing racial violence to the whole assembly. At this stage she was

More on Page 21