or

A Dark Horse

Pulls
Ahead

by Gin O’Leary

On a cold Sunday afternoon in late March
1976 a group of women gathered together on
Murray Field in Brighton to form a women’s
softball team. They came from diverse
backgrounds and their playing experience
ranged from a low of not knowing how to use
a glove, to players experienced in all the
inner strategies of the game. Bread & Roses,
a women’s restaurant, acted as the team’s
sponsor, paying for the umpires and
equipment needed to join the Boston Parks
& Recreation Department Women’s Softball
League.

Barbara Bing was elected coach, which,
for this group, meant turning the women’s
desire to play ball into the ability to play ball.
In the beginning, Barbara used to sweat a lot
at practices. But that ended quickly and the
players began to do the sweating.

That year, through practice, practice,
practice and more practice, Barbara turned
the “would-be” player into the “I can do it”
player. In their first year of play, Bread &
Roses became a contending team in the
playoffs for the average division.

That first season included an initiation to
the particular trials of women’s softball. The
team weathered a lot together and not just
rain. Razzing from spectators. Motorcycles
cutting through the games. Men refusing to
give up a playing field Bread & Roses had a
permit to practice on. Not being told by
Boston Parks and Recreation that games had

been canceled.

In their first scheduled game, the team
arrived at Chelsea Field only to sit with the
opposing team and watch the field being dug
up by bulldozers. But they didn’t sit for very
long. The two teams found a school
playground in Everett and held a scrimmage
there until dark, proving that when women

want to play badly enough they’ll find a way.

When the season ended, Bread & Roses
placed second in their division in the
Average League. They lost in the playoffs,
knocked out by Finton, the friendly rivals
they had scrimmaged with on that dusty
grammar school playground.

When the season ended, the team
members hung up their gloves. But over the
course of the winter, softball friendships
flourished.

With the spring of ’77 came a new name.
In a political race, the little-known or
unlikely candidate with an outside chance of
winning is called a “dark horse.” These
twenty women intended to be the dark horse
winners of 1977.

That year the team went from playing in
a motley assortment of t-shirts to full-fledged
uniforms right down to matching socks.
These women meant business and wanted to
look as professional as possible on the
playing field.

Again Barbara Bing was the team’s
coach and practices began under the strict
injunction that, “If you don’t come to
practice you don’t play in the next game.”
Practice permits in the city were hard, if not
impossible, to come by, forcing Dark Horse
outside the city to practice at the Fernald
School in Waltham.

The problems of ’76 followed them
through the summer of ’77. One problem
which threatened to escalate from minor to
major was the question of umpires. There
was still only one umpire to oversee an entire
game. In a few cases both teams came away

from the field feeling that the umpire hadn’t
taken the women’s game seriously. There
was even an instance when an umpire turned
his back on the game to chat with a friend.

That year the team lived up to their name
and won their division title in the Average
League. But the Average League title
continued to elude them — they were

eliminated during the League playoffs. In
spite of the setback, the team was proud of
its play. As third base player Cel Meyers put
it, “If you don’t have team spirit, you don’t
have a team, even if you happen to have a
winning record.”

Dark Horse is back together again for
1978. Half of the team’s roster dates back to
the original Bread & Roses team. And
players who are no longer with the team are
rooting for them.

Dark Horse has joined a new league in
Boston Parks and Recreation, the Above
Average League, consisting of 7 women’s
teams. Softball in the city has grown from 32
teams three years ago to 114 this year.

The Above Average League differs from
the other leagues in that women are allowed
to slide, steal, and bunt. This makes the
game more of a challenge both offensively
and defensively. “You have to stay awake. A
player can steal all the way from first base to
home,” as first base player Sandy Martin put
it. And that’s no idle threat. “The women
can do it,” says Cel Meyers.

There are two new coaches for Dark
Horse this season, Sandy Martin and Denny
Davis. Barbara Bing has become the team’s
pitcher. “The team was ready for someone
else to take over,” said Bing who wanted to
play in the games. As coach she hadn’t had
the opportunity.

Practice permits were impossible to come
by again this year but the team managed by
hunting out unused playing fields for
practice sessions.

Happily for the team there are two
umpires per game this season: one behind
the plate, the other on the playing field. This
makes it easier for umpires to make fair
calls. Also most games have been umpired
by women and the players prefer it. As
pitcher Natalie Yarnell put it, “It’s nice to
have women umpiring women’s softball
games, because they’re qualified and you
have the feeling they care about the game
and sports for women.”

Field conditions are as bad as usual. For
example, Noy’s Field is a litter bug’s dream.
Rocks, glass, and junk food wrappers are
abundant. The ground is uneven and when
the ball hits the ground you never know
which way it’s going. Right fielder “Smitty,”
(Pat Smith), has plenty of complaints about
the grounds. One routine grounder rolling
straight toward her glove hit a rock, took a

sharp right, and had her chasing it.

Dark Horse entered the 1978 season with
a modest goal in mind; they hoped to win
only half the games on their playing roster.
They had never played with sliding, stealing,
and bunting before.

Instead, Dark Horse has won every game
they’ve played so far.

What has made them a winning team?
Sandy Martin replied, “It’s in our attitude,
we go out to do our best.” Cel Meyers
admitted, “The other teams haven’t been
there [forfeited] and were unable to capitalize
on the errors we’ve made.”

Dark Horse's last scheduled game was
played against Finton, the team they were
unable to beat in their first year. The game
at Noy’s Field was close, but Dark Horse
won 7 to 6.

Going into the last inning the score was 7
to 4. After two runs scored, Barbara Bing
struck out the batter for the last out. When
the elation abated, the team headed out to
left field where they could be seen on their
hands and knees looking for a contact lens.
(During the game Claudia Turner, the left
fielder lost one while making a play.)

Dark Horse has one more obstacle to face
this year; the playoffs for the Mayor’s Cup.
And Dark Horse is hoping that their third
attempt at the prize will be a winner.

=edco

which include staff development

EDU

is a voluntary,
education collaborative serving
14 school districts in the Greater
Boston area. EdCo offers educators a variety of services
and
focusing on professional growth. For more information
contact EdCo, 738-5600. 20 Kent Street, Brookline, MA 02146

multi-purpose runner women
tennis women
soccer women
racquet women

swimmer women

teacher training

sailing women
read Equal Times, Boston's
newspaper for women. Reach
them with your ad here.

STON

Co-ed Classes

Day and Evening

Boylston School of Electrology

an ETC Company
ENROLL NOW

For a Career in the Para Medical Profession
ELECTROLYSIS “PERMANENT HAIR REMOVAL”

Classes Starting Sept. 11th

Nominal Fee for Use of Clinic
All Work Done by Students
Limited Space Available...Call NOW 266-1806
Ask for Mr. Zack, R.E.—Director
739 Boylston Street, Boston
(across from Lord and Taylor)

Equal Times September 11, 1978 1