A Look at Strategies, Research and Politics

First Conference on Pornography

Kathy Riley

Recently I was one of several
members of Women Against Violence
Against Women in Denver who attended
the national Perspectives on Porn-
ography conference in San Francisco.
(See box). I went for a couple of
reasons: mostly to meet other women
working in the area of violence
against women, but also to work out
my confusions and politics on the
issue of pornography itself.

The confusion is not in my feel-
ings. I get the same feeling in my
gut when I see "Snuff" scheduled at
a local theater as I do when I hear
that still another woman has died
from an illegal abortion. Rather,
the confusion comes from my head:
how to define the whole of porno-
graphy; how to look at it in relation
to other feminist issues, and then—
only then—how to fight it.

Reisman also cautioned that we ought
to pay special attention to cartoons.
Cartoons are powerful conveyers of
ideas, mostly because we view them
expecting humor, and our critical
powers tend to be lowered.

Outside of workshops, much of the
talk at the conference centered
around the relationship of anti-porn-
ography strategies to First Amendment
free speech guarantees. A Saturday
afternoon panel on that subject in-
cluded author Susan Brownmiller,
poet Susan Griffin and San Francisco
lawyers Camille LeGrand and Jill
Lippett. Brownmiller spent much of
her time arguing against the “creep-
ing absolutism" of the First Amend-
ment—our refusal to touch it des-
pite the restrictions imposed by

Many were looking at strategies other than
new laws—such as boycotts, civil disobedience

and harassment...

Is pornography basically anti-
woman propaganda? As one feminist
put it, “the theory of the practice
of rape"? Or to what extent must
we also see it as an industry/institution
with a multi-million dollar
bankroll made off of women's bodies?
If pornography is propaganda/theory,
does it make sense to put our ener-
gies into fighting it, when we have
so few resources or strategies around
sexual assault and battering? Or,
conversely, does it make sense to
focus on rape and battering, when
all around us a multi-million dollar
industry promotes violence against
us—all the way from snuff films to
the "subtle" child porn images in

Playboy?
Clearly, feminists need to do

some thinking about pornography. Yet,
consider all the problems inherent
in even talking about porn: just
getting through the misconceptions—
the old associations of an anti-porn-
ography stance with sexual puritanism
or censorship. Then there's the
question of the law. With nearly
every feminist issue one can name,
changes in the law have been part
of our strategy; it's only with porn
that many of us question, not what
kind of law, but whether we should
have any at all. And then there's
our ignorance of what we're actually
fighting. While all of us read
Right To Life literature when we
were educating ourselves about abor-
tion, few of us go to porn movies
or buy Hustler. Not surprising. To
see another woman bound, gagged,
forced through a meat grinder, is
to watch our own deaths and humilia-
tion; to feel the rage we have to
push back every day just to survive.
Many of us who attended the con-
ference were in that state of ignor-
ance. And that was probably why
Judith Reisman's Friday night slide
show was one of the more powerful
presentations of the weekend.
Reisman, a researcher at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland,
presented "The Evolution of the
Pornographic Environment", a series
of slides, taken mostly from Playboy
and Penthouse. A major part of her
thesis was that even "soft core" porn
(consider the language we're forced
to use) in mass market publications
like Playboy, is part of a massive
marketing strategy aimed at making
child pornography culturally accept-
able. Not by picturing "seductive"

children; but by picturing seductive
women, who look—with their washed
out faces, anklet socks and teddy
bear poses—just like little girls.

She cited the well-worn example of "crying fire
in a crowded theater", and noted
that many of us would place other
rights above free speech or the
"public's right to know." (For
example, most of us would support
striking newspaper unions at the
expense of not getting news for
awhile.)

The accompanying story was
written by one of several mem-
bers of Women Against Violence
Against Women in Denver who at-
tended a three-day “Perspectives
on Pornography" conference in
San Francisco, Nov. 17-19.

The event was sponsored by
Women Against Violence in Porn-
ography & Media (WAVPAM), and
was designed to be a national
conference focusing on analyses
and strategies around the issue
of pornography.

Workshops included discussions
about pornography in relation to
the law, academic research, ra-
cism, children, art and politi-
cal movements, as well as strat-
egy sessions on legislation,
media, organizing, boycotts and
direct actions.

The weekend also included a
poetry reading by Adrienne Rich,
Susan Griffin and Nellie Wong;
a dance at the soon-to-be Bay
Area Women's Building, a speech
on female eroticism by poet/
author Audre Lorde, and a Sat-
urday "Take Back the Night"
march down Broadway in San Fran-
cisco.

The march, attended by 3,000
women, included a guerrilla
theater float and songs by Holly
Near, followed by a spirituality
ritual by Motion, a Bay area
women's performance group.

Denver women who attended
the conference were Pandoura
Carpenter, Fran Day, Crystal
Arp, Lori Bradford, Nancy Egbeighu,
Paula Sperry and Kathy Riley.

Griffin said that for women, free
speech is a goal, not a guarantee,
since we don't have full access to
the media—a point emphasized by
others throughout the conference.

In considering changes in the law,
she said, we must balance the value
of free speech against the damage
being done to women by pornography.
However, Griffin did not argue for
a campaign for new laws; rather,
she urged us to look at other strat-
egies, keeping in mind that porn-
ography, like the issue of rape,
ought to become a "symbol of our re-
sistance" against all forms of vio-
lence against us.

Yet, it was LeGrand's speech that
most confirmed my own opinions on
this subject. She implied that
while an anti-pornography law today
may not automatically produce a
government campaign against Our
Bodies, Our Selves tomorrow, we need
to remember that all enforcement of
laws against pornography is selective
and political: “There is no law in
this country requiring every case
to be prosecuted." As things stand
now, she said, existing obscenity
laws have been loosened; those al-
ready on the books have been re-
versed by the Supreme Court without
a unanimous written opinion; the
judges simply couldn't agree.

Judging by the applause during a
panel, a large number of women at-
tending the conference were already
looking at strategies other than
the law—such as boycotts, civil
disobedience and selective harass-
ment of pornographers; yet, many
others seemed to support Jill Lipp-
ett, who argued that a good law
could be devised if it were “aimed
at the for-profit distribution of
materials."

Panelists did not object to the
passage of anti-child porn laws—
aimed at protecting minors from
abuse—which have been adopted by
many states. Such a law is now under
consideration in Colorado, and has
already passed a Senate committee.
Rather, the panel dealt with the
law question in relation to porn-
ography as it exploits women.

How feminists ought to look at
the law as strategy depends a lot
on how we define porn, another area
that, not surprisingly, women at
the conference couldn't agree on.

If pornography is to be viewed
primarily as the idea that promotes
the act (rape, etc.), then new laws
are not going to work. Historically,
all attempts to legislate ideas
have worked against those who tried
to get those laws passed—unless
those attempts coincided with the
interests of the State. With this
in mind, we might as well work on
stopping the effects of porn. Unless,
that is, we can prove a direct cause-
effect relationship between porn-
ography and actual violence.

The cause-effect question was
another major topic at the confer-
ence. One of the best attended work-
shops, led by researchers Diana
Russell, Pauline Bart, and Irene
Diamond, dealt with current research
on the effects of porn. The work-
shop discredited government studies
(both in the U.S. and elsewhere)
that claim no connection between
pornography and assault. For ex-
ample, while Sweden claimed a re-
duction in sexual assault rates
after pornography became more prev-
alent, that government's study did

confused and poorly attended resolutions session late Sunday, a resolution in support of decriminalizing
prostitution failed overwhelmingly. Since the session did not include time for discussion, it's unclear
why the vote went that way. Was it class/race bias? The fact that the movement in general has such an in-
complete analysis of prostitution? The possibility that, as feminists, we cannot reconcile our anger at
the exploitation of women who are prostitutes from our anger at the existence of prostitution?

Another difficulty I had with
the conference was its politics in
relation to left politics. Generally
speaking, there was little at-
tempt to relate a feminist view of
pornography with "left" issues such
as race, class and economics.

(Which is not to say that these are
not inherent in feminism.)

For example, there could have
been more discussion on how govern-
ments profit from pornography
(through sales taxes, etc.) Although
in fairness, once women start doing
more work along these lines, con-
ferences such as this one will bene-
fit;
MORE ON PAGE 14