In the summer of 1970, Ana Lou Coelho and her four

children left Oakland, California, to go camping on the
Yuba River outside of Grass Valley in Nevada County,

California.

“It was beautiful and we all loved being on the earth
again,” Ana said. “I asked the children if they'd like to
stay — and they said yes, so after spending most of the
summer there, we moved up permanently in Septem-
ber, 1970. I had wanted to get out of Oakland, and get
the children out of the city — so it seemed like a very
good thing. We were all really happy up there. . .”

One year later — on September 25, 1971, life changed
drastically for Ana and her children — Linda, 11; Sheri,
10; Rhonda, 14; and Ronnie, 7. On that day, Ana was
charged with second degree murder and held without
bail in Nevada County Jail. Her children were sent to
stay with their grandmother. She was charged with
killing a man she didn't know in a barroom brawl. The
man was stabbed to death. Ana had been wearing a
hunting knife in the bar the night of his death.

An all-white Nevada County jury found Ana guilty on
December 10, 1971. Ana has three Apache grand-
parents, and one Chicano grandparent.

We met in mid-February, 1972, 25 days after she had
been sentenced to life and transferred to the California
State Institution for Women at Frontera. She was CIW
number 8811.

Ana, five feet tall, her shiny black hair tied in braids on
each side of her small olive face, looked about 17 years
old instead of 32. She wore a prison uniform covered
by a beige prison jacket about three times too big for
her. Her room, small and bare except for bed, toilet,
sink and desk, was decorated with pictures of her chil-
dren. It was obvious that they were as much the focus
of her life in that small barren room as they had been in
their home on the Yuba River.

“I've never been in jail before and to be plunked down
in prison is so heavy,” she said, her hands shaking as she
fixed coffee for both of us in a small automatic pot.
“At times I get so close to losing my mind; I think I just
can’t take it. I’m here for a crime I didn’t commit. I
guess if I wasn’t innocent it wouldn't be so hard, but I
just can’t accept that I'm really here for something I
didn’t do. All during the trial I was optimistic because
I didn’t see how they could find me guilty of something
I didn’t do. Plus... the D.A. had about 30 witnesses
and they told 30 different stories.

“The only thing they all agree to was that I had a knife
I admitted having. I had my hunting knife strapped on
my side, and somebody took it away from me when a
big fight broke out. It turned into a brawl — like a
free-for-all with 15 or 20 people involved. At this point
I was shoved back up against the jukebox. It was like a
football huddle only everyone was swinging, including
myself. It was during this time the man was stabbed. I
had never even seen him until the pictures of him were
shown at the trial. I didn’t even know anyone had been
stabbed until I heard someone yell, ‘Someone’s been
stabbed.’ The crowd had already dispersed, and we
were standing outside when the police came. I was
standing with this friend and someone told the police
officer, ‘Arrest them two because someone’s been
stabbed and either one of them did it.’ The officer told
me to get in the car, which I did.”

Ana said she was wearing the knife because she was
planning to join her children and another family on a
camping trip when she left the bar.

“I always wore Levis, tee-shirt, and a hunting knife on
these camping trips,” she said. “The knife I used pri-
marily in the preparation of meals, making sandwiches,
cutting watermelon or cantaloupe — just general camping
uses. I used it to help skin a rattlesnake once, but I had
a hard time as the knife wasn’t very sharp.”

During the trial, one pathologist testified that it would
take an incredible amount of strength to inflict the
wound — because it penetrated every muscle and tough
tendon and clipped the man’s backbone. He was
slashed from his chest to his waist. Ana, whose first
arrest came with the death, weighs less than 100
pounds. Testimony was contradictory — and even
Ana’s lawyer, David Kogus of San Francisco, couldn't
believe that the jury found her guilty with such scant
evidence.

Although Ana maintained hope for her freedom to the
very end, she knew the odds were against her, just be-
cause of her ethnic background and the attitudes to-
wards her which came out on the front pages of the
local paper and in the courtroom.

“The witnesses were so hostile. And the jury seemed
disinterested. One lady knitted through the whole trial
and another one addressed Christmas cards. I guess
they were hostile, too. I wasn’t an active member of
the community. We lived three or four blocks out of
town. We had made friends with a family with seven
children and apparently the community didn’t like them
so, they were hostile to me because of our association
with them. I didn’t know how unpopular they were
until the trial. It was also against me that I’ve been
divorced six years and I was on AFDC (welfare). All
kinds of negative points. Witnesses said they heard me
arguing and saying things in Mexican or Spanish, but I
can't neither speak Mexican or Spanish, so whatever I
said was in English! It didn't matter to them that I
had been past president of the PTA in Alameda, or
active with the drug abuse council and the Alameda
City Council. None of these things were brought up in
the trial. They said I was on welfare, but they didn’t
say that I had been working with the social worker and
he was putting me on job training. I wanted clerical or
secretarial work, although I'd like to teach roller-skat-
ing. (Ana took third place in the National Roller
Skating Meet in 1956 in Richmond, Virginia, represent-
ing the Bay Area and California.)

“The jury was unbelievable,” her attorney said.

“They were so hostile to her; it was apparent from the
first. Ana was disliked in the area because she was close
to people in a motorcycle gang who had moved to Grass
Valley and terrorized the people. It's a conservative,
white, older community of people who had moved out
to Grass Valley to escape the cities themselves. I was
used to San Francisco juries, and I didn’t anticipate or
see what a small-time jury would be like. Ana had asked
me to get a change of venue and she was right, I should
have listened to her. I’ve been living with this case now
and it’s really rough. Ana has beautiful children, and
comes from a fine family. I feel so strongly about it I
don’t think I'd go back to Nevada County for another
trial.

“There were allegedly two eyewitnesses, but they didn’t
seem like much to me. And I don’t think they’re worth
much ...so I would expect that eventually we'll get her
out on appeal. I’m confident we'll get her a new trial.
I just don’t know whether they'll cut her loose or not.
I don’t know... I can only hope.

“I went to New York to talk to the guy who really did
it. But he’s too scared — he’s on parole — and not will-
ing to confess to anything, let alone open his mouth, ..
so that’s not much help.”

“When I first got here,” Ana said, “I didn’t know any-
thing. Like the first day I went back to my room and it
was locked — I went up to the control desk and asked
if I could have a key to my door. She just looked at me
and said, ‘No, we don’t give keys.’ I said, ‘Well, how do
I get in?’ ‘Just tell us and we'll pop your door,’ the
officer said. I was so scared and ignorant of what I
could and couldn't do, I just stayed in my room that
first week and went so close to going out of my mind —
I was dangerously close to it. I knew I couldn’t stay.
But then I found out we could go out in the yard — plus
I found a copy of the rules and read them and knew
more what was going on.

“It's so hard to write to my kids — there’s nothing to
write but bad things. All I can tell them is someday
justice will be done. Ronnie said, ‘Those people must
be mean to keep you there,’ and I just told him, ‘They
can’t help it — they’re doing what the court ordered
them to do. It’s hard for them to understand — I’m
innocent, yet I’m being punished for it. It's hard for
me to understand too — and I guess I never will accept
it. God knows I am innocent — and if I can just main-
tain my sanity, someday justice will be done. It has to
be. I can’t stand not being with my children.”

(This article is excerpted from a book Kitsi Burkhardt
is writing on women in prison, to be published by
Doubleday in March, 1973. Permission to reprint
should be obtained from the author. We are grateful
to Off Our Backs, a paper for women’s liberation, for
calling Ana Coelho’s situation to our attention.)

My name is Ana Lou Coelho #8811, my
story appeared in your April 1972, Volume II,
Number 8 edition of Off Our Backs.

On the 25th of this month it will be one
year that I have been unjustly incarcerated
for a crime which I DID NOT COMMIT!

I did not receive a fair trial and it
took the jury less than 15 minutes to reach a
guilty verdict. The charge is 2nd degree mur-
der. My conscience is clear and in my heart
I know that I am not guilty of this crime, but
that is of little help as long as I am being
held prisoner of the State of California. My
appeal was heard on August 15th in Sacramento,
California.

What I need is financial help, from any-
one who is willing to contribute. I need
enough money to cover an Appeal Bond, so that
I can be cut loose. The Cut Ana Loose Fund
(C.A.L.F.) has been set up by my mom, but so
far it hasn't been too successful, therefore
I am asking anyone and everyone who is able
and who cares to please donate whatever you
can to the fund. Donations may be sent dir-
ectly to my mom: Rose Spanyard, 1557 79th
Ave. Oakland, California, 94621.

I'm sure that there are other counties,
like Nevada County, in which there is no
justice and its theme song should be “I've
Been Working on the Railroad.” These coun-
ties should be exposed for what they are doing
to innocent people. Everyone, including the
jury, judge, D.A., police and Public Defender
are either related or know each
other very well. And it doesn't matter whether
you are guilty or not, if they want to prose-
cute you they will do it and especially if you
are unliked and not white and an outsider.

For these three reasons and only for these
three reasons, I am a prisoner of the State
in the only Women's Prison in California.

I am asking for your help and anything
you can do will be deeply appreciated by me
and my family.

Thank You Sincerely,

Ana Coelho #8811

Frontera, California

91720
P.S. I wish to express my thanks for all the
letters I have received from all of you out
there who expressed your sympathy, offered
advice and offered to help. You are really
beautiful people.