BMR Community Meeting

Deirdre Reilly

Author's note: Although I attended
the BMR community meeting, I did not
know I would be writing this article.
It is therefore being written with
the assistance of a taped recording
of the meeting.

On Tuesday, May 2, approximately
25-30 women attended the Big Mama Rag
community meeting held at Woman to
Woman as part of an ongoing series.
Members of the collective shared in-
formation about the production of the
paper, politics and finances.

The BMR collective operates under a
process that is a combination of
methods used by other women's journals
around the country. Of Our Backs, of
Washington, D.C., employs the page
system. Each member of a small, closed
collective is responsible for the pro-
duction of one page of the paper.
Plexus, the women's journal of the
Bay Area uses task forces-- small
groups working on independent seg-
ments of production such as typing,
writing, photography, etc. Each mem-
ber of BMR serves on a task force
and is responsible for the production
of a page. This means a commitment to
learning all phases of production. It
also allows for non-collective members
to assist in various phases of putting
the paper together. All copy is read
and approved by collective members.

In this way the content of the paper
reflects the politics and goals of
the collective.

The news items we read come to the
paper from many sources. Local issues
are covered by collective members or
community contributors. News on the
national/international level comes
from over 90 other lesbian, feminist,
gay and socialist publications
throughout the world and two news
services. These can provide stories
or ideas for follow-up stories. The
culture page has contained mostly
book and record reviews written for
BMR. The collective looks forward to
more analysis and dialogue on the arts
and coverage of local events to take
place in this section.

The collective actively encourages
contributions to all sections of the
paper. Clean, readable copy is great-
ly appreciated. Authors will be noti-
fied of the status of their contribu-
tions. Some copy may need editing, or
may be held for printing in a later
issue. Help is also always needed in
distribution and production. It is
best to participate in the full cycle
of production to learn the process
and give the most assistance. About

bmr: where we’re at

We regretfully say goodbye to Clair Kaplan, who's left the collective
this month after spending a full year on BMR. We want to thank her for
all the help she's given us and still continues to give. Clair has done
far more for the paper than merely what was necessary and we
know that she'll continue to be a source of emotional and intellectual
support.

She'll still be helping with production and in the office. We
wish her a carefree summer combing the beaches of Cape Cod. Also, thanks
for reorganizing the bulletin board, Clair. We felt that BMR's community meeting went well. It was a wonderful surprise! We were pleased with
the number of women who attended, the interest shown and the criticism
expressed.

Thanks to all of you who came.

We think that community meet-
ings provide an important forum for feminists to communicate with each
other.

In the future, BMR plans to hold these meetings more often, per-
haps on a quarterly basis with the next one coming up in September. We
would like to hold them at various places throughout Denver, in an at-
tempt to make the newspaper accessible to a larger number of women.

Suggestions for locations have included Denver Free University, Mi Casa and
the Velvet Hammer.

If you have any other ideas, please let us know.

As we promised last month, we are including a financial statement for
the month of April.

We are in the process of discussing the frequency of
these statements; quarterly, monthly, etc., and would appreciate opinions
on this.

Put Your Money

Where Your

Beginning Balance
Income of
Expenses of

Ending Balance

FINANCIAL STATEMENT

APRIL

$261.87
467.67
672.69
$56.85

Itemized Expenses

Telephone bill for
April
Printer for May issue
(12 pgs)
Rent (2 months)
News services
Movement Is
LNS
Hersay
Mailing of paper
UPS (April)
Post Office (April)
UPS (May)
Post Office (May)
Production & office
supplies
Total Expenses

One week after the paper has come
out a meeting is held on Thursday
night to critique the last issue and
start planning for the next. Plans
are made for what events in the
community need coverage and what
other kinds of copy are needed. One
week later (usually the second
Thursday of the month) is the copy
deadline. The following Monday and
Thursday are copy meetings. Stories
are read by all the collective mem-
bers and decided upon for publication.
If needed, copy is returned to
authors for editing. This brings
things up to production weekend--
reportedly a somewhat chaotic event.
Stories must be typed on galley
sheets, laid out, headlined and
everything ready to go to the prin-
ter on Monday morning. The final step
is mailing and distribution and every-
one is ready to start again!

The politics of the collective were
shared by reading from a statement
that originally appeared in the
September, 1976 issue of Big Mama Rag.
The statement was written by previous
collective members (the present col-
lective members are all new as of
the beginning of this year). Portions
of the statement which were not
agreed upon or which had not been
sufficiently discussed were omitted.

Some of the goals are to keep women
informed and to help develop radical
feminist theory and make it relevant
to women's everyday lives. They see
the paper as geared to women of some
political consciousness. BMR desires
to produce a quality paper to as many
people as possible and to pass on
skills related to newspaper pro-
duction. As radical feminists, they
see themselves dedicated to the com-
plete eradication of the present
social system and institution of
another which will not benefit any
one group or class of people at the
expense of any other. They are comm-
itted to the strategy of separatism
as a political means, not a goal.

(BMR desires to encourage feminist
accountability by publishing finan-
cial statements, holding community
meetings, accepting for publication
letters and criticism, and being
open to talking to people on issues
of concern. BMR is presently involved in two
legal actions. The first is a
battle with the IRS over tax-exempt
status. When formed, the collective
requested tax exempt status as the
basis of being a non-profit, edu-
cational operation. The request was
denied, the IRS claiming that non-
profit does not always lead to tax-
exempt and that BMR is not education-
al. Through the process of appeals,
it was also learned that the denial
was made because of BMR's favorable
stand on the issue of homosexuality.
Since this began, two other publi-
cations, Lambda and Quest have received
tax-exempt status. It is hoped
that this will aid BMR's claims.

Tax exempt status will permit people
who make donations to deduct them
from their income tax. The final
appeal on this matter is now in
Washington, D.C.

In addition, BMR along with the
National Gay Task Force and other
publications, is involved in an
action against the federal prison
system. A prisoner was denied
access to BMR because of the polit-
ical content and again, because of
the favorable presentation of
homosexuality. If successful, this
action will permit inmates of
federal prisons to receive BMR and
other political journals.

The discussion following the meet-
ing seemed both open and honest
on everyone's part. There was some
defensiveness, but a general desire
to listen and learn from the crit-
icism offered. The collective is
eager for any and all assistance -
money, time, copy. To keep up with
what is happening - read Where We're
At each month. It is Big Mama
Rag's communication with the
community they serve.

Lesbian/Gay March Plans

Judy Barlow

Denver area lesbian-feminists and
sympathetic gay men have obtained
the parade permit for this year's
Lesbian/Gay Freedom Week March. One
of the group's members said that they
planned to have a political march
this year as opposed to the parades
in celebration of gay pride that have
taken place for the last several years.

A member of the march coalition said
that the purpose of the group was to
stop the objectification of drag
that has taken place in previous "Gay
Pride Day" parades. This year there
will be no floats. The coalition
plans instead, to present a list of
demands including an end to racism
and sexism in the gay community,
support of custody rights for lesbian
and gay parents, support of gay rights
at the legislature, an end to police
harassment of lesbians and gays,
and support of gay youth movements.
The march will begin at 12 noon on
Sunday, June 25th at East High
School and will end with a rally
at the Capitol. People are encour-
aged to start assembling between
11:00 and 11:30.

Kathy Pritchett 723 E. 17th Ave

Denver, CO 80203