8

Big Mama Rag

Vol. 4, No. 3

Miriam Greenspan: Professionalism, Patriarchy, Pillows, and Feminist Therapy

Following is the exact text of a
speech which Miriam Greenspan
presented at the Feminist Therapists Conference in Boulder, Colorado on January 23, 1976.

My subject tonight is therapy and its
relation to the liberation of women
under capitalism. In preparing this
talk, I remembered one of my earliest
experiences in training as a therapist
in a reputable, psychoanalytically
oriented, male-dominated program.

Naively, I used to talk in supervision
and in case conferences about my
experiences helping and being
helped by women, experiences
which I felt had contributed to my
understanding of what was “therapeutic.” This tended to irritate my
supervisors. Their message to me
was quite clear: “Your experience
doesn’t count as experience. That
was friendship; this is therapy. That
was amateur hour; this is forty
bucks an hour.

All of us trainees could now put
behind us anything we thought we
knew or understood about people,
men and women, politics, friendship,
love, sex, pain, health, anger
and strength. Chuck it all. The professional study and practice of
therapy was something utterly new
and different from our experiences
as human beings in this society and
required an utterly new and esoteric
jargon. And to continue, in my naive
way, to cling to this idea that my so-called personal experience as a
woman, the journeys I had made and
seen other women make, that this
personal experience was every bit as
valuable as psychological research
and "years of clinical experience,” to
continue on this path was to be
labelled downright unprofessional
and “overidentified with the patient.”

Well now I have very little trouble
admitting that by the standards of
the male mental health establishment, I am incorrigibly unprofessional. I am even brazen enough to
make a virtue of this liability and say
that those same professional standards
of knowledge and expertise
have contributed largely to the sexist
ideology that keeps women running
to shrinks and keeps shrinks in the
money, professionally exploiting
them. And that feminist therapy has
very much to do with collapsing
these professional standards and
demystifying the process by which
people help one another struggle to
change themselves and to change
society. And, finally, that feminist
therapy has everything to do with
“identifying with the patient!”

So first, I want to talk about professionalism. Professionalism is
ideological in nature. By ideology I mean a set of beliefs which are used
to support, reinforce or maintain the
existent structure of class and sex
domination in this society. What professionalism does is to posit two
groups or classes or kinds of people —
the expert and the layman.

The expert is vested with knowledge of the truth. In our society, he
is invariably seen as a scientist because truth is measured by scientific criteria. In former historic eras,
these criteria were religious (the
truthmakers and truth knowers were
clergy, divine kings, etc.) As bearer of
the truth, the expert is sanctioned in
the power he wields over the second
kind of person — the layman.

The layman is not the maker of
truth. He is the victim of it. He has no
choice but to follow the dictates of
the expert because the expert knows
and he does not know. And knowledge, especially in our society, is
power. So the expert is the subject,
the actor; the layman is the object
acted upon.

In the psychotherapy field, professionals have created their own
group of passive people — patients
who learn, above all, how to act, i.e.
sick, and what to expect, i.e. to be
saved from themselves by their
shrinks. Patients who turn to the
professionals for what they are
taught to believe does not exist
within themselves — resources,
skills, knowledge, power. Professionals are fond of calling this kind of
thing "magical thinking” on the part
of the patient but they are usually
blind to the ways in which this kind
of thinking is, in fact, encouraged
and supported by the professional
code.

Now if the professional is a man
and the patient is a woman, this
process is all the more intensified by
the sexist ideology which makes this
kind of relationship — the passive,
helpless, unknowing female who
turns to the male for power — quite
acceptable, in fact the “normal” relationship between the sexes in our
society. In short, what professionalism in therapy gets down to is the
sanctioning of the professional's
power to exploit the sufferings of the
patient for profit.

Women, as we all know, are the
largest group of people exploited in
this way by professional experts.
This is largely because of what I've
just said — because women are conditioned everywhere else in the
society to fit into the passive mold.
So the professional relationship is a
less alien, more habitual relationship
for women than for men.

Professionalism, both by its theory
of female personality and by its
ideology of the expert, helps to keep
women in this passive mode. In
short, professionalism in therapy is
in the interests of the male ruling
class, the class that acts to keep
women, as well as poor men, in
positions of political, economic, and
psychological powerlessness. So the first point I want to make is
that professionalism is a political
issue, a class issue, not an issue of
expertise only. And when I hear,
therefore, of a school whose stated
goal is to professionalize the training
of feminist therapists and sanction
that training with the approval of the
APA (American Psychological Association), my excitement is counterbalanced by a grave sense of caution.

Feminist therapy was created and
continues to be created by women in
the process of salvaging our lives
from the ancient strangleholds of
patriarchal authority. What can the
APA tell us about that struggle and
that process? And if we agree, as I
think we must, that they can tell us
nothing, then why turn our energies
to winning their approval?

The answer, at least in part, is
economic: feminist therapists, like
everyone else in capitalist society,
must try to earn their bread. I am not
underestimating the difficulties involved here. I am currently working
on the periphery of respectability
without a license and without malpractice insurance. When women
ask me if I'm insecure about the
latter, I usually answer that I don’t do
the kind of work that would lead my
clients to want to file suit against me.

But that answer is, I realize, glib. It
is not easy to work without the protections, benefits and privileges of
professional respectability. I spent
rough times getting credentials.

I am aware of the efforts which the established boys have undertaken in
California and which will no doubt
happen elsewhere.

Indeed, as is usually the case, we
have good reason to be paranoid:
they (the professional elite) are out to
get us because, among other things,
we are infringing on their markets.
So I'm quite familiar with the problems and contradictions of credentializing necessities. The way I've tried to get around those contradictions is
to get the minimal credentials needed
in order to work without getting
busted while steering clear of the
professional organizations like the
APA.

I'm quite certain that the APA
would find the kind of work I do reprehensible. But what is the APA? It
is a political body which functions to
define standards of professionalism
and to work and lobby for the
interests not of clients but of professionals. It is interested in “therapeutic” issues only as defined within
this framework of state-approved
protection for the professional but
not for the client. APA ethics make
this quite clear. It is, as we know,
unethical for professionals to
advertise. The APA occasionally excommunicates members for
violating this rule.

But what does this rule have to do
with ethics? Absolutely nothing. The
rule serves, first of all, to mystify the
fact that professionals have to sell
themselves to earn a living. It makes
it appear that professionals are
above such contemptible capitalist
transactions. The professional can
say: "I'm a pro — I don’t need to sell
myself like those workers."

In other words, the rule is part of
the creation of the image of the
expert. Now in a sense, it is true that
the pro is above it all; because by
virtue of his status as the expert he is
allowed certain privileges (money,
prestige, authority) not accorded to
working people.

A second thing the APA rule
against advertising accomplishes is
that it keeps the handling of patients
in professional hands. That is, despite the fact that the relationship between doctor and patient is supposed to be private and confidential, by and large we do not have a
consumer system where professionals advertise and people shop
around for therapists until they find
one suitable to their needs. What we
have instead is elaborate referral
systems which amount to this: that
patients are owned by their doctors.
The doctor is empowered to transfer
ownership of his patient to another
doctor if deemed necessary in his
professional opinion.

The patient who decides that she
wants to find another therapist on
her own is not allowed to do so without the owner's permission and approval. Therapists and other professionals are the only consumer items
in the capitalist marketplace that
own their buyers in this way. If the
patient is defiant and leaves the
doctor of her own accord, she is
usually told that she'll never be able
to solve her problems. In short: the
pro puts a hex on her.

So all of this — the professional's
superior status as expert and his
ownership of the patient — is reflected
in that one small APA rule not to
advertise. It's no wonder that the
APA watches over this rule like a
hawk, and expels violators.

But how many members does the
APA expel for the psychic destruction
of women through sexist therapeutic practices? How many
members does it expel for the
damaging psychic consequences of
routine class-bias in therapy? How
many clients does it support when
occasionally they have the strength
to fight therapists who have been
responsible for untold psychological
and sometimes physical crimes
against them?

What I am suggesting is that the
fact that the APA has never responded to the real ethical insults
involved in traditional therapy is not
simply an ethical mistake that can be
solved by reform within the APA because the fact is that the APA is one
of the many organizations that ideologically supports and represents the
interests of the male ruling class.

And secondly, I am suggesting
that bad therapy for women is not a
unique instance with some individual
sexist therapists — bad therapy for women is institutionalized and
systematic and, among other
things, inevitably related to the
politics of professionalization in
therapy.

Professionalization has created an
elite class of experts who have two
jobs: (1) to promulgate psychological
theories which serve as ideological
apologies for the sexist treatment of
women and (2) to protect the “professional standing,” i.e. the profiteering of these professionals at the expense of their clients. And
organizations like the APA are there
to protect these experts and make
sure that this job gets done.

So what we need to do is to publicly, as a feminist community, symbolically “prosecute” the organizations which protect these doctors —
the American Psychiatric Association, the American Psychological Association, the state licensing agencies, etc. We don’t need to join these organizations; we need to fight them.

So I am not afraid that these agencies will not accept us as legitimate therapists. I am not afraid that, recognizing the threatening revolutionary potential of feminist therapy, they will wisely act to protect their own vested interests. I am not afraid that they will shut us out. But I am afraid, I am very much afraid that these agencies will accept us — and thereby co-opt and buy us off.

What does it mean to be accepted by the APA? It means professional feminist therapists will not have to worry so much about job security. It means professional feminist therapists will be firmly ensconced in the cozy warmth of bourgeois respectability. It means that professional feminist therapists will be sanctioned to charge outrageous fees. To those who say, but we don't have to charge these fees, just because the APA would allow us to do so, I urge you to consider how the APA might respond to being undersold by feminist therapists on the psychotherapy marketplace. It is simply not professional to charge fees on a sliding scale. Above all, APA approval means protection for some women at the expense of others, who will be non-legitimate by APA standards, and that means most of us, right now. It means furthering divisions within the feminist therapy community, divisions not only between legitimate and non-legitimate therapists but between the therapist and her clients, many of whom have no such privileges or protections.

It means, therefore, enhancing the power differential between clients and therapists. But isn’t feminist therapy, perhaps more than anything else, centrally concerned with minimizing this power differential? Professionalization of feminist therapists runs head-on into this major contradiction.

So, to conclude my remarks on professionalism then, at the Socialist/Feminist Conference in Yellow Springs last July, I heard Charlotte Bunch say to lesbians: "It’s not ok to be queer in patriarchy and we should not try to make it ok.” And I am saying “It is not ok to be revolutionary feminist therapists in capitalism and we should not try to make it ok.” We don't need to waste our energies playing with the APA. We need to build feminist networks and organizations and collective work groups and patient advocate groups to help each other and ourselves trust our own standards for therapy, not the standards that have crushed us; to protect and support each other — therapists and clients — and not the organizations which would like to crush us; to validate our own work and not to have it validated for us.

So, having said all this, including the rhetorical flourishes, I am left with the question: “What in the Goddess’ name is this thing called revolutionary feminist therapy?” I'm afraid I may talk a lot better about what it is not than what it is, but I would like to present some ideas which have grown out of the last few years of my life, out of the struggle to begin to integrate feminism, socialism, woman-loving and therapy.

It's probably clear from my remarks that I feel that there are some profound differences amongst us as feminist therapists. What I'm hoping to do in this talk is not to further those differences but to acknowledge that they already exist and to bring them into bold relief so that we can struggle around them. What I want to do is to help clarify our differences, both from traditional therapy and from each other by talking about three basic models for therapy: the traditional or patriarchal model, the reformist or liberal feminist model, and the revolutionary or socialist feminist model.

I think we're all pretty familiar with the traditional model, and so I'll make my remarks on it brief. In this model, there is the doctor, the man with an exclusive and highly esoteric professional expertise, gained at considerable expense and available, generally, only to members of the middle or upper classes. To him, the Father with all vested authority and power, knowledge and magic, the woman turns for help. She is the supplicant, the patient.

As patient she is pre-defined as ill and all of her words, gestures, mannerisms, qualities of speech, virtually everything about her is seen as “symptoms” of her illness. She is seen to have no legitimate social/political/economic concerns; these are all viewed as material, the technical term for the conscious manifestations of her illness.

In other words, these concerns are all “interpreted” out of existence, delegitimized by the doctor. “Real concerns such as poverty are not seen as within the purview of therapy. It is the woman's job to report the material of her illness, the doctor's job to cure her of it (by cultivating and bringing to completion her “transference neurosis”). In all cases, he knows her better than she knows herself. The doctor is the epitome of the expert.

To those who would ask: “But why is this model particularly damaging to women? Aren't men patients too?” my answer is that the model is patriarchal. The clear social archetype for this model is the relationship between the father and his children in the nuclear family, a relationship which indeed is destructive to male as well as female children.

The difference is that little boys can grow up to be fathers themselves, to wear the robes of power, while little girls cannot. Girls are instead socialized to remain children, to replace their fathers with husbands, in whose hands they, in turn, place their identities and their beings. The son can kill the father or succeed him. The daughter must bow her head to the father.

The psychiatrist is the last in the line of these (at best) benevolent patriarchs. Both male and female alike are tremendously dependent upon a doctor whom they see as all-powerful and all-knowing.

Freud, of course, was inclined to see these fantasies as projections that the patient transferred onto the doctor, remnants of unresolved Oedipal conflicts. But needless to say, Freud had no political analysis of why these major conflicts were bound to arise in the patriarchal nuclear family set-up. Nor did he see how the actual structure of the psychoanalytic therapeutic situation was bound to recapitulate these family themes. In other words, what he saw as purely intrapsychic phenomena — the transference of rational feelings onto a doctor fantasized as all-powerful — are, in fact, objectively built into the structure of the traditional therapeutic relationship, in which the professional patriarchal doctor is a member of the dominant class and sex and in which he wields the power that this class and sex privilege give him.

To summarize, in traditional therapy, both the ideology by which women are defined and the actual therapeutic situation enforce the system of male domination. The model of health here is the oppressed woman who is mystified by her oppression into thinking her problems are purely personal. And the model for the therapeutic relationship is patriarchal — Daddy versus little girl. The doctor learns how to cut off all feeling in himself and manage or patronize feelings in the patient.

Therapy in this context is the attempt to finish off a sexist socialization process that began in the nuclear family and this time, to accomplish it fully, to succeed where the family failed. And to do this means, of course, to help keep women in their place.

So this