7

Class Struggle: Our Shared Responsibility Cont.

9. Less care taken over verbal clarity than over verbal impressiveness, less
concern with being understood than with sounding good.
12. The lesser likelihood of middle/upper class people to acknowledge or
respect the work and accomplishments of others due to a feeling of overall
superiority, regardless of the area involved.
11. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class people will feel that a
menial job is beneath them, that they can't function in a meaningless, un-
fulfilling job and that they deserve something better than such a job.
12. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class people will feel that any
way of making money is okay—the lesser likelihood that they will be prin-
cipled about how they make/get money or even understand that there are such
things as "dirty money" (money from Dad, the banker or corporate executive),
privileged money (inheritance or money acquired from a privileged education
at a prestigious school), exploitative money (money from being a boss or land-
lord) or cooptive money (money from being a professional "feminist", from a
government grant or from being in management).
13. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class women do not have an
understanding of survival and as such only give lip service to the survival
issues of the poor and those on welfare, i.e. do not come out politically
against such things as welfare and food stamp cutbacks.
14. The greater likelihood that middle/upper class women are viewing women
entering the workforce as a new aspect of women's liberation—when working
class women would tell them that women have always been a part of the work
force; consequently, work issues have only recently become a priority be-
cause middle/upper class women are beginning to face some of the bad con-
ditions themselves.

The following discussion of professionalism is far from complete—but be-
gins to connect feelings of workers and professionals and where they are in
conflict. Professionalism as an ideology is dangerous to the women's move-
ment (refer to definitions). The need to have the women's movement advance
the professional options of women might have us believe that equal access in
to capitalist privilege for women would eliminate sexism when that option
has not even worked for white men. In a classist society equal access for
all women into capitalism will never be real.

A Discussion of Professionalism
and Worker Responsibility

Miriam Greenspan, keynote speaker at the Feminist Therapists Conference
in Boulder, Colorado, on February 23, 1976, (see BMR Vol. 4, No. 3, March,
1976), defines professionalism as follows:

Professionalism is ideological in nature. By ideology
I mean a set of beliefs which are used to support,
reinforce, or maintain the existent structure of class
and sex domination in this society. What profession-
alism does is to posit a set up of two groups or class-
es or kinds of people—the expert and the layman. In
our society, he is invariably seen as a scientist be-
cause truth is measured by scientific criteria. In
former historic eras, these criteria were
religious (the truthmakers and truth knowers were
clergy, divine kings, etc.). As bearer of the truth
the expert is sanctioned and given permission in the
power he wields over the second kind of person—the
layman.

The professional, professionalism, within the women's movement is in a
precarious position. We write this because women have been denied posi-
tions of power, money, and authority based purely on sex. Finally, as women
begin to make advances through temporary reformist measures into more careers
with more power, money, and authority, we must recognize that this kind
of political advancement leaves out most working class, poor, and minor-
ity women. The class position of most professionals is overwhelmingly co-optive
because for them to oppose their own class oppressiveness is to oppose their own self-
interest. The women's movement throughout its great mass has no class analysis, although it
has some class consciousness.

I'm so confused...
Are we really sisters?

When you finish
typing that letter
for me, go pick up
those office sup-
plies you ordered

and on your way
back pick up some
coffee for the
office.

The ability between the profession-
al and her political community,
and no great support from the
community's strong opposition
to classism to make her job
less cooptive. It is a pol-
itically dangerous position.
The careers that are labeled
"professional" are not neces-
sarily corrupt in nature. But
in this society we must recog-
nize that access into these
areas is still most open to white males of class privilege. Class privilege, like
easy access to higher education, must be recognized as real privilege and a
source of classist attitudes, i.e. a source of oppression.
because for them to oppose their own class oppressiveness is to oppose their
own self-interest. The women's movement throughout its great mass has no
class analysis, although having some class consciousness. There are no ave-
nues of accountability between the professional and her political community,
and no great support from the community's strong opposition to classism to
make her job less cooptive. It is a politically dangerous position.

The careers that are labeled "professional" are not necessarily corrupt
in nature. But in this society we must recognize that access into these
areas is still most open to white males of class privilege. Class privilege,
like easy access to higher education, must be recognized as real privilege
and a source of classist attitudes, i.e. a source of oppression.

How do we as radical feminists take advantage of the privilege of educa-
tion without noting its inherent class oppression? When we take advantage of
a privileged alternative unchallenged, are we really being given power by the
society through the manipulation of the poor and working classes? It's not
just the jobs we hold that define our class view, but rather we need to de-
cide whose class interests our attitudes and behaviors support.

American consumerism paves the way for an individual to strengthen or
change her class position. Consumerism's demands keep those with little
money in debt, keep the welfare lines steady, and support upward class mobil-
ity. Consumerism leaves the individual always striving: no matter what your
class position, it is never good enough—and if you are in the “right” class,
your position is secured by the oppression of others.

How painful to recognize how rarely we truly have a sense of power over
our lives. In order to survive we regularly make concessions to a society
that has its foot on our throats. Part of the privilege of the middle and

Drawings by Nicole Hollander

There are no avenues of account

upper classes, and professionals, is a greater chance at job security. A
lawyer with offices of her own has more personal control over her life, and
more direction and control over the lives of others, than the worker whose
job security and life situation could be changed with little or no notice—
a worker who only takes orders. The higher your class position, the greater
a sense of personal control capitalism and patriarchy allows. This ability
to be upwardly mobile enhances the option of strengthening our own class
positions.

There is no easy balance to be found for women trying to organize
around how we personally and politically have control over our lives. More
and more, however, we find that personal strength seems to rally around real,
directed, political struggles—as we are educated, not through traditional forms,
but through constructive criticism and hard-fought political growth and com-
promise.

Our merely wanting to have more poor and working class white and minor-
ity women join the women's movement does not mean our politics don't continue
to alienate those women. Political struggle and growth offer better proof of
the radical women's movement's desire to work politically with all women. To
get that foot off of all our necks, we also need to be careful where we put
our own damn feet.

Although professionalism, with its resultant privileges and power, is
just one aspect of class oppression, it is perhaps one of the most prevalent
and threatening problems of the present women's movement. Professionalism
(professional careers and attitudes) is widespread because of the roots of
the present independent women's movement. Historically, the women's move-
ment was a reaction against sexism in the middle class, white, male-dominated
left. Although, certainly, there were highly oppressed groups organizing
against capitalism, and women within those groups making feminist connections,
it was white women from the highly privileged white male left, who most visibly
put forth the feminist analysis that characterizes the “second wave" of
feminism. This is due to the fact that these, mostly middle class women,
were educated, articulate and monied enough to get their ideas published and
were free enough from economic and racial oppression to push for an extensive
analysis of the oppression of women. Certainly, the best analysis of the
women's movement have always included an uncompromising anti-capitalist stand
taken not only on the basis of the oppression of women but of all oppressed
groups. However, it is perhaps the prevalence of women from middle class
and upper class backgrounds within the movement that has always posed the
greatest threat to the movement's radical politics. By this, we certainly
do not mean to say that there is no place in the movement for women of such
backgrounds, but we do mean to say that such women need to struggle seriously
against the realities of their being holders of substantial privilege—they
must establish a class-rooted need for attacking capitalism. Those of us
for whom professionalism is an option (due mostly to greater education) must
reject such an option. We must reject professional vocations and our uncrit-
ical belief in their value (using a traditional professional career in a
traditional way is different from using some of the skills associated with
that profession in non-oppressive, accountable ways), if we are to assure
ourselves of a decidedly anti-capitalist movement. This is because, no move-
ment, no matter how idealistic, can succeed if it does not stem from its own
self-interest. If we have been born and bred to privilege we must force our-
selves to tangibly reject privilege. When we have access to professional

careers, we have one of two principled options. We can either reject those
careers or reject leadership roles in the movement. Decisions about the
movement's goals and strategies as well as about specific ways in which
professionally associated skills (medical, legal, educational, etc.) will be
used by the movement must be made by those who have the least to lose from
attacking the system, i.e. the least privileged. The movement must lead out
of its own self-interest if we are to ensure the elimination of capitalism/
patriarchy.

A woman with particular skills must be able to share her skills with women in
the community. If she is a lawyer, then workshops should be used as a means
of de-mystifying legal language, court procedure, teaching law research and
other legal skills. Women who are involved in legal cases must make the deci-
sions on how these cases will proceed. If a woman is a doctor she must teach
about self-help and de-mystify medical language and technology.

When women with professional skills make a living from those skills, they
must be willing to be accountable to their political communities for such
things as political decisions, fees, process, education, and accessibility
of skills. Individual women and groups must make their skills accessible in
ways that are not oppressive to working class women, i.e. they must be willing
to share skills and establish a sliding scale of payment. They must organize
themselves collectively with policies that demand equally shared hours, take-
home pay and types of work done (including shit work), regardless of varying
education and experience. Financial considerations of such responsibilities
as children and care for the elderly must be provided for within such groups.
Childcare or financial responsibility for childcare must be a commitment
of the group. Skills that the group uses must always be accessible to both
women in the group and women in the community.

Workers too, have a responsibility to be aware of and challenge profes-
sional and classist attitudes while at the same time refusing to buy into
those attitudes. Also, we as workers have to have guidelines for how we work
together. For example, although doing our jobs well may earn us raises, we
must be careful not to "set the pace" in the workplace so that the management
will not use us as an example to push other workers to a faster pace. On
the other hand, we cannot do less than our share because we must not dump our
workload on other workers. Hourly wages and raises should be discussed with
other workers so that everyone can, in a non-union shop, push for higher
wages. Workers should find ways of building trust with other workers so they
can present a solid front to the bosses. Capitalism profits from workers
being divided, just as it profits from racism and sexism.

All of us share equally in the responsibility to struggle against classism.
Women from middle and upper class backgrounds must reject the privilege
they have and working class women must reject striving for privilege they
might acquire. This struggle is equally difficult and threatening for all of
us, but is necessary in order to really confront the roots of our exploita-
tion and to build for a pre-revolutionary movement. Revolution is not our
goal, but rather our goal is a non-hierarchical, non-oppressive post-revolu-
tionary society. Classism must be a radically feminist issue.