IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Therapists Conference Gee

From Page 7

communication on behalf of
WIAP were brought up. Workshop
leaders had little advance
notice if their proposed workshops
were to occur. They were
also not informed they would be
taped and asked to sign a waiver
of rights to the taped material.

The group decided to ask
WIAP for a specific conference
budget. Since the conference
was planned for 200 women,
and 350 actually attended, uses
for the surplus money needed to
be explored.

The meeting adjourned with
the information that Hogie
Wyckoff was receptive to allowing
time for the group to read
their statement, directly following
her speech.

Radical Therapy vs. Radical
Therapy in Action

Saturday night, the third keynote
speaker, Hogie Wyckoff,
spoke on “How Women Can Reclaim the Power to Create Their
Own Mental, Emotional and
Physical Well-Being.” Wyckoff
outlined radical psychiatry as
put forth by her therapy collective. 
On the question of professionalism, 
she said the power of
the word “psychiatrist” should
be taken over by those practicing
in a radical counseling
framework. “Anyone who is
competent as a soul-healer
should be called a radical psychiatrist, as noncredentialed, but
with commitment to ongoing
training, collective quality control
and group therapy.” Wyckoff was careful to express the impossibility of individual liberation without social liberation. She saw social liberation as coming because people are basically good. Her statement, “there won't be a violent revolution, but a spiritual one,” was met with applause. She closed by granting that there is a need to work within the establishment since so many women are in the establishment. She hoped, however, that the same values would be held by both professional and radical therapists.

The statement protesting the organization of the conference and the conference fees was supposed to be presented at this time. Instead, Wyckoff opened a question and answer period on the topic of radical psychiatry. During the question period, Donna Smith of the Boulder Women’s Health Group requested three times that she be allowed to present the statement. Finally, after about a half hour of discussion, Wyckoff turned the podium over to Smith and the statement was read.

One woman responded to the statement by saying that she felt the conference was good and that the criticisms were valid, but she asked if they couldn't be made at another time. While most women applauded, a small group of women shouted, “No.” At this point, Hogie Wyckoff announced she was ‘facilitating’ the meeting and asked if people wanted to discuss the dissidents’ concerns. A great deal of confusion and discussion ensued over whether or not to deal with the issues. Wyckoff seemingly did everything in her power to diffuse the discussion; whenever an especially controversial issue was raised she would interrupt to ask if women wanted to continue. Despite Wyckoff's attempts, discussion did ensue. Many of those who had previously not wanted to be “bothered” with political hassle began to raise questions of their own. Conference planners in the audience were asked to explain their decisions and to give a financial report. One woman who had worked on the conference for a mere three days tried to reply, but she could only plead ignorance owing to her short association with WIAP conference planning. Women expressed a feeling of “impotence” at not having their questions answered. At this point, Miriam Greenspan demanded to know where Ann Schaef was and why she was not answering. To this, Schaef, who was seated in the balcony, grinned for quite some time, eventually responding, “I don't have to talk if I don’t want to.” When repeatedly pressed by a number of women to be accountable, she promised a meeting in the morning which would include a budgetary disclosure, although she failed to name a time and place for the meeting. Soon after, the evening dissolved in confusion.

As the meeting dispersed, several women approached Wyckoff to ask her why she felt it was necessary to derail the discussion every time it got going. Wyckoff accused the women of ganging up on her. When the women informed her they were all there independently, she asked them if they were trying to “run a paranoid trip” on her, and stalked off, saying, “all right, you get your gang and I’ll get mine.”

Getting Down to Business

On Sunday morning conference participants met for the scheduled opening session.

At this meeting, Anne Sprague read a statement on behalf of WIAP in which WIAP attempted to speak to the issues of the day before. The statement included a rather vague financial report and the promise to send out an inclusive one to conference participants at a later date. The statement also explained that WIAP had bought a conference “package deal” from the University of Colorado and that they had charged $40.00 per person to cover the cost of the university’s conference price. Members of WIAP were also asked to stand so that they could be recognized in the event of conference participants wanting to ask them questions.

A few more announcements were made after this meeting and the gathering was dismissed to attend the workshops. A few women verbalized the feeling that they wanted to remain and talk out the political issues which had pervaded the weekend. Other women said they wanted to get on with the work of the conference, i.e., the workshops. Others replied, “This is the work of the conference!”

Eventually, about 50 women decided to stay, including four women from WIAP. The WIAP women, however, were neither long-time participants in WIAP nor were they at all informed about conference matters. Heated dialogue went on for some time between these two groups. The more the dissident group raged over the indefensible contradictions and political naivete of the conference, the more the opposing group felt obliged to defend WIAP, the conference planners, and Anne Schaef. WIAP representatives assured the group that they were there because they were interested in the issues and not because they were delegated by WIAP to stay. It became painfully clear that the WIAP members who stayed could not answer for WIAP and that they were taking the heat for those WIAP people who were in positions of power.

Frustration mounted and women wanted their objections to be heard by both the entire conference population and by those accountable for the actions of WIAP. The decision was made to draft a statement to be read at the luncheon meeting. What ensued was an exhilarating discussion of radical feminist therapy. A political discussion of length and fervor was taking place. Basic feminist theory was being related in real and specific ways to the field of feminist therapy. Guidelines for feminist conferences and the need for accessibility and accountability of conference planners were being discussed.

The suggestions for future feminist therapists’ conferences were as follows:

— Make time and place available for anger, objections and evaluation of conference processes

— Institute before, after, and during-conference accountability

— Weigh words like “feminist” and “alternative” carefully when using them in conference publicity so that they become a reality

— Consciously solicit a broad range of women at the planning stages

— Make conferences accessible to women who can't afford to pay

— Use women's energy to do a conference a woman's way. Don't buy a package deal from the white male system located in a white male facility

— Establish an equitable way to distribute any conference profits

Suggestions for conference planners:

— That there be a statement on the use of conference profits

— That profits be used to disseminate information on the workshops and to establish and distribute a nationwide roster of feminist therapists

Criticisms of this particular conference:

— That there was exploitation of the labor of workshop leaders and all other participants

— That there was no consumer (meaning those receiving therapy) input.

During the meeting on conference organizing, roughly 300 other conference participants met for workshops which were set up to draft participants’ definitions of feminist therapy. The atmosphere of the workshops was tense. Many women had mixed feelings; some women expressed that they really wanted to be at both their workshop and the meeting. They had found other conference workshops valuable and wanted to get the most for their money, but they could also relate to the issues being raised. Still other women were angry at the energy being “ripped off” by the confrontations.

Pillow Punching Prevails

The luncheon following the workshops was the final event of the conference. Ann Seidon, a psychiatrist, spoke at the luncheon to divided and drained conference participants. Seidon expressed her belief in the importance of taking over established systems, while agreeing with the need for alternative mental health facilities. Addressing the question of compromise in working with the establishment, Seidon warned that the risk of revolutionary thinking which does not allow such compromise is disillusionment. The only way to avoid cooptation, she said, is to have no women in the establishment or to have many women so that they aren't isolated and easily picked off. The role of radical feminist therapists in such a situation is to direct attention to the areas of unawareness and cooptation of feminists who work within the system, she said. In her low-key speech, Seidon seemed to be working towards a balance of importance for both professional liberal and radical feminist therapists.

The luncheon meeting continued for a few more hours. Announcements were made, addresses of several publications and groups were announced and the workshop statements (found around the issues of class, power, racism, hierarchies, accountability, and responsivity to criticism). The way the conference was organized, consciously or not, reflects all of these personal/political issues.

We all met to struggle with these issues and want to share with you the excitement and energy of the struggle which is feminist therapy. Out of this came the following criticism of the organization and administration of this conference:

We believe that conferences like this belong to all women who made feminist therapy, many of whom are not credentialed and did not have the money to attend. We feel that the conference, in effect, excluded many of these women.

Our concrete suggestions for the organization of future conferences like this include:

1. We need to consciously work to include a broad range of women at the planning stages: third world women, working class women, non-credentialed women workers, students, and clients by financial flexibility in conference costs.

2. Space and time needs to be built into the conference schedule for dealing with conflicts, anger and objections.

3. A budgetary statement of the finances of the conference, including how surplus profits will be used, should be available to all prior to conference time.

4. That the labor of those who helped make the conference not be exploited simply for the benefit of the administrators of the conference.

5. That we examine what we mean by ‘feminist’ and ‘alternative’ therapy if it does not include the above considerations.

Unfortunately, the statement, as read, came across as a near apology. It seemed that the statement’s potential for getting WIAP to answer for their actions was not realized; the statement was met with a polite round of applause, but little else.

Ann Schaef's reaction was particularly revealing; she turned what should have been a discussion into a frivolous escape of the issues, at the same time absolving herself of blame through a ‘woe is me’ strategy. “For 14 years I've been called a radical; now I'm being accused of not being radical enough. Now I know what it's like to be on the other side,” she said. The audience chuckled at her comments and gave her a standing ovation. This is how the conference ended.

See conference analysis and workshop reports on page 10.