bmn:

We had a good fundraiser—the Sunday Brunch. The whole  
project was coordinated well, superbly by Deb and the  
energy and dedication and work of the numerous supporters  
was outstanding. The food was plentiful, much of it was  
donated. Kay/Sue's backyard was manicured, we even had  
tablecloths on the various tables under a big apple tree.  
The day was sunny and hot and plenty of people came over  
and ate and talked and ate and relaxed and ate. A most en-  
joyable time—the first of BMR's annual brunches. We thank  
everyone for a good time and a profitable one for the  
paper.  

The supporters are now talking about a Halloween masquer-  
ade party, and trying to think up good ideas for future  
fundraisers. The brunch brought in $290.00 and we needed  
it, the money paid our rent through April ‘82. Our finances  
are in a sad way. As you all know, feminist projects  
always cry the blues, we are in a double bind. Money is  
always in short supply and to make things worse—the col-  
lective member who keeps the books can't add or subtract.  
We are always making a plea for money and in August we  
will be mailing out a sustainer letter.  

Anyone wanting to join the supporters are urged to do so.  

See calendar for supporters meeting in August. We can be  
reached through our tape machine if you will leave your  

OUR THANKS FOR YOUR WORK &  
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE BRUNCH  
Wendy Highby Paula Sperry  
Kay Young Linda Lane  
Theresa Moore Kim Womantree  
Claire Ellington King Sooper  
T. J. Feuerborn Mercury Cafe  
Woman to Woman GLCCC  

Nane ——— “qq  

1724 GAYLORD ST  
DENVER, CO. 80206  

Subscribe  

$7 Individual Sub  
Outside USA or Plain  
Wrapper  
Universities, Libraries,  
Institutions or Overseas. Address  
Air Mail -  
$1.25 Sample copies  
Free to Women in Prisons &  
Psychiatric Institutions  

This month's cover includes work by Taeko  
Tomiyama, Artemis, Suzanne Jackson, and  
graphics reprinted from Matrix and from LNS.  

collective: Lori Bradford, Liz Lewis, Deb Luger,  

Bobbe Ross  

Support Team: Wendy Highby, Kim Womantree,  

Susanna Smith, Molly Barlow, Claire Ellington, Theresa Moore  

cover:  

Vickie Barriga, Kathy Burns,  
contributors: Linda Lane, Fe: cae Kathy ~  
Barriga, Deb Taylor, Kathy Lopata, Betty Carr, Jacky Ferrand,  
Alberta Gallardo, Sue, Lee Eddy, Trudy Sauter, Inez Yslas,  
Cara Ernst, Kathy Riley, Eden Stone, Vicki Piotter  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by  

where we're at  

name and phone number.  

One idea the supporters are urging is for you, our  
readers, in town and out of Denver, to canvas your local  
bookstores and ask them to get BMR's in. And anyone who  
wants to throw a BMR benefit in a distant town would get  

Brownie points.  

We want to send Sue a big HI, knowing she has been  
splashing around the beaches off the Florida coast, and  
to Sara and Elena—the original water baby.  

We have struggled long and hard with members of the  
New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican and Mexican  
Revolutions and in struggle with ourselves and the women  
who wrote the articles for this issue. We encourage feed-  

back.  

Our vacation starts now, with the mailing of this issue.  
We won't have an issue out till the end of September.  
None of us are heading out of town for glamorous far away  
places but at least we won't be holding any meetings in  
August, although we will all be stopping down to do chores.  

HOLD THE PRESSES, HOLD THE PRESSES, BMR wants to  
announce another woman has just joined the collective.  

Susanna Smith, a former collective member has decided to  
rejoin and we rejoice, we are now 5.  

READ & SUBSCRIBE TO  

NO MORE CAGES,  

A BI-MONTHLY  

WOMEN’S PRISON NEWSLETTER  

More Problems at Purdy  
El Salvador & Nicaragua  

Bitter Pill for Amer. Shrinks  

Womens Press Network  

all in August  

Available at women’s and  
progressive bookstores or from  
Women Free Women in Prison,  
PO Box 90, Bklyn, NY 11215.  
$1 each copy, $6 per yr.  
more if you can, less if you can’t  
FREE TO PRISONERS  
AND PSYCHIATRIC INMATES  

Where We're At.....  

Local  

REED ccetaiwis cote Bs aie le oye ok ess ae im 3  
WOUCEY Ss «cigles"s ee 49.8 AS eoypes  
National  

Women Studies.......-s.-- 6  

America Held Hostage.....6  
Conference.....10,11,12,13  
20; 21,27  

Struggle..... Errno:  

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.  

111 East Dale  
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80903  
Phone [303] 471-9492  

International:  
Apartheid.....  

Voices;  

Mabel Hampton.....- . -18819  
More” On ga%ts «006 wine a eO,eouco  
Calendar .-dsees te ele vse ae  

Classifieds & Ads.....+-.+40 24  
Resources...  

funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21  
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated  
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at  
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA  
and is available on microfilm (Vol.1#1 Oct. 1972 through  
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is indexed  
by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,  
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010  

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 19th of the preceding  

month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with  
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolic-  
ited material. We reserve the right to edit all material for  
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are  

Page 2 ~ Big Mama Rag, August, 1982