14

TRON THE CRT

ADRIENNE RICH: ‘Survival takes naked and fiery forms”

Suzanne Juhasz

Adrienne Rich is to many the strongest and most eloquent woman
poet writing today. Her clearly articulated feminism has changed her
poetry, changed her life, by bringing about a closer integration of the
one with the other. She has struggled over a period of many years to
reach this place.

Her first book, A Change of World (1951), is poetry with wraps on,
accepting and emulating the models provided by her patriarchal world
and literary tradition. Her language is discreet, decorous, lady-like; it is
a poetry, in her own words, of “conscious craft.” “But poems are like
dreams: in them you put what you don’t know you know,” she later
writes. The process of her development as a poet has been to come to
consciousness — to know what she knows. “Perhaps a simple way of
putting it would be to say that instead of poems about experience I am
getting poems that are experiences, that contribute to my knowledge
and my emotional life even while they reflect and assimilate it,” she has
said.

Rich's gradual and painful development as a feminist poet, the
breaking down of her poetic language itself to re-form it (“for this is the
oppressor's language,” she observes in “The Burning of Paper instead
of Children”; “yet I need to talk to you”), has resulted in three stunning
collections of poems since 1968: The Will to Change, Diving into the
Wreck, and the new poems of Poems: Selected and New. This poetry is
stark, lucid, visionary. It offers visions of a patriarchal culture that
oppresses, destroys, gives birth only to death; of women being reborn
into selfhood, power, and hopefully salvation; of things as they are and
as they might be.

At the center of these poems is the poet herself; for poetry, as Rich
has said, is “the voice of someone who knows the rhythm of her own
energy and blood.” “I am an instrument in the shape / of a woman
trying to translate pulsations / into images for the relief of the body /
and the reconstruction of the mind” (“Planetarium,” 1968). This poet
possesses “another eye” that has opened underneath her lids, as she
describes it in “From the Prison House,” 1971. “This eye / is not for
weeping / its vision / must be unblurred,” the poem continues.
“Though tears are on my face / its intent is clarity / it must forget /
nothing.”

Rich’s new poetry looks with urgency, with excruciating clarity; it
translates images into language, for the purpose of change: “What we
see, we see / and seeing is changing” (“The Blue Ghazals”). Poetry
does not exist in a separate compartment from other political activities
in Rich's opinion. To re-see and re-express: see the existing damages
and dangers, express the realities that have been hidden or lied about or
have not yet been born: this is her purpose as a feminist desirous of
saving the culture. “We need a poetry which will dare to explore, and to
begin exploding, the phallic delusions which are endangering
consciousness itself,” she says.

Her poems describe the patriarchal world:

The tragedy of sex

lies around us, a woodlot

the axes are sharpened for.

The old shelters and huts

stare through the clearing with a certain resolution
— the hermit’s cabin, the hunter’s shack —

scenes of masturbation

and dirty jokes.

A man’s world: But finished.

They themselves have sold it to the machines.

(“Waking in the Dark”)

She sees women working for re-birth, in (and on) their own terms.

even you, fellow-creature, sister,

sitting across from me, dark with love,

working like me to pick apart

working like me to remake

this trailing knitted thing, this cloth of darkness,

this women’s garment, trying to save the skein.
(“When We Dead Awaken”)

More and more she sees beyond the present moment into the process
that will create a new world. Everywhere in her poetry a fire of creativity
rises up against man’s ice of impotence.

raking his body down to the thread
of existence
burning away his lie
leaving him in a new
world; a changed
man
(“The Phenomenology of Anger,” 1972)

*

when summer comes the ocean may be closed for good
we will turn

to the desert

where survival

takes naked and fiery forms

(“Blood-Sister,” 1973)

Dawn is the test, the agony
but we were meant to see it:
After this, we may sleep, my sister,
while the flames rise higher and higher, we can sleep.
(“White Night,” 1974)

In articulating these images of the mind, bringing them into
consciousness and into focus in black words on white paper in the
waking world, Rich is helping to bring about the new world.

Announcement

The new women’s bookstore
needs a name!! Send all
entries to Rocky Mountain
Feminist Bookstore c/o Big
1724 Gaylord,
Denver, 80206. The name
chosen by the bookstore collective will be published in BMR
and a prize given.

Mama Rag,

Bay Area Singer

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 5

Kaplowitz Wows Denver

On Friday night, May 9, a
handful of Denver women had
the privilege of hearing Betty
Kaplowitz, a San Francisco
musician who is currently touring women's communities
across the country. Betty is well
known in the Bay Area, where

she sings regularly at
coffeehouses and women's
bars.

I first heard Betty sing around
six months ago — at that time
she was doing a lot of street
singing, which she says has
been one of her most important
musical experiences. Even then,
she was widely popular in the
women’s community. Since
then her skill and versatility have
expanded to such an extent that I could hardly believe I was listening
to the same woman at DFU.

Her guitar is evident in the ease
with which she handled folk,
rock and blues styles. Obviously
she has been working hard at
her playing.
Good Variety

Her voice is naturally powerful, 
and with practice she has
perfected an effortless control
which enables her to make every
song she sings her own: from
the near-whisper of “Cocaine”
to her fine, rounded version of
“Me and Bobby McGee,” a song
so much Janis’s that few would
dare to attempt it. Betty didn't
hold back. She took off
her glasses for fear they'd fall off
and climbed right into it. Stevie
Wonder’s “Superstition” was
yet another hard-rocking song
I'd never have expected to hear
from one woman with a guitar,
but Betty did it and she did it
well.

On Friday night, her dedication to

Rants & Raves

Lois Lane

Who Rates?

Well, what are they giving away this year? Gold engraved grapefruit?
Seven t-shirts saying ‘I love my mother. Signed Oedipus?” How about a
trip to beautiful Hugo, Colo... all expenses paid? Or maybe Kanorado?
Another scenic thrill!

Whenever you hear a contest on just about every commercial radio in
the area you can bet it’s rating time. So, what are ratings?

There are two primary rating services to which radio stations in the
U.S. subscribe — Pulse and ARB. Both are independent research
organizations which use different surveying techniques. Neither are
particularly accurate in assessing audiences. Some radio stations are
aware of this but subscribe to rating systems anyway.

The system measures by sex and age the number of people listening
to a particular station at a particular time. Some time periods are
considered more important to have listeners than others. These are
morning drive time (6 a.m. to 10 a.m.) and evening drive time (3 p.m. to 6
or 7 p.m.). These are more commonly known as rush hours to those of
us attempting to get to work. More people are usually listening for
weather, traffic reports, and news... so, more listeners are available to
soak up those lovely exploiting commercials.

Thus, radio stations subscribe to the only available but nonetheless
inaccurate rating services to impress those lovely people with the
money... advertisers. Ah, see? You've got the key word. MONEY. Yes,
this is a capitalistic system. And when you hold the money you hold the
system by the (well, it is male dominated) balls.

You could do nasty things like not listen at those time periods but that
would hurt you as much, if not more, than the station. The advertisers
wouldn't care unless you were being surveyed, and then they'd just buy
time on another equally sexist station. Maybe you should start
examining your buying habits (thank you Flo Kennedy) and organizing
boycotts around those buying habits. Flo suggested tampax but they
don’t buy radio time. Try toothpaste or cola... no it’s not the real thing...
it's really just a bunch of carbonated sugary chemicals. Enough of us
have to get together and boycott an advertiser. While boycotting we
should write letters to them making it clear that their advertising is
sexist or that they are advertising on radio stations who employ sexist
hiring methods.

So, start organizing: No, not against rating services and not against
individual stations... the flaw is in the system. Get the guys with the
moola... Crap all over the advertisers' heads. Maybe we aren't loud
enough but our money sure is.

Next month: restaurants: vegies and non... service, food, ownership.

My personal preference is the
blues, so it was songs like
“Stealin’” and Randy Newman's ‘Guilty’ that got to me
most. But Betty is equally at
home with “Hey, Goodlooking”
or “Just a Closer Walk with
Thee,” two of her most popular
numbers where she comes
from. Not only does Betty present her own very polished
versions of others’ songs, she
writes her own, too. These are
gentle songs, mainly love songs,
pleasing and well-rounded both
musically and lyrically.

Audience Small but Fanatic

Although few women were at
the concert, there was an
enthusiastic response to Betty,
both as a musician and as a
person. When Cris Williamson
talked with Big Mama Rag, she
stressed the importance, for a
performer, of letting the
audience know that you know
what you're doing. There was no
doubt in anyone’s mind that
Betty knew exactly what she
was about, and was happy doing
it. She communicated this to us
through her ease and warmth,
and we responded by clapping,
whistling, stomping and calling
for more.

The only blight on the evening
was the poor turnout, which
made the concert a financial loss.
This was the result, as I understand it, of miscommunication
between Betty’s manager and
Womanchief Productions, who
organized the event, over
responsibility for publicity. Fine
musicians like Betty are more
than just a luxury in the
women’s community. We need
them to carry our sense of
togetherness from group to
group, to express the joy of our
coming together and to actually
bring us together on a level
where sisterhood is a gut ex-
perience. Surely we can afford to
support our musicians. Hopefully, Betty will be back in Denver
sometime, and hopefully next
time many more women will
know she’s here. We all deserve
to hear her.

FOLKLORE CENTER
606 E 17th AVE
851-1019

“RECON,

ON THE PENTAGON

RECON is a monthly newsletter containing
information about the U.S. military
machine, columns on strategy and tactics
and articles on military developments in
other parts of the world.

SUBSCRIBE: $3/year for individuals,
$10/year for institutions & sustainers. 25¢ for single copies.
RECON, P.O. Box 14602, Phila.

PA 19136.