6

First Session Sagaris

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 7

What Happened

Jackie St. Joan

(The following is a descriptive
article written shortly after the
first session closed on July 12,
and under the pressure of a
deadline. In many ways it tells
what happened there but it
doesn't tell the whole story at all.
The story of how a feminist
institution develops, politically,
and practically, to serve the
interests of a woman's revolu-
tion deserves the distance and
reflection that deadlines don't
understand. An analysis and
critique of the Sagaris ex-
perience will follow, but some
personal time and space is
needed to do the job properly.)

SAGARIS, the first 5-week
session of an independent in-
stitute for the study of feminist
thought, ended July 12, in
Lyndonville, Vermont.
Developed by women dis-
satisfied with the Women’s
Studies program at Goddard
College (See Off Our Backs, July
1975), SAGARIS brought 140
women together at a small state
college in the mountains of
Vermont to form a temporary
community and to study
feminism.
Who Was There

The women attending the
institute came for a variety of
reasons: to alleviate isolation in
small communities, to study
with specific teachers in a
systematic way with a strong
support group, to establish a
unifying force of political
organization in this country. Few
participants came from big
cities; the largest representation
was from the mid-West. Well
over half identified themselves
as lesbian feminists. Most were
aged 22-32, although there was
representation of older and more
politically experienced women. The largest number of
women came from Women’s
Studies programs, although
grass-roots organizers were
very vocal and made their
presence felt. Most were from
middle class backgrounds,
although a strong working class
caucus developed. All but five
women were white. Seven
women brought nine children
with them. Although a few
women left early, most stayed
the duration of the session.

The Intensity

of a Love Affair

The days at SAGARIS were a
tightly structured mixture of
ideas and feelings. Breakfast at
8:00, political theory until 10:30,
body development for one hour,
lunch at the cafeteria, political
theory for one hour, electives for
1½ hours, back to the cafeteria
for supper, some classes in the
evening, with workshops,
special events, and small group
work scheduled around, under
and in-between. With the tempo
of a beehive (credit: Mary Daly)
and the intensity of a love affair,
the session was exciting and
exhausting, with a cramping of
personal time/space, hard work,
meetings, conflicts, and learning.

Because of the importance to
the women’s movement of the
ideas explored at SAGARIS, the
following is an attempt to
paraphrase some of the major
concepts running through the
SAGARIS experience. I did not
attend Candace Falk's course on
Socialism nor several of the
electives, so I am unable to
discuss those ideas in this arti-
cle.

Rita Mae Brown
on Leadership

The concept of leadership,
both individual and as a set of
shared but unexpressed
assumptions, was explored
historically, both inside the
women’s movement and outside
of it. Brown pointed out that we
are all potential leaders, and in
the past have borne the scars of
women-hatred for trying to
exercise our organizational
women’s movement needs.
Leaders must emerge who are
responsible and accountable to
the movement in order to ac-
complish the tasks necessary for
building a woman's revolution.
Women must legitimate these
leaders so that their energy is
not spent in constant struggles
to consolidate their power.

The women’s movement has
developed from small group
experiences, but individually we
must take responsibility for
learning large group skills. To be
successful, different kinds of
leaders are needed — task
leaders who can guide the group
toward its goals, and
maintenance leaders who can
facilitate the group's cohesion
by taking leadership in dealing
with the group’s more im-
mediate internal needs.

Direct and Open Conflict
Women must be willing to deal
with conflict directly and openly.
Conflict is a way of staying
together, of distinguishing our
differences, and moving ahead.
Too much energy is spent trying
to avoid those very conflicts we
need to experience politically.
Our political reality is
patriarchal, and as such, we
know, responds only to power
and to money. To our generation
has fallen the task of facing that
very real power of the patriarchy,
and making plans to overcome it.
We cannot live as post-
patriarchal women in a
patriarchal society. We must
face the question of morality and
ethics. Is private morality
applicable to the public area?
Isn't all morality male morality?
Is morality useful in gaining
power for women? What is
feminist morality anyway?

Brown's course included the
following topics: definitions of
leadership, traits and functions
of leaders, task leaders vs.
maintenance leaders in both
patriarchal and feminist
situations, what situations re-
quire leaders to emerge, women
as leaders, power, historical
examples of patriarchal
leadership, women in
patriarchal systems of authority
(lecture by Elaine Nobel), how to
organize yourself on a daily
basis, feminist leadership —
what our standards and expec-
tations of our own leaders are.
Charlotte Bunch on
Organization

Political theory must be de-
mythologized. It involves looking
at what you've done and plan-
ning structures, organizations
and strategies from what you've
learned, analyzing concretely
the whys of our existence as
women, deciding what our
values are, and acting on our
decisions and analysis — mak-
ing theory practical.

The women’s movement
needs a clearer political
framework — theories to guide
long and short run plans for
winning, and to give more flex-
ibility to ourselves to allow for
the changes we need while we
are in process. What are our
political goals? How is women’s
fear of power related to our fear
of responsibility? Power, for
what? What are our economic
goals? We must deal with class
issues in such a way as to
understand our real differences
in style and experience so that
we can utilize those differences
of class to our own mutual
advantage. What are our
cultural goals? What builds
women’s sense of self and sense
of community? We must deper-
sonalize criticism so that we can
examine just how the personal
and the political interact. The
crucial question is: what is the
politics of feminist culture? Not,
which is more important, politics
or community?

Revolutionary Reformists

When we stop seeing
everything that is wrong with
what we consider doing, and
admit to ourselves, as
revolutionaries, that all activities
are reform, that is, only a partial
strategy working towards a
larger goal, we will risk change,
experimentation, making mis-
takes, creating hope and a
vision. In so doing we must
demythologize revolutionary
language and thinking: is a
collective structure applicable to
all situations? Why are we often
so focused on our process that
we are unable to complete our
tasks? Do you, individually and
as groups, take your own power
over your lives? Why aren't you
doing what you want to do? Is the
approval of other feminists so
important to you that you are
unable to break any feminist
“ideal” to think independently?

Sagaris faculty, first session.

Beyond Beyond God the Father

Mary Daly's seven lectures
were a conglomeration of her
thoughts since the publication of
Beyond God the Father, and of
the ideas expressed in her article
in Quest, Vol. 1, No. 4 (Women
and Spirituality). Daly focused
on the importance of women
using their minds to recapture
the knowledge which the
patriarchy has robbed from us.
She sees language as “semantic
pollution” which controls our
thought processes, and,
therefore, our thoughts
themselves. For example, think-
ing of courage, or being, or God,
as a noun, rather than as a verb
(as she prefers) — being, courag-
ing, the power of being present,
limits the very thinking we can
do about these concepts. When
asked how one can think
rationally without using
categories (nouns), she replied
that categories are a substitute
for thinking, and that although
we end up using them anyway,
categories are more likely to
enclose thought than to disclose
one’s being.

The Power of
Presence and Absence

Feminists must keep question-
ing in order to keep from being
possessed by men, who, es-
pecially in their absence, have
power over our minds. In trying
to get through the mind-binding,
Daly suggests four levels on
which our perception must be
especially acute: 1) Erasure —
vague thinking which does not
answer the question: who is
doing what and to whom? 2)
False polarization — creating
male-identified polarizations;
forgetting we are all in process; 
3) False inclusion — imagining
that women are included in
“human” liberation or other
broad male-defined categories;
4) Divide and conquer — falling
victim to men who turn us
against ourselves.

One of the strongest threads
running through Daly’s lectures
and through Daly herself was
the idea of individuation (the
ability to stand alone) and par-
ticipation (or the depth of our
bonding with other women).
Daly believes that communica-
tion can happen most when you
are alone and that women
subject themselves to a kind of
“insectitude,” acting in unity
from instinct and group
pressure, appealing to the
lowest common denominator
among us, and hence being
mediocre in what we create. We
subject each other to “spirit-
shed” and “timeshed” (like
bloodshed) by demanding group
participation and psychically
sapping one another of our
creativity. We need to have the
power to be alone. The fear of
being alone drives women to
male presence and male iden-
tification.

Photo by Jackie St. Joan

Medvec On Economics

Emily Medvec’s eight lectures
focused on what is political
about women and the economy —
how work, as our basis of
survival, is organized, is crucial
for women to understand in
order to make a revolution.
Medvec concentrated on shar-
ing her understanding of how
the economy works in order to
raise the consciousness of
women, especially middle class
women, on the subject. Her
method was to ask questions in
order to challenge our pre-
concepts about economics. Each
class began with everyone clos-
ing her eyes while Medvec gave
us a word, which we then had to
define in writing in one
sentence, without using that
word again in the sentence. For
example: Capitalism is —
Economy is — Socialism is —
Money is — A bum is —.
Medvec discussed such
issues as how we spend our
money, the food industry, un-
employment, housing, con-
sumer price index, the banking
system, oil, scientific labor
management, and the multi-
national corporations. The
multi-nationals are the
monopolistic corporations
which have the world for their
market, owe loyalty to no par-
ticular government, and whose
power to buy and sell among
themselves allows for the crea-
tion of an economy within itself.
They are characterized by a high
level of technology, money
management, and marketing
technology of consumerism. The
source of the power of the multi-
nationals is their ownership of
production; their influence
affects every one of us; their
direction is the direction of the
whole economy.
How We Survive

Medvec attempted to
demonstrate to us how our lives
have been fragmented by the
capitalist system. We all have
existence as producers, con-
sumers and citizens; we are
creative, receptive and political
beings. By pitting one group
against another (each of which
we all are a part), our con-
sciousness about economics
becomes blurred. For example,
citizens blame the workers (the
producers) for inflation, without
looking to the unity of
themselves as workers (and
consumers) also. Women must
create new forms of
organizations of work, as the
basis of our survival and as the
basis of change.
Small group/Large group
In addition to the lectures
given by Brown, Bunch, Daly and
Medvec, the classes were divid-
ed into small groups to work on
tasks, and to prepare presen-
tations for the class. Theoretically, two weeks we were in groups
of ten, the third week in groups
of twenty, and the fourth week in
More on Page 14

United Feminist Front

This statement came out of a Political Work Group project which
evolved during Session I of Sagaris 1975. These women made a
commitment “to determine the potential” for the building of a United
Feminist Front by returning to their communities to explore this
concept. This work group is operating separately from the Sagaris
Institute.

Feminists from different class and geographical
experiences recognize the need to determine the potential for a coalition of feminist organizations that will work cohesively for the interests of women. The structural nature and form of such a coalition cannot yet be defined; the present exploratory process is ongoing and open-ended. A serious consciousness of an international, national, and regional understanding of class, ethnic and racial minorities, age, and sexual preference must be integral to both theory and practice of a United Feminist Front. From this firm base feminists will build a viable women’s movement with direction and clarified tactics and priorities. It is urgent that we develop methods to establish community bases while simultaneously consolidating feminist forces into a United Feminist Front. Suggested levels of action include a Feminist Party, a Feminist Assembly, and workplace organizing.

The women’s movement USA, 1975, is limited by its removal from the realities of the diverse needs and perspectives of women of different race and ethnic minorities, classes, age, and sexual preference. This results in a lack of understanding of what is a “women’s issue,” to polarization and to short-sighted solutions. Also, the mobile nature of the women’s movement has been detrimental to building a grassroots base. The movement needs a comprehensive understanding of money/economic consciousness, and of investigation, study, and historical perspective. It also needs to explore the personal and political means through which children and adults educate each other. Language differences, whether due to age, class, race, ethnic or national background must be understood and bridged; whenever possible feminists must begin to learn other languages; particularly those prevalent in their regions. The necessary changes will be made by mobilizing the strength existing in the women’s movement: our growing seriousness, sense of solidarity, sense of process, and history of struggle.