The Union’s Love Affair with Pa Bell

Women who have been trained to be telephone installers have been unjustly demoted to office clerical positions in the telephone company. These women were hired under the affirmative action quota system last year to help fill quotas Pa Bell had to meet in his hiring practices. At the end of their training, the women were informed that there were no jobs for them and they had to accept a decrease in job responsibility and pay and were also told that “you either take these jobs or quit.”

These women weren't offered installers jobs that were open in nearby areas, the option of which is offered to men.

Some women installers have complained (and one has finally filed suit against her former boss) for harassment on the job. One garage is famous for his woman-hatred. He has “gotten rid of all six women assigned to his shop,” according to a worker.

The Local Communications Workers of America does not support the women or their action to sue the phone company. The union is dominated by men who are as afraid of women as the bosses are. The rules of the union say that seniority reigns and, of course, women are the last to be hired and trained and have no seniority. The jobs of men are protected and the jobs of women forgotten. Unions aren't the lily-white refuges for the workers that the “left” would have us believe. This tends to show that women really have no allies in the traditional leftist-socialist politics mentality.

Linda Fowler

It seems most women’s publications have been having serious financial difficulties lately. BMA is no exception. Since the last issue, however, our situation has changed for the better. We are beginning to see some blue sky.

This breath of financial fresh air is attributable to the United Methodist Voluntary Service, Women’s Task Force. This organization has funded BMA in the amount of $6,000 for the next year, to be used specifically as salary money.

This amount will be added to our budget allotment for salaries and used to pay a living wage to two coordinators ($250.00/month each) and to fund two part-time positions ($125.00/month) of advertising sales and distribution. Our hope is that these jobs will generate more income to make us financially sound and enable us to begin offering at least some money for part-time work and remuneration to contributors.

This is our financial statement for the past six months. Our minimum operating budget is $1,000 per month.

BIG MAMA RAG  
FINANCIAL STATEMENT

July-December 1974

RECEIVED:  
Subscriptions 974.90  
Sales 79  
Pledges 680.00  
Ads 682.15  
1st Benefit 644.05  
2nd Benefit 210.00  
Women's Festival 260.03  
Denver Sustaining Fund 250.00  
*Miscellaneous 1494.31  
July cash on hand 432.26  

PAID OUT:  
Printing 1616.95  
Salaries 1505.50  
Typesetting 871.50  
Promotion 535.00  
Telephone 321.55  
Petty Cash 296.25  
Miscellaneous 288.53  
Postage 285.36  
Rent 232.50  
Supplies 0.00  
Bank Charges 5.83  

6076.49  

* includes: $250, Denver Sustaining Fund; $542, personal loan to BMA; $300, benefits; $60, SisterHood Express; $200, Denver Women’s Festival.

RIP BOOKSTORE  
737 E. 17th Ave.

LARC WOMEN'S SECTION

ALSO BOOKS ON GAY LIBERATION,  
CHINA, CUBA, VIETNAM, MARXISM,  
FEMINISM, O.S. PERILS,  
All BOOKS 20% off AT  

Ate Ties  
Monday 12 - 6  
Tuesday - Saturday 12 - 6  

Big Mama Rag

Women Fight  
to Stop Forced  
Sterilization

A group of women in the Los Angeles area have organized the Committee to End Forced Sterilization. Its purpose is to expose and put an end to these outrages. They have issued a statement accusing the government (through HEW programs) of waging a “massive sterilization campaign” among poor women, especially third world women.

No one knows the exact number of sterilizations financed by HEW or the amount of money spent, but Carol Schultz, Director of HEW’s Office of Population Affairs, estimated that the number of sterilizations may be 100,000 to 200,000 for the last year alone.

Inside the United States, the idea of forced sterilization is not new. During World War II in 1945 while Japanese Americans were incarcerated behind barbed wire in concentration camps, a motion was made in Congress to sterilize all Japanese American women; that motion was defeated by one vote.

Black women in the South have long feared to enter hospitals and clinics due to the widespread practice of sterilizing women without their knowledge. At the Los Angeles County General Hospital, there are many documented cases of women who have been forcibly sterilized. Spanish-speaking women were tricked into signing English consent forms — they believed they were agreeing to Caesarean sections. Women were pressured into agreeing to sterilization operations while in labor or actually on the delivery table.

Women “consented” to sterilization operations without understanding that this meant that they would never be able to have a baby again. Some of the women left the hospital unaware of the fact that they had been sterilized.

Better Treatment?

Colorado Women’s Correction Institute inmates should start getting better treatment and fewer limitations now that a U.S. district judge has ruled that female prisoners do indeed live under inferior conditions from those of male prisoners in this state and that this discrepancy is discriminatory.

Convicted of  
Baby Stealing

A black woman was convicted of stealing a South Carolina woman's baby, while she herself was living in Chicago, was sentenced to 12 years in prison. Her own 6-week-old baby was taken from her by the FBI and given to the other woman without identification or credible investigation. A Habeas Corpus Committee is forming to put together the facts in this case. For more info, contact her lawyer, Lola Boswell, Rt. 1, Box 89, Collins, MO 64738; or Martha Allen, Women's Media Project, P.O. Box 4235, Memphis, TN 38104.

Sarah Badheart Bull Imprisoned

The dismissal of charges for Wounded Knee defendants has not meant an end to judicial oppression for Native Americans. Sarah Badheart Bull was one of 3 people sentenced in 1973 for her participation in a demonstration protesting the fact that charges had been dismissed against the (white) murderer of her 21-year-old son even though several (Indian) witnesses existed. Sarah is presently serving her 3-year sentence in the maximum security wing of a mental hospital in Yankton, South Dakota. As an aftermath of her brutal arrest, the crowd of 200 Indians present burned the Custer Chamber of Commerce to the ground. Supporters of Sarah Badheart Bull say that racism and sexism are the reasons the flagrant injustice of her incarceration is overlooked while the more well-known male American Indian Movement leaders have been released.

Jury was  
Sexually Biased

For the first time in California judicial history, an indictment against a woman was dismissed because the judge held that the composition of the grand jury was sexually biased. The judge stated that judges have a duty to assure that the selection process for the grand jury “includes all social segments.”

Disability  
Benefits Denied

The Supreme Court has ruled recently (6 to 3) that states can deny disability benefits to women incapacitated by normal pregnancy. Working mothers comprise 39% of all women in the labor force.

Italy: Women  
Protest Delay  
of Rights Bill

Rome — 10,000 women marched through the capital in the biggest women’s rights demonstration ever seen in Italy. The angry women held aloft huge placards which clearly stated their main complaint: that women are not equal in the eyes of Italian law, despite a post-war constitution declaring their rights.

The demonstration was organized by the 280,000-member Communist-dominated Union of Italian Women to call attention to the revised family code bill, which has languished in the Senate (upper house) ever since passage two years ago in the Chamber of Deputies (lower house). The legal basis of the present family code is still the ancient concept of “patris potestas,” a Latin term which means “the authority of the father.”

The reform bill would change all that. It would establish legal parity between husband and wife, joint ownership and administration of possessions acquired during the marriage, easier legal separation, recognition of children born out of wedlock and equal rights for illegitimate and legitimate children.

Supreme Court Cases:  
Pregnancy, Paid Leave

Geduldig v. Aiello, 94 S. Ct. 2485 (1974): Four women challenged the exclusion of pregnancy from the California State disability insurance fund, which is supported by contributions from employees’ salaries. Other disabilities also excluded from coverage include court commitment as a dipsomaniac, drug addiction, sexual psychopathy, or any disability beyond 26 weeks. The court held that the state has a legitimate interest in distributing the available resources to keep benefit levels at an adequate level for disabilities that are covered. The court held this to be an objective and non-offensive basis for excluding pregnancy.

Pregnancy — Firing For

Cleveland Board of Education v. LaFleur, 414 U.S. 632 (1974): The court found unconstitutional four and five month mandatory pregnancy leave policies for school teachers. Also struck down in this case was one school district’s policy of prohibiting a teacher from resuming her duties until the first school semester after the infant was three months old.

American Men, Slaves?!

According to a recent report in Sister, Saudi Arabia will not support International Women’s Year. The country’s UN delegate Jamil Brody claims that American men are “slaves” to American women, and that “my government will not contribute a cent to the International Women's Year conference.” Saudi Arabia is one of five countries in the world where women cannot vote.

Medical Women  
for Abortion

Meeting at their annual convention, the American Medical Women’s Association passed resolutions calling for resistance of all efforts to overturn the Supreme Court decision on abortion and the inclusion in any national health insurance program of coverage for preventative maternal and child care. The group also defeated a motion to open the association to