Women In Class Struggle

Marlene Dixon  
Synthesis Publications  
$3.00/paper  

Women in Class Struggle is an  
anthology of articles by Marlene  
Dixon originally printed in the  
journal Synthesis (now Contemporary  
Marxism) during 1977 when Dixon was  
one of the journal's editors. The  
book is divided into two sections.  
The first section is titled "The  
Centrality of Women in Class Struggle"  
and presents good information and  
clear analysis around issues such  

as wages for housework, monogamy,  
homosexuality, bourgeois morality and  
sexuality, and anti-feminism and  
sexism in left-wing movements.  

Dixon presents a wide range of  
information and analysis in this  
first section of her book. She  
brings the reader, clearly and care-  
fully, through the different phases  
of developing her analysis. The  
process itself is quite enjoyable.  

The last section of the book is  

"Critiques of the Women's Movement."  
This section of the book was exciting  
in its class analysis of problems in  
the women's movement from its begin-  
nings in the '60s with consciousness  
raising up until 1977 when this book  
was published and continues to relate  
in 1980.  

Reading this book (especially the  
second section) has caused me to have  
to re-evaluate some of my own polit-  
ical ideas and has given me strength  
by reinforcing and clarifying others.  
The analysis of "The Sisterhood Rip-  
Off" really hit home. My only real  
criticism is of Dixon's choice of big  
(intellectual) words where small  
(simple) ones would have worked just  
as well. All in all Women In Class  
Struggle is a book that should be  
read by every woman ever involved in  
the movement.  

Class consciousness is knowing  
which side of the fence  

you’re on.  

Class analysis is figuring out  
who is there with you.  

—— 2 if A  

The Myth Of Black Capitalism  

Earl Ofari  
Monthly Review Press  
$3.25/paper  

The Myth of Black Capitalism by  
Earl Ofari lays out a history of the  
rise of a black capitalist elite in  
America. This history begins with  
the onset of black slave owners  
(blacks who owned other blacks)--the  
onset of black entrance into small  
business through organizing church  
ownership--through the black civil  
rights movement--to the entrance of  
American capitalists into South  
Africa.  

Ofari has no sympathy for the dev-  
elopment of black capitalism in such  
projects as "Buy Black" campaigns;  
the Black Nationalist movements, like  
CORE (Congress of Racial Equality);  
and the NNBL (National Negro Busi-  
ness League) because benefits (pro-  
fits) from such programs will go to  
the black bourgeoisie, not the black  
masses. The history of these pro-  
grams--how they have functioned in  
the black community and the black  
ghettos--supports his theory.  

The theory behind the myth/prac-  
tice of black capitalism goes like  
this: “...a man is respected in pro-  
portion to his success in business.  
When the avenues of wealth are open  
to us, we will then become educated  
and wealthy...Then and not until then  

will we be able to enjoy true equal-  
ity, which can exist only among  
peers." The problem is that the  
black elite will always be placing  
their needs over the needs of the  
black masses--thus perpetuating the  
exploitation of many of their black  
brothers and sisters.  

Ofari states that "...anyone in-  
volved today in the developing lib-  
eration struggle in the United States  
should...be searching for and think-  
ing about ways through which black  
and white workers can benefit fully  
from the fruits of their labor.  

This would be better than trying to  
make a system work for black workers  
which has not even worked for many  
white workers.  

Even though women's oppression  
is not specifically dealt with in  
the context of this book, it does not  
seem an omission. He successfully  
presents why black capitalism for  
liberation of the black masses is a  
myth, through history and analysis.  

I think that the implications of his  
analysis are important to the women's  
movement as we in the women's move-  
ment examine racism and classism and  
professionalism in greater depth.  

-- A good book.  

Class And Feminism  

A Collection of Essays from The  
Diana Press  
$2.25/paper  

It only takes a couple of hours to  
read the book Class and Feminism.  
However, it has taken years for the  
women's movement, as a movement to  
begin seriously working on the task  
that this book put forward for fem-  
inists to do in 1974--to examine  
class attitudes and behaviors.  

In the introduction to the seven  
essays that make up this book, it  
says: "It is useful to look at how  
feminists have responded to the  
‘class issue' in the past few years.  
At first, it ‘did not exist.' Like  
most Americans, feminists believed  
that we lived in a classless society,  
with equal opportunity for all hard  
working people (or at least all  
worthy whites). As working and  
lower class women grew more conscious  
of being oppressed in the movement  
and raised the class issue, the myth  
was shattered. Today, many feminists  
recognize that a class issue exists,  
but there is little understanding of  
its significance or what to do about  
it.  

The book talks about class con-  
flict among women. All the short  
articles emphasize class, not as an  
economic system that determines ev-  
eryone's place, but in the personal  
ways feminists use patterns of behav-  
ior that go with her position in soc-  
iety, or the way she was brought up.  
Although the book is incomplete at  
times, with statements like: "True,  
women did not create class society,  
which is patriarchal to its core"--

the woman’s work  
is never done  

the news on the telly.  

when you are these things?  

Culture is plays and poetry about the exploited; ceasing to wear mini-  
skirts and taking to trousers instead; the clash between the soul of black  
Baptism and the guilt and sin of white Protestantism. Culture is also the  
shrill of the alarm clock that rings at 6 a.m. when a black woman in London  
wakes her children to get them ready for the baby minder. Culture is how  
cold she feels at the bus stop and then how hot in the crowded bus. Culture  
is how you feel on Monday morning at eight when you clock in wishing it  
was Friday, wishing your life away. Culture is the speed of the line or the  
weight and smell of dirty hospital sheets, and you meanwhile thinking what  
to make for tea that night. Culture is making the tea while your man watches.  

"And culture is an ‘irrational woman' walking out of the kitchen into the  
sitting room and without a word turning off the telly ‘for no reason at all.'  
From where does this culture spring which is so different from a man's  

if you are a woman and different too from a white woman's if you are a  
black woman? Is it auxiliary to the class struggle (as the white left has  
it) or is it more fundamental than the class struggle (as the Black Nation-  
alists and Radical Feminists (separatists) have it) because it is special  
to your sex, your race, your age, your nationality and the moment in time?  

"Our identity, our social roles, the way we are seen, appears to be dis-  
connected from our capitalist functions. To be liberated from them (or  
through them) appears to be independent from our liberation from capitalist  
wage slavery. In our view, identity is the very substance of class."  

Selma James, Sex, Race and Class, 1975  

without going deeper into how the  
authors see patriarchy as the basis  

of class society, it is not meant to  
be an analysis of class. It is meant  
to get middle class feminists to deal  

with the issue in a personal way.  

The book maintains that "as long as  
women support and perpetuate class  
divisions and privileges, we are res-  
ponsible for that (class) system.  

The only way to stop being respon-  
sible for class oppression is by  
fighting to change it."  

This book is a good beginning for  
women who are serious in wanting to  
understand their confusion around  
class differences in the movement, but  
don't know where to start. The essays  
are all written from personal exper-  
iences and are very easy to read and  
it's real hard to miss the point.  
Which basically is--if we are ser-  
ious about changing the world and  
its oppressive ways, we all have to  
begin by changing ourselves and our  
own oppressive ways. Or, as the  
title of one of the essays puts it:  
revolution begins at home.  

(The book was written in 1972 by  
the Furies, a lesbian feminist collec-  
tive of white women who published a  
newspaper in the early ‘70s. Diana  
Press published the book in '74. I  
don't know if it is still in print,  
but it should be hanging around femi-  
nist bookstores, if not on the  
shelves, then in their libraries.)