Legalizing Abortion Is A Major Issue In Canada

By Sandy Stevens

The development of the Canadian
women's movement has in many ways
paralleled that of the American
women's movement. It was largely a
product of a deep radicalization
which began in Canada and Quebec in
the mid-sixties.

Demonstrations against Canada's
complicity in the US war against
Vietnam, student protests against ir-
relevant and undemocratic education
and increased militancy on the part
of labor were indicative of the
times.

The women's liberation movement
emerged out of this widespread re-
jection of the institutions and
values of an unjust society.

This second wave of feminism was
also in part a product of the early
suffrage movement. The women's suf-
frage movement carried a powerful,
united struggle that won for women
the right to vote federally and in
most provinces by about 1920. From
the suffragists we inherited an ex-
ample of how to struggle for our
rights today.

Canada, like the United States, is
a capitalist society, a society or-
ganized for the purpose of making
large profits for few people. And
the oppression of women is highly
profitable. Thus our oppression takes
on the same forms.

Canadian women have been denied
access to legal abortion and safe,

Quebec Women Are Virtually Denied
Access To Safe, Legal Abortions...

effective birth control; Indian
women are sterilized, our desperate
need for child care facilities
available to all has been ignored by
the government. A 1974 Canadian Coun-
cil on Social Development report es-
timated that about 60,000 children
of working mothers needed full-time
government supervised day care. But
at the time of the study, facilities
were available to accommodate only
26,500.

Women continue to face discrimin-
ation on the job, and the wage gap
between male and female workers is
growing. Figures from statistics
in Canada show that in 1971, the
average male worker earned 44% more
than the average female worker. By
1973 the average male worker had
increased the gap to 45.1%.

Canadian feminists began organiz-
ing on a national scale in the early
‘70s. As in the US, abortion be-
came the central focus of government
attacks and for many years was the
main issue in the Canadian women's
movement. The Canadian Criminal Code
allows abortions if they are per-
formed in an accredited hospital and
approved by a board of 3 or more doc-
tors. The law is particularly un-
just for poor rural women who can't
travel to a city hospital.

Quebec women are virtually denied
access to safe abortions because
hospitals, which are predominantly

Lower Caste Are Main Organizers

Indian Women’s Movement Curtailed by Caste

Jana

India is a society of paradoxes.
Class, caste, and sexual inequality
converge on women agricultural labor-
ers and workers. Yet, in the last few
years, women from these groups have
been in the forefront of movements de-
manding change. While Indira Gandhi,
the Prime Minister, is one of the few
women heads of state in modern times,
the percentage of women members of the
Indian Parliament seems to be decreas-
ing (7% in 1962 to 4% in 1971). The
Indian Constitution (1950) guarantees
women equality before the law; the
Hindu Code (1954-56) grants Hindu wo-
men equal inheritance rights, prohibits
polygamy, and allows divorce; legisla-
tion also prohibits dowries and child
marriage. However, none of these laws
is effectively implemented. To begin
to understand these paradoxes we must
realize that the nature of woman's op-
pression in India varies according to
her position in the caste and class
systems. Also we must understand that
Western models of development have not
only failed in India but also have
contributed to worsening conditions for
women. (The caste and class systems
are not perfectly correlated, but will
be considered together, as large land-
lords, professionals, and big business
men tend to be high caste individuals,
and workers and peasants tend to be
members of the lower castes).

The inferiority of high caste women
was legitimized by Hindu religious doc-
trine and maintained by early marriage,
purdah (female seclusion), a lack of
education and independent economic re-
sources. The leaders of the Indian
nationalist movement were high caste
Hindu professionals, and their female
relatives started a movement to improve
women's status. These women were able
to gain acceptance for women's suffrage,
equal rights legislation, and the idea
of women professionals. Indira Gandhi
fully exemplifies the accomplishments
and the limitations of the strategies
pursued by the Indian women's movement.
A patriarchal family structure and
the priority of woman's wife-mother
role continue to shape the attitudes
and behavior of upper caste women. This
is reinforced by magazines, movies, and
billboards which communicate Western
ideals of the "feminine mystique"
variety.

The failure of the Indian women's
movement to reach the masses and ex-
pand its narrow social base has made
it ineffective at promoting social
change in a poverty-stricken nation.
The position of women workers and pea-
sants has deteriorated over the past
thirty years, as population pressures
have increased and economic growth has
stagnated under India's strategy of
dependent capitalist development. To-
day over half of the households in
rural areas are classified as living
below minimum survival requirements.
Women laborers have been displaced by
industrial rationalization. The fe-
male literacy rate is only 19% (male
40%) and is lower for rural women and
women over 35. The lack of adequate
health care and nutrition is especial-
ly detrimental for mothers and infants
(the infant mortality rate in one
Indian state is 20%).

While lower caste/class women are
oppressed by poverty and a double bur-
den of work, religious ideology does
not restrict them as it does their
high caste sisters. Lower caste wo-
men care for their children and hus-
bands, do housework (and wage work if
they can find it), and face a diffi-
cult struggle obtaining the necessi-
ties of life because of inflation and
scarcities. Women's wages are lower
than men's—for field work in the ru-
ral areas, handiwork, domestic ser-
vice, construction, and factory work
in the urban areas. However, lower
caste women enjoy a tradition of so-

Catholic, refuse to set up committees.

The Canadian Women's Coalition to
repeal the Abortion Law was formed
in 1971. Women from all parts of the
country organized chapters, rallied,
petitioned and marched to remove
abortion from the Criminal Code. A
direct result of this massive cam-
paign was a change in public opinion.
Today polls show an overwhelming ma-
jority of Canadians support a woman's
right to choose abortion.

The 1973 US Supreme Court decision
legalizing abortion gave new hope
and impetus to our struggle. But
that decision is under attack in
the US. The Hyde Amendment which
would deny Medicaid funding for abor-
tion is just the first step. The
Canadian government is seeking to do
the same. Thousands of poor and
minority women will again be forced
into the hands of backstreet but-
chers.

One of the Canadian government's
most blatant attacks on women’s
rights was its vendetta against Dr.
Henry Morgentaler. Dr. Morgentaler
performed thousands of abortions in
his Montreal clinic and pioneered
the vacuum aspiration method in
Canada. For many years he publicly
campaigned for women's right to
abortion. As a result, he was
singled out for persecution by the
federal and Quebec governments. His
clinic was raided, files confiscated
and he was charged with 13 counts
of performing illegal abortions and
thrown in jail. Pickets paraded in
front of the Montreal courthouse each
day of his trial, and in the major
Canadian cities people marched to de-
mand his freedom.

In December the newly-elected
Quebec government dropped all charges
against him; it was a real victory
for the Canadian women's movement.

International Women's Year 1975
was the year the Canadian government
attempted to divert and disperse the
energies of the women's movement and
failed. The Trudeau administration
launched its "Why Not?" campaign,

~-LNS

cial freedom and assertiveness (e.g.
acceptability of divorce and remar-
riage) linked to their economically
productive roles.

As conditions have worsened—famine,
inflation, polarization of landlords
and tenants—lower caste women have
organized in several regions of India
to redress their grievances. These
organizations have focused on caste
oppression, class oppression, and
sexual oppression. During the 1973
famine in Maharashtra state, untouch-
able (the lowest caste) and tribal
women led mass protests and gheraos

spending millions on publicity tel-
ling women they had only to change
their attitudes to be liberated?
("Why not be an executive?")

In Toronto on March 8, 1975, a
group of women launched a coalition
and issued a call for action. Al-
though many of these women considered
themselves socialists, their aim was

The Trudeau Administration Spent
Millions On Publicity Telling Women.
They Only Had To Change Their
Attitudes To Be Liberated...

to involve all women interested in
responding to the do-nothing cam-
paign. The goal of the May 10 march
was to demand concrete action by the
government to meet women's needs.
Six demands were raised:

(1) Equal pay for work of equal
value;

(2) Universal access to quality
childcare;

(3) Equal rights in marriage and
property;

(4) Safe, effective birth control
for all;

(5) Removal of abortion from the
Criminal Code, and

(6) The freeing of Dr. Morgentaler.

The march was one of the most
broadly sponsored actions the women's
liberation movement has organized.
It included most of the women's
groups in the city as well as left
political groups and labor organiza-
tions. May 10 was the largest
women's demonstration ever held in
English Canada.

The women's movement is changing.
In both Canada and the US the govern-
ment gets bolder in its attacks on
women's rights. There are more is-
sues and more fronts to fight on.
What is lacking in Canada is a
national women's organization that
could attract and unite women.
Our campaigns take place on a city
to city basis and in isolation from
one another,

System

(surrounding an enemy and not allow-
ing him to leave until demands are
met) against landlords, money lenders,
and government officials. One mass
march involved women wielding rolling
pins: These women also smashed boot-
leg liquor stills, as they realized
that drinking blocked the effective
organization of their men. In 1974
leftist women in Hyderabad started the
Progressive Organization of Women,
which has led several marches. Demands
of the P.O.W. include opposition to
dowries, obscene art that features
women as sex objects, "eve teasing”
(men taunting women as they walk down
the street), and black market, hoarding
and support for the implementation of
laws guaranteeing equal pay and day
care centers in factories.

The State of Emergency declared by
Indira Gandhi in June 1975 forced this
activity underground. Public meetings
and strikes were banned, press censor-
ship was imposed, and arrests up to
one year without a hearing were author-
ized. Many analysts see the Emergency
as an attempt to make dependent capi-
talist development work by silencing
the dissent of groups (workers and
peasants) who don't benefit from this
system. It is estimated that there
are currently 150,000 political pri-
soners in India who are subjected to
brutal torture. We don't know how
many of these prisoners are women,
but certainly the women activists de-
scribed above would be likely targets
for government repression. In spite
of press censorship, news of resis-
tance by women and men to resettlement
schemes and forced sterilization has
leaked out. Recently Indira Gandhi
announced that the Emergency is being
lifted and parliamentary elections
will be held in March. We will hear
more about the desperate and horrific
struggles of women workers and pea-
sants in India.