letters

Diana Press Reply

Dear Editor,

Greetings from Diana Press. You
and your readers may be interested
in reading a statement prepared by
Diana Press in response to the
letter by Ruth Geller which has
turned up in various feminist pub-
lications.

Since we have no accurate record
of which newspapers have printed
Ruth Geller's letter, we have ar-
ranged with Albatross Magazine to
publish in full our statement in
their new issue (Summer 1978 - just
released). Other publications are
invited to pick up the story from
them.

Copies of Albatross, a lesbian
humor magazine, are available in
most women's bookstores or may be
ordered directly from: Albatross,
P.O. Box 2046, Central Station,
East Orange, NJ 07019

A copy of our statement was also
sent to the Lesbian Connexion.

We'd like our statement to be read
by as many interested women as pos-
sible and we encourage everyone to
beg, borrow, steal (or better yet,
to buy) a copy of Albatross and find
out the other side to this story.
Respectfully,

Laurie Friedman
for Diana Press

BMR Confiscated

Hi, Bobbi;

Just thought that I would write
you and let you know that these
police denied me the July issue of
Big Mama Rag. Their reasoning is
because of the subject of homosexual-
ity. They say it is detrimental to
the security, discipline and good
orderly running of this institution,
plus these people say that it is for
my own safety.

I have some attorneys working on
this, plus I have contacted a Gay
Prisoners Support Organization that
is out of New York.

Me and some of my friends would
like for you to put us on your sub-
scription list.

Please reply as soon as you can
find the time.

Cyndi Freeman

02796 - 285
Alderson, W. Va.

COLLECTIVE

Culture: Constance Perenyi
Finances: Judy Barlow
Local News: Susanna Smith
Advertising: Sue Goding

National/International: Judy Barlow

Production: Susanna Smith
Distribution: Lisa Miehle

CONTRIBUTORS

VIRAGO FOLDS

Dear Women,

Over the past few months numerous
people have approached individuals of
Virago and asked us what we have been
doing. The purpose of this letter is
to review some of our recent activi-
ties and to clarify our status as a
collective. Much of the work we have
done during the past six months has
not been visible to local lesbian fem-
inists because we have been working
with women who are not a part of our
community.

During the course of our CETA grant
we spent a considerable amount of time
producing small concerts of local per-
formers for women in detention cen-
ters, safe-houses and nursing homes.
These performances included:

Pam Brooks at Columbine House (a
house for battered women).

Ruth Clark at Park Hill Nursing Home.

Nancy Hutchinson and Mary Centa at

Park Heights Nursing Home.
Kathy Kahn at Excelsior Youth (a de-

tention center for female teenagers).
Martinez and Blair at Colorado Women's

Correctional Institute.

Mary Stribling and Trio at Continen-
tal Care and Safehouse (a house

for battered women).

It has been exciting for Virago to
work more closely with local perform-
ers because there is a lot of talent
and creativity in our own community.
It has also been satisfying to share
these concerts with incarcerated and
institutionalized women.

Also at this time individuals rep-
resenting Virago attended four women's
music festivals. At the festivals we
worked on sound, attended production
workshops, met with tour planners and
other production groups, and contact-
ed new performers including the wo-
men's disco band, "Airhart".

During the latter part of the sum-
mer Virago worked with Diana's Grove
and other interested women on the
5th Annual Colorado Women's Festival.
While Virago worked on all aspects of
planning the festival, our primary
input was arranging the entertainment
for the day. We contacted several
dozen performers with varying styles
and levels of experience. Some of
these women were already known with-
in the community although others were
relatively unknown performers whom

MORE ON PAGE 10

Vicki Piotter, Bobbe Ross, Pandoura, Andrea Chesman, Dona Calacone,
Lori Bradford, Deb Taylor, Fran Dav, Bonnie Parker, Clair Kaplan,
Clare Strawn, Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective, Sandia.

Inside BMR

Women Against Nukes..... Sue cee oe Pp
Living Your Socialist Feminism. ..p

FBI Investigations

Struggle
Editorial..
Culture

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.
Material may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Co. 80206.
Deadline will be announced each month in Where We're At.
Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.
$6 is accepted for unsolicited material.
Subscription rates are

material for Length,

Manuscripts and any work
Please enclose a

No responsibility
We reserve the right to edit all
$6 per year for individual

subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada; and $12 to institutions. BMR
is free to women in prison and in mental institutions. This publication
is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago

and is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell.

We are in-

dexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, Mary-

land 21218.
It may be easiest to send us a note.

We do not have regular office hours during the day. It

Advertising information is available from Sue 333-7656.

home to mama

Big Mama Rag, Vol.6, No.10

Rochester WAVAW Ends Court Battle

Dear Friends,

In October of 1977, some women in
Rochester, N.Y. broke a display win-
dow in order to destroy a poster ad-
vertising the movie Snuff. On Octo-
ber 4, 1978, four of us were sentenc-
ed by Judge Charles Maloy in City
Court. He ordered us to make resti-
tution of $100 within six months to
Cesar D'Agostino, the owner of the
Holiday Cine where the movie Snuff
was shown almost a year ago. Al-
though we had preferred to bring this
to trial and had prepared for nearly
a year for this event, several weeks
ago we decided to plead guilty to
disorderly conduct, a violation.

The original charge was criminal
mischief, third degree, a felony.

A number of factors led to this de-
cision. Although we had planned to
present evidence at the trial to sup-
port our position that the action tak-
en against Snuff was appropriate
and justified, the judge had decided
not to allow this line of argument.
The numerous delays and obstructions
of the past year indicated that the
system was reluctant to bring us to
trial, yet unwilling to drop the
charges. Since we had already ac-
complished much of what we had set
out to do by way of organizing and
stimulating public discussion of
these issues, we concluded that it
would only be a waste of our re-
sources to continue to wait for a
trial.

We remain cynical about the male
dominated system of laws and justice.
We reject their definitions of guilt
and crime and feel no moral obliga-
tion to make restitution. Furthermore,
we don't ever expect to be "rehabil-
itated" into accepting male domination.

At the sentencing we distributed a
flyer (see box) which expresses the
spirit in which Rochester women went
to court. The presence of a large
number of supporters that day, the
sentencing speeches, and the outbreaks
of applause all helped to turn an
otherwise humiliating ritual into a
strong and moving experience.

We do not feel defeated. Rochester
women have accomplished a great deal
in the past year. We have demonstrat-
ed that women refuse to remain intim-
idated by male power or terrorized by
threats of male violence. We did a
great deal of public education and
continued to take direct actions when
necessary; and we were successful in
getting Snuff out of Rochester. This
work could not have been done without
the help of many supporters, both in
Rochester and around the country. We
are grateful to all of you, and we
want these connections to continue
and grow stronger so that we can carry
on the work we have begun. Thank you.
Power to all witches:

In sisterhood,

The Defense Committee of
Rochester Women Against
Violence Against Women.

One year ago we picketed the Holiday Cine when the movie SNUFF was
shown there. Due to the protest and to community pressure, SNUFF was
pulled before the end of the run. During the weekend of the protest four
women were arrested for breaking a pane of glass in order to destroy the
poster advertising SNUFF. No one was charged with the crime against the
community committed by the men who made, distributed and showed SNUFF,
which depicts the atrocious murder of women. Neither the District Attor-
ney or the vice squad would consider such a charge, although forcible
rape in Rochester increased 2% this past year.

We on the defense committee of ROCHESTER WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST
WOMEN felt that a trial would be an opportunity to raise the issue of
violence directed against women. Since then, a year of delays and obstruc-
tions has absorbed time and energy which could have gone to new projects.

The court has made it clear the trial would be an open and shut case
of a broken window; no other issues were relevant or would be permitted
at the trial. It was to be a public humiliation ritual for the uppity
women who dared to speak out for women in a strong way. The message was
implicit: women's issues aren't to be taken seriously; women don't count.
Both victory and defeat would have been meaningless in such a courtroom
where male laws are enforced in defense of male privilege.

The actions we took last October suggested that women's lives and
deaths are indeed matters of great importance. Now we have chosen to
plead guilty to disorderly conduct. In turn, WE INDICT the pornographers,
the porn merchants like Cesar D'Agostino, the owner of the Holiday Cine,
and the “justice” system that all too often turns a blind eye on women
and minorities. WE INDICT the rapists, the child molesters, the wife
beaters, and the killers - whether they kill with a gun or with a word.
WE SERVE NOTICE to all the above that the women of Rochester are uniting
and organizing to defend ourselves and our children against all forms

of terrorism.

ROCHESTER WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

New Mexican Food Menu

3 Velp..
, a

9%

mme*

AIRHART Dec. 889

Pool & Dancing Nightly

open Tues-Sat 5-2

Sun 5-midnight

38th & Chestnut