IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Abortion Rights

Feminists Disrupt Rally

Susanna Smith and Kathy Panzer

On Tuesday, January 22nd, a group
of about 100 anti-abortionists gath-
ered at the State Capitol in Denver
to hold a rally. This anti-abortion
group was sponsored by the Christian
Action Council, a fundamentalist
organization. In an effort to dis-
rupt this rally, a small group of
pro-abortion women and men picketed
and chanted with such slogans as:
"Keep your laws off my body" and "Tell
right-to-life the news, it's a woman's
right to choose."

The so-called "religious" folk re-
sponded violently with shouts of
"Life, Life, Life,” shoving placards
in our faces, pushing us around, and
attempting to take our bullhorn.
Because of this harassment, the pro-
abortion force moved to the top of
the Capitol steps to where the anti-
abortion speakers were standing.

From this area we continued chanting
to drown out the speakers. At this
time a policeman approached the woman
holding the bullhorn, grabbed it,
and yelled, “You can't use that!" A
minor altercation ensued, during
which several members of the pro-
abortion group were threatened with
arrest for disrupting the "legally-
assembled" rally (meaning one with a
permit.) Simultaneously, an anti-
abortionist demanded that a "citizen's
arrest" be made of several pro-abortion
demonstrators.

The cops then demanded several
names and addresses and threatened us
again with arrest if we continued
disrupting the rally. To avoid being
arrested we left the rally chanting
"Women's body, Women's right." We
continued marching into the downtown
area, chanting and handing out leaf-
lets which exposed the anti-abortion-
ists' tactics and explained what

"Pro-Choice" means.

{ There will be a community meeting
to discuss and plan a feminist res-
ponse to Jimmy Carter's plot to re-
instate draft registration and for-
ced conscription into the military.

The
Demands of Women

demand control of our reproduction

The anti-abortion force is a fright-
ening, vocal minority in this coun-
try; their ultimate aim is an amend-
ment to the Constitution barring
abortion under any circumstances.
Thirteen states have already request-
ed that Congress call a convention to
formulate an anti-abortion amendment
to the Constitution. Only 21 more
states are needed to force Congress
to call such a convention.

We as abortion advocates must not
become complacent over the gains we
have won because they are being
steadily eroded away by the visibility
and tactics of the anti-abortionists.
We must remain vocally adamant
that there should be no laws govern-
ing abortion; it is a woman's right to
have complete control over her own
body. We must continue staging act-
ions to counteract the reactionary
right wing. Even though we were a
small group, we were able to disrupt
the anti-abortion rally for a period
of time and gain access to the mass
media. (television/newspaper cover-
age.)

The meeting is to be at Woman to
Woman Feminist Center, 2023 E. Colfax,
in Denver on Wednesday, February 13,
1980. All women are welcome, and
childcare will be provided.

SSS EEE ESE ESSE

Feminism
Lives!

demand free, adequate health care

demand free, 24 hour day care

demand the right to the use of self-defense

demand equality in the job market

demand the right to guaranteed jobs or income

demand free and relevant education

demand an end to sexism in the cultural media

demand an end to the oppression of lesbians

demand an end to privilege based on race

and class

demand the end of defining people in terms of

their relationships to others

demand the right of self-determination for
all people

demand the right to use any means necessary
to eliminate male supremacy

Polygraph Figures in
Rape Acquittal

A Boulder, Colorado, jury has
acquitted a man of first-degree sexual
assault and aggravated robbery in a
trial ruling on the admissibility of lie-
detector evidence.

Richard Anderson, now of 1643 S.
Downing St. in Denver, had been iden-
tified by two victims as the man who
accosted them in the morning
hours of August 6, 1979, in a field
behind the King Soopers store at
Table Mesa Shopping Center.

A legal precedent was set when
District Judge Rex Scott allowed the
jury to hear testimony that Anderson
had “passed" polygraph tests in which
he said that he was innocent.

Assistant District Attorney Phil
Miller said the jury's decision would
be appealed to test the admissibility
of lie-detector evidence as a point
of law. Polygraph evidence in criminal
cases has been the subject of
scientific scrutiny; it hasn't
consistently been used to help
decide guilt or innocence.

Anderson was accused of robbing
a woman and sexually assaulting her
at gunpoint.

A jury that heard the case last
November was unable to reach a verdict,
and a mistrial was declared. Prosecut-
ors said the polygraph evidence was
crucial to their case.

Nurses Organize

Registered nurses from St. Anthony
hospital in Denver voted on January
23 to unionize. In the election con-
ducted by the National Labor Relations
Board, the nurses voted to unionize
within the National Federation of
Nurses and Health Professionals, an
affiliate of the American Federation
of Teachers.

Nurses from Rocky Mountain Hospital,
St. Luke's, and Beth Israel Hospital
had recently voted the Federation as
their "union" representative.

Earlier last summer, nurses from
several area hospitals staged a sick-
out and rally in City Park. Nurses
attending the rally complained that
low wages were causing chronic nurs-
ing shortages in the area. This in
turn was leading to 60-hour work
weeks and poor patient care.

Colorado Springs
Clinic Moves

The Colorado Springs Women's
Health Service Clinic has moved to
their new address at 111 E. Dale
Street. The phone number is
471-9492.

An eyewitness testified that he'd watched Anderson drink for several hours with his nephew on the night of the attacks. He said he didn't return home until 1 a.m.

The nephew testified he remembered
that the two were in the kitchen
of his home about 1:30 a.m. Anderson got so drunk he fell off his chair and hit his head on the table. The nephew said that he looked at a clock and then went to bed.

The rape occurred about 1:45
and 5 a.m.

THIS SPACE
FOR RENT

If you go to a meeting of a local group or attend a
demonstration, please think of your Mama and jot down
a few lines for us (paragraphs would be even better).

We are also interested in receiving articles on any
other Colorado happenings of general
interest to women.

And don't forget calendar items.

Please note graphics are
nice but words are nicer....

Mame.