local

At The Foot Of The Mountain To Perform

Kathy Riley

"There is a tremendous amount to be done. By all of us. With poetry, with song, with music, with art, with our lives and our consciousness. It is both a privilege and an obligation to intensify our efforts." --From Margaret Randall's A Poetry of Resistance

It's a question we all ask ourselves: how do our lives connect with wars and revolutions far away and seemingly beyond our control? It's a question for politics and also one for art. Both will combine next month when At The Foot of the Mountain, a feminist theater company, arrives in Denver for a 4-day series of performances, workshops and film/video presentations. Based in Minneapolis, At The Foot of the Mountain is one of the oldest professional women's theater companies in the country. Highlight of their visit, scheduled for May 3 through May 6, will be four performances of an original play called Las Gringas.

In Las Gringas, each of 12 North American women finds some connection between her life and the continuing struggle of the Nicaraguan people to maintain revolution. As the "gringas" remember invasions they themselves have experienced, they begin to notice their role in the United States' repeated invasions in Central America.

The issues of nuclear war and addiction will be explored in two media presentations by At The Foot of the Mountain, the Minneapolis feminist theater company visiting Denver May 3-6.

The company, which will be performing their new play Las Gringas (see separate story and calendar), will also bring with them a filmed version of their play, Ashes, Ashes, We All Fall Down.

A 60-minute color film, Junkie! explores addictions to chemicals, commodities, food, work, violence and sex. Beginning with the high which comes from any fix, Junkie! follows the progression of dis-ease into pain, denial, deceit and the self-pity which comes from hitting bottom. Out of that bottom of hopelessness, the first step towards recovery is made as addicts begin to admit powerlessness over their obsessions. With surrender, recovery begins. There will be a preview showing of Junkie! during the second week in April for those interested in reviewing the film or sponsoring a showing for their group. Call 322-6298 for more information.

Groups are also invited to rent the 90-minute video production of Ashes, Ashes, We All Fall Down, a ritual drama about nuclear war and fear of death. A member of the company will be available to discuss both the film and video after each showing.

Also scheduled during the At The Foot of the Mountain visit are four workshops led by members of the company.

Each 2-hour workshop is priced at $12 ($8/low income). All four will take place Saturday, May 5, on the University of Denver campus. They are:

Despair and Empowerment, Time: 10 a.m. to noon. Daily we're bombarded with images of doom, particularly the real possibility of a nuclear war ending life on earth. This ritual workshop brings participants face to face with that possibility and names the resulting feelings of despair as appropriate responses. The workshop aims to enable participants to transform our fears into hope and commitment.

- Women's Sexuality/Spirituality. Time: 10 a.m. to 12:30. Using meditation, movement and discussion, this workshop explores the connections between women's sexuality and their spirituality. Central is a meditation in which each participant is invited to discover the images, sounds and feelings of her own sexuality. From there each woman will explore how this energy has been socially conditioned and how it can be rechanneled to nurture her mind and spirit.

Page 4 - Big Mama Rag, April, 1984

York poet, a nun, a senator's wife and a welfare mother.

The six touring actresses, who perform multiple roles, will also portray Nicaraguan freedom fighters, drawn primarily from Margaret Randall's book, Sandino's Daughters.

At The Foot of the Mountain describes Las Gringas, as well as two other plays it will be bringing in film/video form (see separate story), as a ritual drama. Scripted during rehearsals and created jointly by a writer/director and performers, a ritual drama stimulates audience testimony into an otherwise fully rehearsed production.

Las Gringas will be performed at the University of Denver, South University and Evans in Denver. (See calendar for further details).

Here's how Barrie Jean Borich of At The Foot of the Mountain describes the background and perspective of the play:

Artistic Director Martha Boesing and Managing Director Phyllis Jane Rose recently returned from a visit to Nicaragua impressed with the people's commitment to building a society based on respect and justice. "After spending two weeks in a country where the people trust their government, I've come to understand how oppressive it is to live in this culture, where we don't," Boesing said.

Their trip also revealed to them the intense connection between Catholicism and the Nicaraguan revolution. While in many countries the Catholic church has been a figurehead of the Conquistador mentality, many Nicaraguans practice what is called "Liberation Theology."

"In Nicaragua, representatives of the church are working to empower the poor, encouraging them to fight to retain their culture and determine their own future," said performer Laurie Witkowski.

The struggle of women for self-determination is integrated into the Ensemble. Time: 1-3 p.m. In this workshop, participants investigate the choices actors make: the discovery and use of physical, vocal, emotional and spiritual tools. Focus will be on exercises, games and discussion.

All workshops are open to women and men, except women's sexuality/spirituality, which is open to women only.

To register, send your name, address, phone #, workshops selected, and check (made payable to the D.U. Theater Department) to: Paula Sperry, D.U. Theater Dept., Univ. of Denver, Denver, CO 80208. Deadline is April 26, 1984.