BMR on Culture

Malvina Reynolds Dies

Photo by Deb Taylor

Clair

Malvina Reynolds, noted topical song
writer/singer, died Friday, March
17th, 1978, in a Berkeley, California
hospital. Malvina gave her last con-
cert on Wednesday, March 15th. She
was struck by an attack of pancreati-
tis and hospitalized the following
day. She died early Friday morning
of kidney failure.

Malvina was one of a group of act-
ivist musicians who were vital to the
mass movement for social change which
began in the early sixties. She was
active in well over 50 years of pro-
gressive movements, including femi-
nism well before the women's movement
of the late sixties and seventies de-
veloped a mass base.

"Rosie Jane," "We Don't Need The
Men," "The Edge of The World," "No
Hole In My Head," and "The Judge
Said" are some of her most well-loved
feminist songs.

Unlike many movement songwriters,

Malvina integrated her music into a
rich lifetime of activism in many
causes. Two struggles that she took
an active part in in the last several

Baby, I ain't afraid to die
It's just that I hate to say goodbye
To this world, this world, this world.

This old world is mean and cruel,

But still I love it like a fool

I'd rather go to the corner store

Than sing Hosanna on that golden shore.

Somebody else will take my place
Some other hand, some other face
Some other eyes will look around
And find the things I've never found.

Don't weep for me when I'm gone
Just keep this old world rolling on
This world, this world, this world

from "This World," Malvina Reynolds

years prior to her death were the

Seabrook, New Hampshire fight against
nuclear power, and the recall of Madi-
son, Wisconsin Judge Archie Simonson,
which succeeded this year. Her song,
The Judge Said, energized the movement
to recall Simonson, who she called
"the judge who sanctions rape."

Malvina was scheduled to appear in
Denver at the Folklore Center (608 E.
7th Ave.) on Saturday and Sunday,
April 1st and 2nd. Instead, the Center
will hold a memorial concert on Satur-
day, April 1st, the proceeds of which
will be forwarded to her family.

Malvina's many records and song-
books are available through her own
publishing and recording company,
Schroeder Music Co., 2027 Porter St.,
Berkeley, CA, 94704. Copies of the
July 1977 issue of BMR with a two-page
interview with Malvina are available
through the office, 1724 Gaylord, Den-
ver, Colorado, 80206.

Malvina's fine music and dedicated

activism will be remembered by all of
us; her songs will remain with pro-

gressive movements around the world
and we will all remember her as a
great feminist revolutionary.

Conditions:

Herstory in the Making

Andrea Chesman

As an admitted enthusiast of the fem-
inist press and feminist press publica-
tions, I cannot look at and admire
Conditions without seeing it as a unique
publication and as a part of the her-
story of women's publishing.

Published three times a year, Condi-
tions is a magazine of writing by wo-
men, with an emphasis on writing by
lesbians. Each issue is filled with
tightly crafted poetry, fiction, criti-
cism, and reviews. Born in the spring
of 1977, Conditions contains some of the
best writings that this second wave of
American feminism is likely to produce.

When I first saw Conditions I was
struck by its very professional appear-
ance: front cover, a quiet black and
white graphic; back cover, a table of
contents; spine, good for bookshelves.
Inside there are no graphics, but each
page is carefully laid out, with a bal-
ance of prose and poetry that works
visually as well as intellectually.

This is a landmark publication. It rep-
resents a kind of security. This lovely
magazine, not backed by a commercial
set-up like Ms., nor supported (as far as
I know) by any government grant, is
nonetheless able to package feminist
writings in a way they deserve to be
packaged. Not that there aren't other
equally beautiful magazines: there are.
But, unfortunately, financial survival
is still a problem, and many publica-
tions can't afford to look beautiful.
Yet each beautiful feminist magazine we
have is a very proud announcement that
we have overcome many of the technical
and tactical obstacles that we faced in
the first years of feminist publishing.

There is a continuity to the writers
who appear in Conditions that is both
wonderfully familiar and just a little
scary. Anyone who has read feminist
magazines for a while will begin to
pick out the same names over and over a-
gain, particularly in Conditions. Does
this represent a tightening of ranks,
friends publishing friends, creating
stars? Certainly there is fine writing
in Conditions. Perhaps more significant
than the familiar feminist names is the
appearance of writers who have previous-
ly published mainly in the commercial
press. Issue #2 featured an outstand-
ing short story by Jane Rule, and issues
#1 and #2 carried a long interview with
Adrienne Rich. Maybe then, Conditions
does represent a kind of tightening of
ranks, in a positive sense. Through its
editorial policies and its ability to
design a pleasing package, Conditions is
able to transcend all those political
and status questions that enter a writ-
er's mind when choosing where to pub-
lish. The politics of the magazine are
appropriately professional. Truly, a
landmark.

Conditions is attempting to broaden
feminist literary perspectives by inclu-
ding as much criticism and commentary as
poetry; they are especially committed to
publicizing and reviewing women's press
publications. According to their sub-
mission policy, the Conditions collec-
tive is “concerned that women's/les-
bians' publications have often failed
to reflect the experiences of Third
World, working class, and older women.
We want Conditions to include work in
a variety of styles by both published
and unpublished writers of many differ-

MORE ON PAGE 14

Feminist Art in Denver:
Obvious and Superficial Imagery

Constance Perenyi and Dona Calacone

Throughout the month of March an
exhibition of work by Pearl Sanchez-
Plouf was presented at the Confluence
Gallery in Denver. Entitled Woman:
Body and Culture, the show was billed
by the Straight Creek Journal, a Den-
ver weekly, as a feminist statement,
the first of its kind in Denver. We
believe that in reality, there have
been many shows of women's work which
would qualify as feminist statements.
Our interest in this show is that it
is an example of how the popular media
defines and distorts both the concepts
of feminism and art.

To us, feminist art implies a my-
riad of experience and imagery that
grows out of women's most personal
perceptions. To the media, however,
feminist art means obvious images cull-
ed from often superficial rhetoric.

In many ways, Ms. Sanchez-Plouf was
catering to that preconceived notion
of what kind of art the feminist artist
makes.

In the first place, her ideas are
borrowed. Borrowed from sources like
Womanhouse, a spatial experience de-
signed by Los Angeles feminists in
the early seventies. Under the guid-
ance of Judy Chicago and Miriam Shapiro,
several women collaborated in
turning the rooms of an old home into
environments representing the roles
women have traditionally played in
these rooms. For example, trapped
within the shelves of the linen closet
was a life-size female mannequin posed
as if trying to free herself; con-
fined to the bedroom, which was draped
and covered in soft, silken fabrics,
was a real woman sitting at a dressing
table putting on and taking off make-
up repeatedly; in another bedroom the
furniture was scaled to make visitors
feel as small and powerless as women
do even within their own homes; the
bathroom, viewed through a gauze cur-
tain, was spotlessly white, colored only
by the reality of bloodied tampons and
napkins stuffed into a wastebasket.

Womanhouse was an integrated se-
quence of images such as these coupled
with live performances which explored
women's entrapment with a candor both
new and horrifying in 1971. It was
an artistic and effective form of con-
sciousness raising which gave women a
space both physically and aesthetically
to start dealing with common feelings.
This experiment in Los Angeles seven
years ago was a beginning for both the
artists involved and the feminist art
movement. But feminist art is a pro-
cess of continual growth and evolution
and does not mean repeating the same
images over and over again. Just as
our consciousness has expanded, so has
our art and image-making.

Unfortunately, the show at the Con-
fluence Gallery did not reflect this
change and growth because Ms. Sanchez-
Plouf was insensitive to and failed to
learn from the precedent of Womanhouse.
She conceived of the show as an envir-
onment in which people could "actually
walk around the space, not just come
in and glance at the pieces from a
distance." In reality, the exhibition
was uninvitingly crammed into a base-
ment corner of the gallery. It con-
sisted of soft sculpture of various
sizes arbitrarily separated by trans-
parent curtains forming nine compart-
ments. Each of these illustrated a
different book chosen by Sanchez-Plouf
as examples of literature predominantly
written by women. Each book hung from
the ceiling in front of its respective
display, thus titling it. Sisterhood
Is Powerful was represented by a large
bedspread appliquéd with the title of
the anthology. Anonymous Was A Woman
was encased in a small glass box along-
side a cloaked, androgynous figure.
Opposite this hung a small fabric scul-
pture of a doll clinging to an airplane
illustrating—believe it or not—Fear
of Flying. A large pallid-colored
female figure displayed her orange
yarn as testament to the Ms. Reader's
contention that women's last frontier
is pride in body hair. Exceeding even
this in bad taste was The Stepford
Wives which featured an elephantine
crocheted figure which read popular
magazines and sported button nipples.
The pièce de résistance was the men-
struation piece which consisted of two
hangings, each with a series of sanitary
napkins, one decorated with identical
red felt lips, the other with red
patches.

Sanchez-Plouf's show was a total
mockery of early feminist imagery. It
was completely camp. The colors were
hideous. The faces were at best doll-
like. She has condemned women to the
same roles that men have by making her
female images offensive and insipid.
Nowhere did one sense any feeling of
pride in being a woman. Furthermore,
she has done a large disservice to the
feminist art movement by so carelessly
plagiarizing and abusing the work of
other women.

To call Woman: Body and Culture a
feminist statement is appalling and
insults the many women artists who are
struggling to give their imagery real
validity and relevance. This struggle
is the crux of feminist art and when
this is recognized, women will be one
step closer to understanding their
power as feminists and artists. We
hope that future shows in Denver will
reflect a true spirit of feminism and
challenge viewers to consider the var-
iety and strength of women's art.

A MAGAZINE OF LESBIAN CULTURE AND
WOMEN'S ISSUES

Subscription: $8.00 for four issues
Sample copy: $2.75 by mail
Checks payable to

Tomato Publications

70 Barrow St

New York, NY 10014

We are looking for
graphic and written
contributions

We pay for
everything we print
Write for details

QUARTERLY ANALYSIS AND INTERVIEWS