Feminist Radio Folds

After 2 1/2 years of broadcasting  
on KFML the Women Everywhere Radio  
Collective aired its last show in  
July. During that time the collec-  
tive presented feminist news, culture,  
and interviews on issues important to  
the Denver women's community, includ-  
ing interviews with feminist organiz-  
ers and performers. Several of the  
programs raised issues and exposés  
that were instrumental in effecting  
changes that were felt in the larger  
community (i.e. women's health rights  
and nurses’ rights at Colorado General  
Hospital, and changes in the Denver  
Public Library.)

Women Everywhere was the only show  
of its kind to be broadcast on the AM  
band in the country.  
Everywhere the only feminist program-  
ming AM women listeners had. There  
has been some attempt at feminist pro-  
gramming for FM station listeners, but  
the AM radio stations are still guilty  
of no programming for women.

Doing political work through the  
electronic media is an excellent way  
to do outreach to new women, and vital  
to the feminist community. Working  
through this type of media requires  
the learning and refining of tech-  
niques of broadcasting which involve  
hard work and long hours. This is one  
of the difficulties the women exper-  
ienced in forming this kind of collec-  
tive, and in getting other women in-  
terested in joining and giving ener-  
gy. The past months have been extre-  
mely difficult for the collective to  
find women who wanted to give that  

kind of commitment.

During the last year KFML itself has  
gone through changes. Originally it  
was typecast as a freeform station  
with a laid back attitude. Last year  
the owner decided to attract more con-  
servative advertisers. At that time  

KFML management that didn't like the  

politics of Women Everywhere tried to  
get the show off the air, but the fem-  
inist community bombarded the station  
with letters asking not to remove the  
show, and they were able to continue.

In spite of the great support and  
encouragement received from many women  
things at the station remained precar-  
ious. The trend towards more conser-  
vative programming was real, and the  
demands and needs of the collective  

were at that time again.

Last month, in the middle of our financial panic,  
we were bailed out largely through the assistance of Linda Ryan, of the Velvet  
Hammer, and with the help of the women at Woman to Woman.  
But BMR seems to stare insolently, daring us to do something about it,  
only too aware that the costs are beginning to override everything.

The cost of putting  
We are  
just to do the typing, (renting the machine, buying the ribbon, correction tape,  
liquid paper, galley paper), costs us $54.30 plus tax.  
Production requires exacto knives, blades, non-reproducible blue mark-  
ers, blue lined paper, frosted scotch tape, rubylith paper and tape, wax for the  
waxer, photographic paper and developing chemicals for the stripprinter. The  
list goes on and on and...

What this is leading to is that Big Mama needs your support.  
We need money, office supplies, and woman-energy.  
That machine will cut down on time and the  
assorted supplies we use just to get the words down on paper, and give us more  
time to devote to the actual layout and production work.  
Subscriptions have fallen down, even when  
Advertising remains on a fluctuating  
level.  
Taking out an ad for your business or an event is a good way to get the  
word out to all those women who read BMR.

And, it's neater, no more of these uneven right margins.  
Remember, although you may reach the  
women of the Denver-Boulder area by word of mouth, there are women throughout  
the country who are traveling through and pick up a copy of the paper just to  
find out what they might look forward to when they hit Denver on vacation or on  
their way to visit friends in other locales.  
But, we realize that a lot of our sisters are doing all they can just to  
survive.

There are other ways to support the paper.  
Send us news, articles, book reviews, etc. Tell us what's happening in your area.  
Drop us a letter,  
and let us know what you think of what you read in Big Mama, what you think  
of what you don't read, whatever.  
Let us know you're still out there, more  
than just names and addresses that we send papers to once a month.  
Okay, enough of this tirade, it's time to get on with what's happening. We  
have happy news that the collective is about to be joined by a woman who has  
made a commitment to BMR, to start in September.  
Trudy Sauter is coming to us  
from the Woman to Woman Bookcenter.  
with her talents for organization  
and reputation for hard work, is most certainly welcomed by the collective. We  
are looking forward to having her among us.  
Sue Goding, also of the Center,  
has been a steady contributor to the paper for  
hee a while and we are anticipating the time when she will be with us also.  
The thought of an expansion of the collective has us all just excited as hell.  
And the knowledge that two of the finest women in the community have answered  
our need, or will soon, lends a great deal of strength to energies that have  
needed just this type of rejuvenation.

Speaking of energy happening just when we most need it, Jev and Jan are now  
coordinating the distribution of BMR in the city.  
We need new outlets, women  
to get the paper out, and the two women have volunteered to keep track of who  
is going to distribute when and where.  
It only takes a few hours during one day a month.  
Big Mama Rag will be having a benefit at the Velvet  
Hammer on Saturday night, September 17th, 8:00 to 12:00.  
And the news rolls on.  
If you're interested, give them a call at 322-9242.  
Kathy Kahn and Wood-  
Check with the Bookcenter and the  
Hammer for details later.

The weekend of the 17th (September) has been set aside by the collective to  
hold a retreat to discuss the paper.  
Any woman who is interested is welcome to  
come see what it's all about.  
We'll be meeting from 11 to 4 on Saturday, and  
11 to 5 on Sunday at Tea's, 555 E. 10th, apt. #401.  
Bring your swimsuit.

And, finally, don't forget the community critique meeting, September 12th,  
7:00 pm to 9:00, at Woman to Woman.  
We'll be going over the past few issues,  
so be there and let us know what you think.

Health and Healing  
Conference

A Women's Health and Healing Confer-  
ence is being planned to take place in  
mid-October, in Denver. A list of  
workshops includes such topics as:  
Anatomy and Physiology; GYN Exams -  
What You Deserve; Women's Rights -  
Assertiveness; Menstrual Problems, D & C's; Hysterectomy, Abortion, Sterilization;  
Vaginal and Breast Self-Exam; Natural Healing and Contraceptives;  
Sexuality - Masturbation, Lesbianism,  
etc.; Rape - Self-defense and Politics  
of Rape, Menopause for All Ages, Nu-  
trition, Herbology, Old Age, NAPA  
(Network Against Psychiatric Assault),  
Lesbianism as Feminism, and Beyond  
Sexuality (using color). These are  
just part of the workshops that will  
take place. Other workshops not yet  
confirmed will be included. Organizers  
are interested in getting in touch  
with any other women who have other  
topics to offer for workshops. They  
are interested in hearing from other  
women regarding any other interests  
and expectations.

Organizers will be compiling a bib-  
liography on women's health at the end  
of the conference. A number of 8mm  
films will be made at the workshops  
upon approval of the participants.  
Organizers have also expressed that  
they hope that the conference gener-  
ates ongoing task-forces to work on  
continuing problems related to healing  
and health care for women.

Vegetarian lunches will be served,  
and childcare will be provided. Pla-  
ces to stay for women from out-of-town  
will be arranged. A sliding scale to  
cover three days of conference partic-  
ipation is planned, with fees ranging  
from $30.00 to free, based on income.  
Conference organizers expect as many  
as 600 women to attend. Sixty per-  
cent of any money made by the confer-  
ence (through fees) will be distribut-  
ed among 4 local feminist projects.  
The remainder of any money made will  
be distributed as determined by the  
conference participants.

Organizers are contacting feminist  
musicians and other entertainers, both  
well-known national performers, and  
local talent. Anyone with any other  
suggestions or talents to offer for  
the conference are urged to contact  
the organizers. They would like to  
receive workshop proposals by Sept.  
15, and conference registrations by  
Oct. 1st. For more information on  
the conference watch the next issue  
of BMR, and call conference organizers  
at Woman to Woman Feminist Center -  
320-5972, Romy - 377-9754, or Wendy -  
333-0161.

Kathy Kahn (cont.)

from page 3

should be fought over and I refused to  
get into a rivalry situation which  
would only be harmful to the kids.

At one point when I was fighting Si  
over his illegal holding of the kids  
on my legal time, he tried to black-  
mail me. He told me that he had seen  
my picture on the cover of this porn-  
ographic book. He was telling me that  
if I dared to take them to court, that  
they were going to attempt to black-  
mail me with some pornographic book  
that had a picture of a woman on it  
who may or may not have looked like  
me. Well, I ran across that book, and  
this woman has virtually no resem-  
blance to me. I'd have to have plas-  
tic surgery all over my body to even  
resemble her. She was blonde, that  
was the only thing. So, that's a bit  
of a statement about where Si's liber-  
al politics are at about feminism.

BMR: Kathy, Si was instrumental in  
having you busted in Kansas City,  
Missouri, right? Tell us all about  
that.

Kathy: Last summer the kids came to  
stay with me in Kansas City where I  
had been living and working for about  
a year. Si and Charlotte told me that  
I could have them for only three  
weeks, even though the papers said I  
had a right to them all summer. The  
kids wanted to stay with me all sum-  
mer, and permanently after that. So,  
still acting in good faith, we called  
Si and Charlotte and tried to talk to  
them about it. They responded with  
threats that they would "destroy me  
all over the country" if I attempted  
to keep the kids. Well, at that point  
they were red-baiting me pretty heav-  
ily because I had been to China, and  
they had started these stories that I  
had deserted the kids, and also that I  
was a prostitute and also insane, and  
then also that I was a communist. All  
these things - I don't think they  
could make up their minds.

Well, at some point this time a  
federal grand jury convened in San  
Francisco around the underground N.W.  
L.F. (New World Liberation Front).  
They began to subpoena friends of mine.  
I was informed that the first question  
they were asking witnesses was, did  
they know Kathy Kahn. A legal aide in  
SF told me that she had information  
that my kids were going to be used  
against me in an attempt to stop my  
political activities, and that this  
grand jury was obviously targeting me.

Two days after I got this informa-  
tion, still on my “legal” time with  
the kids, our house was surrounded by  
police and private detectives and un-  
marked cars, and Si and Charlotte.  
They were beating on the doors and  
windows, trying to break into the  
house. We were terrified, having no  
idea of what was happening. I made a  
phone call and pretty soon there were  
more people outside the house than  
there were police and thugs. We man-  
aged to escape and go into hiding.  
Charlotte could have reached into the  
kids' bedroom through an open window  
and taken them during this raid, but  
she didn't. During this time we  
learned that detectives had been em-  
ployed to watch my movements. We  
called Si and asked him to call off the  
police and sit down and talk. He said  
no. I was told that I was to appear  
in court two days later to surrender  
the kids.

BMR: Was it at this point that you  
went underground with the kids?

Kathy: Yes. It became clear that Si  
wasn't going to be reasonable, and  
that he would go to any length to keep  
me and the kids separated. We decided  
not to show up in court, even though  
we hadn't done anything wrong. We  
didn't have any money and didn't be-  
lieve that we'd get justice in the  
courts. So, we went underground and  

more on pg. 14