EDITORIAL

Joy of Lesbian Sex

As a collective, we have had several discussions over whether or not to run an ad from Simon & Schuster for The Joy of Lesbian Sex. I feel the book has many negative aspects, such as perpetuating "lookism"; having pictures of only traditionally good-looking, well-formed, and almost all young women. There is also an inordinate and oppressive amount of emphasis put on cleanliness and the use of deodorants. The most oppressive statement I found in the book, and one which is a blatant lie, was that all lesbians always have orgasms. All lesbians do not always, or even usually, have orgasms, nor do they come to orgasm at the drop of a finger, as the book implies.

On the plus side, the best aspect of The Joy of Lesbian Sex is that it is a positive affirmation of women loving women. It is in commercial bookstores, which exposes women loving women to a wide audience, and reaches many lesbians who otherwise might not find any affirmation of their sexuality.

The Joy of Lesbian Sex is about lesbian sexuality, not, as the cover states, "the problems and pleasures of a lesbian lifestyle," of which sexuality is only a portion. I agreed to print the ad for this book because of the positive aspects of the book as stated in the previous paragraph, and because BMR needs the $100 we will receive. (Unfortunately, the second reason carries more weight.) I depend on the women who buy this book because of the ad to buy it because of the affirmation of women loving women, and to reject those aspects of the book which are oppressive.

Susanna Smith

KRIKAAKIKRKRIKRRIA IIR IRERERTITR

Complete this sentence: "The Joy of Lesbian Sex." If you can imagine anyone answering anything but "Joy," you can also probably imagine why this book is necessary and should be advertised. While this manual does give oppressive opinions about body hair and odor, if it helps a woman to go that far, she can probably start making her own opinions about these.

The most oppressive feeling a lesbian can have is that she is one of a very sick few. The fact that The Joy of Lesbian Sex is printed and distributed by an establishment printing house and that it is available at many shopping center bookstores will help spread the word that we are here, you are not alone.

Also, the appendix at the back of the book listing other lesbian books and periodicals will enable women to start finding us.

The Joy of Lesbian Sex, while not as great as it could have been, still fills the void that was filled by Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex and other hetero-stock. And that accomplishment makes it good enough.

Susan Goding

For weeks, I have struggled with the issue of printing this ad, and finally agreed only when we decided to include an editorial statement. I am still opposed to advertising The Joy of Lesbian Sex in a feminist publication, but see potential value in expressing my own objections to the book which I feel exploits and objectifies lesbian sexuality by reducing individual experiences to slick drawings and even slicker definitions.

As lesbians, we must learn to discard the messages we've gotten about ourselves as sexual beings - not only the messages from the straight, misogynist world, but also those from our peers. We must realize that we are healthy when we fulfill our own expectations of what we want for ourselves. And that means rejecting stereotypes and roles, and affirming ourselves as individuals who are unique in appearance and expression.

I feel that The Joy of Lesbian Sex continues to promote many of the same stereotypes and myths that have long intimidated women; and, because it is a sex manual, it leaves little room for us to define lesbian sexuality outside of another “accepted norm." In accepting ourselves, we must create spaces in which to grow and relate to each other in a way that celebrates our differences. I am looking forward to a day when we can share our experiences, when we can explore what it means to be women-identified women without the need of manuals that tell us who we are and what we should do with each other. Self-acceptance is itself the joy of lesbian sex.

Constance Perenyi

It is difficult for me to criticize The Joy of Lesbian Sex merely because it fails to stress political awareness. For many women, the first step in becoming a politically active and aware lesbian is to first identify herself as a woman who loves other women. For many women, this step is enormous and frightening. It is only after adjusting to this new identity that the woman is then ready to take another step of change, such as developing and living by personal and feminist politics.

It would be nice to truthfully think of this woman bursting into her new lesbian identity completely developed; open-minded, politically correct at all times, and at immediate ease with radicals. Sadly, this is not the usual case. Growth is in most cases a slow process, and development proceeds in single steps. I think it's crucial to refrain from criticizing the size of a woman's first step - the one she took to come out sexually, if not politically. Just as “no woman is free to be anything else unless she is also free to be a lesbian," no lesbian is free to be political unless she is also free to not be. I have difficulty believing any lesbian's politics are very reasonable if they do not allow other women to be political or not, as they choose. So I have very little complaint with the “just sexuality" emphasis of the book.

What I do object to is the frequent presentation of either mildly misleading or grossly inaccurate statements presented as fact.

There were many entries in The Joy of Lesbian Sex that, while not dangerously misleading, still might cause a large amount of private embarrassment if taken as fact by a reader who doesn't know enough to know any better. For instance, I would have been sorely disappointed upon my first visit to a lesbian bar if I had first read that they are "the most enduring temples of foreplay we have." I was also never aware of the deep significance of dancing. (When dancing, one's “hands signal not only invitation but suggestions of what they will perform in bed.") And I would hate to think that women who are just coming out might read The Joy of Lesbian Sex and believe they can find their true love simply by wearing the right kind of boots, or, worse, by carefully scrutinizing the boots on other women, perhaps searching for "boots that are thick leather, heavy-heeled, and vaguely cowboy-ish," because such boots are worn by "a lesbian announcing that she is freewheeling, sexually assertive, prepared to make a lot of noise and willing to try just about anything."

Such guidelines seem almost unbelievably ridiculous, but these humorous explanations and pieces of advice were written seriously, and there are many lesbians, particularly those who have just come out or who have been isolated from other lesbians, who will read these statements and take them just as seriously as they were written and this is disturbing. At the same time the book states that roles all too often become "a catchall to constrict people by defining them within."

The homosexual population has the second highest percentage of alcohol and drug abuse of all minorities in the country. It has been estimated that two out of three lesbians have an alcohol or drug-related problem. More conservative figures place the percentage between 25% and 35%. This means that, even conservatively, one out of every three lesbians is affected.

There is strong evidence suggesting that these high percentage figures are directly related to the homosexuality of the alcoholic. This correlation should surprise no one. The lesbian alcoholic does share the same problems as the alcoholic in the general population, but she has many additional problems stemming from her lesbianism.

These problems include the fact that an alcoholic bar still remains the only public setting in which many lesbians are able to feel comfortable enough to be themselves. Additional problems for the lesbian alcoholic are found in the availability of treatment. Many clinics will refuse to treat a woman if they find out she is a lesbian.

We have:

2023 E. Colfax

Christmas Cards
Jewelry by Sandia

(IF YOU HAVE THINGS IN THE BASEMENT, PLEASE CLAIM IT BY THE END OF THE YEAR)
PLEASE RETURN OVERDUE LIBRARY BOOKS

Talamolic, affecting the lesbian alcoholic. A first step toward recognition is to stop pretending the problem doesn't exist, and start providing support for the lesbian alcoholic and understanding of the specific problems that exist for her.

OPEN SUNDAYS THROUGH DECEMBER

10-7

Mon-Fri 10-7

WOMAN TO WOMAN

feminist center

It would be nice to truthfully believe that these problems and obstacles to recovery do not exist, but there is overwhelming evidence that they do. Lesbian alcoholics need to be able to find understanding groups and therapists with whom they can find support and achieve recovery.