hot briefs...

Hyde Goahead

The Supreme Court refused in Sep-
tember to reconsider its ruling on
the Hyde Amendment. In a one-sentence
order, the Court cleared the way for
the Department of Health and Human
Services to cut off all Medicaid
funds to women on welfare seeking
abortion. The department had contin-
ued to pay for poor women's abortions
pending the outcome of the rehearing
requests. By a 5-4 vote last June
30, the court upheld as constitution-
al the Hyde Amendment, a congression-
al restriction on Medicaid spending
for abortions. (See BMR August '80
for a report on that decision.)

Aborted Logic

As for poor women who can't afford
abortions without public funds, one
person in a congressional race called
their plight “a blessing in disguise.
The consciences of the wealthy (who
can afford them) will be scarred.”
No, these are not the words of Henry
Hyde. They are the words of Naomi
Bradford, who is challenging Rep.

Pat Schroeder for her Colorado con-
gressional seat. Bradford continued
her display of not grasping the abor-
tion situation by stating, "It
astounds me that women activists
aren't against this. If ever an issue
should bring out women en masse, it
should be the lives of children. Is
(abortion) what I want my daughters
to learn from me as a woman? We
should teach young women self-
control." Here's hoping her daugh-
ters are never in a situation where
they have to get parental consent.

Sexist Trivialization

Glasgow students demonstrated at
the university this summer in protest
against a debate held there titled
"Rape- A Female Fantasy." Union Pres-
ident Charles Kennedy tried to defend
the debate on the grounds that it
"wasn't a serious discussion- rape
figured in the title merely to pull
in a crowd." Just the kind of flip,
sexist trivialization the students
were angry about.

How To Say No

Sonia Johnson, whom the Mormon
Church excommunicated for her lead-
ership in the struggle for the ERA,
told Hugh Hefner, "I'm a feminist
first," as she turned down Playboy's
freedom of expression award of
$3,000, since she would not profit
from the magazine's exploitation of
women. She suggested that Hefner do-
nate the money to the feminist move-
ment, “anonymously, if necessary."

bntr:

Ms. Tortion

A few months ago we printed a hot
brief about a recently unsealed time
capsule buried in 1879. In the cap-
sule was a pamphlet which contained
the following inscription by the
pamphlet's author, Laura DeForce Gor-
don; "If this little book should see
the light of day after its 100 years
entombment, I should like the readers
to know that the author was a lover
of her own sex, and devoted the best
years of her life in striving for the
political equality and social and
moral elevation of women.” In May,
Ms. Magazine ran the same news item,
but specifically left out of the or-
iginal quote any indication of les-
bianism by cutting out the words that
Laura Gordon “was a lover of her own
sex." In a letter to Ms., that has
yet to be printed, one woman wrote,
"If it was important enough to Laura
DeForce Gordon to leave that message
for those of us living 100 years af-
ter her, one would think that 'fem-
inists' in 1980 would feel some obli-
gation to respect the integrity of
her words. If this kind of censorship
of lesbian lives is part of your ‘new
look,’ it looks too much like the
"same old thing" to me."

No Library Lesbo Lit?

A referendum calling for the ban-
ning of lesbian and gay publications
from the Virginia Beach Library sys-
tem will be on the ballot in Virginia
November 4th. The storm centers
around a local newspaper called Our
Own, published by a lesbian and gay
organization operating under the
sponsorship of the Unitarian Church
of Norfolk. Copies of the newspaper,
along with other local community pub-
lications, had been available free in
Virginia Beach libraries until a num-
ber of politically conservative min-
isters began objecting to its pres-
ence. While facing the referendum
vote, Our Own is preparing to sue
the city demanding the restoration
of its rights to distribution.

Husband Kept “Safe”

A woman in England has been jailed
for a year because the judge felt it
would be dangerous for her and her
husband to live together. She stab-
bed him, but the court heard that
their marriage was in crisis, that
she had spent many nights away from
home to escape beatings, and that on
the night of the stabbing he had
been working himself into a temper
and she had intended to use the
knife to frighten him off. Still,
she was judged a battering wife, a
dangerous criminal, and locked up.

where we're at

After participating in our many discussions on how to facilitate the
process here at BMR, Lori Bradford has decided to join the paper as a col-
lective member. Lori has been an ardent and dedicated supporter for quite
some time. Her new energy and level-headedness is a welcome asset to the

collective.

Speaking of process, the January issue will deal specifically with coll-
ective process, structure and politics. We hope you all will write us about
your experiences in collective process. Collectives and individuals are

welcome to write.

This month we acquired 10 (count 'em, ten) new used newspaper display
boxes. In October they will be painted white to match the other 5 we al-
ready have. So if you see a white newspaper stand on the street, stop and
buy a paper. If, at some time, you should lose money in the boxes, call
us and leave a message and we'll send you a paper or stop by Woman to
Woman and tell them. They'll give you one to replace it. (It doesn't hap-
pen often). Feel free to call and leave a location you would like a box.
We are considering locations in C. Springs, Ft. Collins, Greeley, Pueblo,
Alamosa or other CO towns. (We'll send one out of state too). We need women
who live in these towns to take care of it, perhaps in exchange for a
free sub. If interested give us a call (303-322-2010) or write.

The garage sale this month was fairly successful. We made about $100.
(More when all the BMR collective members pay for what we bought at our

own sale).

If you want to help BMR out but don't want a humongous commitment, we
have many ideas. These are short term, one-shot helps. A few suggestions
are: convince a business to run an ad in BMR, rates are on the classie
page. Or convince a bookstore to carry BMR, just ask if they carry BMR
every time you go in, they'll get the idea eventually. We'll send a pub-
licity packet to do PR in your town. Leaflets, back issues of BMR, etc.

that you can

leave in laundromats, buses, waiting rooms, etc. Or run an

ad in the local free or alternative paper, for us.

Winter is approaching, so we are putting out our yearly appeal for space
heaters. We have very little heat down here so we end up freezing during
production. We will pick up anywhere in the Denver/Metro area.

Comrade’s Lament

Women are holding up a good deal
more than “half the sky" in China.
Dong Chunfeng, a woman who works at
the Peking Masses Publishing House,
told an American newspaper a familiar
story: “Besides doing eight hours of
work every day, we have to do the
cooking, washing, sewing, and mending
after we get back home. If you have a
baby, you are fully occupied. There
is often not enough time for a meal,
we get no sound sleep, and some women
doze off at work."

Soviet Sisters

Three Russian feminists expelled
from the Soviet Union say they will
work abroad to promote their movement.
Their expulsion came one day after
they issued a public appeal in Lenin-
grad urging Soviet women to refuse to
let their husbands and sons be sent
to Afghanistan.

Fight On Feminists

A staggeringly repressive abortion
bill was defeated in Queensland,
Australia this summer on its second
reading. Over 3,000 women demonstrat-
ed as the bill was being read—an
amazing achievement for Queensland
women, where demonstrations of more
than three people are illegal. The
bill would have imprisoned women
for three months for seeking an
abortion, and women would face three
years in jail for inducing their own
miscarriage. The bill proposed sen-
tences of 14 years for those people
doing abortion referral and seven
years for the woman having an abor-
tion.

Fed Fundfuckers

Each year in Congress, the House
attaches anti-abortion amendments to
many pieces of legislation. Some-
times they are removed by the Senate
before final passage, but other
times—most notoriously in the case
of the Hyde Amendment—they are al-
lowed to stand in some form. Last
month the House did it again, approv-
ing an amendment that prohibits fed-
eral workers and their dependents
from using government-financed in-
surance plans to pay for an abortion.
Such plans now cover about 10 mil-
lion people, while about 20,000 abor-
tions were paid for last year under
this form of insurance. The vote in
favor of the ban provoked outrage on
Capitol Hill where a group of women
workers began planning a work stop-
page in protest of the action.

Equal Unpaid Parenting

The US Department of Labor has be-
come the first federal employer to
allow up to two years of unpaid child
rearing leave for both women and men,
with the same or a comparable job
guaranteed on their return.

Opportunity Knocks

"You don't hire a married man with
two kids without creating opportunit-
ies for him." This is how a Vancouver
Alcan Products sales manager defends
his hiring of a male sales adminis-
trator at $160 more a month than a
woman who had held the same job for
26 years. Noel Dowie, the sales man-
ager, tried to explain to the human
rights officer why a man with two
kids constitutes such a hot item for
promotion. Customers, he said, seemed
to prefer male sales administrators
to women. Distributors can communi-
cate better with a guy, he explained.
They can swear at a guy but they
can't at a woman. The Human Rights
Branch board of inquiry, which is
currently hearing the case, argues
that salary levels must be based on
the work an employee is doing, not
on his/her promotion potential.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 9

Radical Unemployment

Rosemarie Ukrow has had to go
through four hearings in West Germany
to see if she's too radical to keep
her job as a telephone operator. Un-
der the "Berufsverbot" law anyone,
in any government job, can be ques-
tioned, and if found "guilty of hav-
ing subversive ideas," can be fired.
Rosemarie, a Communist Party member,
is under suspicion for her involve-
ment in feminism and labor politics;
she has written leaflets and given
talks on women and the trade unions.
She first became politically active
after she caught German measles in
early pregnancy and was refused an
abortion under the notorious "Para-
graph 218." (Her daughter was born
deaf.) Rosemarie says she has no
doubt that the secret police is mon-
itoring women's groups. Around 8,000
people have lost their jobs under the
"Berufsverbot" law—almost all have
had some connection to left politics.

-Madness Network News

Off. The Wall

The women's committee of Local 1033
of the United Steelworkers has forced
the Republic Steel Co. of Gary, Indi-
ana to remove pornographic photos
glued from floor to ceiling in a work
area used by both women and men work-
ers. Caroline Jasin, of the women's

committee, first tried polite re-
quests, asking male coworkers to re-
move the offensive photographs. When
that didn't work, Jasin wrote direct-
ly to Republic Steel. She reminded
the company that three years previous-
ly she had been ordered to remove a
pro-strike sticker from her hard hat,
on the grounds the hat was company
property and could not be defaced.
Jasin inquired, wasn't the wall also
company property, and didn't the pic-
tures also deface their property?

The photos were quickly cleared off
the wall by company representatives.

Sterilization Sacrifice

A sad and ironic ending has come
to light in the case of the five wo-
men who were sterilized in order to
keep their jobs at the American Cya-
namid plant in Willow Island, West
Virginia, in October 1978. American
Cyanamid has shut down the section
in which the women worked. All five
have been transferred to other de-
partments with complete loss of the
departmental seniority and pay for
which they had sacrificed so much.
"If they had not had so much senior-
ity in their original department
they would have been fired altogether,"
explained Joan Bertin of the
ACLU who is representing four of
them in a damage suit against Amer-
ican Cyanamid. "As it is, they have
been ‘bumped down' to the lowest
level in their new departments. They
would not have needed to be steril-
ized to work where they are now."

Robotomy Of Labor

The General Electric Co. is about
to launch a sweeping program that
may eventually replace half of its
37,000 assembly workers, most of whom
are women, with robots. GE, Business
Week reports, already figures that it
can replace 2,000 positions in rela-
tively short order. Working women
aren't the only ones to be put out
of work by the "robotization" of the
assembly line. The auto industry is
eagerly installing robots, hoping it
will boost its sagging fortunes.
While there are fewer than 1,000 ro-
bots in the industry, General Motors'
next generation of small cars is
already on the drawing boards designed
for robot-controlled production.
With a new generation of robots that
can "see" and "feel" and “hear," but
don't strike, ask for day care, or
retirement benefits, automation ex-
perts say such robots could displace
up to 75% of today's factory workers.