Continued from pg. 8

in a position where it would not have to rely upon such business operations as
sales to stay open. Obviously, such a business would be one in appearance only. 
Another exception is movement outlets—such as bookstores that function as ideological 
spaces where women may become politicized, the vast majority of feminist 
newspapers that do not exploit our movement for personal benefit (there unfortunately 
are one or two that are clearly opportunistic), etc.

Since Daughters Inc. functions "aboveground" as a bona-fide business, I do not 
consider Daughters to be a feminist business as claimed—rather, a women-owned 
business.

This is not merely a matter of semantics. Each business in the United States 
that has so far defined its operations as being the wave of the future—an eventual 
alternative to capitalism and/or the systematic oppression of women as a class— 
has yet to show how it can live up to its claim. This observation holds true 
whether these enterprises are hierarchical, collective, or cooperative; whether 
they are operated by socialists, anarchists, or feminists.

Were feminist businesses viable, they would effectively challenge the institutions 
including our patriarchal economic structure that provides the channels for minority 
groups, not only the methods of production within the economy and the profits that 
result, but the social relationships amongst the workers as well. This "economic 
control" relies upon perpetuating existing oppressions, and it must be said that 
Third World women suffer the most.

The reserve army of labor is primarily comprised of women, migrants, and third 
world people, who out of necessity, work for low wages in low-status jobs and 
provide an expendable and temporary source of labor to be utilized in emergency 
situations such as strikes and labor shortages. A reserve army of labor, or an 
(unemployed) surplus labor force, is indispensable under capitalism to keep 
wages low through competition among workers for an inadequate number of jobs. 
Your advocacy of women owning businesses as a progressive direction of feminism 
is inadvertently both racist and classist because most women cannot accumulate the 
necessary capital to start businesses or keep them running. How do you expect 
most women to move beyond this obstacle? Moreover, because less-privileged women 
have always participated—out of economic necessity—in the business world, your 
promoting business—albeit "feminist"—as a revolutionary idea does not realistically 
appraise, nor appear to appreciate these women's reality—their extensive, yet 
unrewarded, contribution to business. Obviously, some of these women would have 
already started businesses had they been able to. If women do not have the means 
with which to start ordinary businesses, how are they going to start feminist 
businesses?

I and other lesbian separatists of course believe that it is vital that women 
have economic security; it is understandable that some women would provide for 
their economic needs through owning businesses. It is important to bear in mind, 
however, that owning a business is not a political action—it is a privilege; 
participating in such a business may also be a privilege. Our argument lies in 
"feminist businesses" being falsely promoted as an economic answer, and as an 
autonomous political strategy. While a few women undoubtedly are provided for by 
women-owned enterprises, most women remain unaffected and must therefore continue 
to look to the establishment business structure for economic security—only a 
few women progress.

Moreover, you mislead yourselves (and us) when you limit the considerations of 
economic development to economics alone. You know that those in power deliberately 
perpetuate the illusion that it is possible for women to reverse our second 
class status by allowing a small percentage of women marginal access to those 
privileged areas within establishment institutions including the economy. This 
is their time-worn tactic designed to fool, thus subdue, women, and thereby keep 
us from rising up against established authority. Their token system has historically 
proven to be effective; political impetus gets lost in the mad scramble for crumbs.

Don't get me wrong—I recognize that there have been honest attempts by feminists 
to remain true to their political commitments within the framework of a 
woman-owned business structure. Oftentimes, this was the reason for setting up 
such a structure in the first place—especially amongst poor, working-class, and 
Third World women who have fewer economic choices, as explained, within the 
establishment business structure. Unfortunately, these attempts are at best, sadly 
unrealistic—particularly for those women with fewer resources to start off with— 
politics unavoidably get sacrificed to the demands of keeping the business itself 
alive; and at worst, are dangerous to the WLM.

As a committed feminist, I find that I must take issue with the promotion of any 
methods which are presented as being feminist, and which in fact hinder—in spite 
of any good intentions—the progress of the WLM as a revolutionary force. Over- 
estimating the political clout of women-owned businesses allows some feminists to 
feel that they are doing something concrete to ensure women's futures. This mis- 
assessment is particularly dangerous when complacency amongst women sets in because: 
(1) woman-energy gets diverted from true political work; (2) women are given false 
hope; (3) the WLM loses momentum as a revolutionary force; (4) the WLM loses 
credibility with non-movement women—potential allies—who are struggling with 
survival issues; and (5) less-privileged feminists must work all that much harder 
to ensure the movement's future, while struggling with basic survival.

Lois Gould describes you as being in "this vigorously moving part of 'the movement'", 
(referring to women-owned enterprises) with other women also "past youth".

For the reasons given, I do not believe that these businesses are any great part 
of a radical political movement—which is what the WLM must remain—let alone 
"this vigorously moving part." On the contrary, I believe that so-called feminist 
businesses, such as Daughters, are dangerously deluding yourselves and other 
women by presenting individual answers as political strategy.

Lois Gould says that you are "attacked...for imitating male-model capitalism..."

Do you feel that this is a fair criticism?

Since under capitalism businesses and all institutions are hopelessly interconnected, 
all "aboveground" institutions serve the political interests of those hostile to 
women—be they "male" or "new." To ignore or underplay this political 
interrelatedness is to be politically irresponsible to women.

(The Daughters "community" believes) they are building the working models 
for the critical next stage of feminism: full independence from the control 
and influence of "male-dominated" institutions—the news media, the health, 
education and legal systems, the art, theater and literary worlds, the banks.

How are you "building" these "working models"?

Are "feminist businesses," such as Daughters Inc., prototypes of these models?

Do these businesses redefine women's role in society? Explain how they unin- 
stitutionalize the oppressive myths that are concretely enforced.

What role does gender-reversal in businesses play in catalyzing patriarchal 
society into a feminist one? You appear to be encouraging women to create a 
female “right" (as opposed to the male “left"). Is this, in fact, your in- 
tention?

Does your vision of "full independence" include our control of such basics as 
food and shelter? If not, why not? How do “feminist businesses" manage to 
put bread and butter on most women's tables?

Are "new institutions," as proposed by Charlotte Bunch (see below) prototypes 
of these models? What political conditions demarcate this “next stage" from the 
present stage? Why do you advocate an elitist solution to the oppression of women?

Success, as Charlotte defines it, is a matter of gaining power to control your 
own life. Her vision of a feminist future extends that definition: women 
building new institutions that control increasingly larger portions of their 
lives—and ultimately, of the nation's life.

Charlotte, you appear to think that the answer to all women's oppression is in 
our building "new institutions." Do you genuinely think that such institutions 
could function as revolutionary vehicles? If so, how will they counteract, thus 
nullify, the effects of the dominant economic institutions? Why would those cur- 
rently in power passively allow “new"—adversary—institutions to exist? to 
gain power? to proliferate? to ultimately destroy them? How would these “new 
institutions" combat establishment retaliation? Explain their autonomy. What 
connection, if any, do these “new institutions" have with “working to make changes 
from within"—a political belief which Lois Gould attributes to you?

(The Daughters women) attended a secret feminist-press convention...where 
more than 80 feminist companies engaged in various phases of publishing 
gathered together for the first time to chart their course and define their 
ultimate goal—not to become a unified underground women's press, but actually 
to lead a feminist takeover of the nation's media. They were and are serious. 
The only question is how they expect to succeed.

Why is the feminist-press network's “ultimate goal" expressed to The New York 
Times? Where is your sense of political security? One can assume that you 
are not serious.

Is becoming "a unified underground women's press" not your "ultimate goal"?

The feminist-press network, of which you are a part, is presented as wanting 
to "lead a feminist takeover..." The Daughters "community"—women who “devote 
their 'energy' to all-woman enterprises"—is presented as "building the 
working models for the critical next stage of feminism." The implication of 
these presentations is that you see yourselves as being at the helm of the 
WLM—defining and instituting your collective aim, and defining and instituting 
your collective strategy. Do you see yourselves as leaders of the WLM? 
If so, what are your qualifications? Who appointed you as such? What are 
your responsibilities? How are you held accountable?

This brings us to the following statement by Lois Gould:

Charlotte Bunch...has been described as one of the movement's “hidden leaders"... 
she seems to be trusted by an impressive number of otherwise disparate, even 
clashing, groups. The trust is built at least in part on the fact that she 
has risen from within the ranks of the movement.

The concept that there is a hierarchy within the WLM which divides feminists 
into two camps—the leaders and the ranks—is not one of the principles that 
our political movement should encourage. According to Leffler, Gillespie, and 
others:

Eventually elitism and opportunism appear almost indistinguishable, each 
reinforcing the other. If unchecked at this stage, movement leaders become 
practically invulnerable to internal attacks; the movement's stratification 
deepens and the rank-and-file loses control over its own movement.

What are your thoughts on this?

Lois Gould describes you as “distinct and separate bands of women"—"not an 
army." When I think of an army of women, I think of women being united in our 
common ongoing struggle against men—our common enemy—until we win; even if it 
takes us the rest of our lives. Do you consider yourselves as part of the army 
I describe? How do you see yourselves and all women—including lesbian separatists— 
working together for this common aim? On what basis do you decide which 
women you will work with and which women you won't work with?

Why do you not make better use of your “structural advantages" within the 
women's movement to promote realistic political solutions?

“Are you building an alternate society?" I (Lois Gould) ask the women at the 
table. "Of course not!" June Arnold exclaims..."We are building the real 
society. Theirs is the alternate."

June, calling "their" society "the alternate" is not merely glib, it is wishful 
thinking. I recognize that "their" society is not set up in the interests of 
women, but it is all pervasive. To imply that it is less powerful than it really 
is, is to deny reality. This is harmful to women because: (1) it is not safe for 
women to miscalculate the power of our oppressor; and (2) it makes invisible most 
women's lives who know all too well that "the alternate" currently is the “real 
society."

In conclusion, revolutionary strategy is based on the material conditions of 
women's lives. A short-sighted strategy containing ideological contradiction, 
political glibness, wishful thinking, political naivete (lack of consciousness 
concerning race, class, ethnicity, the structure of the United States government, 
etc.) is often based on individual privilege and therefore cannot be useful in 
formulating answers to all forms of women's oppression. I feel that your individual 
and collective lack of realism does a grave disservice to the women's movement 
because it is short-sighted and therefore does not fully address the pervasiveness, 
and destructiveness of the patriarchy.

THIS ARTICLE WILL BE CONTINUED NEXT MONTH.