MR  
In Other Words  
by Alice Molloy  

Women's Press Collective  
Oakland, California  

Martha Shelley  

In Other Words is one of the most  
astounding works to come out of the  
Women's Movement, differing from  
other books in form as well as con-  
tent. Perhaps the easiest way to be-  
gin is to describe the structure.  

The pages are laid out with text on  
one side and illustrations on the  
other. The text consists of notes  
from the author's journal, and quota-  
tions which caught her attention.  
The illustrations may be drawings or  
photographs, but more often they are  
excerpts from Scientific American,  
advertisements for ITT and Xerox,  
paragraphs from a book called Crowds  
and Power by a complete paranoid.  
Around the margins are Molloy's com-  
ments and “word trips."  

The journal, the illustrations and  
marginal comments bounce back and  
forth, so you can read the book  
through or dip in anywhere. The au-  
thor chooses her form with a purpose;  
"I am trying to put out information  
in a way that I think has more to do  
with how information is actually ta-  
ken in/handled, than the usual ways."  

She is not presenting a linear  
argument, a thesis against which you  
can build the antithesis: "...I  
have set out to contrive an associa-  
tion network, so that you can combine  
it with yours. if you will. diabol-  
ic." In order to facilitate your ab-  
sorption of this material, to make it  
reverberate through the brain, she  
suggests reading it while stoned.  

Much of the illustrative material is  
on the brain and perception--right-  
brain, left-brain theory--on learning;  
how we are conditioned and how this  
affects our relationships with each  
other.  

Molloy uses words very carefully,  
very precisely. It is impossible to  
paraphrase her without hanging the  
curtain of my own thought-system be-  
tween author and reader. This is, of  
course, what happens in all book re-  
views, but I am made more aware of the  
process here, which says something  
about the book itself. Rather than  
my other words, I will try to use hers  
as often as possible.  

"Love making is a process that be-  
gins when two persons decide they are  
not enemies": the opening line. A  
good lesbian scientist, Alice Molloy  
applied her knowledge to her own re-  
lationships, the love stories running  
through the journal, the communica-  

Three Women, a play  

performed by the Rainbow Beach Company  

written by Cynthia Baker Johnson,  
Roberta McGuire, Sandy Lipton, and  
Cecil O'Neal  

In a Labyrinth  

The Slightly Off Center Theatre ap-  
pears to be more than slightly off-  
center with their production of Three  
Women by the Rainbow Beach Company.  
The play was performed June 30  
through July 30 at 2549 15th Street,  
next to Muddy Waters of the Platte  
Cafe.  

Madeline Kimmel, Kate Knez and  
Laurie Greer Munro are directed by  
Steve Munro. Need I say more? The  
original play had three women (Cyn-  
thia Baker Johnson, Roberta McGuire,  
and Sandy Lipton) as authors and one  
man (Cecil O'Neal) as administrator,  
producer, director, implementor, and  
coordinator. Get the picture?  

Occasional identification is possi-  
ble for the female audience as the  
women proceed through the story of  
their lives (i.e. our lives?), but  
there is no spirit to the play.  
There is no sense of sisterhood in  
the story or the acting, no cry to  
raise clenched fists in support of  
the revolution. No hope.  

The audience sees a "bitchy" di-  
vorced woman overwhelmed by financial  
crises and a nagging child who would  
"rather be with daddy" but does not  
see the anger she should justifiably  
have toward her ex-husband.  

Culture  

tions, verbal and non-verbal, among  
the women in her household. Wanting,  
focusing on the other, distrusting  
that off-balanced state. "So, one  
can have, what in this perspective is  
perceived as an ‘unhealthy’ need to  
be in that focused magnetic state  
all the time. Hooked."  

Examining the process: “This mach-  
ine called ‘personal relationships‘  
must be taken apart and put together  
differently." We do not have access  
to the Man's technology, but we have  
our colonized selves. She observes  
the body English, speculates on forms  
of psychic attack and control, points  
out over and over that every psychic  
state is a physiological one, and vice  
versa.  

“Participating in, creating, an at-  
mosphere, in which there are two le-  
vels: the surface, ostensible level  
of what is being talked about, and  
underneath that, the level that is  
actually the controlling dynamic:  
the ‘sexual’ play, push-pulls going  
on. People relating on the basis of  
who they want to 'sleep' with; it is  
dishonest and results in unhealthy  
conversation in which no real thing  
can take place. It is this kind of  
behavior that has driven otherwise  
sensible women in the women's “move-  
ment into 'monogamy.'"  

Later, she reluctantly concludes  
that you can't help but operate on  
two levels: “At first I thought, it  
is not right to say one thing and mean  
another. how done; tone of voice, bo-  
dy English. then I thought, but well  
I do that. it's a form of communica-  

tion. at work, the so-called real  
world, it is not permissible to act  
on, respond to the underlying meanings  
what is really on the mind."  

Yet, even if we have to play the  
system much of the time, we can study  
how it works. Figure out what holds  
our attention, what we are ordered to  
pay attention to, to focus on. What  
we are forbidden to learn or do.  

"One is not allowed to use one’s own  
devices," notes the author, particu-  
larly in reference to counting on  
one's fingers and lip-reading. The  
educational system is designed to  
create divisions, not merely those of  
sex, race, and class; but also to bring  
the mind-body split into the elemen-  
tary schools. “The system is within  
us."  

We are actually capable of using the  

In another scene, a middle-aged  
wealthy woman is talking to her law-  
yer on the phone. She's complaining  

to him about past due alimony pay-  

ments. Again the only anger we see  
is when she hangs up the phone after  
agreeing to have dinner with him be-  
cause she can't get an appointment  
any other way; she calls the wall  
"assholes."  

body as an analog computer (right-  
brain function), but the dominant  
(left-brain, male) technology special-  
izes in digital computers. The sys-  
tem has destroyed our access to “prim-  
itive" technology (herbal medicine,  
witchcraft, animal husbandry, celes-  
tial navigation) and hidden “advanced"  
technology behind incomprehensible  
jargon.  

We are rendered helpless, dependent  
on the system for food, clothing, and  
shelter, driven off the land more  
slowly, yet more efficiently than the  

villagers of My Lai.  
been a major factor in the refinement  
of the master-slave relationship.  

We are denied half of ourselves.  

Technology has  

Molloy quotes Esther Harding: "...be-  
cause their natures are complementary,  
men and women have an inescapable need  
of each other and are compelled to  
make mutual relationships."  

And replies: "It is escapable.  
This ‘compelling need' is about the  
fact that each person must be masculine  
or feminine...[men] like that you have  
to pick one or the other, not both...  
The creation of this ‘compelling need'  
is part and parcel of the bag of tricks  
that is the dynamics of fascism."  

Jumping from the male-female rela-  
tionship to the fascist state? Stu-  
dents are told not to generalize from  
personal or psychological relationships  
to larger social structures...that  
rules which apply to one don't apply  
to the other. This has always meant  
to me that it's wrong for the individ-  
ual to kill, but it's right for the  
state to make war. Molloy not only  

A young woman pours out her reali-  
zation (Laurie Greer Munro) that men  
notice only her body, disregarding  

-all the intellectual achievements she  

has made or could make. But again,  
the audience sees tears and defeat,  
not anger and fight.  

The action or lack of it drags on  
throughout the play until a token  
monologue rears its ugly head. Kate  
Knez presents to the audience a “les-  
bian's" view of lesbianism. Nellhaus  
of The Denver Post calls it "one of  
the most insightful and sympathetic  
descriptions of lesbianism to be en-  
countered." Her view of this mono-  
logue as insightful is another slap  
in the face of all lesbians by the  
straight society. Knez talks about  
her overwhelming joy at discovering  
the skin and body of another woman.  
Her joy is so complete she has been  
transported into that god-like state  
of love for “both men and women.”  

The pathetic last scene is com-  
prised of three extremely deaf senior  
citizens discussing the dinner menu.  
Munro and his company have not only  
insulted lesbians, discouraged all  
hopeful new feminists, made no at-  
tempt to acknowledge women who are  
not white, depressed active feminists,  

Big Mama Rag Vol 5, No 7  

generalizes from the individual to the  
state, she dares to bridge the gap to  
the physical sciences.  

“I do not differentiate between human  
energy and atomic energy. it's all  
physics to me, not physics and meta-  
physics. Those terms represent an  
unhealthy separation, like the separ-  
ation between factory worker and artist.  
The setting up of the categories ‘meta-  
physics’ and 'occult' is a way of mani-  
pulating/denying reality."  

Fascism is not simply a particular  
form of government, as I was taught in  
Civics. "Fascism is another word for  
patriarchy...[it] has the same root  
as fascinate...from the Latin word  
fasces, the bundle of sticks bound  
around the axe handle, the symbol of  
authority, to which all eyes rivet.  
Riveted eyes being a physiological  
state."  

The eyes, the attention, the physio-  
logical state of being fascinated (or  
bound, tied up in a bundle as my dic-  
tionary puts it): the power dynamics  
hidden in our language. Molloy dis-  
sects abstract Latinate words through-  
out the book, showing their physiolog-  
ical origins (throwing, covering, fol-  
ding, breathing). She points out that  
we are no longer taught Latin, that  
the visceral meaning of words is con-  
cealed from us.  

There have been rebellions, but the  
system has always won, digging deeper  
into our lives, continuing to re-create  
the world in its own image. “It would  
seem that there are ways to linearize  
[the education of pre-school children]:  
childcare centers, etc.--so socialist  
countries, already ahead of us on this  
issue, are in fact further entrench-  
ments of the system of left-brained male  
dominance."  

So far, our most successful (?) rebel-  
lions have consisted of learning to  

beat them using their own methods, but -  

as Molloy points out, "they have you  
playing their game, and that's their  
game." She considers anarchism the only  
sensible response to the ever-tighten-  
ing net of state control. On the cover  
of the book, you will see a pie divided  
into six sectors, each with its label:  
"anarchist paranoid-schizophrenic feminist  
witch nurturer lesbian dyke."  

I've read In Other Words twice--once  
stoned, once sober--and haven't finished  
it yet. Do not be fooled into thinking  

More on page 14.  

but also laughed at the aged.  

Arlyn Nellhaus says, “It could just  
as easily have been written by men."  
I must take that one step further;  
Cecil O'Neal was the original direc-  
tor, and Steve Munro was this produc-  
tion's director--it was written by  
men.  

for Gay Women:  
GAIA’S GUIDE, 1977  

Annual discreet pocket size international bar/club  
guide and complete directory. This fourth edition:  
All USA plus 40 other countries. 3000 listings. Cen-  
ters, switchboards, publications, resources, services,  
retreats, restaurants and much much more: $5.00  
only from: Cara’s Gump, 115 New Montgomery  
Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94105. (discreet mail  
order only — two weeks delivery on all orders).  
Also in Boulder at: BOULDER WOMEN’S RESOURCE  
CENTER and ULTTH, 1743 Walnut and in Denver at  
WOMAN TO WOMAN.  

2000  

Eve’s Garden  

by w  

ey SEND 25¢ FOR CATALOG