Food Stamps Threatened by Fiscal Responsibility

Cutbacks Are Imminent

Welfare

Cheryl

The government, under the banner
of “fiscal responsibility," is trying
to pass a number of welfare and food
stamp reform bills into law at both
the state and federal levels which
will cut many people off of programs
and place extremely restrictive
requirements on many others.

Welfare reform groups around the
country are protesting many of these
bills. I learned most of the infor-
mation in this article at a meeting
held to discuss “Changes in Welfare
and Food Stamps" at the Auraria
Center, 1212 Mariposa Street, Denver.

The US Senate has passed a bill which
vastly alters food stamp eligibility
requirements. The most widely adver-
tised portion of this bill eliminates
cash payments for food stamps thus
directly aiding families (and indi-
viduals) who oftentimes cannot
afford to buy their food stamp
allotment.

What is not being advertised is
that a great number of families and
individuals who now qualify for food
stamps will no longer be eligible
under the new bill. The US House of
Representatives has passed a similar
bill, but has even stricter require-
ments for qualifying.

The Congress is now working on a
compromise bill to present for
Carter's signature.

Welfare reformers have long been
asking that the cash payment for food
stamps be ended. Under the current
system, a food stamp technician
calculates how much money you can
spend on food and then decides, ac-
cording to the tables, how much more
money in food stamps you need to bring
you up to the governmentally set
standards. Thus, if by the calcula-

Rachele Yaseen Is
Home To Stay

Cheryl

Ginny Yaseen won custody of her
daughter Rachele in April, 1977
in Springfield after a 9-month court
battle waged by Ginny, her lover Pam,
and the nation-wide Rachele Yaseen
Defense Fund.

The case centered around Ginny's
ex-husband's petition to alter their
four-year-old divorce decree so that
he would gain custody of Rachele.
Claiming that Rachele was getting
neither a proper education, scholasti-
cally and religiously, nor “develop-
ing normally," he sought to prove that
Ginny was an unfit mother.

Since the guiding principle in child
custody cases is always "the best
interests of the child," David's
efforts were directed towards showing
how Rachele's environment was harmful
to her. He brought in expert wit-
nesses to testify that "Rachele has
become intellectually deficient by
attending the free school and has
forgotten all the basics that a child
of the age of 6 years should know."

Ginny and Rachele--photo by Pam Keeley

He brought in a psychologist who
testified that Rachele had “sexual
identity problems." David, trying
to discredit Ginny in any way he
could, alleged that Ginny did not
give Rachele the love and attention
that a "6-year-old should have."
Offering as evidence 2 issues of
ed Mama Rag which contained articles
about the Rachele Yaseen Defense
Fund, he claimed that these were
examples of the exploitive atmosphere
in which the child was forced to live.
While David and his lawyer never
directly brought out the issue of
Ginny's lesbian relationship with
Pam, there were plenty of comments
about the “unnatural family constel-
lation," and “the unusual living
situation,” and the lack of a male
figure in the home.

Ginny, Pam, and Rachele, living
together as a family in Denver, were
caught unawares by David's court
action in Illinois. Ginny's strategy,
which was often worked out on long
distance calls to Illinois, centered
around providing evidence that
Rachele was in fact a happy and
healthy child who wanted to stay with
her mother.

To this end, psychologist Maggie
Davis testified, after testing
Rachele, that she in fact did not
have any learning problem, and urged
the court to leave this "young lady
of six, having a very satisfactory
self-concept, along with a firmly es-
tablished female sex identity" with
her mother. Psychiatrist Bog Cowan
also testified as to Rachele's
normalcy and could find no reason for
removing Rachele from her mother's
care. Both therapists cited the
importance of continuity of custody
of a child as of crucial importance.

Richard Greene, well known for
his research on sex roles and sexual
identity, also testified that Rachele
did not have any sexual identity
problems. He stated his learned
opinion about the influences that
go into determining a person's sexual
identity and emphasized that whether
a male is present in the home has
little, or nothing, to do with a
child's sexual identity, that there
are many factors which influence
a child, i.e. TV, peers, teachers,
books, etc.

While Ginny's defense did not focus
on lesbianism as a major factor in
David's decision to seek custody of
Rachele; they did try to educate
the Judge as to the important issues
involved. They stressed the quality
of the relationship between Ginny
and Rachele, the importance of
continuity in the child's life,
Rachele's healthy sexual identity,
the irrelevance of whether a child
lives with a man in the house, and
the lack of any proof that Ginny
was not a good mother.

In the closing statement of one
of Ginny's lawyers, he challenged
David, or his attorney, to bring
out the issue of lesbianism if they
wanted to deal with it. Saying that
Ginny was not afraid to deal with
the issue, he asked the Judge to
rule the issue irrelevant if David
did not wish to bring up the sub-
ject except by innuendo. The Judge
agreed not to consider lesbianism
an issue when David did not bring
up the issue directly.

The Judge, in ruling on the case,
did not write an extensive brief.
After taking the case under consider-
ation for 8 days, he basically
stated that Ginny would retain cus-

more on page 14

tions, a family of four can spend
$95/month on food, it would be
eligible to receive $65 worth of
food stamps to bring it up to $160/
month food buying power. The problem
is that, now, that family would have
to pay the government $95 to receive
$160 worth of food stamps. If they
were unable to pay that money, then
no food stamps. Under the proposed
bills, the family would simply be
given $65 worth of food stamps:
This part is clearly an improvement.
Carter has said that he wants the
government to get out of the food
business and people's kitchens:
this is fine. This new approach will
save money; fewer stamps to print,
to distribute, etc. There is a
catch-22, of course. The Senate
and House bills also place lower
limits on how much someone can
earn and still qualify for food
stamps.

Currently, food stamp eligibility
is determined by taking the gross
income, deducting necessary expenses
and then seeing if there is enough
money left to buy food. Under the
new Senate bill, a gross income of
$6000 for a non-working family of
four is the cut-off level. A gross
income of $9000-$10000 for a working
family of four would also put you
over the eligible income level.

It is those families, in the income
bracket just at the cut-off level
and a little higher who will suffer
most from the new bills. The bill
passed by the House has set the
cut-off level $1000 lower in each
case.

No one has mentioned how these
families in those income brackets
who can now qualify for food stamps
would survive under the proposed
legislation.

Another aspect of the new bills
which makes them rougher is the
way in which net income is determined.

Currently a family has a whole set of
deductions which they can claim in
determining the net income: medical
costs, shelter costs (including
heating, electricity, house taxes,
etc.), dependent care costs, taxes,
work-related costs, and court-ordered
alimony payments.

Under the new bills, there are set
formulas for determining net
income. Each family will get a
20% (of the gross income) deduction
and a $65 deduction. Then there
are deductions for child care up to
$85/month, and in some cases a
partial deduction for shelter care.

Public Assistance is going to work very narrowly.

All of this is regardless of how
much your expenses really are.
If your expenses are over 20%
of your gross income, that is
unfortunately your tough luck.
Another bill, this one not yet
out of committee, would allow utilities
and landlords to be paid directly by
the Welfare Department rather than be
paid by the AFDC recipient (Aid
to Families with Dependent Children)
as is now the case. Although this pro-
gram is supposed to be voluntary, landlords would most likely require Wel-
fare recipients who are renting from
them to participate in order that
the landlords can be sure of getting
more on page 14

photo by Deb Taylor

Freda Hancock, high school student from Pueblo Centennial High School in
Pueblo, Colorado beginning her winning 440-yard dash in the High School State
Track Meet in Jefferson County Stadium on May 21, 1977.

Freda was the outstanding woman athlete of the meet.