14

STRUGGLE...
From page 4
federation of local groups which exist:
"To encourage the development of a new and positive awareness in
our culture of the total life span of all persons as a continuing
process to maturity, self-fulfillment and social responsibility.

To strive for alternative life-styles and opportunities for older
and younger people which will challenge and help eliminate in our
institutions and elsewhere, all forms of paternalism, discrimination,
segregation and oppression based solely on age—which makes
ageism, like racism and sexism, a socially destructive force.

To act as advocates for those who are powerless to throw off
discrimination and oppression because of age.

To build a new power base in coalition with other movements to
bring about needed change in order to achieve social justice,
human dignity, and self-fulfillment for all people regardless of
age, sex, race or economic status.

To reinforce and support each other in our quest for liberation
and to celebrate our shared humanity."

The Denver chapter of the Gray Panthers has about 400 members, after be-
ginning in April 1974 with 10 people. They've been heavily involved in
such projects as alternatives to nursing homes and investigating nursing
homes in the Denver area. Testifying before government committees, run-
ning workshops, and making public appearances are important parts of their
fight against ageism. They have also joined in coalitions with other area
groups on issues such as opposing Denver City budget cuts on social ser-
vices, and food stamp actions.

One concrete example of what they have done is to get longer stoplight
time for pedestrians to cross busy streets. The problem of being able to
get safely across the street is a basic one for both old and younger peo-
ple. They have also been instrumental in getting favorable legislation
passed on subjects especially relevant to old people.

Ageism/Sexism Connections

Ageism may have multiplied effect for women due to its interaction with
sexism. Women get fewer of the already few rewards available to them in a
sexist, ageist value system as they age: the characteristics associated
with rewardable femininity are incompetence, passivity, and youthful good
looks, all of which do not usually improve with time. Women's role as wife
and mother diminishes with age, too—as wife because ageist social standards
for sexual desirability may lower her sexual value; and as mother because
there is less chance she would be heavily involved in actively being a mother
the older she gets. Such a woman inevitably feels useless at this point in
her life. At a time when a woman could have more options because her “wife
and mother" expectations are diminished, ageism works to lessen her options.
Women experience double jeopardy as they get older; the discrimination and
stereotyping they experience as women is compounded by those same elements
of ageism.

Sex among the aged, as for children, is also a taboo topic. Standards of
sexual availability tend to be both ageist and sexist. Desirability in a
woman is more related to her body than it is for a man. A woman's looks are
her resume—and the less wrinkled the better her recommendation, according
to the standards of the youth-oriented culture. Such standards are in
operation not only in sexual relationships but also in getting a job, in
many cases.

The stand-

Effects On Us All

As long as we live, there is an older age before us. The elderly teach us to avoid seeing ourselves in the future and to hate
ourselves as the inevitable aging process changes our bodies.

The isolation of age groups from one another not only cuts us off from
one another, but also from history. If it is political, so is it historically relevant. By keeping the older from the younger we lose the personal perspective of recent history and are left only with the accounts of historians—even about World War II. We lose the heritage of women's radicalism, hard work, and capability that has been here but left out of the books by bourgeois, male chauvinist historians.

The elimination of ageism is another part of the liberation of all people.

REVIEWING THE BUDGET

EXPLANATION

THE LESBIAN/FEMINIST
SATIRE MAGAZINE

REVIEWS-INTERVIEWS-POETRY-FICTION-HUMOR-
COMIX!
SUBSCRIPTION PER YEAR $7.00

Sample copies are available at the incredibly high price
of $1.50—Neatness doesn't count but it certainly helps a lot! Thank you~

NAMES
ADDRESS
CITY
STATE

ZIP

Negative feelings ab-

Just as we have learned that the personal

POLITICS OF HEALTH...

From page 6

whose only function is to give us pleasure, is surrounded by pubic hair
in thick tufts and magnificent colors and growing sometimes as long as to
the knees.

A woman who has done a lot to help us see our genitals is Betty Dodson.
Author of Liberating Masturbation and leader of sex therapy groups in New
York, she was one of the first women to draw beautiful, detailed pictures
of women's vulvas. She calls looking at our genitals "pure healing": most
women fear they are deformed or unworthy of being looked at. In her
groups Ms. Dodson encourages women to use a vibrator because it is a source
of stimulation that does not take effort and energy and will not get
"tired or bored." She treats masturbation as a "meditation in self-love"
and she herself meditates every day using the mantra, "The Mother and I
are One."

Sex therapy groups for preorgasmic women enable women to focus their
consciousness on their sexuality and give each other support. These groups
have started all over the country (see the New Women's Survival Sourcebook
available at women's bookstores).

One serious drawback to such groups is that they are mostly geared to middle
class women in orientation and cost. Studies show that working class wo-

LETTERS..
From page 2

therapy that you publish their (the institute's) experience of the con-
ference in Bur. I would also like to see you express an apology (to be
published) to WIAP for neglecting their participation in the April issue; and also apologize that all the articles published were so negative.
I believe this would help to restore BMR's credibility with me, and restore my faith in this women's journal which can be a very important one.

What appeared to me to be happening was "trashing" or “character assassination" of the Institute and also of Anne Schaef - also known as "heads we win, tails you lose." The person or group doesn't have a chance because you're not really dealing with their behavior or an issue, but with their character. This is frequently done to children. Instead of saying, "I don't like your behavior right now," the kid is told, "You're a bad girl!" and is threatened with withdrawal of love and support - very manipulative. (Perhaps something similar was going on at the conference - WIAP was shown nonsupport for being bad.) The articles used tactics of blaming, one-upmanship, self-righteousness, superiority - all destructive, non-communicative, white-male-like tactics - instead of being responsible, in the sense of "having the ability to respond," (and not in the sense of being "accountable").

Until fairly recently, "the system" has not had much luck in destroying the Women's Movement. But now there seems to be a new development of "the system" infiltrating women's organizations - especially ones which are really effective in reaching large numbers of women and in actually helping to get some valuable things done for women (like BMR).

The main thing I got in touch with was that the articles on the Feminist Therapists' Conference were very draining of my energy, rather than uplifting and energizing (some kinds of anger can be mobilizing). I just don't need that, especially from a journal that is meant to be for women. It makes me feel sad and angry.

I hope that you can hear what I've tried to say.

In sisterhood,

Danna, Daughter

of Virginia
Editor's note:
1) We agree that each of us goes through a process of growing and developing, and that that process does not end until we do. At the same time, however, we hold certain beliefs and have certain values which we call our politics. When a woman or group of women puts together a conference and calls that conference "feminist," we, in turn, expect that conference to be feminist—which implies a certain level of political development. On a very basic level, we expect the conference to be non-racist and non-classist; the Feminist Therapy Conference failed in both those categories. We expect the women organizing the conference to be accountable for their actions - the women of WIAP were not.
2) We were most certainly dealing with the behavior of the conference organizers and the issues raised by the women at the conference. We were non-supportive of WIAP, not because we thought the women themselves are bad, but because we disagree with their political analyses and their handling of very valid issues which were raised.
3) If to have values and beliefs which you care enough about to defend is “white male," we shudder for the future of women's revolution.
4) Yes, anger can be mobilizing. We left the WIAP conference angry enough to spend long hours writing the articles in question.

RADIO...

From page 1

prior statement, when he asked
to be checked back within a
month regarding contracts.

As of this moment the Women
Everywhere Radio Collective
definitely has control of the
Women Everywhere Show through
July and possibly for a long
time to come.

So,

by Edith Thomas
Translated by Estelle Eirinberg

by an award-winning

French woman's historian who claims
that biblical women were slandered or
ignored by the male authors of the Bible
$6.95 at booksellers or from the:
Publisher, CONTINENTAL EDITIONS,
P.O. Box 1611, Sioux City, Iowa 51104

Eve and the others

Residents add 3% sales tax.