12

WOMEN OF CHINA, continued from page ||

THE FOURTH MOUNTAIN

The mountain goddess, if she is still there,  
will be startled to see her  
world so changed.

~-Mao

Remarkable advances in the quality of life of Chinese women have been made.  
“Women in China measure their progress not by some standard of how things  
might be, but by progress made since 1949. Where things aren't yet up to  
their standards, they still feel progress is being made and that things are  
improving." (MacLean:9)

However, many visitors to China point out the large areas of inequality  
that still exist. "It is true that women are far from equal in China."  
(Gordon:3) They have made great strides in many spheres, but they still  
constitute a dismally small percentage of those at the top of the economic  
and political pyramids.

Women have equal rights before the law. Article 27 of the Constitution of  
the People's Republic of China guarantees that women shall "enjoy equal  
rights with men in all respects." (Ascher:64) However, in practice, some  
marriages continue to be unequal; some women are still bearing the burden of  
doing all the household chores. Husbands are gradually beginning to share  
housework and child care; a husband's refusal to help in the home is grounds  
for divorce. (Gimenez)

Other remnants from the past remain, especially in rural areas where tra-  
ditional, patriarchal social patterns are hard to break. Wife beating and  
arranged marriages are still occasional problems.

Chinese women's fight for liberation should be viewed from within the con-  
text of Chinese society and culture. The "three big mountains" of oppression--  
imperialism, feudalism and bureaucratic capitalism--tyrannized both men and  
women. The "fourth mountain" was women's additional oppression--sexism, the  
authority of men over women. Measuring the progress of women in China a-  
gainst the goals of another feminist movement is incongruous. People who  
apply categories from their own realities are attempting to mechanically fit  
the Chinese woman's experience onto their own value system. It is essential  
to comprehend historically the point from which women emerged.

To realize that unsolved problems remain in Chinese women's emancipation  
does not dismiss the tremendous progress that has been made. Chinese women  

have made an incredible journey and are scaling the precipices of the "fourth  
mountain".

Goals for the future are reflected in the following tasks outlined by Kang  
Ke-ching at the Fourth National Women's Conference held September 9, 1978:

1. Gain new merits in class struggle, the struggle for production and  
scientific experiment (mobilization of women workers, pre-and post-  
natal care, equal pay for equal work).

2. Do a good job in providing supportive services (such as child care,  
socialization of housework and laundry services) for realizing the  

four modernizations: agriculture, industry, national defense and  
science and technology.

3. Bring up successors to the revolution with care: school/society/  
family shared responsibility in educating children.

4. Use socialist ideology to deal correctly with marriage and family  
matters (free will marriages, family planning, medical care for women  
and children and shared housework).

5. Strengthen and develop the national and international united front  
in women's work.

(Kang Ke-ching)

China Pictorial/ LNS

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.4

PANDORA

Postscript: Women gain from a process of general democratization and  
lose from a rightward turn in politics. (Rowbotham) (Gordon) In an attempt  
to hasten the four modernizations, China currently appears to be taking that  
rightward turn. What impact will this have on the status of women? Femin-  
ists fear that it will bring another setback. The mountain is formidable;  
the process of change is painful and uneven:

Two steps forward

and one

back.

RK IK HRI KHIR HK IKI KIKI IKI IK IIIA IA IK IIIA AISI AAI AAAS SS  
References:

1. Ascher, Isaac. China's Social Policy.  
London: Anglo-Chinese Education Institute, (Modern China Series No. 3), 1976.

2. Belden, Jack. Gold Flower’s Story: A Peasant Woman in the Chinese  
Revolution. Somerville, Mass.: New England Free Press, (no date  
given).

3. Bunch-Weeks, Charlotte. Asian Women in Revolution.  
Pittsburgh: KNOW, Inc., (no date given).

4. Cohen, Charlotte. “Experiment in Freedom: Women of China," Sisterhood  
is Powerful (Robin Morgan, ed.) New York: Vintage, 1970.

5. Deckard, Barbara Sinclair. The Women's Movement.  
New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1979.

6. Gimenez, Martha E. and Elizabeth Moen.  
"Fertility Control and Status of Women in China," unpublished paper.

7. Gordon, Linda. The Fourth Mountain: The Four Women in China.  
Somerville, Mass.: New England Free Press, 1973.

8. Hinton, William. Fanshen: A Documentary of Revolution in a Chinese  
Village. New York: Vintage Books, 1966.

9. Kang, Ke-ching. "Women's Movement in China: Guiding Concepts and New  
Tasks," Peking Review. (September 29, 1978) pp. 5-11.

10. MacLean, Judy. "Women in China," Edcentric: A Journal of Educational  
Change. (November, 1974) pp. 8-11.

11. Rowbotham, Sheila. Women, Resistance and Revolution: A History of  
Women and Revolution in the Modern World. New York: Vintage Books.

12. Sidel, Ruth. Women and Child Care in China; A Firsthand Report.  
New York: Penguin Books, Inc., 1972.