racism and anti-semitism

Maori Woman On Racism And Classism: Issues

(reprinted from The Black Forum sec-
tion of Bitches, Witches and Dykes, an
excellent new monthly feminist newspa-
per from New Zealand. A sub can be got-
ten for $4NZ at P.O. Box 68-570, Newton
Auckland, New Zealand.)

Ripeka Evans

In her article about feminist racism
and feminist classism in the Women's
Movement in the United States, (off our
Backs, Nov., 1979), Hope Landrine de-
fines culture as "that which a particu-
lar race seeing as good and true accepts
as good and true and takes to be part of
their particular lifestyle." She makes

a distinction between what a particular
race sees as good and true—and will
facilitate that particular race's con-
tinued survival—and what an alien race
imposes as a characteristic of a sub-
servient race. Essentially she outlines
the process of racist stereotyping.

In her theory of "victim blame ideolo-
gy", she elaborates on white-racist-
feminists' acceptance of the ideology.
This acceptance of racist stereotyping
is prevalent amongst white feminists
today.

The examples of experiences she cites
run parallel to those I and other black
women have experienced here. Basically
they can be categorized as either extre-
me patronization, both verbally and
sexually, or ignorance. I want to quote
some examples from Maori and Pacific
Island Women.

I have at times been involved in some feminist
event and in the context of that event
have experienced frequent passes from
white lesbians not unlike heterosexist
passes. As a black lesbian said to me
once, "Black women have a high sexual

status in the white racist lesbian
community."

I have heard white lesbians claim how
they know how it feels to be "that" op-
pressed—that is, as oppressed as black
women. What bullshit and patronization.
Blackness is not a matter of sexual pri-

Jo Carrillo

Our white sisters

radical friends

love to own pictures of us

sitting at a factory machine

wielding a machete

in our bright bandanas

holding brown yellow black red children
reading books from literacy campaigns
holding machine guns bayonets bombs knives
Our white sisters

radical friends

should think

again.

Our white sisters

radical friends

love to own pictures of us

walking to the fields in hot sun

with straw hat on head if brown
bandana if black

in bright embroidered shirts

holding brown yellow black red children
reading books from literacy campaigns
smiling.

And When You Leave,
Take Your Pictures With You

Our white sisters radical friends
should think again.

No one smiles

at the beginning of a day spent
digging for souvenir chunks of uranium
of cleaning up after

our white sisters

radical friends

And when our white sisters
radical friends see us

in the flesh

not as pictures they own,
they are not quite as sure
if

they like us as much.
We're not as happy as we look
on

their

wall.

(reprinted from This Bridge Called
My Back; Persephone Press, P.O. Box
7222, Watertown, MA 02172)

privilege as lesbianism has become.

The difference between black separa-
tism and lesbian separatism is biologi-
cal and social in origin. There are many
facets of lesbian oppression like the
oppression of blacks but I'm not going
to play "I'm more oppressed than you"
games, I'm telling you!

Being black and proud challenges the
white status quo and acclaims that
which we as blacks have been consistent-
ly denied by oppressors who have chained
us in a social formation of their creat-
ion. That oppression has been specifi-
cally institutionalized and although it
is a primarily capitalist patriarchy,
you, as white women, because of your
bondage to white men share and inherit
a racist system.

There's no element of choice in being
black. You can, by changing your social
conditioning choose NOT TO BE BLACK, by
acceptance and compliance with the white
status quo. White lesbian separatism has
excluded any black woman not willing to
do so. Those that have stayed and toed
the line have been rewarded with stud
status. "By having an intimate or sexual
relationship with a black woman you do
not become partners in our oppression."

White heterosexual feminists have ac-
corded black men the same "stud" status,
and are party to the propping up of

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Page 10 - Big Mama Rag, November, 1981

racism and anti-semitism

Similar To U.S.

racist and sexist myths of black sexual-
ity. Having failed to exorcise the image
of the black man as rapist and/or super-
stud, white women have invested black
women with the same bestiality, so that
we are still the eternally promiscuous
whore.

The verbal patronizations of black
women have varied from the "it's so nice
to have one of you here" statements, and
not discussing racism seriously, to the
“Black women must discuss THEIR (WHITE
racism) issues on their own" statements
of dismissal and ignorance.

The failure by white feminists (lesbi-
an and heterosexual alike) to confront
racist attitudes signifies an inability
to concretize the connections between
racism and classism.

This results in falling for the old
divide and rule trap of "feminism divides
black women from black men" that's
black men saying “we were a united peo-
ple before you whites (excluding white
men when they choose to) came along.
United yes, but under a BLACK PATRIARCHY.

The glorification of black women, in
particular the traditional role of Maori
women, is popularized by those seeking
an anchor for oppression and those who
wish to suppress a revolution led by
black women. "Kia whawhai tonu matou
Ake! Ake!! Ake!! Ake!! Ake!!"

Let me state categorically that Maori
women were not, have not and never have
been accorded equal status.

One of the outcomes of a racist and
classist movement has been the "ideolo-
gical control" of the movement by white
middle class women. The movement is
(Like the white male left) generally,
dominated by articulate white women who
have a fair degree of knowledge of and
access to resources and skills necessary
for more than personal survival. These
are middle (and upper) class skills ac-
cumulated and or inherited from that
particular social status.

By maintaining such a movement white
women utilize class privilege and demon-
strate a failure to revolutionize hier-
archical and oppressive structures.

Knowing how to include and exclude,
even if you don't overtly do the includ-
ing or excluding, but are not eroded in
the process, is maintenance of class
privilege. After a lifetime of tutoring
by the best teachers—white men—I see
little change in these principles of
operation.

Issues of classism are said to be not
applicable to black women yet again by
those romantic perpetrators of the pow-
erfully traditional (ever powerfully
oppressed) black woman. Again we have had
to cope with a narrowness of vision from
all fronts,—an ideological hegemony,
that had dictated to us a lineal concept,
no and, no as well as, no black, no
woman, anything that could be rammed
down our throats fast enough to quash the
scream of revolution.

One of the dangers of this situation

MORE ON PAGE 21

When I Was Growing Up

Nellie Wong

I know now that once I longed
to be white,

when I was growing up, people told me
I was dark and I believed my own darkness
in the mirror, in my soul, my own narrow vision

when I was growing up, my sisters

with fair skin got praised

for their beauty, and in the dark

I fell further, crushed between high walls

when I was growing up, I read magazines

and saw movies, blonde movie stars, white skin,
sensuous lips and to be elevated, to become

a woman, a desirable woman, I began to wear
imaginary pale skin

when I was growing up, I was proud

of my English, my grammar, my spelling
fitting into the group of smart children
smart Chinese children, fitting in
belonging, getting in line

when I was growing up and went to high school,

I discovered the rich white girls, a few yellow girls
their imported cotton dresses, their cashmere sweaters
their curly hair and I thought that I too should have
what these lucky girls had...

when I was growing up, I hungered
for American food, American styles
coded: white and even to me, a child
born of Chinese parents, being Chinese
was feeling foreign; was limiting
was unAmerican

when I was growing up and a white man wanted
to take me out, I thought I was special,

an exotic gardenia, anxious to fit

the stereotype of an oriental chick

when I was growing up, I felt ashamed
of some yellow men, their small bones,
their frail bodies, their spitting

on the streets, their coughing

their lying in sunless rooms,
shooting themselves in the arms

when I was growing up, people would ask

if I were Filipino, Polynesian, Portuguese.
They named all colors except white, the shell
of my soul, but not my dark, rough skin

when I was growing up I felt

dirty. I thought that god

made white people clean

and no matter how much I bathed,

I could not change, I could not shed
my skin in the gray water

when I was growing up, I swore
I would run away to purple mountains,
houses by the sea with nothing over
my head, with space to breathe,
uncongested with yellow people in an area
called Chinatown, in an area I later learned
was a ghetto, one of many hearts
of Asian America
I know now that once I longed to be white.
How many more ways? you ask.
Haven't I told you enough?
(reprinted from This Bridge Called
My Back, Persephone Press, P.O. Box
7222, Watertown, MA 02172.)

Big Mama Rag, November, 1981 - Page 11