Legal Defense Forms for  
‘Bluebird 5’ Anti-Porn Trial  

A defense committee has formed to  
support five women who were arrested  
Oct. 31 near an East Colfax Avenue  
porn theater for alleged actions  
protesting violence against women.  

The five are facing trial Dec. 22  
on charges of destruction of property,  
a city ordinance violation carrying a  
maximum penalty of $300 and 90 days  
in jail.  

Initially, they had also been un-  

der investigation on possible charges  
of criminal mischief, a felony. How-  
ever, those charges were not placed  
at a Nov. 10 hearing, although they  
may still be placed at any time until  
Dec. 22.  

The five women, who spent a night  
and nearly a full day in jail before  
they were released on personal recog-  
nisance the following evening are:  
Bobbe Ross, Lori Bradford, Crystal  
Arp, Judy Barlow and Ms. Carpenter.  

They are pleading not guilty, and  
plan to present a political defense  
of civil disobedience. Feminists  
are asked to pack the courtroom Dec.  
22 at 9 am, when trial begins in  
Courtroom D, Room 124, City and Coun-  
ty Building, Denver.  

Photo by Corine Coston  

The five were arrested early Mon-  
day morning near the Bluebird theater,  
3317 E. Colfax, which regularly shows  
porn films. The theater had been spray  
painted and plastered with leaflets.  
(A sample is reprinted below).  

That same morning dozens of porn  
theaters, bookstores, massage parlors  
and bus stop billboards in Denver and  
suburbs were also observed to have  
been spray painted with "Disarm Rap-  
ists", "Women Fight Back", “Rape is  
War" and “Smash Sexism."  

On Sunday evening before the ar-  
rests, several East Colfax and South  
Broadway porn theaters and bookstores  
had been entered by a group of masked  
feminists who walked through each  
shop, pounded on booths and chanted  
slogans, such as "Double Bubble, Toil  
and Trouble; When you mess with wom-  
en, you're in trouble."  

During the night and day follow-  
ing the arrest of the Bluebird 5,  
feminists raised several hundred dol-  
lars for a bail fund. The fund turned  
out to be unnecessary, and the money  
was returned to the women who had  
volunteered a loan. Women also began  
to organize a defense committee.  

which now consists of about 12 women  
who are asking for donations in time  
and money for work around the up-  
coming trial. All correspondence  
should be sent to P.O. Box 18236,  
Denver, CO 80218. Checks should be  
made out to "The Bluebird 5 Legal  
Defense."  

Women are asked to help with fund-  
raising to offset any court costs.  
The defendants are hoping to have five  

Photo by Corine Coston  

separate feminist attorneys, most of  
whom are expected to donate their ser-  
vices. Surplus money raised by the  
defense committee will go to a commun-  
ity bail fund. A benefit is being  
planned for the near future, and some  
members of the committee are also  
organizing a press conference to be held  
in late November.  

The defense will be based on the  
political points raised in the leaflet,  
which is reprinted on this page.  

AGAINST  

Women have to lead the struggle against the gross profiteering made off our  
bodies.  

Physical, psychological and economic.  

In a group women do have the power to combat violent attacks that are  

Rape is on the increase. Yet media and judges say that rape  
is not a serious crime. The majority of rapes in Denver occur in the home. Only women are get-  
ting subject to being terrorized by physical threats in their own homes and cars.  

The position of women is to live in constant fear; never  
to leave windows or doors unlocked, to be aware that walking alone on a street at night means that you are  
"asking for" verbal harassment and possibly rape.  

Violence is present for every woman every day.  

Women prescribed 70% of all tranquilizers.  
Psychologists label angry or assertive women as  
“sick or crazy." The same qualities are, in a man, a sign of mental health.  

WOMEN, CONTROL YOUR OWN MINDS.  

The threat of physical vio-  
But rape is war: WOMEN, FIGHT BACK.  

What is it that women have to  

Women are also the victims of unnecessary surgery (like hysterectomies) and  
cancer-causing birth control pills.  

Forced childbearing (no abortions for poor women, Hyde amendment) and forced sterilization (mainly used against minority women) again point out the attacks on women’s bodies.  

Medical and mental abuse separates women from positive feelings about their own bodies.  

It is almost impossible to think of women apart from their sexuality, and our  
sexuality is an advertising gimmick.  

Every ad or commercial that sells their product along with a half-dressed woman uses women.  

Sex is seen as a commodity  
to be bought (as in prostitution or legal marriage) or taken (as in rape).  

WOMEN, CONTROL YOUR OWN BODIES.  

75% of women work in low pay clerical and service jobs with little chance for  
promotion and few health or retirement benefits. Most poor women have two jobs,  
one at slave wages and another for free (housework and kid-raising).  

A woman's chances of getting a decent well-paying job are further blocked by business and  
government refusal to provide daycare.  

EXPLOITATION,  

WOMEN ORGANIZE AGAINST ECONOMIC  

Fat cats are making profits off of women's sexuality, profits women are not  
getting.  

In fact, very few women have the chance for any economic power. The  
best paid jobs a woman can get exploit her sexually,  
and can land her in jail.  

"Snuff" is a pornographic film which shows on screen the actual murder and dis-  
memberment of a woman.  

Women have mobilized successfully to stop the showing of this movie.  

STOP VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.  

In cities across the country, including Denver, angry  
women have mobilized successfully to stop the showing of this movie.  

WOMEN,  

We must all unite to fight a system that exploits us daily for the benefit of  
a few rich people. This system deforms us all  
and robs us of the possibility of real loving relationships.  

Analysis: Tread Lightly on the 1st Amendment -  
By Kathy Riley  

In every area of feminist activity  
we have had to face the question of  
how much we can expect out of the law  
to help us get the changes we want.  

Often legal areas are where we  
start: in abortion law repeal, in the  
expansion of rape laws to all forms of  
sexual assault, to the adoption of  
equal employment statutes, law reform  
is where we first focused our efforts  
and where many of us learned the neces-  
sity for other strategies and a deeper  
analysis of our oppression.  

Pornography is the exception. It's  
the only area of feminist work that  
directly confronts the issue of first  
amendment freedoms and forces us to  
decide whether any legal reforms in  
that area will be ultimately more dan-  
gerous to us than helpful.  

Maybe partly because of this, the  
growing feminist movement against porn  
has not been oriented to the legal  
system.  

A number of groups across the coun-  
try began during the past two years in  
response to the outrage of Snuff, the  
violent Argentinian-made S-M film in  
which at least one of the several tor-  
ture-murders depicted was rumored to  
be an actual killing. Snuff was re-  
cently scheduled to play in Denver, but  
was shut down by the District Attorney  
amid feminist protest. (See separate  
story).  

Many of these groups are still ac-  
tive.  

In Berkeley, Women Against Vio-  
lence in Pornography and the Media are  
negotiating with the San Francisco  
Chronicle and the San Francisco Exam-  
iner to stop carrying porn ads. WAVPM,  
which has been around for about a year,  
has also picketed the Mitchell Broth-  
ers' Ultraroom--a live sex show fea-  
turing women using whips and chains  
on each other. The group has also held  
regular marches, including one last May  
that drew 500 women, and it has also  
played a part in the city's denial of a  
permit to the Mitchell Brothers for  
two new porn theaters.  

Also in California, California  
NOW and the Los Angeles chapter of  
Women Against Violence Against Women  
are still promoting a national boy-  
cott of Warner/Elektra/Atlantic rec-  
ords until sexist and violent promo-  
tions stop. Initially they forced re-  
moval of a Sunset Strip billboard  
showing a bound woman advertising the  
Stones' new album: "I'm black and blue  
from the Rolling Stones and I love it!"  

In Denver, Boston, Chicago and  
other cities, women have forced de-  
partment store owners to stop carrying  
sadomasochistic products and window  
displays. In Boston, the Camel's Hump  
clothing store had placed bloody, dis-  
membered manikins under pairs of men's  
shoes with the sign, "We'd kill for  
these."  

In Boulder last fall women an-  
gered by some male law students' de-  
cision to sponsor a porn movie at the  
school entered the projection room,  
grabbed the reel and mailed it back  
to the distributor.  

In New York and other states,  
feminists have been working for state  
and national laws banning child porn  
and imposing heavy penalties on those  
who profit from that form of child  
abuse.  

Basic to a feminist analysis of  
porn is that it reflects and perpetu-  
ates the political, economic and cul-  
tural exploitation of women. Given an  
understanding of the ways media vio-  
lence influences behavior--the basis of  
many attempts to pressure commercial  
broadcasting--we know that porn is a  
direct threat to our lives and safety;  
and porn, as part of the culture, con-  
tributes to all the destructive myths  
we've ever been told about ourselves.  

The economics are also clear: the  
porn industry still provides some of  
the highest paying jobs a woman can  
get: At the Ultraroom in Berkeley,  
women can make $20 for a half hour per-  
formance of whips and chains, and can  
go home with as much as $160 for a  
day's work. The same principle applies  
elsewhere.  

A feminist view of porn also acknow-  
ledges that porn won't stop until pa-  
triarchy ends, and that any struggle  
against our exploitation as women is  
to some extent a fight against porn.  

Yet, that still leaves us with  
questions of strategy.  

Most of the strategies used so far  
deal with standard movement tactics:  
economic boycotts, marches, demonstra-  
tions and harassment. Their effective-  
ness may vary, but all are visible  
actions, providing consciousness  
raising as well as a focus for more  
women to get involved. Yet by their  
nature, they are often limited to a  
single target (a record company, re-  
moval of a film, etc.) and ultimately  
rely on the goodwill or economic self-  
interest of corporations.  

Those limits have prompted some  
women to argue for changes in the law.  

In the September newsletter of  
Women Against Violence in Pornography  
& the Media, Pat Loomes of the Berkeley  
Women's Center, argues:  

"Consumer action and corporate re-  
sponsibility are not going to be ef-  
fective in fighting pornography. We  

More on P. 6