On the threshold of its worst political and economic crisis in history, U.S. imperialism and the ruling class are moving to stabilize their military might, and re-establish their economic hegemony through a policy of imperialist world war and internal repression against oppressed nationalities (New Afrikans, Chicano-Mexicanos, Puerto Ricans, and Native Americans) and world socialist movements. It is in this context that we must understand the present U.S. intervention in El Salvador.

Billions of dollars have been taken from social programs for oppressed people and turned over to the military budget which is now over $256 billion, or over one-third of the national budget of the U.S.

Ronald Reagan, the current choice of the monopoly capitalists, is being used as the U.S. imperialist spokesman to consolidate a white-supremacist mass base for fascism, to lead the drive for world war, and to cover up the military and economic losses around the world.

The foreign and internal policies of the Reagan administration have come to represent two faces of the same coin—wars of repression and genocide against national liberation movements, and intervention in the developing world where capitalist hegemony is being challenged by progressive liberation movements.

Within its imposed borders, the U.S. imperialists attempt to liquidate the “gains” made by oppressed nationalities (particularly the workers) in decades of struggle, strip them of their jobs, and violate their human rights. U.S. imperialism is increasing its role as a police state by waging wars of repression, violence, and terror against the national liberation movements as a prelude to the wholesale destruction of potential dissent.

The imperialist rulers understand well that their chances of success in the war of repression against the broad masses of oppressed people depend on the demise of the national liberation struggles within its imposed borders, on the pacification of progressive forces, and on the mobilization of large sectors of the oppressor nation. This is the U.S. imperialist strategy of bringing on a climate of right-wing conservativism, repression, and state terror leading to the implementation of fascism. The state recognizes that armed struggle is the cutting edge in the development of a revolutionary movement and practice. Because of this, the state has turned loose its police and intelligence forces on those revolutionary movements which have long advocated and struggled for the rights of the oppressed people to wage armed struggle. The state’s ultimate objective is to deny the oppressed masses a revolutionary ideology.

But they will not stop here. Every dissident movement, as Samuel Huntington said in his thesis for the Trilateral Commission, “represents a danger to (the state) democracy.”

The state is escalating its offensive against oppressed peoples in Third World communities, and human rights everywhere, while actively promoting police terror and encouraging the white supremacist ideology and violence of the Ku Klux Klan, the Moral Majority, and other reactionary and racist organizations.

As the national liberation movements consolidate and advance their struggles in the face of imperialist attack, they offer white people a revolutionary alternative to this fascist mobilization. It is of utmost importance that progressive white people build anti-imperialist solidarity with these struggles which are leading the overall fight to defeat U.S. imperialism. In order to do this, the white working class must reject its history of allying with imperialism through white supremacist privilege. Only by following the leadership and strategy of national liberation movements can it assume its historic role as a revolutionary class and become a partner in the destruction of imperialism.

In the face of the state’s well-financed and well-coordinated offensive, we need to first understand clearly both the forces and the issues facing oppressed nationalities, and then conference together on the means and the programs necessary to launch a counter-offensive against repression and fascism.

We propose a NATIONAL CONFERENCE AGAINST REPRESSION AND FASCISM in Denver, Colorado, on May 28-29-30 to discuss the many ramifications of U.S. imperialist repression, and to develop a national strategy and program against fascism.

Right now a number of local ad hoc committees are being organized in cities throughout America. We call on you to build for the conference by participating in your local committee:

THE REPRESSION AGAINST THE PUERTO RICAN PEOPLE

Repression against the Puerto Rican people has taken place on many levels throughout the 84 years of occupation by the United States. Acts of repression have ranged from the massacre of people (20 dead and 200 wounded in the Ponce Massacre of 1937), to the forced sterilization of women and men (over 40% of Puerto Rican women and 20% of Puerto Rican men have been sterilized by the United States Health Services).

In between these are the selective assassinations of independence movement members (five in the last 2 years), arrests and imprisonments, often without trial (14 in the last 4 years through the use of the Grand Jury). There are currently 16 Puerto Ricans in prison for their pro-independence activities—11 Prisoners of War accused of being members of the clandestine revolutionary organization, the Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional (F.A.L.N.)—and five Political Prisoners.

Repression also takes on a mass character. Hundreds of millions of dollars designated for alleviating the worst aspects of poverty have been wiped out—plunging Puerto Rico into a period of extreme hunger and need. This money has largely come from the Puerto Rican workers themselves through the tariffs they pay on the consumption of U.S. goods.

Much more repression awaits the Puerto Rican people in the future. Under the so-called 2020 plan (named for the year 2020 A.D.), the United States aims to transform Puerto Rico into a number of industrial parks of enormous proportions, reducing the population and restricting its inhabitants to pockets of urbanizations totally under the control of corporations.