Watch Where We Put Our Own Damn Feet

Process

Two of us, Lori and Bobbe, objected to many aspects of the Lesbians of Colorado Conference, October 1979; one of the objections was the absence of a workshop dealing with the issue of class. However, it was not only the omission of class as a singular issue for lesbian feminists, but it was also some of the workshops that were presented, for example, one advocating Lesbian Nation, one for the development of women in small business, and a workshop for real estate/investment.

Would the formation of a lesbian nation recognize that to change who has power without changing how that power is used still leaves us with an established system for exploiting workers? What is the purpose of forming a capitalist, feminist small business elite, how do we see landlords—income property owners? All these workshops brought up areas that we, as radical feminists, should have analyzed through a class analysis.

The feeling of isolation, of not being able to relate to the community at large politically, was even more of a reality when we openly voiced and then wrote a letter to BMR (vol. 7, no. 10, Nov. '79), questioning the politics of the conference. Politically and socially we had both become more and more put off by the privilege we saw and received from professional women in the lesbian/straight feminist community.

We poorly structured a community meeting to begin talking of class. About 25 women came and it was soon clear that many of us didn't know anything about class. We went into the meeting very emotional and saw that others were also in quite a state, some wanting confrontations while others fearing confrontations. The meeting was a disaster.

We had wanted the meeting to begin a class struggle to understand what was happening in our political community. We had been in and had seen political groups start and then fold because many internal issues had not been dealt with. Class struggle had come out of our own needs and fears—the biggest fear is that the movement as we know it would not grow and might cease to exist.

Shortly after the community meeting, Kate joined us and since that meeting we have learned how badly informed we were, and how emotionally involved we were; we three began to meet weekly.

We decided we had to read, not necessarily the same book at the same time, but that some books were to be read by all three of us: Constructive Criticism by Gracie Lyons, Lessons From The Damned by the Damned, and The Hidden Injuries of Class by Sennett and Cobb. As we met we gushed out information to each other; what we had read, we relived political actions in Denver and other communities and tried to give them a class perspective, we talked of our job experiences. However, the talk that connected most directly with our anger was in exposing our personal feelings in reaction to classist attitudes from women in the movement.

*feeling pissed off at the movement for not accepting classism as a feminist issue

*feeling inferior, while at the same time being awed, in our dealings with professional women

*feeling frustrated over the primacy of cultural events and discussions over politics—our need for both of these is at least equally great

We looked up terms in the Marxist Glossary by Harry Gould, read definitions from many feminist sources, some of which were Feminist Revolution by Redstockings, Women in Class Struggle by Marlene Dixon, and Women, Resistance and Revolution by Sheila Rowbotham; we read from Quotations From Chairman Mao by Mao Tse Tung and finally we read from many standard dictionaries.

We felt we should write a struggle column on class for BMR and tell other women what we were feeling and learning with the hope that other women feeling the same problems would also write and we could all learn more.

We wrote a lot of stuff we finally decided didn't belong in the article but that had been good for us to put it down on paper: a historical perspective on the evolution of capitalism, much of our personal lives—we agonized over words and sentences. Deciding to throw out the above analysis was hard because of the time and labor we had put into it, but the decision really helped us in focusing on our main concern—class division in the radical feminist community.

We take issue with women who feel that classism is not a feminist issue. Whether women will acknowledge it or not, classism runs wild in our community. Working-class women do not always feel welcome with good reason. The attitudes of professionals have always been that of superiority and the goals of middle and ruling class women are not the goals of working-class women. Middle and ruling class women want to buy into the system as they will gain power, prestige, and privilege. Working-class women want to get raises in their hourly pay or advancement on the job, knowing full well that power and privilege will never come their way.

We feel that it is critical at this time for women to deal with internal as well as external issues. We see classism and racism as the two largest issues that have made the white middle-class women's movement what it is today, and we don't like it the way it is.

Definitions

The following definitions are of terms that we found ourselves using over and over again in our discussions. Often we would use a term a few times until eventually one of us would remark, “What does that mean anyway?" We found that to stop and define our terms gave our discussions focus and it is our hope that perhaps including these terms will give our readers some focus too for additional discussions or thought.

Get Fens

IDEOLOGY - ideas and objectives that influence a whole group or national culture—expressed and defends the interests of classes or groups in struggle.

PATRIARCHY - an ideology manifested in all of society that dictates the natural, in-born authority and superiority of men.

CAPITAL - wealth in any form used to help in producing more wealth; "A cotton spinning machine is a machine for spinning cotton. Only under certain conditions does it become capital. Torn away from these conditions it is as little capital as gold by itself is money, or as sugar is the price of sugar." (Marx)

CAPITALIST - one who has capital available for use in financial or industrial enterprises; frequently, one who allows his money to work for him instead of working himself.

CAPITALISM - an economic system which favors the existence of capitalists and the amassing of capital (see above definitions) through racism, classism, sexism, national chauvinism, and unlimited rights to private property where happiness lies in the accumulation of material things; under capitalism you have to have money to make money: this system benefits a small minority of ruling class people who ultimately, with the aid of middle class and those who are striving to be middle class, profit from the exploitation of the working class; before there is anything there is labor—past labor generates a product—the capitalist takes this product and with more labor capitalists can make money, profits over and above the cost of labor; the working class is the alive-vital part of capital (wealth in any form), the working class will set in motion the process that yields profits to the middle and upper class and only survival needs for themselves.

IMPERIALISM - the last stage of capitalism which requires the concentration of production and capital developed into corporate, multi-national monopolies which play a decisive role in political and economic life; merging of bank and industrial capital occurs; investments are extended outside national boundaries; export of capital has greater importance; international monopolies are formed; labor is exploited and other governments infiltrated; war is used to add new possessions and to create new fields of exploitation.

CLASS STRUGGLE - the struggle between exploiters and exploited; proves that class interests are irreconcilable; the ladder of classes leads to fighting each other in order to get to the top of the ladder; struggle occurs on many levels: economic, political, social, ideological, and theoretical.

CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM - its overall goal is to strengthen us for victory in class struggle; gives us a way to consciously prepare ourselves for a revolution to build a better society; serves to help us sort out ideas that serve our oppressors from ideas that serve the working people; criticism gives us a method for struggling to reach agreement on what we should do and why, and how we should organize ourselves to do the work politically and personally.

LIBERALISM - is that political analysis that seeks to improve capitalism/imperialism through constitutional changes, or legal and administrative reforms; strives to make capitalism accountable—i.e. to live up to the "letter of its laws," but making sure that the basic structure remains intact; capitalism allows for liberalism because it pacifies the people and continues their faith in a system that exploits them; under liberalism, the power does not change hands although the situation may seem to improve.

REFORMISM - is an ideology that may use some liberal methodology but which ultimately believes the existence of capitalism will eventually be chipped away to a point where some other system can be allowed to evolve in its place; reformism seeks a course of action which attempts to harmonize interests which are antagonistic and irreconcilable—i.e. reformists would have a board of people sit in review of the police; the premise is that if the people watch the police they will function fairly because police are necessary to watch and protect people and property; the reality is to do away with the police as they can never be fair; they are here for the protection of the rich and their property, not for the welfare of the people.

CONSUMERISM - demands private profit over profit shared with the workers; stimulates individual need over individual necessity; keeps nearly all but the very rich in constant debt.

PROFESSIONALISM - engagement in a calling considered socially superior to a trade or handicraft; requires specialized, accredited education; implies a greater control over one's work and lifestyle; gives instruction (art, sports); is under the control of capitalism.

RACISM - everyone in the white world, no matter how poor, is supposed to be better than the highest class of people of color; this has always given white people the "right" to make people of color subservient through psychological intimidation, force, coercion, laws, and genocide; racism has a class identity; it demands a relation of inequality, subordination, and the assumed inferiority of one group of humanity to another.

PRIVILEGE - when you are privileged you have more than the working class; even here there are real divisions; you are permitted a few more luxuries; you try to assimilate—with this kind of mentality there is no way possible to make revolution (from Latin: privi—meaning secret, hidden or separate and legis—meaning separate and secret law); an exemption by virtue of one's class from burdens or liabilities to which others are subject.

REVOLUTIONARY - an extensive or radical change in government and society—hopefully in our situation to seize political power for the working class; the majority of the class conscious must understand the necessity for revolution and be ready to sacrifice our lives for it; the ruling classes should be in a state of governmental crisis which draws even the laid-back masses into politics.

RADICAL FEMINISM - must be pro-revolutionary in goals and tactics; anti-capitalist, anti-patriarchal, anti-racist; requires a class analysis, recognizes the need for the independent women's movement.

SEXISM - the assumption of patriarchy sets up the situation of sexism; if males are the superior gender they have the right to maintain privilege by ridicule, violence, objectification, economic exploitation, and laws; sexism, like racism, has a class identity; it demands a relation of inequality, subordination, and the assumed inferiority of women.

CLASSISM - "In class society everyone lives as a particular class and every kind of thinking, without exception, is stamped with the brand of a class." (Chairman Mao); serves to maintain individualism; the attitudes which divide people, as long as there are economic differences, the chances for continuation of classism will continue. MORE ON PAGE 16

Dollars and Sense

- & Sy:
SECT I *

4

°
=r
3
é
2
l

Commercial