Juanita Thomas - Appeal

I enjoyed reading your journal a lot, the article you printed for me was nicely done.

I am still in Huron Valley Women's Prison waiting for my appeal. My new state attorney has contacted me so he can move forward on my appeal.

I would still like the support of all you sisters out there, letters as well as donations. We can have money orders sent here. We do have a store here and I need money for personal things.

I have faith that justice will be done this time and I'll be free. If anyone has questions on battered women, I'll answer them. I was a battered woman for six years; maybe I could help some other woman.

Juanita Thomas 161091  
3511 Bemis Rd.  
Ypsilanti, Mich. 48197  

(ed. note: In June 1980, Ms. Thomas was convicted of murder. She pled self-defense as the man she killed had been abusing her for years. Ms. Thomas is a 37-year-old Black woman with three children. Her jury was an all-white jury with a lawyer who was assigned to her and who, she felt, wasn't too interested in helping her. Her case is up for appeal and she needs all our help and encouragement.)

Help The Sourceline

Gentlewomen:

Help! The Sourceline will die without money to publish. How do you publish a 16-page tabloid with almost no ads?

We are volunteers who all have other jobs, a home to work from, and no one who can sell ads.

Our circulation is approximately 1500 and many of these are trade-offs.

Karen Carlisle, editor  
P. O. Box 131  
Anchorage, Alaska 99510  

(ed. note: None of our staff, whether a leader or a member working on the Rag, we all have outside jobs and our circulation is the same as The Sourceline. We are in constant need of money. Lately we have asked women to contribute money on an ongoing basis monthly and many times we have had benefits and have also had to dig into our own pockets. Naturally, we do not receive any grants, not from institutions, foundations or government, nor do we seek them. We are in constant struggle and ask our readers for their help for both The Sourceline and Big Mama Rag.)

COLLECTIVE

Susan Goding, Vicki Piotter, Lori Bradford,

SUPPORTERS

BMR's phone number:

Lesbian Rights-NOW

Dear Sisters,

I was just recently looking through an old copy of Big Mama Rag and realized that I must be missing out on a lot of news. Enclosed is a check—please start sending me your fine paper. If the price is different, please advise.

Also of interest (at least to the confined lesbians in Billings, Montana) is the establishment of the Lesbian Rights Committee of the local chapter of NOW. I don't know where it's going in terms of growth but hopefully it will become meaningful to local lesbians.

I look forward to receiving your fine paper soon.

Thank you.

Irene M. Crawford  
Billings, Montana  

FALN POW’s

Dear Sisters,

Thank you for including the article that we sent you on the 11 Puerto Rican Prisoners of War who are accused of membership in the FALN. The FALN (Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional) is an armed clandestine Puerto Rican organization here in the U.S. We think that coverage like that really contributes to the building of solidarity among women with the POWs and with the revolutionary independence movement.

The situation with the 11 has intensified since we sent you that article. In December, the U.S. government brought charges of seditious conspiracy—or conspiracy to overthrow the U.S. government by force—against 10 of the 11. Haydee Torres, who is already serving a life sentence in San Diego, was named as an unindicted co-conspirator. The 11 continue to demand POW status and to refuse to recognize the jurisdiction of the U.S. over them. At their arraignment, the POWs tore up the indictment papers and demanded to be brought to an international tribunal. They refuse to participate in U.S. government trials declaring that as captured fighters in the war for Puerto Rican independence, they have the right under international law to be treated as Prisoners of War.

The last time that the government used the seditious conspiracy statute was in 1954 against Lolita Lebron and her comrades for their attack on the U.S. Congress in which they demanded the independence of Puerto Rico.

The sedition trial will begin on February 3 in Chicago. This is only the third time since World War I that the government has used the seditious conspiracy statute and each time it has been used against

(303) 322-2029

Liz Lewis

Judy Barlow, Constance Perenyi, Bobbe Ross

CONTRIBUTORS

Cheryl Brandt, Clair Kaplan, Kathy Riley, Bobbe Ross, Sara Withers, Dona Calacone, Susanna Smith, Marti Barrett, Kim Womantree

INSIDE BMR

VOICE NEWS  
Letters  
National News...  
Hot Briefs  
International News.  
Struggle  

Resources  
Classifieds/Calendar....

Cover: Line-shot adaptation of a 1917 photograph of Members of the Women's Forage Corps. (Shoulder to Shoulder).

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly “for women by women” by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.

Manuscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material will be announced each month in Where We're At—it's generally the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.

We reserve the right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6 per year (11 issues) for individuals in the US, $10 outside the US and $18 to institutions.

BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prison or mental institutions. BMR is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bete and Howell, Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218.

We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 2000, New York, NY 10003.

WOMAN

to letters home to mama

the Puerto Rican independence movement. We think that it is very important for women to be aware of this trial and to continue to build support for the POWs.

Also, I want to mention that we have developed a slideshow on the Puerto Rican struggle through the words of revolutionary women. It includes tapes and quotations of Lolita Lebron, Haydee Torres, Dylcia Pagan, and other Puerto Rican revolutionary women. We think that these women can be an inspiring example to all women of the strength and commitment that women can have in a revolutionary struggle. Please contact us if you are interested in arranging to see it in your area.

In solidarity,  
Barbara Duhl  
New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rico  

(ed. note: For more information contact: The New Movement in Solidarity With Puerto Rican Independence, 1005 Market #207, San Francisco, CA, 94103. Letters of support can be sent to Maria Haydee Torres-39484, Metropolitan Correctional Center, 808 Union, San Diego 92101 and Dylcia Pagan-7166, Carmen Valentin-7167, Alicia Rodriguez-7157, Lucy Rodriguez-7165 at Dwight Correctional Center, P. O. Box C, Dwight, Illinois 60420. BMR will send each woman a subscription of the paper.)

Cathlyn Wilkerson

Dear Friends:

On January 16, Cathlyn Wilkerson began serving a three-year term for possession of dynamite. She pled guilty to the charge which arose out of an accidental explosion. She asked me to be sure to send a copy of her statement to you.

She will be at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women, 247 Harris Rd., Bedford Hills, N.Y. 19597.

Sincerely,

Margaret Ratner, Staff Attorney  
Center for Constitutional Rights  
853 Broadway 14th Floor  
New York, N.Y. 10003  

STATEMENT OF CATHLYN PLATT WILKERSON  
January 15, 1981  

Today I am going to prison to serve a 3-year term. I have been identified as one who sought to attack the foundations of American justice. I did indeed do this because I believe that American justice is a system organized to protect the rich and powerful and to terrorize those who fight against its cruelties.

Where, I ask you, is the justice in the mass murders of Black women in Boston, Black men in Buffalo, Black children in Atlanta, when these murders follow centuries of violent race hatred? Where is the justice in the exoneration of Nixon, Gray, Felt, and Miller while the victims of their illegal Cointelpro frame-ups remain in jail?

The culture that grows from the economic and political institutions of North America bears poison flowers. Our culture is rife with contempt and hatred of women, causing the rape, brutalization, and belittlement of our sex. Our culture is rancid with white supremacy, with many white people obsessed with justifying our obviously greater access to education, housing, jobs, and power.  

MORE ON PAGE 13  

Mon-Th 10am-8pm  
Fri-Sat 10am-7pm  

New Herstorical Collections by Rosetta Records:  

Red, White and Blues  
Wild Women Don't Get The Blues  

New Classical Album:  
Women's Orchestra  
Works Conducted by Kay Gardner and Antonia Brico  

We also have all your favorite albums.  

WATCH FOR NEW "T" SHIRTS, CARDS, POSTERS AND BUTTONS  

2023 E. Colfax 320-5972