Up From Underground

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 2

Jane Alpert Talks About the Left & Feminism

Jane Alpert became a legal fugitive 4 1/2 years ago. She
and Sam Melville, who had been active in the left, pleaded
guilty to charges of conspiracy to bomb federal
buildings in New York. (Melville was later killed in the
riots at Attica State Prison.) On November 14, 1974 she
surrendered to federal authorities.

Since then, controversy has flared in both the women’s
community and in the left over Alpert’s actions and
politics. Leftists and some feminists are concerned with
the question of her cooperation with authorities, fearing
she might divulge vital information about the un-
derground. Those who know her personally consider ac-
tion of that type inconsistent with her character. Many
feminists feel the entire issue is irrelevant since both the
established authorities and the male left are oppressive to
women; it is a choice between oppressors. Her theory of
Mother Right is considered reactionary by some,
visionary by others. (For her theory, see Ms. August,
1973.)

Whether we agree or disagree with her actions and her
politics, Jane Alpert is a strong and radical feminist. She
has emerged as such in spite of heavy pressure from the
left. She deserves a chance to tell her own story in her
own words. Neither establishment nor leftist media has
given her that chance.

If we as feminists refuse Alpert this opportunity in our
own feminist press because we disagree with her
politically we are silencing dialogue vital to a growing
movement and a growing political consciousness. This
reflects a dogmatic attitude characteristic of the very op-
pression we are struggling to overcome. In effect, it is an
alliance with the male left against the emotions, intellect
and courage of a sister; against her right to speak her own
truths.

We must realize that solidarity with oppressed peoples
is not the same as solidarity with any given political fac-
tion or movement.

In the interest of sisterhood and the dialogue of
development, we offer this most recent interview with
Jane Alpert. The interview was conducted by Kirsten
Grimstad and Susan Rennie (compilers of The
Woman's S Catalog) at the State Correctional In-
stitute of Muncy, Muncy, Pennsylvania.

K&S: During the period 1968-1970, when you were in-
volved in the left, the Women’s Movement had surfaced and
was growing. What was your attitude to feminism at that
time?

JA: 1968 through 1970 covers a big slice of my psy-
chological and philosophical development. In 1968 I was
working as an editor at Cambridge University Press and had
started my second year of graduate school. I was
passionately opposed to what the American government
was doing in Viet Nam and at home. And I felt an urgent
need for change. Then I met Sam Melville, a man very active
in the left, and fell in love with him. He claimed to have
changed his life for the sake of his beliefs, and he con-
fronted me with the argument that if I really cared as
passionately about change as I claimed to, I had to give up
my privileges as a white, middle-class American — living in
a nice apartment, going to graduate school, having a good
job, and so forth. At that time, I did not understand my own
oppression as a woman — didn’t have respect for the
struggle I had gone through to have these things. So I
accepted his argument that if I really cared about political
change, I had to give up what in fact I had fought for in a sex-
ist system. It was just a classic case of misidentifying my op-
pression.

K&S: Melville himself, of course, had no anti-sexist con-
sciousness?

JA: No, he had none. But this was in 1968, and at the
time few men were even pretending to. In fact, part of his
claim to be so radical rested on the fact that he had left his
wife and child. The oppression she had experienced when
he abandoned her was of no concern to him. He was proud
of the courage that he had had to leave her! Which was not
an act of courage at all — it cost him absolutely nothing, it
merely freed him of responsibility. And I was not sufficiently
in touch with myself as a woman to see that my real iden-
tification lay with her.

K&S: At about the time you were facing changes with
Melville, you were part of a group of women who took over
RAT, a New York radical newspaper, and put out several
issues as a women’s collective. Some of these women,
Robin Morgan, Rita Mae Brown, Martha Shelley, were
already radical feminists. What were your feelings about
their politics?

Of all the things I did during that year, I feel
worst about my guilty plea, because I knew at
that time that had I been willing to make a
break from Sam and the influence he had over
me, that I could have won acquittal.

JA: I'm glad you brought up that takeover, and I would
like to talk about it because it was an event important to my
own growth and to many other women’s change. I think the
motives of myself and the other women who took over the
paper have been somewhat misunderstood. We intended it
as a genuine exploration of the connections between
feminism and what we mistakenly thought of as overall
politics for social change. There was really a sincere desire,
shared by most of the women who came in to work on the
first issue, to keep our minds open and come to some new
resolutions about feminism and socialism. There was real
enthusiasm at first, when we invited women from feminist
organizations, from left organizations, from all over — and
they just poured in. And then we had the added delight of
permanently kicking the men off the paper and taking it over
for good. Unfortunately, a left-feminist split developed and
hardened, and the paper became rigid and doctrinaire and
opposed itself to feminism.

It was just a classic case of misidentifying
my oppression.

K&S: How could women who had taken over a male-
controlled paper in defiance of the men’s sexism become
opposed to feminism? Isn't there a contradiction in that?

JA: What happened was that many feminists became
turned off, feeling that once again they were being used and
manipulated. They wanted assurances that the takeover of
RAT would not use the fact of the paper's being all women in
order to push leftist ideas — in other words, to be a ladies’
auxiliary of the left. I now understand that they had plenty of
reasons to be suspicious of women’s separatism taking on
the guise of feminism, when in fact it was a disguise for left-
ism, for women doing men's work, carrying on men's
politics. Still, I wish more feminists had stuck it out with us. I
don't blame them for leaving, but had more feminists
remained, the paper might have taken a different direction.

Personally, the period during which I worked on RAT was
one in which I was increasingly moved toward feminism.
And I think that had I not been awaiting trial on bombing
charges at that time, and had I not been completely
emotionally involved with the fact that the man I loved was
facing a life sentence and was being held in jail without bail —
had it not been for this overwhelming personal cir-
cumstance — I would have broken with the left and
asserted my commitment to feminism. But the personal cir-
cumstances in my life were such that I could not make this
break. It would have seemed an utter betrayal of Sam, of
everything I was involved in. However, the whole exposure
to feminism then, particularly to Robin Morgan — the way
she continued to work sympathetically and supportively
with left-wing women like myself — was a vital part of what
took with me when I went underground.

K&S: What was your response to “Goodbye to All That,”
which was published in the first women’s issue of RAT?

JA: In many ways it was one of the works that changed
my life: It certainly threatened me in that mind-opening way
of posing a challenge.

K&S: Why did you decide to go underground?

JA: First, I'd like to go into how I came to plead guilty to
the conspiracy charges. Of all the things I did during that
year, I feel worst about my guilty plea, because I knew at
that time that had I been willing to make a break from Sam
and the influence he had over me, that I could have won ac-
quittal. There was almost no evidence against me, or at
least not enough to convict me. But the cost would have
been a betrayal of Sam — in effect blaming Sam for
everything and holding him to account for the conspiracy
because he had manipulated me into it — as he had done in
fact. But at the time, I could not admit this because the
emotional cost would have been too great. In addition, my
guilty plea had the effect of lessening the charges against
him, guaranteeing him a maximum sentence of twelve to
eighteen years instead of life. Even so, I didn’t feel that he
would survive eighteen years in prison. But, it was what he
wanted to do, and I didn’t feel able to oppose him. Going un-
derground was just a natural extension of that. I was so out
of touch with myself — I was so out of touch with my own
needs. Everything in my life at that time, as far as the trial,
the charges were concerned, revolved around Sam. And I
went underground in the sort of hope that I could somehow
rescue him from prison. Also, some part of me really believ-
ed that the left was going to make a revolution in this coun-
try, and I wanted to be a part of it.

K&S: Can you tell us what it was like being underground?

JA: If I had to apply one adjective to it, it would be “lonely.” Life underground was anything but dramatic. I worked
at a series of waitressing, secretary-type jobs. I lived under
false identities; I lived as quietly as possible. I usually lived
with roommates, although for periods I lived alone. When I
felt that there was some kind of heat on me I would go to
another city. I became quite adept at finding myself places
to stay and getting myself jobs, making friends and acquain-
tances in the areas in which I lived.

K&S: What contacts did you have with feminism during
these years underground?

JA: Shortly after I had come to San Diego, I joined a
consciousness-raising group. At that time I had no women
friends at all, and I was so hungry for the company and con-
versation of other women that I did a very risky thing in
walking right into the San Diego Women’s Center. I found
out that a CR group was forming that very evening, and I
joined it. It was an absolutely life-saving experience for me.
I became very close to the five other women in the group.
Just the sense of sisterhood that I got from them was a
tremendous source of support and strength. Shortly after
joining, I got my own apartment and began to settle down in
my own life. They were the first close friends that I made
while I was underground — and it really tore me to pieces to
leave San Diego. From that point on, I was always in contact
with the Women’s Movement, and with women. I tried
never again to put myself in the position of being dependent
on men’s feelings for me — their sympathy or whatever was
necessary to get financial or emotional support.

K&S: Wasn't it very difficult to be in a CR group, where
everyone tells the most intimate details of their life, while you
could not?

JA: It did get difficult after four or five months. I was torn
between wanting to unburden myself and yet knowing that I
couldn't. It would have been unfair of me to impose this in-
formation on them, because anyone I told would be put in
the position of having to choose between their legal
obligations and their sense of moral responsibility toward a
friend. But, finally, the night before I left San Diego, I felt
that I could not just leave without an explanation. So I told
my CR group that I was being looked for, and that I would
have to leave without telling them where I was going or ever
being in touch with them again. I wanted them to know that
it wasn’t from my lack of love for them that they would never
hear from me again.

K&S: Have you been in touch with any of these women
since you surrendered?

JA: Since I've been overground I've gotten back in touch
with a few of them to ask for character references. A couple
of them told me that they had had the feeling when they
read “Mother Right” that their CR member had been me.
They have been just wonderful — just as I had expected. In a
way, I think they are an extraordinary and marvelous group
of women, and in another way, I think they are pretty much
like women everywhere. The kind of closeness we shared in
the CR group is a universal thing. It grows out of the bond
women have with each other. Wonderful as it is, it wasn’t
even unique.

K&S: What made you decide to give yourself up?

JA: In the same way that my going underground was an
outgrowth of my despair, my surfacing was an outgrowth of
my self-respect — which came from my feminist identity.
The more I thought about it, the more it seemed to me that
this was the next essential step in my life. By 1973, my third
year underground, my life had stabilized a good deal. I had
been living in Denver for two years. I had a steady job work-
ing as a secretary in a small private school for girls. I had a
comfortable life; I was secure and it had been a long time
since I had felt I was being chased. I was teaching women’s
courses at a free university in Denver. I had just about
everything that I could ever hope to have as a fugitive, but I
realized that I wanted a whole lot more: that I wanted to
write more freely, to express my feminist ideas; I wanted to
be able to work in any area in the Women’s Movement I
chose, and not just the areas that seemed “safe.” I wanted
to know my family again, to go back to my roots. I was begin-
ning to have a much larger conception of what my life was
about and who I could be. I was more in touch with a sense
of my own creative potential. I don’t mean this in any kind of
arrogant sense; I mean in the sense that all of us possess
immense creative potential. Surfacing — and paying in the
legal system for what I had done, but getting these conse-

quences over with, became an important and positive thing
for me. Before, every time I thought of surrendering, it was
in despair — almost a suicidal act: I'm a failure, I'm giving
up. But by the time I decided to go ahead and do it, I felt the
very opposite. I had a conviction that this was how it began, and that's how I’ve continued to feel about surrendering.

K&S: What has been the reaction to your decision to sur-
render?

JA: Well, I have been overwhelmed by the warmth and
support people have shown me. I've received mail and
messages — especially from women — who in sisterly and
motherly ways identify with my coming home again. Re-
establishing a relationship with my mother has been very
important for me: connecting me with my own female
history, my own female roots, specifically through my
mother, a strong and wonderful woman, whose life has
been changed as mine has by my coming back.

There has been another, perhaps predictable reaction on
the part of both the extreme right and the left — both male of
course — who see something negative in my surrender. For
example, The National Review commented something to
the effect that “There is nothing to be applauded in Jane
Alpert’s conversion from communism to feminism, because
after all these are just two brands of subversion of
American society.” On the other hand, there has been a left-
ist reaction which looks for something sinister in my sur-
facing: “What does it mean that Jane Alpert is speaking to
Federal prosecutors?”

K&S: How do you respond to such insinuations from the
left?

JA: Well, it’s possible that having not been in touch with
me for five years, people think that I've gone to pieces or
have been broken. The fact is that I'm much stronger, more
capable of handling pressure, and have, if anything, more
integrity than I did before. It’s conceivable that I have turned
into the kind of moral ogre that paranoid people on the left
seem to suggest.

K&S: Perhaps we can talk about your change in politics
and change in consciousness. It was in “Mother Right” that
you indicated your repudiation of left politics and your com-
mitment to radical feminism. Could you tell us a little more
about this process of change?

JA: I think that left politics had always been for me, as for
other women, a false identification with male power. As
long as there was no women’s movement, or as long as the
Women’s Movement was too threatening to our relations
with our men, we had to express our opposition to the
system and our feelings for social change through men.
This is certainly what I did when I took up Sam Melville's
politics, and what I continued to do in my first years un-
derground. I couldn't really risk saying anything that came
strictly out of myself because it might jeopardize or threaten
my relationship with a man I loved. After Sam was killed,
certainly in the period that I wrote a preface to his letters, I
still felt very committed to his memory. But I think my very
brief coincidental encounter with the Weather un-
derground after Sam was killed, ended for me any notion
that I could any longer live