ae Big Mama Rag Vol: 2\No. 7

Utopia in China?

So let's forget about the Women’s Movement here and
move to China. Women there, it is claimed, have achieved
social, political, and economic equality along with the men and
can supposedly even grow up to take a place on the Central
Committee someday.

While we do not intend to minimize the tremendous
strides that have been made in the interests of Chinese people
today, we would seriously question the premise that the sexes
are now really “equal” there. Certainly the Chinese govern-
ment has giant-stepped the U.S. in its efforts to combat sexism

and racism and to build a decent place to live and work for all
the people, but to assume that women have achieved the ul-
timate in what women can achieve would be a drastic mistake.

Underlying Levels

Despite the visible gains for Chinese women today, no-
thing is ever mentioned about how or if the underlying levels of
male oppression are ever dealt with or even, in fact, con-
sidered. It is these underlying levels which perpetuate a male
state where male culture and male absurdity still abound — the
kind of state that still forces women to have to ask for so-called
“equality.”

Said Ms. Klonsky in her talk Thursday night (see article,
page 3) “Go out and do it. Prove you can do it. Women have
gained respect by doing it in China.” Gained whose respect?
Proved what to whom? Why men of course. And there we are —
back at getting male approval for our existence again. And real-
ly, what is so revolutionary about that?

Granted, Chinese women are taking an active part in many
facets of the country’s operation, but “taking part” is only that.
When it comes right down to it Chinese men are still occupying
the real positions of power in China and are still making the
decisions about women’s destiny there — women occupy only
about 12% of government positions. (We'd be interested in see-

ing just how long women’s equality would last if they demand-
ed an equal share in running the government from the top
echelons.)

Who else but males would decide that women can’t be
employed in certain positions because it would ‘damage their
reproductive organs’? (a doubtful as well as blatantly sexist
conclusion anyway). What of the woman who doesn’t want to
have children or the Chinese lesbian, or the woman who just
might want to do one of those jobs?

Political Deviation?

Who else but men would say that homosexuality is really a
“political deviation” (just a more sophisticated way of saying
sick) not understanding that “homosexuality is a category of
behavior possible only in a sexist society characterized by rigid
sex roles and dominated by male supremacy”? (Woman Iden-
tified Woman). In spite of all Ms. Klonsky’s attempts to explain
away gay suppression in China by talking about how important
the nuclear family structure is there, the fact remains that

where gay people do not have real expression, the country is
still a sexist one underneath all its pretty layers of
achievements.
Yes women have come far in the Peoples Republic of China
but they also still have a long way to go.
—Chocolate Waters

LETTERS HOME
ZO MAMA

Dear Editors:

(Re: Experience with
Separatist Dykes at March 25
NOW Meeting.)

The things I went to the
mountains to do, I’ve done.
Now I want to be with other
feminists and Lesbians, so
I've been spending a lot of
time in Denver lately.

As I listened to the state-
ments of the separatists
Monday night, I began to
wonder if I was exchanging a
positive energy environment
for a negative one. Although
I thought many of the points

I am a woman who identifies
herself as a Lesbian. For the
past year and a half I have
been living in the mountains
in semi-seclusion,
sometimes not seeing people
for days at a time and work-
ing on my own head. A lot of

Letter Continued

made by the separatists were
valid, I could not ignore the
negativism, the hatred, the
double-think and the double-
talk.

As I listened to the rap
about clothes and hair —
appearance in general — I
felt they weren't interested in
my development as an in-
dividual, my identity, or my
self-expression but only in
my indoctrination. I have long
hair and I don't feel that it’s a
cop-out; I’m not hiding my
Lesbianism from anyone. In
one way it makes things
more difficult because I have
to tell people I'm a dyke —
they can’t assume it from my
appearance. And I do tell
them — personal confronta-
tion — I prefer that to the lack
of personal contact. In one
sense cutting your hair short
is copping to the man, who
has defined woman’s
appearance. Short hair is not
traditionally feminine, and
that’s why it can be used by
Lesbians as a political state-
ment. Personally, I don’t give
a damn what anyone looks
like. I wear my hair long
because I like it and because
it happens naturally when I
leave it alone. And that kind
of thinking seems to me to be
a lot closer to freedom than
simply instating a new
stereotype is.

And work? The state-
ment was made that “we
don't work with men and we
don't work with women who
work with men” along with
statements about being the
only women where they
work. What? They don’t work
with men and they are the only
women in the shops. Is there
a third sex I don't know
about? And aren’t these
Lesbians putting profits in
the pockets of the man? Now
just where are they really at?

The separatists also
spoke of classism within the
movement and about how
this divides women. I think
that’s true. But I also feel that
antagonism and hatred are

More on Page 9

Hot Times at NOW Meeting

“THE BAD FAIRIES WHO CAME TO THE CHRISTENING
UNINVITED”

Time: Early evening, March 25th. Setting: A very polite meeting of the
National Organization for Women. Subject: Lesbianism. Par-
ticipants: Three nice Lesbians on a panel, five bad fairies, and a room
full of bewildered observers. Purpose: “To educate the public” (??!).

Panel Dialogue: We are Lesbians. We are doing our own thing. We
are living authentically. We think Lesbianism is an important issue
because NOW just formed a task force on it. We have come to
educate... 1.) I belong to the Gay Coalition and I believe in human
rights for everyone, regardless... 2.) I am a member of the Lesbian
Resource Center in Boulder and I believe I'm a Lesbian.... 3.) I am really
Cinderella.... (Question: Will the real Lesbian please stand up?)

Bad Fairies: We are five women in Denver who call ourselves
Separatist Dykes. We don’t work with men and we don’t work with
women who work with men and we don’t work with anybody but
ourselves. (Question: We don’t fuck and we don’t screw and we don't
go with the girls who do?) We hate all of you straight chickies who
have long hair and wear earrings and fuck us dykes over by existing.
We get shit every day because we're dykes who are proud and strong
(not because we're loud and obnoxious) and who aren’t afraid to say
we're better than everybody else (and say it and say it and say it ad
nauseam). We never smile. We know Karate.

Audience Response: And what are you five a coalition of? ... belch ...
Gee, isn't it swell that we girls can all get together like this and have
controversy in this nifty organization? ... What do you Lesbians do in
the daytime anyway? ... I'm not telling you to shut up ... shut up...
Could you tell me where the Ladies' room is please? ... Get them out of
here ... But what can we do to help you? ... Women must stop fighting
each other! Join NOW! (applause) ... Hey, I really came here to raise
money ... Pass the hat around. Throw in a dime for the dykes.

Interpretation: All kidding around aside, we realize that not everyone
has exactly the same views about Lesbianism, the political importance
of Lesbianism, or even the understanding that Lesbianism is vitally
connected with feminism. A group of women known as the
Radicalesbians wrote a statement in 1970 called Woman-identified
Woman which has been one of the most important articles ever
written on these relationships. Since they said it better than we can,
we'd like to reprint some excerpts from this statement here:

A Lesbian is the rage of all women condensed to the point of explo-
sion. .

Those of us who work that (coming to understand what this sexist
society has done to her and why it is functional and necessary for it to
do so) through find ourselves on the other side of a tortuous journey
through a night that may have been decades long. The inner peace,
the real love of self and of all women, is something to be shared with
all women — because we are all women... .

It should first be understood that Lesbianism, like male homosexuality,
is a category of behavior possible only in a sexist society
characterized by rigid sex roles and dominated by male supremacy..
In a society in which men do not oppress women, and sexual expres-
sion is allowed to follow feelings, the categories of homosexuality
and heterosexuality would disappear.
But Lesbianism is also different from male homosexuality, and serves
2 different functions in the society. “Dyke” is a different kind of put-

More on Page 9