Misleading advertising cited

Breast Feeding Being Discouraged

On Halloween morning, over twenty-five members of the Denver Area Justice and Peace Committee dressed in "Death" costumes and visited the Nestlé Company regional office in Lakewood, CO. They presented the Nestlé Company with "The Pinocchio Great Pretender Award" for its public relations cover-up of over 100 recent violations of the World Health Organization/UNICEF infant feeding recommendations. "As the largest seller of infant formula in poor countries, the Nestlé Company had agreed to abide by these recommendations, curbing infant formula promotion in developing countries," stated Rev. Len Schreiner, spokesperson for the Justice and Peace Committee. "However, in reality, the Nestlé Company continues its unethical advertising and has merely changed its public relations tactics."

For example, R.A. Wilson, Managing Director of Nestlé in the United Kingdom, claims “There has been no mass media advertising at all of infant formula since July 1978," but on August 16th, 1980, Nestlé ran a full-page ad in Padres e Hijos, a mass-circulated magazine in Mexico advertising its infant formula.

Despite claims to the contrary, the infant food industry continues to violate the recommendations of the October 1979 WHO/UNICEF meeting on infant feeding recommendations which were designed to protect the health of infants.

The October recommendations said that company personnel should not work in the health care system.

In January, Nestlé advertised for "black, female health educator to work closely with health authorities." In June, in Zimbabwe, one of Nestlé's "medical delegates" said he often spoke directly to mothers about "health and nutrition" in hospitals and clinics. In June and July, in Malaysia, Nestlé advertised for mothercraft nurses who would be "contacting doctors, nurses and helping mothers with their infant feeding problems." In Nigeria, in July, Nestlé personnel visited childcare clinics in Ibadan and talked to mothers. In the Philippines, in August, Nestlé marketing personnel were reported to have visited a hospital and talked with the mothers there.

The October meeting recommended that products should be labeled to indicate proper and safe home preparation. The October meeting recommended that marketing of these products should not discourage breastfeeding.

In June 1980, marketing personnel were reported visiting mothers at home in Indonesia. Such visits are clearly outside the spirit of the recommendations and are not designed to encourage breastfeeding.

Nestlé labels from Indonesia, in May, had such small instructions that they were illegible.

Nestlé distributed samples through a hospital in Quezon City and a health center in Pangasinan in July, a Manila hospital in August, and a Davao City hospital during January, April, and July - all in the Philippines. In Indonesia, samples were left for distribution to mothers. A hospital worker said, "Samples are plentiful... this is one item we never run out of..." Samples have been received by clinics in Nigeria and Venezuela as well.

In much of the promotional literature of Nestlé infant formula, the products are called “maternalized” milks. Baby care booklets with one page on breastfeeding and three on bottle feeding were distributed in Ghana calling one of Nestlé's formulas the "ideal" milk.

A leading pediatric nutritionist estimates that ten million babies each year suffer needless malnutrition and often die because they are bottle-fed instead of breast-fed. Mothers in developing countries have neither sufficient income nor sanitary conditions to use powdered baby formula safely.

As the local coordinator of the Save Babies/Don't Buy Nestlé campaign, the Denver Area Justice and Peace Committee is urging all consumers not to patronize the Nestlé Company and its subsidiaries, Stouffer and Libby.

Suit Against Restaurant Filed

Karen Sommers, a former waitress at Stuart Anderson Black Angus Restaurant in Aurora, CO, has filed a $100,000 damage suit against that restaurant for sexual harassment.

In the suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Denver, Karen Sommers claims that, on New Year's Eve 1979, her skirt was torn off her and champagne was poured on her head by Bruno Balliotolli, a disc jockey employed by the restaurant.

"Victory! I have the cocktail waitress' skirt," Balliotolli allegedly told the holiday revelers.

In January and February, “almost on a daily basis," Sommers claims, Balliotolli harassed her with celery stalks.

Sommers, who quit the restaurant in March, also claims that, throughout her employment, she was asked repeatedly not to wear a sweater because restaurant officials wanted her to show "more cleavage.” She was also repeatedly asked to remove her bra by other employees because she was the only waitress who wore one.

In February, she also says, Michael Peterson, a regional vice president of Saga Enterprises Inc., parent company of the Black Angus chain, ordered her to dance with two fellow employees "who yanked her around against her will."

Sommers asks $50,000 actual damages and $50,000 punitive damages.

Upcoming themes for Big Mama Rag:

- Thursday's Child

Unions, deadline is Dec. 15th. Process, Structure & Politics, deadline is Feb. 1st.

SWAPO Member, Ellen Musialela, In Town

This Is The Time...

This is the time we were all waiting for.

Our guns are light in our hands the reasons and aims of the struggle clear in our minds.

The blood shed by our heroes makes us sad but resolute. It is the price of our freedom.

We keep them close in our hearts from their example new generations -- revolutionary generations -- are already being born.

Ahead of us we see bitter hardships. But we see also our children running free our country plundered no more.

This is the time to be ready and firm.

The time to give ourselves to the Revolution

Josina Machel

Susan Goding

On October 31st, Ellen Musialela, central committee member of the Women's Council of SWAPO (South West Africa People's Organization) was in Denver. Ellen Musialela was in Denver as part of a 25-stop tour of North America to speak about the Namibian people's struggle for freedom against the white South African forces occupying Namibia.

Namibia is located on the southwest coast of Africa. It is bordered on the north by Angola and Zambia, on the east by Botswana and on the south by South Africa.

Ellen began the evening by giving a history of Namibia and the system of Bantustans ("homelands") instituted by the South African government.

In 1884, as part of Germany's drive to catch up with the more established colonial power, the Germans occupied Namibia. After the Germans were defeated in World War I, South Africa displaced Germany as the occupying power and in 1920 was officially recognized as the authority in Namibia by the League of Nations.

South Africa was given a mandate by the League of Nations to "promote to the utmost, the material and moral well-being and the social progress of the inhabitants" of Namibia. In fact, South Africa extended and intensified the oppression of the Namibian people through the apartheid system, with its pass laws, contract labor, forced population removal, and Bantustans.

Apartheid is the theory that there are culturally distinct and antagonistic nations within South Africa. All whites, regardless of nationality, constitute the "white nation." Therefore the South African government set up Bantustans; each group of people that the government decides constitutes a nation is put on its Bantustan. It is the official doctrine that each African nation can develop its own homeland at its own speed according to its own ability, values, and ways of life. Very much like the system of reservations for Native Americans in the U.S. The poorest land is set aside for the African peoples. Only 39% of the land is "reserved" for Africans who are 85% of the population.

The facts are though, many facets of traditional African culture (like cattle culture, which requires virtually unlimited grazing) cannot be restored or are not allowed because they interfere with white South Africa's need for a constant supply of cheap black labor for its farms, industries, and mines. Also, the revival of certain aspects of African religions would not be tolerated by the devout “national Christian" Afrikaners (white South Africans). Consequently, the South African regime has created a version of African traditions which are convenient for white purposes and has foisted them on the blacks as the old-time culture by which they must abide.

United States corporations have large investments in mining and fishing, owning several large companies and up to one-third share in many of the South African firms. One American company, Tsumeb Corporation (jointly controlled by American Metal Climax and Newmont Mining Corporation), mines most of the base minerals and is the largest single employer of Africans in Namibia. In 28 years of existence, Tsumeb has extracted over $1 billion worth of minerals from Namibia. Other U.S. corporations are involved in uranium and diamond extraction, oil exploration, and fishing. Led by Del Monte, the U.S. fishing industry takes 90% of the Namibian annual catch to sell in the U.S. as canned sardines and dried food for pet animals and fish. Meanwhile, the Namibian people suffer from severe protein deficiency.

This version of old-time culture reflects the authoritarian and patriarchal attitudes of the whites who devised it. In particular, it places many restrictions on women. Under contract labor, men must leave the Bantustans to work in the towns and mines. They are not allowed to take their families. All movement of Africans is restricted by permit; no African woman has been able to enter any urban area lawfully for over a decade, since it has become official policy not to issue permits to women.

Government officials recognize the homemaking role of women and fear their presence in the cities will lead to the establishment of a stable black urban population. They reason that a stable population would demand permanent residence and other rights in the white "homeland."

In the Bantustan, on the other hand, there is not enough land for the populations, so, in most cases, the government refuses to allot land to women. If a woman's husband dies, she is entitled to continue living there, but if she leaves her home, she must forfeit her right to return to the land.

Ellen Musialela had to apply to enter the U.S. as a refugee; she has been in exile from Namibia for 12 years. When she was 14, Ellen became a member of SWAPO, the party that is mobilizing Namibians against the South African regime.

In response to the growing strength of SWAPO, the South African government has developed a puppet regime they would like to install. This group is called the “Democratic Turnhalle Alliance" and is led by Dirk Mudge, a white. SWAPO is dedicated to the liberation of all of Namibia and is opposed to that neo-colonial regime.

Ellen is asking that people supporting the nationalist struggle of the Namibian people contribute warm clothing, good shoes, blankets, children's clothes, and money. Arrangements can be made by calling the Denver American Friends Service Committee office, 832-1676 on Mon., Wed., and Thurs. Checks may be made out to Africa Fund/SWAPO Tour Account and are tax deductible.

(For more information on the struggles of African women see page 12)

SOLIDARITY FREEDOM JUSTICE