Women “Fluffers”  
Breathe Asbestos  

Angela Singer  

At night, on the London Subway, after  
the last train stops, women go down  
into the tunnels to dust the tracks.  
They are called "fluffers."  

The dust is so thick, that if it  
were not for the fluffers, the elec-  
tric points on the rails would short.  
They dust the white ceramic joints  
on the line. "If we didn't do it,  
there would be an accident every  
day," said one woman. So in 1979,  
one of the most advanced railway sys-  
tems in the world is cleaned by a  
modern equivalent of chimney boys.  

There are 18 women on the gang.  
They clean 30 miles of track in a  
year.  

The dust on the subway is not just  
dirt. It contains high levels of  
silica and asbestos. Both of these  
dusts can cause progressive and in-  
curable lung diseases. London Trans-  
port's own measurements have found  
both dusts above the maximum levels  
to which workers should be exposed -  
as recommended by the Government's  

Health and Safety Executive.  

Asbestos is released from the brake  
linings and asbestos is used in the  
insulating and soundproofing of the  
train cars. London Transport is  
currently removing asbestos from the  
cars, yet have installed new asbestos  
cable on one train line. The authori-  
ties say the cables are sealed and  
will not be released into the air.  

The fluffers are provided with  
masks but that doesn't prevent them  
from having to “eat dust." John Mc-  
Morrow, a National Union of Railway-  
men branch secretary, has been run-  
ning an awareness campaign on  
"killer dust in the tube" for years.  
He said he has tried to warn the  
women but they say, "We know it's  
dangerous, but there's nothing we  
can do."  

"We're not here because we love the  
work. We're here because we have  
children, because the hours are good  
for us, everybody on this job has a  
family."  

Most of the women are Black, all  
of them have children, some of them  
are single parents. They say they  
get home in time to send their child-  
ren off to school and do their house-  
work before going to meet.  

There is nothing to suggest that  
there will be any different method  
of cleaning in the future. A vacuum  
train to clean the tunnel has been  
in a "stage of development" for  
eight years. There is still no date  
for the train to become operational  
and even when it does, London  
Transport has said it will not re-  
place the women.  

Reprinted from The Guardian (England)  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 11  

Genital Mutilation Modernized  

Maria Scipione  

This Halloween, as in the past,  
UNICEF sent out small children to  
collect money to help children all  
over the world. In Africa this is  
not the case. The money donated to  
UNICEF goes to hospitals and doctors  
who perform “routine” genital muti-  
lations on African female children.  

At the World Health Organization  
Seminar in Khartoum, Sudan, in Feb-  
ruary 1979, it was revealed that  
genital mutilation is practiced today  
in at least 30 countries across  
Africa and Asia. Over 30 million  
living women and young girls have  
had their genitals mutilated, and it  
is estimated that 10 million more  
are subject to the same.  

All of these women are robbed of  
their rights to their health, their  
sexuality, their ability to have a  
normal childbirth and, most of all,  
control over their own bodies. The  
trend has been to perform these op-  
erations at a younger and younger  
age. The younger girl is less apt  
to resist. (In rural situations  
anesthesia is seldom used resulting  
in a much more brutal operation).  
Also, she is more inclined to per-  
ceive her mutilation as normal.  

Unmutilated women are unmarriageable  
in cultures that practice mutilation.  
In Africa, like everywhere else, wom-  

any organizations know of mutila-  
tion: United Nations Children's Fund  
(UNICEF), United Nations Fund for  
Population Activities (UNFPA), United  
Nations Development Program (UNDP),  
OXFAM, CARE, World Council of Churches,  
Christian Medical Commission and  
countless others. They have been con-  
tacted by Fran Hosken, editor of  
Women's International Network (WIN)  
News. She has been working to halt  
these practices by trying to get  
health and reproductive information  
made available to African women. She  
offered to conduct information ses-  
sions with them. She asked for reports  
of their experience with mutilated  
women and children in Africa. Most  
did not respond.  

UNICEF had various responses from  
"We don't know anything about this"  
to they are “unable to get involved  
in cultural matters of African count-  
ries."  

UNICEF, because of its involvement  
in community health programs, is in  
direct contact with women and children  
in African countries. They could  
easily disseminate information about  
sexuality, women's biological func-  
tions and genital health. But they  
don't and they won't.  

The excuse most international or-  
ganizations use is that it is a ritual  
important to the culture. But since  

mutilations are no longer done just in  
ceremonial situations, but have become routine  
procedure in hospitals, done by doctors  
of western origin.  

Women's worth is determined by their  
ability to sexually please men and  
to bear them children, especially sons.  
Unmutilated women become outcasts in  
their communities. Their actual sur-  
vival is threatened. Knowing that  
women are virtually outcasts without  
having had the operation is the most  
coercive factor that perpetuates their  
submission to these atrocities, even  
in the few countries where the prac-  
tice has been outlawed.  

In order to destroy this cycle of  
ignorance, coercion, fear and submis-  
sion, the women of Africa need to have  
access to information about their  
health, sexuality and biology. There  
has been a conspiracy of silence.  

The conference in Khartoum sent a  
plea to the World Health Organization  
imploring them to help end the prac-  
tice of genital mutilation. Thus far,  
WHO has failed to take any action to  
stop it. For the past eight months,  
it has been "studying" the situation.  

Much modernization has occurred, mutil-  
ations are no longer done just in  
ceremonial situations, but have be-  
come routine procedure in hospitals,  
done by doctors of western origin.  

Organizations that conspire to  
hide the fact that genital mutilations  
occur should be confronted and boy-  
cotted until they recognize and begin  
to combat these violent practices that  
violate women's bodies and destroy  
women's health. They are part of a  
system that for thousands of years  
has torn out women's genitalia.  

The mutilation of women and young  
girls in Africa is a form of woman  
hating. Every country in the world  
has a history of practices that vio-  
late women. It is the responsibility  
of all women in the world to help  
our African sisters.  

From New Women's Times, for more infor-  
mation see Big Mama Rag, Vol. 6 No.  
11 May 1978.  

Massage Abortion in Thailand  

Massage abortion is a little known  
and widely used method of pregnancy  
termination in South East Asia. Here  
Tongplaew Narkavonkit, a sociologist,  
reports on her two-year study of  
village abortionists in Thailand which  
shows the importance of this technique  
in dealing with unwanted pregnancy.  

Illegal abortion probably represents  
the main method of fertility regula-  
tion in rural Thailand. An estimated  
600 village abortion practitioners are  
now thought to be carrying out over  
300,000 pregnancy terminations each  
year, representing an abortion to live  
birth ratio of around 250 per 1,000  
live births. Eighty-one rural abor-  
tionists interviewed in a two-year  
study carried out for the National  
Family Planning Program have yielded  
a wealth of information both on the  
techniques used and the attitudes of  
Thai women who seek abortion.  

Abortion is legal in Thailand only  
in cases where the mother's life or  
health is severely threatened or in  
cases of rape or incest and only with  
the consent of two doctors. Legal  
abortions through the Ministry of  
Public Health's 89 hospitals numbered  
1,200 in 1975. But a study of 3,530  
cases of septic, incomplete or  
threatened abortions at one Bangkok  
hospital points to a high incidence of  
illegal practice.  

Family planning services are not  
yet available widely in much of rural  
Thailand - a family planning program  
has only so far reached 155 out of  
565 districts - and abortion is the  
traditional solution to an unwanted  
pregnancy.  

Most village stores have herbal  
remedies for bringing on a period  
though it is doubtful that these  
work; the injection of substances  
like saline, Dettol, gasoline and  
glucose into the womb is used by some  
abortionists, but the most surprising  
finding of the study was the dominant  
role that massage abortion plays in  
Thailand. Fully 80 percent of abor-  
tions are estimated to be performed  
by this technique, which, while prac-  
tised widely in Malaysia, Thailand  
and the Philippines, is unknown out-  
side South East Asia.  

Twenty-one year old Chun is a typi-  
cal Thai village abortionist who  
took over this role from her mother  
when she died. Each of her clients -  
she usually sees about seven each  
month - lies on her back on the  
floor with her legs spread apart and  
a pillow or rolled cloth is placed  
under her back to raise the lower  
abdomen. Chun locates the fetal mass  
using external palpation and raises  
the uterus by pushing with her bare  
heel just below the pubic bone.  

The mass is dislodged by a pressing  
and pulling motion of the fingertips  
from the pubic bone to the navel, and  
the area of the abdomen above the  
embryo is then massaged with the  
thumb or base of the palm. The whole  
procedure may extend over 20-30 min-  
utes or more since Chun will pause  
if the client complains of intolerable  
pain; if necessary the procedure is  
repeated the next day. When bleeding  
begins the woman is instructed to  
return home and the fetus will be  
delivered in 2-10 days.  

While it may be safer than other  
illegal abortion methods, abortion  
by massage can cause severe bleeding  
and pelvic infections are not uncommon.  
Other complications include periton-  
itis, rupture of the intestines, and  
internal bleeding; death and sterility  
can result.  

The Thai caseloads are very mixed,  
with both single and married women  
and a whole range of occupations,  
from farmers to students and civil  
servants. Most abortions are car-  

ried out in the first trimester,  
although it is occasionally carried  
out as late as seven or eight months  
and is sometimes performed even before  
a period is missed as a method of  
menstrual regulation. Rural abortion-  
ists charge from a minimum of 170  
baht (U.S. $8.50) to about 660 baht  
(U.S. $30) - a few charge very  
exploitative prices.  

In Thailand, a remoteness from law  
enforcement, coupled with social  
factors such as more or less equal  
education and work opportunities for  
women and an acceptance of the bene-  
fits of smaller families, means that  
abortion is an acceptable form of  
fertility regulation in the absence of  
contraceptive services. Its practitio-  
ner is therefore seen as an established  
and accepted member of the local com-  
munity who offers a needed medical  
service in the absence of government  
providers.  

From Boston Women’s Health Packet #23