Points

Following is the first section of the BMR collective's Points of Unity—those that deal with the control of our bodies. Further points of unity will be published periodically.

We are writing them down to let our readers know what are the politics that are behind our determinations of what does and does not get into BMR. They are by no means our final word on any of these subjects (in fact, we realize they are incomplete.) We are committed to struggle, and to Criticism/Self-Criticism, and welcome criticisms or comments of any of the points (or anything that appears in BMR, for that matter).

These Points of Unity are also the politics upon which membership in the BMR collective is based. All collective members agree with these points; all our political struggles are based on our understanding of them. Prospective members must read and be willing to struggle around these points.

The demands which follow the points are not made from the context of the current system's ability to grant them, but are based on what is needed to end our oppression and on our revolutionary vision for what society must become.

You may notice that the writing styles vary; this is because the various parts were written by different collective members, and we saw no reason to homogenize them. We have chosen to begin with Control of Our Bodies because we feel that this issue is primary to our struggle as women.

Childcare

The right to control our bodies includes the right to quality childcare.

Women do not have control over our bodies if we have to choose between being a parent or being a worker outside the home, or suffering economically if we are both. Individual women should not have to assume the responsibility of childcare, but right now we are expected to assume all the costs of childcare when we do, and must, work outside the home. Children are the wealth of society, and therefore the responsibility of society, but not the responsibility of one or two people.

Historically in the United States, full daycare programs have been provided in times of economic stress—World War II and the Depression—when women were required in the workforce. These programs were created primarily as a service to the corporations which needed woman-power. Their rapid closing following World War II was a clear indication that these centers had not been organized primarily to benefit children or liberate women. Rather, they had been organized to assist the carrying out of needed production. There has also been an interest recently by state and national government in developing daycare centers for welfare mothers. This current interest is similar to the expansion of daycare during earlier periods of economic crisis. Today, the main reason is the goal of lowering welfare costs by channeling welfare mothers into "desirable" occupations (typists, keypunch operators, etc.). The official drive for daycare has been motivated by the "needs" of the economy, not a concern for the woman or her children.

Our goals for daycare must be seen as a right open to all and which are in conflict with those institutions (corporations, schools, the government) from which we demand daycare services. The majority of existing daycare centers—run as profit-making enterprises—are glorified babysitting services, dumping grounds where children are bored most of the time. In these centers, children learn the values of obedience and passivity. Boys learn to be "boys" and girls to be "girls" and are punished for challenging sex role stereotyping. They are programmed through a daily routine in which opportunities for personal choice and meaningful relationships with adults and other children are minimal. Eating and sleeping are managed in a mass production style which values efficiency over dignity. Control of childcare centers must rest with those who struggle for and use the centers. Childcare must be seen as a right open to all, not a benefit conditioned upon meeting state eligibility requirements. Quality childcare, controlled by parents and childcare workers, with respect to the freedom, needs, and opinions of children, must be available to all regardless of age, marital status, income, or occupation on a 24-hour basis, so that we have real choices about bearing and rearing children.

WE DEMAND FREE QUALITY CHILDCARE.

Sterilization

The right to control our bodies includes the right to choose onereject permanent sterilization. Such sterilizations are often denied to upper, middle, and white working-class women—unless they have fulfilled their "duty" of having an acceptable number of children—but are forced upon women of color, often without their knowledge or consent.

The choice to have no children, one child, or many children must rest with the woman alone. No interference in her decision by the state or its agents can be tolerated.

The most noxious of this interference has manifested itself in the refusal by some doctors to assist in the delivery of the children of "welfare" recipients who will not agree to permanent sterilization. Because these women are largely of color, and because they have deliberately been forced into economically disadvantaged positions by centuries of exploitation and educational malpractice, such sterilizations are nothing less than genocide.

This planned eugenics program, which has been directed with particular malice against Native American and Puerto Rican women, must stop.

Additionally, the sterilizations of women declared "retarded" or "mentally deficient" must stop. Often these women are the products of poverty—poor nutrition, inadequate socialization, deficient education. Intelligence is only one aspect of a person, and because of the cultural and economic biases built into IQ tests, it cannot always be meaningfully or adequately measured—certainly there is no one who can currently be trusted to make such determinations.

The state must not be allowed to decide who will have children and who will not. Our bodies are ours. As feminists, we oppose all state attempts at eugenics planning. History has shown the horrible result of state policies which value some lives over others.

WE DEMAND AN END TO FORCED STERILIZATIONS.

FORCED STERILIZATION IS GENOCIDE. WE DEMAND FREE STERILIZATION, ON DEMAND AND WITHOUT QUESTIONS, FOR WOMEN WHO WANT IT.

Health Care

The right to control our bodies includes the right to adequate nutrition, quality health care, and the right to refuse any or all medical treatment.

Because adequate nutrition is necessary for both attaining and maintaining good health, all people must have access to healthy foods. We must also have access to clear and relevant information about good nutrition as it applies to different age groups both in health and in disease.

As long as there is a hierarchical system of health care workers that is sexist, racist, and classist, the administration of health care will be done in a sexist, racist, and classist manner. A restructuring of the health care system which would give easy access to free quality health care for all people is needed. By “quality” we mean not only the best care available, but also easy access to all information necessary for each person to examine the pros and cons of all potential courses of treatment. Each individual should have the responsibility to choose which course of treatment is best for them and maintain the right to refuse any or all medical care regardless of the consequences.

Because women, minorities, and the poor are much more likely to be diagnosed as having mental illnesses, the sexist, racist, and classist attitudes in determining and treating mental illness must be stopped.

WE DEMAND ACCESS TO HEALTHY FOODS AND NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION.

WE DEMAND A RESTRUCTURING OF ALL HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS IN ORDER TO SERVE THE NEEDS OF THE PEOPLE RATHER THAN FOR THE CONVENIENCE OF THE MEDICAL ELITE.

WE DEMAND ACCESS TO FREE QUALITY HEALTH CARE.

WE DEMAND THE RIGHT OF EACH INDIVIDUAL TO REFUSE ANY OR ALL MEDICAL CARE REGARDLESS OF THE CONSEQUENCES.

Sex Education

The right to control our bodies includes the right to learn about sex without first learning fear, shame, and anxiety about our sexuality.

Traditional sex education, through the schools, churches, and in the family, has taught young women to feel guilt rather than the power of sexuality. It has made a mockery of “women's right to choose” because it continues to promote a double standard of experience for men and women. In turn, this has fueled the so-called sexual revolution which has, more often than not, pressured women into earlier and more frequent experiences of sexual submission.

Sex education must begin at an early age; and from girlhood on, young women must be well-informed of options, not just about contraceptives and hygiene, but about sexual expression (masturbation, lesbianism, celibacy). Through exposure to women who feel good about their bodies, other girls and women will learn that we can experience our sexuality when and how we choose, from a position of strength as opposed to traditional positions of guilt and weakness.

WE DEMAND THE RIGHT TO OPEN, NON-MORALISTIC AND NON-SEXIST SEX EDUCATION FOR ALL.

Parenting

The right to control our bodies includes the right to raise a child, if we so choose, and to be given support, including economic support for this, free from coercive influences and standards of society.

Children are seen as part of the wealth of most cultures. They are seen as bundles of joy who will carry on in our place when we are too old or gone. Each child at birth has the potential, if given the right opportunities, to grow up to be leaders of our communities. They are our hope for the future of society.

Because of this investment in raising children, the government has felt it has the right to decide who should and should not bear children and, once born, who should, from their perspective, raise them. The government uses every means it can to influence and force women to serve these decisions.

Women are pushed to have children by the state and clergy. This has caused those of us who are sterile or choose to remain childfree needless shame and trauma because society measures womanhood by our ability and desire to have children.

Children are a wedge used by the ruling class to keep us powerless. We are convinced to have children or denied the means to prevent them, especially if we are white, and then we are held solely responsible for their physical care while being denied input into most of the moral upbringing they receive through the public school system and mass media. If we are minority, we are frequently robbed of our ability to have children through forced sterilization.

Child custody is a wedge used by the ruling class to keep us powerless and divided. Women from particular groups—Native American, minority, lesbian mothers, those on welfare, those living in unconventional lifestyles, handicapped and political women—live with the threat that our children can be taken from us. This threat is made and carried out to weaken people's collective power. It demonstrates the power the ruling class has against us and removes children from a potentially radical upbringing to a situation where they may very well learn their place in this society.

In this society, none of us can make free, clear decisions about our desires to have and raise children. We are pushed to have children yet denied support to raise the children. We live under the threat of having our children taken from us if we do not conform to the ruling class wishes.

WE DEMAND THE RIGHT TO CHOOSE WHETHER TO HAVE CHILDREN, FREE FROM THREATS AND COERCION.

WE DEMAND SUPPORT AND POWER IN ALL ASPECTS OF THE UPBRINGING OF CHILDREN.

Abortion

The right to control our bodies includes the right to choose our role in the process of reproduction. Our participation in this process is necessary in order that human life may continue. Additionally, the children of our bodies are needed by the ruling class as laborers and soldiers. (Men of the ruling class also need children, by women of their own class, to consolidate their families' power and to provide for inheritance.) So the state attempts to force pregnancy upon us.

This forced pregnancy is enforced by the restriction of the availability of abortion (along with the denial of safe, effective birth control devices). All the moralizing that accompanies such restriction is part of the battle for the control of women's minds in order to gain control of our bodies.

Economic sanctions which allow the rich safe abortion, but deny it to the poor are the most blatant example of the class system that allows upper and middle-class women to exercise some control over their lives—control which is denied to the poor. (Indeed, the Supreme Court has recently upheld the Hyde Amendment which denies abortion to the poor even when pregnancy is a clear danger to the health of the woman.) In addition, abortion providers are virtually nonexistent in many parts of the US, placing an added burden on poor women from those regions.

If abortion were outlawed in the US tomorrow, it would not end all abortions of US women. Such prohibitions would merely require the financially able to fly to Europe or to bribe their doctors, while the poor would be condemned, once again, to self-remedies or to the butchers.

Abortion is an issue of prime importance to every woman, be she heterosexual or lesbian, young or old. No woman of childbearing age is free from the threat of rape and, thereby, possible unwanted pregnancy. If the state can make laws to control the bodies of any of us, none of us are safe.

WE DEMAND AN END TO ALL RESTRICTIONS ON ABORTION.

FREE ABORTION, ON DEMAND.

Safe Environment

Included in the right to control our bodies is the right to live and work in a safe place free from environmental pollutants and physical hazards. These rights are basic, but are constantly denied by the capitalist system which values profits over people.

In recent years the issue of safety in the workplace has been used to exclude women of childbearing age, the presumed mothers of the next generation, from toxic workplaces—supposedly to protect the fetus on the assumption that all women of this age are always pregnant. The only way women in such situations have been able to keep their jobs is by submitting to sterilization. This must end.

WE DEMAND THAT ALL WORKPLACES BE MADE SAFE AND HEALTHY FOR ALL PEOPLE.

WE DEMAND A SAFE, HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT, FREE FROM ALL DANGEROUS POLLUTANTS.

Prostitution

The right to control our bodies includes the right of prostitutes to be free from harassment, prosecution, and discrimination.

For many women, our access to money, security, and safety is from the men we associate with. Our work is caring for and soothing the alienation of men from their work. Our work is often successful to the degree that we can subjugate our needs to the needs of the men we get money from. As long as we live in a society where men dominate women, where men have access to money and jobs, where we can have access largely through men, we will continue to earn our living as prostitutes.

Pornography is an industry run by the ruling class for its benefit. Although women who work in that industry are the most accessible people to confront, we need to keep in mind that they are workers and like all workers, do not control or have influence in the products it puts out. When protesting the violence pornography portrays against women, we need to target the power structure of the industry.

Among the fantasies men have of women, that we enjoy provoking or deserve rape and sexual harassment are the most dangerous. Since prostitutes make a living expressing the fantasies of men, the police and courts deny prostitutes the right to fight back against rape and sexual harassment. The police and courts enforce the fantasy by denying that all women have the right to walk about freely and to say no.

Prostitution is not a victimless crime. Women who earn their living as prostitutes are the victims of prostitution. Our job requires us to submit to men's fantasies and whims, work in unsafe neighborhoods without protection from the police or courts against attack, to pay protection money to pimps, and risk arrest for trying to earn a living. Legalizing prostitution would only make the state our pimp, who could dictate where we could work and how much we could charge.

WE DEMAND THE DECRIMINALIZATION OF PROSTITUTION.

The right to control our bodies includes the right to live in a society free from rape and the threat of rape.

As women, we live in a war zone, constantly under attack by the patriarchy and its agents. This war against us takes many forms—sexual harassment, violent pornography, threatening messages in popular culture, immobilizing clothing, and rape. All these are rooted in woman-hatred, an ideology which keeps women weak and terrified—non-threatening and dependent upon men for our protection.

The chief weapon of terror in this war is rape. Rapists are terrorists whose actions benefit primarily the ruling class, since that class receives primary benefit from the continued exploitation of women. However, all men benefit to some extent from rape, since all men benefit from male supremacy.

As long as women are dependent upon men and the patriarchy to protect us from other men, agents of the patriarchy, we are at a significant disadvantage. Especially since it is apparent that men as individuals and as a group, along with the ruling class, have a real interest in women remaining terrorized and weak.

The patriarchy has also used rape, or supposed rape, as a weapon against people of color. Women of color are not believed when they attempt to bring rape charges against white men. The patriarchy has also perpetuated the myth that the "average" rapist is a man of color. We do not believe that women lie when they bring rape charges against men of color (or other men). But we do believe that the state decides who will be believed and who will be prosecuted, based on an ideology that seeks to oppress some and not others.

All rape charges must be considered equal—be they brought by women of color, white women, prostitutes, wives, women who are acquainted with the rapist, or women who happened to be defying some traditionally held expectation at the time when they were raped.

Added to the threat of rape, we live in constant fear of horrible deaths merely for being female and in the wrong place at the wrong time. And since attacks on women happen everywhere—in our homes, on the streets, in parks, schools, workplaces—everywhere we happen to be is the wrong place; any time could be the wrong time. Constantly under siege, we spend our lives looking over our shoulders, locking doors, staying in at night—never feeling completely secure.

Rape is a crime of violence, not a "sex crime." It will never be ended under any economic system as long as patriarchy remains. Patriarchy requires that women be less free than men in order that male privilege be maintained.

Rape laws have historically been designed to protect women to the same extent that burglary laws are designed to protect property—not for the sake of the property, but for the sake of the "rights" of the owner—the man.

As long as the ideology of patriarchy exists, as long as men see women as inferiors and gain concrete benefits from our exploitation, rape will continue. To end rape, we must end patriarchy—nothing else will do it.

WE DEMAND THE RIGHT TO USE ANY MEANS NECESSARY TO TAKE THE RAPIST OUT OF OUR LIVES.

WE DEMAND THAT WOMEN BE PROVIDED, FROM THE EARLIEST YEARS, WITH PHYSICAL TRAINING, INCLUDING SELF-DEFENSE TRAINING.

Contraception

The right to control our bodies includes the right to free contraceptives that are safe and effective. Women are denied control of our bodies when as girls we are refused information about sex and birth control methods