Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 9

Grand Jury Abuse Continues

Bolstered by endorsements from over 50 organizations and individuals, including Local 6, Newspaper and Graphic Communications Union, itself a recent victim of grand jury abuse, the Campaign to Free Lureida Torres has launched a national drive to free the imprisoned woman, a member of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party (PSP).

Torres, a 26-year-old school teacher, has been imprisoned since June 24, 1976, for refusing to testify before a federal grand jury allegedly investigating several bombings attributed to the Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN).

"In reality, this grand jury is being used by the government to harass and intimidate the growing Puerto Rican independence movement, particularly the PSP," said a Campaign spokesperson. The Justice Department has used similar grand juries to attack many progressive groups struggling for change over the past year.

The goals of the national campaign are to free Lureida Torres and stop the attacks on the Puerto Rican independence movement. The group has launched a letter-writing and petition drive directed at U.S. Attorney General Edward Levi, demanding Torres' immediate release. The Campaign, which includes church, labor, Puerto Rican, women's, Black, Native American, gay, and anti-repression groups, will be calling for many demonstrations both in New York and around the country.

On August 12, a federal judge turned down a Grumbles Motion argued by Torres' lawyers, Jose A. Lugo and Martin Stolar. The motion stated that the Puerto Rican woman will never testify before the grand jury and therefore her continued incarceration is merely punitive. While the motion was being argued, over 75 supporters demonstrated outside the courthouse for the PSP member's freedom.

“We will continue to build massive demonstrations and resistance to this repression, until Lureida Torres is free and the government ends its attacks on the independence movement," added the Campaign spokesperson.

Despite the vicious attacks on her liberty and political beliefs, Torres remains firm in her decision. “I state now, as I have stated since I was first subpoenaed, that I will not testify before this grand jury and that no amount of jail will force me to change my mind," Torres stated in an affidavit filed August 12, with the court.

Another case of government abuse of the grand jury system has surfaced in the state of Washington.

A federal grand jury "fishing expedition" and a massive assault by government agents on the radical community in Seattle has resulted in the jailing of Michelle Whitnack, a local activist. To date, eleven people have been subpoenaed to the grand jury, four of whom are single mothers.

Under the guise of investigating the activities of the George Jackson Brigade, a group claiming responsibility for several bank robberies and bombings, the government has launched a vicious attack on this West Coast political community.

In early February, three people active in prisoner support struggles were called before the grand jury. On May 1, over 15 agents from the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) Division of the Treasury Department invaded a house of political activists. The people inside were held incommunicado while the house was being searched. The agents seized such “dangerous" objects as typewriters, alarm clocks, masking tape, and red felt-tipped pens. Also illegally seized were the financial and political records of the newly formed Committee to End Grand Jury Abuses. During the raid, two women were issued subpoenas.

Residents of the house later learned that the government had ordered special pick-ups of their garbage and had "reason to believe" that the radicals had issued several Brigade communiques. After examination of the seized items, the U.S. attorney announced that the government had been mistaken.

Michelle Whitnack was ordered before the grand jury on May 19 and refused to give the federal prosecutor a sample of her handwriting and fingerprints. She also filed a $25,000 suit against the government, charging it with illegal interception of her mail, illegal search of her home, and electronic surveillance.

In her affidavit, she stated that she found a note taped to her Post Office Box saying, "Do not put any mail in this box. Give it to M. Smith in the morning," the local postmaster warned against one.

So far, four single mothers have been subpoenaed to this grand jury. Single mothers are particularly vulnerable to this harassment as their children can be taken away if they are jailed for contempt.

Whitnack was jailed on July 20 by a federal judge, a move that shocked and surprised her friends and supporters. Laurie Raymond, a friend and Jill Raymond's sister, was so outraged that she tried to prevent a marshal from taking Whitnack from the courtroom. Raymond was subsequently charged with felonious assault on an officer.

Letters of support can be sent to Michelle Whitnack, c/o City Women's Jail, Public Safety Building, 3rd and James, Seattle, Washington 98104, and contributions can be sent to her lawyer - John Ziegler, 1712 Smith Tower, Seattle, Washington 98104.

For more information contact the Grand Jury Project, 853 Broadway, Room 1415, New York, New York 10003. (212) 533-2299.

Sharon & Linda Invite You To

TE DELDET
HAMMER

[formerly Ms. J’s]

feminist women’s bar