voices from our lives

We Remember Momma -- I Don't

Sue Goding and Bobbe Ross

Editor's Note: Following is Part 2 of
our Mother's Day article--Daughters
remember their mothers.

Maree Trice

My family was large and mad. Every
last one of us, crazy as Betsy bugs in
our own way. We were on welfare, she did
a lot of things under the table and wel-
fare wasn't enough and the court had
only demanded that daddy pay momma $20,
was it a week or a month, for our up-
keep and there was like 8 of us. $20,
even in those days it wasn't shit. So

oral herstories

she worked under the table in a policy
station, that's the numbers racket,
that's what the honkeys call it. You
know, the numbers racket, you go in, you
have a dream, you'd consult your dream
book, get the numbers down, you go play
the numbers, quarters, dollars, what-
ever and she was like behind a teller's
cage and she took the numbers down and
turned them in and she would get paid
for doing that. So she did that. She
also did a stint in politics, she was
working, it may have been on a volunteer
basis, I don't know, I was really young,
for a dude who was running for a judge-
ship, his name was Fred Wort, light-

skinned Black man. She took some kind of
course and became a medical assistant
for a doctor's office, didn't pay much
but everything was supplementary to the
welfare. Long about the time, oh, before
I was thirteen, but it really started
hitting me when I was about 13 or 14
years old that nothing was ever enough.
She used to talk to me in the dead of
night knowing that I had to get up

3 or 4 hours later and go to school and
get my sisters ready to go to school,
but she needed to talk to somebody. I
started realizing how hard it was for
her to make the ends meet. She would be
crying and kind of like blubbering, say-
ing, "I can't make it, I got all these
kids" and stuff like this. She worked
a lot of jobs to supplement welfare. Long
about that time too, I really started
knowing how sick she was getting. She
started with cancer in her uterus, that's
when they first told her that she either
had to have a hysterectomy or explora-
tory surgery or something. She wouldn't
really talk about it, she just referred
to something, "In case I have to go to
the hospital, Maree, this is what I want
you to do", and "Nita, this is what I
want you to do."

She is illegitimate, if you can be-
lieve that term, it's my belief and hers
that no child is illegitimate. She was
the first, oldest daughter of a man,
well, the only daughter, of the man

Page 18 ~ Big Mama Rag, June, 1981

that her mother had gotten with, and
married, his name was Leigh. She had 1 sis-
ter, 3 years younger, and a brother
Sammy, who was younger by 10 years, 7
years. She grew up in Virginia on a farm,
went to school when she wasn't working
the farm, her mother died when she was
about 10, and so she was raised by her
grandmother, and she took care of her
little sister and little brother, she
did farm chores, and went to school when
those things would allow it. She fin-
ished high school, under those conditions,
at age 15 with an offer of a scholarship
to Hampton Institute, but she didn't take
it, you know, she was young, ignorant
and she had had a kid by then. She had
a kid when she was thirteen. Now that's
not commonly known, and I don't know

how my mother would feel about that be-
ing known. She is still suffering about
that, she talks to me about it, I mean
that daughter is 32 years old now, and
she still talks to me about it with

a lot of pain in her voice, a lot of

hurt in her voice. Anyway she graduated,
and she had an offer to go to Hampton
Institute, but in those days, I mean
they didn't do it maliciously, but they
dissuaded her from doing that, because
that's like getting uppity; her grand-

mother, her folks. She was a fair skin-
ned Black woman, I'm brown, that's from my
daddy, she's high yellow with freckles

and a long thin nose, small lips. They
figured she'd have enough problems, I
guess, I'm making an assumption here,
that because she was light-skinned, her
hair was wavy, that she would have
enough problems that way. And if she
was a light-skinned Black woman and made it
big in education, forget it buddy,
about the rest of the people, dealing,
living, those things still happen.
That's the way she was, she was always
interested in books and botany. That
was very strange, but she lived on a
farm; see, to farm folks, grass and trees
and dirt was for growing, it was totally
useful, and she would see beauty in it.
I can send her a book about grass and
trees and birds and butterflies right
now and she'd get a lot of joy. Just
from the beauty of it.
She wrote. She wrote stories that she

kept in a little box under her bed that
I used to and mostly Deborah, my sister
3 years younger than me, because I was
real honorable when I was little, would
sneak in to see what secrets momma
had. And that's when Deborah found out
that momma had had that other child.
'Cause I didn't know about that, she
didn't tell me until I was over 16, but
Deborah had found out about it and she
was telling me and I was going nah, for-
get it buddy, momma didn't, but she'd
say yes she did. But she wrote, I mean
she was a writer, but she chose not to
do that.

I don't want you to be thinking that
my momma was a great woman, that she
was totally noble, she was abusive, es-
pecially to me, and I can pass it off
and explain it as saying, well she saw
a lot of herself in me, and therefore
she wanted me to stay on the right path
and this kind of stuff. But nobody will
ever know but her why she was so abu-
sive, more abusive to me than the rest
of my sisters and my little brother.

Dirt, concrete, broken glass. Grew up
in the city. I think she made a wrong
choice. I don't know what her problem
was, but she had too many kids too
young. She's only 47 now, she looks 67.
She believes in birth control, she has
mixed feelings about abortion, sometimes
we get into arguments, because she
thinks abortion is murder but she would
not hesitate one minute, one second, if
a daughter of hers got pregnant by a
"no-good Black man" and the daughter said,
"Momma, I don't want to have this", she
would not hesitate one second making
arrangements for an abortion, to get
rid of the kid and let her daughter be
free. So she has mixed feelings about
it. We had arguments, heavy-duty argu-
ments and then it happened and what does
she do, like a champ, went and made the
arrangements for my sister to get an
abortion. She didn't want to mess up my
sister's chances and my sister didn't
want the kid. So she made the arrange-
ments, because my sister didn't know
anything.

I don't think she could have done bet-
ter. I think she could have done worse.
My life with my mother was not easy, nor
good. I suffer from the abuse, I still
suffer. But she was young, younger than
me, by the time she was 25 she had 5
kids. I don't think I could stand up
under the strain she had to go through.
Now that's not by way of excusing my
mother's abuse, physical and emotional,
to me. It's not by way of excusing, it's
by way of understanding how a person
could do that to their own kid, it's not
by way of saying I like it, or I could
deal with it, or I'm saying it's cool,
no way.

I want to say that my mother did the
absolute best she could, under damn dif-
ficult circumstances, number one. Number
two, you got to realize everybody, you,

voices from our lives

think she could have done better.

Everybody's got to realize, mothers are
not just mothers, our vision is clouded
by saying "my mother", we have this
idealistic picture of what a mother is
to be, but a mother was also a young
girl, a mother is also a young woman, a
mother is also a human being and indivi-
dual. And when that individual's needs
are not met, it makes for strange behavior
to everyone, lovers, fathers, children,
so there are a lot of things I will not
understand, I never will understand,
about my mother's life, but she gave me
a lot of strength. I sometimes wish I
could go crazy and be absolved of all
responsibility. I know this is going to
sound weird, but I keep seeing and hear-
ing things, not that my mother said or
did, but how she would do it, how she
would say it, how she would be it. Lit-
tle things I still remember from my
childhood, "Maree, you can fall but you
don't have to wallow. Hold your head up,
girl, straighten up your shoulders. This
too will pass, Maree." Things like that.

Momma's damn near dying, she got so
many things wrong with her and I think
it's only will that keeps her alive. I'm
sure it's only will that keeps her alive.
Ornery, ornery woman, she will not die to
please nobody. And that's another thing
she used to say, "Hell no, I ain't going
to die, I ain't going to die, to please
too many people."

I always wondered why my mother treat-
ed me worse than my sisters. I couldn't
wait to get out of there, she hurt me
so bad and so much and so often. When
I left home, every time she called me
or contacted me it was to ask for money.
You know, she didn't make any apologies
for the abuse she had heaped on me until
1977. I will remember it to my dying
day. "Maree, I made a mistake and I'm
sorry." Well, I've already passed that.
It's not that I'm a good person and can
put all that shit aside, no, I'm hard
about it. I, to this day can't believe,
when she says that she cares, and that
she loves me. But she says it now,
since 1977. I think it's because she's
saying, that she's trying to clean it
up. When she says that, I like it, okay.
When she gives me support, in her voice
and what she says, a combination of ten-
derness and hardness, and I think to
myself, too little, too late, I've
lived too long without your love, momma.

Angela Greene

There were three of us, my two broth-
ers and I'm in the middle. Mom did the
whole housework, housewife bit while we
were growing up. Malcolm was 2 years
younger and Wayne was 2 years older.
When I was about 13, 14, I guess, some-
thing like that Mom decided to get her
teaching credentials, to go ahead get
her degrees and become an educator.

She had not been to college and this was
after having raised her kids, and stuck

it out. Daddy had done all the work and
he was the breadwinner, that's for sure.
Back when they got married he had to

lie about his family, he would have

lost his job (Angela's father is white,
her mother is Black). He belonged to

the Teamsters Union and they had all
those things, family outings, that we
could never go to. Yes, we could never go.
He would have lost his job and he had
been working with them 10 years, he
ended up getting laid off, but not be-
cause they found out.

But my Mom, she survived, she thought
for sure we were going to send her to
the nut house, raising 3 kids. She said,
"If you live through this I am going

Rachel Burger
to do something else" and since then she
is a reading specialist at Berkeley High

(Calif.) I would imagine after raising
three kids and going back to school it
was difficult but we were a tight family,
I would cook and we alternated with
cleaning up and stuff like that.

She got through her schooling with a
lot of determination to be a real good
teacher and that's what she is now, she
is an exceptional teacher. She has an
excellent rapport with the kids. She
teaches teenagers, yes, teenagers that
screwed up and don't know how to read.

She's the best one, the best teacher
they have there, other schools have lit-
erally tried to buy her off to work
for them for more money but she is sat-
isfied where she is. And they are union-
ized there, and she wouldn't do it any
other way, absolutely no other way. She
belongs to the co-op credit union, she
is a union person.

She went back to school around 1966
when the civil rights movement was ac-
tive and had support from everyone
around her. I don't think it was too
unusual for a Black woman to be going
to college then, not at Berkeley.

She was active in the Civil Rights
movement, oh good lord, she was in all
of them, she went to the marches, the
sit-ins, everything--singing louder

than anyone. We used to kid her, "Do you

have to sing so loud?"

My Mom comes from a family of 15 chil-
dren. She was born in California,
raised in Berkeley. Her parents were
from New Orleans and Grandpa and Mama
Johnson (mother's mother) also came
from New Orleans with nothing. My Mom
was the only one in her family that
broke loose, O.K., like she took off,
she just had enough of everything, she
took off and did a little traveling and
worked on her own as opposed to the
rest of them just staying around and
having babies. My grandmother had 7
kids and her half-sister, Lou, was
having babies at the same time, she had
7. My Mom was the oldest girl. It was
depression times and they were sleeping
in drawers. When they came to California
they had nothing and now they have a
family, you can't go home without run-
ning into so much family.

Something real sad happened and I just
thought about it. My grandma hadn't seen
her brother in 40 years and he was in
Chicago. This was probably 20 years ago,
they had called the newspaper and this
was going to be a human interest story,
a reunion after that many years but then
the newspaper came and they found out
they were Black people and they wouldn't
even do it.

Raising the three of us just wasn't
enough. When she went to work I was not
upset about it, I thought, even way
back then, "more power to her", I
thought it was great, I thought it was
really independent.

She taught mentally retarded children
one year and couldn't do it any more.
That was intense. She has gone beyond
just teaching and she is also a travel
agent. She had to drop that (teaching)
since my father had a stroke, you know
she couldn't do that now the expenses
are going back up again and it looks
like she has to work two jobs, but it is
just that she is, my mom is--I don't
know what planet she comes from--she
has this endless energy and strength and
stamina to maintain whenever people are
falling totally apart. She is heart, she
is there, she is right there. When her
father and Lou died she had to maintain
her sisters from losing their minds and
she won't fall apart. She's got an ul-

I tried to tell her when I was home
this time, "...slack off, don't worry
about your daughter so much, I'm really
stronger than you give me credit for and
don't let that be part of your daily
concerns, that I am all right and don't
worry about me." She just says, "I have
to worry about all of you and just keep
things together." When I was home she
wept for the first time.

She has said, "Well, I guess that's
what they call a strong person and I
guess that's what I am and how people
see me. I don't mean to come on strong
that I set people back, you know."

Big Mama Rag, June, 1981 ~ Page 19