14

groups-projects °

BEL HORIZONTE, BRAZIL, is the loca~
tion of a new women's group which
plans to investigate the situation of
women with respect to violence, fam-
ily, discrimination, and health
throughout Brazil. Two women were mur-
dered publicly by their husbands in
this city last August. Killed for re-
questing permission to study, work or
be divorced, the two women are only
the most recent victims in a continu-
ing series of murders of wives by hus-
bands. Trials of other, similar mur-
derers have resulted in acquittal by
all-male juries and judges, and the
women fear that trials of these two
husbands will have similar outcomes.
(Women in Brazil are not allowed to
serve on juries and may not leave
their homes at all without their hus-
bands' permission.) Please write let-
ters of support to the group at the
address below. The group has been rid-
iculed by the Brazilian press and
seeks legitimization through state-
ments of progressive groups and indi-
viduals throughout the world. Their
address is: Centro dos Direitos da
Mulher (Center for the Rights of
Women), Av. Álvares Cabral 400,
30.000 Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

The CALIFORNIA WOMEN OF COLOR
AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE is a new
organization formed by a contingent
of women of color at a California
statewide shelters meeting. The goals
of the group include: creating a for-
um for women of color to share needs,
expertise and experience; helping al-
leviate the isolation of working in
programs that have predominantly
white, middle-class staff; developing
culturally relevant services and re-
cruiting bi-lingual, bi-cultural
staff to reflect our communities.

For more information contact: Janice,
Clemmy or Renee, Haven House, PO Box
2007, Pasadena, CA 91105, or Rosa or
Lillian, Mariposa House, PO Box 275,
Santa Cruz, CA 95076.

The NATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH NETWORK
currently is working with several
groups and individuals to coordinate
the production of a sterilization
abuse monitoring manual. Participants
in the project all have a long-stand-
ing interest in the problem of steril-
ization abuse, and some have develop-
ed concrete strategies for fighting
against the problem. The manual will
be designed for US groups who wish to
investigate and, hopefully, eliminate
whatever incidence of sterilization
abuse exists in their communities. If
your center or group would be inter-
ested in starting a sterilization a-
buse monitoring project in your area
or if you already have experience
with investigating/opposing steriliza-
tion abuse, please let the Network
know. Contact Elayne Clift, NWHN, 224
Seventh St. S.E., Washington DC 20003
(202) 543-9222. A copy of the monitor-
ing manual can be sent to you when
completed (early 1981). Of course,
your feedback would be appreciated.

"Queer" and “lezzie" are slurs
heard daily now in most high schools.
Teachers who want to give factual in-
formation about lesbian and gay life-
styles need teaching ideas. The Edu-
cation Exploration Project is solic-
iting articles and lesson plans for
an anthology tentatively titled
TEACHING AND LEARNING ABOUT LESBIANS
AND GAYS. We want articles on how to
bring up lesbian and gay issues in
any class in high schools or elemen-
tary schools. How do you turn a
"queer joke" into a constructive dis-
cussion? How can you use gay themes
in pop music or media to start class
discussions? If you are interested
in writing an article or lesson plan
or have information for us, write
Polly Kellogg, Education Exploration
Center, PO Box 7339, Minneapolis, MN
55407. (612) 722-5705. Please contact
by December 15th.

publications

Proceedings of the FIRST FEMINIST
FAT ACTIVISTS' WORKING MEETING, held
April 1980 in New Haven, CT, is now
available for $3.50 from: Fat Livera-
tor Publications, Box 7232, Minneapo-
lis, MN 55407. The report was prepar-
ed by Judith Stein and illustrated by
Berly-Elise Hoffstein.

resources

A booklet on the CERVICAL CAP,
which will include a list of cap pro-
viders in the US, soon will be avail-
able from the Cervical Cap Team, Emma
Goldman Clinic for Women, 715 N.
Dodge, Iowa City, IA 52240. Write for
details.

INTERNATIONAL WOMEN AND HEALTH RE-
SOURCE GUIDE, a joint project of the
Boston Women's Health Book Collective
and ISIS, represents four years of
information gathering from sources
all over the world. Annotations for
both literature and groups appear in
English and usually in one other lan-
guage where applicable. This prelim-
inary edition is 177 pages. Feedback
and additions are welcome. Single
copies of the Guide are available for
US/$5.00 (surface mail) or US/$8.00
(air mail) from the BWHBC, Box 192,
West Somerville, MA 02144.

THE NEW DANN (Determined Action for
Women Now) is published monthly by
prisoners at Huron Valley Women's
Facility in Michigan. In a recent is-
sue they announced that DAWN is now
available on a subscription basis to
the general public and to women in
other prisons. Subscriptions are $4
for six months or $7.50 for a year.
Send to: DAWN, PO Box 910, 3511 Bemis
Road, Ypsilanti, MI 48197.

A new prison newsletter is being
created by and for the women locked
up in Muncy, Pennsylvania. This news-
letter is urgently needed but funds,
of course, are low. To send donations
or to receive a copy of the newslet-
ter, write: Evalina Everlidge, 1508
Gallatin St, NW, Washington, DC
20011.

EVERYWOMAN'S ALMANAC 1981 from Can-
ada. The Women's Press focuses on
friendship this year. “Sister friend-
ship is explored, as are friendships
that have developed in the workplace
and through crises...in lively and
entertaining format. The weekly two-
page spreads illustrated by original
photographs, cartoons and drawings...
that also provide worthwhile reading.
A day calendar and address book with
plenty of note space and timely in-
formation. Pocket-size.” $5.95 from
The Women's Press, 280 Bloor St. West
#313, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1W1 Canada.

WOMEN IN MARTIAL ARTS 1981 CALEN-
DAR is a unique collector's item
featuring women's active participa-
tion in martial arts. Exciting action
photos of women nationwide. Proceeds
benefit Women In Martial Arts organ-
ization. $6 each includes postage
and handling. Send check or money or-
der payable to WIMA to: Women in
Martial Arts, 12538 Venice Blvd. #5,
Los Angeles, CA 90066.

LONG ISLAND CHILDBIRTH ALTERNATIVES
QUARTERLY is a 16-page, illustrated
quarterly newsletter devoted to ex-
ploring and providing information on
home birth, natural childbirth, mid-
wifery, and issues in maternal and
child health. Each issue includes or-
iginal feature articles, reprints, a
personal birth story, regular depart-
ments and selected advertisements. A
one-year subscription costs $5.00 and
includes membership in LICA. Back
issues and sample copies are avail-
able for 50¢. Send to LICA, Box 17,
Shoreham, NY 11786.

films

PERIOD PIECE...OF WOMEN'S HISTORY,
is a personal look at menstruation in
a 10-minute, 16mm color film. The
film explores attitudes towards men-
struation with photographs, drawings
and interviews with four women and
one man. The interviews begin with a
reading from the autobiography of a
Winnebago Indian woman, who was sent
out, as tradition demanded, to spend
her period in the woods alone. This
is accompanied by contemporary ads
which assure women that, through
technology, they too can isolate
themselves and "no one will know."
Also included is a scene of a woman
doing a self-exam for the first time.
Basic film rental fee: $50 (negoti-
able). To order PERIOD PIECE, contact
Emily Culpepper, 3726 Lake Shore Ave,
Oakland, CA 94610.

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF ROSIE THE
RIVETER, a film three years in the
making, is now completed. "The story
is told by five former 'Rosies' who
movingly recall their histories as
welders, riveters, shipfitters, and
ammunition specialists," the filmmakers
say. "Their testimony is interwoven
with rare archival recruitment films,
posters, ads, and music from the per-
iod which contrast the reality of
their experiences with the popular
legend and myth of Rosie the Riveter.
Like millions of women who went to
work with her, she was devastated at
war's end when women were laid off in
massive numbers and forced to return
to low-paid ‘women's' work." For in-
formation, rental and sales prices,
contact Clarity Educational Produc-
tions, 5915 Hollis St., Emeryville,
CA 94608. (415) 655-7150.

(A scene from the film is pictured
below.)

-From the film "The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter"

OUR LIVES ON THE LINE, a videotape
on black women and their feelings
about abortion is available free,
(pay postage only), from Linda DeRoc-
co and Fay Moore, c/o Urban Planning
Aide, 120 Boylston St. Boston, MA.
Copies are available for the cost of
the tape.

culture

SWEET SORCERY is the first album of
Betsy Rose and Cathy Winter, and is
produced on their own label. The all-
woman production includes many of the
arrangements for which Rose and Win-
ter have earned a solid musical rep-
utation. The contents of their music
reveal many facets of women's lives
and struggles, and their musical art-
iculation is both superb and acces-
sible. Retail and wholesale distribu-
tion by Galaxia Women Enterprises,
Box 212, Woburn, MA 01801.

The BAY AREA CONGRESS ON WOMEN IN
MUSIC, a San Francisco area music
association, has announced it will
hold a two-day national conference on
women in music next January, at San
Francisco State University. The con-
ference will feature women composers,
performers, scholars and music educa-
tors. Conference organizers are sol-
iciting new music scores and outlines
for lectures, recitals and workshops,
to be presented at next year's meet-
ing.

DIASPORA DISTRIBUTION - A DYKE AL-
TERNATIVE is a new lesbian distribu-
tion and publishing company. It has
been formed to distribute the works
of lesbians to lesbians. Diaspora's
first offering is They Will Know Me
By My Teeth, stories and poems of
lesbian struggle, celebration and sur-
vival, by Elana Dykewoman. $4.50 in-
cluding postage, from PO Box 272,
Langlois, OR 97450. Elana Dykewoman's
forthcoming book of love poems,
Fragments from Lesbos, will be avail-
able to lesbians only in the summer
of 1981. Please write to them for
more information, bookstore rates,
comments, or with ideas.

Big Mama Rag - Vol. 8 No. 11

The One Act Theatre Company of San
Francisco has announced the Mortimer
Fleishhacker Playwrighting Contest
for BEST NEW ONE ACT PLAYS BY WOMEN.
Plays submitted must be in the one
act form (no longer than 60 minutes),
written by a woman in the US, typed,
bound with a folder with the author's
name, address and telephone number on
the title page, and accompanied by a
self-addressed stamped envelope.
Plays written for children, musicals,
adaptations, translations, or plays
that have been previously produced
or published are not acceptable. Five
plays will receive cash prizes from
$100 - $500. The winning plays will
receive full productions. Awards will
be announced in June 1981. Send manu-
scripts to One Act Theatre Company,
One Acts by Women Contest, 430 Mason
St., San Francisco, CA 94102. Manu-
scripts must be postmarked no later
than January 31, 1981.

conferences

The Committee for the Visibility of
the Other Black Woman has announced
the postponement of their conference
originally scheduled for October 10-
12, BECOMING VISIBLE--SURVIVAL FOR
BLACK LESBIANS will now be held
January 16-18 at P.S. 136 in Harlem
at 6 Edgecomb Avenue, which is the
intersection of Edgecomb and 136th
Street. The conference is open to
all women--of color or white, les-
bian or straight. It will include
discussion groups, seminars, and
workshops on a number of issues, as
well as performances, art exhibits,
and commercial exhibits of products
“oriented towards women's needs." If
you are interested in performing, ex-
hibiting, speaking, or leading a
workshop, would like to make a dona-
tion, or want more information,
write The Committee for the Visibil-
ity of the Other Black Woman, c/o
Georgia M. Brooks, P.O. Box M564,
Hoboken, N.J. 07030. Or call Georgia
Brooks at (201) 795-1794, Luvenia
Pinson at (212) 982-6290, or Leanne
Gray at (212) 860-4936.

actions

Citing a need to recapture the mil-
itant roots of the woman suffrage
drive, active feminists have formed
the CONGRESSIONAL UNION to work for
the ratification of the Equal Rights
Amendment and other feminist issues.
The Congressional Union will utilize
many civil disobedience tactics prac-
ticed by the suffragists. These in-
clude picketing, election campaigns
to defeat the political party in pow-
er, and public questioning/heckling
of elected officials. The first major
activity of the Congressional Union
will be a stately and silent banner-
carrying procession of ERA supporters
marching around the White House on
January 19, 1981, the eve of the
President's inauguration. Anyone
wishing further information on the
programs and activities of the Cong-
ressional Union can write to the
group at PO Box 173, Bronxville, NY
10708.