Report On National People’s Moratorium

Susanna Smith

(I am a white lesbian feminist, member of a support group for El Comite de Colorado, a Chicano organization against repression.)

I attended the National People's Moratorium against Police/I.N.S./B.I.A. Crimes and Grand Jury/F.B.I. Repression on September 7, 8, 9 in New York City. The main objective of this moratorium was to develop unity among Third World Peoples and to denounce nationally and internationally the role played by the police, Immigration and Naturalization Service (I.N.S.) and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (B.I.A.) in Third World communities, as armies of occupation. Another objective of the moratorium was to discuss the role of the Trilateral Commission, composed of representatives from the U.S., Western Europe, Japan and Canada, (see box), and to develop a strategy for combating its plans.

The moratorium began with a people's tribunal on Friday night and continued Saturday morning. Persons from different parts of the U.S. told of murders or beatings/harassment of themselves and people from their communities. Chuck Espinoza spoke about the killings of his brother Artie and James Hinojos by Denver police. Marco Martinez spoke about the murder, also by Denver police, of his brother, Luis.

The tribunal was an emotionally charged event, causing both intense sadness for the loss of those murdered and anger at their killers.

In the afternoon we broke up into small groups to discuss the strategy of the Trilateral Commission and how it is used against Third World People in this country, and what strategy to use against it. The facilitators of my workshop were a Puerto Rican woman from Chicago (Marty) and a Latino man (I don't know whether he is Chicano or Puerto Rican). The man spoke first about how U.S. imperialism is the common enemy of Third World Peoples. He stated that Marxist/Leninism is the common theory that will guide oppressed nations.

Marty spoke about the Trilateral Commission, an aim of which is to come up with treaties among the major industrial countries to avert war between them, which could only be detrimental to the continuation of imperialism. The Trilateral Commission is also pushing the upper class in Third World countries to extract resources for the imperialist countries, since they can't really go in militarily and take the resources.

Marty also talked about Puerto Rico and the independence movement. The U.S. is trying to isolate and invalidate those who are fighting for independence in Puerto Rico through the use of torture and an I.D. card system, among other things.

Few people talked in our group - the only woman who talked was Marty. I was frustrated with what I felt was a lack of focus, but as an Anglo, I was unsure of how I should give input, or whether I should at all, so I didn't say anything, along with a lot of other people. I was also angry at the male style and dominance of discussion. I belatedly criticize myself for not saying anything about either of those issues.

The conclusion of the group was that repression affects all Third World Peoples, so a common strategy must be developed. There must be more communication - feeding of information - among Third World groups.

Saturday night was the cultural event, one of the highlights of the moratorium for me. Theater was presented depicting colonialist tactics to keep Third World people down. One skit showed the bosses making a Puerto Rican act like a dog (literally) to get - and keep - a job. This eventually destroyed his self-image, his life and the life of his family. It is a direct analogy to what most Third World people and women go through to get a job. Unfortunately, the only woman portrayed was the worker's wife, whose role was to comfort him and stay home to take care of the kids and do housework.

Other theater was presented by members of two Puerto Rican high school drama groups, one from an alternative high school in Chicago run by the Movement for National Liberation (of Puerto Rico). They put on skits about drugs among youth and landlord/tenant relations. It was great to see revolutionary consciousness among high school people.

Marty, the Puerto Rican woman from Chicago, sang political songs, most of which had to be translated for me, as they were in Spanish. Her strong voice carried the message of liberation loud and clear.

The cultural event ended with some fine bongo drumming by several men from different cultural backgrounds.

On Sunday was a plenary session to discuss the outcome of the tribunal and the group discussions (workshops). I missed this because I was doing childcare, but I obtained a report of the events. Most of the workshops came to the same conclusion as ours did - establish a national network of communication and support between Third World groups around police crimes, start a newsletter and have a center for compiling documents of police crimes.

The people's tribunal indicted all police named in the harassment and murders of Third World People. They also composed a letter to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights stating this, which will accompany documentation of crimes against Third World people.

Later there was the march and rally at the United Nations. The march started with about 300 - 400 people, with the ranks swelling as we marched through the predominantly Puerto Rican section of the lower east side, chanting, “El pueblo unido, jamás será vencido." (The people united, will never be defeated). We marched past Bellevue Hospital, from which William Morales, a Puerto Rican freedom fighter, recently escaped.

Our numbers diminished as we left the Puerto Rican neighborhood and continued through mid-town Manhattan, toward the U.N. The rally there was spirited, with speakers from Puerto Rico, Mexico and different parts of the U.S., urging unity and strength for the difficult struggle for the independence of Puerto Rico and self-determination for all Third World Peoples.

On Monday, September 19th, a delegation was to present to the Commission on Human Rights at the U.N. five years of documentation of the killings of Third World People by law enforcement agents.

The focus of this moratorium on national unity of Third World Peoples is another step toward the downfall of imperialism. The majority of people there were Chicano/Mexicano and Puerto Rican, with some black groups and white support groups represented. I saw no Native people, but there were letters of support from Native American individuals and groups.

This moratorium was highly energizing for me. I see so many factions within movements - the women’s movement, the Chicano movement, the black movement - that to see a coming together of people of such diversity, and a giving of support for each other's struggles, is really motivating. Lines of communication were set up, contacts made, a network developed. Most of the emphasis of the moratorium was placed on Chicano/Mexicano and Puerto Rican struggles, because those peoples had the largest representation there, and seemed to have done most of the organizing. I would have liked to have seen more integration of the black struggle into the events of the weekend, and also Native American representation.

Most of the people at the moratorium seemed to have come from out of town, a majority of those from Chicago. Many people from New York were from white support groups. A reason for this is because Julio Rosado, the main contact person and organizer in New York, along with Maria Cueto, another key person, was hit by a car (under suspicious circumstances) and was (and is) in traction for several months and could do no work. A criticism I have of the white support groups from New York is that they did not do more of the logistical organizing of the weekend - childcare, cooking, cleaning, etc. was done by the Third World groups, who should have had their time free to attend all the events.

My major criticism of the moratorium was the lack of any overt feminist consciousness. There was no mention of the women's movement, much less aligning with it. Colonialism, racism and classism were discussed extensively - I never heard sexism discussed by anyone but us white feminists there.

Some very strong women were obvious leaders at the moratorium and in the political movements of which they were a part. A real effort was made by the organizers to have equal participation by both women and men in the moratorium. It was empowering to hear some strong women speak assertively and articulately.

On the other hand, spiked heels and "fashionable" clothes were in evidence, as was a Penthouse magazine on one of the buses on the trip out to New York.

Men's style dominated the moratorium - they did most of the major speaking and in my workshop, dominated the discussion. They were also the only ones using the gymnasium in the building, except for the children using half of it at times.

My thoughts about this are that progressive men, both Third World and white, realize the major changes they would have to go through if they were to develop a feminist analysis. They are not going to give up male privilege unless absolutely forced to or unless they can see how it's in their self-interest to work for the total liberation of all people.

White women have had enough privilege, as compared with most Third World women, that some of us have been able to develop a feminist analysis and movement to the point where we demand a women's revolution as an essential, integral part of a socialist revolution, as has not happened in Cuba, China or any other socialist revolution so far. As I understand, for most Third World women the primary struggle is for their peoples as a whole, and they are not going to "split the movement" by forcing a radical feminist consciousness and analysis into the work. The fact that so few Third World women have joined the women's movement is testimony to how racist we are and how much we need to be aware of and work on our racism and white privilege.

Each movement (Third World and women's) is working on what is seen as their (our) "primary" struggle. To make a revolution, connections and alignments will eventually have to be made. We need to educate ourselves and each other about our respective politics, goals, strategies and also our racism and sexism.

NO HAY LIBERACION SIN LA MUJER SIN REVOLUCION

NO HAY REVOLUCION SIN LIBERACION DE LA MUJER.