a

10

Scraps From Mama’s Table

Chocolate Waters

The "Aunty" Award of the Month - Goes to Susan Rennie, an editor along with
Kirsten Grimstaad of the “New Woman's Survival Catalogue," for getting
slammed by the “Fifty Thousand-Dollar Grand Slam:" Susan, who appeared on
the popular TV quiz show in November, had successfully out-answered five
other competitors before stumbling. (I thought I heard Kirsten screaming
from the audience, but I can't be sure because I was too busy screaming my-
self.) Rennie, however, must be congratulated for an ingenious attempt to
squeeze money out of the patriarchy. She did win a new car as a consolation
prize, and anyone who wants to send Susan some consolation money to help pay
the taxes on the car should make all checks payable to me. (I will make a
concentrated effort to ensure that she doesn't get that money either.)

Women's Liberation a "Crock". - So says Karen Nelson, a professional truck
driver from Golden, Colorado, who has been making hauls for the last five
years and has driven everything from Internationals to Mack trucks. "All
that bra-burnin' stuff and stompin' around is for the birds. I like being
a woman and having doors opened for me." (Country Style, December ‘76)
Interesting that a woman who can drive a semi can't open a door.

Is This What We Have to Look Forward To? - Criswell is a psychic newspaper
man who had formerly been a mortician. He says his predictions are 86% accu-
rate though this is as hard to believe as his predictions. Here are some
things in store for us: From November 28 to December 1980, Pennsylvania will
be afflicted by an outbreak of cannibalism caused by an experiment that goes
awry... Between February 1 and May 11, 1983, all the women in St. Louis
will lose their hair. It will grow back only after a period of panic which
will produce divorces, murders, lawsuits, suicides, and massacres, mainly of
hairdressers... In 1985, a Caucasian woman, called Lady of Light, will be-
come leader, first of the Orient, then of the world. Under her leadership,
men will become slaves and women will hold power. War will end; the world
will become a near Paradise. Her end will come after she is raped in Africa,
then dies in childbirth... On June 9, 1989, Denver will be wiped out by a
"pressure" from outer space, which will turn solids to a jelly-like mass.
(The People's Almanac, David Wallechinsky and Irving Wallace, pp. 3-4)... I
only just write it down, folks.

Husband's Job - According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
almost half of intact, wife-husband families now include two
workers. In an average job, between one third and one half of a husband's
earnings may be eaten up by job-generated costs. For instance, taxes in-
crease since the husband's extra income may push the couple into a higher
tax bracket. Transportation goes up since the husband will be driving too.
Food costs and child care expenses get higher because the husband will not
be able to provide the services that a househusband usually supplies. Cloth-
ing costs for a working man, according to a government survey, are double
those of the man who usually stays at home. These figures, however, make no
allowance for the satisfactions a man achieves through working; and after
all, even only half of the second salary a man could provide still fattens
the family's coffers. (A take-off on an item from Skeptic, Nov/Dec '76 en-
titled "Does a Wife's Job Pay Off?")

P.S. - Many of us in the women's community have what we term primary commit-
ments - someone we're most involved with, and secondary commitments - other
people we're involved with but to a lesser degree. A friend of mine, puzzled
by differences between the two kinds of relationships, has come up with the
following enlightening definition: "If your primary commitment is just about
to be run over by an oncoming car, you unhesitatingly throw yourself in
front of the car in order to save her. If, however, your secondary commit-
ment is in the same situation, you hover loudly in the hope that she will
be able to jump out of the way in time.

WOMAN
Woman

feminist bookcenter
2023 E. Colfax Mon-Sat 10-8

Lots of new books, and, of course, books for children

Some things You May Can Do

&

Brunchiness

By Yours Truly

OPEN HOUSE
Dec. 18 10-6

REFRESHMENTS

= CONVERSATION

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 12

Kentucky Women Fight
Growing Klan Influence

Following is an LVS interview with
two women who played a crucial role
in the year-long strike at the Brook-
side mine in Harlan County, Kentucky.
The strike began in 1973 when the
miners voted in the United Mine Wor-
kers union but the company would not
recognize it. Finally, the Eastover
Mining Company, a subsidiary of Duke
Power Company, was forced by the
strike to sign a contract with the
UMW in 1974.

The women came to New York City in
October for the premier showing of
"Harlan County, USA." The film de-
tails the struggle between the com-
pany - aided by local officials and
scab workers - and the miners and
their families.

Bessie Lou Cornet and her mother,
Lois Scott, the daughter of a union
organizer in the days of "Bloody
Harlan" of the 1930s, here discuss
the changes in the repressive tac-
tics of the coal operators and how
local officials condone the recent
growth of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) in
the county. And they describe how
the miners and the Harlan community,
organized during the strike, are
continuing to fight back.

LOIS: The miners and their wives
began to put out the Harlan Labor
News during the strike to speak for the
miners' people. When we decided to
start the paper there were eight of us.

LNS: Can you talk about what's been
happening since the strike?

BESSIE: During the strike the gov-
ernor was able to send in all his
troops in a real legitimate way. But
now that the strike is over there's
so much open, direct confrontation
between the mine owners and mining
families and the rest of the com-
munity in general. So in order to
take action against individuals, they
can't do it with their legal face.
They need this extralegal organiza-
tion, the KKK.

The same people that were used by
coal operators during the strike
are now in the Ku Klux Klan.

LNS: Has the Klan stepped up its
activities in Harlan?

BESSIE: There have been so many inci-
dents. There are two women run out of
Harlan County now. Their house was
burned down by the Klan.

BESSIE: Both women supported the
Brookside Women’s Club, supported the
strike.

At one point the Klan came and
burned a cross in front of their home
and said, "We don't want any nigger-
mixing going on." Then the Klan
fired a hundred rounds of ammunition
into their house - just last winter.

The family went to the sheriff and

LOIS: he said, "I don't see a crime being
committed." He condoned what the
Klan did.

And then they had the home econ-
omics class making hoods and robes.
And this black woman was sitting
there making those hoods and robes
and she asked her home ec teacher,
"What are those for?" And the
teacher said, "For the Masons," or
for some men's organization. And
she said, "No, these look like Klan
hoods and robes to me." She refused
to make them. She came to the Labor
News and told us what they were
doing.

LNS: Why had the Klan been able to
get away with all of this?

LOIS: These people are poor,
and the only feeling that they can
get of superiority is feeling super-
ior to blacks. They can't feel sup-
erior to the coal operators who've
got all the money.

BESSIE: But they wouldn't be able
to make a white miner believe that
he's superior without those advan-
tages that the coal operators give to
the white miners. A white miner can
get a job; the first people to get
fired anywhere are blacks, and
they're last to get hired.

LOIS: And what they're trying to do
now is to replace the police in Har-
lan County with Klansmen. They're
getting them in through each town,
side of the story - the union
in Everts and Benham. The next
place I imagine they'll try will be
Cumberland.

Mike Anderson and Kenneth
Castille, they were working as
deputies in Benham and they were
real proud that they were Klansmen.
I went in to ask the sheriff to
fire them. But they're still there.
They're working out of the deputy's
office, wearing deputies' uniforms,
riding in deputies' cars.

LNS: Who's helping these people
get into the police department?

LOIS: The main ones are the
officials right there in the
Harlan County Courthouse and the
coal operators. There are a lot
of connections between the Harlan
County coal operators and the
Klan, like when the Klan had a
rally in Harlan, they held it in
a field owned by coal operators.

LNS: Has there been any organizing
against the Klan during and after
the strike?

LOIS: Yes, especially because of
the paper (the Harlan Labor News).
When the Klan started organizing,
the paper began to print articles
against the Klan, showing how we've
always fought together, stood on
picket lines together, and we did
not want the Klan in Harlan County.
And we wrote how the Klan was used
to bust unions before.

BESSIE: We began to expose the
blacklist, and expose the fact that
we had a union miner killed and
the scab miner - the gun thug that
killed him - got off scott free. We
fingered every person on the grand
jury that let this murderer go.

LNS: Why did you first become in-
volved in organizing at Brookside?

LOIS: The Brookside strike gave me
the opportunity to show the feel-
ings, I guess you'd call it the
hatred, I feel for the coal opera-
tor - for what he had done to my
father and to my brother and the
family.

My father was a union organizer;
this was in the thirties. We lived
in a coal camp and whenever they'd
come in, they'd kick the door open
and shine the flashlights in our
eyes. They made us get out of bed
while they raised the mattresses and
started looking for union literature.

It's like a war between the coal
miner and the operator because the
Harlan County Coal Association has
fought UMW harder than any other coal
association in the United States.

LNS: It's been said that the women's
participation marked the turning
point in winning the Brookside strike.
What was the role of women and how
were you affected by the strike?

BESSIE: The women really had to
force their way into participation in
the strike - it was a struggle.

But when the court said only six
men on the picket lines, the men's
hands were tied. And they were get-
ting defeated - scabs were crossing.
So we said, well, we’re not under a
court injunction, and we went down
there.

They would at times try to force
the women off the picket lines.
Women's husbands tried to keep them
home. My husband said, “You can't
go." He even beat me or locked the
doors. He said a woman's role was
in the home, cooking and cleaning and
so on. And there was a lot of jeal-
ousy. If you were exposed to a lot

More on page 14