Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.5

BMR On Compromise and Commitment

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15

Judy: I see a real problem with us all wanting something different. It's very difficult to compromise on issues that are so emotional. Most of what we are working for is from such a gut level reaction. Compromise is really difficult and I see that as a real split in the women's community. Women who wrote for this issue attribute their change in perspective to turning 30, meaning they got serious about jobs and money became more important to them.

Sue: As they were reaching 30, the whole economy of the United States was changing, and everyone was affected by that change. It's wrong to look at it as a personal question of getting older; the economy has affected everyone.

Vicki: I see a conflict between women who no longer get any kind of rewards from the system and those who still get some kind of sustenance. The work at my straight job is not what I define as my “work," but that it is a tool that enables me to do my real political work.

Judy: Even if you are at the stage where you define yourself in terms of your political activities instead of your job, the realities of money can tip the scale to the side of the job instead of toward political work. When you are down to your last meal and your politics aren't putting food on the table it's really frightening. It's easy, but a cop-out, to fall right into the system that guarantees you food at the expense of what you believe in. It really frightens me that women have made compromise after compromise till their politics are no longer recognizable.

Women who have become system-oriented can lobby for the ERA or the Commission on Women and still maintain their jobs. But to go out and march openly as a lesbian, or to risk getting arrested is touchy. When I got arrested, I wasn't working. But after I got my job, and really felt like I needed that job and we were talking about another action, I said immediately, "I'm not going to do it, I'm not going to lose my job" when, in fact, the action meant a lot.

Vicki: I see that I've been compromised in that my job limits my freedom. Before, when I worked nothing but shit jobs, I didn't have much to lose; there was always another shit job around the corner. My political mobility, as far as not showing up for work means getting fired, has been curtailed.

What Price Peace?  
Combatting Liberalism

Peg Hickox

The term "liberal" has been frequently used in the radical feminist movement as the ultimate putdown. Unfortunately, it has so often been misused by the “more radical than thou” group (another form of liberalism) that many of us are unclear as to just what "liberalism" is. Liberalism stands for peace at all costs, even when that "peace" is at the expense of feminist goals.

Liberalism manifests itself in many ways:

Letting things slide for the sake of peace and friendship when a woman has clearly gone wrong, refraining from honest argument of the principles involved because she is an old friend, a lover, or works in the same collective. Or to touch on the matter lightly instead of going into it thoroughly so that you can keep on good terms. The result is that both the movement and the individual woman are harmed.

Indulging in irresponsible criticism in private instead of actively putting your suggestions to your organization. To say nothing to people to their faces but to gossip behind their backs, or to say nothing at a meeting but to gossip afterwards. To show no regard for the principles of collective life, but to follow your own inclination.

Letting things drift if they do not affect you personally, saying as little as possible while knowing perfectly well what is wrong, playing cool and playing safe, to avoid blame.

Refusing to carry out a collective decision or assigned job because you aren't sure it's that important. Demanding special consideration from your collective, but rejecting its discipline.

Indulging in personal attacks, picking quarrels, being personally spiteful or vengeful instead of entering into an argument against unsound political views.

Hearing anti-feminist views without rebutting them, but taking them calmly as if nothing had happened. Failing to express your feminist viewpoints when you are with people outside the feminist community (at work, at a party, in the bars) or failing to encourage these women to a feminist perspective, instead behaving indifferently to such women, showing no concern for their well-being, forgetting you are a feminist and behaving like an ordinary non-feminist.

Seeing someone harming the interests of women and yet not feeling indignation, not dissuading them, stopping them or reasoning with them, but allowing them to continue.

Working half-heartedly without a definite plan or direction; working mechanically and muddling along. Choosing those tasks which can be most easily performed and performing them in a non-thinking manner, not thinking about whether this is the most effective thing you can be doing in the movement.

Regarding yourself as having done your part in the movement, priding yourself on being an old-time feminist, disdaining minor jobs even if you are not equal to major jobs; being careless in your work, failing to keep up with recent developments in the feminist movement.

Being aware of your own mistakes and making no attempt to correct them; taking a liberal attitude towards yourself.

Are you a liberal? Do you want to be?

(Author's note: Most of this article has been lifted from Mao Tse-Tung's article "Combat Liberalism" with certain, obvious changes).

(Editor's note: in 1975).

This article first appeared in Big Mama Rag.

Fran: I teach and it's a very draining, emotionally draining job and I'm re-evaluating if I'm going to be doing it for another year. It is a reality that my job infringes on my political work.

Vicki: A very important thing is that our political work is not limited to outside our jobs.

Judy: That's very important; I couldn't help but come out as a feminist at work.

Connie: I'm in a real special situation because I'm working with women who are politically aware. The other day, when I wanted to leave for a picket (at the "News"), it was not a problem; I got support. In fact, two of the women came to the picket. I feel, though, that I have a different kind of pressure--trying to justify the two different kinds of politics I'm working with. My job is very coalition-oriented, working with a lot of broad-based groups, and it needs to be because it's a broad-based movement. But, I have a difficult time fitting that in as a lesbian who sees the importance of working together with other lesbians. The people at work would never, I don't think, ask me to do something that would be totally compromising, but I do make compromises. If nothing else the job I'm working with has made me get more specific as to my own political needs.

Judy: 

Sue: What job isn't compromising? 

Drive a bus. 

Putting Money in the Movement

Vicki: A slogan came out in the movement a few years ago: "Put your money where your mouth is." I think that idea is still very important. Women who are in the position of having “extra” money can do it, but choose not to.

Judy: When I got my job, I was putting money in, but only when someone was crying out for help. One of the purposes I had in getting this job was to put money in, but even though I'm making what sounds to me like a lot of money, it seems the actual value of the dollar is such that I really don't have that much more than when I was on welfare. The system is set up so that women who work who have children, besides getting a lower pay to start with, have the financial burden of paying someone to take care of their kids. It's outrageous.

Fran: There are a lot of women who could make that commitment (to put money in) and it wouldn't squeeze them personally, but for some reason they won't even go to the bookstore to buy a gift. I think a lot of women just don't let themselves think about it.

Sue: When I was working shit jobs, I'd gross about $256 a month and after paying rent and food, I'd have $15 a month left. What can you do with $15? You might as well give it to Woman to Woman and Big Mama Rag, so I did. But now that I make more money, if I save my extra each month, at the end of the year I could really buy something that was out of the question before: It's changed so that I have to think about giving money now, where before it was automatic.

Connie: A lot of us who have been supporting ourselves have been used to living real spartan existences where "I can't buy something nice for myself." It's important to do something nice for yourself, and it doesn't have to be in terms of money, but the system says that. Instead of going to the park, you are supposed to go buy something. For a lot of women, it's the first time we've been able to do something nice for ourselves, and that's where the money goes. I can understand that, but we have to move beyond that.

Fran: I have a real fear of ending up like my mother--65, without a cent, having to work hard every day, being ill. I don’t want to be 65 and in that position. I keep trying to save money and say, “this is for my old age.” Now I'm also trying to save money to have a year off from working. I feel I've worked all my life, and that's a lot of years. I want to have a year not to work at all to devote to the women's movement.

(The above discussion was the beginning of an important process for the present Big Mama Rag collective. We are excited by the energy and enthusiasm we are experiencing as a result of our collective process/interaction. This discussion is the first of many in which we will explore, define and connect our political selves and our commitment to Big Mama Rag.)