rightening Prospects For

very Woman’s

NO NUCLEAR MATERIAL
~ WHICH MAY CONTAMINATE
“THE PUBLIC WILL BE
RELEASED...

Many U.S. products are sold abroad to Third World nations because they have
either been banned in this country or not tested, presumably because the man-
ufacturer knew they were dangerous and would not pass safety testing. Products
dumped on Third World markets include chemically treated baby clothes, birth
control devices, medical machinery, dangerous pesticides, contaminated baby
foods and formula, drugs, and baby pacifiers that American babies have choked
on.

All baby clothing treated with the flame retardant chemical TRIS (2,3-
dibromopropyl) was recalled from the U.S. market in 1977 when this chemical
was found to cause cancer. Manufacturers who were stuck with a large invent-
ory of TRIS-treated clothing started selling their supplies overseas. After
a year of protesting, red tape, and “many pajama dumps" later TRIS was banned
from export.

The example of TRIS-treated sleepwear is unique only in that it was event-
ually banned from export. Many if not most dangerous products are never banned
from export.

The case of the Dalkon Shield is a good example. After at least 17 deaths,
numerous emergency hysterectomies, spontaneous abortions, and a cost to Amer-
ican women of 20 million dollars for related health problems, the Dalkon
Shield continues to be distributed in Third World countries where it has
caused countless deaths and injuries. AID (Agency for International Develop-
ment) purchased unsterilized bulk packages of Dalkon Shields from the A.H.
Robbins Company at a 48% discount to distribute to women in Third World
countries. The fact that these IUDs are unsterilized and come with only 10
inserting devices per 100 shields greatly increases the risk of infection
which is significantly increased by the insertion of any IUD, even sterile
ones. (Dalkon Shields sold to doctors in this country each came in individ-
ual sterilized packages, each with its own disposable inserter.)

Depo-Provera, a birth control injection given to Third World women which
has never been approved for use in this country, is available without a
prescription in as many as 70 Third World nations. Side effects of this drug

include nodules in the breasts, cancer of the reproductive organs, headaches, 

dizziness, permanent sterility, excessive bleeding, general “menstrual chaos,”
and death.

Birth control pills marketed in this country generally contain 40-50 micro-
grams of estrogen because higher levels of estrogen were found to greatly
increase the risks of blood clotting, cancer, swollen breasts, etc. Birth
control pills marketed overseas through AID usually contain 80 micrograms
of estrogen. The high estrogen pills are cheaper because they are rarely sold
in this country anymore and the manufacturers have a large supply to dump.

A resuscitation device called the Res-Q-Aire, found ineffective and recalled
in the U.S., has been sold to hospitals and emergency clinics abroad causing
numerous deaths.

The most dramatic of our dangerous exports are pesticides. With dangerous
birth control devices, carcinogenic clothing, or defective medical machinery
deaths are isolated and erratic and often difficult to connect to faulty or
dangerous products. This is not the case with pesticides. Every year 500,000
Third World people are poisoned by pesticides manufactured in the U.S. but
deemed unsafe for use in this country. Farm workers who earn 7 cents a day
are coated by pesticides dropped from airplanes on the fields they work in
and live in.

Many of these pesticides are used on coffee plantations and in banana groves
in South and Central America. Many of these banned chemicals return to this
country in or on the food we eat. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
reports that "nearly half of the coffee beans imported by this country are
contaminated by pesticides that have been previously banned in the U.S."

The FDA admits however that there are many “banned" pesticides that they are
not even able to detect.

Series on Technology and Women. The
second part of this article will dis-
cuss ways of taking technology back
for the benefit of the people rather
than for profit.
part two of this article in the next
Issue of Big Mama Rag.)

Sources for this article include
Mother Jones, The Progressive, The
New England Journal of Medicine, Her-
Say, Gay Community News, Business
Week, Science, Scientific American,
The Rocky Mountain News, Fortune
Magazine, other public news media,
and first-hand information.

A 24-page reprint of "The Corporate
Crime of the Century," an investig-
ative report on dumping technology

on Third World nations, can be ob-
tained by sending 50 cents for each
reprint to Mother Jones Reprint Ser-
vice, 625 Third Street, San Francisco
CA 94107.
copies ($1 plus 35¢ shipping and
handling. )

13

uture

Putting The Pieces Together

Although none of us can escape the dangers of modern technology, it is
evident that some are affected more than others--Third World Countries more
than Industrialized Nations, working-class people more than upper-class people,
poor people more than rich people, children more than adults, women more than
men. Mother Jones calls dumping on Third World people "subtle genocide.”

Blue-collar workers employed in dangerous fields are "paid" for the risks
they take. Many women working with chemicals that could potentially cause
birth defects in their children are forced to be sterilized or give up their
jobs for lower-paying ones. Much of the experimentation with drugs and
birth control devices is done on poor women and Third World people in this
country. If a sufficient number of these people die or become seriously ill
as a result of the experimentation, the product will probably be banned from
sale in this country and dumped on Third World nations. Many people become
ill or die before a specific environmental contaminant is discovered. The
information may or may not be made public, or it may never be discovered at
all. We have much to fear.

It appears that in the future of technology more and more control will be
given to those with money and power. The prospect of a society devoid of
women because the men have the power to create life without us sounds like
science fiction, but is it really? Those who have the money to fund scient-
ific research (mostly the government and large corporations) also have the
authority of ownership of any results of this research. Dangerous information
can be suppressed. Life forms and other scientific products can be patented.
Women can be (and have been) sterilized, drugged, exposed to carcinogens and
radiation and never even know it! Is it really unrealistic to consider a
society without women--where maybe a few women are kept behind bars in zoos
or stuffed and on display in museums--an extinct sex? Maybe it is, but I
leave that up to you, the reader, to decide.

“The people who work in the fields
of Central America are treated like
half-humans. When an airplane flies
over to spray (pesticides) they can
leave if they want, but they won't
be paid their 7 cents a day. They
often live in huts in the fields.

Their homes, children, and food

get contaminated.”

How do we fight back? How do we stop the corporate giants from destroying

us? How do we stop the United States government from practicing genocide of
American Indians (sterilization), other racial minorities and poor people?
How do we stop the attack on us as women and feminists?
traditional channels to change national policy?
the corporate giants are going to sit quietly by while we ask for legislation?
They never have before.
how they could destroy us before we even realized what was happening? When
we talk about armed struggle and revolution do we seriously consider what
resources "the enemy" has?
Are they better designed for a less-technologically advanced society? How,
if we succeed in overthrowing the system, will we manage technology? Will
we be able to manage technology at all?

Do we work through
Do we really believe that

Do we really comprehend the power they hold over us--

Are our ideas of revolution really realistic?

The questions are difficult to answer. The evidence is so formidable that

it seems easier to just block it out and go about our business as usual. How
do we deal with it?

How do we cope? Where do we go from here?

(This is the first of a two-part

Please watch for

The minimum order is two