movement

Sharing Our Hard Earned Lessons --

The Upstream Collective

After four years of producing UPSTREAM, the members of the UPSTREAM collective have formally decided to cease publishing. With our final issue we hope to explain to our readers, and our sisters in other feminist publications and the women's movement in general, the factors which have contributed to this decision, which now seems to us to have been inevitable. This article, which has been collectively written, will describe UPSTREAM's internal organization, both in terms of structure and politics, and our relationships externally, that is with our readers and with the women's movement.

As with most organizations which falter and eventually fail, the reasons for UPSTREAM's demise lie in its beginnings. From UPSTREAM's introductory issue we learn that the paper's original purpose was one which could be shared by "women of any age, race, religion, political belief, economic class, social status or sexual orientation." In an article entitled, "UPSTREAM Staff Diverse" we read that the staff of UPSTREAM "is united in a common purpose but believe that reaching a collective goal demands exploring as many routes as there are people involved." The common purpose that united women at UPSTREAM was "the self-determination of women and the advancement of the status of women."

Even if contradictory, all of these goals and purposes are perhaps laudable in theory. In practice, however, UPSTREAM's vague "common" purpose masked or diverted attention from the reality that there was no substantial shared political direction within the organization. In retrospect, we believe this lack of political consensus was the fundamental problem with the UPSTREAM collective and by extension with the paper.

The most immediate and serious consequence of the lack of political consensus was the establishment of an informal decision-making process that, due to the disintegration of a formal collective structure, determined the political direction of UPSTREAM. An informal decision-making process denies the individual members of the group full and equal access to decision-making. It creates a situation where everyone is not equally aware of whether decisions have in fact been made, and they do not know how or why decisions were arrived at or whether they can be amended or changed. Of equal importance, they do not know why they were excluded from this process. Among the consequences of informal decision-making are confusion, insecurity, and distrust.

When there was substantial political disagreement between individuals at the paper, the individual able to find the least support for her analysis would invariably leave the paper. Largely because there was no collective forum for these disagreements, the problems they produced could be seen as, and were seen as, personal (i.e. the individual couldn't get along with others). Again, the most serious consequence of this was that the collective was never obligated to examine and criticize its operation and direction.

Another area where this lack of collective functioning became a critical problem was in UPSTREAM's accessibility to new women. A new woman soon learned there were positions and definitions; what she didn't learn clearly was what they were or how they were arrived at. Obviously, she also didn't learn how to work collectively, so this inability was perpetuated. As well, since there was no formal collective method to establish whether she agreed with the collective's direction, such as it was, she never knew whether her political views were acceptable to the collective. Thus the sense of insecurity mentioned earlier was further institutionalized.

The inability of UPSTREAM to establish a collective political direction and decision-making process was its most serious failure, but was certainly not its only one.

A collective is successful because its individual members are dedicated to upholding certain principles. Briefly these are:

- A commitment to a horizontal structure with power and decision-making which are equalized among all collective members.

- A decision-making mechanism which relies on consensus (difficult to achieve if everyone does not share certain fundamentals).

- Ongoing dialogue, including criticism and self-criticism.

- A willingness to be accountable to the collective.

- A commitment to skill-sharing and development (so that no one woman becomes indispensable and has therefore more power and/or responsibility).

Early in its evolution, the Women's Liberation Movement, in a justifiable reaction against oppressive hierarchical structures, proposed the collective as an organizing structure which was most responsive to the particular needs of women new to political organizing. With its emphasis on dialogue, consensus, and skill-sharing, it promised women greater individual control and input over our groups and organizations.

Because of its feminist orientation, UPSTREAM elected to structure itself collectively. This decision, however, doesn't necessarily translate into the ability to do so. It is clear now that one of the major problems women faced with the collective structure was our inexperience with it.

The initial excitement and enthusiasm commonplace to the birth of most new organizations camouflaged for some time many of the lapses of the collective. In the beginning, women had more energy and were therefore willing to do more than their share or to excuse others who were not fulfilling their commitments. As well, once the paper got started it began with a vengeance. A 16-page paper every two weeks means a production schedule that is exacting and exhausting. Along with the production cycle pressures, there was the inexperience and uncertainty around confronting a collective member: how to do it without draining and damaging the collective. From the beginning there was an inability or unwillingness to take these risks or to understand why it was so critically necessary to do so. Some of the other problems that resulted from these patterns were: a de-emphasis on skill-sharing and training - it was so much easier to do it yourself; consequently, more and more work was left with fewer and fewer women; the unwillingness to confront led eventually to a tacit agreement not to do so - an unwillingness to disturb the status quo which was in some sense "working." Inevitably, all of these things combined to create an atmosphere of mistrust and personal feelings of guilt and immobilization. These feelings are obviously not ones which individuals can readily translate into energy to renew their commitment to an organization.

The lack of common purpose and direction that we experienced at UPSTREAM also influenced the content of the paper. Looking back, we see that articles were often scattered in what they were trying to say and the paper was not consistent in its presentation from issue to issue.

When we look at UPSTREAM's content, we also have to look at the collective's relationship to the rest of the women's movement, because UPSTREAM was a paper developed to report on and help expand that movement. And that was the first place we fell down.

When we look back at UPSTREAM, we find that we tended to concentrate too much on government - reporting what the federal government was doing to women, rather than looking more at what women were trying to do to the federal government. The implicit suggestion in that kind of reporting is that the federal government or other established institutions will give us our liberation. Our attention should have been focused on the ways women were and are actively working for change. When we did report on women's organizations, we reported on things they had done, not what they were trying to do. That is, we were not informing other women about the organizing process. We feel that in our own minds UPSTREAM and other women's organizations tended to be viewed as institutions that were autonomous and distant. It was a situation of "us" and "them" within something that was expected to be a mass movement.

As a result, UPSTREAM was not presenting bad journalism, but neither was it good. In particular, we could have improved the method in which we criticized other women's organizations - especially those we saw as reformist. The few times we did attempt this criticism it was vague, partially because we weren't clear ourselves on what our criticisms were, and partially because we did not present the arguments on both sides in a concise way. We feel now that we should have carried more articles on political differences that exist within the women's movement and on the process that different women go through to reach the viewpoints they hold.

UPSTREAM had, as well, a tendency to print articles that were essentially rewrites of reports from either government or women's groups. It would have been more effective if we had actually interviewed the people those reports were about, letting them tell their own stories. We also could have tried more to report on things before they happened, preparing women for events that we may have been able to alter or change completely. There were several reasons why we did not do these things. Certainly lack of time and money were among them.

As we look back, we see that perhaps we should have considered changing UPSTREAM in both style and format. The pressure to produce 24 pages every month often resulted in a scattered and confused product. But, UPSTREAM was initially planned to be a mass market publication and that direction was never seriously reconsidered or criticized. As we went through the process of review and self-criticism that led to this article, it became clear that we do not think we're the only ones responsible for the problems that existed in UPSTREAM's relationship to the rest of the women's movement and its effect on the paper's content. We do feel that it was our responsibility to initiate the kind of dialogue we were looking for and to provide an initial direction. However, as a result of our experiences with UPSTREAM we think that the women's movement in Canada is in trouble unless the all-important dialogue among individuals and organizations begins on a mass scale.

The UPSTREAM collective attempted, with varying degrees of effort, to create that dialogue in the pages of the paper. While we didn't do it all the time or not always as we should have, the efforts we did make met with little response. While we didn't always go digging after stories, trying to find out what women across the country were doing, neither did women's groups tell us when something was happening. The moments when we had more than two "Letters" to print were exciting. We sent notices across the country asking women's centres and other organizations to send us news, or at least their newsletters, to let us know what they were doing so we could pass that information along. The response was minimal.

Probably the best, and most discouraging, example of this lack of dialogue occurred after we printed UPSTREAM's new statement of principles in the March 1980 issue. To date we have received exactly one letter in favor of the statement and two letters against. When a collective of women issues a statement defining what they see as the principles of feminism, and three women respond, we know it can't be just our fault.

The lack of dialogue between UPSTREAM and the rest of the women's movement is not unique; the things we have already described that were happening within the UPSTREAM collective itself. And the effects are no less important.

In our discussion preparing for this article, we asked ourselves who the women are who read UPSTREAM. We didn't have a sure answer. We often felt that we were putting the paper out in a vacuum and, as a result, didn't change UPSTREAM in any substantial way although we may have felt it necessary to do so for ourselves. We didn't know what you, our readers, felt about the paper. It's a demoralizing situation, because with neither positive nor negative feedback, the impetus to change is slight and one begins to wonder whether anyone cares. We ask you to start now to give other feminist newspapers your support by using the information services available to the women's movement - the services that help it expand - and by letting them know, even in a paragraph, that you're reading the paper at least.

There has been a somber tone throughout this article, but it doesn't mean we're discouraged. We printed this article for a couple of reasons. First, because it has helped us as members of the UPSTREAM collective to sort out what happened at UPSTREAM and has allowed us to sort it out together in a way that is helping to relieve tensions that exist at the paper. Secondly, we do not believe that the experiences of the UPSTREAM collective are unique - particularly when we consider that a similar dynamic to that operating within the collective itself was operative in UPSTREAM's relationship with the rest of the women's movement - and we hope that by publishing our view of the experience we can help other women avoid making the same mistakes.

UPSTREAM has discontinued publishing. But, we would still like to hear what you think about this article and others that appear in this final issue. We found for ourselves that real dialogue didn't begin until we had made the decision to stop putting out UPSTREAM. It is not unlikely that the same thing could happen with readers. But, to make sure that your response becomes part of a larger dialogue within the women's movement, we suggest that you send copies of letters to UPSTREAM to your local feminist newspaper.

The UPSTREAM office is closing at the end of July. To make sure we receive your thoughts and ideas for the future, please send letters c/o 263 Arlington Ave., Apt. 2, Ottawa, Ont., K2A 1A5.

- Page 21