local

“Rocky Mountain Women Center”: Multi-

Geraldine Barr  
Deborah Hampton  
Roseanne Barr  

(This article was a collective effort. We are a collective of many ideas. We are a multi-cultural group of lesbian and straight women, from all class backgrounds speaking/acting with an increasing amount of supporters.)

struggle

We recognize a new storm is brewing within the movement of womyn. It has never taken place before in the world. Women all over the world are recognizing the truth of our re/de/oppression. We, as Women of Color and Jewish Womyn refuse to acknowledge or buy into the system of white men who as parasites grow rich from our blood, sweat and tears, and the mutilation of our mother/sister earth.

Imperialism and the monopoly rule of capitalist class (identified here as white skinned males and their patriarchal head hunters/head huntresses) serve only to continually keep people of color, those of differing cultures and working class people as ignorant servants to advance their own desires which are classist, racist, sexist and Jew-hating.

The war against womyn can be borne out by economic discrimination in the workplace, along with the discrimination against all people of color who now have the highest rate of unemployment ever. As Jews and women, we reject the notion of individual success in Amerika. We realize that we have many privileges because of our white skin, but that despite the "well-being" of some Jews, all Jews are still "Other" in Amerika, and must, in order to become economically well-off, internalize self-hatred and assimilate. As radical Jews and women, we stand in solidarity with women of color, working class women and all oppressed people.

Women are in grave danger again in Reagonian America of being forced out of the workplace as they were in the 50's, after WWII. We do not believe that this is the time for groups that represent women to become cautiously conservative or de-radicalized. This is what we feel is happening in the feminist movement.

As Jewish women and women of color, we remember that power among a few can be plucked and stolen and destroyed, while it is infinitely more difficult to take power away from a large diverse group. We feel that until now it was only the white middle class woman who has seen the fruits of the feminist movement. We do not believe that either Reagonomics or the feminist movement will ever "trickle down" past the middle class in white patriarchal/imperialist Amerika. The Revolution will come from the shared efforts of working class, third world, Jewish women who do not speak as daughters of our fathers but as sisters.

We remember the herstory of the womyn's movement rendered powerless many times in the last 150 years, because of the inability of its largely white leaders to deal with their own racism/Jew hatred as well as class bias. No one can speak for black women but black women, no one can speak for Jewish womyn but Jewish womyn, etc....in the same way that man cannot speak for womyn. We therefore call on our white/non-Jewish sisters to remember that they are historically, both victims and oppressors, seldom fighting injustice unless it directly affected them, and to deal with their attitudes around those who look and are culturally different from themselves.

The man's political rhetoric tells us to stay the course, to wait until the budget balances, to wait and watch while the military budget grows and school lunches, student grants and other social services become less and less.

We at Rocky Mountain Women Center (formerly Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter) will not stay the course with any movement that tells us to wait for some pig to tell us what we can do and when we can do it. We reject any movement that is sexist/racist/anti-Semitic/classist. In this article we hope to inform women of the changes facing Rocky Mountain Women Center.

As a newly formed collective, we have adopted points of unity which are based on a multi-cultural transformation and re-definition of the women's movement. We are women of color and Jewish women who have all struggled for many years, individually, to remain vocal and active within the feminist movement.

Part of our re-definition includes understanding each womyn speaks a different language, owing to her background and culture and that in order to hear each other and be heard we must invent new ways of listening to each other. It is more than culture and skin color that have separated women, we believe it is class distinction and language. Oftentimes the feminist movement itself has filtered, processed and translated third world and Jewish women's language into an acceptable form for white gentile women. There is an attitude of suffocating political correctness which strips our words of their power, their truth, and their experience through the process of "processing information." We demand that our words stand as they are spoken, and that white women learn to hear/decipher our languages, as we have always had to do with theirs in order to survive in their white world, the world of their fathers.

In our points of unity we are committed to continue to provide a womyn's space. We are committed to fighting Jew-hatred/racism/ageism/sexism/classism and other forms of oppression. We are committed to effect change on this earth and pass our knowledge on to our children. As all womyn live under increasingly oppressive conditions, we commit ourselves to continue in the struggle for our freedom. We are committed to trusting women on their words alone. This is the most difficult of our commitments. For we feel the issue of trust is often side-stepped. We are committed to work as a collective of individual womyn. Sharing our common goals and our differing ideas. We not only celebrate our sameness we also celebrate our differences, because we feel that too long it has been because of our difference we couldn't get together.

We define collective action as a democratic centralism. Which we define as the individual effort being recognized/supported/encouraged. This statement means that we will maintain our own identities/herstories and not merge into a melting pot. Each womyn must define herself as she sees herself, with her definition of self in hand she offers her talents/interests and works together with others on a mutually agreed project.

Part of our collective experience is painful/frustrating and more often joyous.

As a group of Jewish womyn/womyn of color from differing backgrounds, we have opened ourselves to a continuous dialogue, each of us owning our racism/anti-Semitism. We are committed to working with other women. Our commitments are many we are defining what is meant by collective action.

Changes within the center have been painful/often frustrating experiences. A few reasons are our words/works have needed to be continuously validated. When we sought to open our meetings to the community we were met with intense racism, Jew-hatred and classist attitudes. We stood up to meet the accusers by providing information that would explain our changes. Once they had had their say and their demands had been met, they didn't return to us to hear our words. We feel cheated because these white women are still whispering their murderous words for which we have no defense. However, some white women did return and are hooking up with us and/or supporting change.

Some of our changes are:  
1) We have removed the word feminist from our name because we refuse to include ourselves any longer in a movement which does not listen to or hear us. We feel the feminist movement has de-radicalized itself and become increasingly conservative and exclusionary. Feminism has not dealt with Jew-hatred/racism. When we hear "It doesn't matter what your color is or your cultural background" from feminists we wonder; Have you really grown up in America without ever noticing that racism and anti-Semitism are sanctified institutions, just like Master Charge accepted everywhere? We sure haven't!  
2) We have decided to keep the bookstore at the Colfax address (2023 E. Colfax). We also will maintain a house on High Street where we will have our library, seminar and office space, for the implementation of all our other programs, in order to create a Womyn's Center. We will be renting out some of the office spaces to other women's groups.  
3) In 1983, we hope to define our own health/childcare needs as single mothers and working women. We are offering twelve women to train as sales agents. These women will participate in the planning and implementation of a women's health care program that will eventually be introduced to business women's health care within the United States. We are now working with an insurance company to develop a program for women. Any women who have experience in sales, desire to acquire an insurance license, or questions regarding this project please contact us.  
4) We are making ourselves accountable to the community by publishing the records of the last four years. Three months ago, Geraldine and Deborah quit their jobs and the collective took a vow to keep them alive throughout the task of auditing and unscrambling the maze and confusion that existed at the former Woman to Woman bookstore in its ledgers and books, and payables. This needed to be done so that the women’s space could be assured of continuing. The work is now done, which makes it possible to apply for grants and other monies. The system that was used at Woman to Woman Bookcenter was a baffling one that seemed to be set up so that only a few women knew where money was actually going/coming. We redid that system because the community should have access to and know where their monies are used, and to put into practice our belief that women must share power with all women, never hiding or hoarding it into small groups thereby creating hierarchies and inevitably powerlessness.  
5) We now have a new feature: Special book ordering, any book that the center does not carry we will order it prepaid plus $1.00 postage and handling. We will also do book searches upon request.  
6) We will begin a newsletter that will be published every two months beginning in Feb., 1983.  
7) Once a month we will sponsor poetry readings, dance, feminist storytelling and films, any woman wanting to share her creative energies please call 303-320-5972.  
8) We have a self-health group where women who wish to learn more about their bodies and how to take care of themselves and how to do self-examination, call Mackay Schneider at 355-3630.  
9) There is a straight women's group that meets every Friday at 7pm at the center to discuss personal and political issues.  
10) There is a lesbian support group that meets every Monday night at 7pm to discuss those issues pertinent to lesbians.  

MORE ON PAGE 16

day 705

Ah, the holiday season and so many good things happened to so few. RonKnee showed us what a Glorious Leader can do by traveling in South & Central America by giving 1.2 billion dollars to Brazil and strengthening our ties with other dictatorships.  
But, they can make what else did you promise and GL wants to tax. Presses are making taxes. A new federal tax will cost the average of $30 more a year. Unemployment is over 10.8, the highest since the Depression.  

GL, as he was lighting the palace Christmas tree, took care of the destitute. Congress said they wanted to do it.  

Attorney General William French Smith said Presidents don't have to tell us about acts without advising us—so RonKnee, to W.  

He cited how waitresses make their fortunes off of their tips and not pay the gas tax of 5 cents a year.  

Suddenly I don’t feel like dancing, contempt. The educational system decided not to prosecute Annie Gorski, though the Senate has held her in contempt. The House stood by itself and gave itself a 15% raise, a Republican said the unemployed would want us to do it.  

Pentagon employees are standing on their outrage at the Defense Department issuing expanded uses of lie detector tests, as one said "...it is an insult to my professional integrity." GL stood with a straight face and said that CIA agents were not in Honduras helping to fight against the Sandinista government of Nicaragua.

It was 5 years ago when another US ally, South Africa absolved their police of any responsibility in the brutal death of Stephen Biko. You are known by the company you keep.

Page 5

Big Mama Rag, January, 1983 -