14

Kate Millet

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.4

Interview

Sandia  
Intro: Brief Notes Beforehand

With our lives so often split between the personal and the political, here  
is one woman who uses her art as a synthesis. Kate Millet identifies herself  
primarily as an artist even though it is her political identity that has thrust  
her into the public eye again.

We had begun speaking of these things in a relaxed way in her room at the  
Brown Palace. I felt at first I was being too low-keyed, but as she herself  
says, something vital can happen when two women, two artists, try to talk to  
each other in a trusting atmosphere. It was not difficult to make connections  
between woman as artist and woman as political activist. Once the interview  
began taking on its own life, it slowly built to a central theme: our relat-  
ionship to violence and destruction as non-violent and creative women in the  
face of it. (Creation vs. Destruction):

The interview ran for two hours so necessarily it had to be cut down. I  
hope I neither violated the essence of our talk or our confidences.

She mentioned how Beauvoir and Le Duc had been important in her life. I think  
Kate herself will be a woman many of us will acknowledge like that.

April 17, 1979

KATE: When I was in Iran, and we'd been doing film and making tapes, and do-  
ing a kind of historical study of the beginning of the women's move-  
ment, archives sort of job, because when we were doing our beginnings  
here we were too busy to run a tape recorder. We never thought of it  
either... so I do that as kind of a service thing. I'm sort of a tape  
freak you know. I like to feel I'm more like Andy Warhol than Richard  
Nixon... It's so much nicer when you can talk with a feminist and friend  
and fellow artist but it's rare, and those kinds of conversations never  
get taped because nobody thinks it's important, and actually that's the  
better conversation.

SANDIA: That's why I'd like not to structure so much as to ask you about your  

writing, some things about The Basement, and for me personally to ask  

about your process... How are you balancing the time things, time to  
write, finding time for a personal life, and then your political in-  
volvements plus the demands being made of you, people wanting to inter-  
view you... Do you keep notes on the run? Are there periods when it gets  
quiet and you can just work?

When I got home there were a lot of demands from college and I was sup-  

posed to sit right down and begin my book on Iran, but I thought, well,  
I'll give it three weeks and in the process I can organize—then I'll —  
have done all I can do for the Circle of Support, and the 20th of April  
I'll just go underground and stay in my studio. I have never tried to  
write this fast, but I've given myself 40 days and I'll produce a man-  

uscript which is sort of a long essay. If I neatly work every day for  

40 days I can produce a lot of pages and... I have all my tapes, all my  

notebooks, so then I can create the experience of Iran, plus I have the  

pictures that Sophie took, and she's living with me so it's easy for us  
to remember it all.

The first of June another wall goes up. I want to go to the farm and  

play artist all summer.... we'll make lots and lots of silk screens.  

We're turning this farm into a women's art colony...

It's usually a little more relaxed than this, the transition between  

artist and writer, but because of the trip to Iran everything got high-  

pressured. And next fall—see the trouble is I've already got my life  

planned, fortunately years in advance—Basement comes out and I have  

to go on tour for it for a while, then I want to go over to France and  

tape the film. There's another 16mm version that des Femmes, the French  

publishing house took... it's the center of the International Committee  
and hopefully oversee the production of our book too...

SANDIA: So there's been like a cycle where it gets quiet and then hectic. Yeah  
and then you just put a limit on it and say you won't go anyplace after  
the 20th of April.

It does seem like you've been underground for a while. This is like your  
reemergence. Part of the difficulty in publishing this event was that a  
lot of the younger women didn't know who Kate Millet was... or who you  
are now.

KATE: When I came out in 1970 that was the last time I was on national tele-  

vision and if you aren't on TV, and people don't read, they've probably  
never heard of you. I was completely censored out of national television  
and I haven't been on it since Iran which was totally accidental.

SANDIA: You didn't anticipate all this would happen, did you?

KATE: Of course not. I went over there to make a little speech... people over  
there didn't know I was there. It wasn't until I called the press con-  
ference to get them (the press) to go to the demonstrations with the  
purpose of saving lives, there was so much danger.

SANDIA: That was a really important point you made last night, the fact that  
if someone is visible, it's harder to eradicate them.

KATE: For me I really didn't mind. I hate TV, the whole world, the hype. It  

was a relief personally. As an artist, a writer, I don't need TV, great  
to get out of that world. If I had stayed in it I never could have  
written F. Sed Sita even more private, but it's not good to  

be out of TV because you're gay and trying to do something for  

and personal...

KATE: Yeah, well, all the misconceptions. They'll say things like "you're too  
gentle, you talk too quietly”,... I have always been a pacifist, even from  
the beginning, I've always had a soft voice, so what is this shit about,  
you know?

SANDIA: The threatening type of woman stereotype.

SANDIA: Most of your writing's never real fiction.

KATE: I guess I write a little bit closer to fiction in Basement. The last  
section takes place in everyone's mind who carries out this atrocity,  
or was victim to it, like Sylvia, and I had to sort of imagine what  
kinds of thought patterns, sentences, diction. That's about as close as  
I ever got to fiction, but it's really like fictionalizing fact. I was  
trying to see how close I could get to what people really do and say...  
For example I was about 1/3 of the way through writing a book about my  
family when I was called to go to Iran. I have to put that off till  
next winter. I have a show in December of drawings and silk screens.  
Then I'll settle down in my studio and write again... I didn't go back  
into fiction at all. I'm still writing autobiography, from life I call  
it.

SANDIA: And your drawings that way?  
KATE: I'm afraid they're a lot more abstract, I draw with a Japanese brush,  
and you don't get the same realistic effects that you do with a pencil.  
I mostly draw the nude, and I unite in the pictures and write love  
poems to the lover I'm drawing, and I'm doing two books of them that  
I'll be publishing myself. First they're gonna be published as private  
editions by somebody else and then this man who's a very nice person  
is going to give me the plates, and I'm halfway there... I've arrived  
at a point of utter disillusionment with commercial publishers... I  
want to be in charge myself, even if it's a nuisance distributing...  
I've been distributing my prints through the back pages of MS magazine...  
and they're a great success. I call it my Lemonade stand, and as a child  
I was always economically independent--- so now the Lemonade stand pays  
for itself. The first thing we did was a poster for my "Lesbian Body"  
Show... and everybody who writes for a print also writes a letter, so I  
know my collectors and the thing's 5 bucks and it's signed...

by women all the way through. Now we're past posters and just making  
profits. We've got one wonderful big breast that's got a wonderful  
nipple on top and it says, "there are times when you're on top of the  
world." and it's really fun to live with. That signed is 10 bucks. And  
you can't get anything like that anymore. In the art world pictures are  
a lot of money, even prints they overprice... which destroys the whole  
purpose... I'm trying to undermine the whole art world, actually... if  
you can have women collect you the way they buy your books, for just a  
cheap sum, then you have made a whole different basis for who collects  
and owns art. Now it's just rich people... We're in the middle of a long  
revolution, you know how the printing press changed books, well, how  
it's changing pictures is taking terribly long... crazy schemes of me  
and Judy Chicago and probably a lot of other women too, to change the  
entire relationship between women and the fine arts, so they can love  
pictures the way they love records and books.

SANDIA: That side of you is not known to most women. You're mostly known as  
a writer. Few who could say this is Kate Millet and this is her style.

KATE: I guess I spend a lot of time being misunderstood.

SANDIA: The verbal has been more visible than the visual.

KATE: That's funny, cause I've only been writing 10 years and I've been a  
sculptor 24. Which is what I really do, see—that's my difficult art.

Lunch break here may make things very incontinuous—After lunch, Kate talked  
about another writer...  
KATE: Maxese Holder was almost a finished PhD at City and she got fired so  

she went to Mexico to recover from the shock, and she started to  
go to pieces and the book is her letters to her friend Edith, one of her  
chums in NY. Nothing's enough to keep her together, and she starts to  
disintegrate, and she begins to pursue young Mexican boys. They’re  
gigolos and taking her for a ride. She's enormously insecure and uh, she  
ended up being murdered. The book is an effort of her friends to gain her  
a little immortality... the letters are awful cause they're a conscious  
personality on its way to its own destruction. That's something I saw  
as very much of current time. Sometimes we can fall apart, too, but we pull  
ourselves together. In another time that personality would never have  
been conscious enough to write these letters... just going down the  
tube. Reaching for, almost getting a hold of what she wanted to be and  
her hand slipped and she begins this progressive suicide, cause though  
she was murdered, in a lot of ways she was self-destructive, that it was a  
looking to get killed kind of thing, and I think it's there in the  
corner of our eye for a lot of us, and we manage to get out of the way  
and survive. I was very touched and horrified by this account so I tried  

Continued on page 18