struggle

Of Self Defense

Big Mama Rag

And The Deaths Of Five Dear Friends

Eileen Bresnahan

I didn't put on black when they "elected" Reagan. Didn't re-rag in black
for the Republican Congress. I didn't even do it when they started talking
about resurrecting the Senate and House Committees on Internal Security,
i.e. "Un-American Activities" (or as the news media put it, the "Commie
hunters"). Or when they cut off the funds for busing. But yesterday finally
did it--yesterday I got scared.

Yesterday, November 17, an all-white jury, 6 men, 6 women, found 4 Ku
Klux Klansmen and 2 American Nazis not guilty by reason of self defense in
the deaths of 5 members of the Communist Workers Party (CWP) in Greensboro,
North Carolina.

They found this even though the Klansmen and the Nazis had gone to the
CWP "Death to the Klan" rally, where the shootings occurred, armed and look-
ing for trouble. Even though the Klan and Nazis make no secret of their
hatred of Communists. Even though there was a videotape of the shootings.

After the verdict, a CWP spokesperson said the verdict is "a green light
to the Klan and the Nazis to ride the streets and shoot people down."

And I believe he's right, too, at least as long as the Klan and the Nazis
don't change their tastes (too rapidly) as to whom they shoot at. Commun-
ists, of course, are fair game, as are blacks and homosexuals. Jew and
Catholic bashing would probably cause them more trouble these days, but then
times change and so must the Klan (at least until farther down the road).

The verdict illustrates current American attitudes on the subject of self
defense:

When Dessie Woods, a black woman, kills an armed white man who's trying to
rape her and her friend, that's murder requiring 22 years punishment in
prison. When Sandy Hagen, a poor white lesbian, being beaten in her own
apartment, picks up the attacker's gun and blows him away, that's first de-
gree manslaughter, good for seven years behind bars. When Juanita Thomas,
a black woman, beaten brutally over five years, finally can stand no more
and stabs her boyfriend to death, that's murder one--life in prison. When
Rita Silk Nauni, a Native American woman, scared out of her mind because
two cops, investigating a littering complaint, are roughing her up and try-
ing to handcuff her 10-year-old son, grabs one of the cop's guns and kills
the other, that's manslaughter in the first degree and shooting with the
intent to kill, earning her 150 years, two lifetimes, locked away.

But when the Klan shoots a commie, or a shopkeeper shoots a robber, or a
rich man shoots a burglar in his house, or the police shoot just about any-
body, that's self defense.

Self defense in America has less to do with the circumstances of the
event than with who is defending against whom, who is believed, who the
jury can “identify” with. So any woman who kills a man (unless she's white
and he's of color) is in deep trouble, regardless of the circumstances of
the killing. She'd better find a good lawyer (sure to cost a fortune) and
keep her fingers crossed, because she has flown in the face of a time
honored tradition, i.e. men kill women, not the other way around. If she's
a woman of color or poor, she'd as well forget about self defense and cop a
plea, especially if the corpse is white.

To find self defense, a jury must believe that the use of force is justi-
fiable under the circumstances. And there are damn few circumstances under
which an American jury is going to believe a woman is justified in killing
a man. Such an act threatens the societal power structure, as manifested in
the sensibilities of most jurors. And it's not just jurors--it's police,
district attorneys, judges: everyone down the line--none of them will be-
lieve it's self defense if this belief is inconsistent with their concepts
of what's "true" about the world.

In the Greensboro case, the jury apparently was easily able to side with
the good Christians and family men, neighbors all, who killed a few dirty
reds--they were only doing what they thought was right, to protect their
families and, of course, the revered "American way." The jury believed the
Communists got what was coming to them--execution for thinking "dif-
ferent" and having the courage to act.

The Communist Workers Party is far from my favorite leftist group. Indeed,
feminists attending a rally held in Denver by the CWP after the Greensboro
murders were told that they shouldn't be there if they weren't in support of
the CWP. CWP members said that the issue was not murder by the Klan, but
the singling out of the CWP for Klan retaliation. So, these women were told
not to rally unless they were there in support of the CWP, rather than op-
position to the Klan. This is certainly a sectarian and divisive stance,
and left feminists who attended left with a very bad taste in their mouths. But
we must not let their (CWP) errors excuse ours. In these frightening
and repressive times we must keep in mind who is our enemy and who, there-
fore, are our friends.

Leftist groups such as the CWP, however bad they may be in official policy
on the "woman question" or however personally piggy their male members come
off, are our friends. This is not to say that they don't have a serious
responsibility to get their own act together and get their male supremacist
politics and practices off of women's backs--the tacitly male supremacist
stand of many leftist groups is one of the major factors currently keeping
people's movements small and divided.

But feminists must not forget either that our common enemy is this
country's ruling class, who maintain their control through an ideology of
power and dominance that manifests itself as patriarchy and the patriarchy's
current most advantageous (to the ruling class) economic form: capitalism.

All leftists must see that wiping away capitalism is not enough, for pat-
riarchy will always spawn yet another repressive economic system, as long
as the ideals of power that are patriarchy are allowed to continue.

All feminists must see that economic oppression is a foot on the windpipe
of most of the world's people, an oppression as devastating psychologically
and emotionally as that of sexism, with the attendant lifetime's ghosts.
And with an added burden of material deprivation, too often resulting in an
existence of misery: poor nutrition, ill health, lack of hope for relief
or for even a moment when life is easy. Things are hard for any woman--
but the poorer the woman, the harder things are. Most feminists are not
starving; we can turn our attention to other matters. If we were starving,
you can bet that ending our hunger would become our first priority.

“The verdict

in Greensboro
was a license

to murder any of us

... Who happen

to be on

America’s shit list ”

-LNS

I'm certainly not agreeing here with those who characterize feminism as an
issue only for sleek, well-fed, middle class Western women--feminism, be-
cause it seeks to end the original oppression (exploitation), that of women
by men, is the only politic with a chance of changing things, for real and
forever. But I am saying that we must express solidarity with all the
world's oppressed and must realize that all men are not our enemies, at
least not in the sense that I use the word here--those who care not at all
for us or our lives, but want to exploit us, even to the ultimate, for their
own gain. Certainly some men fit this definition: big businessmen, multi-
nationalists, politicians, murderers, rapists. And other men (and some women)
work directly for those who do: soldiers, cops, business's flunkies. But
the vast majority of men fall somewhere in between, in a vast grey area.
They exploit us, for sure--this is the privilege, male, given to them by the
ruling class in order to buy their allegiance to the ideal of power and dom-
inance on which all current social structure rests. This male privilege is,
however, in no true sense power that belongs to the ruling class male. It
is power that belongs to the ruling patriarchs, which they allow the work-
ing class male to exercise because it gives him a stake in keeping things
as they are. The ruling class, through male supremacy, attempts to give
every male a stake in the system of exploitation which is society. If every-
one is to be free, how may a man have a wife, a personal servant dedicated
to his and, ultimately, capitalism's service (since what she does for him
helps him be a better worker)? This is why leftist males are quick to
attack capitalism, but slow to attack its father, patriarchy. They objec-
tively have no stake in capitalism (if they're working class), but they do
have a stake in patriarchy--they are co-opted. It is up to these men to
acknowledge their co-optation and turn the leadership of all people's move-
ments over to those who have the least to gain from either system--working
class women. Until this happens (and I'm not holding my breath) the inde-
pendent women's movement will be a vital necessity, for only women may be
trusted to advance women's concerns--this is a lesson of history, both
ancient and recent. Working class women, especially women of color, have
the least stake in either system, and, therefore, are the most reliable as
leaders of movements that seek to free all people.

Despite all this, I mourn today the deaths of five dear friends--and burn
with rage over the sham trial that let their murderers go free. We may for-
get their names, may not like all of their politics, but they stood up
against the Klan and the Nazis--and gave up their lives in that stand.

In Germany, when Hitler was rising and his thugs roamed the streets,
practically all of German society either approved or knuckled under out of
fear. One of the few groups to openly oppose the fascist murders then was
the Communists--and many people turned away, afraid to act, as they were
cut down in the streets.

Another time, another place--but barely 50 years later, we have not come
so far that history could not do one of its renowned repeating acts. The
verdict in Greensboro was a license to murder any of us: communists, left-
ists, feminists, blacks, Chicanos, dykes, faggots, "hippies," "punks," poor
people--all who stand up to change the world or who happen to be on
America's shit list.

The murderers must not go free!

Now, more than ever, is a time for solidarity among all of us who stand
against the tide of American fascism. Our differences are great, and
ideologically important, but our enemies are the same. “Death to the Klan"
is a slogan that must be on all our lips and on all our minds in the times
to come. If we spend our energy hating each other, our common cause of
justice is truly lost.

Vol.8 No.1