Big Mama Rag

Vol. 3-A, No. 12

Letters Home To Mama

Dear Big Mama,

A letter for your letters to the editor column, I hope you have the guts to print it:

This post card was in my mail box a couple of days ago: “Shirl, the big story from ABQ: the U of New Mexico elected a professed lesbian for their homecoming queen. Detail following.” My first inclination was to say, “Hey, that's really great.” Liberation may be upon us.

A little mulling over has changed that communication’s perspective for me radically. I fear now, not only are we more liberated than before, but we may have gone once around lightly, collected a measly $200, and we are back at go again.

Thanks to our lesbian and male homosexual movement friends we may have returned to the primeval point of being regarded in terms of our sexuality again. My understanding of the women’s movement is that it is all about NOT being identified by your genitalia (Genitals being standard not optional equipment on the human machine — neither men nor women have a choice.) I thought we were asking to be regarded in terms of the things we can control: our competencies as human beings, our talents and artistry, the sensitivities and sensibilities we cultivate. The things we build with our own psychological and physiological hands.

I am also under the impression that Black men and women, Native American men and women, Chicano men and women and other minorities are asking the very same simple thing. That is, not to have sex, color or physical characteristics limit your potential.

I fault the “queen” of the University of New Mexico on two counts. A queen contest focuses on the externals of a woman, not her human competencies. This woman certainly cannot single handedly put a stop to men’s tendency to rate, classify and parade women. However, she certainly can refuse complicity, quietly and with dignity. Moreover, she can cut down on the overt oppression by her profession of lesbianism.

That profession is no different than a woman who publicly announces herself as Jimmy's mother or Roger's wife. She is demanding sex/role identification not personal identification. It's like a cheap publicity stunt calculated to get some mileage out of sexual preference or social role. Beauty contests, rodeos and other such spectacles play to the baseness in people and I thought it was something we were trying to get away from.

Those of us going into the world demanding equality and respect for our abilities and remuneration for them at the going rate will still have our competencies questioned because of factors beyond our control, blackness, brownness or femaleness. We see our demands delegitimized by a group of people flaunting their homosexuality in the guise of liberation.

To manufacture a political issue when women in the workforce doing the same job as men, make half the pay, day care is abysmally inadequate and half the ghetto population can't read or don't have enough to eat seems like an abrogation of social responsibility.

This is not to advocate that a person who is a lesbian or homosexual (a la Ann Landers) check into the local shrink nor that they go into hiding. My question is: Is it necessary or politically fair or even legitimate to draw public attention to an issue which is basically a private one and will fortunately remain so unless the individual flaunts it? Unfortunately, Blacks, Chicanos, Women, and Native Americans are not in such an easy or enviable position.

What can possibly be gained by returning to what we fought so hard to get away from — sexual identification? Honest personal regard for each human’s individuality and personality seems farther away than ever. Will we ever get there when a manufactured minority is demanding discrimination on the very basis we have been fighting to get rid of it for ten years?

Most sincerely,  
Shirley A. McDermott

Dear Big Mama Collective:

I find it very interesting that in your second coverage of Sagaris, you would choose only three negative analyses to print when there were at least three positive ones (two from students, one from me) from that list you referred to. Rita Jensen wrote a startling analysis of the “no” group (August 7th Survival Community) which points out some of its more unsavory characteristics, along with her account of her decision making process to remain in Sagaris.

I also find it interesting that we as a collective have written four separate responses, very full ones, to all the criticism of Sagaris in the different feminist presses and none has been printed!!

I would like to know from Big Mama how and why it decided not to print anything from the pro-Sagaris side. Everyone was so angry when Steinem didn't respond to the criticism of Ms. herself, but when a person or an organization does respond, it gets no coverage.

If this movement can do nothing but destroy, this movement will destroy itself.  
Joan Peters  
Board Member  
Sagaris Collective

MEMBER  
COSMEP

COMMITTEE OF SMALL MAGAZINES EDITORS AND PUBLISHERS  
BOR +0) SAN FRANCISCO CA 94105

P.S. If you ‘choose’ not to print this letter, please send me a bill immediately and I will put it in as a paid advertisement!

Olivia Records, national women's recording company, proudly offers fine women's music. On the Olivia label:

CRIS WILLIAMSON: The Changer and the Changed

Our second LP, More than forty women contributed their talents and energies. Cris's music at its loveliest. ($5.50)

Meg Christian: I Know You Know

Olivia's first album, Five of Meg's own songs and five others as she interprets them. ($5.50) And for those who want words and music (and guitar chords) to the songs, a Songbook & Scrapbook of the Album contains all ten songs on I Know You Know, plus photos and raps about the music and the making of the album. ($3.50)

Still available, Olivia's first release ever--a 45rpm with Meg ("Lady") and Cris ("If It Weren't for the Music"). ($1.50)

And Olivia distributes other fine woman-produced music:

HIGH RISK: Degradation / The Common Woman

This 45rpm features Sandi Ajida, Bobi Jackson, Cyndy Mason, and Virginia Rubino. Beautiful full-color cover. ($2.00--price includes postage, for those ordering direct by mail.)

Kay Gardner/MOONCIRCLES

This is an album of music written, arranged and performed by Kay Gardner. Five instrumental pieces and three songs. ($5.50)

Available at your local feminist store (or check your favorite record store.) To find out where to buy records in the Boulder/Denver area, call your Olivia representative, Cheetah, at 44-1616.

To order direct, send $2.00 for the first item, .15 for each additional item, and check to: Olivia Records, Box 70237, Los Angeles CA 90070. (California residents add sales tax, please.)