page 8

Stone and Kelly

M.L. Trice

Kelly had always had a secret desire to know a different sort of person
... someone like Stone...

Kelly was in her bedroom, getting dressed, when she thought she
heard someone say, “What's happenin’?” She froze. Hearing nothing
further, she resumed tying the strings to her sweatpants. She heard a
loud belch, and froze again. “If I keep hearing stuff, I'm gonna start talk-
ing to myself,” she muttered. She looked outside, but there was no one
there. Somehow, she didn’t think there would be. ‘Well, ya can’t hit
what ya can’t see,’ she thought. Still she peered around anxiously as
she tied her gym shoes.

“Yeah, you heard what you thought you heard.”

By now Kelly couldn't decide whether to run or not, so she asked,
“Who's there? Where are you?”

“Here, dodo. In the shoe.”

Kelly's eyes went down. There, among the various clothes and items
one accumulates when one is the messy type, was a woman no bigger
than a minute. Kelly shook her head as if to clear it out, and muttered,
“Wait, wait. This is not a dream —"

The little woman nodded.

“ — because I'm awake —"

She nodded again.

“And it's debatable whether or not I’m crazy... I don’t feel crazy right
now...” The little one shook her head negatively. “Yeah, you see what
you think you see, I —" she pointed to herself importantly, “— am here
before you, in the flesh.” She preened exaggeratedly. “Better close your
mouth, there’s room for a buncha flies in there.”

“Who are you?”

“My name is Stone, pronounced stone-say, and you better say it
right, 'cause if you don’t I'll turn you into a pile of road apples.”

“Okay, I got your name, but that still doesn't answer my question —
who are you?”

“I'm a Composite — you know what that means, don’t you? It means,”
she went on, not waiting for an answer, “that I am the sum of many, uh,
things. See, the only reason I exist at all is because of you and the
energy you put out. I tend to ignore the negative, but I do respond rather
well to the positive. So, for countless years I have been helping certain
women free their spirits and their bodies.”

Kelly eyed her critically. “Judging from the size of you, I'd say those
‘certain’ women were or are in trouble. I don’t believe this.” She fell
across the bed, covering her eyes with her arm. “You're not real, y’know
— oh hell, you must be.” She sat up. “Well?”

“Pick me up.”

“WHAT? Look, I'm clumsy; suppose I drop you or something — you'd
turn me into a frog or something, I can’t —” Stone smiled at her.
Kelly shrugged, then broke into a grin. “I always was a sucker for a
smile.” “Oh yeah, why’s your face the same color as your hair? I
mean, it’s pretty, but I can see coppery colored hair, uh, but...”

Stone interrupted her, “Look, I like this color, therefore I chose it to be mine, okay? Now, we Composites have done studies that reveal when energy surges are at their greatest intensity, and that’s when a person has an impulse, you follow me? Our studies show that too many women for too long have stifled these impulses, or the impulses are not used to their full potential. Understand? Well, are you ready to go to the game?”

“You comin’ too?” Kelly asked.

“Sure,” Stone replied, “that’s why I'm here.”

“Question.”

“What's that?”

“Can you get bigger, or shall I put you in my pocket?”

Stone laughed, “I can, but I'd rather ride in your pocket.”

Stone Comes Through

On her way to the gym, with
Stone in her pocket, people were
looking at Kelly rather oddly, because
they thought she was holding a conversation
with herself.

“Will you please be quiet?” Kelly whispered
frantically, “— people are looking.”

“Let ‘em look,” Stone said unconcerned. “Gonna play basketball? I don't mind telling you that today is gonna be a good day for you.”

“I'm gonna cut across the park, so everybody won't have to know that
I'm carrying this weird little woman in my pocket — since you obviously
aren't going to shut your mouth.” She held her pocket with one hand
and sprinted across the street.

As soon as Kelly had gotten to a spot away from the street, she took
Stone out of her pocket, sat down, and put Stone on the top of her
knee. “Look, I know you've been helping all these women, and you ex-
plained about the energy, and all that — which I understand — now just
wait ‘til I finish,” she said, seeing Stone was about to interrupt. “Ob-
viously, you are here for me. Now I'm on my way to a game and all you do
is talk and talk. If you can make me a star, better yet a starter, then you'll
be helping me. I don't even know if I'm gonna get to play tonight... never
mind... I'm sorry for fussin’ at you.”

“It's okay, Kelly. Let’s go, and you'll see why, exactly why I'm here.”

Kelly got up, replaced Stone and headed again toward the gym. She
didn’t hear Stone say, “You got it, I'm gonna show you how to use it.”

It was the second half, and Kelly hadn’t gotten a chance to play. What
was worse, she didn’t think she was going to. She was excited because
she loved the game, but dejected because she wasn't in it. All of a
sudden, she felt like she could fly! A charge went through her, she felt
every hair on her body stand on end. She heard a voice say “go” inside
her head. She went to the coach and said, “I'm ready to go in.” Coach

looked surprised. Kelly radiated confidence — radiated energy, her eyes
sparkled. She was a very different Kelly. Kelly was definitely not what
you might call star material — yes, she could shoot, but she was incon-
sistent, her speed was average; she was a mediocre player, and
mediocrity was not what she needed at this point, since being behind
fifteen points. But this Kelly had a different look in her eyes... the coach
decided to chance it.

“Okay, Kelly — go in for Anne.”

Kelly played offense, defense, she rebounded, scored, she radiated so
much energy that her teammates were infected. They looked at each
other and made ‘I don’t know’ signs to each other whenever they
thought Kelly wasn't looking. But Kelly had finally understood, well
almost, and she saw Stone out of the corner of her eye, sitting on the
top of the backboard... smiling at her. It made her feel refreshed.

Parting Time

“Nice game, Kelly.” Everybody was talking at once, but Kelly didn’t
hear them. All she wanted to do was get home and ask Stone what
really happened.

They were both quiet on the way home. Stone, feeling pleased with
herself (and Kelly), and Kelly, saving her words for home.

Kelly couldn't wait, “Baby, you are fantastic! C'mon, tell me what you did
— oh, I'm sorry I forgot.” She took Stone out of her pocket and sat her
on the dresser.

“Okay, tell me what you did — I’ve never been so charged before in
my life — I've never moved so fast — what did you do?”

“Slow down,” Stone said, “take it easy; for one thing, I did nothing,
you did.”

“But — but — I never did that before.”

“That's because you did not know what you could do. I took the love
you have for the game, your excitement at being there, the energy you
had heretofore wasted on being sad and depressed, the impulses you
had during the course of the game, and your desire to get in the game,
and gave it back to you — that was a lot of energy you were wasting out
there.”

Kelly sees Stone in the shoe.
Graphic by Filly

“But I felt like a different person — how... I don’t quite understand,”
Kelly said frowning.

“I acted as your battery... stored up your output, then gave you a full
charge of your own juice. Get it?

“See,” she went on, “up until now, tonight specifically, all you knew
was that you dug the game; you didn’t really KNOW that you could do
some of the stuff you thought about doing. You wasted energy thinking
about it and not trying. Now you know you can. You don’t need me any
more.”

“You're leaving, aren't you? But you can’t! I need you!” getting agitated.

“You're wasting energy, tsk, tsk,” Stone said smilingly.

“Oh, I'm okay, I just wish you wouldn't.”

“Once a Composite’s job is done, she has to leave.”

“But why do you have to go? Can't some other --- no, I guess not.” Kel-
ly shrugged.

“There are other women who need me too.”

“Will you be back?”

“If the need is there one of us will be.”

“But will you?”

“Well, even Composites take vacations.” And she was gone.

Kelly was

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 6

Alexandria
Library

Larelle Hughes

The New Alexandria Library
for Lesbian women opened July
12, 1974, as a service of the Les-
bian Feminist Center in Chicago.
The Library takes its name from
the Great Library in Alexandria,
Egypt which was destroyed by
the Christians in the 5th Century. According to some scholars,
nearly all the recorded know-
ledge of the ancients was lost
with that destruction — know-
ledge which originally came out
of the Matriarchal Period, the
lost key to our woman heritage
and power. We are attempting to
preserve some of our Woman-
Knowledge in this collection and
to make it freely accessible to all
women.

NALLW’s first and major
priority is to meet the infor-
mational and educational needs
of lesbians, although we still
maintain our policy of free
access for all women. We want
to acquire and make readily
available knowledge, ideas and
information which will help
lesbian women grow strong and
independent and to create a
better understanding of
ourselves and herstory.

NALLW's first and ma-
jor priority is to meet
the informational and
educational needs of
lesbians, although we
still maintain our policy
of free access for all
women.

The Lending Library has over
80 books for borrowing, dealing
with Movement & Herstory,
Woman-Lives, Health & Herbs,
Fiction, Special Interest, Poetry
& Song. We've begun a special
section called the Lesbian in
Literature Collection which we
would like to see become one of
the important features of our
Library. Our Periodical File con-
tains complete holdings to
current Chicago lesbian
publications as well as lesbian
publications from around the
country. The Library also main-
tains the LFC Archives as
periodically we hold exhibits and
also provide reference services.

Financially we are supported
by funds from two sources — in-
dividual donations and all
donations from the monthly
poetry readings at the Lesbian
Feminist Center. However, we
need more donations of both
books and money and any help
would be much appreciated. Our
staff is volunteer and we
welcome women with time and
energy.

The following publications are
available from NALLW:

THE LESBIAN & FEMINIST
PRESS ON THE SLA, a reprint
collection plus folder. Compiled
by NALLW staff. $1.75 plus
postage.

A LESBIAN - FEMINIST
READING LIST compiled by
NALLW staff. Free. Order must
include a stamped, self-
addressed envelope.

All inquiries, orders and
donations may be sent to: New
Alexandria Library for
Lesbian women c/o Lesbian
Feminist Center 3523 N.
Halsted, Chicago, IL 60657.