In short, because oppression works differently for every group, if we attempt to use one racial or ethnic group's oppression to explain the oppression of another group, we run the high risk of being racist by drawing a parallel that is wrong, thereby distorting the political struggles of both groups and, in effect, de-emphasizing the struggle of the racial or ethnic group used as an example. We must guard against making invisible the specific political conditions against which different groups are politically struggling.

Parke, in the Times article you brought up the Jewish people in order to strengthen Charlotte's view that heterosexual women are entitled to call themselves lesbians.

It is irresponsible to use the oppression of Jewish people as an example, because racism against Jewish people is a largely ignored issue within the WLM.

Specifically, the King of Denmark did not have a right to "declare himself" a Jew because he was not Jewish. Moreover, your example is not even accurate because King Christian X did not "declare himself" as Jewish, nor did he wear a yellow armband. Your statement does not correspond to historical fact. According to Leni Yahil, the author of Rescue of Danish Jewry, and Harold Flender in his book Rescue in Denmark, although King Christian X was benevolent and interceded directly with the Nazis on behalf of the Jewish people, many legends were created about him which exaggerated the situation.

For example, it is legend that he threatened to wear a badge of solidarity which is a replica of the kind the Jewish people were compelled to wear - this replica bearing the insignia "Jews and non-Jews stand united in their struggle." The significance attributed to this non-existent act is that he was able to spare the Jewish people of Denmark from having to wear badges identifying their Jewishness.

"The principal objective in introducing distinctive signs for the Jews was to erect a barrier between them and non-Jews and to restrict their movements. The Nazis achieved their objective to a large extent, despite the various reactions which rendered application of the orders difficult. The Jews increasingly concentrated in closed districts even before the establishment of the ghettos by the Nazis for fear of being arrested and deported to concentration camps. A Jew had the choice of concealing the sign and thus becoming an offender liable to deportation to the concentration camps, or of wearing the sign and becoming an easy prey to his enemies. The distinctive signs were thus an effective means in the hands of the Nazis to facilitate their plan to exterminate the Jews." According to Flender and Yahil, this never occurred.

A favorite story was that King Christian had announced, "If the Germans want to introduce the yellow Jewish star in Denmark, I and my whole family will wear it as a sign of the highest distinction."

Many Danes spread stories that the King and members of his family had actually worn the yellow Star of David, and by doing so caused the Germans to rescind the order that all Danish Jews were to wear the armband.

Actually, none of these stories is true. King Christian X never made the statements attributed to him. He never wore the armband, never even said that he would wear it.

There is not a single shred of evidence to show that any of the stories of King Christian X and the yellow Star of David are true. The apocryphal nature of the stories is attested to by Danish historians Per Haestrup and Ole Barfoed, leading authorities on this period, as well as by Rabbi Melchoir, librarian Julius Margdlinsky, newspaper editor Borge Outze, and other authorities on the Danish Jews under the occupation.

The second point around which legends flourish was the fact that Danish Jews were not forced to wear the yellow star. This was so fantastic an omission in the eyes of observers that they felt bound to provide some extremely unusual explanation. The legend goes that when the Germans raised the subject of the yellow star, the king threatened that he himself would be the first to wear it, and the Germans thereupon withdrew their demand.

Jewish people generally recognize the courageousness of this King's political acts on their behalf; his office was little protection though against the posed threat of Nazi invasion. Unfortunately, Parke, you conspicuously neglected to attribute innumerable acts of resistance, under the most staggering and unimaginable conditions, to the Jewish people themselves. You extracted one bit of erroneous information out of a whole legacy of oppression, information that glorifies - out of context - a non-Jewish male.

In addition, your use of the King of Denmark is an anti-Jewish parallel, because it perpetuates the racist stereotype of Jewish people as being passive and dependent on non-Jewish people to bail us out. When you talk about the Holocaust, you should discuss the Jewish people and our acts of resistance - especially the courageousness of Jewish women.

Your implied advocacy of non-Jewish people proclaiming their "Jewishness" is wrong as non-Jewish people will never experience the day-to-day oppression that Jewish people experience. Non-Jewish people will never feel a direct connection to the genocide of 40% of the Jewish population during World War II - mothers, daughters, and other Jewish relatives, lovers, and friends who were slaughtered during that period, nor to the anti-Jewishness that is prevalent and threatening today. This is a lack of respect for the Jewish people.

Lastly, when addressing a non-Jewish audience, the Jewish people should be called "the Jewish people" instead of "Jews" because of what it has historically meant to be called "Jew" by non-Jewish people - this word being spat out as a racial insult.

Charlotte and Parke, your exchange is also anti-lesbian.

Showing Respect for Lesbians

Heterosexual women undoubtedly have varying degrees of humiliation, sadism, and sexual abuse thrust upon them by the men in their lives. Sadly, many heterosexual women live in constant fear; oftentimes, they want to leave their situations and find they cannot - threats may range from economic deprivation, to violence and rape, to loss of child custody, to loss of even their very lives. Yet it cannot be denied that heterosexual women experience some measure - from very small to very great - of protection and privilege which is granted them by patriarchal society which has a vested interest in maintaining heterosexual institutions.

Lesbians who find themselves in desperate situations stemming from men’s hatred of women cannot avail themselves of any societal protection or sympathies.

Heterosexual institutions do not provide for female "queers," and, most sadly, heterosexual women all too often act as agents for men by echoing the anti-lesbian sentiments which the men put into action.

Some heterosexual women do live up to their political responsibility of studying lesbian oppression and actively work to put an end to heterosexual institutions. It is disrespectful, however, for these women to call themselves lesbians. Such women are still afforded the privilege and protection of heterosexual society, which they do not relinquish until they become lesbians. And even when heterosexual women become lesbians, for the majority of these women, there are still vestiges of “straight" life that allow them to "pass." Their reality is qualitatively different from the reality of women who have always (or for a very long time) been lesbians - women who have taken the risks involved - "coming out" is a process, not an event.

Your advocacy of heterosexual women calling themselves lesbians is, therefore, both incomprehensible and unjustifiable. I take issue not only with the exchange between Charlotte and Parke, but with the following as well:

We (Lois Gould and you) agree that the term "lesbian" is no longer just a sexual definition. Many feminists now consider it a highly charged political term used to describe any woman who lives independently from men.

Is this your definition of "lesbian"? If so, what is the name for women who love, and make love with, other women? What do you call yourselves? What do you call a lesbian who is forced, out of economic necessity, to live non-independently of a man - a father, etc.? Your equating independence from men with lesbianism is, at the very least, classist because many lesbians are forced to be dependent on men due to economic circumstances.

"We so need to develop new words," Charlotte says. "to support women and all forms of women's sexuality."

Charlotte, you cannot be unaware that words that have specific meaning are often co-opted by the establishment to suit their own needs. This has happened to the term "revolutionary" - which once had a power and a specific meaning. Now every new product on the market is described as such. A lesbian is a woman who loves, and makes love with, other women. It is wrong for a woman who is not a lesbian to define herself as such just because men define her that way. It is not a "logical extension"; your following reiterated quote is not only disconcerting, it is baffling:

"... that is a logical extension. In the sense that if your life is not bound up with men, then in men's eyes you might as well be a lesbian."

Do you really believe this? Since when is a lesbian defined by men?

Anti-lesbian sentiment is not only present in these particular statements, but it is present throughout the article.

Why did you publicly discuss lesbians when none of you openly claimed lesbianism as your own - even though all of you are lesbians? The consequences of this omission is that you avoided directly challenging the institution of heterosexuality - which you knew would hardly please the Times. Moreover, your silence tacitly endorsed heterosexuality by implication as you were in the position of spokeswomen for the WLM.

One can assume that you were left feeling free to make definitions and judgments about lesbianism - because you never came out and said that you weren't lesbians. Unfortunately, you used your fence-sitting status as a way to express definitions and judgments almost uniformly disparaging to lesbians.

What does this say about how you see other lesbians? Your own lesbian identities?

To continue, both of you, (particularly Charlotte, who describes lesbian sexuality as a "frightening idea") insult lesbians in the following:

...(Charlotte Bunch) and the others reject the notion...that to be a feminist a woman must try, explore, convert to lesbian sexuality. “It's not only a frightening idea," says Charlotte, "it's utterly false...The worst thing about it is the overemphasis on sexuality as a definition of one's self. It's just another way to create guilt - the way people are made to feel guilty if they aren't hypersexed..."

This statement feeds the fear of lesbians/lesbianism that many heterosexual women have. It perpetuates, by implication, the myth that we lesbians are frightening seducers, intent on "making" every woman - with sexual gratification our main reason for living. As this statement stands, it is grossly insensitive to all women - lesbian and heterosexual; it relegates sexual expression to the realm of pure physical sensation. While I believe that making love with a woman is an exquisite experience (when there is trust and caring), more is involved than making love with a woman you have love for. Such an experience is an affirmation of our femaleness (as opposed to femininity) and self-love - Lesbian sexuality is a vehicle for true intimacy which we can know ourselves because we feel safe with each other and can, therefore, intensely and lovingly communicate.

Moreover, your statement implies that no woman should have to force her natural inclinations towards anything which feels unnatural to her because that generates fear and guilt. Most conditioned values are not in our best interest - heterosexuality is no exception.

I think it is not politically important that all women become lesbians, and that we direct our energies to all women as much as possible, and to men as little as possible.

Your actively diluting the political significance of "lesbianism" for the Times is politically unforgivable. All lesbians with whom I have spoken are very angry and feel politically sold-out by your publicly co-opting the term "lesbian" instead of representing it for what it is - a powerful word for an extremely powerful political identity, a reality that has staggering future political implications. Why did you omit the political soundness of women directing our energy and love towards women? Why do you not encourage heterosexual women to give up their heterosexual privilege - with its attendant oppression?

In addition, you are paraphrased as saying:

"Maybe a third of the women in the feminist press network are married and living with their husbands. Another, not inconsiderable number are sexually - or at least emotionally - celibate."

You label these non-lesbian women "woman-identified" while lesbians are not even mentioned in this context - we are conspicuously absent. This is a serious - in fact, glaring - political misrepresentation. The way that Radical lesbians coined this political term in their 1970 essay on lesbianism entitled "We need words that..." 

MORE ON PAGE 8