struggle

This is the first in a series.  
Corinne Coston

There is no difference between  
being raped  

and being run over in a truck  

except that afterward men ask you  
if you enjoyed it...  

There is no difference between  
being  

and going head first through a  
windshield  

except that afterward you are afraid  
not of cars  
but of half the human race.  

Marge Piercy  
Living in the open  

Rape is not an accident, or natural  
male aggression or the act of a der-  
anged sexual pervert. Rape is war.  
The reasons for it combine A) a con-  
scious strategy to suppress women  
with B) subconscious fears of women  
and C) male struggles for dominance  
over other males using women as the  
pawns.  

Rape has always been an integral  
part of the patriarchy. Rape has re-  
duced women from the mysterious life-  
givers to chattel.  

Once the male took title to a spec-  
ific female body, and surely for  
him this was a great sexual con-  
venience as well as a testament to  
his warring stature, he had to ass-  
ume the burden of fighting off all  
other potential attackers, or scar-  
ing them off by the retaliatory  
threat of raping their women.  

(Against Our Will, Susan Brown-  
miller pg. 7)  

Any woman who did not belong to some-  
“man was free game for any male who  
wished to make use of her. This, of  
course, furthered the desires of  
males by convincing women of their  
‘need to always have an owner to "pro-  
tect" them from other males. It was  
a very efficient method of forcing  
women to, not only put up with, but  
to actually seek their own slavery.  

Forcible seizure was a perfectly  
acceptable way - for men - of ac-  
quiring women, and it existed in  
England as late as the 15th century.  
Eleanor of Aquitaine . . . lived  
her daily life in terror of being  
‘rapt’ by a vassal who might  
through appropriation of her body  
gain title to her considerable  
property.  
(Brownmiller, pg. 7)  
This historic intimidation is still  
forcing women into self-limitation;  
into not going out alone, not living  
alone, not being obviously ownerless,  

bi :  

SE Ee  

June 30, where we raised $150.  

crunch, such as securing a grant.  

‘ward to a tranquil,  

mr: where we’re at  

Once again, BMR is in bad financial straits. We held a benefit party on  
- and had fun doing it. Thanks to all the  
women who came (especially the neighbors!). On August 12, there will be a  
Women's Nite benefit for BMR and Woman to Woman Bookcenter. We are still  
just filling in the program but we know that there will be theatre, films,  
music, dinner, and much, much more. While benefits are very enjoyable, we  
are discussing other, more long-range alternatives out of our financial  

BMR has decided to accept poetry submissions.  
tionary thought is expressed through poetry and that it would be a welcome  
addition to the newspaper. We ask that poets enclose a self-addressed,  
stamped envelope with their submissions.  

We remind you again that this is our combined July/August issue, there-  
fore we've tried to make it an especially good one. We're all looking for-  
newspaper-less July. Our next issue will be coming  
out in September. Copy deadline for that issue is August 17. We're very  
excited about the issues we have planned for the fall. The October issue  
will focus on self-defense, a topic which is especially on our minds now  
in the midst of summer and warm evenings. We hope to receive a lot of  
input from the new Denver chapter of Women Against Violence Against Women.  
The deadline for that issue is September 14. For November, we're planning  
an issue on women and aging, the deadline for which is October 19.  

And as always, we need women to help out - writing, production, photo-  
graphy, graphics, etc. Our collective is open, and we need you.  

editorial  

for fear of being assaulted by any  
male who happens to come along at  
the wrong time.  

When a woman is raped as she is  
walking home from work at 10 pm she  
is A) asking for it, B) should have  
known better. Either way it's her  
fault and she must bear the shame of  
having been raped. Her experience,  
not coincidentally, shows other women  
what might happen to them.  

The myths surrounding rape are very  
specific about who is to blame: the  
evil enticer: woman. She "plays hard  
to get," Myth 1, and then when the  
poor fellow's "natural male lust,"  
Myth 2, gets the better of him,  
he assaults her. She “enjoys it,"  
Myth 3, and later "regrets her plea-  
sure and ‘cries rape'," Myth 4. This  
is the popular male construct that  
women have been indoctrinated into  
believing. Even science in the form  
of Dr. Kinsey agrees that "the diff-  
erence between a ‘good time’ and a  
‘rape' may hinge on whether the girl's  
parents were awake when she finally  
arrived home."  

This brings us to the greatest myth  
of all - rape as an act of sexuality.  
It is, only insofar as men "get off"  
on the violent dominance of another  
human being. Rape of an independent  
woman is dominance over her, and,  
by transference, all women; a rape of  
someone else's property is a battle  
won in a competitive war against  

another male.  

The "theory" about rapists being  
"perverts" can be considered a ration-  
alization to protect women from the  
reality of how men really feel about  
women. Bluntly, men hate and fear  
women. Can male actions (when viewed  
objectively) be a function of anything  
else? Normal males typically abuse  
and murder  
boyfriends, brothers, beat, pe, and  
murder women that they supposedly  
love or women they don't even know.  
Any male is a potential rapist. How  

Many men make comments about women  
that are obviously classifying women  
as objects? To perceive a woman as an  
object is the first step to rape.  
Verbal harassment, fondling a waitress  
etc., are all steps to rape. How easy  
it is for a male to step over into  
more aggressive violence can be seen  
in rape and murder statistics. "Crimes  
of passion” is the misnomer given to  
these crimes. Crimes of violence is  
obviously more correct.  

Perhaps, when women realize, emo-  
tionally as well as intellectually,  
that the system encourages rape and  
other forms of violence against women,  
we will be able to begin to accept the  
responsibility for stopping rape in-  
stead of hoping the police and judges,  
almost exclusively male, will do it  
for us.  

We feel that much revolu-  

Big Mama Rag vol. 6, No. 7  

In Where We'ne At (BMR, Vol. 6, No. 7, May issue) we said that we would be  
printing an editorial about the article "Just What Can Feminists Afford?,"  
discussing the article, the points raised in it and our process in choosing  
to publish it.  

We printed Marina Franchild's article "Just What Can Feminists Afford?"  

(see BMR April and May issues, 1978) because vital feminist issues are raised  
and discussed within it. We feel that theoretical discussion of issues that  
apply very specifically to the current state of the feminist movement is too  
rare and much needed. Many of the political ideas contained in the article  
need to be thought about and debated. These include: the responsibility of  
feminists when dealing with the straight press, accountability to the feminist  
community, collective responsibility for feminist strategies, maintaining a  
radical overview with regards to reformist political tactics, and attempting  
to create feminist businesses. Discussion of the strategies that feminists  
are using is necessary as a vehicle to determine if these strategies are com-  
patible with our goals and if not, in what direction are they leading us.  

The BMR collective criticizes itself for our handling of the Marina Fran-  
child article. We don't feel we made a mistake in printing it. However, if  
we had it to do over, we would have spent an additional month researching and  
discussing the article. We would have contacted June Arnold, Parke Bowman,  
Charlotte Bunch and Bertha Harris that we were running the article and we  
would definitely have requested and encouraged a response from them. BMR reit-  
erates the sincere hope, made via telephone to Parke Bowman on 6/11/78 that  
daughters respond in some way to the article. We think it is important to  
continue dialogue within the feminist press.  

To fully understand this series of articles, one must read the interview  
that Bunch, Bowman, Arnold and Harris gave to the New York Times, "Creating a  
Woman's World," New York Times, Jan. 2, 1977.  

We agree with Marina Franchild that the interview is indeed infuriating.  

We do not feel that Franchild misrepresented the Times interview in any way.  
We do object to the ‘personal attack' tone of the Franchild article. She crit-  
icizes the women as self-aggrandizing and opportunistic. She sets a tone of bad  
faith by attributing their motives to opportunism. We object to the fact that  
Franchild seems more concerned with demanding apologies than communicating  

the reasons their action was irresponsible. This is irresponsible criticism.  
It neither created an atmosphere for dialogue nor takes Daughters' past his-  
tory into account. It would seem logical to assume good motives of women who  
publish good feminist books, who seem to have class awareness based on whom  
they choose to publish and who treat the women they publish very well.  

Criticism and self-criticism within the feminist community, and channels  
for that criticism are essential to our continual development of ideas, poli-  
tics, and strategies. Criticism should function to provide cohesiveness and  
strength by illuminating and stimulating debate on these issues.  

Rarely in the feminist community have we learned to give or accept construc-  
tive criticism. We must learn to criticize our strategies, point out the  
consequences and suggest changes, compromises, or new strategies, not attack the  
women involved. We must also learn to listen to  
take it as a personal attack when it is not.  

Dealing With the Establishment Media —  

The establishment media is a very powerful propaganda tool that feminists  
can sometimes effectively use to our advantage. For most women it is the only  
source of information about the women's movement. It is also true that the  
establishment media will portray us to their advantage, choose who will repre-  
sent us and define our struggles however they see fit. This will often be by  
trivializing our oppressions, and by accentuating and creating intramovement  
struggles.  

We must anticipate this and take precautions against it. We must never be  
influenced by how sympathetic we believe the interviewer to be, the interview  
must remain strictly on our terms, dealing only with those issues we decide  
to discuss, not issues the establishment media choose as being important.  
Giving the New York Times an interview about Daughters Press could have been  
an effective forum for giving the movement visibility to many women. But  
Arnold, Bunch, Bowman and Harris did not stick to discussing Daughters and  
the politics of women's presses; They volunteered much information that  
distorted and badly misrepresented the women's movement.  

To guard against this kind of misrepresentation, the interview should have  
been tightly structured. The establishment media interviewer is not to be  
viewed as a confidant. The establishment media cannot be made a forum for our  
intramovement struggles no matter how sympathetic or feminist the interviewer  
may be.  

Therefore, the roles of the participants in an interview must be clearly  
defined. The women being interviewed are representing feminists; they are re-  
presenting all of us. They must make it clear that we are confronting and  
struggling against sexism, racism, classism and ageism. Our intramovement  
goals are to develop and clarify these struggles; in any interview we must  
keep these priorities clearly in mind.  

Collective Responsibility  

In talking to the establishment media we must keep aware that, given any  
opportunity, they will play us off against each other and portray us as com-  
peting against each other instead of struggling with each other against the  
same oppressions. Therefore, we must choose our words carefully; we must keep  
our intramovement struggles within our own community.  

We must take responsibility for all women's struggles and confront the  
issue of the right of women to separate whenever the strategy of separatism  
is discussed.  

Whenever an issue that other women are dealing with is brought up in an  
interview or any situation, it must never be assumed that the interviewer, or  
the readers will grasp the motives behind it without a thorough explanation.  
For instance, when the issue of separatism was brought up in the interview,  
Arnold, Bunch, Bowman and Harris should have explained and defended it as a  
vital strategy for women.  

We must make it clear what the issue is; not discuss the validity of the  
strategy but support it and all women's struggles.  

MORE ON PAGE 18