bmn:

where we're at

Yes, folks, it's another hectic month here at the big rag.  
Lori is attending the Eleventh Annual International Confer-  
ence on Human Rights and Psychiatric Oppression in Syracuse,  
N.Y., and we are sorely missing her presence at production.  
It's the second month in a row now that one of us collective  
members has been absent from production weekend. Our support-  
ers are really coming through for us - not only typing, lay-  
ing out pages, proofreading, etc., but donating to us the  
money they raised as front money for the film festival so  
we could mail last month's issue. And thanks to all of you  
who sent in extra money to help out.

We did get a "no-show" booth at the People's Fair here in  
Denver, so hopefully that will relieve a bit of the finan-  
cial crunch - at least give us enough to print the paper!  
Thanks to the supporters for helping out with the selling of  
T-shirts, newspapers, bumper stickers, et al, to free up the  
collective during production. We're still really strapped  
for money, so send in those few extra dollars, we need them!

Speaking of financial problems, Woman to Woman Bookcenter/  
Rocky Mountain Women's Center has closed its doors for good.  
Seems there were too many financial and collective/community  
problems for it to continue. We will miss the center badly,  
as it served not only as a bookstore, but a place for women  
to connect with each other on both a political and personal  
basis. In this time of increasing repression, it's a sign of  
the oppression of the system we live in that projects are  
folding or having difficult times. Makes us somewhat more  
concerned for the future of BMR, but we're well into our  
11th year, and with your support, we'll continue for quite  
some time.

We have an article here at BMR about the book Sitt Marie  
Rose, called, “The Impossible Mutation or Why I No Longer  
Call Myself A Zionist." Unfortunately, we don't have the  
author's name or address - it's not on the article and we  
have lost the envelope somewhere in the piles of paper at  
the office. Please contact us as we want to discuss the art-  
icle with you.

Bobbe is feeling somewhat isolated as the only older mem-  
ber on the BMR collective, and as the only older lesbian  
with radical politics in this community that she/we know of.  
(Congratulations on your 55th birthday, Bobbe!) So to all  
you radical communist older women out there, get out your  
pens and write us about your experiences - working in poli-  
tical groups, on the job, etc. We are also soliciting graph-  
ics and photos of older women.

We have reprinted an interview in this issue with Meridel  
le Sueur. She is an 83-year-old socialist feminist who has  

cover:

The cover is a photograph by Cate Gilles of an elder  
at the Big Mountain Survival Gathering.

collective:

Deb Luger, Lori Bradford, Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross

Supporters: Liz Lewis, Sue Goding, Linda  

Lane, Claire Ellington, Joan Pettijohn, Kay Young,  
Candy McCullough, Kathy Riley, Natalie Phillips

contributors: Tea Schook, Vickie Barriga,  
Patricia Silva, Lauren Young, Jan Hackendy, Louise  

Knapp, Rozz Liegth, Barb Beiser, Laura Carlson,  
Geraldine Barr, Hollise Smith

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly  
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,  

Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding  
month. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope  
with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-  
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-  
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, June 1983  

been politically active all her lifetime. She is an inspira-  
tion, as is Katherine Smith, Mae Wilson Tso, Alice Bennally,  
Pauline Whitesinger, Roberta Blackgoat, Carolyn Tawagyouna  
and the many, many more elder Diné and Hopi women of Big  
Mountain who are resisting forced relocation from their home-  
land. (See pages 10-12 of this issue.)

We encourage all of you to respond to articles printed in  
BMR. We need the input, and letters always extend and add to  
the articles and add to our consciousness. We don't/authors  
don't have the definitive word on an issue - it's a continual  
struggling/changing/growing process. Do let us hear from you.

For those of you in and around Denver, don't forget the  
film festival on June 18th. We're all looking forward to  
some great films and a fun dance afterwards. See you there!

oops

We apologize to Dee dee  
NiHera for the sloppy  
proofreading which dis-  
torted her "letter home to  
mama" in the May, '83 is-  
sue. She wrote, "To hear  
from sisters and brothers  
struggling with similar  
issues...reinforces my be-  
lief that this work has  
importance..." and we  

printed had. She wrote  
"...the sorry excuses for  

alternatives we're now  
witnessing" and we print-  
ed not. Both mistakes  
really change her mean-  
ing. We try to proof each  
page twice, but at 1 or 2  
am on Monday morning before  
going to the printer, we  
have been known to let  
things slide. We're sorry.

-Cate Gilles/BMR

inside BMR:

Voices  
Meridel le Sueur........8,9  

Where we're at...........  
National  
Women Farmworkers........4  
Wounded Knee.............5  
Big Mountain.............10-12  
America Held Hostage......5  
Hot Briers...............7  

International  
Aboriginal Struggles.....13  
“Angry Women"...........15  
Women in Cages  

Eva Williams..............6  
Classifieds and Ads......18,19  
RESOURCES...............  

Rates are $9/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,  
$15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 over-  

seas, and $22 for U.S.  

institutions. BMR is free to all  

women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions.  
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian  
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1,  
#1 Oct.'72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60.  

BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box  

7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is (303) 322-2010.