The story of Charity Lamb

free

13

First Woman Prisoner In Oregon

Charity Lamb was the first woman prisoner in Oregon. On May 13, 1854, in Clackamas County, Oregon Territory, she picked up a double-bitted household ax and drove it into the skull of her husband, Nathaniel. Ever since, Charity has been held up as a symbol of all that is evil in women. It's time to tell her side of the story.

Charity's side of the story is very important. She was a battered wife. She murdered Nathaniel only after he had tried to kill her. It is relevant today because there have been and are countless battered women who have faced similar choices. Many women are driven to violence by circumstances which would tax any human. Yet they are punished and vilified as exotic and heinous creatures. 

For the fate of Charity Lamb.

First we must dispense with some myths. There's the myth that women are naturally non-violent. This has wide credence because it so often appears to be true. Women are trained - or as sociologists say, "socialized" - to be passive, compliant, tolerant of abuse, and steadfastly loyal. The training is so thorough that these attributes appear with great regularity. The deviant from this mold appears unseemly at best, unnatural at worst. The woman who turns, or is pushed, to violence is described by that evocative word, "unnatural." So it was with Charity. She was called a monster.

A second myth is that women experience chivalry in the justice system. This too, appears to be true but isn't. There is hard evidence that the justice system is overly punitive with women. Women are liable to serve longer time than men convicted of the same crime. Social control institutions are used interchangeably. Women are underrepresented in prison populations but this is more than made up by their overrepresentation in mental hospitals. So it was with Charity Lamb.

For the past one hundred and twenty-three years, myths have been woven about Charity Lamb. Accounts of her have described her as evil or crazy and lucky to have escaped her deserved fate - hanging. There have been one hundred and twenty-three years of grievous puns. Men have written of Charity Lamb and her “improbable name." The very first account of the murder said she should be more appropriately called, "Mrs. Tiger." A 1958 newspaper article referred to her as the "little mother" who took things into her own hands after some "domestic discord." Other accounts see her as lustful, ridding herself of a burdensome spouse.

Popular accounts have assumed that somehow Charity escaped the consequences of her act. Stories appear in the vein, “Whatever Became of Charity Lamb?" One wistful story in the Oregon prisoners' magazine, Shadows, expressed hope that Charity, like so many early prisoners, escaped through slipshod management of the penitentiary.

The bulk of the popular articles enhance the stereotype of Charity as a monster. One relatively sympathetic account did appear in the press. Elizabeth Thompson wrote “The Sad Story of Charity Lamb" in the Oregon Journal, January 6, 1946. Particularly noteworthy as evidence of the strength of the myth is the disparity between this published article and its author's original draft. The original is in the Oregon State Library and it contains the following explanation for the harsh treatment of Charity given the circumstance of her life: "The world of 1854 was wholly a man's world in which woman worked and obeyed and was supposed to show respect for the superior male.” It seems it was still a "man's world” in 1946, too. This telling line was deleted from the published account.

The history

The real story of Charity Lamb is a sad story, not a romantic tale of a woman who eluded her destiny. The real story is not glamorous.

Charity Lamb was a thin and work-worn pioneer woman described as "pale and sallow, emaciated as a skeleton." Trial observers thought her to be about fifty years of age, although they knew her to be much younger because of her newly born child. Actually, she was only thirty-two.

Their fates mirror

The Lamb family had arrived in Oregon Territory in the fall of 1852. There were five of them - Charity, Nathaniel, their daughter Mary Ann, their sons Tommie and Abram. Most likely, they were lured by the Donation Land Claim Act of 1850. Under the act, a married couple could have 320 acres if they worked and improved the claim. The Lambs crossed the country by wagon. Pioneers who did so were usually working people. Richer settlers came to the territory by ship.

We now view the great western migration of American ancestors under a patina of romance. The trip in the prairie schooner is portrayed as harsh but somehow noble. This romantic hue is deceptive. The pioneers suffered terribly. Plagued by death and disease, fearful of the journey and irritable from heat and dust or cold and rain, couples would quarrel and separate. Their companions would confer on the matter and sometimes in the absence of a court system grant a divorce. Many a marriage was ended on the trail.

The Lambs, too, had trouble. The children later testified that their parents quarreled both in Oregon and before, "in the states." On the trail, the situation became critical enough that Charity walked separately from the others, carrying the gun to keep it from Nathaniel.

The Lamb family arrived in Clackamas County and started a farm. Nathaniel also found work with the wealthy farmer and mill owner, Philip Foster, Esq. The Lambs built a cabin and lived like their neighbors.

The children later testified to the father's abusiveness. In a drunken rage, he would beat his wife. In a sober rage, he would abuse. Tommie testified that Nathaniel once threw a hammer at Charity. Abram didn't see this occur, but he saw the scar on his mother's forehead. Once, angry that she was sick and couldn't pick herself up, Nathaniel drew a bench over Charity to keep her, he said, from ever getting up.

The murder

The situation worsened in the spring of 1854. Nathaniel told Charity he was going to kill her as soon as the calf was born. At one point, he offered her the chance to leave if she left the baby behind. Fearfully, she got her bonnet and went as far as the gate. Nathaniel pointed a gun at her and told her she couldn't leave, and if she did he'd “drop her before she got out of sight." She later said that she didn't dare leave because he was “a mighty good shot."

Nathaniel finally named the day he was going to kill her. Mary Ann testified that on Saturday, a week before the murder, Nathaniel said that Charity would not live on his expense longer than a week - that he was going to kill her the next Saturday night and take the boys and go off. On the day that Nathaniel said would be Charity's last, Nathaniel pointed the rifle at Charity. He turned and shot a tree when the children happened on the scene. Then Nathaniel left with neighbors to go hunting and a distraught Charity cried and worried.

When Nathaniel returned from the hunt, Charity offered him supper. She asked his hunting companion, Mr. Muzzy, to stay but he said no. Later, Muzzy said he didn't understand just what she meant when she talked of trouble.

As the family sat to the supper table, Charity took the ax and hit Nathaniel from behind. Charity ran out the door. Mary Ann, had been in the back room, putting away part of the day's hunt, a bear paw. Mary Ann, too, ran out the door. Nathaniel, with his skull split open, followed. He made it all the way to the gate before he collapsed. He told the boys to go to the neighbors, the Smiths, for help.

While the boys raced to the Smiths, Charity and Mary Ann were on their way to the Smiths. They, however, took a more roundabout route through the woods, perhaps because they were afraid Nathaniel would find them on the road. Charity and Mary Ann passed their neighbors on their way to aid Nathaniel. They told them to hurry, then took refuge at the Smith's home.

Charity talked to Mrs. Smith until the latter retired. Mrs. Smith, however, didn't testify in court. Respectable women didn't appear in court. Late that night, the neighbors who had been to Nathaniel's death bed came to see Charity. She was sitting in front of the fire, smoking her pipe. They asked that she go to Nathaniel. She refused until she was assured that he was unable to kill her as she feared. Charity agreed to return home only to feed her children. The neighbors insisted that she see Nathaniel and there was a death bed confrontation. Nathaniel asked why she had done the deed and she told him that it was because he planned to kill her. She gave him a long litany of his sins - Nathaniel, playing to the gallery, denied all. To the assembled witnesses, Charity appeared, “irritated and angry." Given the gravity of the moment, the witnesses thought this accusatory tone unseemly.

Nathaniel played the wronged husband. No, he hadn't tried to shoot her that day, he was merely putting a fresh load of shot in his rifle. Charity, out of patience, told him to remember his condition and tell the truth: "Don't lie about it. Consider the situation you are in."

The neighbors talked to Charity. One told her that people might take action over this. She might even be hung. Charity was unperturbed. She was matter-of-fact and answered that if she didn't kill him, she would die at his hand; and if she did she would hang. It was about the same either way. Later, the state's witnesses, Drs. Welch and Barclay, commented on her calmness. Dr. Welch thought it strange she could do such an act and be so indifferent to it.

Both Charity and Mary Ann were arrested because, in response to a query, Charity said that Mary Ann knew what Charity was about to do, that Mary Ann would have done it herself, but Charity took it off her hands. Mary Ann was offered the choice of caring for her dying father but she refused, saying she'd go where her mother did. They were housed in the now Oregon City jail. Nathaniel was still proclaiming his martyrdom from his death bed. Later, Charity was condemned for saying, while being transported to jail, that she was sorry she had not struck him a little harder and prevented his giving evidence against her.

Public opinion was fixed against Charity when Philip Foster, Esq., Nathaniel's boss, went to the newspapers with his account of the events. Foster thought Nathaniel to be a temperate man and hard-working. Perhaps he wasn't privy to the truth. Nonetheless, the prestige of Foster lent credence to Nathaniel's claims. The papers called Charity a “monster.” Newspapers claimed that Charity had tried to escape into the woods after the act. Speculation was that Charity and Mary Ann were both seduced by a man named Collins, Mary Ann's beau.

The charge that the women had tried to escape is as false as the description of Nathaniel as “an industrious and quiet citizen." Still, Nathaniel was painted as an innocent victim, a sober man whose hard work was rewarded with death at the hands of a faithless wife and an ungrateful daughter.

Even if Nathaniel hadn't been billed as guiltless, Charity's act would be considered unthinkable. The role of woman was that of faithful servant. The papers weekly gave maudlin examples of selflessness in wives. Articles would inveigh against intoxicants but tell in glowing terms how even the vile drunken state cannot drive away the loving wife: "Such is a woman's love. It is the brightest jewel in her crown. Then what to her is life when love has flown."

It took a week for Nathaniel to die. Lucid to the last, his accusations were repeated in the press. In June, in a charged atmosphere, the trials of Charity and Mary Ann opened. Charity's trial was immediately declared a mistrial and bound over for the September term of Judge Cyrus Olney.

Mary Ann's trial was over quickly. Nothing tied her to the death of her father but her mother's comments that she had known the deed was to be done and that she had run out the cabin door when Charity axed Nathaniel.

The Oregon City paper was outraged. The paper asked, "Ha Ha, does Judge Olney think that women are getting so scarce in Oregon?" The paper wagered oysters for the jury that "the old woman," Charity would get off in September. There was fear that this would trigger other such episodes of ladies chopping open the heads of fathers and husbands.

Charity's second trial was lengthy. Witness after witness was called and the testimony duly reported by the press. The children were effective defense witnesses as they told of Nathaniel's cruelty.

After returning for instructions on the finer points of the recently adopted territorial code, the jury finally came to a verdict. They voted for murder in the second degree. They concluded that Charity should have at least tried to run away. They were, however, sympathetic and recommended clemency.

Unfortunately, the new code had no mechanism for clemency. Judge Olney was required to sentence Charity to hard labor for life. He hoped that his recording of the jury's recommendation would later be taken into account. It never was.

The sentence

Charity spent two years in the Oregon City jail and was then transferred to the newly established penitentiary in Portland. She fulfilled her sentence of hard labor by washing and scrubbing for the warden's wife in their home near the prison.

Myth has it that the state was charitable to Charity. Not so. Myth has it that she was lucky to have escaped hanging. Not so. She was convicted of second degree murder under extenuating circumstances. Men convicted of the same crime also received a sentence of hard labor for life, but the practice was that after two years, the governor would issue a pardon. This was the forerunner to the parole system. Men were pardoned, Charity was not. As her fellow prisoners escaped from the incapable hands of the lessees of the penitentiary, Charity stayed. Charity Lamb, prisoner #8, remained.

Just why Charity was never released is obscure. Partly, it was because she had never shown remorse. To the end, she insisted that she had no choice when she killed Nathaniel. Another factor may be that she refused to take religion. It was common for religious figures to visit the incarcerated so that their hearts would be "tendered" and broken before the Lord. Charity was not to be “tendered” and “broken."

Writers have speculated that Charity was eventually quietly released. She was not. She spent eight years as a prisoner and was transferred to a mental asylum. There was no evidence, other than the doctor's certification needed for the transfer, that Charity was insane.

Observers had questioned Charity's sanity. Nothing in her demeanor had suggested insanity to them, but after making inquiries of her jailers, and learning of the murder, each would conclude that such an act must signal insanity. The warden's reports from the prison referred to her poor health but not to insanity.

MORE ON PAGE 18