Women in New Zealand  
Samoan Feminist Battles Cultural Odds  

Mona Papali'i  

The following is an interview with  
Peta Siukepa, a Detached Youth Worker  
for the YWCA in Wellington working  
with Arohata Women's Prison and one of  
the founding members of Tu Tangata  
Polynesia. The piece is reprinted from  
Broadsheet, a women's publication from  
New Zealand.  

Peta Siukepa is a Samoan woman and a  
feminist. A gruelling combination for  
while European society has made a few  
concessions to women, the staunchly  
male-oriented Samoan society has chan-  
ged little in the past hundred years  
or so.  

Male privilege is almost synonymous  
with fa'a Samoa (the Samoan way, Samo-  
an culture) and this, sadly, has been  
reinforced by its only innovation, the  
Church with its anti-woman doctrines.  
Those of us who dare to question such  
a good thing are seen to be anti-Samo-  
an, or, worse still, "a Palagi"  
(Samoan for Pakeha). Feminism, for  
those who have heard of it, is consi-  
dered a Palagi principle, born out of  
white experience, out of white history,  
and therefore, having no place in fa'a  
Samoa. Are there no women in Samoa?  
Peta has had to break through the  
barrier of romanticism which enshrouds  
the fa'a Samoa, to endure the put-downs  
and often the rejection of many of her  
own people, and struggle against the  
overwhelming odds set up by this male  
capitalist society to reach the poli-  
tical stance that she takes today: that  
of a black working-class woman.  

My parents came to New Zealand for  
economic reasons - they wanted their  
children to be born and educated in  
New Zealand. My father is a matai  
(chief) and that put pressure on him  
to succeed, for this would mean extra  
status for him. So that we would suc-  
ceed on Palagi terms my parents felt  
it was best to suspend fa'a Samoa, so  
that, unlike a lot of other Samoan mi-  
grant parents, they didn't speak Sa-  
moan to us - consequently we were  
brought up speaking only English.  

But despite all that, in terms of  
power structure and privilege we were  
brought up in the Samoan way. That is,  
the men in our family got all the pri-  
vilege, while the women did all the  
work. I couldn't understand why we  
girls had to get up in the morning,  
make breakfast for all my brothers,  
make their beds, run around and wait  
on them and my father, but not treat  
my mother in the same way. They ob-  
viously had preferential treatment  
and this used to really anger me be-  
cause as far as I was concerned I was  
just as capable, if not better, at  
doing most things than my brothers  
were.  

At high school three of my teachers  
were what I called in those days "wo-  
men's libbers," and they really helped  
me to articulate a lot of the anger,  
a lot of what I saw as unfair in my  
home situation. They used to encour-  
age me to look at my culture and to  
question the position I was in as a  
Samoan woman. There is no encourage-  
ment in Samoa to question or to  
challenge - this is seen as rebellious  
and disrespectful.  

When I was in senior high a lot more  
Pacific Island and Maori girls start-  
ed to arrive, followed by a wave of  
girls, all of whom were black, being  
suspended and expelled. My sister was  

one of them. I saw it as a black/  
white issue at the time - one with a  
lot of racist undertones. Because I  
was the only black in the senior school  
a lot of the girls would come to me  
with their problems. We black women  
organized ourselves into a collective  
where we discussed the problems that  
some were having at school, and the  
whole issue of expulsions. We were  
basically a support group for these  
women, and I think that was the first  
time that I ever experienced solidar-  
ity for a cause.  

Through these meetings we got the  
support of the Maori Women's Welfare  
League and the Department of Maori  
Affairs. We also got involved with Te  

Huinga Rangatahi, a group consisting  
largely of university students concern-  
ed with issues such as Maori land and  
language. That was the beginning of my  
black awareness, of my black conscious-  
ness raising.  

During my involvement with this  
group I was struck by the number of  
black men who were heavily into white  
women. I couldn't understand why these  
black men who stood up on the marae  
and spoke against the white oppre-  
ssion, saying it's about time that blacks  
stood up with real pride, at the same  
time, in their personal lives, only  
went after white women. My older bro-  
ther was very much like that: I remem-  
ber once he said to me, "I would never  
go out with a ‘bonga' or a ‘hori’ wo-  
man." That, to me, was the ultimate  
put-down. To me he was saying that I  
was worth nothing. The white woman was  
a status symbol, the white woman was  
the white male privilege, and, in or-  
der to get the white male privilege,  
you had to get the white woman, at the  
expense of shitting on the black wo-  
man. Black men have just fallen for  
the whole racist ideal of the white  
woman being the epitome of beauty. The  
blue-eyed blonde that we black women  
could never hope to be.  

I could see that these men saw the women  
as just cheap labor as well as cheap  
screws.  

I was hurt and angry to see the rut  
that most of us black women are in.  
We black women really were at the bot-  
tom of the shit heap. I realized that  
I was in a position to help improve  
the plight of black women, so I deci-  
ded that was the direction my whole  
life would take.  

So, I returned to varsity. And it  
was about this time that my sister  
was raped. She was waiting for a bus  
on Karangahape Road when three men,  
two Samoans and one Palagi, approach-  
ed her and asked her whether she was  
a Maori. She told them to mind their  
own business and they grabbed her and  
dragged her away struggling. There  
were several people at the bus stop  
at the time but none tried to help her  
because they saw it as a domestic  
dispute.  

To me that rape was a complete vio-  
lation of her as a woman. But that  
question they fired at her right at  
the beginning really hit home to me.  
If she was a Maori woman, and they ob-  
viously thought that she was, they  
could violate her because she was no-  
thing, and meant nothing.  

The attitude of the court summed it  
up quite well. In the press she was  
described as an “unsophisticated Poly-  
nesian girl" who couldn't remember  
much and who said very little. They  
did not take into account that she was  
immensely shocked. She went through  
three days of hysteria and not being  
able to talk. It was obvious to me  
that in this society it is far worse  
for a black woman victim than it is  
for a white woman victim and that so-  
ciety is far more sympathetic to white  
women who are raped by black men than  
to black women who are raped by black  
men. And the classic example was my  
sister. The rapists walked out of the  
courtroom because that “unsophistica-  
ted Polynesian girl" didn't have en-  
ough evidence to convict them.  

I couldn't bear the harassment she  
was subjected to in court. She didn't  
have to go through that. Going through  
that white, male, middle-class system.  
What woman, let alone a black woman,  
can come through without bruises? That  
culminated in my really wanting to  
get away from Auckland, to go some-  
where isolated and work out my whole  
politics. So I decided to go to Well-  
ington.  

In Wellington, I stayed with my  
uncle who is a minister. I only stayed  
there three months and that was en-  
ough. I just had to leave. One of the  
problems was that because my uncle is  
a minister I was pressured to go to  
church and I really found the pressure  
the church puts on women hard to take.  
A lot of fa'a Samoa is based around  
the church - Samoan culture today is  
very steeped in religion.  

Staying with my uncle really helped  
me to learn a lot more about Samoa and  
the very definite sex-role stereotyp-  
ing. For instance, whenever any of  
my male cousins walked into a room, I  
was expected to walk out. I wasn't  
allowed to wear trousers. I always  
had to wear long sleeves and virtually  
button myself right up to the neck.  

One good thing was that they spoke  
Samoan in the home which helped me to  
understand and learn more. But I  
couldn't cope with their whole rigid  
lifestyle. I especially couldn't cope  
with them telling me that I was re-  
bellious, that I was lost, and that  
I would never find my place, and that  
once again, it was my mother's fault.  
The typical sexist assumption that  
children are the father's property  
but the mother's responsibility.  

At Victoria University I got invol-  
ved in women's groups and my feminist  
awareness became a lot more consoli-  
dated. But at the same time I was very  
much aware that the whole women's  
movement was very white and middle-  
class. These women were articulate, they  
had the resources, the contacts, the  
time and the money to get involved.  

I often felt that I was a token black,  
and I was constantly asked to speak on  
the position of black women. Every-  
thing I said was seen to represent  
the views of other black women.  

I started seeking out other black  
women, particularly Samoan women,  
but most of them were really caught  
up in the conflicts of fa'a Samoa,  
romanticizing it so that they never  
questioned it. At that time I became  
quite nervous of questioning it in  
front of them for fear of being os-  
tracized by them and that would mean  
that I wouldn't have that safe cult-  
ural group I could retreat to when I  
felt oppressed by white society. That  
was one of my conflicts, that I had  
to negate aspects of fa'a Samoa.  

There have been several instances  
where I have been ostracized or  
severely reprimanded by my own people  
for the stance that I have taken on  
issues. I have been had up for the  
way I talk - “refine your mouth" was  
how it was put, and for the way that  
I dress, especially on Sundays and  
most vehemently, for the way that I  
am often seen to question authority.  
In fa'a Samoa, superiors, no matter  
what they stand for, are never ever  
to be questioned. And it is mainly men  
who are supervisors.  

I would never be put down by this.  
There is so much in the system that I  
will always question. I decided to  
get into some kind of welfare work. It  
really concerned me that there weren't  
enough blacks in the field who had  
some kind of political understanding  
of the system and how it works against  
us. My whole emphasis as a Youth Work-  
er is to get people back in touch  

with their power, to get blacks back  
in touch with our power. To have at  
least some control of our destiny.  

The women in the Arohata prison are  
the most powerless in society. They  
are predominantly black and they are  
all working class. They don't  
have the social skills to deal with  
their immediate situation, they're  
constantly being put down, they don't  
have the confidence to stand up for  
themselves, and they can't articulate  
what they want and where they're com-  
ing from. Personal power is self-es-  
teem, self-confidence, self-assertion.  
I want to help them gain that back.  

There are a lot of parallels be-  
tween feminism and fa'a Samoa and I  
accept and admire those aspects of  
fa'a Samoa. For example, group con-  
sensus, where everybody has a say and  
everybody's point of view is taken in-  
to consideration. Cooperation in fem-  
inism follows much of the same lines  
as it does in Samoa, the idea of work-  
ing in collectives and groups. We've  
been able to adopt this with the group  
that I'm involved with at the moment  
called Tu Tangata Polynesia.  

This group consists predominantly of  
Pacific Island and Maori youth and the  
thing I like about it is that we put  
these principles of cooperation and  
group consensus into practice. We, as  
a group, recognize the need for social  
change and are trying to reach other  
groups of young people. We're doing  
quite a bit of outreach work, build-  

ing self-esteem, helping them to real-  
ize their own worth, their own power.  

For me Tu Tangata Polynesia has  
been a personal support group. Though  
I have been able to meet other black  
women who are slowly becoming aware  
of the difficult aspects of sexism in  
the Palagi culture as well as looking  
at women's role in Maoritanga, and in  
fa'a Samoa, and beginning to question.