Big Mama Rag Vol.5 No.2

Women Organize Peace Movement In Ireland

By Deborah Middelkamp

In August of 1976 working class
women in Andersontown, a Catholic
neighborhood in Belfast, united to
march and pray against the increased
violence by the British Army, the
Provisional Irish Republican Army
(PIRA) and the Ulster Volunteer
Force (UVF).

It is of historical importance
that within its ranks the Women's
Peace Movement has included both
the Catholic and Protestant women
in the Protestant Shankill Road sec-
tion of Belfast and has spread to
counties in both the North and South
of Ireland.

The reaction to the Peace Move-
ment by such progressive organiza-
tions as the Official IRA and the
Irish Congress of Trade Unions has
varied from guarded support to open
attacks against the movement. To
develop a clearer idea of these vary-
ing degrees of response and the ef-
fect it might have on the future of
Ireland, it is important to examine
the events and causes that led to
the formation of the Peace Movement.

In 1932, as a result of an IRA
uprising in Dublin, 26 of the 32
counties broke from British domina-
tion and became sovereign. An arbi-
trary line was drawn and the six
counties in northeast Ireland re-
mained under British rule.

In 1969 a Hunger Movement brought
together Catholics and some Protest-
ants—a coalition which had not hap-
pened since the '30s. The British,
frightened of a mass movement, sent
police to provoke armed retaliation
in Catholic areas, smashing homes
and bullying the people. During this
time a small faction broke from the
IRA to form what is now known as the
Provisional IRA. They immediately
began a civilian bombing campaign
along with armed activity against
the Protestants.

IT WAS BECAUSE OF THE VIO—
LENT ASSAULT ON INNOCENT
PEOPLE THAT THE WOMEN’S
PEACE MOVEMENT AROSE.

Their explanations for bombing
libraries, theaters, pubs and fac-
tories was that their war was an
economic one and they were destroy-
ing British property. As a result
of their violent tactics, many be-
lieve that they only succeeded in
initiating more repressive acts
against the people of Northern Ireland.

This civil rights movement was sim-
ilar in style and demands to the
Black civil rights movement in the
US during the ‘60s. Specific issues
confronting the Unionist (loyal to
Britain) government of the Six
Counties by the predominantly Catho-
lic people were centered around un-
fair housing practices and unjust
hiring procedures.

There was strong resistance from
extreme pro-Union sectors, but the
movement also met with support from
the workers and people. Mass rallies
and marches across the Six Counties
included students, women, the unem-
ployed and oppressed Catholics. The
broad appeal of the demands created

a climate of social unrest which
seeded such organizations as the
Peoples' Democracy, the Northern
Ireland Civil Rights Association
and the Trade Union Councils.

From this period grew an active
force that made revolution in
Northern Ireland seem possible. How-
ever the failure to organize a non-
sectarian, united movement in the
Six Counties in 1971 permitted a
strong counterattack by the multi-
national corporations.

Controlling investments in Ire-
land are held by the US, Britain,
and West Germany. Natural resources
such as oil, gas, lead, zinc and cop-
per are taken out of the ground and
shipped out of the country, leaving
the Irish with fewer jobs and fewer
resources. Those large investments
were in danger. As a result, the
forces behind them sought to control
the social unrest by armed force.

British troops were sent into
the countryside and the cities of
Belfast and Derry, while the US
military filled NATO positions left
open in Western Europe by the
British. Among the British Army
detachments sent to Ireland were
US-trained Special Air Services
(SAS). The SAS has been accused of
torture and murder and has been re-
sponsible for antagonizing the con-
flict between the Catholic and Prot-
estant communities.

Along with the Royal Ulster Con-
stabulary and the B-Specials (Six
Counties colonial police), the Brit-
ish Army has driven people from the
streets and squares of the cities
and towns. What was to be a mili-
tary conflict against the British
Army by the Provisional IRA has
since deteriorated into a tit-for-
tat killing between themselves and
the right-wing Protestant UVF.
Because of the futile nature of
this form of struggle the Official
IRA declared a cease-fire in 1972.
Over the past six years, since
the arrival of the British troops,
sectarian violence has killed more
than 1500 people.

The Peace Movement is unclear as to what dir-
ection it is heading in; it may be-
come a reactionary force unable to
differentiate the armed struggle of
the Irish people from the repressive
troops of imperial Britain, the US
and Western Europe.

Bernadette Devlin, of the Socialist
Workers Party in Ireland, in a
recent speech in Los Angeles, ex-
pressed similar doubt:

"It (the movement) is not a
progressive movement which is build-
ing in an attempt to move toward
peace, but a movement which will
unconsciously retard the political
development of women, the class and
the national struggle against op-
pression and will unconsciously be
slotted and fitted into a position
where it becomes part of the oppres-
sive machine."

On the other hand, it is impor-
tant that the Peace Movement has been
mobilized by working women, and
therefore, carries potential for
unifying Catholic and Protestant
workers. Mairin DeBurca, an
Official Republican Movement leader,
has called peace a "revolutionary
demand." However the Official IRA
is giving its guarded support to

More on Page 18

Women In Chile Are Facing A Long, Hard Battle

(This is the second and final part
of an interview with Carel Andreas
on the position of women in Chile.
The first part of the interview ap-
peared in the Jan/Feb BMR where she
discussed how the presence of
Popular Unity Government affected the
progress of Chilean women.

The interview was conducted by a
woman from the Women Everywhere Radio
Collective while visiting in Latin
America.)

BMR: What were some of the other pro-
grams in the city? In your book you
discussed some of the different health
centers that originally started out
as community-based programs.

Carol: Women were trained as parapro-
fessionals in the working-class neigh-
borhoods to do regular checkups on
babies and to do all kinds of clinical
services. Doctors would then come out
periodically to take care of more
serious problems. The emphasis in these
centers was always on preventative care
such as sanitation in the community or
the distribution of free milk to nurs-
ing mothers. These centers were all
over the country, not just in the
cities, by the way.

These programs were very beneficial
to women, not only in the sense of
improving their health and that of
their families, but in the sense of
giving them a real part in the politi-
cal process that was taking place,
giving them a center for political act-
ivism. These centers were very often
set up on the initiative of the people
with the instigation of the political
groups they belonged to. This was very
good for women in taking their own
initiative—to actually help determine
the revolutionary process and not just
wait for it to come to them.

BMR: What were some of the other pro-
grams in the city? In your book you
discussed some of the different health
centers that originally started out
as community-based programs.

Carol: Women were trained as parapro-
fessionals in the working-class neigh-
borhoods to do regular checkups on
babies and to do all kinds of clinical
services. Doctors would then come out
periodically to take care of more
serious problems. The emphasis in these
centers was always on preventative care
such as sanitation in the community or
the distribution of free milk to nurs-
ing mothers. These centers were all
over the country, not just in the
cities, by the way.

These programs were very beneficial
to women, not only in the sense of
improving their health and that of
their families, but in the sense of
giving them a real part in the politi-
cal process that was taking place,
giving them a center for political act-
ivism. These centers were very often
set up on the initiative of the people
with the instigation of the political
groups they belonged to. This was very
good for women in taking their own
initiative—to actually help determine
the revolutionary process and not just
wait for it to come to them.

BMR: How were they affected by the Popular Unity?
Carol: Mothers' centers were originally
set up by the government preceding that
of Allende under pressure from women's
groups who had set up pilot projects
getting women out of the confines of the
home and developing their skills, etc.
They were implemented in a reactionary
way initially, and women were subjected
to a barrage of consumerism more than
anything else. The centers were almost
like Tupperware parties in some re-
spects. Singer Sewing Machine Company
sold sewing machines to the govern-
ment so that women would become addict-
ed to them and want to buy them.
During the PUG, however, many of
the centers became centers where
women went for classes in literacy
training, courses in the history of
their country and classes in how to
become community organizers. The
mothers' centers became places where
women could help define programs that
would liberate them from the domestic
definitions of their role in society
that they had become used to.

Now the centers that had become
really revolutionary have been closed
down entirely. Those that are willing
to support the present government's
reactionary ideology have become
centers for the diffusion of that
ideology. Some of the mothers' centers
as well as former childcare centers
have been converted into centers
where malnourished children are re-
ceiving treatment. This is an urgent
problem and some of the women are
involved in that kind of community
effort.

BMR: Do you think that because the
basic nature of the original mothers'
centers was to improve their tradi-
tional skills enabled the women to
revert more easily to a reactionary
position than, say, some of the more
innovative health care programs?
Carol: Yes. That's probably a very
accurate observation. There was
always a political power struggle
within the centers and sometimes,
even in working-class neighborhoods,
the reactionary women would win out;
there would be a split and two
mothers' centers would be set up, so
that during the PUG there were some
mothers' centers that retained their
reactionary character. Of course,
they are now the only ones which
survive. The women who were involved
in the other centers are now under
strict vigilance, if they have not
been arrested or killed. They have
been identified by the government
and kept under strict control.

BMR: Were most of the projects
that women were involved in during
the Allende government still orient-
ed more toward the service occupa-
tions? How much did the caste
division of labor break down?

Carol: Women were more service
oriented in the sense that the
neighborhood programs were where the
women were most politically active.
It was partly just because men were
more involved in workplace activities
politically. However, women were
outnumbering men in training for the
professions such as medicine and
law. This was because the PUG
instituted a more open system of
admissions in the universities with-
out any kinds of favoritism and
women came out ahead in the compe-
tition. They were also numerous in
engineering and agronomy which were
very crucial areas. So, in the sense
of higher education, the profession-
al caste structure was changing.

BMR: What was happening in terms of
breaking down the caste division of
labor in the nonprofessional areas?
What was happening on the farms
where you were working?

Carol: Traditionally only the Mapuche
Indian women worked in the fields
and were active in fishing and making
rugs. The other Chilean women were
very much confined to the four walls
of their homes. It was a very diffi-
cult tradition to break down in
terms of the acceptance of men as
well as the women.

When integration was proposed or
developed in certain areas, it was
usually done in a segregated way.
Women would undertake to start a new
industry on the farm, such as the
production of chickens. This seemed
to be their own choice as well as
the official policy that was being
promoted. I think it's not surpris-
ing, given the very real segregation
and oppression that had existed, that
the women didn't desire to be inte-
grated in a work team where they
would be under the thumbs of men.
Women preferred developing their
own industries; they were proud when
they succeeded in doing so, and the
men gave them respect and were proud
of them as well.

BMR: Why did the Allende government
fail? What were the causes
of its downfall, but why
do you think it did not succeed?
Carol: It did not succeed basically
because the political line of the
Popular Unity Government was incor-
rect. It was a line that did not
permit the arming of the people to
defend the revolutionary process.
The professional army remained intact
and their army was basically outfitted,
equipped and trained by the US,
even more so during the Allende per-
iod than in previous periods.

The bourgeois parliament was not
dissolved in favor of setting up a
Worker's Assembly, which would have
been a revolutionary move. The
parliament, although almost half its
members belonged to one or another
of the left parties, effectively was
able to block many necessary and
crucial changes.

More on Page 18