On Thursday evening of May 18, approximately 30 protesting feminists  
converged on The Disconnection, a Thornton area discotheque.  

The protest action was in response to the disco's anti-woman advertising  
of their "women-only, free beer" hour every Thursday.  

While drinking beer and dancing for an hour, the women passed out leaf-  
lets to the women customers, waitresses, and management. At 8:30 pm, the  
time designated for men to re-enter the bar, the feminists marched out  
en masse. In the parking lot, there was a meeting with the owner of the  
disco, in which he promised to change his advertising. One woman told  
him, "if not, we will be back."  

The following statement is the leaflet distributed during the action:  

THIS ACTION HAS BEEN TAKEN BY DENVER AREA FEMINISTS  
We find the concept of "ladies night" at the Disconnection as advertised  
on radio station KTLK repulsive and far below the standards one should  
expect the management of any singles bar to hold.  

Each Thursday night the Disconnection provides unlimited free alcohol  
to female customers in the clearly obvious hope that the women will be-  
come markedly less inhibited by the end of the hour when men are admitted  
to the bar.  

The "generosity" is then publicized, and the ads blatantly suggest that  
the women will be "mellow and willing" as a result of the free alcohol.  
We feel this concept of "ladies night" is vulgar and degrading, both to  
the women the Disconnection views as mere bodies to be seduced with  

Feminists Act On Thornton Discotheque  

alcohol, and to the men who are expected to believe and respond to the  
crude form of advertising.  

We are not protesting the kindness of the Disconnection in providing  
free refreshments to women on Thursday nights. We fully realize that,  
due to continuing social conditioning and only recently loosening stereo-  
types, it remains difficult for a single woman to enter any bar alone.  

Our response would be much different if the intent of "ladies night"  
were to give women a reason to go out and to make them feel more at  
ease in an atmosphere in which traditionally only men have been able  
to feel at home.  

Unfortunately, it is painfully clear from the tone of the publicity  
that the purpose of "ladies night" is not to relax the women who attend,  
but rather to disarm them.  

We feel that such an intent is in direct contradiction of the concept  
of freedom for women that we would hope a singles bar would support,  
and we question the ethics of any bar that sets an advertising campaign  
around getting single women drunk on free alcohol.  

In conclusion, we feel the concept behind "ladies nights" at the  
Disconnection is just another form of rape, and we call for an end to  
this concept, and to the crudely suggestive advertising publicizing it.  
WOMEN: DO NOT ALLOW YOURSELVES TO BE MANIPULATED IN THIS WAY!  

IF YOU DRINK AT THE DISCONNECTION ON "LADIES NIGHT", JOIN US IN PROTEST  
AND LEAVE AS SOON AS THE FREE ALCOHOL OFFER ENDS AND THE MEN ARE  
ADMITTED.  

Women's Health  

Care Collective  

The Colorado Springs Women's Health  
Care Collective held a community  
meeting April 22. Two women from  
the collective of 15,  

Bonnie Poucel and Mercedes Marcial,  
talked with 7 or 8 interested women  
at the Woman to Woman Bookcenter.  

The health collective started in  
1973 as an off-shoot of a conscious-  
ness raising group. It offered  
problem pregnancy counseling, re-  
ferrals, advocacy with local phy-  
sicians and self-health groups. The  
collective interviewed all the  
doctors in Colorado Springs as to  
which of them were open to perform-  
ing abortions, which were open to  
having an advocate accompany a woman  
seeing the doctor, etc.  

In Oct. 1975, the collective decided  
to open a clinic, and borrowed money  
to do so. They found a doctor to  
work with them and had 3 CETA paid  
positions. Money was donated back  
from the CETA grants to the collec-  
tive to pay each member equally -  
$400 for full time, $200 for half-  
time. A nurse practitioner was, and  
is, a member of the collective.  

With the clinic open, the collective  
could offer direct services, as an  
alternative to going to a regular  
doctor. The clinic now does preg-  
nancy testing, problem pregnancy  
counseling, abortions, gyn exams,  
diaphragm and IUD fittings, and  
offers self-health groups, pre-  
orgasmic groups and menopause groups.  
They have a grant for the menopause  
group, and charge $5 for 5 sessions.  
The self-health class costs $10, in-  
cluding a speculum and Circle I,  

a political statement and self-health  
manual written by the collective.  

The collective is now self-support-  
ing from patients' fees, except for  
a few CETA positions. The women  
believe that health care should be  
free, but they feel they must charge  
to support themselves. There is a  
sliding scale of $15-20-25 for a  

gyn exam, an abortion ranges from  

$110-175, and an office visit is $8.  
Because of past problems with women  
not paying their bills, specific  
costs are discussed on the phone when  
a woman calls for an appointment.  
She then pays when she comes for the  
appointment.  

The collective sees approximately  
80 women a week. New members are  
hired in two ways: 1) hiring  
volunteers who have worked there  
over a long period of time, or  

2) hiring through CETA. Prospective  
members take a self-health class and  
are interviewed extensively about  
such things as their feelings about  
abortions and working with both  
lesbians and straight women.  

The collective has a policy of skill  
sharing and job rotation - each  
member learns and does each specific  
job in the clinic. There are problems  
with this method, since the skills  
and preferences of individual women  
vary and women may want to specialize.  
The collective is considering having  
each woman have a main area of respon-  
sibility, with others familiar with  
that area, and rotate jobs less often.  

Each woman works on giving strokes  
when she gives criticism/self  
criticism. The collective has  
feelings meetings which are a time  
for dealing with interactions among  
the workers, getting out negative  
feelings. There is also a new  
policy that members do not discuss  
problems concerning another member  
before first discussing it with the  
woman in question. Then the problem  
will be brought up in a staff meeting.  
The collective is closed with the  
positions in great demand. It is  
worker owned and controlled. Their  
basic philosophy is that we as women  
must reclaim our bodies, our terri-  
tories. We have a right to all  
information we can get about our  
bodies. The collective gives all  
information possible - they keep  
files on everything they find re-  
lating to women's health care, and  
a notebook on incidents related to  
them about doctors in town. They  
encourage women to arm themselves -  
to question and demand answers.  

Artemis, Inc.  
Community Meeting  

On May 9th, the Artemis community  
meeting took place at the Woman to  
Woman Feminist Bookcenter. Sylvia  
Brady, Connie Ott, and Sydney Lapan  
(and previously Mary Lou Centa) are  
the officers and essentially run  
Artemis, Inc., which has been a media  
corporation since 1974.  

Artemis is a business, not a col-  
lective, and its purpose is to make  
a profit, though another function is  
to "create alternative media situa-  
tions for women." Artemis produc-  
tions have included a concert produc-  
tion of Alive last fall and the re-  
cent lecture visit of Rita Mae Brown.  

Ten percent of Artemis profits will  
be put into a trust fund in the Fem-  
inist Credit Union, to be channeled  
into women's projects. The fund will  
be administered by one woman from  
Artemis, one woman from the Feminist  
Credit Union, and one woman from the  
feminist community at large.  

A recording studio is the main pro-  
ject of Artemis at present and it is  
almost finished. When asked how they  
plan to use the studio, Sylvia said  
they will start by recording a spec-  
ific but unidentified mixed musical  
group (men and women) in order to  
make money. She said, "it is not what  
I would like to do but what I have to  
do."  

Artemis will record mixed groups as  
long as they are not "offensive,"  
meaning that "they do not put anyone  
down." The Artemis women have not  
discussed producing mixed groups in  
concert but probably will not  
produce them.  

When asked if Artemis identified  
itself as a 'feminist' business, the  
answer was "no," although they do  
have some political goals.  

The point was raised that the fem-  
inist community cannot demand accoun-  
tability from Artemis because Artemis  
is non-feminist and profit-making,  
even though Artemis sells a feminist  
product to a feminist audience.  
Sylvia replied that they did feel  
accountable and that they have been  
wanting a community meeting for some  
time. She added that they would con-  
sider doing a newsletter.  

There was a lengthy discussion of  
class issues related to the Rita Mae  
Brown lecture. Were the tickets too  
much? Artemis says they barely  
broke even so they had to charge that  
much; they gave a rough breakdown  
of expenses. Did Artemis realize that  
dividing seats and tickets into $4  
and $6 brackets sets up and perpetu-  
ates a classist structure? They said  
that it was not their intention to  
discriminate but to increase incoming  
money.  

Part of Artemis policy that is not  
widely known is that anyone who wants  
to come in will be allowed into the  
function. There is also a work-in-  
exchange-for-ticket program. At  
Rita Mae Brown, fifty women came in  
free. A woman from the community at  
large emphasized "that Artemis under-  
stand the objections around class.  
There may be a boycott against you  
that you don't even know about."  
Sydney complained that if people had  
gripes then they should be at the  
community meeting to express them.  

Women calling themselves "concerned  
feminists" leafletted the Rita Mae  
Brown lecture. The leaflets asked  
"Who is Artemis?" and raised ques-  
tions such as "Is this a Feminist  
Business?" and "Why the two-class  
seating arrangement?"  

For nonpayment  

Diana Press sued  

Jeannette Foster, author of Sex  
Variant Women in Literature, has  
filed suit against Diana Press for  
nonpayment of royalties.  

Sex Variant Women in Literature, a  
definitive study of the portrayal of  
variant and lesbian women in litera-  
ture in the last 5 centuries including  
French, German, English, and American  
titles, was first published by the  
author in 1956. Diana Press reprinted  
it in 1975.  

Since that time Jeannette Foster  
has not received royalty payments  
for her book. Ms. Foster is 83 years  
old and lives in a nursing home.