culture. ..

Women and Craft  
Shouldering the Traditions of Oppression  

Constance Perenyi  

How can I write in a new way about  
an aspect of women's lives that is  
ancient, that is as old and as pre-  
dictable and as confining as oppress-  
ion itself? I have braided the trad-  
itions of women's crafts into my  
own artistic and feminist identity,  
so how can I examine this topic with-  
out having to hold our anonymous her-  
itage at a distance? How can I affirm  
women's roles as incredibly tireless  
and inevitably tired bearers of cul-  
ture when I too have perpetuated the  
myth that women's crafts are always  
rewards in and of themselves? This  
all seemed so clear not too long  
ago, but like every aspect of my  
life, I find myself questioning,  
really wanting to understand the va-  
gue sense of discontent I've had a-  
bout my craft, my art for the last  
few months. This is a piece of my  
evolving examination of women's  
traditions, my own speculation of how  
I fit into them as a contemporary  
feminist artist.  

I'm sitting here trying to write  
this story on women and crafts. Hav-  
ing tried a rational, legal pad ap-  
proach, I've gone back to my journal  
(I'm tied to finishing the last blank  
pages of it so I can move onto a new,  
brighter notebook. I'm tied to my own  
rituals). But, I hate this too; it's  
dark and it's cramped, and fitted  
with more than a year's worth of old  
feelings - I want to be finished, to  
fly free.  

And I am uncertain of myself. I  
said the other night at the meeting  
that no matter what direction the  
paper takes, I am committed to my  
own personal and explorative style.  

This responsibility feels awesome -  
did I ever want to be this involved  
with myself, with the paper, with  
art and politics in the first place?  

I really need to break through this  
in some way tonight. I wish I had a  
tape recorder because I need to hear  
my own voice. I need to break my  
silence, to cast off the structure,  
the grid pattern overlaying my large  
risk. Take risks this time - the other  
years have been real too; but this  
feels different. It is more com-  
plicated than my first analysis. It  
is proof that I can grow, that I can  
break through those patterns, that  
I can make choices for myself with-  
out having to justify everything,  
to myself and to others.  

A year ago, I was getting ready for  
a show. I was not working a nine-  
to-five job, and was for the most  
part, free to structure my own time.  
I wasn't acting free though - instead  
I was acting out my crazy self-disci-  
pline. It had become so completely  
internalized that I didn't even  
have to consider what I would do  
next. I propelled myself between  
projects, and between ensuing cri-  
ses and mini-dramas that grew out of  
the self-inflicted pressure of rest-  
less days and sleepless nights. Three  
months of preparation were punctuated  
with continuous ups and downs. The  
only breaks that I remember were  
times that I made drawings. They  
were spontaneous, quick, experiment-  
al - and in many ways, totally diff-  
erent than my quilts, which often  

Plain as this canvas was, as plain we find  
Untethered, unadorned the female mind,  

No fine ideas fill the vacant soul,  
No graceful coloring animates the whole  

With the close attention carefully inwrought,  
Fine education paints a pleasing thought,  
Inserts the curious line on proper ground,  

Completes the whole and scatters flowers around.  

My ear exults, while to the attentive eyes,  
The curious needle spreads the enamel'd dyes,  
While varying shades the pleasing tasks bequite,  
My friends approve me, and my parents smite.  

-from a 19th Century American Needlework Sampler  

CRSCHOREHONOROTOROHOHOROMONOROMORSOECHORORCHeROROHOROHOReHe  

were conceived spontaneously, but  
took many days to piece. The draw-  
ings balanced the intense commit-  
ment I made to my quilts, and in  
that they were refreshing. All in  
all, those months were tense, and I  
felt immediate relief after the show  
was over. I also felt a responsi-  
bility to myself to never go back  
to exactly the same kind of work  

I had done before. I was tired of  
where I had been, realized through  
my drawings that I needed more art-  
istic leeway, and I ached for some-  
thing new. And with that longing  
came fear - I had come part of the  
way in realizing myself as an art-  
ist, and what if I could get no  
further?  

How does this connect with the top-  
ic of women and craft? First of all,  
I am a craftswoman, a quiltmaker.  

It took me years to consider what  
I do to be art. I had learned that  
needle + thread + fabric = craft,  
and in turn that craft = anything  
but ART. For the most part, I was  
modest about what I did, consider-  
ing its one redeeming quality to  
be strong elements of design, and  
that was something I had learned,  
so that made it acceptable.  

In my first stage of self-accept-  
ance, I considered and glorified  
craft as an integral and important  
part of women's lives much as Judy  
Chicago built a menstruation bathroom  
into Womanhouse (one of the first  
collective, feminist art projects  
in California). A group of women  
secured a house which they turned  
into a series of environments, each  
one symbolizing experiences of women  
within similar spaces. One of those  
rooms was a bathroom designed by  
Chicago which was pristine and  
white and also littered with bloodied  
tampax and kotex.) It was a kind  
of, "We've been doing this all along  
so let's come out of the closet and  
celebrate!" Not even close to a  
thorough examination of women's  
lifestyles, traditions, or oppress-  
ion, this attitude bordered on  
cotton-candy cultism - pretty colors,  
a sugar-speed high, and then tre-  
mendous let-down. It wasn't enough  
to keep me going very long, at least  
without asking some more questions  
about what I was doing, and about  
what other women had done.  

Before I knew it, the Heresies  
(a journal of feminist art and  
politics) issue on Women's Tradition-  
al Arts - The Politics of Aesthetics  
intruded into my consciousness. I  
realize that after two years, I  
still have not read the entire pub-  
lication. At first, I couldn't get  
beyond an article by Linda Nochlin  
about Women and the Decorative  
Arts. I wrote above it the comment  
"Condescending,” and I remember  
thinking that it was apologetic in  
tone. She says, "If, however, we  
take a less conventional view of  
what constitutes value in the avant-  
garde production of the twentieth-  
century, we can see that women art-  
ists, by remaining faithful to their  
time-honored role as decorative art-  
ists, have advanced the cause of  
abstraction and at the same time,  
spread its message beyond the walls  
of the studio, museum, and gallery  
into the realm of daily life - a  

goal devoutly sought by artists -  
whether "high" or “applied,” male  
or female..." To that, I responded  
in the margin, “Is this supposed to  
redeem the attitude that Nochlin  
cannot seem to escape?"  

Apparently, I thought that some-  
how I had escaped unscathed, unquest-  
ioning. Not only was I theorizing  
and thinking a lot, but I was in the  
throes of giving birth to a meticu-  
lously hand-pieced quilt that took,  
symbolically enough, nine months  
of hard labor.  

But, I was aware, even as I de-  
signed the quilt that it was differ-  
ent than "craft." In simplistically  
proclaiming the value of women's  
crafts as art, I effectively isolated  
myself from the real meanings of  
those words. But, it's like peeling  
an onion; women who actively engage  
in examining their own oppression  
keep discovering new layers. And  
sometimes we cry a lot in the pro-  
cess.  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 1 No. 9  

The first relates to my own pro-  
cess and the craft-making pro-  
cess in general. Because I do not  
have to work with snippets of fabric  
and time, because my craft does not  
grow out of necessity (except to be  
creative and expressive), and because  
I am not tied to my own survival in  
the same way as were my "foremoth-  
ers," I am privileged in a manner  
that they were not. There is strength  
in this awareness, and also a more  
genuine respect for other traditions.  
I realize that in comparison, my art  
is a kind of luxury, and I short-  
change everyone involved when I fig-  
ure myself too literally into the  
complex linkage of herstory. I can  
afford to borrow from the past and  
from different cultures because I  
am relatively comfortable in the  
present.  

Without a basic understanding of  
the origins and applications of women  
and crafts, the rediscovery and  
subsequent affirmation of tradition  
is shallow at best. One of the arti-  

cles in the Heresies issue deals with  
the traditional arts of women in  
Mexico, and is appropriately, if  
not painfully titled, “The Aesthetics  
of Oppression." There is a lot to  
consider in this article, but there  
are some specific points that I feel  
are particularly relevant to my  
discussion.  

1. "The nature of fine arts is indi-  
vidualistic, that of the folk, col-  
lective. The fine arts represent  
the work of specialists, recognized  
persons who dedicate themselves  
almost exclusively to their art.  
The folk arts on the contrary are the  
work of nonspecialists, unknown  
people... What is more, according to  
cultural definitions, folk-artists  
do not create so much as carry on  
timeless traditions. They are living  
vestiges of the past and the more  
obscure they are, the more authentic  
they appear."  

2. "In a culture where progress,  
specialization and rugged individual-  
ism are valued, why have we created  
and maintained such a static category  
as the traditional arts?" The author,  
Judith Friedlander, suggests that a  
the anonymity and tirelessness im-  
posed on folk art permit those who  
practice the fine arts to borrow  
freely from traditional motifs. And  
that the alienation of our lives  
in modern America has awakened in  
many a yearning for simpler times  
and forms.  

"Yet in order to have 'folk', a  
group of people must preserve for  
us the ways of the past - in the  
hills of Appalachia, in the African  
bush or in the mud huts of Mexico."  

3. And, the way this relates to wo-  
men specifically is, as Judith Fried-  
lander notes, “Like the folk artist,  
woman is by definition a non-  
specialist and a carrier of tradi-  
tions." And while feminists have  
recently begun to give women the  
credit they so richly deserve, Fried-  
lander cautions us about the effects  
of our interest in the women “who  
happen to be carrying on our timeless  
authentic female culture.”  

4. In discussing the tedious, back-  
breaking cultural duties of the  
Hueyapan women in Mexico, she points  
out the vested, and capitalistic  
interest that the Mexican government  
has in keeping women “traditional.”  

MORE ON PAGE 18