continued from pg. 7

LETTERS-HOME TO, « «9, 19 ere,  
MAMA 2K PN.  
?  

an integral and necessary part  

. . : : tes  

of Amerikana. And in this role it lies  

the oppression of not a minority, but a majority of our  

se yell I really due the first issue of Rag, I couldn't put it down until I  

And for a woman concerned  

with ‘ aol read the whole thing, Alta told us  

hi le ine ey oan cine ay to write our own TEN COMMANDMENTS:  

1. Thou shalt respect woman's labor, with the oppressed masses,  

it is blindness or worse not to work, traditional and untraditional,  

2. Thou shalt accept the way chosen for you to play. Chosen  

not because of your inherent qualities or lack of them, but plainly and blatantly because of your sex. Pay attention to  

3. Thou shalt be polite to thy sisters.  

4. Thou shalt judge any action by this principle: Does it help women?  

Dear Ms.,  
I picked up a copy of your fine paper at the Abortion Tribunal spon—  

sored all over the world, and I really enjoyed every bit of it. Hopefully, you  

are going to have more than one issue of it, I would like to obtain your future editions and would appreciate it if you could mail them  

to me and bill me, I really think it's great and would like to read more.  

5. Thou shalt be long on work.  

I am ordering a subscription because I think you've got a good thing going! When I have time I plan on sending something of my own for publication. Please send me the issue right after your very first issue, I think I may have missed it. Thank You,  

Ada Freewoman;  
Sincerely yours,  

Donna's note: Aisi anyone else out there thinks they missed the second issue, don't worry, This is it.  

Dear Mama:  

A week or so ago I picked up a copy of your newspaper at the MSWAC Abortion Tribunal. I am very impressed with the paper and with my hardworking sisters in Denver. The article on Sex and The Struggle by Carol was very encouraging to me personally.  

Is there a possibility of me receiving copies of your paper on a regular basis? There is no organized Women's group here at U.N.C. and seemingly little interest in starting one so I feel the need for the stimulus your paper gives me.  

Please let me know about this as soon as you can,  

Love—and that's the truth...  
Susan Steedman  

Dear People,  

It's been emphasized that as women we ought to learn how to really communicate and thus cease viewing each other as threats. However, women are one part of the whole. The truth is, people are not communicating with people.  

This capitalistic society possesses a unique way of keeping us humans alienated. It's called "competition."  

Most women only see other women as competitors because they define themselves in terms of "beauty" (society's conception of what beauty is — blond, 36 bust, etc.), wealth and status.  

However, men aren't relating for the same basic reasons. And one can't view another as a potential friend if one's worried about whether the poor dude is outdoing you. "He's fucked more chicks than I, He's sexier. His penis is bigger. He makes 10 grand, I make 8. I've only got a Mustang and he's got a Porsche."  

It's really time to stop evaluating our beings in terms of the outside standards of beauty, wealth and status. When we realize our capacity as humans for such forsaken emotions as compassion, love (not sex) and understanding, we can afford to halt competition.  

When this is ended we can realize that our sisters and brothers are not mere obstacles on some road to success who we must beat out or get ahead of. Perhaps then we can see each other as humans with emotional needs and finally reach out and embrace each other instead of crushing one another. Relating to women and men will only come after redefining our goals and worths in terms of humanity.  

HAWK BIG MAMA!  

PAY 15° == SELL for 25¢  
minimum 10 copies  

Available at  

the RLP bookstore  
737 E. 17th avenue.  
Denver Colorado, 80203  

Peace,  
Deborah fo.