All eyes on court case

Who Pays

Marcy Ristorucci considered herself
lucky when she landed a job at the
Westinghouse plant in Trenton, New
Jersey, 16 years ago. At that time the
assembly line job was worth $2.10 an
hour—above the going rate for the
only other jobs available, waitressing
or clerical work.

Because she considered herself com-
paratively lucky, Ristorucci didn't
complain when she saw what she consid-
ered blatant discrimination against
women by her employer.

The plant had 400 workers, and 80%
were women. But all female workers
were automatically put into the three
lowest paying job categories. Mean-
while, all the men were hired as jani-
tors, forklift operators, machine
attendants, warehousemen and craft
workers. These jobs all paid higher
rates. Until 1965 the discrimination
was an open management policy.

After that the Civil Rights and
Equal Pay Acts, federal laws passed
as a result of the civil rights move-
ment, came into force. The company
eliminated "women's jobs" as such and
instead adopted a 10-level wage class-
ification system that made no refer-
ence to women or men. Strangely enough
all but a few of the women hired over
the next 15 years were put into the

five lowest classifications—those
formerly reserved for women.

As a result, the discriminatory
pattern persists today. As of 1979,
of 213 women in the plant all but 14
were in the five lowest grades. Ris-
torucci says she always felt the dis-
crimination was "galling."

“The men didn't work any harder or
have any more difficult jobs than us.
They just got paid more."

Legal Battle

In 1974, Ristorucci decided to join
a court case filed by her union, the
International Union of Electrical
Workers (IUE), challenging the com-
pany. The case, IUE vs. Westinghouse,
is now pending before a federal ap-
peals court in Philadelphia. Many

view it as a decisive legal battle
over the most common form of job dis-
crimination—the undervaluation of
jobs held mostly by women. The suit
demands the Westinghouse women be
paid at a rate comparable to that for
the "men's" jobs. The two categories
of jobs are of "comparable worth,"
the suit argues.

Since 40% of the more than one mil-
lion workers in the electrical equip-
ment manufacturing industry are women
the case will have a wide impact if
the union wins. The IUE estimates
that Westinghouse alone saved "tens
of millions of dollars" by underpay-
ing its women workers over the years.
A victory in the appeals court would
almost certainly mean Westinghouse
would appeal to the Supreme Court,
however.

The issue of equal pay has been
fought on other fronts as well. As
far back as 1943 the United Electric-
al Workers (UE), then the only union
in the industry, filed discrimination
charges against General Electric and
Westinghouse. Grievances and bargain-
ing table demands have also sought to
correct the bias.

The IUE recently experienced its
first strikes over the issue. In Lynn,
Mass., over 100 women at the GE plant
there walked out for over a month to
protest the undervaluation of their
metal finishing jobs in comparison to
jobs in other departments held by
men.

And a strike at the White-Westing-
house plant in Edison, N.J., has been
underway since March 16. An end to
sexist discrimination is the walk-
out's main demand; the plant is about
half women and half men.

The discrimination in the electric-
al industry mirrors similar bias in
the garment, textile, telephone and
pharmaceutical industries, among
others. Overall it is estimated that
half the 40 million women in the work-
force have at one time in their work
lives been victims of undervaluation
of their work.

Wonder Bread Five vs. ITT

In May of 1977, five women banded
together to battle their employer,
the Wonder Bread bakery, and wound
up fighting one of the world's larg-
est conglomerates—International Tel-
ephone and Telegraph, the multination-
al that bakes Wonder Bread, operates
the Sheraton Hotels, among others.

The women, called the Wonder Bread
Five, filed sex discrimination and
harassment charges against their em-
ployer, stating in court and in gov-
ernment agency complaints that they
were victimized by a management cam-
paign initiated in 1976 to rid the
office of women who were either sexu-
ally unattractive to male managers or
who did not respond to their sexual
advances.

But after three years, the fight
persists and the sex-discrimination
case has not been resolved.

"They (company management) thought
we were a bunch of dippy broads,"
said Helen Thomas, the only one of
the five who is no longer working at
the bakery, which is set in Beverly
Hills' industrial area. Thomas was
fired for allegedly going to lunch
at varying times. "They thought it
would all go away because we would
get tired of fighting."

The five middle-aged clerical work-
ers, Geri Horton, Rose Mazer, Dorothy
Copic, Jean Serser, and Thomas, filed
charges with the EEOC in May of '77
and then filed discrimination charges
with the Labor Department's Office
of Federal Contract Compliance Pro-
grams, the agency that enforces fed-
eral equal employment opportunity reg-
ulations with government contractors.

The Wonder Bread Five charged that:
1) women office employees received
written reprimands for errors and
tardiness and were given additional
duties, while male employees were not
treated in the same manner; at the
same time, women were denied equal
opportunities for overtime pay. 2) sex-
ual remarks and advances were made by
the general manager to female employ-
ees, who were treated in a demeaning
manner when they failed to respond
to his remarks and advances.

In the fall of ‘76, Jean Serser was
honored for her work as a payroll
clerk, a job she had held for 10
years. Within a few months, she said,
she was harassed by management so
she would quit. Serser said that this

MORE ON PAGE 19

Westinghouse alone
saved “tens of millions of dollars”
by underpaying its women workers.

Thus the eyes of both the corpora-
tions and their challengers are focus-
ed on the IUE case. "There's an awful
lot of money at stake here," says IUE
attorney Carole Wilson.

Women “Worth Less”

The IUE's case was carefully chosen
because the facts graphically demon-
strate discrimination. Until 1965 the
wage scales and job assignments were
governed by the Westinghouse Wage Ad-
ministration Manual, which instructed
plant officials to pay women's jobs
at a lower wage rate than men's even
though the jobs were equal in diffi-
culty. The manual asserts that women's
work was worth less “because of the
more transient character of the ser-
vice of women, the relative shortness
of their activity in the industry, the
differences in the environment requir-
ed, the extra services that must be
provided, overtime limitations, extra
help needed for heavy work and the
general sociological factors not re-
quiring discussion."

When this frankly biased policy was
abandoned in 1965, the women's and
men's job categories were combined in-
to one "neutral" scale, only women
still remained at the bottom. Some
85% of the women are in the lowest
five grades, against 1% of the men.

The women's jobs are paid an average
35% below that of the men's. At GE,
company figures show the average woman
makes 85% of the average male worker's
wage.

The union points out that Westing-
house, the 14th largest industrial
employer in the US, and GE, the 3rd
largest employer, practice such dis-
crimination as a matter of policy. The
IUE has filed seven actions alleging
"comparable worth" bias against West-
inghouse and GE alone. More than 50
such suits have been filed throughout
the US.

At Westinghouse, over half the women
workers are paid below the rate of pay
for janitors—a mostly male position.
A recent study by the IUE showed an
average differential of 75¢ per hour
between the men and women.

Bread and Butter Issue

The companies argue that the way to
correct the imbalance is to gradually
promote women up to the higher pay
grades. But the unions respond by
asserting that the 80% of the women
workers now locked in the lower pay
grades will never have the opportunity
to displace the 20% of the men in the
highest pay slots. "And with the re-
cession," noted the IUE's attorney,
"the opportunities are being greatly
reduced, not increased."

Despite its merits, the case only
addresses the discrimination in those
industries where women and men are
employed in the same plants and doing
comparable work. Left untouched are
those sectors that are almost entirely
women, like clerical work, nursing
and retail trade. The issue is rising
among women workers, though, and the
battle has only begun.

(Edited and reprinted from

Lesbians Say No To Racism

The owners of C.K. and Augie's, a
women's bar in Chicago, have agreed
to conform to the city's civil rights
ordinance after charges of racial
discrimination and extensive picket-
ing organized by the Black Lesbian
Discrimination Investigative Commit-
tee brought the issue to negotiations
with the Chicago Commission on Human
Relations. BLDIC research showed a
pattern of requiring excessive ident-
ification from black women, while
white women were admitted to the bar
with little or no identification.

Pat Love, a spokeswoman for BLDIC,
commented that "There are two lessons
we learned. The first is that we do
not have to tolerate this kind of
behavior in our community. We can
fight it, and we can win. It is not
an issue just for black women, either.
There were many white women on those
picket lines, sisters who agree that
racism hurts all of us. The second
lesson is that we have to let all bar
owners know that we are watching
their policies and practices, and we
will act whenever it is necessary."
Love was referring to a 1975 racial
discrimination complaint against
C.K.'s, a bar then operated by Carol
Kappa, one of the present owners of
C.K. and Augie's, filed with the Ill-
inois Liquor Control Commission.

The response from white women was particularly
encouraging. There was much more
awareness and support this time."
Hanover represented the complaints
in the 1975 case. She continued, "The
group's action forced Kappa and Flan-
agan (the other owner) to negotiate.
Economic sanctions are the most
effective way to get across the mes-
sage that a community expects appro-
priate behavior from its businesses."
According to Love, the Black Les-
bian Discrimination Investigative
Committee will continue monitoring
C.K. and Augie's as well as other
businesses.