F.B.I. Is Ransacking Homes In Search

The baby shower Ebun Adelona had thrown in her home had been over for more than an hour and Adelona and her five-year-old daughter had gone to bed when a loud crash shook the apartment at 1 a.m. on April 19th. Adelona awoke to the sound of footsteps inside her home and a man's voice shouting, "Come out with your hands up."

That's what she did. "I just got out of bed, threw something on and just as I rounded the corner from my bedroom I looked towards the hallway and saw about seven FBI agents with guns leveled at me."

For Ebun Adelona, that marked the beginning of two and a half hours she and other residents of the Harlem apartment building were to spend being threatened, searched, manhandled, and questioned by 50 FBI agents who claimed to be searching for escaped Black revolutionary Assata Shakur (Joanne Chesimard).

-LNS-

The agents didn't find Shakur, who last November broke out of the New Jersey prison where she was serving life plus 65 years for the killing of a state trooper. They did succeed in giving residents of the building a first-hand experience of the tactics that led Victor Goode of the National Conference of Black Lawyers to charge that Assata was sought by the FBI, tracked down by Cointelpro because of her political beliefs, and the chain of events that led to the shootout on the New Jersey Turnpike for which she was convicted began with the FBI.

The FBI agents who cordoned off a Harlem block on April 19 never showed a search warrant. But they didn't let that stop them from getting into people's apartments, even though the Supreme Court had ruled just a week earlier that police must have a warrant before entering a home to make an arrest. In some cases, as with Ebun Adelona's apartment, they simply broke the door down. In others, they used forceful persuasion. "I don't argue with fire," Wilbur Jackson said, explaining why he let the men in. "The FBI had yelled through the door that if I didn't open it, they would blast the door open and blast me away. So when I opened the door, there they were with shotguns and machine guns, ‘boom, boom, boom' about five different pieces of steel thrust into my belly."

Once inside, the FBI agents ransacked apartments, manhandled, searched and frisked their occupants, and forced Ebun Adelona and other women to show their legs so that they could check for a scar listed as one of Assata Shakur's identifying marks.

"When the agents took me back to my apartment, I saw where they had pulled out my linen, the bathroom door was off the hinges, my drawers were pulled out and my sofa was in the middle of the floor,” Adelona reported. "My daughter's room was in shambles and they even broke her window. I asked them who was going to pay for the damage to my apartment and they said the federal government."

Residents of the building and the surrounding Black community are demanding that the federal government do more than pay for a few broken windows and doors. They want the Justice Department to put an end to such raids and to punish those responsible for the invasion of Harlem.

Residents have spoken at community meetings, called on neighbors, supporters, and political representatives to put pressure on the Justice Department, and participated in a demonstration outside the court where Richard (Dhoruba) Moore is seeking his freedom. Like Assata Shakur, Moore is a former Black Panther Party leader whose conviction on murder charges many consider to have been engineered by the FBI.

At demonstrations and meetings, the Tenants Association at 92 Morningside Avenue distributed a leaflet stating, "We are outraged at this blatant way in which the FBI continues to violate the civil and human rights of African-Americans across the country, endangering their lives and property without an iota of just cause or reasonable suspicion and without the warrant for search that they are mandated by law to possess in order to enter and search the home of any citizen of the United States."

Their outrage and their demand for a full investigation of the incident have been taken up by the National Black Human Rights Coalition.

(Reprinted from The Liberation News Service)

"I never worry too much about being fair-minded, because I know that in the end justice always triumphs."

~New Times/ LNS~

Crigler Sentencing

We must not forget that our right to self-defense will not be won in the courtroom. We should be angry, but we must be careful to direct our anger at the system which puts women in this position.

Sharon will be sentenced on June 9th, 1980 by Judge Sauriol. Letters in support should be addressed to Judge Sauriol and sent to the Sharon Crigler Defense Committee, 711 N. 1st #302, Tacoma, WA 98403.

Letters might include any of the following points:

1. Reminding the judge of the history of beating Sharon suffered from Rolland.

2. Reminding the judge that the police had been called earlier and had been unable to prevent Rolland from returning to the apartment. Rolland had been armed when arrested earlier in the day, and the manager had violated the police's request that he not be let into the apartment.

3. Reminding the judge that the Wanrow decision would apply in this case.

4. Any other points about women's right to self-defense.

The Defense Committee also wanted people to know that there is some money left over. If Sharon is sentenced to prison, that money will go to help pay for her needs while locked up. If not, the committee would like to publish a booklet of their experiences and the experiences of other defense committees, so that we can all learn from their victories and their mistakes.

Show your support. Attend the sentencing. June 9th at 9:00 a.m. on the second floor of the Pierce County Superior Court. Judge Sauriol's courtroom. Tacoma, Washington.

(Reprinted from Matrix)