Int'l Women’s Day

Activities

Planned For March 5

Woman to Woman Feminist Center has
initiated plans for International
Women's Day activities to be held
on Saturday, March 5th. The activi-
ties will focus on women's fight

against imperialism, patriarchy and
white privilege.

A march down Colfax Avenue at noon
will end at the State Capitol with a
rally. In the evening, cultural and
educational programs and a potluck
dinner will be held at St. Thomas
Church at 2201 Dexter.

The idea for International Women's
Day originally developed from the
dispute over women's suffrage. The
Australian Social Democrats believed
that the vote for women could under-
mine the battle for male franchise,
as in 1907 working class men were
not franchised. Clara Zetkin, an
active and leading socialist demanded
that the vote be extended to women.
She and many others raised this
issue at the 1907 Congress of the
Second International in Stuttgart.

Here, it was resolved that women
should vote, and the fight for suf-
frage should be in conjunction with
the working class movement and not
with bourgeois reformists.

In 1911, March 8th was observed in
Austria, Denmark, Germany and Switz-
erland. The ensuing events quickly
revealed that suffrage wasn't the
only issue. Alexandra Kollontai, a
Bolshevik feminist, recounted how
"Germany... and Austria were one
seething, trembling sea of women.
Meetings were organized everywhere.
Halls were packed so full that they
had to ask workers to give up their
places to the women. Men stayed at
home with the children for a change
and their wives went to meetings.

In Austria alone 30,000 women and
men marched and demonstrated in the
streets.

In planning the events for Inter-
national Women's Day 1977, Colorado
women hope to draw attention to spe-
cific local, national and interna-
tional issues that are important
to the cause of working women. We
also hope to initiate new activities
and give support to ongoing projects
among women prisoners, welfare moth-
ers, unorganized workers, the unem-
ployed, immigrant families, etc.

The day is being planned by a
broad coalition of women represent-
ing political organizations in Den-
ver, Greeley, Boulder, and Colorado
Springs. Join us in planning for
International Women's Day. Call 321-

7467.

Lallo Charges Dropped

Theresa Schook

On Tuesday, December 14, 1976, the
matter of People vs. M.J. Lallo was
dismissed in a motions hearing be-
fore Judge Close. Attorneys for Ms.
Lallo, Kathy Bonham and Sandra Roth-
enberg, argued for a dismissal on
the basis of double jeopardy.

Double jeopardy occurs where a per-
son is tried twice for the same of-
fense. This is unconstitutional un-
der the Fifth Amendment of the US
Constitution. Lallo's attorneys
argued that the previous trial, which
had been declared a mistrial (see
BMR December 1976), had been nearing
completion when it had abruptly end-
ed, leaving Lallo's defense half-
stated. They contended that, in
fact, jeopardy had attached to Ms.
Lallo at the time the jury was sworn
in during the first trial, and the
original defense counsel in the matter
had objected to the mistrial, voicing
worry that jeopardy problems would
arise. They noted that the request
for a mistrial had been made by Carol
Polevoy, assistant City Attorney and
not at the request of defense coun-
sel. This was the key point of law;
double jeopardy cannot occur where
the defense asks and is granted a
mistrial.

The judge agreed with the defense
arguments, which were clearly sup-
ported by case law, granted the motion
to dismiss and so dropped charges
of jaywalking and disturbance against
M.J. Lallo, which had been pending
since she was arrested in September,
1975.

No doubt you have all noticed that a collective member is missing from the
staff box on page two. Yes, indeed, Eileen is now numbered among the "women
who used to work for Big Mama". She is at present working more fully with
the radio show and on other projects in Denver. We will miss her!

With Eileen gone, we more than ever are pleading for you women out there
who have always wanted to know how to create a newspaper, to come forth and
help us. If you have any time at all, even a few hours a week, please give
them to Big Mama.

If you are having trouble reaching us at the office, our staffing has be-
come irregular because we are working at other jobs for survival. The best
way to reach us is to drop us a note. We are trying to work out a staffing
schedule. Keep trying.

To date we have received $60 earmarked for the typesetting fund. We want to
thank the four women who responded to our plea. Unfortunately this would
just about buy solvent to clean the machine. So please dig deep in your
pockets and send what you can.

We would like to take this opportunity to welcome any feedback on this
double issue on "Feminism and the Left". We felt a need to do this issue due
to our own mixed feelings about working with the Left. We hoped to create a
dialogue wherein, as feminists, we could explore the hows, whens and whys of
aligning with the Left. There is a need for theory and direction in the women's
movement. We believe in an autonomous women's movement, but feminism includes
many issues that have long been concerns of the Left. We need to develop
feminist theory about class, race and economics. We welcome your response and
encourage you to send us articles and ideas in this continuing dialogue.

An explanation about the coverage of the Feminist Law Conference, BMR Nov.
'76 which was not very complete, and for which we were criticized in a letter
to Mama, Dec. '76. Originally, two women, one of whom was connected with the
conference, had promised to write articles on the conference. We thought that
we had good coverage. Unfortunately, on the second day of the conference,
we learned that neither woman could, due to time commitments, write an article.
It was at this point that we asked Carol Lease, who was at the conference,
if she would write an article on it. Despite the lack of notice, she kindly
agreed to do this. We feel that both BMR and Carol Lease were remiss in
not responding to the criticism about the coverage.

Law School Shows Porn

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 1

Feminists Purloin
Porno Film At CU

The x-rated porno film, Fantasex,
was shown in Ramaley Hall on the CU
campus in Boulder, Colorado on Fri-
day, November 19, 1967. During
the second showing, after the first
reel, viewers were shocked as the
lights suddenly went up. For a
brief moment, they caught a glimpse
of a "woman of medium height with
bangs" as she caught the flying
2nd reel of the film in mid-air.
Dumbfounded, they saw her hurl it
to a second comrade standing near
a window. She, in turn, completed
a neat throw through the open win-
dow where untold hordes of
“women's libbers", as they were
later described by tattle-tale
male witnesses, spirited the film
away.

Pandemonium reigned as the spon-
sors of the show, the third year
class officers of CU Law School,
in the true spirit of our Nixonian
Law and Order Era, called the cops
and spewed forth their garbled
accounts of the caper. The campus
cops arrived on the scene and pro-
ceeded to pursue the criminals.
Unwittingly, they helped one of the
culprits back her car out of a
tight boxed-in parking spot. Even
as the long arm of the law encircled
the area, the fleet-footed gang
eluded the police. Running
like hell in diverse directions,
they easily foiled the true-blue
defenders of Fantasex.

The next afternoon, the President
of the CU Law School's third
year class received an anonymous
phone call. It was the guerrillas.
In exchange for the return of the
2nd reel, they demanded a promise
not to press charges against any of
the purloiners. Reluctantly, Spi-
liotis agreed. Still later that
Saturday, a car sped up to Kitty's
(A sex-sell business including
"porno" films at various old thea-
ters around Denver, a "photograph
our girls" parlor, and a porno
bookstore.) An anonymous woman ran
in and dropped off the film.

Traditionally each graduating
class at CU Law School has raised
funds to give the Law School a
"gift" (several women law students
interviewed said the last thing in
the world they would think of giv-
ing the CU Law School would be a
"gift".)

Anyway, this fall, the word went
around that the third year class
officers "elected" in a mini-elec-
tion similar to those good old
high school council popularity con-
tests, had decided to raise this
money by showing Fantasex. A
woman in the third year class called
a noon meeting to protest this
fundraising method as oppressive to
women (not pornographic).

Even though several women present
reaffirmed her and asked the class
officers to raise money some
other way, they decided to go
ahead with the showing.

The Monday after the Friday night
caper, it was the class officers'
turn to call a meeting. This time,
even more women, and a few sensi-
tive (progressive?) men demanded
an account of what happened. The
class officers lamely defended
their actions. They admitted that
in spite of the objections a week
before, they had not even tried to
get out of their contract with
Kitty's to rent the film. They
promised to take a poll of third
year students on whether porn should
be used as a fundraiser, and after
the fact, results were 35 against,
and 34 pro, for a grand total of
69.

At this meeting, the officers,
(3 men and 1 woman) took a hard line
on prosecuting the “offenders” in
spite of jeering remarks and ques-
tions from women in the audience.
Later, in spite of their promise
not to press charges if the 2nd
reel was returned, the officers re-
vealed they were attempting to
persuade the Boulder County DA's
office to prosecute an identified
suspect (a CU undergraduate) and
"go after" the other guerrillas.
In addition, they threatened to file
a civil suit against the culprits.

Later Spiliotis explained the use
of the film as part of the class
officers' "obligation to raise funds."
"We're certainly not promoters of
pornography,” he said. Yet, accord-
ing to CU police, two crime reports
were filed, one reporting the theft
of a film and one concerning the
loss of proceeds from its showing.

At present two third year students
are representing one accused guer-
rilla through the CU Legal Aid and
Defender Program. Many CU Law
School women and men are angry
about the possible prosecution
of political protestors in the name
of the third year class. They plan
to put a lot of pressure on the
class officers to withdraw all
complaints.