I can say those things to him, even though I decided to have a kid to have somebody to love: It's easier. It's a social thing - I - though a lot of the time it comes out very angry -- which comes to where it's at. I said it real fast because I can't say it real slow. Trudy: Timewise, it's harder, but expensive.

I have said a lot of things to Larry angry, in a way that I would never speak to anybody else in my life.

Seriously, I mean things have come out of my mouth so foul and nasty - and I don't mean cussing - just cutting verbal abuse. I have never done that to anybody, and I've tried to hook that up to myself: Because he's so close to me?

Child Abuse

BMR: Trudy, would you talk about your feelings about being a child abuser and "jailer" to your children?

Emotionally, it’s easier. I found that one of the joys of divorce is that I don't expect a man to do anything. Much of my disappointment in marriage was that I expected him to be active in childrearing - and he wasn't.

Now I'm not being undermined and I've gotten more confident of myself. I'm not getting any putdowns like "You're not a loving mother. You don’t sit home on Saturdays and play games with the kids like I do."

Also, I've given up wanting a lot of material comforts and I've simplified my life. I've learned to value other things than middle-class comforts.

BMR: Does the experience of being a mother encourage you to love other people more? To feel like more of a member of the human race?

Trudy: I think there's a lot more to the financial thing. Now I'm on ADC, which is a trip - $189 a month!

My rent is $134, food stamps cost $23, security rent deposit is $25 for the next four months, leaving $7. Survival right now is like a whole new world.

What trips me out is that when I'm working, I have an apartment and a car, and now when I'm not working, I still have an apartment and a car. And now I'm supporting a kid!

One thing I feel good about - those jeans Larry is wearing cost $2.70 and I feel good about the fact that I can go and hunt for bargains.

One of the things that's important to me that wasn't important before is child care - day care centers. It makes a difference to me if I go to a meeting and I know there's going to be child care there. New York State recently pulled its money from day care centers and the day care center Larry was in went up to $14 a week for only an hour and a half a day.

Sarah: I think one of the advantages politically of being a mother is that you feel that kind of trust from other women and other people because they have all the burdens and worries with their kids and you've had that too, so you share that. I value that.

Trudy: Well, with my first child, I was married and three months after I had the first child, my husband found a job that took him away from the home for the entire week and he was home only on the weekends.

I never had experience with babies and there was no woman in the area I could talk to. All that came through to me was work - you're up 24 hours taking care of an infant.

As the child grew up - and then three years later I had another child, another boy - I felt like I was a constant jailer. A sergeant, giving orders and making kids do things. I would do as most people do - banish a child to their room, take away privileges - that's how I had been treated.

My anger was so great because emotionally my husband had abandoned me. When he came home on weekends he was the white god coming in and the kids ran to him. He didn't do any discipline, while all through the week I had been doing all the things to make a household run as women were supposed to.

I had no car and no time for myself. So that very early in my first son's life I abused him - I whacked him. And it just grew and grew until I was afraid of what I was going to do. I would get so angry out of proportion that everything turned a little gray. My husband knew about it but he never did anything about it.

I was getting more and more afraid of my violence with my children, particularly my oldest until finally I stopped myself - luckily. But it took years and I still have a hard time thinking of it. I don't feel that violence anymore since leaving my husband. It's a wonder that I can still relate to my sons and they to me on a fairly decent, normal basis. I have talked to them about the brutality and they both laughed at me.

Love

Trudy: One of the things that was important for me as far as this interview was concerned was coming to terms with why I decided to adopt. My answers were always because I've worked with children, love children and I wanted to have a child of my own and I wasn't going to wait around to have some man make my life real.

Now each and every one of those is part of my decision. But that's not the gut level of it. I finally came to terms with it a year ago - and I've had Larry about a year and 8 months.

Yet I can't say it's all been this positive thing that comes from learning to love someone. It's just sharing both good and bad times. Being a parent in this society isn’t that easy.

I would like to have an intimate relationship with someone who has also had the experience of being a parent. It is an experience that grounds you in reality.

Trudy: I was thinking of apprentice motherhood. I don't think you can guess what it's like until you do it. I used to be a lifeguard at pools and camps and the kids flocked to me. I was the goddess, and I thought, "Motherhood - it's a snap!" I was really looking forward to it. But none of my kids have let me teach them swimming! (laughter)

Collectives

BMR: What about collectives versus living alone for raising children?

Trudy: I think what matters is that however you arrange living your life, that the children are accepted in that life. I think a collective would be a good idea. The hard part is that so many of us have to have the emotional burden alone on a 24-hour basis.

But I also think that no household should contain just one child. I think a child needs other children to relate to. And everybody needs a little good neglect; no one should be under everyone's scrutiny constantly. They need a distance to breathe. Children need to grow themselves up.

BMR: It seems the most you can be oppressed as a woman is to raise children without a husband.

Finances

BMR: Sarah, how do you survive on $200 a month? That seems amazing to me to support two people on only that little.

Sarah: We get by. Saul gets $30 from me because he is assuming the major responsibility of managing the building we live in, and in turn we get our rent reduced that $30. That takes a lot of the pressure off in that that's a fair amount of money for a 12-year-old kid to have every month.

It puts us on a more equal basis - in that he's not begging me for things. He sort of realizes that if he wants something special, more than the thrift store stuff, he's going to have to get it and pay for it himself.

I try not to bug him too much when I think he's making bad choices, but there are certain things I maintain control of, that he has to get permission for - like he can't get a TV yet. (laughter) And he thinks that's really bad, but he kind of respects it.

In terms of the daily things - Saul gets breakfast and lunch at school free because of my low income. He also eats breakfast at home, so he eats two breakfasts! He doesn't seem to want too much to eat in the evenings and I don't worry about it.

Saul has seen the contrast between the way we live and the way that his father lives. He's lived temporarily at times with his father and he's bought off there. They spend every weekend at the shopping centers and they buy him everything he wants. But he realizes that that's kind of an empty way to live. Even though he kind of wants those things, he really sees that that isn't where it's at.

He doesn't make a lot of demands on me. I think that's kind of the crux.

What about guilt and impossible standards for mothers?

Trudy: I'd like a whole evening to discuss guilt because so much of it is irrational; so much of the guilt is a hangover from other times and other people.

Sarah: I have some survival techniques around guilt. Saul and I both leave notes for each other constantly and it seems like those notes have a much bigger function than just the information in them "where I am and when I’m going to be home." We're both busy, and it's like a security and getting rid of the guilt at the same time.

When I write a note, I make some suggestions of what he might do if he's feeling lonesome and about when I'll be back - but don't worry if it's a little later. It's just communicating certain things that put both of our minds at ease, and he does the same thing for me.

I try to tell him in advance what nights I'm going to have meetings or be out of the house and he can have the option of arranging something for that night. He's a little older and when he has that option ahead of time, he can make plans. He kind of enjoys being alone too.

Super Mom

Trudy: What I'm always wondering about is, Am I coming off to other people as their mother? It's not an age thing, but having been a mother for so damn long. There's a tendency for that paternal attitude to carry over into other relationships. That makes a friendship very difficult sometimes.

Sarah: I had a real trip with my first two children of being such a Super Mom - professional mother that I wanted to control their environment entirely. I was really upset at their schools. Their schools were really bad sometimes, and I would insist on getting involved. I think the thing that got me over taking motherhood so seriously was realizing that it was impossible. I couldn't change the schools and I...

More On Page 6