P omy: where we're at

Welcome to our world and another month at BMR. It took an
extra week for us to put the paper out last month, so it
feels like we just finished production as we begin it again.

Usually production--typing, laying out, and getting the
paper ready for the printer, takes one long, intense week-
end per month. Last month it couldn't be finished in that
weekend. The preparation and writing of Deb's article on
anti-Semitism was too difficult for her, as a Jewish woman,
to complete during that time. Reading and rereading the ar-
ray of white supremacist hate literature she used for her
article was a painful, life-threatening reality for her. In
the face of overwhelming disbelief in the existence of anti-
Semitism, Deb wanted to prove that anti-Semitism still ex-
ists and affects and threatens every Jew in this country and
in the world. As she read and reread this genocidal hate
literature, this was like trying to prove a flood exists
as it is washing you away.

Joan was away last month in Florida trying to thaw out
from the Colorado winters, but is back and working on the
paper this month. Sue, our newest collective member, left
the paper last month. We all miss Sue--her input at collec-
tive meetings; her help at production; always staying until
the bitter end. As another ex-mental patient her presence,
input and support are especially missed by Lori. So there
were only four of us putting the paper together, along with
very dedicated and patient supporters. Again we thank the
supporters for their time and energy, and welcome anyone
else who wants to help out.

This month we have suffered another loss at BMR. Bobbe,
who has been on the collective for the past three years and
has been a collective member and/or supporter for many more,
has left the collective. She will continue to write "America
Held Hostage," do bookstore invoices and mailings, and write
the article on the history of Zionism. We will miss Bobbe,
her opinions and ideas were important to us, and her criti-
cisms have raised many questions. Bobbe criticized how
the collective works for her and for all of us; what we talk
about and what we let pass, or are unwilling or unable to
say about ourselves, each other, and the articles we read,
write, and print. That the collective has become a place
where we can't question our own and each other's politics
without feeling threatened and attacked. Our ageism is/has
been a barrier among us. We don't talk well or honestly a-
bout many things--our mentalism or the issue of ex-psychi-
atric inmate politics; of suicide, of "madness," and we avoid
other issues altogether--alcoholism/drug addiction. Bobbe
seriously challenged whether the collective and BMR itself,
is still a revolutionary project or is involved in revolu-
tionary struggle because of our "process" or lack of it. And
that process must affect what we write or decide to print in
the paper. BMR recently received criticism in the publica-
tion The Black Working Class vs. the U.S. Government- Build-
ing the Offensive Against Slander (available from The Burn-
ing Spear Publication, 7622 Mac Arthur Blvd. Oakland, CA
94605) that we were a "bourgeois" feminist paper. We have
much to think about and are in quite a quandary.

As we reread this right before we type it, we know that
we haven't told nearly enough about our meeting with Bobbe
(and in some ways what's been going on for months in the col-
lective) --she was angry, we were angry; some of the meeting
was bitter; it raised issues/problems that are not new, but
longstanding ones. Bobbe's criticisms especially centered a-

e@ver ® The cover photograph, "All America Sale",
is by Cate Gilles.

eollective: Lori Bradford, Susanna Smith,

Deb Luger, Joan Pettijohn

$s uppo rte rs3 Sue Goding, Kay Young, Claire
Ellington, Bobbe Ross, Liz Lewis, Rozz Leight,
Kathy Riley, Barbara Wish, Linda Lane

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Patricia Silva,

Fran Day

BIG MAMA RAG is a feminist periodical published monthly
by BIG MAMA RAG, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Man-
uscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to: 1724
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material sub-
mission will generally fall between the 15th and 18th of
the preceding month. Please enclose a stamped, self-add-
ressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is
accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length with the input of the author.

bac on—rates-a2@- $9/year +1-issues} for individuals

round how anti-psychiatry issues have been dealt with in the
collective, saying she/we are too intimidated to deal openly
with this issue because of fear of Lori's anger and/or hurt.
She feels as though Lori has treated us as "the enemy" around
this issue sometimes. All of us have said things connected to
issues raised by the politics of the Mental Patients Libera-
tion Movement which have been insensitive and ignorant, and
there is much more that we haven't said at all. The dynamics
have definitely been poor. We are left seriously questioning
ourselves, each other, and the project.

We need and still want to have a community meeting as we
feel/are isolated and very separated from feminists and o-
ther people working politically here in Denver. We hope to
make more definite plans by next month's issue, but still
want to hear from local readers what it is we need to talk
about most.

Last month we said in "Where we're At" that we would
write and print articles on the history of Palestine and of
Zionism in this month's issue. Neither of them are finished,
but again we plan/commit ourselves to print them next month.
We set deadlines for ourselves and are again and again
forced to change our plans for the paper to account for the
things that occur in our lives, our jobs--leaving them or
finding one, our health, our confusion about the issues,
and the continual difficulty in putting our ideas and thou-
ghts on paper, to name a few. Susanna's article on Palestine
isn't ready because she has been in bed with the flu this
past week. All of us have been sick with various ailments
for the past 2 months or so. Bobbe is still writing about
the history of Zionism, but there has been confusion about
what she was covering. She did research on Zionism up to
the time of the establishment of the state of Israel, so
Joan will continue from 1948 to the present instead of writ-
ing on Jewish progressive movements.

We have been so focused on keeping up with what we have
planned to write and pressured by our plans to have an ar-
ticle in print "on time," that we didn't stop and take time
to talk about, research, or really plan an International
Women's Day issue. Like print more articles about women in

national liberation struggles, articles by and about work-

ing class women, labor issues, or international revolution-
ary struggles. The history of I.W.D. as a history of cele-
bration of working class women and revolutionary struggles
has often been lost nationally/locally in a "celebration of
women." In this month's issue the article on the "Feminiza-
tion of Poverty" (pp. 10) discusses the classist and racist
view that all women are equally oppressed and refutes that
position. We didn't want to present I.W.D. as a celebration
of “women's culture," and yet we could have researched and
included more. There are no local, community organized dem-
onstrations (see Calendar for events here and in Boulder)
around I.W.D. and we also feel that loss.

What we did include in this issue is timely and is infor-
mation that is important to have in print. We have printed
three articles about women in prison, one on women giving

MORE ON PAGE 18

oops
The research for "The Good Americans," which Deb used

for her article in last month's issue was done by John
Judge and Mae Brussell. We're sorry we didn't credit Mae.

inside BMR:

Where We're At..........2
LECCOrS « «ks ewie ee see ese 3
Women in Cages.....4,5,14
International

MARAE win ss aoe e 3 w 8 2 0 ee
National

Feminization of

POVERTY <:sieacelee te ener By oL

Homelessness......++.12

Hot Briefs....+s.s..«.6,7
America Held Hostage...14
COPGnG er sé oc se vw einsin sw?
OTD so 5s 010s 0-0 wie oun oe Le
RESOURCES 6 ew ee cease 20

in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper,
$28 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is
available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct. '72 through July '79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat-
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.