review

‘Psychiatry Cured Frances Farmer Of Her

Reprinted from Womanews, May 1983

Rena Grasso Patterson

The horrors of the Frances Farmer story are political to the core. Frances, the recent film, manhandles the essence of her story and buries its feminist significance. Fortunately, the journalist William Arnold investigated and published in Shadowland (1978) details that enable us to reconstruct her fascinating story.

When Frances Farmer died in 1970, she had been living with another woman for over ten years. Six women were her pallbearers. Beside the fact that she was probably a lesbian, Frances Farmer was a woman of unconventional ambition, intelligence, and artistic genius.

Frances Farmer's Seattle neighbors remembered her as a tomboy. Her high school English teacher recalled Farmer's passionate desire to be a poet. Arnold reports, however, that at the University of Washington, Farmer's literary ambitions were not encouraged. Her attempts at originality were particularly discouraged. Farmer turned to journalism, only to be thwarted with mundane assignments. Social and personal influences brought her finally to the theatre. As Andrea Dworkin has pointed out, acting is one of the only artistic roles open to women; and at the University, there was a faculty woman who encouraged her dramatic talent.

In 1936, Farmer became a Hollywood star after her leading part in Come and Get It. Stardom led to destruction. Farmer's fierce attachment to artistic integrity and her intelligence conflicted with both Hollywood and the Left theatre of the 30's. She was defiant and courageous. She battled for meaningful roles. Farmer was vocal in her contempt for Hollywood's superficiality and pretension. She cursed, wore no makeup, drove a beat-up car, lived simply. She maintained active political commitments. Frances Farmer fought against her trivialization as a female star. Ultimately her unconventional autonomy and seriousness were brutally punished.

I knew nothing of Frances Farmer until I saw the film. Given her fame in the 30's, her present oblivion struck me as odd. The movie itself was fascinating. Despite the deficiencies of the film, traces of an extraordinary woman break through. But its sharp focus on two relationships provoked the suspicions of my feminist consciousness.

The mother as victimizer holds center stage. Echoing the "generation of vipers" message, the movie follows a “mother as monster motif" and convinces us that the interdependency of Frances and her mother Lillian Farmer caused Frances' destruction. We are shown Frances subjected to the brutalities of gang rape; she is deprived of her civil rights, of her status as an adult, and finally of her mind. Yet the man in front of me in the audience found only one scene to speak out against. When the film depicts Frances and her mother fighting, so effective is the "mother monster" message that he urged Frances to "kill her."

The full importance of this distortion lies in its connection to the character of Harold, Frances' lover and mainstay. At the film's beginning, he is shown in association with the seething labor movement of the 30's. He offers Frances love, understanding, and undying loyalty. Twice he saves her from the mental institution. He proposes marriage and an idyllic farmhouse retreat. The film's insistence on Harold as rescuer reinforces Frances’ self-destructive rejection of the salvation he offers. When she turns down his proposal and returns to her mother, the film says Frances signs her own death warrant. At this point, the full violence comes down upon her; her final incarceration subjects her to humiliating and ruthless "treatments" which culminate in lobotomy.

In the wind-up, we see Frances robot-like, the painful spectacle of her appearance on Ralph Edwards' This is Your Life. And, at this bitter end—Harold, naturally still in love with her, now pities her.

She barely recognizes him. With this final rejection, the film ends with the postscript that Frances Farmer died “alone." This means, of course, without a man, without the man she rejected.

Harold disturbed me the most. He seemed too good to be true. To my amazement, this intuition proved more true than I imagined. Harold was a complete fabrication. He never existed. Harold brings us to the center of the film's deception. He embodies the romantic lie at the heart of all patriarchal culture. Harold is the ordinary good man that every woman needs; he is the class hero of the Left.

In the film, his presence spins a web of deceit, every strand of which falsifies Frances Farmer. The fiction Harold denies Frances’ true strength. Not the male hero, but Frances herself attempted to escape from her institutionalization. Indeed, Arnold reports that, despite her unbelievable degradation, Frances Farmer kept alive a spirit of resistance—right up to the lobotomy table and throughout five years of electric shock treatments, hydrotherapy, massive doses of experimental drugs, rapes (the asylum, Steilacoom, was the whorehouse for soldiers from nearby Fort Lewis in Seattle). This fighting spirit earned her the obsessive focus of the psychiatrists bent on curing her into submission, as well as the admiration of her sister inmates.

The Harold myth is deeply insidious. As it makes Frances into a neurotic, self-destructive woman, it correspondingly obscures the political significance of Farmer's life. Harold deflects attention from the fact that her destruction is inseparable from patriarchal values and power. Frances Farmer's life demonstrates the systematic restriction of women's spirits, genius, and desires for self-realization. The movie needs to be exposed and some measure of authenticity restored to Frances Farmer. Jessica Lange trivializes Farmer's intelligence, politics, and artistry. Lange's Sphinx-like silence and beautiful face charm us instead with the cliché of dumb feminine mystery. Clifford Odets is the film's choice for the genius role; Lange portrays Farmer in adoration of him. By contrast, Farmer is depicted as a witty, adolescent rebel—another non-threatening cliché.

The film makes much of teenage Frances shocking the Seattle public with her prize-winning essay on God's death; it makes much of Farmer screaming "cocksucker" to the judge who sentences her. Conspicuously absent is Frances Farmer the woman with a keen sense of social injustice; Frances Farmer who gave away most of her money (one of the facts used to prove her insanity); or Frances Farmer who spoke for the cause of the migrant workers, and for progressive forces of the Spanish Civil War.

Frances suppresses the political context surrounding Frances Farmer's entrapment. Turned on to amphetamines and alcohol, overworked and very unhappy, Farmer delivered herself into the fatal arms of the law and psychiatry, her arrest for drunken driving initiating her doom.

In jail, she became vulnerable to a series of psychiatrists, each of whom, acting out of lifelong interests in the beautiful star, subjected her to sadistic treatments. Dr. Leonard was first when he exercised his right to examine Frances Farmer's sanity—a right given any psychiatrist over anyone unfortunate enough to find themselves in prison. He found her "hostile and uncooperative" and decided Farmer was suffering from "manic-depressive psychosis."

This judgment led to her first incarceration and shock treatments. She managed to get out. But in 1944, she came before Judge Frater, who belonged to the American Vigilantes of Seattle, a right-wing, anti-communist group. Judge Frater remembered the teenager who had outraged Seattle with her "communists" essay, the woman who had won a trip to Moscow; the woman with well-known radical sentiments. Though Frances Farmer didn't know it, she found herself before a man who had it in for her. It would be like Jerry Falwell judging a lesbian.

Judge Frater used the state's psychiatrist, Dr. Nicholson, to certify Farmer "insane." Nicholson's reactionary politics are suggested by the fact that he had worked for the FBI. His verdict put Farmer in Steilacoom for five years. It was Dr. Freeman, renowned for his innovative lobotomies, who "liberated" Frances Farmer and countless other women and powerless persons from their mental powers. He, too, nourished an interest in the fallen star. Freeman had three interviews with Farmer and found her "defiant and uncooperative."

The doctor himself boasted a dramatic flair. He loved to perform his techniques and Arnold reports how Freeman would lobotomize many women—up to thirty-five at a time—assembly-line style before large audiences of his medical colleagues. Freeman described his method of "inserting this calibrated instrument (similar to an icepick) between the patient's eye and eyelid, and driving it through the orbital plate and into the brain, where it is moved to sever the nerves connecting the cortex with the thalamus..., the nerves that deliver emotional power to ideas.” Of course, with the cure he admitted came "a loss in the patient's imaginative powers." But, he reasoned, in the circular self-justifying logic of his trade, these people were "sick in the imagination." This high priest of psychiatry cured Frances Farmer of her imagination with the miracle cure of patriarchy, the mind-fuck that doesn't even leave a scar.

None of this comes across in the movie, nor do we get any sense of the positive role of women and women-identification in Frances Farmer's life. But, in fact, it was her English teacher, Belle McKensie, who submitted Frances’ prize-winning essay; a faculty woman, Sophie Rosenstein, who encouraged Frances' dramatic ambition, and who set her on the road to fame. And finally it was a woman, Jean Ratcliffe, with whom Frances Farmer lived out the last ten years of her life.

Details on Farmer's probable lesbianism need a feminist researcher. Arnold deserts us on this ground. He is totally silent on this relationship though he grants that Frances Farmer might have been "latently homosexual." This homophobia is only one facet of Arnold's lack of feminist understanding. He misses the point of the facts he uncovers: No one involved—not Frater, not Nicholson, not Lillian Farmer, not the American Vigilantes of Washington, not the doctors of Steilacoom, not even Walter Freeman—had to do anything that was glaringly illegal! This was the most chilling aspect of the entire case.

The greater truth buried in this observation is that woman-hating is not illegal in patriarchy. Within its closed system of values, laws, practices, learning, culture, it is mandated as part of the “natural order of things."

If we would approach the significance of Frances Farmer's story, we would read it in terms of the truth Virginia Woolf grasped in her creation of Shakespeare's sister. Woolf imagined her raving on the moors, crazed with the pain of her denied genius. We would begin with her connections to others. Perhaps with Tennessee Williams's sister lobotomized at 24, or with "neurotic" Alice James, or with the unnamed women who make up the majority population in our mental institutions.

As feminists, as women, as people, we should rage and be sad at the destruction of Frances Farmer, and with her continued desecration. Breaking every oppressive silence, disallowing every deception, and revolting against every aspect of patriarchal violence is our responsibility to ourselves, to all the Frances Farmers, and to life itself.

City Attorney, Manuela Scott, has not decided whether to appeal Judge McKibben's ruling on the summary judgment. If his ruling goes unchallenged, this will permanently invalidate the ban and eliminate the possibility of a full hearing on the legality of the ordinance. Members of the Coalition to Stop Electroshock are appalled by Judge McKibben's apparent indifference to the democratic process and are demanding that the city appeal.

Funds are urgently needed to cover the expenses of the Coalition's legal project. Send to: Coalition to Stop Electroshock, P.O. Box 3301, Berkeley, CA 94703.

Big Mama Rag, October, 1983 - Page 13