page 4

The Politics of Rape in Denver

The latest report from the Violence Research Unit of Denver General
Hospital claims to deflate the old myths about rape, but in fact
perpetuates the biggest myth of all — that women can avoid being
raped.

The unit says that 40% of all rapes can be avoided if women didn’t do
things such as walk alone at night and other things that people tend to
do every day of their lives. If a woman's behavior stays within certain
boundaries then if she is raped it’s not her fault. But if she acts as if she
were a free person and is raped then she is guilty of allowing herself to
be raped. After all, it is the rapist’s option in this society to rape. It is not a
woman's option to be free.

It is too bad that the Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault cannot be
honest with itself. Almost all women who had any energy, ideas and
desire to work on the problem of rape have been edged out of the group
or have left in disgust, principally due to power-personality conflicts of a
couple of steering committee members.

It seems odd, because these same women see themselves as essen-
tial to the “cause” of rape in Denver. They have done good things but
they have also stood in the way of action and self-determination for
other women, and especially minority women, who want to do
something about rape. But the coalition is dead. It may continue to
be used as a political magnet for grant monies and people and news
conferences but its effectiveness as a tool for organizing men and
women in dealing with rape is gone.

Women who want to do something about rape would do well with
their time to look into the NOW Task Force on Rape and/or the
Storefront self-defense classes that will be offered in early February.

Solidarity

This month, a Colorado Springs woman, Mrs. Margie Ann Lynch was
convicted of second degree murder for the shooting death of her hus-
band last July.

She shot him in self-defense after he came home one night drunk and
threatened to beat her and her 4 children. “I fired as many bullets into
him as the gun held,” she told the judge.

She was sentenced to 10-15 years in the women’s prison at Canon
City. 

This is an example of the way this system of law and order works to
repress women. Women’s bodies have been colonized long enough. We
must support women who have been imprisoned. We are all sisters.

Welcome Sisterhood Express

In June, 1974, during the Summer Solstice celebration in New Mex-
ico, Big Mama Rag offered a workshop on newspapers and production.
Several women from Tucson, Arizona attended, exchanging
enthusiasm and ideas with us. They wanted to begin a Feminist
newspaper in Arizona.

Over the following months, a close contact was maintained between
BMR and the women of Tucson. Then in September, wanting to publish
a much needed newspaper for Arizona women and unable to undertake
the entire process independently, SisterHood Express contacted BMA
with a proposal: SHE would become a regular insert in BMA in ex-
change for securing new outlets for the paper in Arizona.

With this issue of BMA coming fittingly at Winter Solstice, we and
our sisters give birth to the child of a dream, SisterHood Express. Over
the past six months, we have shared our skills and resources, our
enthusiasm and struggles. The process has been generative; a fine ex-
ample of the power of being that flows from shared sister-energy.

SisterHood Express begins and will remain an independent expres-
sion, both in content and structure. SHE will, eventually, as with all
children, leave home to make her own life as a strong new sister and a
supportive energy force.

An idea conceived at Summer Solstice has, through time and
spiritual energy and the political understanding of women, come alive
at Winter Solstice. It is again time for celebration. To the women of
SisterHood Express, and to all of you, we send warmth and love. How
fitting that we should give birth to each other!

Linda Fowler

To all the women who responded to Mama's desperate cries in the
November issue she sends a great big “I love you!” It is so fine to know
you are there. Although we still need a lot more help, the response of
the many women who offered their time has eased the load con-
siderably. If you are wanting to help but couldn't yet, there is still a place
for you. So come on home for a visit.

The biggest problem right now is that none of you may ever see this
column. And if you do, it could be the last. Unless we get our money trip
together, the February issue may never come out! It takes over $1,000 a
month to get BMA on the streets and in the mail. And starting in ‘75 it’s
going to take more; cost of newsprint and ink is going up again. (We will
probably have to raise our newsstand price.)

The key to the $$ problem is advertising. We are in desperate need of
people to sell ads. If you can give even two hours per week to sell an ad
or two it can matter. And you can keep 20% of what you sell.

A request: remember Mama when you get your tax return in ‘75.
Maybe 10%, huh?

We think this newspaper is too important to let die. No other media
even deals with the issues that we do, much less from a Feminist
perspective. And we need you and your ideas to keep it going. What do
you want to talk about? What's important to you? What are your ideas on
how to make money? Mama’s young at heart and she'll try everything.

This past month we have received donations ranging from $3 to
$100. To all the women who remembered Mama, thank you! Because
of those who worked and those who gave, and sometimes both, Big
Mama Lives! We can't let her slip away.

Vietnamese Prisons

“One of the Hells on

Earth”

A Woman Recently
Released From
Saigon Jails

(Editor’s note: More than
200,000 political prisoners re-
main in the jails of the Saigon
regime. These prisons, largely
possible only because of
massive U.S. aid to the Thieu
regime, are constant reminders
that for the Vietnamese the war
has not ended.

The following is an interview
conducted by the Liberation
Agency of South Vietnam with a
woman recently released after
nearly eight years in Thieu’s
prisons. In italics are the
questions and thoughts of the
interviewer, and the regular type
are the words of Pham Thi My.
We thank the Provisional
Revolutionary Government
(PRG) of South Vietnam for mak-
ing this interview available to
Liberation News Service.)

Her name is Pham Thi My. She
is from the Vinh Long province
of South Vietnam. At age 16 My
fell victim to the repression of
students. One morning, as she
was reading her lesson, men of
the “national police” broke in,
tied her hands behind her back
and kicked her to the ground. At
the district police office she was
put to the third degree and
beaten black and blue.

Unable to capture any infor-
mation from Pham Thi My, they
set her free only to capture her
again one month later. She was
released a second time in late
1966. Twice jailed and tortured,
she had weakened and finally
had to give up her schooling.
The hardships endured by her
parents, the deaths she witnessed
around her — all that and
other things led My into the
resistance. As though to explain
her decision she said:

My family consists of 6 people,
4 of them were thrown in U.S.-
Thieu prisons while earning
their living most honestly. My
second eldest sister and my
youngest brother alone, who
had joined the revolution, es-
caped. My mother and father
were arrested in June, 1970.
While he was detained at Chau
Doc for one year, she was
brought to Thu Duc prison.

When did they arrest you for
the last time?

One day in November, 1969.
They kept me over 5 months in
Can Tho jail. By May, 1970, they
shifted me to Thu Duc and held
me there until I was released.

I asked My to relate what
happened to her in Can Tho jail.
Her bright eyes turned dim
because of the recollection of
the pains from being caned and
kicked, or stifled by lime water
poured into her mouth and
nose.

You know, Can Tho is one of
the U.S.-Thieu hells on earth in
South Vietnam and one of the
largest detention camps in the
4th tactical region.

My nursed her head in her
hands. As to know later,
at that moment My saw in her
mind the head warder — the
professional knocker — and 4
half naked strongmen, each
when she collapsed on the ce-
ment floor the devils continued
to beat her into insensibility on
her knees and soles. Now any
changes of weather cause
agonizing pains in her joints.

My startled on hearing a
sharp, heart-rending cry from a
neighboring room. Looking at
my anxious face she explained:

That’s Sen from Binh Dinh.
She was my mate at Thu Duc
prison. Several times thugs
thrust a cudgel into her vagina,
which eventually paralyzed both
of her legs. Every day, she gets
into fits. She was released in
May last year and cannot walk
yet.

Sen is only 17 years old. When
I look at her I think of Aunt Bay
who was also detained at Thu
Duc. Aunt Bay is over 40. She
has undergone every con-
ceivable torture. One of the most
terrible things I ever witnessed
was her being put to electric
shock.

The warders inserted deep
into her vagina a live eel to
which they applied an electrode.
The eel writhed as best it could
to escape and moved deeper into
the victim's organ. As a woman
you can imagine the ex-
cruciating pain that Aunt Bay
had to endure. As a result of that
U.S.-invented method, her
genitals got infected and she is
sterilized for life.

Before the “security officers”
set me free, they sent her and a
number of my fellow inmates in
similar conditions to unknown
destinations. But, according to
sources inside the jail, they were
abandoned in far remote
temples and pagodas in some
provinces of western Nam Bo.

What helped you stand the
atrocities?

Out of love for my parents, for
my village and fellow villagers, I
joined the revolution. Had I told
them [the torturers] what I did,
many of my comrades would
have been put to torture or
thrown in prison. So I made up
my mind to endure everything
and die alone if I had to.

I was tortured and savagely
treated but that was nothing
compared to what my prison
mates suffered. If I got five years
imprisonment from the so-called
itinerant military tribunal of Can
Tho province, many among
them, older and younger than I,
like my mother, did not even
know whether they would ever
be set free.

Living conditions in U.S.-
Thieu detention places, in Can
Tho and in Thu Duc, were simply
inhuman. Sixty or seventy peo-
ple were crowded into a room
about 50 square meters large,
less than one square meter for
each. We lay packed like sar-
dines.

Full of maggots, the pail con-
taining excrements and urine
was put in the corner of the
room, stinking terribly. Each in-
mate received a liter of water a
day for washing. So did women
in menstruation. Most of the
female detainees suffered from
gynecological troubles, for there
are no medicines. They bled
whether they sat or lay on the
ground and flies swarmed
around them.

The diet and medical treat-
ment were no better. We were
given every day two bowlfuls of
food consisting of one third un-
husked grains and pebbles, and
two thirds of moldy rice and a
spoonful of salted soya sauce or
rotten fish tasting like quinine.

The sick were not cared for at
all. In Thu Duc, for lack of
medicines, Thuy, one of the in-
mates, died some time after she
had caught a slight cold. So did
three-year-old Han, a native of
Ben Tre who died of dysentery,
and Aunt Ty of Quang Ngai, who
was not sent to the hospital after
her lungs had been gravely in-
jured by beatings.

They were not content with
putting us to a slow death. They
compelled us to attend
“denounce communists”
sessions, hoping to sow
divisions among us. We, who liv-
ed far from home in utter adver-
sity, and who badly needed
friendship, were not allowed to
talk with and help one another,
even to gaze at one another. The
wardens used to accuse us of
hatching “communist plots,” to
mistreat us whenever they
wanted to. But we knew that un-
ion is strength, for our elder
fellow inmates — through the
examples of undauntedness
they themselves had set —
taught us how to live and behave
like patriots.

I looked at My, into her bright
eyes, full of love and pride. At
that moment I could not help in-
quiring after her mother. As
though she struggled to over-
come something in her,

She said.

When I left Thu Duc jail last
May, my mother was still there.
Others like Chanh Qui too. She
was not among those released
this year.