Women’s Festival Celebrates Fifth Year

Dona Calacone

On Saturday, September 9th, the  
Fifth Annual Colorado Women's Fest-  
ival was held at the Auraria college  
campus in Denver. Blessed by warm,  
sunny weather, this year's festival  
drew over 500 women and children.  
Over 100 women worked on the day-  
long event: entertaining, organizing,  
and staffing booths. From noon until  
6 p.m. everyone enjoyed listening to  
non-stop entertainment and browsing  
through the many kinds of items for  
sale. The festival was capped off by  
a dance in the evening sponsored by  
the Denver chapter of the National  
Lesbian Feminist Organization.

The first Colorado Women's Festival  
was held at East High School in Aug-  
ust of 1974. Its purpose was to  
raise funds for the establishment of  
a Denver Women's Center. This center  
never became a reality. Since then,  
money acquired through the festival  
has been channeled back into the  
festival fund to make subsequent  
festivals possible.

A member of the festival organizing  
committee, Vickie McConnell, said  
that one of the purposes of the fest-  
ival was to bring women together in  
support of each other's talents: "If  
she juggles, she can be there; or if  
she bakes cookies...or paints Ukrain-  
ian Easter eggs...or makes amazing  
stained glass, she can be there."  
Deirdre Reilly, another festival com-  
mittee member, said that the festival  
also provides outreach to the commun-  
ity for women who have a craft or a  
skill, so that other women may see  
their work and buy it.

There were 58 booths at the festi-  
val where women sold a variety of  
custom-made items such as jewelry,  
clothing, furniture, macrame, draw-  
ings, pottery and quilts. A fair var-  
iety of foods and beverages were avai-  
lable and feminist organizations (in-  
cluding BMR) were also represented.  
Woman to Woman Bookcenter made a tidy  

The Festival

Pat Dellin

Some women who helped organize this  
year’s Colorado Women's Festival  
wanted to entitle this article "Our  
Bid for Power." Lest the sarcasm of  
that heading be misconstrued, we at  
the festival committee settled on a  
more straightforward approach. Unfor-  
tunately, "The Festival Committee Re-  
ports” won't bring back the hordes of  
women, the crafts, the music, the  
theatre, the comedy, the celebration  
that was part of this year's festival.  
Hopefully, it will provide some infor-  
mation to those individuals and  
groups who are interested in learning  
about how this event came to pass one  
more year and, perhaps more important-  
ly, what happened to the money.

The Colorado Women's Festival has  
been traditionally planned each year  
by women from different feminist  
groups plus other individual inter-  
ested women. This year was no excep-  
tion. Some women from Diana's Grove  
plus some from Virago Productions plus  
two other women not affiliated with  
either of these two groups constituted  
this year's organizing committee.  
Diana's Grove and June Summers, who  
helped organize last year's festival,  
provided the impetus for this year's  
first organizing meetings which took  
place in May and June. These initial  
meetings were publicized by leaflets  
and by a classified in BMR. From the  
beginning, all interested women and  

profit primarily through the sale of  
lemonade and among the hottest-sell-  
ing items were T-shirts sold by the  
Colorado Springs Women's Health Ser-  
vice Clinic. The shirts were emblazon-  
ed with some pleasant flowers encircled  
by the phrase "Ladies' Sewing Circle  
and Terrorist Society.” There was al-  
so an information booth for use as a  
free display area for groups and indi-  
viduals wishing to pass out free in-  
formation.

A women's festival is an important  
way for craftswomen to expose their  
work to a large and, hopefully, sup-  
portive audience notwithstanding the  
fact that there is certainly no abun-  
dance of money in the feminist com-  
munity. However, many women at the  
festival did not do as well at sell-  
ing their merchandise as they'd hoped.  
One silversmith overheard some women  
say that they were glad they didn't  
bring their billfolds so that they  
wouldn't spend too much. Outlets for  
women to sell their work are too few  
in number and often at fairs and fes-  
tivals the work of craftswomen is not  
taken as seriously and, hence, does  
not sell as well, as that of their  
male counterparts. Vickie McConnell  
said that she felt simple attendance  
at a women's festival was not enough:  
"It is not supportive just to sit on  
the grass and hear people sing. If  
you have the money, buy something  
from a woman, not May D&F." Deirdre  
Reilly echoed those feelings and  
asked, “How many people did their  
Christmas shopping at the festival?"

Many of the women attending the  
festival expected to find more diver-  
sity both in the kinds of wares being  
sold and in the kinds of women sell-  
ing them. There seemed to be fewer  
older women and fewer women outside  
of the feminist community than at  
last year’s festival. Also, although  
there were 60 booths, their number  
seemed to be much smaller.

The Auraria campus offered some  
serious physical limitations for the  
festival. In order to allow people to  
sit comfortably on the grass while  

groups were welcome to participate in  
organizing the festival and decisions  
were made by those present at each  
meeting.

Although several women expressed  
interest in helping to organize this  
year's festival, there were only about  
8 to 10 women who consistently par-  
ticipated in the organizing process.  
Meetings were held every Tuesday even-  
ing at Woman to Woman. One of the  
first and most difficult tasks was to  
find a suitable location for the fes-  
tival. Some women thought that a loc-  
ation in the countryside would be  
ideal and certainly an improvement  
over last year's church parking lot  
site. However, we decided that  
accessibility to women in the city  
was paramount and we finally secured  
the facilities of the Auraria campus  
for Sept. 9th. With the cosponsor-  
ship of the Associated Women's Stu-  
dents group on campus, we were able  
to obtain the space for the festival  
practically free of charge.

That all sounds so neat and simple,  
but actually it took many meetings to  
get going and find a good location.  
Our next decisions as a committee re-  
volved around including other feminist  
groups in the process and possible  
profits from the festival. The Velvet  
Hammer had previously proposed to us  
that they would donate beer for BMR  
and Woman to Woman to sell during the  
day. The festival committee decided  
that that would be OK. Unfortunately,  
due to misinformation, the application  

viewing the entertainment, it was  
necessary for the stage to be turned  
away from the booths. This resulted  
in a very disjointed situation be-  
cause women could not both enjoy the  
entertainment and browse through the  
booths at the same time. This arran-  
gement was probably to the detriment  
of the women selling at the booths  
because both the crowds and the major  
emphasis of the festival were with  
the entertainment.

The entertainment was the highlight  
of the festival. Everyone enjoyed it.  
All the acts were of a high quality  
and were very professionally staged.  
There were smooth transitions from  
one act to the next without any awk-  
ward gaps. The sound system performed  
well, too, though it would have been  
nice to have had speakers directed  
back at the booths as well. There  
were 17 acts and each was given about  
15 minutes to perform. Some veteran  
performers wanted more performance  
time since they had more equipment  
and a longer repertoire. However, the  
festival committee tried to keep  
everyone as close to the 15 minute  
limit as possible, to allow everyone  
to perform. Some performers, when ap-  
proached by the festival committee,  
turned them down because they didn't  
want to do another "free gig” for the  
women's community.

The acts which did perform offered  
a nice variety of music, poetry,  
comedy and theatre. The music ranged  
from bluegrass and country to tradi-  
tional, popular and original composi-  
tions. The bluegrass and country  
music performed by members of the  
Motherfolkers was thoroughly enjoyed  
by everyone. The Sunday Ladies closed  
the festival with a long performance  
lasting nearly an hour. Blaze did an  
ingenious comedy routine where she  
portrayed the newly elected pope,  
Dolly Parton (alias Dolly Parton).  
In a sequined and lavender miter  
(pope's hat) spelling out "Dolly" and  
carrying a large lavender feather,  
she said that these days she was see-  
ing "too many cardinals and not en-  

‘Committee Reports

for a beer license for the day was  
turned down and there was no beer at  
the festival. The committee had also  
wanted to put on a dance after the  
festival with a women's band, Airhart.  
However, we didn't think we had the  
necessary energy to put on a dance, a  
whole new production, after an all-day  
festival so we decided to see if some  
other feminist group or groups in Den-  
ver or Boulder would take on this en-  
ergy consuming but possibly lucrative  
production. After asking around, the  
National Lesbian Feminist Organization  
of Denver came forward with a proposal  
to put on the dance and the festival  
committee agreed to let them do it.  
The NLFO produced this dance on their  
own after the initial planning stages.  
The festival committee did however re-  
serve the right to final approval of  
their plans.

ill-fated beer concession.

The ensuing weeks were spent on  
many things. For example, publicity:  
sending out booth applications to  
approximately 350 women and groups  
on our mailing list from last year;  
designing, printing and distributing  
posters and leaflets; sending out  
public service announcements about  
the festival to local media. In this  
same time period, we started contact-  
ing performers to fill our 6-hour  
entertainment schedule. We also had  
to attend to matters concerning  
equipment needed to run the festival:  
obtaining a stage and sound equip-  

MORE ON PAGE 10

ough black birds and hens. Martinez  
and Blair performed a very funny ver-  
tiloquist act and introduced their  
idea for a new fast food chain: World  
Food, featuring various ethnic com-  
binations such as kosher burritos.  
There was a self-defense demonstra-  
tion presented by Caroline Agosta  
after which Denver's Women Against  
Violence Against Women dragged an  
effigy of a man through the audience  
and hanged him on a gallows pole.  
Throughout the course of the festival  
women pinned onto the effigy the  
names of men who had done violence  

to them.

Over 300 women were present at the  
dance in the evening sponsored by the  
NLFO. Everyone enjoyed it tremendously.  
The band Airhart from Kansas City  
performed current disco music. Some  
women were bothered by the presence of  
men who were mainly Auraria personnel  
such as the bartender and security  
guards. Also, the band had a male  
drummer. Katherine Davenport of the  
NLFO said that when Airhart was  
originally signed to perform there were  
only women in the band. The male  
drummer was a last minute replacement  
and the NLFO “didn't know about it until the night before the  
festival.” Some women questioned  
Airhart's ethics in not telling the  
NLFO about this change beforehand,  
but at the dance itself, the drummer  
was quite inconspicuous and most  
women were not even aware of his pre-  
sence. The Auraria Rathskeller was  
a very comfortable space for the  
dance. It was just large enough and  
adjoined an outdoor patio which women  
used frequently throughout the even-  
ing. A definite problem with Auraria  
though was that the dance had to end  
at midnight, much too soon.

T-shirts from the festival with  
the 1979 Colorado Women's Festival  
logo are still available. There are  
large and X-large sizes left and  
other sizes can be ordered if there  
is a demand for them. They're $5.00  
each and can be obtained by writing  
to P.O. Box 3024, Denver, CO. 80201.

1978 FESTIVAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT

INCOME:  
78 Festival Fund $602.27  
Booths 66 @ $5 990.00  
T-shirts 195.00  
$1787.27  
EXPENSES:  

Advertising $222.95  
Sound & Electricity 200.10  
Insurance 79.00  
T-shirts 192.91  
Rental equipment 45.20  
Miscellaneous 23.65  
79 Festival Fund 602.27  
$1357.38  
NET PROFIT: $429.89  
‘79 Festival Fund (50%) $214.95  
Festival Committee (50%) 214.94  
Assoc. Women Students 25.00  
Diana's Grove 63.31  
Virago 63.31  
other committee women 63.32  

'79 FESTIVAL FUND:  
Fund from '78 $602.27  
this year's contribution 214.95  
NLFO contribution 30.00  
$847.22