Renters: Know Your Rights

Part Two of a Two Part Series

Susan Goding

MOVE IN SHEET SAMPLE

The following is a list of damages, necessary cleaning defects in the  
Premises existing as of the day of 19... «eb the  

premises known and described at __  

(address, street and apt. #)  

in the city of __ Colorado.  

Room  

Room  

Room  

Room  

Signed  

(landlord) (tenants)  

FOR RENTERS WHO DID RECEIVE A WRITTEN STATEMENT WITHIN 30 DAYS, BUT WHO  
DO NOT AGREE WITH CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES  

Date  
Name of Landlord or Manager  
(or Registered Agent if owned by a Corporation)  
Address  
City, State, Zip  
Certified Mail: Return Receipt Requested  

Dear __  
We, __ (name) (name)  
were the tenants at __ (address)  
from __ (beginning date) to __ (ending date)  
$ ___.00 was paid by us as a damage deposit.  

We have received your letter of __ and do not agree with  

the deductions listed for the following reasons:  

Kindly send the amount of $ __.00 to us at __  
(address) (city, state, zip)  
within seven (7) days of your receipt of this letter. If the amount is not  
refunded, we intend to file suit under Colorado Revised Statutes  
38-12-103, asking treble damages.  

Sincerely,  

NOTE: One copy sent certified mail and one copy  
retain for your own records.  

FOR RENTERS WHO DID NOT RECEIVE A WRITTEN STATEMENT WITHIN 30 DAYS.  

Date  
Name of Landlord or Manager  
(or Registered Agent if owned by a Corporation)  
Address  
City, State, Zip  
Certified Mail: Return Receipt Requested  

Dear __  

We, __ (name)  
were the tenants at __ (address)  
from __ (beginning date) until __ (ending date).  
$ __.00 was paid by us as a damage deposit.  

We have received neither a written explanation nor the return of our deposit.  

It has been more than 30 days since  

Kindly send the full amount of $ __.00 to us at __  
(address) (city, state, zip)  
within seven (7) days of your receipt of this letter. If the full  
amount is not refunded, we intend to file suit under Colorado  
Revised Statutes 38-12-103, asking treble damages.  

Sincerely,  

NOTE: One copy sent certified mail and one  
copy retain for your own records.  

RENTAL LOCATION AGENCIES  

Rental location agencies are regulated by law. The agency must be licensed  
by the Colorado Real Estate Commission. If the agency does not have listings  
to fit your specifications after two weeks of consistent effort, all but $10  
of the fee is to be refunded.  

It is unlawful for an agency to knowingly refer you to: a nonexistent ad-  
dress, a property which is not for lease, a property which does not meet your  
specifications, property which rents for a different price than that quoted  
by the rental location agent, property which has been rented, or property  
listed without the consent of the landlord.  

If you are considering using a rental location agent you should consider  
first: using all available sources of free listings. Real estate agencies  
frequently manage rental properties and are often good sources of free help  
in finding a place. If you do use a rental service, you should use it to its  
maximum effectiveness. If there is a contract provided for this purpose, de-  
sired extras - such as a fenced yard, garage or driveway, close proximity  
to campus or other specified area, or other things - should be listed.  

If problems or questions develop, you can contact the Colorado Real Estate  
Commission Enforcement Division.  

DISCRIMINATION  

The Colorado Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of  
race, creed, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, marital status, or reli-  
gion. Landlords cannot discriminate in ways prohibited by law. However,  
landlords can discriminate in ways which are not prohibited by law. For exam-  
ple, landlords can refuse to rent to students, persons with pets, and persons  
with children.  

Sometimes it is difficult for a person to determine whether or not discrim-  
ination is prohibited by law. In that case, contact the Colorado Civil Rights  
Commission.  

GETTING YOUR DEPOSIT BACK  

When you move, the landlord has 30 days (unless a longer period of time,  
not to exceed 60 days, is stipulated in the lease) to send to your last known  
address the full amount of your security deposit or send a list of damages  
and the amount of money needed for repairs. If the deposit is larger than the  
amount required for repairs, the landlord must return the excess.  

The landlord cannot withhold any portion for normal wear and tear (such as  
for painting, repair of rusty pipes, etc.).  

If the landlord willfully and wrongfully withholds your deposit or if you  
do not hear from him within 30 days you can take him to court. A good pamphlet  
to help is How to Use the Colorado Small Claims Court.  

To start the legal action, send the landlord a certified letter (with re-  
turn receipt requested) demanding the deposit be refunded within 7 days. If  
after the 7 days have passed and you hear nothing from your landlord go to the  
county courthouse in the county in which the house or apartment is located  
to file a suit against the landlord. This will cost $12 - $15. You can decide  
if it is worth that much plus an hour or so in court (you'll probably have  
to go twice, each session will last 1 to 2 hours) to retrieve a deposit of  
often times in excess of $100. According to the Colorado Revised Statutes  
38-12-103 if a landlord withholds the deposit wrongfully, you will receive  
a judgment which may amount to three times the amount wrongfully withheld,  
plus court costs and attorney fees.  

If you decide to go to court remember these: Be Punctual, Have Your Docu-  
mentation In Good Order (bring all your receipts and photographs if you have  
them), And You Must Have Been Reasonable and Fair prior to bringing the land-  
lord to court. In other words, have notified the landlord by certified mail  
(with return receipt requested) of all of your grievances and warned him of  
the actions you intended to take. AVOID THE "PERRY MASON" IMAGE.  

MORE ON PAGE 18  

Useful Publications  

How To Use the Colorado Small Claims Court  
Available free from the State Court Administrator's Office, 323 State  
Capitol, Denver, Colorado 80203  

Tenant-Landlord Facts  
Available free from the Metropolitan District Attorneys’ Consumer Office,  
655 South Broadway, Denver, Colorado 80209  

Other publications which may be helpful:  

Sue the Bastard by Douglas Matthews  
On Your Own in Court by CoPIRG  
See You In Court! How to Use Small Claims Court in the Consumer Survival Kit  

Helpful Phone Numbers  

Colorado Civil Rights Commission 839-3554  
District Attorney - Consumer Fraud Office  

In Denver 777-3072  
County or City Building Department  

Under Public Works Dept., In Denver 575-2443  
Colorado Real Estate Commission  

Enforcement Division 892-2633