struggle

Kate Sharp, Lori Bradford, Bobbe Ross

This struggle column is a beginning examination of some of the issues of class struggle and the women's movement. Certainly, it is not meant as an all-inclusive statement on the subject, but it is hoped that this column will spark additional discussion, study, and struggle in the women's community. We have included in this article a description of our process (how and why we did what we did), some descriptions of class-related terms we found relevant, some observations about classist attitudes and behaviors, a discussion of professionalism as a particularly dangerous trend in the movement, and various other issues we found relevant to the discussion of class, feminism, and the capitalist system.

The very first part of this article, however, is three separate personal introductions of ourselves meant to give our readers some idea of how we came to politics, what our own class struggles and backgrounds have been, and what our present politics are. It is hoped that these personal statements will serve to give the reader some idea of our motivations, our needs, behind discussing the issue of class. And, it is hoped that this struggle column will serve to provide some information and impetus to others with similar concerns.

Personal Introductions

Kate

In recent years I've had a growing feeling of alienation from the women's movement. The term “women's movement" has come to mean everything from NOW, to the women's cultural movement, to dyke separatism, to socialist feminism—as well as any and all things having at least vaguely to do with women. Such an acceptance of all politics and of no politics has led to a grave watering down of any politics that could serve to unite us and make our work effective. For those of us who feel we need a firm political base—one rooted in feminist and economic analysis—this situation is unbearable. It is precisely this situation which has led me to begin discussing the issue of class.

Growing up, the issues of class overwhelmed me. My father was the only non-blue collar worker on either side of my family. He was the first on either side to go to college and he was, proudly, a professional. This caused a great deal of tension in the family. Certainly, most family members were proud of my father because he had "made it," but his newfound status alienated him and our entire nuclear family from the larger family. My father adopted an arrogance, an air of superiority that was unbearable. He got irritated at social functions where members of his family were not familiar with the protocol he had come to know while attending seminary. Eventually, though gradually, he started making more money than anyone else in the family and this divided the family even more. It was obvious that he liked his money and his standing in the community and that he wanted the same for his children. He demanded proper table manners, impeccable grammar, a downright unnatural regard for cleanliness, and always “Christian discussion" rather than angry outbursts. We were taught to be aware of ourselves in the presence of others and to always make "a good impression.”

We were taught to be aware of ourselves in the presence of others

and to always make

“a good impression.”

We lived in a number of communities as I was growing up. I was born while my family lived in a neighborhood of Philadelphia comprised mostly of working-class to poor Italians and blacks with a scattering of white Protestants thrown in who attended my father's church. Next, we lived in a small factory town—the home of Dixie Cups and Crayola Crayons. And puberty found me back in Philly—in the first middle-class neighborhood I was to know. Usually, my father made slightly less than his average parishioner (the church members determined his salary) but his status and his "calling" always made up for any financial lack he would otherwise have felt. But eventually came the big time, as my parents perceived it, and what was misery for me. My parents pulled me out of a large and lively city-wide high school where I felt at home socially and plunked me into a small rich kids' school in Swarthmore, Pennsylvania. Here I was literally flunking out of school, sitting alongside kids whose parents taught at one of the most prestigious colleges in the country.

What a strange dichotomy. Most of my relatives had always felt estranged from our part of the family and now I felt estranged from my classmates for all the same reasons. I could put no term on it—all I knew was that I felt unhappy and inferior—but I was beginning to become class conscious.

This was the late sixties and enough political activity and literature existed that I found the left and eventually feminism. Most feminists had at least some economic analysis because the women's movement had grown out of the left and the anti-war movements—movements that were saying we shouldn't kill the North Vietnamese because as "commies" we were all on the same side. In other words, if you were a feminist, you were naturally anti-capitalist. This seemed reasonable to me because I learned that capitalism and its subsequent class divisions were responsible for keeping people divided—working against one another. Unless we attacked capitalism, it became apparent, any "freedoms" we achieved were incomplete.

It seems to me that a major mistake the women's movement has made has been a failure to recognize the fact that as long as any of us have at least some degree of class privilege we will have at least some degree of vested interest in the system. We may agree that capitalism is an “evil" to be destroyed but until we attack class privilege we will be attacking neither that which keeps us divided from one another, nor that which constitutes our having a stake in the system. Just as the sometimes subtle, sometimes not, realities of classist oppressive attitudes and behaviors pitted my immediate family against most of my extended family, so too will we in the women's movement remain divided unless we confront such realities head-on. An anti-capitalist stance must be a priority for us—an examination of how class privilege and class divisions undermine that stance must be our tool against such a situation. Anything less is just spinning our wheels.

Class Struggle: Our Shared Responsibility

Today I work as a retail clerk—a job I have been “slotted" into ever since my first job nine years ago. Two years ago I started school for the first time at a community college and am working toward my AA degree in photography. It is not my desire to "live off" my photographs but rather to stay in the labor force as a photographic lab tech, studio tech, or photographic retail clerk. My priorities for returning to school were to learn a marketable yet enjoyable skill, and to develop more proficiency at what is a valuable creative outlet for myself and a valuable skill for the movement (a skill I am always willing to pass on). Whenever I do sell a photograph, I charge no more per hour for my labor than the purchaser makes per hour.

Politically, it is a priority for me that the movement's politics become more defined and that a workable strategy be developed out of those politics. For me, it is a priority that feminism attack capitalism and patriarchy simultaneously and that strategically we keep from alienating one another through our use and abuse of class privilege.

Lori

There I was in the middle of my middle-class upbringing: grew up in a neighborhood with only single-family residences—I never knew anyone who lived in an apartment; had bought the line that education would be my salvation, not religion. So what was the big interruption that led me to ultimately develop radical feminist politics? A suicidal depression. The big assumption in my family was that if you were doing well in school everything must be just fine. I was very talented in the area of presenting a "false front.”

My mother was shocked—she said she thought she had read all the right books, but must have missed some important pages somehow.

The eventual result of all this was that I was institutionalized at seventeen (still in high school) for five months and in traditional analysis for almost the next five years (with frequent although briefer stays in the hospital). Come fall after my high school graduation, instead of being ready to enter college I was instead sitting in a looney bin.

My mother was shocked—she said she thought she had read all the right books, but must have missed some important pages somehow. I think now that the pages missing would have connected the problems in our nuclear family to greater problems in the society at large. The society dictates the exploitation of women and children in the family unit, class divisions, the isolation and alienation of each family. These connections would have saved us from a lot of guilt that did not rightly belong in our family, and would have allowed for the release of anger to have a more positive potential. Instead, for us, individual psychological problems were just that, or at best the fault of my mother.

One of the major fallacies of psychoanalysis that I discovered early on was that “knowing THE ROOT of the problem is 99% of the cure." Right after my first and most lengthy stay in the hospital I realized that I had lots of good information and a good awareness of the roots of my depression—but no ability to process this information and put it into effect to change my life. I was as trapped and depressed as I had ever been. Added to that I had missed the opening semester of college and was left with finding a job with no skills and a bad history.

After having been fired from my first job (they found out about my mental illness), I entered politics by becoming an up-front mental patient. At night school in my psychology classes it seems I endlessly confronted the naivete of students who wanted to help the poor crazy folk. I remembered as a patient when we were informed that students would be touring the ward how we would plot and plan to “act out (crazy)" to horrify them and entertain ourselves. I dropped psychology as a major because it made me feel like an oppressor. I believe that many theories taught about the mentally ill only serve to oppress us more, and not just traditional theories are responsible for these results. I knew that the problems of so many could not be solved by an individual understanding of their personal childhood. The Freudian dream would like us all to be caught in this stage or that, preventing us from growing up and letting go of things past.

MORE ON PAGE 14