Boston Black Women

Organize

Ithaca College News

Two black women from the Combahee River Collective, Boston, Massachusetts, sat before an Ithaca College audience and told their "herstories."

Beverly Smith had been active in the civil rights movement and developed a deep racial consciousness when most students at the University of Chicago were embroiled in protests against the war in Viet Nam. Despite her raised racial consciousness, she described herself as "confused" when she attended her first feminist meeting in 1967.

Another “herstory" came from Lorraine Bethel, a product of an all-girls high school, which she found "supportive" in terms of female companionship and “politicizing" in terms of her black identity. At Yale, she became part of the black and the feminist communities and finally a part of the black feminist consciousness-raising movement.

The two women were obviously experiencing a certain serendipitous enjoyment in being at Ithaca College, near Auburn, New York, the home of Harriet Tubman. The Combahee River Collective is located where a Civil War battle that freed several hundred slaves was planned and led by Harriet Tubman.

While nineteenth-century women like Tubman managed occasionally to break out of the black, female role, Smith and Bethel call themselves part of the first generation to really have a chance at the kind of job, lifestyle, and acceptance previously preserved for white people. But they also maintain that as black women, they are on the bottom of the heap of oppressed peoples. If they were free, then every other group would be free too, they say.

As part of the collective, Smith and Bethel practice what they call “identity politics." They concede that it is difficult for unoppressed groups to understand this kind of political stance. But with personal lives affected by racial, sexual, economic, class, and heterosexual oppression, they feel bound to direct their political lives in these areas. They also realize that no one else can be expected to fight their battles or completely understand their politics. No one else understands the “multi-layered texture” of black women's lives—the "smart-ugly" label feminists live with or the love they have nurtured for each other, manifested in lives affected by racial, sexual, economic, class, and heterosexual oppression, they feel bound to direct the "culturally coded language" they use in their personal communication. "We are the only ones who can work for our liberation," they say.

The Combahee women displayed openness, perspective, and humor not often associated with groups that have earned the revolutionary label. They fight against the heterosexual dominance of black men and yet fight with them against racism. They reject lesbian separatism, the idea that an all-female environment would be inherently good, while the presence of men is inherently evil, and they reject "pedestals and queenhood" while insisting on equality.

Their deep-rooted beliefs and commitment do not protect the Combahee organization from problems. Their power resources are limited, they believe, because of the racial, sexual, and economic oppression that is part of their lives. They also find they aren't fighting just one fight, but are establishing fronts in each one of their oppressed areas. They find that black men view their politics as threatening. They are afraid of losing black women as allies in the racial struggle and of losing the historical black family relationship of the man as the head of the household.

The Combahee women have carried their fight to areas where they can manifest their politics. They work against forced sterilization and rape and for abortion rights and proper health care. They hold seminars in colleges to explain their position and are starting to address the presence of racism in the white women's movement, demanding more accountability on their part. Smith feels the Combahee presence has already changed the character of the Boston women’s groups. But they have trouble getting people to take them seriously. "People think we are an exotic, rare strain and not typical," Smith said.

Perhaps one of the aspects of the Combahee group that makes it different is that it doesn't believe that the end justifies the means. "We don't want to mess people over in the name of our politics," they say.

Smith and Bethel appeared before an Ithaca, N.Y., audience on February 23, as part of a continuing series of lectures on the Marxist-Feminist perspective.

Big Mama Rag will have a community meeting on Wednesday, May 3, 7:30 p.m., at the Woman to Woman Bookcenter.

As we said in the February issue, Big Mama Rag has experienced major changes in both the structure and makeup of the collective. Clair is the only old-timer among us now, helping us to get on our feet before she leaves in June. Most of us are brand new to the job of publishing a newspaper, but we're learning fast. We are also trying to pull ourselves together and work as a more cohesive unit. We hope that lots of women will attend to give us feedback and to learn more about both the new structure and the collective process. Also in the works are layout and production workshops to help us improve the visual appearance of the newspaper.

We are planning a prison issue for early summer and we'd like stories, articles, and graphics from women who are or have been confined to an institution.

A big THANK YOU to the wonderful woman who donated a new IBM Selectric typewriter to BMR. This means that we no longer have to rent a typewriter and considerably reduces our monthly expenses.

As always, we welcome your contributions, criticisms, and help in layout and production. Just give us a call or drop us a line.

We're planning a retreat for the new faces in the collective.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 4

editorial:

This editorial relates to the news story on page 1 about the Virago Community Meeting.

The atmosphere at the Virago community meeting was very tense and uncomfortable. We feel that there is a lot of hostility being directed toward Virago from the community as a result of their receiving government money. Much of this is simple envy and is unjustified. But at the same time, the question of the "privilege of having a movement job" and the responsibility which that entails cannot be dismissed. The acceptance of government funds is a debatable issue which has seldom been properly dealt with anywhere. We still need to ask if we can "take the money and run” or whether we must make compromises. At the meeting, Virago seemed to be evading a lot of problems which they themselves are just now discovering and becoming aware of, and which they will need more time to solve. At this point we can only wait and see how they deal with this issue in the future.

The question of politics is also a very important one. Any feminist group which has been together for a year should be able to explain what their politics are, especially if they are receiving government funds. Their statement, "We are still in the process of defining our politics" is an evasion of the whole issue of politics after a year of organization. Through their interaction with the government, members of Virago have become, to some extent, spokeswomen of the movement and, as such, should be held especially accountable to the women's community. We feel that they are obliged to let us know how they have represented us through their grant proposal.

Perhaps they should make the grant itself available not only for the sake of accountability but also to help other feminist groups pursue such grants. Grant writing is an important skill to be shared among other women. Virago now states that they are an organization of women's culture. We are pleased that they want to broaden their scope, but they never defined what "women's culture" means.

We need to be given more information on their criteria for selecting artists and performers and the forms of outreach they plan to use. Presently, Virago does not seem to be using many channels open to them for contacting people, one of which is Big Mama Rag. Much resentment is felt against Virago for what is viewed as their in-group and clique-ish behavior. A well-organized program of community outreach is the first step in beginning to eradicate this.

We feel that Virago has not considered and analyzed the problems involved in presenting "women's culture" and that they need to discuss these problems much more among themselves and with other women who they feel could help them. It seems that Virago needs to do much more introspective analysis and discussion on all points.

The community meeting was fraught with difficulties for which both Virago and the community are responsible. Virago's style of presentation was as defensive as it was communicative. The women of the collective were all seated in a line and the presentation seemed much too long. The women of the community were badly remiss in not providing proper criticism and in being unprepared and unspecific in their criticism and analysis. This resulted in a lot of bad feelings being inarticulately expressed and much criticism being couched in personal terms.

We think that for future community meetings, it might be helpful for members of the community to get together beforehand to collectively discuss their complaints and criticisms of each particular group, thus modifying and clarifying our feelings in an attempt to provide really helpful and constructive feedback.

Lesbian Reinstated

On February 8, Dr. Josetta Mondanaro was reinstated to her job as Deputy Health Director of Substance Abuse. Dr. Mondanaro, a nationally recognized expert on drug abuse, was fired one day before the end of her year-long probationary period. Key figures in this event were Governor George Brown and Secretary of Health and Welfare, Mario Obledo of California.

Dr. Mondanaro was allegedly fired because of a letter she wrote on state stationery that contained “obscene language." Many people speculated that the real reason for the firing was that she was a lesbian, and therefore a political embarrassment to Brown.

In actuality, it was these things combined with pressure from Secretary Obledo that prompted the firing. Obledo had pressured Dr. Mondanaro to hire an unqualified friend of his in direct violation of civil service procedures. Dr. Mondanaro refused and when Obledo came into possession of the letter in question, he took it directly to Brown and demanded that she be fired, rather than appropriately raising the issue with her supervisor. It is likely that Obledo figured the possibility of her lesbianism hurting Brown politically would help his cause.

Brown consistently denied that homosexuality was an issue; however, it was obvious that Brown's main concern was re-election. One witness in the hearing to reinstate Mondanaro testified that Brown's legal affairs secretary Kline waved the letter and said Brown's opponents would use it against him if she were not fired.

The background of the letter was a strong consideration in the reinstatement. The letter was written to a friend of Dr. Mondanaro at the Odyssey Institute in New York, which conducts research on child and drug abuse. The letter contested an article written by Larry Constantine which challenged the position that "severe psychological damage results from imposing sexual behavior on children in the latency (post-puberty) stage." Unfortunately, she used state stationery for what she considered a personal letter between friends. The letter was mysteriously lifted from her filing cabinet and wound up in the hands of Mario Obledo.

The sections of the letter that drew

MORE ON PAGE 14

Kathy Pritchett 723 E. 17th Ave

Denver, CO 80203