10

BMR talks with a union steward  
“They Won't Intimidate Me. They Can Try  

What follows is an interview with Ellen Craig, a union steward for the  

American Postal Workers Union (APWU) Denver-Metro Area Local.  

A union  

steward is one of the most important resources available to a worker in  

a workplace that is unionized. A steward is appointed by the union to rep-  
resent the people at work, to have the answers to our questions about what  
rights we have at work and to handle grievances we file against management,  

and to protect us from unjust actions and “disciplinary  

measures.  

Ellen works the swing shift as a machine clerk for the US Postal Service  
at the Terminal Annex in Denver, often referred to in the interview as "down  
there.“ The Annex is a four-story building on the edges of downtown—it's  
cold in the winter and hot in the summer; it is poorly ventilated, with a  
problem from the dust that settles from the tons of mail that is processed  
in and out of Denver daily. Ellen Craig is one of two women stewards out of  
9 at the Annex. Together, they are responsible for the 2,500 workers "down  
there” who move the mail for a living wage.  

Vicki Piotter  

BMR: Ellen, as a union steward who  
works alongside people and then re-  
presents them when it comes to griev-  
ances against management, what do  
you see as the hardest thing right  
now for women at work?  

Ellen: Without a doubt, the worst  
thing for women at the post office  
is that feeling of powerlessness.  
And, almost without exception, women  
say the union, and unions in general,  
have been no help. Often women never  
think to bring their problems to a  
steward. That's part of the problem  
I'm finding as a steward—people  
don't tell you what's going on with  
them; they don't bring things to the  
union's attention because they don't  
think the union cares.  

BMR: Why do you think that is?  

Ellen: Because it's like things—  
problems—are so big that you can't  
change them, or are too slow to  
change. And then the economy gets  
bad, and any good things around are  
going to get wiped out anyway. It's  
the feeling that nobody cares, and  
if you can't change things, then you  
might as well go ahead and accept  
them. And yet, you can't really ac-  
cept them because they are so bad.  
It's a vicious circle of frustra-  
tion that gets turned around and in-  
stead of doing things that are ef-  
fective, you end up getting angry  
and internalizing it, turning it on  
yourself, or on your co-workers. The  
atmosphere at work is thick with  
that—resentment and frustration. So  
many times I run up against that  
feeling with people at work and I  
ask them, "What would you do to  
change things?" and they say, "I  
don't even want to mess with it," or  
"I don't want to think about it; I  
just want to get out of here." When  
you run up against that feeling,  
there is certainly a reason for it,  
but it doesn't help with change.  

Another problem is that the union  
leadership is somewhat removed from  
the problems on the work floor—not  
the stewards, but the guys who go in-  
to contract negotiations and make  
the decisions. Like around the last  
contract in '78, the union leaders  
thought people wouldn't strike. They  
thought all we were interested in  
was wage increases and an uncapped  
COLA (cost of living allowance), no-  
thing around improving actual work-  
ing conditions.  

BMR: Yeah, when all the talk was go-  
ing on around the possible strike,  
I was active, at least on the work-  

The power that management has to intimidate  

of a strike. It's an irony—people  
get to the point where they are com-  
placent and comfortable—where that  
becomes more important than any prin-  
ciple, or where even the threat of  
that comfort being taken away doesn't  
seem possible.  

BMR: Yeah! Look at all the women at  
work; look at where they've come  
from before getting this job. It's  
like not having anything to lose,  
really—I mean, we've always come  
from that place of having nothing.  

Ellen: That's where unions come from,  
where unions get their strength—  
from fighting a hardline management  
where no quarter is given and where  
people struggle to get that quarter.  
That's where we get that activism  
and unionism together.  

(At this point, we talked about  
how women have been turned off to  
the union because of stewards, and  
the elected officials, who discourage  
activism from the workers—that our  
anger will push farther than the un-  
ion is comfortable with. They dis-  
courage it by their examples because  
they buddy/buddy with management and by  
letting their position as a union  
representative turn into an ego trip,  
where they, too, place themselves  
above the workers. It only increases  
women's cynicism towards the union.  

We also discussed how women are  
feeling left behind in that the Na-  
tional Leadership of the union is  
mostly concerned with how management  
is gutting the Postal Service through  
mismanagement—the workforce has been  
cut in half the last ten years and  
the union sees that soon the Post  
Office will be turned over to private  
enterprise. While this is a concern  
to everyone who works there—the more  
immediate issues, like childcare,  
sexual harassment, speed-ups, and  
unsafe conditions, are not being ad-  
dressed by the union.)  

Ellen: The front-line supervisors  
see that their jobs are on the line,  
too, because of how management is  
mismanaging, and their power to do  
anything is pretty limited.  

BMR: Front-line supervisors get walked  
on too, but the thing is that  
they have made a choice, and that's  
what I see—that choice to be able  
to crack a whip over someone else. I  
have a certain amount of hostility  
for anyone who has made that choice  
to go for the red badge.  

Ellen: I do too.  

BMR: What kind of relationship do  
you have with any of the women su-  

pervisors? Do you see them different-  
ly than you do the other ones?  

Ellen: Not really. They are super-  
visors. They can't be women activists  
and supervisors at the same time. It  
just doesn't jive. Obviously, if they  
have made that choice, they are not  
activists. They want to change things  
maybe, but as far as I'm concerned,  
you can't change it from within,  
not the way it's set up now. It  
changes you. And the power that man-  
agement has to intimidate is just  
enormous—women supervisors use that  
power just as much as men do.  

You know, I used to be easily in-  
timidated. I am fighting that, and  
mentally anyway, to supervisors,  

an angry young woman asked me,  

Ellen: Let's see.  

"You won't intimidate me. You can  
try and might succeed sometimes, but  
I am fighting it and I won't let you  
win." I was raised to have a great  
deal of respect for authority, and  
some fear of it, but mostly respect.  
And when I lose that basis of respect  
for supervisors, then it's real easy  
to take their authority and say,  
"So?" I can also do that with Paul  
(the local president of the APWU).  

BMR: How did you get over that intim-  
idation by authority?  

Ellen: It didn't happen when I became  
a steward. I don't know...I taught  
for a while. Here I was just out of  
school and suddenly I was with pro-  
fessors and instructors—"what am I  
doing here?" I thought—"Geez, they  
must really think I'm worthy of  
this," but I didn't feel that way  

at all.  

BMR: What were you teaching?  

Ellen: Freshman reading and writing  
in the Martin Luther King program,  
and I had never had an education  
class in my life. I knew how to read  
and I knew how to write, so I walked  
into this all-black class, a white  
teacher—"I don't know how to teach.  
What am I being the teacher for?"  

I was used to sitting in the back  

of the class there, somewhere.  

BMR: How did that happen?  

Ellen: It was a new program and no-  
one was willing to take it, I don't  
know why. I guess they were afraid—  
it was in a mostly white, very mid-  
dle-class school, and I guess they  
weren't used to being around black  
people. I didn't think of that. I  
didn't have the credentials, but  
when I applied, they accepted me!  

I remember my first day—a very  
"How come no black teacher is teaching  
this class?" I said, "I don't know,  
I’ve been asking myself the same  
question." It was like I had been  
thrown into a sink or swim situation,  
I floundered around for a while, but  
I guess came through okay.  

There was one class where we had  
a pretty good rapport with each other,  
but this other class was a problem.  
It was a miserable failure, it was  
at 8:00 in the morning, there was no  
rapport at all—people wouldn't show  
up. Finally one day I said, "Look,  
everyone is going to show up tomor-  
row. Everyone is going to be here  
for the next class." So... what hap-  
pened?... I slept through it, didn't  
show up at all! But this was after  
about a year and I got to the point  
where I thought I could do it, and  
I was good at it. And then I was  
afraid of that and that's when I met  
this guy and left.  

BMR: What guy?  

Ellen: The husband...the father of  
my kids. He said, "let's go west."  

I said, "Okay!" But really, I was  
starting to feel like I knew how  
much I didn't know, and I was afraid  
other people didn't know, that I  
knew I didn't know. People thought  

I was being "successful" but I knew  
I really wasn't being.  

BMR: What did you do once you got  
to Denver?  

Ellen: I started working  
at a bank, in a loan cage, for $350  
a month. That was before I had any  
kids, but then I got pregnant, and  
then there were kids and my husband  
wasn't all that eager to work. I  
don't know, it was a strange thing,  
but suddenly the realities of exist-  
ence came down on me—I was working  
full time, no money, two kids, $10  
a week for groceries. It was like—  
“hello, welcome to the real world  
again.“ The academic world can get  
very removed, it's ridiculous. Some-  
times I have this longing to get back  
to that nice little sheltered, inter-  
esting, only in ways, you know, it's  
not relevant, but it's interesting!  
But that's not enough. I don't have  
time for all these esoteric things  
that people build their whole lives  
around. And I saw that, but something  
in me wasn't in touch with what I  
needed to get in touch with, and I  
got in touch with it alright—  
survival.  

I don't like being hungry and I  
don't like not buying milk because  

I can't afford milk—my kids need  
milk. (Actually, I wouldn't buy milk  
because my husband drank it all).  

There were times I was really mis-  
erable, each day was a struggle. Some  
times I'd bounce a check at King Soop-  
ers, to get groceries, right? I began  
to get paranoid going into King Soop-  
ers because I knew they knew I was  
going to bounce a check. And there  
were a couple of times I thought,  
“gee, I could walk right out of here  
with a piece of meat," and I realized,  
"Jesus, look at what people have  
to do to survive."  

I used to make up budgets, right?  
And I would come down with maybe $5  
for food, gas and entertainment. Ev-  
ery day I'd find I was obsessed with  
this budget, because I was still try-  
ing, but it was impossible. I remem-  
ber having this image of this little  
black cloud hanging over my head...  
for years...and I kept thinking maybe  
it will go away someday, but it just  
sat there. I began to lose my confi-  
dence in myself. Then, I found out  
they were hiring at the post office,  
and the money—I looked at the money  
and realized, "Hey. This will do it.  
I don't need a husband anymore. I can  
support two kids, and I was grateful,  
I really was. I thought no matter  
what bullshit this place puts out, at  
least it pays you enough so that a  
woman alone can support her family  
and survive, and do it with some mar-  
gin. Enough so that I could go out  
and buy the kids a pair of shoes at  
some place other than Goodwill, and  
that's basically where I was at.  

BMR: "That" is.  

Ellen: So many women down there do.  
It just amazes me that I can say all  
this and get that look like you just  
gave me like—"Yeah, I know."  

BMR: That's the trick about that  
place—women are somewhat grateful  
for the job, or don't think they are  
really deserving of it. It's a whole  
mentality that helps to keep us from  
fighting the bad things.  

Ellen: I feel a lot less guilty about  
the money than I did before. I need  
it too much, damn it.  

BMR: I remember my first check. I  
couldn't believe it. I made more for  
sixty hours than I had for two months.  
It flipped me right out. I ended up  
giving it away because I didn't know  
what to do with it.  

Ellen: That sounds like something I  
would do.  

BMR: A bunch of us were sitting  
around at lunch talking about how a  
year had been the longest we had ever  
held a job before. If we didn't like  
something about our old jobs, we  
would just quit and go from one shit  
job to another.  

Ellen: Who's going to agonize over  
leaving a waitressing job?  

BMR: Right. And all of us said that  
this is the longest we'd ever had a  
job. It's not so easy to say "stick  
it," because where else are we going  
to go with no skills? And we aren't  
there looking to get married. A lot  
of us have already done that and are  
now single with a kid or two or three.