Bedford Hills  
Prison Strike  

350 out of the 450 women prisoners at the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women held a one-day strike on Mon. July 10, 1978 to protest increased beatings and harassment by guards and prison administration. This peaceful action was their only recourse after many months of filing grievances through official channels and having them ignored by the administration at Bedford Hills and the Dept. of Corrections in Albany. The following is a list of demands and grievances:  

1. Benjamin Ward, Commissioner of the Dept. of Corrections; Stephen Chinlund, Chairman of the State Commission on Corrections must conduct an investigation of the racist brutal conditions at Bedford Hills. The results of this investigation must be made public.  

2. STOP THE USE OF PHYSICAL BRUTALITY AGAINST ALL WOMEN PRISONERS. The use of riot-equipped correctional officers must be halted.  

3. All adjustment clinic hearings and superintendent proceedings must be held within legally required time periods. Keeplocking of women who have not had hearings must stop. Keeplocking of entire housing units must stop. Presently there are 50 women in keeplock for 1 - 3 weeks without hearings.  

4. Recent system of locking and unlocking cells at set times must be ended, and women have access to their cells upon request.  

5. Stop harassment caused by constantly changing rules. No new rules should be instituted without sufficient notice.  

6. Interference with outgoing mail, including grievance letters to official agencies, must stop. Incoming mail must be processed on the day it is received and delivered.  

7. Telephone room must be open as required from 2:30 pm to 9:30 pm each day and each woman guaranteed the regular number of calls per month without interference.  

8. Commissary prices must be rolled back. Those items in constant demand must be stocked at all times.  

9. The wage scale, presently ranging from 35¢ to $1.15 per day, must be substantially increased. Meanwhile, all women at Bedford Hills with at least one year must be paid the maximum wage.  

10. Gym and yard time must be extended, at least equal to that allowed at the men's prisons. New and adequate equipment, of the women's choosing, must be purchased.  

11. Benjamin Ward and Phyllis Curry, Superintendent at Bedford Hills, must meet with the inmate committees immediately to resolve grievances.  

This strike follows on the heels of a month of court hearings (Dec. 1977 to Jan. 1978) on a lawsuit brought by Black and Latin women against the use of male guards whose presence led to increased beatings and sexual harassment. During the hearings one woman was found hanging in her cell under suspicious circumstances. As a result of this death, women at Bedford initiated contempt proceedings against the prison and the Dept. of Corrections for refusing to implement provisions of the medical lawsuit won by them in Dec. 1977.  

From: Solidarity with Sisters Inside Committee  
Box 291, 161 East Houston St.  
New York, New York 10002  

We are still recovering from our office is a colossal mess that overwhelms even Pandora.  

Next month, the November issue will concentrate on Women and Aging, and December's issue will be Working Women. We urge and promise to welcome articles, photographs, graphics, and ideas. The deadlines for material are Sept. 14, October 19.  

We hope to get a core group of women to make our mailing parties fun and productive. We are looking for women to commit a few hours a month to having fun and getting the paper out. Contact Kristin at 333-6321, our temporary, hopefully permanent, mail-party coordinator.  

Big Mama Rag, Vol. 6, No. 8  

Living Your Socialist-Feminism  

The following was presented as part of a panel entitled "Living Your Socialist-Feminism," given by the Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective at a conference on Socialist Feminism at the Redgeather Institute, Livermore, Colorado, May 27-28, 1978. Each collective member chose to address a specific area to relate to the theme of the panel. One of these will be submitted monthly for publication in Big Mama Rag. Many of the ideas expressed here were worked out collectively.  

We are all members of the "Feminist-Socialist-Socialist-Feminist-(Anarchist) Collective." To begin with, I suppose an explanation of our name is in order. Our ambivalence about whether to call ourselves Feminist-Socialist or Socialist-Feminist comes from a grammatical confusion about whether the first word is the primary identification or the modifying adjective. The anarchist parenthetical comes from the fact that we have a strong anarchist lobby in our group which claims that our collective has anarchist tendencies. However, since there is much confusion within our group about what exactly this means, and many negative, misconceived notions in the left triggered by that adjective, we include it only parenthetically.  

We are a group of eight to twelve women with relatively diverse political perspectives and lifestyles. There are Marxists, anarchists, lesbian feminists, gays, and straights. Our incomes range from $0.00 to about $13,000/year (our most affluent member being an RTD bus driver).  

We all identify as feminists and as socialists although these words are broadly and individually defined. We feel that our diversity enriches the political process by forcing us to be flexible, open, self-critical, and able to examine and communicate our ideas effectively.  

We have chosen to come together as a collective because we feel that this structure is most conducive to and consistent with the kinds of changes we envision. We feel that a collective demands the equal, active participation of every member. While in mass-based hierarchical organizations the work of a few leaders gives the illusion of group achievement, in a collective nothing is accomplished without group consensus and the involvement of everyone. Each member assumes responsibility for a share of the mental and physical work. This encourages political activity as opposed to passivity. Each person becomes the subject and not the object of social change.  

Organizing as a collective means that everyone makes a primary commitment to show up on time prepared for the tasks of each meeting. There is no anonymity—every absence is conspicuous and is felt. Again, the structure of a collective means that participation is critical.  

Our collective is closed, although we do open once or twice a year to admit new members as people leave town. We feel that this maintains continuity and security within the group. Our objective is not to recruit or to expand but rather to reproduce the collective by encouraging and aiding the development of other collectives among persons with compatible political perspectives. In fact, we consider this conference our major reproductive effort to date.  

The small size of a collective limits the development of hierarchy. We feel that hierarchical structures (economic, social, etc.) thwart the possibility of creating a truly egalitarian and classless society. Another advantage of small size is that rather than creating administrative structures to deal with political problems, a collective is high in participation and low in definition.  

Concretely, this is the “process” of our collective. It may sound very formal but in reality it is really very flexible. First we choose a subject (the last was personal income and work—others are anarchism, visions of revolution, racism, and the women's movement, Native American struggles) and discuss how it affects us personally—how we feel about it personally. We are each then responsible for doing outside readings and information gathering relevant to the topic at hand, bringing this dimension into our discussions. Finally, the process culminates in action around that subject which could be guerrilla theatre, writing an article, organizing a conference, etc.  

At the heart of our political thought and activity is the idea that the means are the ends. Put another way, we are saying that the means justify the ends alone. We feel that our lifestyles and political process and activity should be consistent with our revolutionary visions. We need to live our ends in the process of attaining them.  

Our vision is of a radically restructured socio-economic system reorganized around the principles of feminism, socialism, collectivity, freedom, and equal opportunity. We want an economy free of the tyranny of class, with collective ownership of production and priorities on quality of life and environmental consciousness rather than growth, expansion, and profit.  

Instead of a society which produces emotionally crippled, spiritually broken robots, we want one that encourages all of us to actively participate in the creation of our lives and our society. We envision a world which encourages, expects, and even demands the full expression of our abilities regardless of sex, race, or sexual/affectional orientation.  

Thus, because of our commitment to living our socialist feminism, we have organized as a non-hierarchical collective which encourages the participation and personal responsibility of everyone. This commitment also manifests itself in other areas of our lives.  

We involve ourselves and commit ourselves only to political activity where we do not have to sell out our feminism, socialism, gay consciousness, or our minority sisters.  

As far as possible, we try to reflect our political beliefs in our personal relationships, jobs, and lifestyles.  

We try to cultivate an environmental consciousness and lifestyle consistent with the changes we would like to see:  

Changing social relations is a process rather than a product of revolution. In other words, we can begin to make the revolution here and now by actually changing the way we relate to people and to society.