ot briefs

compiled by Lori Bradford

Check A Preference

A Louisiana state legislator has introduced a bill requiring all teachers to mark a box on their job applications stating their sexual preference. Categories include heterosexual, homosexual, or both. If the teachers change their preferences they must notify the Board of Education within 30 days of the change or face fraud charges. Transsexuals must bring a note from their doctors.

Off Duty Klan

Ten policemen have been suspended with pay after black residents of a hotel charged that white off-duty officers brandishing a Confederate flag, beat up 8 tenants--yelling racial epithets all the while. A Houston, Tx. detective says that the officers had been drinking and went to the hotel to beat up "dope fiends".

Says Jewel Conley, 31, who was spending the night with a friend, "I was asleep when they kicked open my door. One of them had cowboy boots and tried to kick me, but missed when I moved and stuck a pistol in my face."

Boycott Called

AFL-CIO leaders have declared a nationwide boycott of Proctor & Gamble Soap products.

The boycott includes: Tide, Cheer, Oxydol, Bold, Camay, Zest, Ivory, Joy, and Dawn powder-bar-and liquid soaps. The corporation is charged with ‘obstructive bargaining' tactics at the Kansas City, Kan. soap plant.

Returned Rights

After two years in litigation the Alliance for the Liberation of Mental Patients has finally gained access to Haverford State Hospital and other state-run "mental hospitals" in Pennsylvania. ALMP was guaranteed the right to visit and distribute literature to inmates, to hold private meetings with inmates and to conduct advocacy efforts free of official harassment. Their organizing efforts have been particularly successful partly as a result of 3 suspicious inmate deaths at Haverford within a five month period. Hopefully rights that came too late to save some can now save others.

Page 6 - Big Mama Rag, December, 1981

Alcoa Brings Ruin

Christina Frankland, who with Sandra Onus, waged court battles against the aluminum co. Alcoa, has been forced to leave the town of Portland where she lived. Vandals had wrecked her home, and her daughter, 14, had been abused in the streets. Eight other Aboriginal families, involving about 50 people had also been forced to leave because of continued harassment.

Christina, who has had her dog poisoned, her house burglarized, watched trees on her land cut down, and dodged cars trying to run her down--says there has always been discrimination in Portland but things have gotten worse since the Land Rights battle.

Christina and Sandra have won a High Court ruling which overturned an earlier Supreme Court decision which now allows them to seek an injunction against Alcoa to stop work on their Portland smelter site. The site Alcoa chose for its smelter is a sacred rite for the Guntiji-Mari tribe containing many relics, some of which have already been ruined. The court ruled that they have a "special interest" under the Archaeological and Aboriginal Relics and Preservation Act.

Farmworker Victory

United Farm Workers chief, Cesar Chavez, ended a nearly three month boycott of Ralston Purina Co. The workers, primarily those who tend mushrooms in simulated caves, have been on strike for 96 days.

Abortion Criminals

Warrants have been issued for the arrests of 11 women in Bilbao, Spain who on June 16 failed to appear in court, where two of them were to be tried for performing abortions and 9 for having abortions performed on them.

According to Newsfront Intl prosecutors were seeking 55 to 60 year prison terms for the 2 women charged with performing the operation. The other women, if convicted, might not have been imprisoned but would probably have been barred from government jobs for life.

Widespread organizing in support of the 11 women had caused a 145 year delay in the original trial date.

Ban The Cage

No More Cages, a bi-monthly newsletter for women inmates, has been noticeably absent from the reading materials in Ohio penitentiaries. NMC, which is read by approximately 200 inmates in Marysville, has been banned by prison officials since August 1980 because its contents allegedly pose a "clear and present danger" to the safety of the penitentiary. NMC was banned after an expose of conditions at Marysville which detailed abuse by male guards, medical neglect, and racism, among others was printed. Two of the inmates involved in the suit have had their sentences extended as a result. A class action suit charging unconstitutional infringement on the inmates' First & Fourteenth Amendment Rights has been filed.

Union Wage

Metal Plug

A Melbourne woman who bought tampons made by the firm that produces them in plastic pop-out wrappers and has a short name, has found sharp slivers of metal both in the wrapper and embedded in the wrapper. When she reported this to the manufacturer, she was told they would send someone to pick it up. Not being a fool, she refused and was advised by the Doctors' Reform Society to contact the Health Commission. The manufacturers' excuse? They had had a lot of ‘industrial sabotage’ amongst the workers! As the majority of workers in the industry are women, they are expecting us to blame each other for their machinery falling to bits.

Give Money To Us

On October about a dozen disabled demonstrators stood outside the Victorian Spastic Society's "Miss Victoria Beauty Contest" and leafleted the public. Several of the women invaded the stage holding placards protesting the contest. A spokeswoman from the Women with Disabilities Feminist Collective said the contest created an image of the ideal woman that disabled women found impossible to live up to. The Spastic Society was teaching people that the only thing able-bodied folks can do is put money in a tin. The demonstrators felt the money from the beauty contest would be better spent given directly to the disabled themselves so they could live independently of institutions.

Plastic Death

In the past ten days four children have been injured in plastic bullet attacks by the British Army and the police in Ireland. Once again the security forces have demonstrated the lengths they are prepared to go to in order to terrorize people off the streets. At a tribunal held by the Association for Legal Justice, the indiscriminate use of plastic bullets against people not involved in riots, and the official tolerance of abuses were condemned; calling for a ban of its use in Northern Ireland. However, unless the user of these weapons, the sectarian "security forces" are banned also, the attacks will merely take a different form.