FEN  
From Page 10  

involved. We'd always had a good  
relationship. I interviewed me and hired me as busi-  
ness manager.  

"The staff meetings were really  
weird. It's setting you up for a  
trashing. I found this note in my  
mailbox saying, “Lee, go buy a mail-  
box." It was a mailbox for the out-  
side door that they wanted. I was  
very busy working, then I said to the  
office manager, Carol Nottley, that I  
was going out to get the mailbox.  

She said, 'No, Lee, it's been decided  
that you don't need to get one.'  

"So I dropped it because she had a  
certain amount of authority. I gather  
her job was to set people up for  
trashing. At the staff meetings,  
Laura was reaming everybody out. She  
said '...and Lee, we are suffering be-  
cause you decided not to get a mail-  

"I started comparing notes with  

other women. They had marvelous pow-  
erful women who were being treated  
like shit. They just piled all this  
work on us, more than any human being  
could do, with no overtime pay. If  
you didn't do it, you were fired."  

"I thought, hey, we should organize  
a strike.  

"On Sunday, the closing of the open-  
ing was when we were going to make de-  
mands. It fell through because FEN  
had the armed guards and the women  
were totally inexperienced, they said  
‘let's try the nice way first.' Then  
came the confrontation. I was fired.  
I didn't really want to be there any-  
more, but I was fascinated to see it  
through to the end.  

"Then they tried to rook us out of  
wages so I went to the Wage and Hour  
division of the State Employment  
Dept. They sent a man to look at the  
books and he said 'My goodness, they  
don't know how to keep books, do  
they.' They tried to screw women out  
of wages or only partially pay them.  
You can't do that with Wages and  
Hours, because they sit there until  
you write a check, they will even pad-  
lock the door.  

Financial Collapse  

In conversation with members of the  
Women's Press Collective, Laura blamed  
the collapse of FEN on the bad press  
received in the feminist newspapers,  
saboteurs and FBI agents. In my opin-  
ion, a bad press was a factor--but the  
press was kinder to them than they de-  
served.  

The other, equally important factors  
were bad management and lack of capi-  
tal. FEN did not have enough money to  
weather the storm provoked by their  
high-handed methods, and to support  
the fledgling businesses inside the  
new building. Cost of operations, in-  
cluding repayments on the loan, came  
to $22,000 a month.  

While I do not pretend to have ade-  
quate information on their finances,  
some information was provided to me  
by Kay Xipolipos. She ran the boutique  
in the City Club, and after the FEN  
women left, she was appointed to man-  
age the building. She is now going to  
purchase the building.  

She is candid about her primary mo-  
tivation: to make money. Her testi-  
mony needs to be taken with a grain of  
salt, since she tends to stress her  
own business prowess at the expense of  
the FEN women.  

Kay owns a manufacturing business in  
Greece and a travel agency in Detroit.  
Kay told Laura, "you don't know how to  
run a boutique." Kay and her business  
partner pulled out $200 cash and took  
over the boutique and its inventory,  
and made a contract right there. The  
FEN women swore that they owned the  
merchandise in the shop, but Kay found  

out later that J. B. Dixon, the former  
manager, actually owned it.  

She praised Joanne Parrent, said she  

did a lot of good things in the build-  
ing; the other women had bad attitudes  
and lied to people. They had enough  
help and money, but they didn't know  
how to order supplies or manage their  
money. They ran up a $5,000 phone  
bill. They owe taxes, about $15,000  
to the Internal Revenue Service. Kay  
says you can't file bankruptcy on the  
IRS. She paid them $11,500 for the  
furniture in the building, that  

which was left after it closed down--  
and they accepted it gladly, in order  
to pay off the government.  

According to the Detroit Free Press  
(Sept. 17, 76), Laura Brown filed a  
petition with Wayne County Circuit  
Court to dissolve the corporation,  
listing its total assets at $37,600  
and its debts at about $118,000. In  
a personal conversation with me, Laura  
said that the FEN women had overspent  
because their bookkeeper put a nega-  
tive item in the positive column.  

She said that she now believes the  
bookkeeper to be a saboteur, possibly  
working for the FBI. I was under the  
impression that the bookkeeping error  
might have been a few thousand dollars  
but $118,000? Come on now. Only the  
largest corporations, or the Pentagon,  
can mislay, overspend or lose such  
large amounts through "bookkeeping  
errors."  

As a final insult to the intelligence,  
the FEN women claim credit for  
not declaring bankruptcy, for not  
walking out on their debts. They sold  
Diana Press back to itself, and the  
OFWHC back to itself. They say, "Male  
capitalists would have tried to keep  
the building, and let the press and  
the health center go down the drain.  
The building is the bigger, more val-  
uable property.”  

In fact, what they did was to beat  
a strategic retreat onto territory  
which was solidly under their control.  
They are paying off the remaining  
debts--for example, to the IRS--in or-  
der to avoid having to declare bank-  
ruptcy. If they go bankrupt, they can  
not legally form a new business for  
seven years. As it is, they "dis-  
solved" FEN and they can reactivate it  
anytime they choose.  

Their newest targets for acquisition  
are the Women's Press Collective,  
Olivia Records, Chrysalis Magazine and  
the Los Angeles women's building.  
Joanne Parrent has been put on the  
board of directors of the LA women's  
building, and the Chrysalis office is  
inside it.  

Violence In The Building  

In discussing the well-documented  
violence which took place in the City  
Club, the FEN women say, "these women  
came to trash our building. They were  
trying to take it over. What could we  
do?" In fact, two women of the De-  
troit credit union were attempting to  
repossess the building. I see no evi-  
dence of property damage, nobody tried  
to break windows or set fire to the  
furniture.  

And since FEN had obtained the buil-  

ding through legal trickery and dubi-  
ous loans from the credit union, why  
should they complain if the credit un-  
ion wanted to repossess through its  
own legal machinations? "Our" buil-  
ding, indeed:  

This is a first-hand account from  
Stephanie Whitman, former DFFCU wor-  
ker: "We got the word that there was  
going to be a big dinner at the buil-  
ding, that the dissidents on the board  
were going to announce that they were  
calling the loan in and taking the  
building back. How they could do it  
was that Valerie reported that there  
had been unethical practices.  

“We got together women in Ann Arbor  
and prepped them with the idea that we  
wanted to support Valerie and Beverly  
and we didn't want them to be hurt, to  
be physically abused.  

“We got together maybe 30-50 women  
all told, coming to support the credit  
union in taking back the building. I  
want to stress that we entered with  
the notion of preventing violence to  
Valerie and Beverly, not creating vio-  
lence. We ended up in the cafeteria.  
The building was supposed to be closed  
and people were leaving, and the credit  
union women passed the word to Laura  
that they wanted to meet with us. All  
except one of us were members of the  
credit union and a couple were ex-  
board members.  

"We waited, Laura, Joanne and I  
Roberts came down occasionally to  
watch us. Somebody shut the cafeteria  
door and stood guard so we were basic-  
ally locked in. A woman from FEN ask-  

More on Page 14  

Scraps From Macia’s Table  

Chocolate Waters  

An Asshole By Any Other Name--A Denver appeals court recently upheld the conviction  
of a Colorado man who complained that police laughed at him after he was arrested  
on charges of stealing 1,200 assholes of butchered animals from a meat processing  
plant. His statement that, "I'm really going to be mad if I go to jail for stealing  
1,200 assholes," was used against him in the original trial. The Colorado appeals  
court claimed that under the circumstances the police had good reason to laugh. (ZNS)  

‘«tholoptgism--A news item in Our Sunday Visitor read as follows: "The Catholic  
Theologic Union in Chicago showed an increase in students from 168-189. But don't  
cheer. Among the students are 22 women, subtract them and total showed a loss."  
(Subtract Our Sunday Visitor and there wouldn't be a loss.) Info from Free For All  
Feb-Mar 1977.  

Peek A Boo...I See You--North Carolina's “peeping Tom" law would become a "peeping  
persons" law under legislation introduced by Rep. Robert Jones and Sen. Katherine  
Sebo. While the present law makes it illegal for a man to peep into a room occupied  
by a woman, it does not make it a crime for a woman to peep at a man or a woman, or  
for a man to peep at another man. The Jones-Sebo bill would make it a misdemeanor for  
anyone to peep at anyone. (Plexus, March 1977) Oh the benefits of creeping liberal  
and the advantages of being equal with what it is men are in this society....  

But Never Never On A Sunday, A Sunday--A group of 50 London lesbians picketed the  
British Broadcasting System in February after a radio program on lesbian lifestyles  
was cancelled as being “inappropriate for Sundays." The 45 minute program, which  
was called, “If You Think You've Got Problems," will probably not be aired. (gay  
community news, Feb 26, 1977)  

Shrinking Organs Shrivel Sales of Oranges (And This One's Got Nothing to do with Ant  
Bryant, Folks)--A rumor that oranges from Thailand cause men's sex organs to shrink  
has export chiefs in Bangkok worried about business dropping off. Speaking of dropping  
off, hundreds of men dashed to the hospital for quick check-ups...(Info from Women’s  
Report, Jan-Feb 1977)  

If You're So Smart Then Why Aren't You President?--Lillian Carter (the mother of Mr.  
Peanut) says her son is bright, but not as bright as her daughter, Gloria Carter Spe  
(Gloria lives in Plains, GA and likes to ride motorcycles--that information for any  
you who might be interested in riding motorcycles yourselves.) “Actually,” said Mrs.  
Carter, "Gloria is the most intelligent one in the family.” Actually, we know why  
she's not president. Actually, who cares about any of this? I had a hard time finding  
stuff for this column this month, as you may have already noticed.  

P.S.--And for a good time call 757-5691.  

Struggle ... From Page 5  

will have the more widespread effect of encouraging people to force men to stop  

violent and sexist behavior. This means that people have to deal with the men  

close to them--their family, friends, etc., as well as with strangers who  
hassle women.  

Confrontations can be good for women who've been raped or hassled because  
they allow her to be active and powerful in a situation in which it is safe  
for her to be so. She can make the decisions about how a confrontation will  
take place and what she'd like to say. We can help her get together a group  
of women who will be supportive to her during this process. This is very  
different from reporting a rape to the police where the woman's role is a  
passive one (as a witness for the state) and where others make decisions about  
her case for her. (Contact us for more information on confrontations.)  

We realize that rape is not going to end by the creation of these few alter-  
natives; that rape will only end with the development of a new system that pro-  
vides a context for these changes in people's lives. We want to develop a move-  
ment that is working towards these changes. It is crucial for anti-rape groups  
not to focus on rape as an isolated issue to the exclusion of developing a  
broader analysis of the society as a whole. We are impressed by what we know of  
the anti-rape movement in the People's Republic of China. From all evidence  
and reports, rape has ended or is exceedingly rare there. It was ended through  
a revolutionary process that changed the men, women, and the material conditions  
simultaneously. We strongly encourage everyone to read Goldflower's Story by  
Jack Belden, a pamphlet that deals with the process as it occurred in China.  

Another concern of ours is the lack of the development of anti-racist politics  
and practice in the anti-rape movement. The sexist myth that women “ask for it,"  
and lie about rape is applied many times more to all Third World women than it  
is to White women. Black women have been particularly subject to rape by White  
men from slavery on up to the present, for society has never given them any pro-  
tection. In addition, rape was a primary weapon used against women in the gen-  
ocidal campaign against Native Americans. The myth that most rapists are Black  
men has had enormous consequences for them. Thousands of Black men have been  
lynched or legally executed because they "looked at a White woman wrong.” Of  
the 450 legal executions for rape, 408 of these men were Black.  

“It is crucial that anti-rape groups fight the racist myths, stereotypes, and  
institutions that are associated with rape. The first step in this process is  
to stop supporting the criminal justice system, because no matter what our in-  
tentions are, the system is racist through and through. Prisons are used to  
keep all Third World people down. We cannot turn our backs to the racism of the  
system when a Black man is being prosecuted, and expect that same racism not  
to be used against Joan Little, Yvonne Wanrow, Inez Garcia, etc. As we've  
said before, we do not support a racist process for any end. We must fight  
racism and sexism together.  

We hope that the ideas and issues raised in this letter will serve to spark  
discussion and debate within anti-rape groups, and the left movement as a whole.  
We are very interested in any feedback anyone who reads this has. We are  
especially interested in making contact with those groups and individuals who  
are interested in exploring alternatives. Please write us at: Santa Cruz  
Women Against Rape, P.O. Box 711, Santa Cruz, California, 95061 or call us at  

(408) 426-RAPE.