3 ws? even

Fe

inism in West Berlin a

Part 2: An Interview with Two German Feminists

Dona Calacone

I recently had the opportunity to
talk with two German feminists from
West Berlin. Tommy Tomek has been ac-
tive in the German feminist and Les-
bian movements for several years. She
now works at the safehouse for battered
women in West Berlin and, while in
Denver, has been working at a safe-
house here and at the Woman to Woman
Feminist Bookcenter. Alexandra Goy, 
a feminist lawyer who, in conjunction
with her feminist law partner, has only women as clients. She has a reputa-
tion for dealing with radical issues
and has defended terrorists associated
with Baader and Meinhof and the Red
Army Fraction. She also does legal
work with the women of the safehouse
in West Berlin.

This is Part Two of a two-part se-
ries. In this issue we will be discus-
sing the feminist and Lesbian move-
ments in Germany, the political scene

there, Alex's legal work and terrorism.

In last month's issue we discussed
safehouses for battered women.

BMR: How did the feminist and les-
bian movements begin in Berlin?

Tommy: In Berlin the lesbian movement
began with the gay movement about 1972
and lesbians and gay men had a center
together and then they had some fights
because there were still some sex
roles between them. The men were opp-
ressing the women and so the lesbians
decided to leave the gay center and
start their own lesbian center.

BMR: So these people were all politi-
cally active.

Tommy: In the beginning, yes. Some
years ago, it was very hard for les-
bians in the Women's Center. I had a
lot of fights with the women there
because they would only discuss preg-
nancy and abortion and I wanted to
discuss lesbian issues, too, because
I thought that there were a lot of
lesbians at the center. And they told
me, if you want to discuss lesbian
issues go to the Lesbian Center. So

I went out and joined the Lesbian Cen-
ter. There were a lot of fights but
after a while we found out that we had
to fight together on women's issues.
I think that the contact is better now
because we have some women's bars and
restaurants and all these projects
where straight and gay women work to-
gether so they have to have more con-
tact and they meet with each other
more often.

In the past year, many lesbians have
moved out of Berlin to France and
England. They didn't want to stay in
Germany because of the oppression.
And other lesbians didn't come to the
center because they met their friends
in the gay bars and restaurants and
projects so we were only fifteen or
twenty women and we had a very big
Lesbian Center. So we decided to look
for a smaller place and I hope they
find a place because the Women's Cen-
ter has only so much space. They have
many concerns and lesbian issues al-
ways come last.

BMR: So there aren't that many les-
bians working at the Women's Center?
Tommy: No. I think ten or twelve out
of eighty.

BMR: Are the lesbians more politically
radical?

Tommy: Yes. And in all projects there
are more lesbians working than
straight women: in the bookstores, the
safehouse, the health center. I think
that that's because lesbians have

more time to be together with other
women.

BMR: What happens at the Women's Cen-
ter and is the Center behind these
projects?

Tommy: The projects first started out
of the Women's Center. For the past
year there have been meetings twice

a month when all projects meet at the
Women's Center to report on their
activities. They found out that it is
important to have the women's move-
ment behind them and it is important
to share problems and information.

They have opened a coffeehouse there,
too.

BMR: Do you think that there is more
of an acceptance of feminism by wom-
en in the mass society in Germany
than here?

Alex: I think it's the same.

Tommy: Yes. In the big cities we have
a strong movement but all the women
from the women's movement stay in the
big cities and they don't go out in
the country. When I go to visit my
parents, who live in a small town,
nobody knows about the women's move-
ment and they get very mad when I

try to talk to them about the roles
that women are playing.

BMR: What is the situation between
the feminist movement and the left?
Alex: The left is very interested in
integrating the feminist movement.
The men are always dominating women
in their politics too, but the left
wants to work with the women's move-
ment so that they (the left) will be
more powerful. They are struggling
sometimes for the same things-- the
anti-nuclear movement is like that--
but the women want to struggle separ-
ately.

BMR: Alex, you are considered a radi-
cal lawyer in West Berlin.

Alex: Sure, very, very radical. I was
prohibited from defending any prison-
er for one year because they thought
I was too radical.

BMR: Prohibited by the government?

Alex: No. The bar association has a
court for itself, a kind of discipli-
nary court, and if ever you've been
too radical you go before this court
and in the first instance the court
consists of three lawyers and I went
there because I defended so many poli-
tical cases and I was very enraged and
I accused the state of not treating
political prisoners as other prison-
ers. There is a difference and I said
this is not right; this is against the
law and they said you should not be
saying this...the population does not
think well of lawyers who accuse the
government of misapplying the law.
And I kept doing it so I had to go be-
fore the court.

BMR: So you were disbarred for a year?
Alex: Yes. Before the first court they
said to me, "You are such a radical law-
yer; you haven't got the distance you
should have from your clients. You are
so engaged in these things, you are not
able to be an independent lawyer."

BMR: So the bar association took away
your license to practice law.

Alex: Yes, but I made an appeal to the
next court and they said yes, it was
not that good but it was not that bad
and I got the right to defend people
and I only had to pay $1,000.

BMR: Could this happen to you again?
Alex: Sure, if in any way I repeat
what I said and I always will repeat
it. Perhaps I will choose to say it in
other terms; not so openly, but so
that (people will understand)

BMR: Did you have a lot of support?
Alex: Yes. I had a lot of support from

other lawyers and from women from the
women's center. Many women, only women,

came as spectators for the court hear-
ing. The safehouse women came and wom-
en came and women from the hotline and
they got very great publicity and I
think this was a reason that (the bar
association court) said it was not
right to take away my license: because
of all the publicity and pressure from
these groups.

Tommy Tomek

BMR: Before your involvement with the
women's movement, you were involved
with the political left?

Alex: Yes. The left movement in Ger-
many began in the late 60's and it be-
gan because of the Vietnam War. The

very radical movement in the late 60's,

the so-called terrorists, bombed the
American headquarters in Frankfurt in
Heidelberg, the headquarters of the
U.S. Army, because they found out that
these headquarters directed the inva-
sion of Vietnam, the bombardments of
Vietnam.

In internal politics of the German
government there was a great coali-
tion between the socialist party and
the conservative party. This was some-
thing the left didn't find good. They
thought that if the opposition was
working with the government now, there
had to be an opposition outside the
government, and this was called the
anti-government opposition.

BMR: I'm interested in discussing ter-
rorism with you. You said that there
is not now support for terrorist act-
ivities. Was there support for those
activities a few years ago?

Alex: There was a kind of solidarity
and a campaign starting against the
bad conditions of prisons. But I don't
think that the terrorist movement had
anything to do with feminism. It's
very separated. I think that many of
the women who are in these so-called
terrorist organizations have a very
high consciousness of the emancipation
of women and some of them are lesbians
but they don't say this and they don't
form their politics around this.

BMR: Do they draw attention to femi-
nist issues?

Alex: Not at all; only socialism or
communism.

BMR: Did they have support?

Alex: They had support in the begin-
ning in the 60's, perhaps, but they
lost it very quickly.

BMR: So the terrorism occurred mostly
during the 60's and 70's?

Alex: Yes, and now the government says
that there is terrorism again but I
don't think that's right. I think that
the government is just trying to find
an enemy within the government.

BMR: Do you think that the government
is using that to become more fascist
and have more control over political
groups? Also, do you think that the
government has become more repressive
as a result of the terrorism?
Alex: Sure. The government has always
said that they have become more re-
pressive as a result of terrorist ac-
tivities, but I think it's not like
that. A lot of laws have changed tak-
ing away people's rights.
Tommy: And they hire more and more
police and they say it's because of
the terrorists but it's to have more
control over people.

But what's very bad in Germany is
that in the past few years the Nazi

party has begun again and they have

a lot of youth movements and the gov-
ernment doesn't do much about it.
They (the government) fight more a-
gainst the left movement. In nearly
every youth center in Berlin you can
find girls and boys who join the

Nazi party.

BMR: How could that begin again after
the experience of Hitler's regime and
the treatment the Jewish people and
homosexual people received?

Tommy: I can see it happening again
because the government makes people
think that communism is wrong and
young people didn't know what to do
and they thought that they were a-
gainst the communists. Then these
neo-Nazis came and said "Yes, that's
right and we are against them too"
and they didn't talk about the bad
things. I know a social worker who
had this problem in a youth center
and he showed them pictures and films
about Hitler and they didn't know
much about that; they only thought
that (Nazism) was against communism.

Alex: You ask about the consciousness
of the population about the treatment
of the Jews. You see, we have very
good relations with Israel and the
official policy of the government is
that Germany is guilty. The govern-
ment helps Israel a lot and some Jew-
ish people were remunerated for be-
ing held in concentration camps. But
on the other hand, old-nation Nazis
(those who belonged to the Nazi party
during the 30's and 40's) still hold
very high government positions in
Germany.

I think that the population is very
conservative. The government really
didn't work out the problem of fasc-
ism, and I think that people who were
born around 1940 to 1945 have a lot
to work out about the treatment of
the Jewish people, homosexuals and
the left during the war. Some people
think that terrorism is coming out of
this; that it has never been resolved.
In school they begin very late
to speak about what happened during
Hitler's reign. It was hidden from
the German people. I remember I had
a teacher who emigrated to Canada
during the Hitler regime and he told
us about it and we were one of the
first classes to hear about it. That
must have been about 1962. Before
this time, they didn't speak about

it in the schools.

I think that this is one reason
for the terrorism because terrorism
comes out of a great moral sense and
this led to violence. I think that
some of the terrorist leaders felt
guilty about the history of Germany
and they never wanted this oppres-
sion to come back.

BMR: What about specific terrorist
activities themselves; who or what
was attacked: old Nazis, banks, gov-
ernment institutions?

Alex: There were never actions a-
gainst old Nazis because they are
very hidden. We don't know who in
the government have been Nazis.
There is a center on the history of
Hitler's dictatorship which is under
the rule of the Americans and some
Germans have asked for the records
and information on some people but
the Americans hide it.

In the most famous cases, the ter-
rorists attacked the American Air
Force headquarters and they attacked
the owner of the newspaper Springer,
a very low level, conservative paper.
They attacked police stations and
some people were murdered. Later
they attacked banks to get money to
organize and the last time they
fought to get their members out of
prison. Then in 1974-75, they kid-
napped a member of the conservative
party to get their members free from
prison and the government let them
out. They left the country and went
to Aden in Africa. Most of them are
now in prison again because they
came back to Germany and were cap-
tured.

BMR: A few years ago, three impri-
soned members of the Baader-Meinhof

MORE ON PAGE 15