More Letters...

Keep The Center Open

WOMEN!!!

How many times have you been to Woman
to Woman and found the Center closed?
When you found the door locked, you
probably had some suggestions about
keeping the Center open. You may have
wondered why nobody was staffing. Now
is the time to bring these suggestions
and any other energies to the Center.
At the present time Woman to Woman is
faced with the possibility of having to
drastically cut back its hours. The
responsibility of operating the Center
rests with a small number of women, who
are presently finding the task over-
whelming. Consequently, the work that
needs to be done is barely getting ac-
complished. If you feel that the Center
is an essential part of the feminist
community, then Woman to Woman needs
you now. Staffers are needed to work
one of three shifts, one or two days a
week. Shifts run from 9:30 am - 1:30 pm,
1:30 pm - 5:30 pm, and 5:30 pm - 8 pm, Mon-
day through Saturday. There are also
two required political meetings that
staffers must attend each month; they
are held the first and third Sundays of
the month at the Center, at 7 pm.

Presently the core group in the col-
lective involved in the operations of
the Center, such as finances, book or-
dering, and events, has been opened to
any interested woman. Core meetings
are presently at 8 pm Thursday evenings
at the Center; as of Wednesday, October
19th, they will be on Wednesday even-
ings. Several of the core group mem-
bers will be dropping out of the group.
Jo Ann Grosswiler, who has been hand-
ling Woman to Woman finances for the
past six months, is leaving sometime in
October. Sue Godding, who has been a

driving force at the Center for two
years, will be leaving soon to join the
women at Big Mama Rag (ed note: Hooray).
Kathy Barriga is planning to attend
school on the West Coast, and Cara
Ernst, another “old timer" who has do-
nated many hours to the Center, has
just left. The core group is down to
these women, who are very aware of the
need for women to fill the spaces vac-
ated by the women who are leaving.

If you are unable to donate your time
and energy to the Center, remember that
donations of money, stamps, office sup-
plies, or whatever are also helpful.

If you are considering joining the
staff, you need to be aware that the
minimum commitment expected is six
months to a year. In conclusion, to
paraphrase a traditional typing exer-
cise, "Now is the time for all good
women to come to the aid of their
Center."

Dear Name,

Ed note: This is a new mini-column
open to any reader who would like to
write about her personal/political ex-
periences as a woman. We feel that
BMR lacks woman-interest stories on our
survival struggles. Submission of your
experiences does not guarantee publish-
ing, and stories may be edited. Feel
free to use a pseudonym or to ask that
your name be left out, if you wish.
Women whose Dear Mama stories are
printed will receive a free sub to BMR.
Share your struggles, victories and
pain!

Dear Mama,
At the end of June I separated from my
husband and found myself in need of a
source of money and in need of hard
physical work. It was convenient to
work downtown and so I found myself ap-

where we're at

The weekend of the October 18th benefit was a most eventful three

days for the collective.
at Tea's home.

That same weekend, a BMR retreat was held
The retreat was composed of two marathon meetings dur-

ing which the collective and interested friends talked about every-
thing involved in producing Big Mama - from layout supplies to distribu-
tion, from greater non-collective involvement to establishing a type-

setting business.

A lot of very important things happened in the meetings.

We discov-

ered that by the end of this month, the collective will be but three

members -- Kathy Riley, Mary Wadding and Clair Kaplan.

It has been

known for quite some time that Tea was leaving this month; she has been

giving notice for the past six months!
announcement that the production of this issue would be her last.

Debby Taylor made the announc-
Deb has been

hard at work on the paper for over a year, and now wants time to get
into other things. We desperately need new members.

We discussed the possibility of a typesetting business, a business
that would be run through an independent collective, yet somehow tied

politically to us.

We talked a bit about the sorts of problems that

would entail - insuring a political basis for the typesetter, the prob-
lem of an independent collective with "ties" to us, the actual chances

such a venture would have of survival.

Right now, we are looking for

any women who would like to continue this discussion and make the type-
setter a reality within the next year.
The benefit made for a wonderful break in the heavy politics of Saturday

and Sunday.
use on a Saturday night.
men.

The Velvet Hammer was very graciously turned over for our
The place was packed to overflowing with wo-
We wish to thank the women who performed, all the people who do-

nated items for the auction, June Sommers for her work with the sound
equipment, and a very special thank you to the Velvet Hammer for her

continuing visible support of the women's community.

Due to the help

of all these many women, the benefit netted us over $600.00, much of

which has been desperately needed to pay old bills.

We're a little bit

over the edge of the hole, and it feels good!
The women of the collective have begun discussing their political dif-

ferences.

We are discovering that each individual

politics differ

widely from the others. With five people we cover the ground from
socialist feminist to anarchist to lesbian feminist to feminist femi-

nist.
satisfying.

Our political discussions have of late been very lively and

Two women who recently moved to Denver from Ohio, Lori and Rocky,
have expressed an interest in working on the paper, as has Pandora,

another newcomer.

Pandora wants to work on our distribution (a much

needed area); Lori wants to learn everything, and Rocky is an artist

(at long last, original graphics!).
at present to desire working collectively.

None of these women has the time
We are excited by the pros-

pect of working with them in other ways.
Our main need is new collective members and women who want to help us

in a variety of other ways.

The three women who are remaining are be-

ginning to get hysterical thinking about the work they will have to

shoulder.

We need feedback; we need input; we need you.
Thursday nights from 7 to 10 at the office at 322-2010.

Call us on
You can also

reach us at home at: 355-8209, 321-7467, 832-6598, 837-9281, and 837-

8405.

You can also call Woman to Woman at 320-5972 and leave messages

for us - we will return your call. Come get involved!

plying for a job as a maid for the
Holiday Inn Downtown Denver (HIDD).

I found the hard physical work I was
looking for, and I also found an at-
mosphere that smacked of distrust of
the "girls'" honesty - attitudes that
the women and their work were not dig-

nified, and that the women themselves
were not worthy of respect.

I was told we, the maids, were to
enter the hotel at the service ent-
rance. This was a spooky, secluded,
unattended area. We were to enter and
leave through that entrance to pass
through a “frisk" station, since the
assumption was made that we were all
thieves. I didn't use that entrance,
but went in and out the front door.
After a while we all heard that one of
the women had been raped in the alley
outside of that entrance. After that
everyone used the front door and we
were no longer given directives to
enter and leave through the service en-
trance, but anyone could have told that
that place wasn't safe.

While I was at the HIDD two women
were involved in situations where mon-
ey was alleged to be missing from
guests' rooms. In each case the women
were taken off the floors, interrogated
by the security guards, and never gi-
ven an opportunity for attorney's coun-
sel. In each case they were left with
the fear of losing their jobs at the

very least, and prosecution at the
worst. In each case the women were
never told that their case was closed
to the satisfaction of the hotel. Your
guilt was just presumed, and this would
follow you on your job record, no mat-
ter if there was any proof at all.

Inappropriate sexual advances to the
maid staff by male staff members and
hotel guests were handled by the house-
keeping department supervisors as ob-
jects of laughter and suggestive com-
ments. The women's only defense was
to leave the area where she was working
and go to another area. No recrimina-
tions were handed down to a man who
felt the maids there were the famous
“French maids" of skin flicks. One
woman was forced onto a bed by a male
guest while cleaning his room, and
held down while he fondled her clothed
body and made threatening remarks.

When this woman reported the attack to
her supervisors, they laughed at her,
made suggestive comments, and sent her
back to clean the same room the next
day on threat of losing her job.

They insisted that she had not been
raped and was making too much out of
it.

Promoting women from the ranks of
maid to floor supervisor had nothing
to do with seniority. Women were hired
from other hotels, or off the street,
to supervise the maids who had been
working at the hotel for as long as
1 1/2 years. The only difference be-
tween these "supervisors" and the
"floor girls" was that the so-called
supervisors received a higher rate of
pay. The highest paid maid after 1 1/2
years was paid $2.75/hour.

My time there was interesting, be-
cause I had never been subjected to an
atmosphere of distrust and lack of per-
sonal worth and respect. I knew I had
some other place to go; most of the
women I worked with did not. They
must stay in a position of inordinately
hard work, low pay, and poor working
conditions. HIDD is ripe for a union.
It needs a group, union oriented, who
can infiltrate and organize such a
union. Then management can contend
with demands that employees cannot now
bring to their attention for fear of
losing their jobs.

Wednesdays - All you
can eat for $1.50...

Friday, Oct. 28, 9 pm

BERKELEY WOMEN'S MUSIC COLLECTIVE

Friday, Oct. 14, 9 pm

38th and Chestnut

M-F 11 am - 2 pm and 5 pm - 2 am
Sat. 11 am - 2 am
Sun. 11 am - midnight