Awoman's place:

Creating the Universe

Janet Sergi

How do we get away from Amerika 1974 and to a Womansplace, date
unknown?

Looking at history and trying to be aware of all that is happening
right now gives both a dismal and hopeful view.

In the late nineteenth century, men discovered their patriarchal God
was too strict. These white men knew that this God was not
conceived in their most complementary image, so they decided “God
is Dead.” A new god was needed. They were it. Thus new possibilities
opened up. Since there were no absolute laws to follow, everything
was possible—as long as it was in the interest of white men.

What followed was the industrial revolution, leaps in man-made
technology, the rape of the Earth, wars, revolutions, the new religions
(Dread, Anxiety, and Despair). The white man’s soul was projected as
the new God. It contained nothing. White man had reached his final
peak—Absurdity.

Man is Dead

Today the White Man is dead. It is up to Woman to ‘create the
universe. She must create the values and lifestyles in keeping with her
Womansoul. This soul has been forgotten by both the patriarchal God
and by the male concept of Absurdity. But She lives! Man is Dead.
Absurdity is Dead. Now everything is possible.

White man is nothing but the reflection of his own lack of
grounding in the life processes. His energies are borrowed from his
mother, the poor and the Third World communities. Man is Nothing.
Man is dead. Enough of beating a dead horse. Woman must get on
with their real business, that of Creation.

The energies and oneness with the natural order of things, that used
to be part of childbearing, are now freed to create a fit world. A world
fit for the child in all of us. A world where wonder and awareness are
the prime qualities that are given social approval. A community where
aggressiveness in the pursuit of beauty and love, not in competitiveness
and destruction, is the mark of distinction.

Man is Dead. Women are giving birth to themselves. A Womansplace
is that place within ourselves that the hopelessness and self-hate of
white men could not reach. Woman’s self-hate and anxiety come from
accepting the Male Culture’s definitions of her either as an
ever-nurturing mother or as an incomplete existential creature with no
future.

The Male Culture is Dead. The male wasteland is nowhere land. A
womansplace is the only somewhere there is. A vision of womanhood
that transforms all ways of being and seeing life is what Radical
Feminism is all about. All our political actions must prepare the way
for externalizing our woman's soul onto the outside world.

Woman’s Revolution

We need good paying jobs to survive while we are making a woman’s
revolution. But to make entry into the male capitalist economy, our
top political priority would be a deadly mistake.

Equal pay for equal work, like the vote, is a piece of the Amerikan pie
that is basically inedible. There is no equality in a death culture. The
Capitalist system is founded on the free labor of women in the
household and cheap labor in the economy. To pay women for their
real services is impossible in a profit motivated society.

Energies Diverted

Better jobs for women are possible only for a select few. The token
woman is used by the male capitalist order to divert energies of the
most aggressive woman away from making a truly humanized society.
We need the best jobs and the most skills we can obtain, but our real
task is making a woman’s culture that frees all members of it—not just
a few.

There is no equality in a death culture; for woman to ask parity with
man is to ask to be nothing, to be dead.

As my old friend used to say, “No slogans can convey my hopes, but
we cannot be co-opted because we want everything.”

By Lake Circumspect

We talk about white weight, white walls, and white
whales, but I still think seasonal images are only as
fitting as the calendar. Otherwise, after Winter we
would fade away like white light encompassing all
the spectrum colors, the step beyond that and naturally
we will not. Because spring is green, of course anybody
knows that.

By Lake Circumspect

The seedling of this whole is that the growth
of these human plantlings is limited only by one’s
own estimation of the circular pot at one’s feet.
Beyond that, anything is possible.

Sex Preference Vote Slated

The controversial amendment
to the City of Boulder’s human
rights ordinance, which would
prohibit job discrimination
because of “sexual preference,”
has been set for a referendum
vote on May 7.

The amendment, which
originally included a ban on
discrimination on the basis of
marital status and age, has been
divided up by the City Council
after groups opposing the
“sexual preference” part of the
measure began their campaign to
defeat the amendment. The
sections banning discrimination
on the basis of age and marital
status have won the approval of
the City Council, but the section
dealing with the civil rights of
gay people will be put to
a referendum vote.

Speaking at the Denver
chapter of NOW’s panel on
Lesbianism on March 25,

Georgia Borgen of Boulder Gay

Liberation stated that most
recently those opposing the
referendum have taken two new
approaches to defeat the
measure.

They are attempting a recall of
those male City Council

members who supported the
amendment (the female City
Council members who
supported the amendment have
been serving in their positions
for less than six months, so they
are ineligible for such a recall.) 
The opponents are attempting to
have the referendum postponed
to a later date—possibly during
the summer months when those
members of the university

NOW Features Lesbianism Panel

Approximately 250 people
attended the March 25 meeting
of the Denver Chapter of NOW
(National Organization of
Women) which featured a panel
discussion on “Lesbianism and
Lesbian Lifestyles.”

Prior to the panel discussion
a member of the Boulder group
Concerned Citizens for Civil
Rights spoke on the current
situation of the homosexual
rights bill now pending in that
city. With a recall election of the
mayor and city council
scheduled for May 7, the
Boulder daily press has placed a
“blackout” on all advertising
from those who support the bill.
The citizens group there

welcomes all
support, particularly financial.

The panel opened with a
statement from each of the
three members concerning her
own thoughts and feelings about
Lesbianism as both a political
position and a sexual preference.
While the link between
Lesbianism and Feminism was
mentioned, it was never fully
discussed by any of the panel
members, who occasionally
drifted into apologetic tones
throughout the evening.

During the question and
answer session which followed, a

group of “Separatist Dykes”
took the floor to protest
discrimination against them

would not be present. Ms.
Borgen also noted that the gay
community, while having a basis
of strong support from many
community groups, is at a
disadvantage because the
Boulder Daily Camera has
refused to print the
advertisements that Gay
Liberation has prepared for
them.

The amendment to the city’s
human rights ordinance would
protect the employment rights
of those with “an inclination or
preference for or an orientation
towards intimate sexual relations
with a member of one’s own sex
or with members of both sexes.”
Several U.S. cities have such
ordinances, but Boulder would
be the first in Colorado.

In March

from the Women’s Movement
and NOW, They noted that
NOW had not invited any
separatists to participate in the
panel. A reflection, they felt, of
both classism and intellectualism
within the Women’s Movement
and NOW. Following about
fifteen minutes of sparring, the
discussion moved on and closed
shortly afterward.

A task force has recently
been formed within NOW to
focus on legislation which will
help to remove legal barriers
surrounding the Lesbian,