IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

te © gc: Sipe aiinneanaet OF Asam 2 ee ea mPa  
Response to Franchild  

To Big Mama Rag,  

Concerning the excellent article by  
Marina Franchild that you ran in your  
April/78 and May/78 issues entitled  
"Just What Can Feminists Afford?" Will  
you please state when the material you  
print is edited in the future? I was  
fortunate to receive a complete ver-  
sion of the article and I noticed that  
one of the things that you omitted in  
your newspaper was her acknowledge-  
ments. That is, the list of women who  
Franchild cites for their "political  
insights, encouragement, labor and  
even money, etc..." without which,  
according to Franchild, her article  
would not be complete. Curiously  
enough, these names are not "move-  
ment Stars or celebrities". Omissions  
like these serve to perpetuate an eli-  
tist structure to our movement wri-  
tings, something which Franchild is  
keenly aware of and precisely why she  
made it her business to not overlook  
these women's contributions to her  
article. Also, this tells us that  
there are many women who concern them-  
selves with the issues that that out-  
rageous N.Y. Times-Daughters, Inc.  
interview poses. Also, the articles the  
Franchild article cites are indispen-  
sable to a development of a feminist  
consciousness.  

_ Does BMR have any more insight to  
share with us as to why Daughters, Inc  
has virtually ignored this article up  

Marina Franchild  

FROM PAGE 2  

your going back on your word.) Per-  
haps you did not feel that such omis-  
sions would alter the article. I  
would like to explain how they do.  

The subtitle--"A belated Lesbian  
Separatist Response..."--was written,  
as indicated, in response to an action  
and the published statements made by,  
and attributed to, four other Lesbian  
feminists in that action. The contro-  
versy was not initiated by my article-  
It already existed in the Times art-  
icle (January 2, 1977), by virtue of  
the (in my opinion), unwise discussion  
of feminist (controversial) topics in  
an establishment paper.  

Concerning the "Acknowledgements",  
they are an integral--as opposed to  
extraneous--part of the article. While  
any criticisms directed at the content  
and/or style of this article right-  
fully belong addressed solely to the  
author (as stated), any credit gener-  
ated by same, must rightfully be dis-  
tributed amongst all the women who  
directly, or indirectly, participated  
in the realization of “Just What Can  
Feminists Afford?"; this "Acknowled-  
gments" aspires to not perpetuate the  
author-as- "star syndrome" all too pre-  
valent in our movement, as elsewhere.  
I would therefore like you to belated-  
ly print the enclosed.  

(See Acknowledgements at end)  

Concerning your editorial: you  
state that you ..."object to the 'per-  
sonal attack’ tone of the Franchild ar  
article"... which "sets a tone of bad  
faith"...and which "seems more con-  
cerned with demanding apologies than  
communicating the reasons their action  
was irresponsible." I take exception  
to this! It is ironic that it is I  
who is criticized for taking to task  
women who-- as far as I'm concerned--  
trashed various aspects of the WLM  
to the establishment while promoting  
a classist strategy. It seems that you  
find it easier to criticize me for  
holding these women accountable to  
the movement than, overtly criticizing  
them for their show of bad faith.  

Your editorial, in part, misses  
major points of both the content and  
style of my article; the major thrust  
of which is to explain to all femin-  
ists--including the four women to whom  
my article was specifically addressed-  
why the actions of these women were  

until now. For example, what was the  
response when you talked to Parke  
Bowman on the telephone 6/11/78?  

And what about the rest of the move-  
ment silence in general? Are these is-  
sues going to be dealt with seriously?  
Or, is it going to be the "keep quiet  
and ignore the screaming" approach.  
Perhaps there should be a movement con-  
ference to discuss ways in which to  
combat the rising indifference, apathy  
and unreachability of our so-called  
institutions, businesses and stars.  

This indifference relates directly,  
I think, to the nature of Franchild's  
article, which you claim is “irres-  
ponsible criticism... She sets a tone  
of bad faith by attributing their mo-  
tives to opportunism." Well, Daughters  
has yet to come out publicly (in our  
own feminist press, of course) and  
deny this! In response to this growing  
abandonment of radical perspectives  
which continue to manifest themselves  
in more and more arrogance on the part  
of our movement “institutions”. It is  
precisely this reason why the "tone"  
of the Franchild article is not only  
courageous, but vital. And it may very  
well be that articles like these are  
the beginning of a new phase of move-  
ment housecleaning. It is a fact that  
lesbian separatists in New York, Boston  
and elsewhere were outraged by the in-  
sulting rip-off that was the Times ar-  
ticle "Creating a Women's World" and  

Big Mama Rag, Vol.6, No.8  

Abortion Clinics  

made numerous attempts at dialogue with  
FROM PAGE 3  

Daughters, Inc. soon after the article  
appeared, but to no avail. All lesbian  
hats off to Marina Franchild for doing  
something about it! Her article is a  
kind of literary demonstration which is  
a revolutionary approach to a theor-  
etical analysis of oppression with its  
roots in the living of real women's  
lives.  

As a Third World woman I am partic-  
ularly appreciative of Franchild’s  
article’s section on "Showing Respect  
for Oppressed Peoples." Third World  
invisibility among white feminists is  
indeed a regrettable situation and will  
not be tolerated as long as Third  
World women continue to struggle, and  
non-Third World women make it their  
business too.  

Thanks to Franchild also, for attem-  
pting to raise consciousness around  
the oppression of Jewish People. Right  
on!  

Finally, because I do not have a  
college degree, I fear that I haven't  
made myself clear to those that do and  
those that don't. But, the issues at  
hand and Franchild's important article  
compelled me to respond in some way.  

I hope, BMR, that you print this  
letter, in spite of its tone  

Sincerely,  
Latina  
NYC.  

They picket, they rally. They have  
mounted a growing fight on many lev-  
els to reverse the legalization of  
abortion of 1973. They have tempor-  
arily succeeded in all but stopping  
funds for abortion in the limited but  
promising victory of the Hyde Amend-  
ment.  

Now there are new accomplishments;  
more than a half million dollars  
worth of damage to abortion clinics,  
personal injury and threats to clinic  
personnel, and temporary cessations  
of clinic services. Hints of law  
enforcement complicity contribute to  
a growing feminist anger, anger that  
must recharge our actions on all  
levels. The right to a safe, afford-  
able, legal abortion is the right of  
women to control their own bodies.  

Information can be obtained from and  
donations sent to NARAL, 825 Fifteen-  
th Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20005  
(202-347-7774).  

Donations to the Emma Goldman Clinic  
can be sent to 715 N. Dodge St.,  
Iowa City, Iowa 52240.  

Sources used were Seven Days, off  
our backs, The Militant, Her Say,  
New Women's Times, The Emma Goldman  
Clinic for Women, Vancouver Status  

of Women and Feminist Communications  

An appropriate, and moreover warranted  
rectification.  

The direct address to the four is  
meant to directly involve them in the  
process of analyzing their action.  
(Apology to the offended groups in  
particular, as well as to the move-  
ment in general, on their part, would  
simply be a step toward rectification  
arising out of a critical--and presum-  
ably, enlightened--reconsideration of  
the offensive statements made to an  
ill-advised audience. One might draw  
the conclusion, by virtue of their  
silence in the feminist press, that  
they feel as justified now as they  
did when they made their statements.  
Assuming, that the tone of my article  
is what prevents them from responding,  
the question arises; since a year pas-  
sed between "Creating A Women's World"  
and "Just What Can Feminists Afford?"  
why was there no voluntary explanation  
to the movement during this time? It  
had, in fact, been brought to my at-  
tention that they did not show a will-  
ingness to even consider similar obj-  
ections, raised by other feminists,  
which were presented to them prior to  
the publication of my article. Fur-  
thermore, there were movement rum-  
blings which could not have escaped  
their attention, regarding said in-  
terview.  

Importantly, the scope of "Just  
What Can Feminists Afford?..." is  
limited mainly to criticism of the at-  
titudes of these women as reflected  
in the Times interview, and peri-  
pherally to other related issues  
brought up by said interview. My art-  
icle is not meant--nor was it ever  
meant-- to be an indictment of these  
women's cumulative political contribu-  
tions to the WLM; June Arnold, Parke  
Bowman, Charlotte Bunch, and Bertha  
Harris have undeniably made valuable  
contributions to the movement! This  
fact was made clear in my article. While I of course agree with  
you that criticism should be directed  
to women in a responsible way, I do  
not feel that I have not done this.  

Lastly, the points made by other wo-  
men (who have written in during the  
these last months) regarding the pol-  
itics of non-censorship of controver-  
sial articles, as well as your impli-  
ed change-of-heart re: my article,  
are well taken. (See:"BMR: where we're  
at"--May, 1978) There is an unmista-  

kable waffling of position from issue  
to issue on your part, that is not  
totally undercut by your stating in  
your editorial..."we don't feel that  
we made a mistake in printing it."  
"Queasiness", as one woman put it,  
does seem to describe your treatment  
of the article in question. This is  
mysterious to me because of your in-  
itial enthusiasm expressed to me in  
private and implied in your April  
issue. What happened? I certainly  
expected up-frontness. You cannot  
deny that you veered from your  
original opinion; it is unfortunate  
that I had to find out about this by  
reading it in your subsequent issues.  

In struggle,  

Marina Franchild  
New York City  

Atk do ph  

Acknowledgements  

(from "Just What Can Feminists  
Afford?", BMR, April and May, 1978)  

I am politically indebted to the  
many women - lesbians and lesbian  
separatists - who read and commented  
on this article at various states of  
pre-publication. My article would not  
be complete without acknowledging the  
political insights, encouragement,  
labor - even money for production and  
distribution, of these, and other fem-  
inists: Lorey Bonante, Maria Finchenko  
Frog, Rhonda Gottlieb, Judith Lennett,  
Carol Lewis, Marizel Rios, and Debor-  
ah Yam-Esh,  

I am especially indebted to:  

Deborah Yam-Esh - for her signifi-  
cant feminist contribution throughout  
the first draft of my article. Her  
political insight and many hours of  
work are greatly appreciated. I par-  
ticularly value the insights she  
shared with me concerning the oppre-  
ssion of the Jewish people in parti-  
cular, and racism in general.  

Rhonda Gottlieb - for exposing me  
to the brilliant essay “Academic Fem-  
inists and the Women's Movement" by  

Ann Leffler, Dair L. Gillespie and -  
Elinor Lerner Ratner. This essay has  
not gotten the exposure and consider-  
ation within the WLM that it deserves.  
Moreover, I appreciate Rhonda's shar-  
ing with me her own thoughts and  
writings on this situation; I found  
her insights concerning academic fem-  
inists to be extremely valuable.  

Marizel Rios - for sharing with me  
her understanding of the oppression  
of Third World people in particular,  
as well as of racism in general. In  
addition, I value her sharing with me  
her political insights concerning  
feminism, including “feminist busi-  
nesses," which she arrived at partly  
through her experience of owning and  
running Labyris Books - New York  
City's first feminist bookstore.  
(Labyris was forced to close in Dec-  
ember 1977 after serving the NYC fem-  
inist community for over 4 years.)  

Maria Finchenko - for her contribu-  
tion of time, patience and labor in  
typesetting this long article. With-  
out her help I would not have been  
able to produce it.  

Lastly, I would again like to thank  
the women who read and reread the  
many drafts of this article - making  
valuable suggestions for its improve-  
ment. Their patience and encourage-  
ment were a continuing source of  
strength. I would especially like to  
thank Deborah, Frog, Maria, Marizel  
and Rhonda.  

I would also like to acknowledge the  
following writings concerning women:  

1. "Academic Feminists and the  
Women's Movement" by Ann Leffler;  
Dair L. Gillespie and Elinor  
Lerner Ratner, 1973.  

2. "The Woman Identified Woman" by  
Radicalesbians, 1970.  

3. "Separated & Unequal - Discrim-  
ination Against Women Workers  
After World War II (The U.A.W.  
1944-1954)" by the Women's Work  
Project, URPE (A Union for Rad-  
ical Political Economics - Pol-  
itical Education Project).  

REGARDLESS OF THESE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS,  
I ASSUME COMPLETE POLITICAL RESPON-  
SIBILITY FOR THE ENTIRE CONTENTS OF  
MY ARTICLE.  

Copyright 1978 by Marina Franchild.  
All rights reserved.