national  
Coors: No Matter Which Way You Drink It You Lose  

Bobbe Ross  

The boycott against Coors  
beer has been on and off for  
the last 15 years. The his-  
tory of the boycott is basic-  
ally a union-busting fight.  

In 1978 Coors was able to  
oust Brewery Workers Local  
366. The local is still fight-  
ing against the forced lie  
detector rules of the company.  

Each applicant had to take a  
lie detector test, and some  
of the questions asked pert-  
ained to that person's sex-  
uality. In Colorado there is  
no law against the use of lie  
detector tests either for hir-  
ing purposes or randomly if  
the employer decides he needs  
to know whatever. In many  
states that test is illegal,  
which doesn't mean companies  
in those states don't try to  
force employees  
into taking them. People are  
subject to being fired or not  
hired if they refuse to take  
the tests.  

Coors headquarters is in  
Golden, Colorado, just out-  
side Denver. The area has a  
large population of Chicanos/  
Chicanas but traditionally  
Coors hired very few. Coors  
demands the right to require  

its workers to have a physic  
al exam at any time, in an  
attempt to discharge them be-  
fore retirement age. They  
also reserve the right to  
fire any worker who makes re-  
marks against the company,  
its product or anything that  
would discourage people from  
drinking their beer.  

Since 1978 Coors has advert-  
ised extensively that they  
don't question anyone about  
their sexuality on the lie  
detector test and they have  
hired some more Chicanos. But  
the boycott continues; in San  
Francisco most gay bars don't  
serve Coors. Recently a San  
Francisco TV station, KQED  

planned a "Coors Day" fund-  
raising auction. Gay activ-  

ists picketed the Cow Palace,  
where the station was going  
to hold the auction, jammed  
the switchboard and the  
auction was cancelled. KQED  
blamed the cancellation on  
unspecified "threats of vio-  
lence," and station KGO, who  
had tried to fire a Black wo-  
man commentator for wearing  
corn rows, inserted film  
from 2 years back when the  
lesbian and gay community  
objected to the verdict in  
the murder trial concerning  
Dan White's killer.  

The Coors family have a  
history of union-busting, har-  
assment of workers and they  

have always been ultra-con-  
servative. Mother Jones has  
called Joseph Coors, pres-  
ident of the brewery, the  
“godfather" of the New Right,  
supporting the John Birch  
Society, the Committee For  
The Survival Of A Free Cong-  
ress and The Heritage Found-  
ation. The Committee took  
credit for the defeat of  
“radicals” like Sen. Geo.  
McGovern and a post-election  
Heritage Foundation study  
advocated the reinstitution  
of a full-scale witch hunt  
against political radicals.  
NOW is boycotting Coors for  
financially supporting organ-  
izations against the ERA like  
the Moral Majority and Phyl-  
lis Schlafly's Eagle Forum.  
Coors is an advisor to Reag-  
an. Coors-financed Mountain  
States Legal Defense Fund  
had recruited James Watt into  

Reagan's cabinet.  
The National Moral Majority  

accepted a $5,000 contribution  
from the Coors family. A  
1979 financial report from  
the Federal Election Commiss-  
ion indicated that Coors con-  
tribution represented about  
25% of the money received by  
the political action commit-  
tee from various donations  
throughout the country.  
Publicly Coors is trying to  
get in good with gays. It  
gave the Metropolitan Com-  

munity Church of the Los  
Angeles-Hollywood area a  
large delivery truck, which  

they accepted with a flowery  
speech. Coors has also plac-  

ed a series of paid ads in  
gay publications across the  
country trying to improve  
their image, and drum up  
more business.  

When confronted with the  
fact that Coors has contrib-  
uted to anti-gay groups, a  
representative of the comp-  
any denied it. Regarding the  
Coors donation to the Moral  
Majority (given in the  
wife's name), a Coors  
official claimed that that  
was a personal contribution  
on behalf of the Coors fam-  
ily and not a corporate  
contribution.  

KBNO, Denver's Latino radio  
station carries ads in Span-  
ish from Coors, even though  
Coors still has not hired a  
great many Chicanos/Chicanas.  
The boycott still exists—  
keep it going.  

DON'T DRINK SCAB BEER!  
COORS, LIGHT & HERMAN JOSEPH'S  

“in Denver" and be done with it. However, so much goes on here  
and we feel a need to let people who read BMR in on some  
of our process. Collectively speaking we are worn out but  
not giving up. We had another community meeting with very  
little community response where we said we could only  

make it until March if we didn't get more help with get-  
ting the paper out. An ultimatum... well even though the  
meeting was small we do have some women who haven't worked  
with the paper before who have really jumped right in and  
helped us with this production, and women who have been  
working with us for a while who extended their commitment,  
saved from the jaws of the lion again. We are trying to be  
better organized... production last month was like some kind  
of capitalist torture, leaving us just exhausted. The criti-  
que of this issue will be held at the BMR office—1724 Gay-  
lord—November 9th at 7:00 pm. Last month we had a good  
sized meeting for the critique which was just overwhelming,  
feel free to do it again. Especially since this is only  
Part 1 of 2 parts of a theme on racism and anti-Semitism,  
please come and let us know what you thought of this half,  
and what you think is a must to be included in the second  
half. If any of you are out there reading political books  
(unless we all collapse in front of the TV) how about send-  
ing in some reviews, or articles, or graphics or money.  
Our finances are just the pits this month and with postage  

Any way business goes on. We have two more newspaper box-  
es out on the streets: at Safeway 27th and Federal and  
Safeway at sixth and Ogden. We have been trying to get  
this Addressograph (a machine for organizing and address-  
ing our sub list) working so that maintaining our subs and  
the mailing will be less time consuming. We are in need of  
women to come in and spend a little time getting the Ad-  
dressograph working—stamping out names and addresses on  
these little metal plates that will print the name on the  
newspaper or envelope directly. Please call in and leave  
a message on the phone machine or call on Mon. evenings  
during our meetings if you would like to get in on this  
change. We are also having the office open three nights  
a week—Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday for typing, etc.  
the two weeks before production (generally the last two  
full weeks of the month), from about 6:30 pm on. Please  
call in to connect with this scheduling also, our number is  
322-2010, give us a call. In spite of all the work and  
struggle involved in this project, it is really a good  
place to have access to lots of information and to continue  
to develop our politics to make connections with other  
movements. We do get good things in a personal sense from  
our work on BMR, hopefully we always put out the best pol-  
itics we can in the pages of the paper.  

In Process BMR  

Big Mama Rag, November, 1981 - Page 5