international  
Queen St. Death: Another Drug Victim  

(Reprinted from Phoenix Rising, a Canadian anti-psychiatric journal.)  

News that Patricia Ellerton had died in August 1981 at the Queen Street Mental Health Centre hit Toronto  

toronto  

like aftershock following the reported death of Austin Davis last fall in the same facility.  

Ironically, both drug deaths made the headlines the day after Health Minister Dennis Tombrell had assured reporters Queen Street was safe.  

Ellerton and Davis's drug-related deaths joined that of Aldo Alviani—who died at the centre a year and a half before—as two more grim statistics in the battleground called Queen Street Mental Health Centre, a facility that has been torn by staff cutbacks and the turnover of three administrators in one year.  

At the inquest into Ellerton's death, held this January, the public learned about the short life of this troubled woman whose psychiatric problems started in 1963 and ended with her death from an apparent overdose of the drug levomepromazine (Nozinan) at the age of thirty-seven.  

Ellerton was alternately described as "a whiny kind of patient constantly seeking attention" by the hospital physician responsible for her physical health, and as a person well-liked by her fellow inmates by a nurse.  

Her brother David told jurors Ellerton hated to take medication. "She did not like drugs in any way, shape or form... not even aspirin." He said that although she had made several pseudo-suicide attempts to get attention, she was not "serious" about killing herself.  

Neither Marlene Berry, a registered nurse who knew Ellerton well, nor Delores Apps, her supervisor, felt Ellerton was suicidal at the time of her death, although they conceded any inmate at Queen Street could be unpredictable at times.  

Jurors were told she would often try to take other inmates' medication rather than her own which she thought was poisonous. Although she wouldn't eat hospital food, because she thought it too was poisonous, she would buy chocolate bars at the cafeteria in the social area called the “mall” or get another inmate to go across the street from the centre and buy her chips and a coke.  

Nurses described her as “sexually active" within the hospital, although this was never explained. A boyfriend was mentioned, but he did not testify.  

It was evident from the beginning that the crown attorney, Peter DeJulio, was determined to badger the witnesses into suggesting suicide as the most obvious cause of her death, despite evidence that seemed to contradict the theory.  

Both jury members and the coroner, Dr. Margaret Milton, appeared shocked when it was revealed that only one physician was on duty to take care of 600 inmates the morning Ellerton died. Dr. Gerard Lippert, on duty at the time of Ellerton's death, testified it was common practice for only one doctor to be on the 11 pm to 8:30 am shift.  

He told the jurors that he did not go directly to Ellerton when he was paged because no emergency call was made to him. When he finally heard it was an emergency, he ran across a parking lot and up to the fifth floor of another building to her room, where he found her dead.  

Because Ellerton had been refusing food, Lippert concluded her death was caused by “self-induced anorexia."  

When her body was examined by a pathologist, however, he found her lungs congested and partially collapsed—common in deaths due to drug overdoses. No fresh needle marks were found on her body. Her stomach was empty. Toxicologist David Hall, chosen to do the testing for a possible drug overdose, had only two samples of blood to work with by this time instead of the normal urine, liver, blood samples and stomach contents often used to identify drug or alcohol related deaths. Patricia Ellerton's room had been stripped and cleaned before Metro police had a chance to search the room for possible vials of pills or any other clues to her death. No account of the non-narcotic medicines in the medicine room was being kept, so it was impossible to check whether Ellerton had been given an accidental overdose by nursing staff.  

Hall was told by Dr. Milton to look for traces of haloperidol (Haldol) and fluphenazine (Modicate, Moditen), which had been given to Ellerton in needle form before her death; an anti-parkinsonian drug; and levomepromazine, which Ellerton had been taking in liquid form.  

Ellerton was found to have ten times the normal amount of levomepromazine in her body. Although she was being prescribed a high dose of the drug—150 milligrams four times per day—for her body weight (98 pounds at death), it was clear that somewhere, somehow, along the way she must have taken more of the drug.  

When one of the nurses casually revealed that she had known that drug dealing had been taking place in the "mall" since she had started working at Queen Street three years ago, pandemonium hit the courtroom.  

Since Ellerton had to walk unaccompanied through the “danger" zone to her occupational programs, could she not have bought some drugs along the way?  

Sergeant Roy Teeft, investigating officer in the Ellerton death, told a hushed courtroom how he went undercover at the request of the coroner, and received any drugs he asked for through pushers who came into the mall area. He said he could have had drugs, alcohol and even sex if he had wanted it and was willing to pay.  

Teeft, who has been with the narcotics division of the Metro police force for thirteen years, told jurors he did not know if levomepromazine was a common street drug. (It is. In the 1960s it was sold by pushers who called the pills “Honey Bees" because of their colour. Because it is commonly used as a pain killer, it is often sold in the place of Percodan, a commonly used drug that relieves the pain of cancer patients.)  

Without a shred of evidence, he theorized that if Ellerton was sexually active, she probably prostituted herself to get some levomepromazine so she could treat herself. "I'm not saying she did that all the time." After all, reasoned Teeft, she wouldn't eat the hospital food, yet she bought chocolate bars, so it stood to reason she would do the same with drugs.  

This theory was later questioned by Dr. Milton, who stated that with an IQ of 84 it seemed unlikely Ellerton would know the name of her drug and ask for it from pushers.  

Dr. Henry Durost, Medical Director of the centre at the time (he is now Clinical Director of the Clarke Institute of Psychiatry in Toronto), appeared shaken when revelations of an illegal drug market and stories of female inmates exchanging sex for drugs came out. In the face of sharp questioning on Queen Street's open door policy, counsel for the Ministry of Health valiantly  
‘CONTINUED ON PAGE 25  

Big Mama Rag, August 1982 - Page 17