calendar

May 22 Any Woman's Coffeehouse presents Ronna Keil-original
music, vocals & guitar--and Ain't I A Woman Theatre.

Films with * are shown through the Denver International Film
Festival (DIFF). Codes next to name of film read as follows:

A non-alcoholic alternative & refreshments. All women (O) = Ogden Theatre 935 E. Colfax
welcome. Childcare available. 8pm - midnight. $2 sugg- “(C) = Denver Center Cinema 14th & Curtis St.-Downtown
ested donation. Unitarian Church 1400 Lafayette, Den- (SR)= DCC Screening Room 14th & Curtis St.-Downtown

ver. For more info call 585-8498 or 722-4873. (G) = Guild Theatre 1028 S. Gaylord St.
For more info call 321-FILM. Most films have numerous show-
ings so check local program or phone. (These reviews are

through DIFF not BMR).

Slightly Older Lesbians (S.O.L.) monthly meeting.
7:30pm. For more info call 321-5948.

People's Fair at East High School, Denver. Come to the
BMR table for the most current & older issues of BMR
and for wonderful BMR T-shirts, camisoles, etc.

BMR Supporter's Meeting. If you've wanted to help out
but are not sure just how, come on down! 7pm at the
office 1724 Gaylord St., Denver or call 322-2010.

National Conference Against Repression: A Call to
Resist. (see Article in this issue) Workshops include:
Grand Jury, Repressive legislation, Police repression,
Prisoners, Repression on labor, Prisoners of war,
Paramilitary white supremacist organization, U.S.

terror internationally, Repression on women, Repres-

sion on youth. Contact:

The Center 3704 Franklin St.

Denver 629-6460. Registration $15 fee.

On-Going Groups

Tuesday Still Ain't Satisfied

revolutionary & feminist singers & musicians.

Feminist Singers. Looking for
7pm.

Call Deb 321-7531 for weekly location.

Wednesday

The People's Free Theatre. An open stage at a

women's owned and operated business. Musical Mercury

Cafe; 1308 Pearl St.,

Thursday

Denver. 863-8298.

T.E.R.R.A. - A women's group focusing on reproduc-

tive rights, Native land rights, anti-nuke issues. 

Meets 6:45 - 8:30pm at RIP Bookstore,
call 839-1288.

Denver,

Sunday for info.

727 B.L. 7th,

RUTH - support group for battered lesbians. Call
Blair 830-2346 or Donna 333-3993.

Mothers Without Custody is a nationwide, non-pro-
fit group providing emotional support and info
for women who are not living with any or all of
their children for any reason, that meets on the
first Sunday of each month at the Glendale
Firehouse Community Room 999 S. Clermont. For
more info call 988-5628 or 427-9194.

international
film
festival

¢ Over 135 film events - the finest in new
international releases, documentaries,
animation, video programs, seminars,
midnight movies, and more.

Over two-dozen special guests - actors,

directors, critics, and technicians,

including Ed Asner, Peter Bogdanovich, Lee

Grant, Wim Wenders, Colleen Camp, and

many others.

call 321-FILM.

SEE CALENDAR LISTINGS FOR FILMS OF SPECIAL INTEREST.

Federal Grand

Lori Bradford

A grand jury convened under
the Racketeering Influence and
Corrupt Organizations (RICO)
Act is attempting to smash the

Black Liberation Army by sweep-Independence Movement and: revo:

ing up activists from the
Black Liberation struggle, the
Puerto Rican Independence Mo-
vement, and white anti-imperi-
alists who support and defend
the BLA.

Under the RICO Act, any mem-
ber of an organization or as-
sociation can be found guilty
of criminal conspiracy for the
acts of any other member. The
government doesn't have to
prove any acts were committed
or even intended to be commit-
ted; the issue is solely poli-
tical beliefs and associations.

The Justice Department and FBI
are using the Nyack action to
implement a program of whole-
sale attack on the New Afrikan

revolutionary anti-imperialist
forces.

The Grand Jury is used to
broaden the attack beyond
those charged and arrested
with the Nyack expropriation.
Under federal indictment, two
black activists were arrested
in pre-dawn terror raids in
New York City; Chui (Cecil
Ferguson) and Jamal (Eddie Jo-
sephs) their family and
friends subpoenaed.

On Friday, March 26th, over
100 FBI/Police agents raided
the Black Acupuncture Advisory

Association of North America
(BAAANA). BAAANA is a revolu-
tionary health care center
and school in the Black commu-
nity committed to combatting
the government's chemical
warfare (drug plague) and gen-
ocidal health conditions through
the use of acupuncture and
traditional medicine, has been
ransacked, its records seized,
and four of its members sub-
poenaed. Dr. Mutulu Shakur, a
founder of BAAANA and a revo-
lutionary activist in the New
Afrikan Independence Movement

is now being sought by the fed-

Jerry Gaines, Yassamin Fula,
Eve Rosahn are locked up for
their refusal to collaborate.
Puerto Rican Independentista

Jury On The March Again

Ivette Alfonso not yet offi-
cially cited, has refused to
collaborate. Fulani Sunni-Ali,
a leader of the Provisional
Government of the Republic of
New Africa, also refused to
collaborate and now is being
sought as a material witness.

The strategy to win
must be based on a strong and
militant resistance, our goal
to end the grand jury, not just
to "curb" its abuses.

In Denver, the local Defense
Committee to Defend The October
20th Freedom Fighters can be
contacted by writing to P.O.
Box 4505, Den, CO 80204.

(Information from the Nation-
al Coalition to Defend The Oct.
20th Freedom Fighters.)

Big Mama Rag, May, 1982 - Page 25