```
14

resources

actions

There will be a national march in
Chicago, Illinois Saturday, May 10th,
for the ratification of the Illinois
Equal Rights Amendment. The National
March for Illinois Ratification is
intended to communicate to the Illinois
legislature the massive nationwide
grassroots support for the ERA. ERA
supporters are putting a lot of energy
into this march saying that Illinois
ratification is crucial to national
ratification. They ask you all to be
there if possible.

Come and join members of the "mental
patients" liberation movement in a day
of protest against the American Psychi-
atric Association. The APA and its mem-
bers have participated and condoned
the forced “treatment" of millions of
innocent people. This treatment con-
sists of locking people up, stripping
them of their rights and dignity,
drugging them with mind-altering chem-
icals, shock treatment, lobotomies,
forced labor, and behavior modifica-
tion. Demonstrate against psychiatric
oppression at the American Psychiatric
Association convention, Monday, May 5
in San Francisco. 9:30 am, Tribunal-
The Inmates' View, Glide Church's
Freedom Hall, Taylor and Ellis Streets
11:30 am, March to the APA's meeting
headquarters, Brooks Hall, Civic
Center with a rally and open mic at
noon. Sponsored by the 8th Internation
al Conference on Human Rights and
Psychiatric Oppression, 1301 Hearst,
#8, Berkeley, CA 94702.

publications

"With over 50% of Colorado women in
the labor force, insufficient child
care remains a reality. For the
80,000 children under age 6 whose
mothers work outside the home, supple-
mental child care is not a luxury.”
So begins a new free brochure from
the Colorado Commission on Women-
“Working Mothers and Child Care."
This informative brochure, along with
"Corporate Response to Child Care,"
is available from the Commission on
Women, 1525 Sherman, Denver, CO 80203.

Just in time to greet the new de-
cade, the Women's Occupational Health
and Resource Center is introducing
a unique and artfully illustrated
Fact Pack and Engagement Calendar.
The Fact Pack contains interesting
and important information about
many of the women-dominated jobs such
as health and hospital workers, cler-
ical workers, textile mill workers,
and of course, household workers.
Descriptions of the hazards related
to these jobs alert the readers,
while the information on prevention
helps protect them. Each new year's
calendar will focus on additional
women's occupations and hazards. The
photographs have been donated by vari-
ous unions and are representative of
their women members at work, $5.00
each with discounts for bulk orders
from Women's Occupational Health Re-
source Center, School of Public
Health, 60 Haven Avenue, B-1, New
York, NY 10032.

An annotated bibliography on Sex-
ual Harassment (50¢) and a report on
a Conference on Sexual Harassment in
the Workplace held in Detroit in Oct-
ober 1979 ($3.25) is available from
The Program on Women and Work, Insti-
tute of Labor and Industrial Rela-
tions, University of Michigan/Wayne
State University, 108 Museums Annex,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Aegis, the Magazine on Ending Vio-
lence Against Women, has not publish-
ed since September/October 1979 due
to financial woes which have forced
them to reorganize and readjust. Their
grant funding was not reappropriated
this year and they no longer have
full-time staffers. They are finding
that grant monies for feminist pub-
lications are becoming harder and
harder to find and do not yet have
the subscription base needed to make
Aegis self-sufficient. Help Aegis con-
tinue publishing information about
ending violence against women by mak-
ing a contribution or taking out a
subscription for $8.75 for one year
or $15.50 for two. Make checks pay-
able to FAAR, PO Box 21033, Washington
DC, 20009. Aegis is also soliciting
articles for their next issue on child
sexual assault. Deadline is May 8th;
send to the above address.

culture

Attention photographers! Women in
Martial Arts is looking for 12 fabu-
lous photos of women martial artists
in action for inclusion in a 1981
Calendar of Women in Martial Arts.
Photos will be chosen by women repre-
sentative of several different styles
of martial art on correctness of form/
technique, variety (of styles, action,
etc.), photographic quality and eye
appeal. Each photo included will earn
for the submitter 1% of the net profit
after expenses for printing, distribu-
ting and selling the calendars. No
salaries will be paid to the producers
and all other profits will go to Women in
Martial Arts. Requirements for submis-
sion: Names, style and rank of princi-
pals in the photo. Include other pert-
inent info. Name of photographer. Sub-
mit both a snapshot and the negative.
Permission form signed by all parties
included in the photo. Submit to Women
in Martial Arts, 12538 Venice Bl. #5,
Mar Vista, CA 90066 by July 31, 1980.

The Lesbian Community Theatre of
Lansing, MI announces an original One-
Act-Play contest. First prize is $75
and second place is $35. There will be
honorable mentions. There is a $5 en-
try fee and a playwright can enter more
than once. All plays must be accompan-
ied by a return self-addressed envel-
ope. Deadline is August 15, 1980. Win-
ners will be announced September 15.
Entries and questions can be sent to
LCT, PO Box 89, East Lansing, MI 48823.

There will be a Women's Theatre Fes-
tival in Cambridge, MA May 7th thru
May 11, at the Loeb Experimental The-
atre, produced by the Feminist Amerik-
an Theatre and the Black Star Theatre.
Featured groups include the Cambridge
Lesbian Theatre, Time and Space The-
atre of NY, The Three Clowns of Boston
and others. Workshops will be included
too. More information: Susie Chancey,
217 Elm, Cambridge (617) 876-3305.

In honor of lesbian artists, on Sat-
urday, May 3, there will be an opening
reception for the Great American Les-
bian Art Show at the Woman's Building
in Los Angeles. On exhibit will be
works by Kate Millett, Harmony Hammond,
Louise Fishman, Betsy Damon, Tee Cor-
inne, Debbie Jones, Lula Mae Blocton,
Gloria Longval, Nancy Fried and Lili
Lakich. Works on display include paint
ing, sculpture, photography and neon.
An opening reception for women only
will be held from 6-8 P.M. During this
time, Betsy Damon will perform "What
do you think of Knives" at 7 P.M. A
$1 donation for the event is requested.
The Women's Building is located at
1727 North Spring St. in LA. Also
featured in the exhibit will be slide
documentation of the artwork shown in
regional exhibits of the Great Ameri-
can Lesbian Art Show.

The Seventh Annual Women's Music
Festival is being held in Champaign,
Illinois May 29 - June 1. Tickets for
the weekend at the door $32; a single
concert $8.50; a single workshop $2.
Confirmed performers include Gwen Av-
ery, Meg Christian, Maxine Feldman,
Robin Flower and Nancy Vogl, Terry
Garthwaite, Holly Near, Teresa Trull
and Juli Homi, and Mary Watkins. Work-
shops, films, sale of women's merchan-
dise, open mic sets, jam sessions and
a dance included in the celebration.
Write for more info: NWMF, Box 2721,
Stn A, Champaign, IL 61820.

conferences

Join in a major mental health event:
The First Annual West Coast Conference
for Women Working With Women In Coun-
seling and Psychotherapy, June 7 and
8 in San Francisco. Conference aims
are to address theoretical and practi-
cal concerns of women working with
women; to focus on social and cultur-
al perspectives; to stimulate dialogue
and networking; to provide experiment-
al learning in various therapeutic
modalities. Special notes: the confer-
ence will be wheelchair accessible; —
an interpreter for the deaf will be
available; while men working with
women will be excluded from certain
workshops, they will be welcome for
certain portions of the conference;
sliding scale fee. Contact the Center
for Feminist Therapy and Education,
944 Market Street, San Francisco, CA
94102.

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.4

calendar

1-10 Eight films of special interest to women will be included this year
in the third Denver International Film Festival. The films, from seven
different countries, focus primarily on women and their struggles within
their own cultures. For information as to titles, times and places call
629-8343 or 320-3958.

2-4 Sandra Roth, National Secretary of the National Organization for
Women (NOW) will be the keynote speaker at the Colorado NOW State Confer-
ence at the Cosmopolitan Hotel in Denver. The conference is open to all
NOW members and to the public at a conference fee of $15; childcare will
be provided. Included in the agenda is a presentation by Susan Milner and
Debbie Flick on "Feminist Rage and Organizational Trauma." Call 624-2755
for more info.

9-12

"Breaking the Cycle of Violence," a conference on family violence,
will be held at the Auraria campus in Denver. Registration starts Saturday
morning at 8:00 A.M. at St. Cajetan's. For more info call 629-3178.

10-11

Look for Big Mama Rag and Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter at the
Capitol Hill People's Fair at East High School. We'll be sharing a booth
on the Esplanade close to 17th.

10 The Izquierda Ensemble and Hilary Morgan will perform at the St. Thom-
as Episcopal Church, 2201 Dexter, Denver at 8 P.M. Tickets are $4.00 at
the door or available at Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter. Refreshments,
childcare. Call June for more info 722-6646.

10 "Birth in the 80's- Mother's Day Visions": a childbirth conference in
Boulder featuring Suzanne Arms,
author of Immaculate Deception. From the
press release: "Mother's Day is a perfect time to evaluate the quality of
care given mothers and how this care will improve in this
decade. This
conference will present to the public a gathering of exciting profession-
als who work with pregnancy and childbirth in Colorado, in order to intro-
duce options that are available and present an opportunity to explore new
alternatives." Registration at 8:30 at Casey Junior High, 2410 13th St.,
Boulder.
Call 443-6888 for more info.

13. Children's Fair at 13th and Vine in Denver, 10 A.M to 4 P.M. Children
75¢ and adults $1.00.

17. Wood, feminist songwriter, will perform in a special concert appear-
ance with Nina Daugherty on jazz guitar. One performance at 8 P.M. at
the Houston Fine Arts Center at Colorado Women's College in Denver. Tick-
ets $5 at the box office.

24 A meeting to form a Feminist Action Group for the purpose of uniting
Denver women will be held at Woman to Woman, 1 P.M. Call 831-4419 or
333-7656 for more information.

25 Big Mama Rag community meeting at Woman to Woman, 2023 E. Colfax at
7 P.M. Bring energy, suggestions, criticisms, etc.

31

Cris Williamson will be appearing in concert 8 P.M. at East High
School with June Millington, Jackie Robbins and Cam Davis. Tickets $7.50
at the door and in advance at Woman to Woman. Free childcare, interpretation
for the hearing impaired, work exchange- call two weeks in advance.
443-8749 or 355-3488.

Every Tuesday LUNA, a feminist support group for lesbian alcoholics and
their friends/supporters meets weekly. For more information call
Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter, 320-5972. New women welcome.

Every Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday from 1-9 p.m. and Thursday and Friday
from 1-5 p.m.
Street.
of funds.

There will be a Women of Color Con-
ference at Evergreen State College in
Olympia, Washington for women of color
to unite in an atmosphere of caring
and openness and sharing some of daily
diversities. The conference will be
held May 19th and 20th. The only con-
tact we have is two phone numbers for
more information: (206) 866-6034, Kim,
or (206) 564-1611, Elaine.

Women and Appropriate Technology is
a conference by and for women being
offered by Heathcote Center, May 23rd
thru the 26th. The weekend is intended
to provide an environment and resources
for women to explore and define appro-
priate technology. Sliding scale fee.
You are urged to pre-register. For more
info: Heathcote Center, 21300 Heath-
cote Road, Freeland, MD 21053.

Join the rise of the Lavender Left.
Come to the Powder Ridge Conference,
a Northeast Conference of Multination-
al Lesbian and Gay Male Feminist Soc-
ialists in Middlefield, CT, May 23rd
through the 26th. The conference will
provide an opportunity for lesbians
and gay males to discuss perspectives
on Marxism and lesbian and gay liber-
ation, and to develop strategies on
what is to be done. There will be two
main workshops: building an anti-rac-
ist lesbian/gay movement and how to
fight the right and win. Conference
fee: pre-registration plus food for
the entire weekend, $35; registration
at the conference plus food, $40.

Write to Powder Ridge Conference,
PO Box 512, New York, NY 10014.

Denver Women's Health Care Clinic is open at 1829 High
Call 320-1020 24 hours a day.

No woman turned away for lack
of funds.

projects

Michigan "Red Squad" files to be
released: in the next two months,
over 38,000 past and present Michi-
gan residents, who were spied on by
the State Police, will be notified
that they have a "red squad" file,
and how to obtain it. Persons who do
not receive a notice and think they
should, or who wish more information,
can contact the Political Surveil-
lance Project, National Lawyer's
Guild, 1035 St. Antoine, Detroit, MI
48226. (313) 963-0843.

BMR received a letter from “concerned
Women's Studies students, faculty
and staff at the University of Mass-
achusetts at Amherst." They say: "We
are in the midst of a crisis that
threatens the stability of our pro-
gram. This is an appeal for your writ-
ten support of Women's Studies as an
independent major with adequate re-
sources. In March 1978, the proposal
for an independent major in Women's
Studies was approved by the Faculty
Senate. For two years this status has
not been implemented due to current
Administration's refusal to take ac-
tion. As a result the program's sta-
tus remains in limbo. We would appre-
ciate any forms of support you wish
to express; your immediate response
is extremely important to the future
status of Women's Studies at UMass."
Address your support of independent
Women's Studies to: Chancellor Henry
Koffler, Whitmore Administration
Building, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003.
```