Virago Receives

By Kathy Riley

Virago Productions, a feminist collective producing women's cultural events in the Denver area, has received a $41,096 salaries grant under CETA, the federal Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.

The seven and one half month grant—which runs through September of this year—will allow Virago to hire five and possibly six women. Positions include project director, secretary-bookkeeper, two community liaisons, and one sound/light technician.

The grant will allow Virago to do more community-based events, including performances and workshops with schools, nursing homes, and community groups, according to Sarah Falion, a Virago member who will continue working with the collective on a non-paid basis. "We're excited by this grant because we'll be able to focus our energy in new areas.”

Virago hopes that the grant will allow the group to work with local women artists, particularly Third World and Native American women, whose work may not have had much public attention yet.

Since the collective began in Feb. 1977, Virago has produced a number of concerts by feminist musicians including Teresa Trull, Margie Adam, Kay Gardner, Willie Tyson, Alive, and the Berkeley Women's Music Collective. Virago hopes that the grant will make it possible to branch into other kinds of women's art, including dance, theater, and visual art. Another project is the development of a resource guidebook on producing women's cultural events.

Virago has hired women for the five staff positions and is seeking approval from CETA for the sixth. While the grant officially began Jan. 15, Virago didn't get formal notice until late February. Therefore, they would like to apply money that would have gone into salaries during that first month to a sixth position. In hiring, priority was given to collective members who are also CETA-certified; that is, eligible for jobs because they have been unemployed.

However, applications were also being taken from other women referred by CETA who have not worked with the collective. Virago will have all positions filled by March 11—the date of a retreat for all collective members. To date, the following women have been hired: Gayle Novak, Martha Levering, Susan Frazier, Pat Dellin, and June Summers.

As for the structure of the group, Virago members say they will continue to work as before: all decisions will be made collectively at weekly meetings by both paid and non-paid members.

Under the terms of the grant, the five positions are not equally paid: monthly salaries were approved by CETA at $821 for the project director; $628 for the secretary-bookkeeper; $785 for the sound/light technician; and $751 each for the community liaisons.

However, Virago says it is committed to equalizing salaries among the paid members, as well as equalizing and/or rotating job responsibilities. All paid members will be returning some of their salaries into Virago, to cover expenses not funded by the grant and to provide a financial base after the grant expires.

Politically, Virago says it will continue to put a priority on cultural events at the women's prison in Canon City, and also on women-only as well as open concerts. Technically, the grant covers only events in the City and County of Denver, yet salaried members will continue to work on Canon City events, on their own time if necessary.

According to Ronnie Storey, a collective member who will be leaving the group soon, Virago has a commitment to providing women-only space, as well as concerts open to men: "Not because we want to encourage men," she said, “but because we want to have something for straight or Third World women who might be intimidated by women-only events.”

CETA Grant

She said that while the law does not permit men to be refused admittance to events in public or church facilities, the collective plans to continue to ask men who arrive at women-only events to leave. "We think a feminist man will understand, and an obnoxious man would be asked to leave anyway," Ronnie said.

Virago's next event is a concert March 18 at Moore School, featuring guitarist Woody Simmons, who recorded "Oregon Mountains," and Nancy Vogel of the Berkeley Women's Music Collective. Wood, a Denver singer-guitarist, and comedian Blaze O'Brien will open the concert. All women are welcome.

At the retreat planned for March 11, collective members plan to discuss finances, projected plans, collective process, and feminist ethics and politics. Later in the month, on Tuesday, March 21, the collective will hold a community meeting at 7 p.m. at Woman to Woman Feminist Center, 2023 E. Colfax. The meeting is the first in a series planned by the Woman to Woman collective, which is inviting feminist groups to hold community meetings at the center. The first part of the Virago meeting will be a discussion of collective process, with the remainder open to community questions and feedback.

Virago has an office at 1135 Ogden, Apt. 9, in Denver, and a P.O. Box 18153. Phone No. is 837-8741.

Celebration of International Women’s Day

by Andrea Gabriel

International Women's Day will be celebrated in Denver, Saturday, March 4th, beginning with a march from Mestizo Park (Curtis Park) at 12:00, rallying at the capitol at 1:00, and meeting for workshops at the Unitarian Church, 14th and Lafayette, at 3:00. Colorado women began planning for the day's events in December, when a call was sent out by the Working Women's Action Group, women who worked on last year's International Women's Day Celebration. We have been meeting each Tuesday evening at 202 Broadway (Broadway Assistance Center) and will meet there on the Tuesday following the celebration (March 7th) at 7:00 p.m. to evaluate the Saturday events and the process involved in planning them.

Speakers for the rally are for the most part, women who have been actively involved in planning for International Women's Day, among them Beki Pastor, Phyllis Kadison, Tsehai Habte-Mariam, Diane Scheeler, Lori Bradford, and Irene Gutierrez.

The planning group will also be conducting the workshops at the church with the hope of mobilizing Coloradans around the major issues confronting us as women. Workshops will be held around Workplace Organizing, Welfare Degradation, Deportations, Violence Against Women, Lesbian/Heterosexual Unity, National Liberation, Ageism, Disabled Women, Psychiatric Assault, Legislation (equal rights, affirmative action, protective legislation), and Women in Prisons. Literature will be available on grand jury abuse, Nestlé and J.P. Stevens boycotts, alternative health programs, and other issues around which Coloradans are mobilizing. Films such as "Bottle Babies" and "Testimony - Justice vs. J.P. Stevens," will be shown concurrent with workshops for those who have not seen them previously. The new film, “Like a Rose," will be shown at the end of the day's activities if a print is available by then. It is a film made by Sheila Barrett-Page about women in prisons.

Childcare and cooking for International Women's Day events is being done by men who have been supportive throughout the planning stages by doing childcare and discussing concerns. A children's van will accompany the march and childcare and food will be available all afternoon and evening at the church.

International Women's Day is traditionally a time when the issues of women are dramatized in order to mobilize wide support for women's emancipation among all groups who are struggling for revolutionary change.

Peg Avril 1/LNS

In the United States, it has been primarily white women who have been active in specifically feminist causes. In International Women's Day, they are helped in broadening their concerns to include those whose needs as women are sometimes not dealt with because their oppression as members of minority communities isolates them somewhat from organized activities of white women, even those who work side by side with them in factories, offices, hospitals, restaurants, and schools.

The issues and slogans selected by the International Women's Day Planning Committee (reproduced below as they appear on the leaflet) reflect hope that genuine unity can be built in the movement. This unity is based on respect for the special concerns of all working-class women, including our sisters in other parts of the world and those with whom we are not in touch on a daily basis.

Most of us who have been planning for International Women's Day feel that we are learning to work with each other seriously and are dealing with the problems that come up among us in constructive ways. We are building a force that will have to be taken seriously in Colorado. We are eager to communicate with women in other parts of the country who share our sense of urgency about building a women's movement that is truly linked with the masses of poor and working people.

We feel unity with the thousands of garment and textile workers who first marched in New York City in 1908 demanding an end to the oppressive conditions of their lives, and we feel unity with the thousands of Russian women who demonstrated on International Women's Day in Petrograd, heralding the inception of the Russian revolution. But most of all we feel unity with our sisters here in Denver who have not yet joined us in celebrating International Women's Day, those who are working in the sausage factories and recycling mills at $2.65 per hour, those who are living in fear of being deported to Mexico or being separated from their husbands or children. We feel unity with those who cannot keep their jobs or work effectively in unions because of lack of adequate childcare, with young lesbians who fear being “found out" by parents, friends, teachers, or employers, women who have been raped and haven't discovered a way to fight back, women who have been trapped in unwanted pregnancies, and women who have been sterilized unknowingly without being informed of their rights. To these women, we pledge our renewed commitment as a result of our coming together on this day. We pledge to deepen our understanding of each other's problems and of the ways we can organize collectively to build our movement.

International Women's Day demands:

Fight Welfare Degradation and Cutbacks! Welfare is one means the government uses to control the poor. Funds are provided for forced sterilization, but not abortions, daycare, or job skill training. Therefore women are unable to become self-supporting. The invasion of privacy is insulting and humiliating as well as a method to control the poor who have a high potential of rebellion within the present system of government.

Stop Deportation of Undocumented Workers: Open Borders for all Working People! Trying to stop the growing unity between the Mexican and Chicano communities, la Migra has stepped up its deportation of undocumented Mexican workers. U.S. corporation takeovers in Mexico force workers to migrate North, where these workers are made the scapegoat for our economic crisis. Women, children, and men suffer at the hands of la Migra. The crimes against the women take on the most vile forms of racism and sexism—separation from their children. 

MORE ON PAGE 10