Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 3

Mother’s Lover Fights For Custody

Cheryl

In a new area of lesbians' battles for child custody rights, Donna Levy has been fighting in Denver Juvenile Court since October, 1976, to obtain custody of the daughter of her deceased lover, Jeanette Hatzapoulos. Donna and Jeanette jointly raised Betty (not the child's real name), who is now 7 years old, and both women are looked upon as mothers by the girl.

Jeanette's sister and brother-in-law, Lois and Gil Lucero, are also seeking to gain custody of Jeanette's daughter.

Currently, although the Judge said that Donna "...in the long range is the preferable custodian," the Luceros have temporary custody of Betty. On June 23rd, Judge Orelle Weeks will make a more permanent custody order.

Meanwhile, Donna is having to bear steep financial costs. A defense fund is being set up to raise money to pay some of her legal bills and to prepare for further court battles if necessary. If you are interested in working on the defense fund or can contribute time or money, write Donna Levy at 2211 Newport, Denver.

Donna and Jeanette met and became lovers 15 years ago in their hometown, Denver. Donna was 19 and Jeanette 23. About 8 years ago, Jeanette slept with a man with the hope of getting pregnant. Donna especially loved kids but was unable to have any. Jeanette and Donna, who were living in Los Angeles at the time, decided that they would raise this child together. Jeanette took care of Betty during the day, and Donna took over her care when she got home from work. In 1973, the two women and "their" child moved back to Denver, in part so that Betty could get to know both Jeanette's and Donna's families.

As it turned out, Betty spent more time with Donna's family. Jeanette did not get along well with her family and didn't spend much time with them.

In 1974, Donna and Jeanette split up, with Betty staying with her biological mother. Nonetheless, Donna maintained a strong relationship with Betty, taking her on her days off, and seeing her often during the week. Donna, who is a bus driver for RTD, would often let Betty ride the bus with her after school hours.

Then last July 5th, Jeanette committed suicide. Donna, besides having to deal with the shock of Jeanette's death, had to plan what was best for Betty.

Donna and Jeanette's mother, Mrs. Martinez, made a verbal agreement. Betty could stay with Lois and Gil Lucero and Mrs. Martinez on a temporary basis while Donna worked. Betty would stay with Donna on her days off. Donna thought it might be easier for Betty to be around her cousin Leslie and other children, and that it might prove some solace for Jeanette's family to be around her daughter.

This arrangement worked for only a couple of weeks. One day when Donna went over to pick up Betty, Mr. Lucero said that Donna and Betty were "too close" and that Betty needed a father figure in her life. They were not going to let Donna take Betty. Donna, not wanting to further upset Betty by fighting over her, left her with the Luceros and consulted an attorney.

In the ensuing legal battle, the case wound up in Juvenile Court in front of Judge Weeks. The court appointed Donald Wasko as the guardian ad litem, who is supposed to represent the “interests of the child" before the court. Donna and her attorney, Gerald Gerash, worked to show the deep bond of love and caring which exists between Donna and Betty, very much a relationship between a child and its mother. Donna has been constantly in Betty's life and is her "psychological mother."

Lois and Gil Lucero portrayed themselves as the happy nuclear family, who, as relatives of Betty's, of Mrs. Lucero's previous marriage, only two years older than Betty, could give Betty the most love and the best home.

Jeanette had left a suicide note, asking Donna to take care of Betty. Unfortunately, the note accidentally got destroyed. Donna had had no reason to suspect that anyone would try to separate her and Betty. Donna and Lois have known each other since Lois was twelve. Mrs. Martinez had recognized the importance of Donna in Betty's life. When Jeanette's body had been found, Mrs. Martinez had called Donna at her job and asked her to come home because "Betty needed her." Now Lois and her husband and Mrs. Martinez all have become Donna's legal opponents.

The legal battle pivots around what the court decides will be in the "best interests" of Betty. Gerald Gerash filed a motion asking for full psychological studies of everyone involved, especially the adults' relationships with Betty. There were some problems over even this relatively simple request, with the guardian, who is supposed to represent the child, opposing that motion. He ended up resigning and a new guardian was subsequently appointed. The court did order a psychological assessment be made of Betty. Eventually, several different professionals and the new guardian interviewed Donna, Lois, Donna and Betty, and Lois and Betty. As is the way of courts and professionals, not all of the psychological evaluations jibed. Linda Pitt, who interviewed the Luceros for the court, described them as a "loving family." The first guardian, Donald Wasko, interviewed Donna and Betty, then Lois and Betty. He said that Donna and Betty loved each other, but that the Lucero family was a better situation.

In contrast to those statements is one by Pat Aperson, who interviewed Donna. Pat, who worked for over ten years evaluating prospective adoptive parents, said that Donna was in the top 5% in terms of parental qualifications. In her written report, she considered "...it most likely to be detrimental to the emotional health of this youngster to lose not only her natural mother but also the relationship with an individual who represents to her a second parent with whom she is deeply involved." In an addendum to that report, she expressed concern over the length of time and the completeness of the separation between Donna and Betty.

Dr. Rabin, of Children's Hospital, who assessed Betty, the new guardian ad litem, and Linda Pitt of Social Services all agreed that the Luceros couldn't adequately grieve for the loss of Jeanette and couldn't help Betty go through that very important process. They all recommended that Donna must be allowed to see Betty and to help Betty grieve for the loss of her mother, that to repress the grieving process can lead to severe psychological problems.

The Luceros were not admitting that it was a problem.

Very little has been made of the fact that Donna and Jeanette were lovers, but recently a racist note has been introduced into the case. Jeanette was Chicana and Donna is Black. It appears that the Luceros are trying to sway Betty away from Donna by stressing that Donna is Black and Betty is not. This is a new concern for the child, one never before cited in making her temporary custody decision.

More on Page 14

Chicana Lesbian Locked Up Again

Deborah Taylor

Cecilia Gonzales is a 21-year-old Chicana lesbian who escaped from the Colorado State Mental Hospital in Pueblo in May 1976. She fled to San Francisco and was arrested there on escape charges in July. She was released on bail and has been fighting extradition back to Colorado ever since. On February 28th, 1977, the California Governor's Office finally announced that they were sending her back on March 24th. They made this decision without granting her a hearing.

In 1973, Cecilia was arrested in Colorado in connection with a shooting incident. Seventeen at the time, she pled not guilty by reason of insanity to a charge of first-degree murder (a murder which she did not commit - see Jan-Feb. issue of BMR). The woman she was lovers with at that time was also involved in the shooting, and Cecilia took the blame because she felt that she was better able to cope with imprisonment than her lover.

Cecilia was never brought to trial because of her plea of insanity. Instead, she was evaluated at Denver General Hospital for a month. A psychiatrist testified that she was insane and the Judge sentenced her to an indefinite commitment to a state mental hospital.

Prior to her sentencing, Cecilia had spent five months in isolation in a Colorado jail. When she escaped last May, she had already served two and one-half years of the indefinite sentence in the hospital. All of her attempts to get a court hearing so that she could be released had failed.

As an open lesbian, Cecilia was verbally and physically harassed, forcibly drugged, and put in seclusion because she refused to change who she was. Frustrated in all her attempts to legally leave the hospital, she finally escaped and went to San Francisco where, as she put it, "There is a strong gay community and I can be who I am."

Cecilia lived in San Francisco for ten months. During that time she had good jobs, made many friends, and lived a stable, happy life. Recently she had been awarded a $1400 grant to go to school and learn a trade.

Cecilia established a community of support in San Francisco. A wide variety of groups and individuals have written letters on her behalf to the Governor's Office - gay groups, women's groups, Third World groups, mental health groups, prison groups, the Human Rights Commission, and even the Mayor's Office of San Francisco. A psychiatrist wrote a strong letter in her support saying that she is sane and does not belong in a mental hospital.

Her lawyers have written long briefs to the Governor's Office and have done an amazing amount of work generating support for her case. A petition demanding her release from incarceration in the mental hospital was circulated in San Francisco in March and within a week more than 500 people had signed it.

Cecilia has waited since last July for a hearing with Governor Brown and his extradition secretary, who decide whether or not to extradite people who are wanted by another state. All the letters of support delayed the extradition process.

But in the end, the legal process was not deterred and by the time you read this, Cecilia will have been returned to a hospital in Colorado.

Already feminist lawyers in Denver are working to prepare a defense against the escape charges and to get her released when she returns to Colorado. They are working with the Public Defenders Office in Trinidad, Colo. where she was originally sentenced.

The escape charges could result in a possible felony conviction. However, it is possible the charges will be dropped in order to avoid the expense of a trial, especially since it could be said she was “insane" when she escaped. If the state is going to try her on these escape charges, her arraignment will take place within a few weeks.

No matter what happens with the escape charges, however, it will take months to schedule a hearing for her release from the hospital. Her lawyers will file a petition for her release but then the State Mental Health Authorities will have a period of time to respond which is usually several months.

It is clear that Cecilia is sane and does not belong in a mental hospital. Letters of support and money for her defense can be mailed to the Cecilia Gonzales Defense Committee c/o Deborah Taylor, 1458 Gaylord St, Denver, Colo. 80206.