be

Women’s Work = Unfreedom.  
Challenging the Stereotypes,

“Most women in lunatic asylums are

there for domestic trouble,

from overwork, from inability to earn a living, or from the fear they

may be unable to do so in the future.”

The following concludes an article  
on the topic of Women and Work begun  
in last month's issue of Big Mama Rag.

Vicki Piotter

It is a very small number of women  
who enjoy, who do not actually dread  
the sound of their alarm clock get-  
ting them up and dressed, making that  
cup of coffee which will get them to  
another day of work. Ask ten women,  
and eight will tell you that it's the  
coffee breaks, and not what they do  
to earn their living, that is the  
most pleasant aspect about their work  
day.

Very few women smile on the way to  
their jobs; the reasons are many. It  
could be they are having trouble at  
home, that they are overworked, that  
no matter how hard they work, they  
are unable to earn a decent living,  
or “from the fear they may be unable  
to do so in the future." Notice women  
walking into a downtown office build-  
ing, the ones who are smiling and the  
majority who are not, and figure out  
where they fall under the ridiculous  
practice of our system of Capitalism  
that pays workers more money in pro-  
portion as work becomes more interest-  
ing and challenging, and less money  
in proportion as work becomes disa-  
greeable and mindrotting.

Women suffer acutely from this par-  
adox, as the statistics showed in  
the article on women and work in last  
month's Big Mama Rag. There are a few  
who manage to escape and take their  
place among the men who set, rather  
than meet production schedules, who  
exercise authority rather than be sub-  
jected to it, and who, in fact, live  
happily for their work, not in spite  
of it. The examples of the “new woman"  
who skillfully combines a challenging  
career with a fulfilling home life is  
passed off as examples of feminism in  
action. This could not be more wrong.

Talking about women and work last  
month, it was shown that despite all  
the media reportage that the reasons  
women are working is for the sole pur-  
pose of “self-fulfillment,” the truth,  
when asking the women who enter the  
office buildings and factories, is  
that most work for women is servitude.  
It is work done for the benefit (pro-  
fit) of employers and is not an act-  
ivity that is an expression of our  
own needs and something that we would  
choose to do for its own sake. We  
work because we have to pay rent and  
buy food, and we work wherever we can.

The idea that college and a good  
education will enable women, as a  
group, to move up and get in on “the  
good life" was shown to be false. As  
women, we are becoming more suspic-  
ious of the success models presented  
to us and are finding the tokenism  
of the "new woman" painful, partic-  
ularly if we happen to work under  
such a new woman boss; if change for  
women means the opportunity to take  
orders, or have our paltry paychecks  
signed by a female, rather than from  
a male, why bother?

Women are coming to the realization  
that the "new woman"— slick, yet  
smart and serious in her pursuit of  
a "career" as opposed to dragging her-  
self to a job— is just as oppressive  
a role model, and even more unreal-  
istic, than that of the dedicated  
housewife or centerfold pin-up. But  
we are coming to it slowly.

A Question of Power

As we sit in our cubicles at our  
machines, or stand for eight hours  
over a continually moving belt, it  
sinks in the incredible amount of  

Virginia Penny, Think and Act, 1869

power employers have over our lives.  
That power goes beyond our time done  
at the workplace and invades our day  
to day living away from work so that  
our “free” time isn't free at all.  
Our jobs can dictate where we live,  
if we are able to find child care,  
the clothes we buy, and our jobs can  
make us physically sick, whether it  
be from dangerous fumes and noise  
levels, inadequate lighting, our work  
places too hot or too cold, or just  
standing and sitting too long a time  
in uncomfortable positions. It's sad,  
but true, that we spend a lot of our  
"free" time just trying to keep heal-  
thy enough in order to go to the job  
that makes us ill in the first place.

The fact that women are allowed to  
work in only a few job areas means  
that there are more of us than there  
are jobs made available to us, and  
our “bargaining” power is almost non-  
existent. Employers constantly use  
their economic power to hire or fire  
us as a way of coercing us into doing  
many things; the threat of losing our  
job is constantly over our heads. The  
simple refusal of a woman to give her  
boss a blow-job behind his desk or  
behind the stacks, or after working  
hours during her "free" time, can  
find her looking through the want ads  
the very next day. When women demand  
more money, we are threatened with  
"technology"— corporations have made  
it known that the tasks performed by  
secretaries can now be performed by  
computers; another way to keep us in  
line. Who has heard of a computer de-  
manding a decent living wage, better  
working conditions, calling in sick,  
or attending an organizing meeting?  
In addition, the technologists are  
undoubtedly working on a machine that  
can do a blow-job, with the only co-  
ercion being the push of a button.

The fact that we go work at jobs  
we hate that offer little reward,  
economic or otherwise, makes us cry  
out at the powerlessness that appears  
to encompass our daily reality. But  
we don't cry out too loud, because  
our powerlessness would double without  
those jobs. Working against our own  
interests is something we have learned  
to accept as a fact of life, as some-  
thing that always has been and always  
will be: "if you gotta eat, you gotta  
eat, and if you gotta eat, you gotta  
work."

Sometimes it seems the only escape  
is to hook up with a millionaire,  
strike oil in our back yards, or write  
a best seller. But, how many million-  
aires do we know, other than the hid-  
den ones we may work for, how many of  
us own our back yards, let alone have  
one, and the best seller, well, maybe  
too many of us are still working on  
it. These are obviously pipe-dream  
avenues for most of us in wanting out  
of our situations of employment.  
Judy, in the group discussion we had  
around women and work, said, “It's to  
the point with me that instead of  
searching for something that's really  
wonderful and appealing and totally  
encompassing, I'm looking for work  
that takes the least amount of pain  
for the most amount of money."

Yet, many of us still want to be-  
lieve in that other pipe-dream ex-  
ample of the “new woman" because she  
appears more accessible to us as a  
life choice. (Isn't she on the cover  
of Ms., Redbook, Essence, TV Guide,  
The National Enquirer and Working  
Woman with regularity?) She is a nat-  
ural for women's aspirations because  
she doesn't have to do “women's work“  
and we have all been led to believe  
that “women's work" is nothing but  
a dead end and offers no future but  
more of the same that drives us hun-  
gry and crazy in the first place.

Self-Worth

In talking to each other at BMR  
about work and expectations, the ideas  
of "success," "failure," “better,”  
and “meaningful" kept coming up in  
our descriptions of the kinds of  
jobs we have had and our feelings a-  
bout what we had one day hoped to  
have.

Connie said, "I'm still not comfort-  
able with calling myself a secretary.  
I have to get away from this whole  
idea that one thing is better than the  
other.”

Fran was also uncomfortable with  
identifying herself with a traditional  
woman's job. "I don’t tell people I'm  
a teacher. I don't feel very good a-  
bout that and never have. I remember  
once I went into a department store  
and was trying on clothes and the  
clerk said, ‘you must be a teacher’,  
and I thought, ‘oh, how did she know?!  
I didn't want her to think I looked  
like a teacher, and it really bother-  
ed me."

Sue talked about the idea of the  
respect and prestige women receive  
who have degrees. "Sometimes I think  
I would get all this prestige if I  
had a degree. There would be more  
respect for me in the community if I  
was a lawyer, because lawyers are so  
necessary to us in so many ways. I'm  
fairly satisfied with myself for being  
a bus driver, but I still sometimes  
have crushing moments of doubt. Plus,  
there is a comfort behind saying, 'I  
could be a lawyer if I really wanted  
to."

Vicki commented that she has gotten  
more respect and enthusiasm for being  
a warehouse worker than for being a  
clerical worker, "even though my cler-  
ical work was more demanding and tap-  
ped more of my skills as far as organ-  
izing and relating to all kinds of  
people."

The amount of money that is paid,  
who it is that does the work, and  
whether we “own" it or work for it  
are three things that dictate what  
work gets respect and what doesn't  
get the slightest recognition. Even  
women who are actively challenging  
society's dictations as to the rewards  
we do or do not receive for our work,  
have created standards for women as  
to what is "good" and what is not so  
good. Women who work in non-tradition-  
al jobs, such as warehousing or car-  
pentry have been singled out as ex-  
ceptional women, doing battle for the  
cause of women every day they go to  
work. It's true that women in the  
trades are the exception, rather than  
the rule, and that the obstacles they  
face on the job are painful and infur-  
iating. However, there is a danger in  
granting non-traditional jobs more  
respect than the "service" type jobs  
most women are confined to, which are  
equally infuriating and painful, only  
differently. Placing a higher value  

on non-traditional work for women  

buys into the very values that need  

to be fought against— that our worth  
as women is directly connected to  
“male“ work and our worth can be meas-  
ured by the size of our paychecks.  
This helps to keep us away from rec-  
ognizing the root of the problems  
faced by working women.

It's dangerous for us to believe  
that women's lives can be "revolution-  
ized" by the few chunks that fall  
from the stone wall blocking our en-  
trance into non-traditional jobs; some  
women are finding the answer to the  
predicament of being a woman in need  
of work in the good pay of the skilled  
trades. However, that number is small,  
not because the majority of women  
haven't come to this realization, but  
because the corporations have let it  
be known that they are not willing to  
absorb any more women into non-tradi-  
tional jobs. Only a fight more major  
than we care to think about will con-  
vince them otherwise.

Another seeming solution to the pro-  
blems faced by working women gets  
more respect than fighting it out on  
the workfront— that of becoming our  
own boss. More women are being told  
to try and save enough money to go  
into business for themselves, whether  
it be operating a restaurant or run-  
ning a painting service, to escape  
the trappings of wage labor, and, per-  
haps, not only be their own boss, but  
other people's boss as well. It sounds  
ideal (isn't it easier having to worry  
about "how to socialize with subordin-  
ates," as a recent article in a major  
magazine recently expressed it, rather  
than worrying about how not to kill  
your boss the next time he rudely or-  
ders you around?) But, again, this  
solution is open to a very small num-  
ber of women. The amount of money