6  
Continued From Preceding Page  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 5  

in the good ole summer time  

Midwest  

form should send tapes. "We are interested in coming in contact with femi-  
nist musicians who we haven't had the opportunity to become familiar with.  
Any woman who'd like to perform in the upcoming festival should send a tape  
of her music to the address below. We realize the quality of tapes fluctu-  
ates with the equipment available. We also plan on incorporating workshops  
into this year's festival--any woman interested in facilitating a workshop,  
please contact us (workshops are not limited to music, production, sound,  
etc.)" Information on directions and schedules will be furnished upon re-  
quest. WWTMC, 1501 Lyons, Mt. Pleasant, Michigan 48858  

MAIDEN ROCK, A WOMEN'S LEARNING INSTITUTE developed by a group of Minnesota  
feminists, will hold its second annual summer session on its Wisconsin farm.  
The summer program will include one to five week sessions and weekend work-  
shops (July 18-August 19). Women attending these programs may want to ar-  
range for independent study credits through home institutions.  

"Because we believe that significant learning proceeds from the inside out,  
we will explore self-identity and our female heritage through non-hierarch-  
ical and personalized learning. Emphasis will be on teaching ourselves new  
skills and upon rediscovering unrecognized woman-ability. Topics of focus  
and study will include collective theory and practice, feminism compared to  
other 20th century political and social movements, myths and rituals, commu-  
nications and women's language, oral history, art history. Activities will  
include athletics, journal keeping, gardening, construction skills, personal  
growth groups."  

For more information write or call: Maiden Rock, Women's Learning Insti-  
tute, Box 8546, Minneapolis, Minn, 55408, (612) 822-2241. The Maiden Rock  
Collective: Jean Eckerly, Adalaide Morris, Toni McNaron, Linda Stripe, Sue  
Wilson, and Connie Wolfe.  

THE FOURTH NATIONAL WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL will be June 28-July 3, in Urbana,  
Illinois. There will be daytime workshops taught by experienced women in all  
areas of music-making and production. “The festival is a time for sharing  
skills and information as well as experiencing fine feminist music," says  
Mary Van Horn, one of the organizers.  

“Interest in the festival is growing and we're seeing more women who've at-  
tended our festivals tackling kinds of music in which women have always been  
underrepresented. Such varied musical styles as jazz, folk, protest, Afro-  
American, classical, and rock material have been represented at the festival.  
There has also been an instrumental concert at each of the past two years'  
festivals.  

Workshop leaders and performers have included such people as Melissa Man-  
chester; Victoria Spivey, blues great who died shortly after her last public  
performance at the festival; Holly Near, singer-songwriter once active in the  
anti-war movement and now active in the women's movement; Judy Roberts, well  
known jazz pianist; Ella Jenkins, singer of children's and black ethnic  
songs; and many others less well known to a national audience but equally  
gifted.  

Festival attendance may be arranged on a full week or daily basis. Last  
year's admission price was $20.00 for the week which included seven concerts  
and unlimited workshop attendance. Extra benefits include day-care for  
children and access to low-cost housing arranged by Festival workers with  
community people and in University of Illinois residence halls.  

Women work in all roles at the festival, including running the sound and  
lighting systems, leading the workshops, and organizing the festival itself.  
This way, a great number of women can have the valuable experiences that can  
set them thinking seriously about pursuing, or continuing, a career in music.  
All concerts and workshops are open to the public. Both women and men are  
encouraged to share in the spirit as listeners and learners.  

Confirmed performers are Malvina Reynolds, renowned activist song-writer  
now in her 76th year; Margie Adam, young feminist songwriter/pianist who has  
just released her first album; Kathy Kahn, author of the widely acclaimed  
book Yizbilly Women and a singer of mountain music. Many other performers  
are pending. All those interested in attending or desirous of more informa-  
tion are urged to contact the National Women's Music Festival at PO Box 2721,  
Sta. A, Champaign, IL 61802, 217-333-6443, or 217-367-9410.  

SAGARIS, A MULTIRACIAL FEMINIST POLITICAL THEORY AND ORGANIZING SCHOOL will  
offer four two-week sessions.  

The faculty will include Ntozake Shange (author of For Colored Girls Who  
Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow is Enuf), Susan Rennie (co-author  
of the New Women's Survival Sourcebook), Margaret Sloan (co-founder of the  
National Black Feminist Organization), Judy Grahn (author of the  
Woman Poem), and Carolyn Reed (chairperson New York State Coalition of  
Household Workers).  
June 26-July 9, Session 1  
July 10-July 23, Session 11  
July 24-Aug 6, Session 111  

Common  

Racism/Sexism and Classism  
Group Processes and the Dynamics of Organizing  
Women and Economics: Future Visions and Everyday Realities  
Aug 7-Aug 20, Session IV Art & Politics  

Lyman Lodge on Lake Minnetonka, 20 minutes outside of Minneapolis, will  
be the location of the four sessions.  

Information and application forms are available from: Corwin, PO Box 464,  
East Setauket, NY 11733  

Southwest  

LEARN ABOUT ORGANIC FARMING. An organic women's farm in central Texas hill  
country needs several interns this summer. One, two or three week stays.  
Transportation costs could be subsidized for poor students. Beginner class-  

es in organic methods of gardening and living, truck driving and music will be  
mixed with whatever you can teach us. We will also trade Sat-Sun camping  
space for a few hours labor, any kind. Will teach/learn. Weekly stays by  

prearrangement. Write for information. Abigail or Carla, Rt. 2, C  
Bertram, TX 78605.  

NOURISHING SPACE is 160 acres of women's space thirty miles southwest of  
Tucson, Arizona. (Children are OK, but no men, please.) It is a place  
where women come to develop new skills for self-support and desert survival,  
and come to be with each other and the land and re-energize.  

The underlying assumption is that any woman who goes there wants to  
learn more about herself and self-nourishment, both physical and mental.  
There will be workshops this summer on solar energy, beekeeping, massage,  
nutrition, etc. Currently, there are eight women staying there in tents  
and A-frames, but the number is continually changing as women pass through.  
Camping is $2/night and the A-frame is available for more. Exceptions are  
made for women who can't afford this. Please call or write before showing  
up: 602-791-7686. Write to Nourishing Space, Box D-11, Vail, Arizona,  
85641.  

West  

OREGON WOMEN’S LAND TRUST (OWL) is a nonprofit land corporation founded to  
acquire land for women and preserve it in perpetuity. They are a diverse  
group of women--mothers, carpenters, electricians, healers, lesbians,  
secretaries, teachers, students, etc. They are all convinced of the im-  
portance of land as a resource for the women's community as a whole. OWL  
is attempting to acquire land collectively and provide access to land in as  
many ways as women want it, whether for long term homesteading and farming  
or short term access to recreation and retreat.  

The first land OWL has purchased is a 147 acre piece of land in southern  
Oregon, now called the OWL farm. For more information write Oregon Women's  
Land Trust, P.O. Box 1692, Roseburg, OR 97470.  

CALIFIA COMMUNITY 1977 will consist of three, one week sessions at Camp de  
Benneville in the Angeles National Forest near Redlands. Califia Community  
is a total feminist environment in which women are able to explore, examine  
and educate themselves on all aspects of their lives. Each participant  
shares the childcare, cooking and necessary maintenance chores, and the part-  
icipants are the teachers.  

The sessions will run June 24-July 1, July 15-July 22, and Aug 1-Aug 8.  
Fees are $75 regular, $50 low income and $25 children. The fees include room  
and board and the cost of printing, publicity and insurance. A $10 nonre-  
fundable deposit is necessary to pay publicity costs and for a down payment  
for the facilities. Women who are underemployed, unemployed, or on welfare  

are urged to write the Califia Collective so that an equitable lower fee can  
be worked out.  

B.r. Sugar Performs in Denver.  

At each session there will be 150 or so women sharing skills and knowledge  
that we all need to grow stronger and more unified as individuals and as sis-  
ters in a movement dedicated to changing the world.  

Califia Community will be a total Feminist political environment, including  
a Children's Community.  
For more information write: PO Box 94, Cardiff, CA 92007.  

Alaska  

KLONDYKES is located on the Chatanika River in Alaska a couple of hours by  
car from Fairbanks and then ten miles of backpacking in, this is a growing  
woman space. From four to thirty women have lived there and/or in Fairbanks,  
working and enjoying the openness, the remoteness and the beauty of Alaska.  

Starting from a base in Fairbanks in a small log house and large tents  
in the yard, the women got 5 acres on the Chatanika River. Summers have  
been spent living on the land in tents, clearing some of it, and building a  
log house and planting gardens.  

No one has yet spent an entire winter on the land. Some return to the  
lower 48 (continental U.S.), some go to the pipeline camps, some live in  
the Fairbanks house and work there. This is an exciting feminist experi-  
ment in survival and self-reliance.  

For information write: Klondykes, c/o off our backs, 1724 20th St. NW,  
Washington, D.C. 20009 (They don't want any more harassment by men.  
(from off our backs)  

Boycott  
BOYCOTT INFORMATION  

THERE IS AN ECONOMIC BOYCOTT OF THE FIFTEEN STATES WHICH HAVE NOT YET RATI-  
FIED THE ERA. PLAN TO VACATION ELSEWHERE THIS SUMMER.  

Thirty-five states have now ratified the ERA, but three more votes are nec-  
essary before 1979. We don't have much time left. The fifteen states are  
mostly in the South, Midwest, and West.  

(213) 622-8818  

Alabama Florida Louisiana Utah Oklahoma  
Arizona Georgia Mississippi Nevada Virginia  
Arkansas Illinois Missouri North Carolina  

If you go to one of these states you might work for the ERA while you are  
there, or after the concert/conference is over.  
Nevada, which has voted down the ERA three times, will be paying the con-  
sequences if a boycott organized by California women has effect.  

California NOW is buying billboard space on highways into Nevada to ask  
drivers to turn back, and is asking members and sympathizers not to visit  
Nevada or buy any of its products.  

(from Sister Courage)  

Information on women's lands comes from an article by Terri Poppe in  
off our backs, March 1977.