hot briefs

No More Boycott

The Infant Formula Action Coalition (INFACT) has called off their boycott against the Nestlé Co., the infant formula manufacturing firm. The campaign against Nestlé had focused on its promotion, marketing and sales of infant formula in developing nations, where unsanitary conditions and nutritional deficiencies made formula a poor - and often deadly - substitute for breastfeeding. INFACT will monitor Nestlé for six months to ensure that they continue to comply with the World Health Organization's infant formula marketing code.

Abuse For Abuse

Fairfield, Calif. Municipal Judge John DeRonde put a 12-year-old girl in solitary confinement for nine days in an unsuccessful attempt to force her to testify against her stepfather, who is accused of abusing her sexually. The girl, her mother and stepfather had all sought counseling after the girl reported that her stepfather had fondled her. The mother also reported the incident to state officials when the counselor told her that such action was required by law. Judge DeRonde not only ordered the girl to jail for refusing to testify, he forbade visits by her mother and refused to allow the girl's lawyer to talk to her in private. Amy still refused to talk. The charges against her stepfather were dropped for lack of evidence.

Office Hazard

In yet another potential office hazard, an Australian study indicates a possible link between fluorescent lighting and a dangerous form of skin cancer called "melanoma." According to the study, the researchers found a doubling in melanoma risk in people who work under fluorescent lights.

While much more research needs to be done in this area, one theory for the greater incidence of melanoma is the qualitative difference in the spectral emissions between fluorescent lighting and sunlight, fluorescent lights emitting a much more jagged spectrum, with peaks somewhat higher than that of sunlight. Another possibility could be the presence in fluorescent lights of longer wavelength UV radiation, which may itself be carcinogenic.

Tamil Activist

Nirmala Nithianandan, a Tamil socialist and feminist writer, has been held in various prisons in Sri Lanka, without trial, since August and her husband were arrested and beaten up and accused of harboring “Tamil boys wanted by the police." Nirmala is internationally known as a feminist activist and has worked with the Black women's movement in America. She translated Latin American poems about the struggle there into Tamil, and used them to illustrate the struggle of the Tamil people. She organized Tamil women in Jaffna against the caste and dowry system. Both Nirmala and her husband helped to organize the publication of political work by the stateless and disenfranchised Tamils of the tea plantations. They and many others are being held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act in Sri Lanka.

Workers Be Aware

The United Freedom Front has issued a communique to all civilians and workers. They state that they will continue to engage in armed attacks on military, police and government installations/personnel and on military contractors and corporations engaged in oppression of the people and exploitation of our resources. Their warnings to civilians and workers include 1) when bomb notice has been received, get out of the building. 2) Make sure your boss has a procedure to notify you and your co-workers of the bomb warning and to evacuate the building. 3) Don't touch any unattended packages, bags, briefcases, suitcases, handbags, boxes, etc.

Guns For Dictators

Customs officials in Miami announced they had captured 12,000 guns they said were bound from Central America, only to discover the guns were Israeli made and bound for Guatemala. Guatemalan dictator Victores admitted the weapons were destined for the Guatemalan army, but didn't explain why they were being shipped through Miami. Israel is Guatemala's major arms supplier, replacing the U.S. when arms shipments were cut off to the dictatorship for human rights violations during the Carter Administration.

Page 6 - Big Mama Rag, February, 1984

Too Emotional

Florida Governor Bob Graham responded to opponents of the death penalty by saying, “It disappoints me that the issue cannot be dealt with on an intellectual basis."

-New Indicator

Rich Get Richer

President Reagan at a press conference: "What I want to see above all is that this country remains a country where someone can always get rich. That's the thing that we have and that must be preserved."