Of ice-

To many people the term psycho-
surgery conjures up the image of a

mad scientist operating in a dark

laboratory or of huddled masses of
people in Nazi concentration camps,
all bearing the horse shoe shaped
scar of the early lobotomies. Many
people also believe that psycho-
surgery is a thing of the past, a
horror of days gone by. But every
year (by conservative estimates) be-
tween 600 and 1000 people in the
United States undergo some form of
psychosurgery, and millions of dol-
lars of federal tax money are going
into studying the feasibility of
large scale psychosurgery as a solu-
tion to the problem of "violence" in
our society.

Psychosurgery, in the form of
frontal and prefrontal lobotomies
was first done on human patients in
1935 by a Portuguese neuropsychiatrist
Dr. Egas Moniz. The operation in-
volved lopping off the prefrontal
and/or frontal lobes of the brain,
the area where emotional and intel-
lectual processes may interact in
high-level thinking and decision
making. The procedure was crude and
nothing was known about its long term
effects. It was not long, however,
before lobotomy was introduced in the
U.S. Two doctors, Walter Freeman and
James W. Watts became pioneers in the
field of lobotomy. Dr. Freeman dev-
eloped a technique for lobotomies
that could be performed in the doc-
tor's office; the ice-pick method.
Freeman would force an ice-pick like
instrument through the skull immed-
iately above the eye into the pre-
frontal lobes of the brain. He would
then manipulate the pick to cut or
separate the bottom sections of the
frontal lobes. Of course, since the
surgeon was operating blindly, he not
only destroyed the target area but
also a good deal of the surrounding
tissue. But despite the fact that
lobotomies were still an unknown
quantity, by the early forties they
were being applied wholesale. Mental
institutions and psychiatric wards
were bulging with people unable to
cope with the social and economic
upheaval caused by World War II as
well as with the thousands of
emotionally broken, battle fatigued
soldiers returning from war. Mass
lobotomies were a cheap and quick
way to subdue people and move them
out of the system. Dr. Freeman
stated that lobotomies "proved to be
the ideal operation for use in crowd-
ed mental hospitals with a shortage
of everything except patients."

To prove how quick and easy the
“ice-pick” method was, Dr. Freeman
traveled the country doing assembly
line operations. In one such incid-
ent, described by William Arnold in
the book Shadowland, Dr. Freeman was
doing a demonstration at a Western
State Hospital in Steilacoom. Accord-
ing to Arnold, "Freeman's new opera-
tion, he claimed, could be administ-
ered as easily as a penicillin shot
and would not even leave a scar. He
said that its potential for control-
ling society's misfits--schizophren-
ics, homosexuals, radicals--was truly
revolutionary and that he already
performed the operation successfully
on a sane person. As he concluded
his briefing, the first woman was
wheeled before him. He put elec-

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No. 3

Picks And Electrodes:

trodes to her temples and gave her
electroshock until she passed out.
Then he lifted her left eyelid and
plunged the ice-pick shaped instru-
ment under her eyeball and into her
brain. Another woman was wheeled be-
fore him and he repeated the proced-
ure, and another and another...(13
women in a row). In a similar incid-
ent at Spencer State Hospital in West
Virginia, Freeman lobotomized thirty-
five women at one time in a test of
what he called "mass surgery." Other
surgeons did as many as fifty lobot-
omies a day.

By the early 1950's, adverse re-
ports on lobotomies were common.
Frontal lobotomies were found to
cause, for example, epilepsy, bizarre
personality changes, ranging from
"invisible inertia" to "perpetual
overactivity," and the reduction of
creativity, sometimes to the vanish-
ing point. About the same time,
powerful tranquilizers had their
dramatic impact on psychiatry.

Tranquilizers were cheaper and easier, so
lobotomy was on its way out as a
“cure,” but not before 50,900 people
had become its victim.

For a period of time psychosurgery
stayed on the back burner, only being
used in "extreme" cases, while
psychiatrists relied on drugs to keep
their patients docile. Research,
however, continued and over the past
few years psychosurgery has been
resurging as a major psychiatric
"treatment."

NEW AND IMPROVED

Research methods and technological
advancements have resulted in scien-
tists attempting to connect specific
functions with smaller and smaller
areas of the brain. Modern day
psychosurgeons no longer indiscrim-
inately whack off the frontal lobes.
Instead, using depth electrodes and
surgical methods which involve
geometric coordinates, they burn or cut
certain areas of the brain, theoret-
ically within one millimeter of a
desired target. They have centered
their attention on the limbic system
located deep inside the brain.

The limbic system is made up of the
cingulum, hippocampus, hypothalamus
and amygdala. These four areas
control most of our social conscience,
memory, sexuality, eating and drink-
ing and waking. Scientists and
psychosurgeons have experimented with
the limbic system by sinking depth
electrodes into various areas, stim-
ulating them one at a time, and not-
ing the response. Both the hypo-
thalamus and the amygdala have pro-
duced rage reactions when stimulated
electronically. This has led re-
searchers to believe that by destroy-
ing certain areas of tissue in the
hypothalamus and/or the amygdala
violent actions by an individual or
groups of individuals can be curtail-
ed. Hypothalamotomies and amygdalot-
omies are performed by the same pro-
cedure used in the research. The
only difference is that instead of
"stimulation" with the charge of
electricity, they just turn the
voltage up and burn out the "offend-
ing” cells.

These new forms of psychosurgery
may reflect advancements in tech-
nology, but the results have been no
less disastrous. For many patients
who have undergone amygdalotomy, the
result has been sluggishness, un-
responsiveness, lack of creativity,
and complete compliance. For others
it has resulted in sudden eruptions
and assaultive outbursts months and
even years after the operation. One
psychiatrist who opposes psychosurg-
ery, Dr. Isidore Ziferstein, is
mindful, stating, "The psychosurgeons focus on a
few cells and claim that with the
availability of sophisticated
instrumentation they ‘can now’ plant
an electrode within a millimeter of
the desired pinpointed area. But
you see, the equipment is more
sophisticated than the knowledge of
what you're about. You may be
impressing people with sophisticated
technology but you really don't
know what you're doing."

BASIC ASSUMPTION: PERMANENCE

Psychosurgical techniques are based
on the assumption that behavior which
is outside the accepted social norm
is caused by defective brain cells.
It ignores any social or economic
reasons for such behavior as aggres-
sion, homosexuality, or political
radicalism. Racism is inherent in
psychosurgical theory as it attempts
to find genetic causes for “unaccept-
able" behavior.

When a person is targeted as a
potential candidate for psycho-
surgery, s/he is first tested for
defective brain waves by means of
the electroencephalogram (EEG). Two
doctors who have been key figures in
the recent American psychosurgery
scene, Dr. Ervin and Dr. Mark, estim-
ate that as many as ten million
Americans are suffering from
“obvious brain disease” and an
additional five million have brains
that have been “subtly damaged."
They use this as an argument for
the institution of a mass screening
program of Americans looking for
“potentially violent” people. But
Dr. Ziferstein argues that many
things can cause abnormal brain waves
in certain areas of the brain.
Childhood injuries can cause "pin-
point" hemorrhages which can result
in damaged cells. Fevers such as
with influenza, measles and other
ailments can also cause slight brain
damage. But there is no conclusive
evidence that such cellular damage
actually causes a person to be
violent or aggressive.

WHO GETS IT?

There are basically four groups of
people in the U.S. who are most
likely to be subjected to some form
of psychosurgery. They are prisoners,
veterans, young people, and persons
incarcerated in mental hospitals.

The majority of psychosurgery victims
are women. Psychosurgery testing
funded by the federal government has
focused largely on women's hormonal
changes throughout the menstrual
cycle and on children and junior
high age people, figuring both groups
to be target populations for
psychosurgery.

Young People

Psychosurgery is being used increas-
ingly on young people as a “cure” for
hyperkinesis (characterized by hyper-
activity). One surgeon, Dr. Orlando
J. Andy of the University of Mississ-
ippi, boasts of doing psychosurgery
on children as young as five years
old to quiet what he calls “hyper-
responsive syndrome." He defines
this as an "erratic, aggressive,
emotionally unstable pattern of
behavior." Dr. Andy sees hyper-
activity as a disorder resulting
directly from "structurally abnormal
brain tissue." The remedy, he
insists, is surgery. Psychosurgery,
he declared, "should be used in the
adolescent and pediatric age group
in order to allow the developing
brain to mature with as normal a
reaction to its environment as poss-
ible." How can a brain have any
normal reactions after parts of it
have been burned out by electric
impulses? The views of Dr. Andy and
his colleagues ignore the fact that
children go through many stages of
development with many changes in
their behavior. So why are children
being victimized by the psychosur-
geons? Surgeons use the rising crime
rate among young people and American
paranoid fear of “random" violence as
a rationalization for such drastic
treatment for children. But the real
reasons are:

1) The cost of institutionalized
care has skyrocketed to a point
where it is now estimated that a
person institutionalized for life
may cost the state between $16,000
and $20,000 per year and

2) Young people form a large group
of people with few or no legal rights
particularly where “medical” treat-
ment is concerned. Permission of
the victim is not required from
children and a young person cannot
refuse psychosurgery once their
parent or guardian has been convinced
by the psychosurgeon that it is
necessary. Thus parents who cannot
afford long term psychiatric care
for their children are often forced
to provide human guinea pigs for the
psychosurgeons to test their new and
unproved theories.

Prisoners

Like young people, prisoners also
form a large group of people with
few legal rights. Naturally, they
too have been targeted to provide
fodder for the surgeons’ experiments.
Though there are laws which allegedly
protect prisoners by not allowing
experimentation on them without
their permission, getting such per-
mission is often made easier by the
promise of early parole, or parole
at all. In 39 states some form of
indeterminate sentencing is used.
This means that, as in California
for example, a person can be sen-
tenced to "one-to-life." Eligibility
for and the granting of parole is
determined by a board of people who
review the prisoner's record as sub-

mitted by the staff. Agreeing to
undergo psychosurgery is seen by
parole boards as a sign that the
prisoner is trying to help herself.
In California, psychosurgery of
prisoners has been documented in at
least three major institutions,
Vacaville Medical Facility (a prison),
Atascadero State Hospital (a maximum
security prison) and Camarillo State
Hospital. Dr. L.A. Swan, a Fisk
University sociologist, believes
that at least fifty psychosurgical
operations were performed in 1975
at the Atmore State Prison in
Birmingham, Alabama. Dr. Swan found
that the closest relatives of the
prisoners did not know exactly what
was happening, but they "suspected
that some kind of surgery was being
done." One woman commenting on a
visit with her husband said, "I
went in there and I didn't even know
him, I couldn't tell that this was
my husband. He had become so passive
I couldn't believe it." Dr. Swan
found evidence that those prisoners
who were operated on were politically
active.

There is no way to know how many
prisoners have been used for brain
surgery experiments, but one thing
is clear. Despite the guise of
rehabilitation, prisoners who are
convinced to undergo psychosurgery
are not better “citizens” when they
get out, they are, at best, better
prisoners. But psychosurgeons again
are able to rationalize their atroc-
ities by citing the hysteria of many
Americans about violence and crime.
Playing off the dual myth that most
prisoners are violent and that most
violent people are eventually locked
up, surgeons are able to carry out
their experimentation not only without
much protest, but indeed with
the blessings of many American
citizens.

Veterans

The Veteran's Administration has
openly declared that it uses psycho-
surgery as a treatment procedure and
not as an experimental technique.
Four of the VA hospitals are espec-
ially assigned to this task: In
Durham, North Carolina; Long Beach,
California; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
and Syracuse, New York. The VA
indicated that it considered drug
users and alcoholics as potentially
violent patients and therefore pos-
sible subjects for psychosurgery.
This statement has more than just
surface implications when one is
reminded that the use of many drugs,
including heroin, was not only not
discouraged by the U.S. military in
Vietnam, but there is extensive
documentation that the Thieu-ky
regime and Nixon Administration con-
spired to provide drugs for U.S.
soldiers in Vietnam. The VA also
indicates that a patient could be
subjected against her/his will to
psychosurgery, stating that psychia-
tric patients are not necessarily
capable of judging what is "best"
for them.

Incarcerated Mental Patients
This is another large block of the

population who have no legal rights.
Even in Washington state, where the

Madness Network News/LNS

involuntary commitment law is one of
the toughest in the nation, once a
person has been involuntarily com-
mitted she no longer has any control
over what happens to her. It is
important to remember also that in
many states it is still possible for
people to be involuntarily committed
for such things as homosexuality and
alcoholism. Psychosurgery on mental
patients takes various forms. At
Tulane University, homosexual men are
shown heterosexual pornography while
having the "pleasure centers" of
their brains stimulated by deeply
implanted electrodes. In Philadel-
phia a Black man was subjected to
psychosurgery for heroin addiction.
He subsequently died of a heroin
overdose. In Louisville a thirty
year old woman was lobotomized for
pain "of psychological origin" with-
out being given an opportunity for
psychotherapy. She was blinded by
this operation. In Boston a depres-
sed woman was operated on several
times with "chronically implanted
electrodes" until she refused further
surgery, told her surgeon she never
wanted to see him again, and "expressed
rage” at her psychiatrist as
well. She killed herself the first
chance she got, but the case is
reported as "gratifying" by her
doctors who argue that the woman must
have been recovering from her depres-
sion, otherwise she would not have
had the energy to kill herself. The
application of psychosurgery is no
longer limited to those persons
suspected of being violent, although
that remains a primary rationaliza-
tion. The new "target populations”
include people diagnosed as "neuro-
tics," that is, depressed, anxious,
obsessive and elderly individuals,
the majority of whom are women.

SO HOW COME WE'RE PAYING FOR IT?

The idea of using psychosurgery to
prevent crime and violence received
major impetus during the Nixon Admin-
istration. The Nixon general staff
was determined to sweep away the
“permissiveness” of the sixties, in
which social and economic factors
took center stage as the prime
causes of crime and disquiet. By
pushing the theory that ghetto riot-
ing and anti-war protest was caused
by genetic, hormonal or brain abnor-
malities, the Nixon administration
was able to take focus away from
police brutality, unemployment,
poverty and federally funded agents
provocateur as causes of violence.

In response to the civil disorder
that broke out immediately following
the assassination of Martin Luther
King, Dr. three Harvard professors,
Dr. Sweet, Dr. Mark, and Dr. Ervin
put forward a proposition that riots
and civil disobedience may be sparked
by individuals who had damaged brain
cells. Although this theory was
directly contradicted by Lyndon John-
son's Kerner Commission formed to
study the same riots, Dr. Sweet,
Ervin and Mark nonetheless were award-
ed $500,000 from the National Insti-
tute of Mental Health and $108,000
from the Law