le de noe ees ah se

SOME THOUGHTS ON WOMEN AND
MENTAL HEALTH

by Letcra, 4, Stager

I have been involved in mental health for over two years now. Though I have many criticisms of and disagreements with frequent practices and attitudes in the field, I will restrict this discussion to women—and how their (our) position in this society is constantly reinforced by therapists.

I shall cite a few specific examples of what I am talking about.

A behavior modification program is designed for a female patient. Among the expected behaviors (for which she will earn such "privileges" as eating, smoking cigarettes, going on an outing) are hair setting, bed-making, and wearing make-up. Is hair setting truly an indication of a well-functioning woman? Perhaps to these therapists. Or wearing make-up? I do neither and haven't for years, and consider myself a well-functioning woman. And what about making one's bed? That's another thing I seldom do, and many of my friends seldom do. Our definitions of sick and healthy, normal and abnormal behavior, feelings and needs, must be changed.

Another woman, perhaps between the ages of 17 and 25, enters a hospital in a "post-partum psychotic episode." This is the label assigned to a woman who becomes depressed immediately after giving birth. She may stop eating, stop talking, and perhaps even reject the child she has just birthed. Is this truly sick? Perhaps she is depressed because she suddenly realized that her schooling will end, or that her career is over, or that she is now, for the next 15 years or so, responsible for another human being. Responsible for her/his health, both physical and mental. Perhaps she recognizes that her life is no longer her own, that she is expected to dedicate it to another human being, and pretty much ignore her own needs and longings. And what if she doesn't want to do this? Then she is made to feel guilty by those around her. Made to feel she is inadequate as a woman, as a human being. Women are not expected to spend their lives pursuing their own goals. They are expected to have as their primary goal dedication to another, or two or three (husband, children) human beings. A woman in post-partum depression is usually convinced by her therapist, and perhaps her loved ones (as well as other patients) that it is "sick" of her to have become depressed. That being a mother is the ultimate experience a woman can have. And perhaps so, for some women. But I suspect that if more options were truly open to us, more and more women would choose not to pursue several other avenues, that the rate of post-partum psychosis would decrease.

An older woman, perhaps 55, enters the hospital in deep depression. Her diagnosis is involutional melancholia. Involutional melancholia is described as being distinguished from psychotic depressive reaction in that the depression "is not due to some life experience." Perhaps being a woman and growing old in this society is not considered enough of a "life experience" to cause depression. Perhaps having completed one's positive role in this society, as sex object and mother, should not cause a woman to become depressed. But if a woman grows up thinking, as most women in America do, that her worth, her significance as a human being, depends on her youth, beauty, and charm (her sexual attractiveness) and her function as mother, then certainly when she loses these roles we shouldn't be surprised that she is depressed. Nor should we consider her depression a problem. It is a problem created by the arbitrary expectations placed on women in this society—that they devote their energies to the children and husband, and that they remain young. Their depression is valid and understandable.

And I hope and ache that the depression changes to anger which she will direct where it belongs—not on herself, but on the system. And how is such a woman treated? Few therapists are in touch with, let alone point out to such a patient, that it is not she who is "sick," but the society. Few therapists recognize that it is a sick society that permits people to feel worthless at age 50, or thinks it healthy that a human being live her life vicariously through her husband and children, or that she be subservient for most of her adult life. What frequently happens is that the woman is given electroconvulsive therapy—shock therapy to the layperson. Or she is placed on anti-depressants and put in a therapy group where she is counseled that her life is not over, and it's silly for her to think it is, or for her to want to end it.

Would you want to end yours? Have you known anyone who has or has wanted to? Were you able to get in touch with why? I can. And it makes my blood boil to know that most women today will be depressed, either mildly or severely, and consider it "their problem" and even feel guilty for needing care and being unable to cook and clean for their husbands because of their depression. It makes me angry to know that it will be years before this changes. Years before male therapists start to really understand what it is like to be a woman in this society. Years before women patients stand up and start saying, SCREAMING: NO! I WILL NOT SUBMIT TO THE MYTH!