national

Ignores

ace

-Alliance Against Women's Oppression

It is true that, in the case of divorce, they may experience a fairly dramatic drop in income and standard of living. However, many of these women have the independent property, financial resources, education and skills to live comfortably with or without men. Furthermore, the majority of these women remarry. And when they do, it is generally to men of their class.

In addition, the greatest impact of the affirmative action and special admission programs won through the civil rights struggles of the 1960s has been to increase the access of women of the petit bourgeoisie and some of the upper strata of the working class to middle management, to a number of the professions and to institutions of higher education.

These women are overwhelmingly white; they are not particularly vulnerable to Reagan's social austerity program; and they do not become welfare mothers upon divorce.

Before rushing to “feminize" poverty, a note on the causes of poverty and its principal victims is in order. Poverty is overwhelmingly the problem of the "old poor". The adage "the poor get poorer" identifies the deepening emiseration of the entire lower strata of the working class.

Many hopes and illusions are fostered about the possibility of ending poverty in the US. But poverty is a class condition and is structural to US capitalism. It is the constant companion to members of the least stable of the working class and afflicts men, women and children. A more or less permanent reserve of unemployed or underemployed workers is the by-product of a profit-oriented economy. This is the sector of the population

tions in the economy and by political attacks on the class.

There are, to be sure, millions of women whose lives are shaped by sex-segregated low-paying, low-status jobs; unemployment; and cutbacks in vital social services. But these are not women in general—they are women of the working class. The class exploitation suffered by these women guarantees that they experience women's oppression in a way qualitatively different from women of the owning classes.

Yet even within the working class there are major differences among women. These differences occur between the class that has enjoyed stable economic conditions and a relatively high standard of living and the sector that has been kept on the lowest rungs of the economic ladder. In the US it has been racism, not sexism that has been the main factor determining who falls on which side of this divide. This division within the working class makes all the difference in a woman's standard of living, income, vulnerability to recession, unemployment and poverty, the condition of her neighborhood, the schools her children attend, and her access to decent health care.

Women in the lower strata, especially minority women, have long been forced to seek wage work. In the past, minority women's participation in the labor force has been much higher than that of white women. The lower incomes of minority men required that every able-bodied adult in the family, female and male, look for work, since family survival depended on multiple wage earners. It is the lower strata of the working class, with its high concentration of minority workers, that make up the “working poor".

However, over the years, the odds have gone up that the men of this strata may either be permanently unemployed or incarcerated. Many leave their families because they no longer fulfill the role of male breadwinner. In any case, poverty is the principal source of the enormous social pressure that leads to the disproportionately high rate of divorce among Black families.

In addition, many men and women of this strata continue to be denied the education, training and opportunity to enter the labor market at all. Thus, they are dependent on the "largesse" of the US government to meet their survival needs. Given that the attitude toward the poor ranges from "benign neglect" to outright hostility, this is a precarious existence indeed.

Of course women are affected in a particular way by poverty because of the role they play in childrearing. Since sexism has assigned them principal or sole responsibility for raising children, the meager wages that poor women receive, or the inadequate welfare checks must stretch to sustain the kids as well. These are the factors that have locked portions of the working class into a cycle of poverty that will not be broken short of a major social transformation.

But it is not these women (or men) that the "feminization of poverty" advocates are primarily concerned about. Their main focus is on the "A-listers" of the world—the so-called "nouveau poor"—the women who had become accustomed to economic stability and for whom not having quite enough to make ends meet comes as a rude shock.

Poverty has, in fact, claimed some new victims. Many women who were part of the more stable and comfortable sector of the working class have been caught in the squeeze between two trends. First, over the past 40 years white women's participation in the labor force has risen dramatically to 50%, almost catching up with the 53% of minority women who work. Since World War II the deepening exploitation of the working class has made the two-wage family the norm and the only way to maintain a comfortable standard of living. Entry into the paid labor force has been a double-edged sword. On one hand, it affords women an important measure of economic independence from men. On the other hand, since women's incorporation into the workforce takes place on a discriminatory basis, their substandard wages mean that they face economic hardship if they become the sole support of their families.

Secondly, the increasing instability of the "nuclear family" has meant that more and more women from the stable strata of the working class

MORE ON PAGE 16

The Racial Differential

The differences along racial lines indicate a substantial material differential among working women. For example, in April 1982 the unemployment rate for white men was 7.3% and 7.2% for white women. The rate for Black men was 16.9% and 15.6% for Black women. The overall unemployment rate for Latinos (not available by sex) was 12.3%. The proportion of Black women in “white-collar" work rose from 38% in 1972 to 51% in 1981, while the rate for white women has reached 67%. Simultaneously, while half of all Black women were household workers in 1960, the figure had dropped to 6% in 1981. Latina women still have the heaviest concentration of all women in operative jobs, as dressmakers, assemblers, machine and equipment operators and farm workers.

According to 1980 figures, only 14% of white families were female-headed vs. 47.5% of Black families and 21.8% of Latino families. While in 1981 approximately one-third of all people living within female-headed households fell below the poverty line, 27% of the households headed by white women were in poverty compared with 52.9% of those headed by Black women and 53.2% of those headed by Latina women. In 1981 Black female-headed family income was 60% of white female-headed household income.

In 1979 Black mothers were four times as likely to die at childbirth as white mothers. Blacks were almost three times as likely to die from diseases in early infancy as whites. Infant mortality for Native Americans is 31% greater than for whites, and an estimated 38% of all Native American children suffer from some form of disability or sensory problem by age four.

Big Mama Rag, March 1984 - Page 11