SELF=

After a year of consciousness-raising and unfocused political actions, our group decided to direct its energies towards the Women's Health Movement, which we feel has real revolutionary implications for the whole Feminist Movement. Women have lost the power we once had over our own bodies and been forced into dependency on a male-controlled medical profession motivated by profit. There was a time when women were responsible for the health care of their own families and households and midwives responsible for all gynecological and obstetrical care. Reclaiming control of our bodies from the medical industry, Madison Avenue, and big business is a basic step in gaining control of our lives.

Three women in our group traveled to Los Angeles and San Francisco about the same time and gleaned some information from the women's centers about what was happening in women's health. One of these women went back to L.A. and attended a self-health course which met weekly. She learned the simple procedures; she brought back the experience, some literature, and a dozen speculums; and Colorado Springs had its first self-health session that week. We found that our fears and self-consciousness vanished almost at once with the excitement that came with the first real knowledge about our bodies. We realized why physicians have been reluctant to share their information ($$$) and, more important, we realized we were making a reality out of the slogan "Control of our own bodies."

We have found that what works most effectively for us is to have three sessions with each small group of women (about 6-8 has been maximum). Our first session always begins with a "rap time" when many fears, misconceptions, resentments, and experiences about things like sex, reproduction, and physiology are shared. We find in sharing our experiences that each woman has at some point in her life been mistreated by physicians, and for many it has been a general rule.

One woman we know, having suffered severe cramps for several months, went to her doctor to have her Dalkon shield (IUD) removed. She learned that the device had slipped and that her cervix had dilated. She had been having labor pains for months! (She was led to believe that discomfort was normal in using an IUD.) The irony is that because she knew the cervix would have to be dilated for removal of the device, and because she wanted a non-messy, constant means of birth control besides the pill, she had it removed only as a last resort. Had she been participating in self-health and examining herself on a regular basis, she would have known there was a real problem and would have gone much sooner for help.

Each woman at the first session purchases a packet made up of good factual literature, her own speculum, and the other necessary supplies for self-examination. There are always at least two women present who have been through the recommended three sessions and feel confident about the procedures. These two women demonstrate to the group how to use the speculum and how to give bi-manual (two hands) pelvic examinations and then invite each woman to participate. If for any reason a woman prefers not to take part, of course she needn't do so. So far every woman has been eager for her turn. Seeing your cervix for the first time is a mind-blow! The mystery is gone, and you gain a new liking for your own body.

In the second session most of our anxiety and self-consciousness is gone. We are able to notice more in our examinations (what is a "tipped uterus"? what are the differences in the cervix of a woman who has had children and one who has not? what are the normal changes in color, shape, and size of the cervix?) Rap-time might be discussing the written material distributed the previous week, or any other subject of interest; we have much to learn from each other.

Either the second or third session is a good time to learn breast self-examination, using the step-by-step procedures explained in a handout sheet.

By the third session, women are usually turned on to the political implications of self-health and to the fact that getting to know ourselves may save our lives. We've been killing ourselves with panic abortion methods, going without PAP smears, etc. We hope that women will continue examining themselves on a regular basis from now on. And now many of these women are ready to start new groups, which is how the movement spreads.

The week of October 11-14th a National Self-Health Conference was held in Iowa City in which women from all over the U.S. and even Canada got together to share their questions and knowledge about women's health. We have divided into geographic regions in order to spread self-health to all our sisters in the quickest and most effective way. Women of our region were present from Colorado Springs, Nebraska, and Utah, and we plan to reach out to other states in the coming months.

Women from Self-Health Clinic I in California (the Feminist Women's Health Center in L.A.) were the originators of the national conference and gave us ideas from their own experience over the past two years. We learned skills, saw films, attended workshops, and generally got turned on to the potential of the women's health movement.

We in Colorado Springs are hoping soon to start work in abortion counseling and referral, wider self-health reach-out (to non-feminist women's groups, for example), patient advocacy (i.e. going along with sisters to doctors, hospitals, etc., demanding information, observation, and high standards), and eventually even opening a women’s clinic. We have, in effect, become a women's health collective.

Although we have found one supportive doctor, most physicians are threatened by this movement, and we see several reasons for it. First, of course, they are afraid we'll stop coming to them entirely and they'll no longer get our money. For the most part this isn't true, since one of the main results of self-health is that we get women who show some signs of abnormality to go to a doctor sooner than they might usually go, but equipped with more useful information than they might normally have. A woman in a recent self-health class (her first session) had what the more experienced women immediately felt to be an inflammation of the cervix (bright red instead of pink). She was being treated for a bladder infection by a doctor, but had not been examined internally. (Her medication was not reducing pain, incidentally). So with a sister for support, she went to her doctor again the following...