Released on Bail

Delay Sought in Little Trial

LNS

Linda Fowler

Joanne Little, a 20-year-old
black woman charged with
murder in the death of a guard at
a Beaufort, N.C., jail where she
was a prisoner, has been
hospitalized. Her attorneys have
filed motions for a delay in her
trial.

Joanne was charged with the
August 27, 1974, slaying of
Clarence Alligood, 62, who was
found dead in her cell, naked
from the waist down, stabbed
with an ice pick normally kept in
the desk drawer of the jail. Ms.
Little admits stabbing him in self
defense when he entered her
cell, ice pick in hand, and
attempted to rape her.

Ms. Little was hospitalized in
Raleigh, N.C., from emotional
and physical stress. Her at-
torneys have asked for a ninety
day postponement of the original
April 14 trial date.

They have also asked that the
trial be moved, feeling that pre-
trial publicity in Beaufort and
surrounding counties has been
prejudicial to the case. The day
following the incident, the local
paper carried an editorial
lauding the guard giving his life
in the line of duty and calling the
slaying a “bestial act.”

Jury composition in the coun-
ty is also highly questionable.
The jury list is 95% white males,
with women and blacks having
been systematically excluded.

During the grand jury
proceedings, only two officers
were allowed to testify, and the
medical examiner's testimony
and report — which confirm
Little's story — were not ad-
mitted.

Attorneys for Little’s defense
say the trial will be a difficult
one. Many of Little's supporters
say a fair trial in North Carolina
will be impossible.

For example, vital evidence for
the case has been scattered
among various law enforcement
agencies, making it extremely
difficult for defense attorneys to
locate and examine the material.
Defense requests that evidence
be kept safely in one place have
been denied.

In addition, the defense’s re-
quest for funds to hire an expert
criminologist to investigate the
case has been denied.

“This is a precedent-setting
case in many, many ways,” said
defense attorney Jerry Paul.
“The right of a woman to defend
herself; the right of an indigent
person to have money to conduct
a defense; the rights of
prisoners, to name just a few.”

Joanne Little support groups
active in Boston, Washington
D.C., Chicago and Pittsburgh, as
well as the National Organiza-
tion for Women and a Black radio
station in Washington D.C. are
planning actions around the
trial date. And supporters in
North Carolina are preparing to
petition Governor James
Holshouser, demanding that the
murder charges against Little be
dropped.

Women prisoners at the
Georgia Rehabilitative Center
for Women in Hardwick, Ga. are
also circulating a petition on
Little’s behalf, as well as trying
to raise funds. “Joanne Little is
fighting for her life and we feel
her fears of prejudiced justice,”
the petition says. “What should
be treated as self-defense has
been turned around to look like
‘cold-blooded murder.’”

To date, the request for reloca-
tion of the case has been denied.

On February 26 Ms. Little was
freed on $115,000 bail. Funds
for her defense are still
desperately needed. Any
amount will help. If convicted,
Joanne faces the death penalty!
Send any contributions to:
Joanne Little Defense Fund,
Inc., P.O. Box 1003, Durham,
N.C. 27702.

38 Arrested in Inez
Garcia Demonstration

On March 19, 1974 Inez Gar-
cia was raped and beaten by two
men. Seventeen minutes later,
when she found them, one of the
men, Miguel Jimenez, threw a
knife at her. She shot and killed
him. Louis Castillo, the other
rapist, got away. On October 4,
1974, she was convicted of se-
cond degree murder and
sentenced to five years to life at
California Institution for Women
at Frontera. Her rapist was the
prosecution’s star witness.

SAN FRANCISCO — De-
manding that newly-
inaugurated Governor Edmund
Brown, Jr., pardon or set
reasonable bail for Inez Garcia,
convicted of second degree
murder of one of the men who
raped her, 150 women rallied in
San Francisco's Union Square
February 7 and 38 were arrested
for sitting-in in the State
Building where they vowed to
wait for the governor or his
representative.

One demonstrator, Kathy
Cade, later confronted the
governor as he began to speak at
the California Association of
Newspaper Publishers. Ms.
Cade read the list of demands
which included that Brown “of-
ficially recognize the right of a
woman to defend herself or
another woman against attack”
and that a multi-racial women's
commission be established to
review the convictions of all
women now in prison for murder
or manslaughter.

Brown was non-committal,
saying he would not intervene in
a case now on appeal, that he
didn’t have the right to set bail,
that the Legislature has the
power to change laws and that
he didn’t want a commission.
The only promise he made was
to visit the women’s prisons and
“do the best I can to see the law
is fairly and equitably applied.”

Ms. Garcia told this reporter
that she knew of the women’s
actions in support of her
freedom and she was heartened
that women continue to fight for
her while she is in prison.

The Free Inez Committee,
which organized the demonstra-
tion, earlier had sent the gover-
nor a letter asking to speak with
him or his representative about
the case. The official reply was
that the governor and his
representatives had no time.

The demonstration started
from Union Square at noon on
Friday Feb. 7 and women march-
ed to the State Building, chan-
ting “Stop Rape, Free Inez” and
“Women Have the Right to Fight
— Free Inez Now.”

When no one appeared in the
State Building, the women sat
down to wait. They carried with
them petitions for Inez Garcia’s
freedom, signed by 1,600 per-
sons. After an hour passed, the
police ordered the women to
leave and when 38 refused, the
Tac Squad (riot police now
politely referred to as the Crime
Prevention Unit) entered the
building. The Tac Squad formed
a corridor through which the sit-
inners were passed to the paddy
wagon. Thirty were cited for
trespassing and 8 were booked.

The rest of the demonstrators
cheered on their arrested sisters
and re-grouped outside where
they were informed that Brown
was speaking that day at the
publishers’ convention in the
San Francisco Hilton.

As the demonstrators arrived
at the hotel, the security guards
refused them entrance. The
women came back when the
governor was actually due to
speak and split in five directions
in the hotel lobby. Ms. Cade
reached the podium and read the
demands.

Money assuredly is needed by
the Free Inez Committee and can
be sent to P.O. Box 840,
Berkeley, California 94701.

Joan Robins, Ilene Sapphire/

Sister

Rants & Raves

Making the Denver Scene

Lois Lane

“Take a look at her! Ain’t she beautiful? Ain't she somethin’ else?
Look at them boobs! An’ that ass ... um hum I'd sure like to get
between those legs.” These are typical comments from one of Denver's
best meat markets, the Sportspage.

If you're not familiar with the term, a meat market is a bar or gathering
place where a member of either sex will go with the express intention of
either getting picked up or laid or both.

The Sportspage is the swinging-singles-sardine-canned-meat
market variety. If you like young management trainees from May D&F,
that's the place!

The Great Divide is a very physically casual hip “delicatessen.” From
there you can slip into the Broadway. It swings either way — hip or non-
hip .. . gay or straight but it's definitely sexually male oriented.

If you're under 21, the Brew is a poor substitute for the higher class
meat markets. It seems to be somewhat of a voyeur’s paradise.

The Carriage Inn can fall into the empty sex atmosphere but once in a
while they have some good live music ... occasionally even a woman
performer!

The Oxford Hotel is not a meat market, but the Cruise Room Bar is just
an extension of the main entertainment area. Drinks are prohibitively
expensive. The entertainment is Denver's finest, but you can find the
same thing probably cheaper, at the Folklore Center or Global Village.

Of course, the Folklore Center doesn't serve alcohol. The atmosphere
is enjoyable: a stage, tables and chairs, no waitress, and a good snack
menu. Admission to the coffeehouse is $1.50 on weekends and enter-
tainment is top notch ... lots of local women perform there.

Global Village is about equal in price but the surroundings are un-
comfortably crowded. The performers fall into the same category as the
Folklore Center: local folk performers.

Ebbetts Field is crowded and smoky. Age doesn't matter, but ya’ have
to be over 21 to drink. Although prices (cover and drinks) are prohibitive;
the women entertainers are worth it. Nationally and internationally
known artists play there; however, not many are female.

If you're a jazz buff The Jazz Place is great. Drinks and food are good
and cheap. It’s a family type bar, so don’t hesitate to go there just to talk
‘cause you won't get picked up. I don't see that many lone women there,
but the atmosphere doesn’t seem to be inhibiting.

My Brother's Bar is known for its classical orientation. Its customers
are young liberal types who like heavy discussion. Drinks and food are
good and medium priced.

Three Sisters is not too far, geographically, from Brothers. Sisters has
an openly feminist clientele. The bar is run by one of the owners. If
you're paranoid of your sexuality, meaning if you don't like to see
women dancing slow dances with other women, don't go. It’s a very
pleasant place to drink and talk.

The Satire on Colfax has good Mexican food and a kind of
neighborhood bar atmosphere. Women can go in with other women
and not get hassled. The Jukebox is okay and drinks are cheap.

The Wazee Lounge and Supper Club is new. The food is good and
economically priced. Drinks are fairly priced but not cheap. Women are
welcome, and there is no select crowd that hangs out there. Music is
taped either jazz, the big band sound, or ragtime.

Lastly, a small feminist bar just opened on 23rd and Clay. Ap-
propriately named Ms. J's, they're hoping to have NOW board meetings
in their back room. No dancing here, just some pool tables, a pleasant
jukebox, and good food. The atmosphere is comfortable and drinks
aren't high priced. Go with a group or alone ... no hassle.

Next month: Women’s music on the radio ... is it being aired?

Free Self-Defense Class

Women: Would you like to learn to protect and defend yourself? Your
opportunity is now! The Capitol Hill Storefront will be sponsoring a Rape
Education and Prevention class for women. The course is free and in-
cludes practical self-defense techniques. It is a seven-week class
meeting for two hours per week. Two separate meeting times have
been arranged. For more information and registration call the Capitol
Hill Storefront at 832-3572. That's 832-3572.

The classes will be meeting at St. Philomena (11th and Filmore) from
6 - 8 p.m. beginning Thursday, April 3; and at the Five Points Communi-
ty Center (2855 Tremont) from 1 - 3 p.m. beginning Wednesday, April 9.

If you have any questions, please feel free to call the Storefront,
Carolyn Agosta, Kim Garrett or Officer Dick Alligood would be more
than happy to help you.

From Page 4

We are in need of more news writers and photography contributors.
More activities are happening daily with the movement in Denver. We
do not have an adequate staff of writers to cover stories and would
welcome new talent. Give us a call about this, or about photography.
We need both news photographers, who can cover assignments, and
contributors for a photo page we want to have as a regular feature. For
this page, submit 8 x 10 high contrast photos. We are waiting to hear
from all you writers. Call us at 322-2010. Do it soon!

Food Stamps...

From Page 1

Mulroy Apartments — 3550 W. 13th; Rudy Park — 2825 W.
Holden; Sunset Park - 1865
Larimer Street; Trinity Church —
18th & Broadway; Walsh Manor
— 1790 W. Mosier PL;
Westwood Homes — 770 So.
Federal; Westridge Apartments
— 3550 W. 13th Avenue; and
Williams Street Apts. — 1710
Williams Street.

When you go to the food stamp
office be prepared to wait. You'll
have to fill out an application.
You should take rent receipts,
paycheck stubs for the current
month or the card from
the Employment Office showing
that you are actively looking for
work, receipts for any medical
expenses, school expenses,
loans you have to pay back, child
care expenses, utility receipts.

If you are denied food stamps
you can appeal the decision at a
hearing where you can present
evidence in your own behalf. The
food stamp office has been
known to misinterpret their own
regulations and deny food
stamps to people who actually
qualify for them.