hot briefs

Mass Fascist Attack On Prisoners

A public Report has been issued by the Marion Prisoners' Rights Project--"About A Violent Mass Assault Against Prisoners and Continuing Illegal Punishment And Torture Of The Prison Population at the US Penitentiary at Marion, Illinois." The entire prison was locked down Oct. 27 '83 after a fight between prisoners and guards while the prisoners were being searched on their way to the dining hall--another prisoner had been stabbed to death that day.

Several prisoners were beaten on the night of Oct. 27, and, on Nov. 2-4 prisoners were taken from the Control Unit to the hospital unit for the forcible searches of the rectum, and multiple x-rays on the pretext that a hacksaw blade was hidden somewhere on the unit. The main assault was delayed until the officers from the other prisons could be brought in.

Then, roughly from Nov. 4-7, every prisoner was taken from his cell by a group of officers--no names, helmets, face masks, heavy gloves and boots and carrying 3-foot long clubs fitted with steel beads on the end. These guards beat and brutalized the entire population of the prison, a so-called "security shakedown."

Prisoners were shoved and dragged from their cells naked or in their underwear and handcuffed behind their backs and beaten. The steel beads on the ends of the clubs are designed for jabbing, so that bones and organs are struck within, and bruises on the outside are minimized. Meanwhile all personal property of the prisoners was taken from the cells. Prisoners who protested the beatings of others were more severely beaten and "old scores" were settled. Many were told they would be killed at a later time--threatened with "suicide."

Forced Relocation

The apartheid regime of South Africa will go ahead with the forced removal of about 300 Black families from their homes. The Mogopa Village and plots have been owned for the past 70 years by these families. Now the laws of apartheid have designated this area to be a white zone.

The people of this village will be moved to an area some 65 miles away. Schools and other facilities in Mogopa have already been demolished. An estimated 3.5 million Blacks have been relocated against their will since the early 60's.

For several days after the "shakedown" the prisoners were allowed no showers, no yard, no recreation, no commissary, one or no warm meals, no religious services, no law library, no sick call or medical attention, no movement out of the cells, except for the delayed legal visits. Since Nov. 20th prisoners have been allowed some recreation--to walk up and down the range in front of the cells for 30-60 min., some showers allowed, and some personal property returned. The prisoners have been told there will be no more "contact" visits with their families, limited to 4 one hour visits per month. The prisoners have been fed in their cells since Oct. 27 and the cells are freezing and few blankets and little clothing is available. The law library remains closed--and the prison yard inaccessible. Full strip searches are in effect before & after legal visits. It is clear that the program of intimidation and reprisal was coordinated at a higher level in the Bureau of Prisons, especially bringing in guards from other prisons. If this Nazi-like system of rule and punishment remains in effect the lives of too many are at stake. We must intervene.

Letters demanding a halt to the beatings and an investigation of the prison should be sent to: Norman Carlson, Director-Bureau of Prisons, Wash. D.C. and to Harold Miller, Warden, US Penitentiary, Box 1000, Marion, ILL 62959.

Coping With War

A new way of "coping" with the war in Beirut, Lebanon has been introduced--tranquilizers--and lots of them. A pharmacist in Moslem-held west Beirut says that tranquilizers are selling like hot cakes and another druggist comments--How are they going to calm their nerves if they don't swallow pills? Both Valium and Tranxene can be bought cheaply and legally without a "doctor's prescription."

Gay Guinea Pigs

Hawley Atkinson, the Republican chair of the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors in Arizona, said that he was only being "facetious" when he suggested that “homosexuals and lesbians from San Francisco" be used in medical experiments in place of animals in pounds. Atkinson insisted that his statement did not warrant an apology, but there has been a demand for his removal by the state's Gay and Lesbian communities.

Page 6 - Big Mama Rag, March, 1984

“Good Rape”=Dead Woman

Vanessa Renee Brown was a 23 year old black woman living in Philadelphia, a mother on welfare. She disappeared for three weeks before her body was found in a vacant lot hidden in the weeds. She had been stabbed and strangled and the words "GOOD RAPE" had been carved in her back. The words on her back were clearly visible and chunks of flesh were missing from her shoulder. The killer is free and the message remains--a good rape equals dead women.

Anti-Nuke Arrests

While about 300 demonstrators shouted anti-nuclear slogans in New London, Conn., a half-dozen members of the Ku Klux Klan--all but one wearing white robes and hoods rallied nearby in support of a strong defense. At this "ceremony" for the U.S.'s fourth Trident submarine, guess who got arrested? Right, 33 of the peace protestors were arrested.

Guns For Some

Permission to carry a concealed weapon in Denver, CO is getting harder to get. Under the new policy a review board of 3 police officers goes over each application. Of the 17 permits granted under the new policy 8 were given to former police officers and the rest to private investigators and psychiatrists.

Queer Files

The FBI has admitted that it has 5600 pages of records of its surveillance of gay and lesbian organizations. Dan Siminoski, a gay researcher and journalist has filed a Freedom Of Information Act for all FBI records between 1950 and 1982. At least 13 organizations have been watched during this time including the Mattachine Society, Daughters of Bilitis, National Gay Task Force, One Inc., and Radical Lesbian Feminists.

Once disclosed, the documents will reveal as much about institutional homophobia as about the early history of the gay and lesbian groups involved.

The US invasion and occupation of Grenada are contrary to long term health and social interests of the people. The deportation of over half of Grenada's doctors and dentists has left the island without a single pediatrician. The women's and youth organizations that assisted in local health programs have been disbanded.

-World Magazine