international

america held hostage

in opening up new areas not such a problem in the day 1014  
through educational and organizational work with the maj-  
ority of those in the move- RayGun is just full of surprises, unfortunately none  
peasants, and in consolidat- ment were young and un- are great for us or the rest of the world.  
ing the semi-liberal areas. married. But then people Willie Clark, ole time rancher buddy-god-fearing west-  
Flora, an ex-political started getting married and erner, got RayGun's nod for Jim Boy Watts' job. Clark was  
detainee, told me about her having kids. Childcare was nat'l security advisor, now he'll get $11,000 more per. He  
years in the underground ~ and still is - considered wasn't qualified for that job, now as Sect'y of Interior  
in the city and in the moun- a women's responsibility. he won't be qualified for that but 5 will get you 10 that  
tains, her capture by the The question is now being the rest of the boys will confirm him--anyone making book?  
military and the years she raised on how to free women Last month saw a Righteous RayGun mourning the Korean  
spent in jail with many from childcare responsibility plane that was downed by the Russians over Sakhalin. It  
other political prisoners. so we can remain active in leaked out that many airlines had spy equipment on board §&  

that one of our RC-135 planes had been penetrating that  
particular Russian airspace at the same time the KAL 007  
was flying there. The RC-135 planes are under the thumb of  
the Nat'l Security Agency and are equipped with electronic  
& communications intercept platforms for the purpose of  
intelligence collecting in sensitive high-priority target  
areas. That was hardly murmured by our "free" press.  

RayGun decried the barbarous act of the ramming of the  
explosive truck into the airport barracks in Lebanon,  
killing US Marines & French troops. To show how civilized  
he and the Pentagon boys are, they invaded that very small  
isle of Grenada. Mouthing that they were going to protect  
Americans and thwart "leftist thugs", 1900 Marines & 300  
troops from 6 Caribbean nations intervened in a civil war.  
Gleefully the US found warehouses with stored weapons and  
ammunition. Saying, aghast, that Russia & Cuba planned to  
use Grenada as a base, now America is going to make Gren-  
ada free for democracy.  

Stats are out that US has troops in 121 countries,  
which isn't counting people on ships at sea. Another bet?  
Grenada in the south would balance colonized Puerto Rico  
in the north for a great US base, I'll cover that bet,  
that the war departments would put plenty of weapons &  
ammunition on that land. ANYTHING FOR DEMOCRACY??  

-Jenny Matthews/Spare Rib The friendly folks that brought us LEEA and the Red  
Squads, our "Justice" Dept. is out to protect future gen-  

"We thought equality between political work, but ‘con- erations. It plans an Early Identification of the Chronic  
men and women had been sciousness has not yet been Juvenile Offender by testing thousands of pre-teen boys.  
achieved," she told me, raised to the point where How you say? Well, if they are left-handed, have odd shap-  
"because women were fighting men's responsibility for ed ears, certain characteristics of their tongues, toes,  
side by side with men. A childcare and parenting is curved fingers, sweaty palms, ad nauseam, all are indicat-  
lot of comrades - both male being considered." ions of criminal tendencies. They plan, with the help of  
and female - still do. The AS PEA eo Gonter $500,000, to measure the amount of male hormone testoster-  
women's question is only ave working to develop a non- one count, use of electric shocks, pire brain-wave &  
beginning to be raised in Pest eprcirr culununceer he Sweat measurements of boys 9-12 yrs old who have had  
the resistance movement. Bhi laren sndwoneeen choi their first contact with the police." No ind-  
Why, only two years ago I bused onbinoweieuieeene ication what would happen to the kids after  
was still saying that the niizent be ene ontideen. Mowe the testing-maybe gas ovens, American  
women's question is sec- of the existing curricula siya. Lt Eaey ban that koe boys.  
ondary to the national ques- are western and middle-class what do Chel aga and aaa ae  
tion. Now many of these oriented. At the same time ie ogageeres. orne: Spectat  
feel that both these strug- they are addressing the issue of non-sexist parenting and men's resist- 5 a foe t ae voouer  

On Flora's invitation, I AncerEs ts. with a national holiday than ‘  
went to visit a childcare All of these women, Dr. Mae swan Kang Suddenly I dont  
center set up in 1980 to from the labour organizers Pe Doves feel like dancing |  
care for the children of to those in the childcare Bid: YOU. OWS ae Nese Baers ae ;  
political prisoners. Sitting center, freely admit that thexG. Bek, Corp. of Las Vegas tried to stimulate natural  
in some of the brightly dec- they are just beginning to gas production in Colorado by detonating a small atomic  
orated rooms, I talked with deal with the double oppres- deyvces in a well bores MHaD Ly  
the staff of the center. sion of women, but what is A $10 million Air Force study was to be published this  
Childcare is one of the impressive is their determin- month but has been delayed. They are having technical prob-  
issues that women are org- ation to carry forward their lems analyzing data concerning men who were sprayed with  
anizing around, they explain- double struggle in the face Agent Orange- Dragging your feet boys, don't want the Viet  
ed, because it is an urgent- of worsening repression and Nam vets knowing you knew how dangerous Agent Orange was &  
ly felt need of so many a deteriorating economic that you didn't give a damn? Technical difficulties, trans-  
women. Linda, who is in situation. lated that means Bonzo has paper & pencil & is trying to  
charge of the littlest ones, figure things out for his former buddy!  
told me: "In the early days Here's a hot tip-if you're unionized and your company  
of the resistance, the ISIS - International Commun- files a Chapter 11 bankruptcy, don't think it's because the  
attitude toward children was ication and Information company is going broke. It's a good bet their union-busting  
very dogmatic. Parents were Service, CP 50, 1211 Geneve with the help of the government.  
expected to sacrifice every- 2, Switzerland. Last month we said in our heading DAY 2030. We were  
thing. When the parents Commission for Filipino Migrant fJwrong, this month the correct heading is DAY 1014. It seem~  
joined the underground or Workers and London Philippines fed like more days because we didn't realize one administra-  
went to the countryside, Support Group - St. Francis tion could do so much world damage in only 1000 days. We  
children were left behind of Assisi Community Centre, were wrong on both counts!  
with the grandmother or Pottery Lane, London W11- KEEP YOUR EYES ALERT & YOUR BACK TO THE WALL, THE US  
other relatives. This was tel. 01-221-0356. GOVERNMENT IS ARMED & DANGEROUS.!!!  

Big Mama Rag, November, 1983 - Page 13