editorial:

When we first received Martha Shelley's document, “What is FEN?" we were im- pressed with her lucid analysis of the structure of and relationships within the Feminist Economic Network. We liked the clarity with which she drew connections between all the groups and sub-groups of FEN. We agree with her position against using capitalism to gain "power for all women" and against hierarchical relationships.

We have a few minor criticisms of her article, however. The tone of her report was often overly fearful, with hints of paranoia that sometimes seemed unjustified. The Olivia critique of her article (See page 11) makes the point that certain of Martha's examples did not lend themselves to the conclusions she made. Martha also does not document if any of the women who still work with OFWHC and FEN for their positions. The article makes other criticisms of Martha's document—criticisms that should be carefully scrutinized.

One of Olivia's first points of criticism was something they termed in Martha's portrayal as "the wimpiness on the part of most of the women who have been in contact with OFWHC (Oakland Feminist Women's Health Center) and FEN"; they thought it too difficult to believe that so many women could have been so intimidated by so few. We take issue with that criticism.

People with skills and money are often in a position to have power, particularly power over those women who are either new to a project or unskilled. In this case, new women also had to contend with an employee-boss hierarchy enforced through a policy of firing any “uppity women" who questioned actions by the "bosses." It is relevant to remember that the women from Ann Arbor who came to support Valerje Angers in taking back the Women's City Club, and the four women from OFWHC who were fired and began their own clinic, the Common Woman, were not “wimpy.”

The Olivia critique also commented on Martha's research methods, or lack thereof. Olivia states that said research was unprincipled. Martha was responsible to the women she interviewed and her documentation was strong; just because everyone Martha interviewed was against FEN does not mean that Martha's bias got in the way. Olivia, at this point, sets up a false dichotomy and equates objectivity with liberalism. The objectivity that comes with perspective is not the “objectivity" that comes from looking at all "sides" to form acceptable non-opinions.

Olivia further criticized Martha for “using capitalist and patriarchal values to discredit the women of FEN." In this section, Olivia uses the words capitalism and patriarchy interchangeably to discuss holding companies and compliance with the Man's law as a survival tactic. Olivia ignores Martha's statement on page 18 of her article (see last month's issue), "We have to look at the purposes of the group: are they ignoring the law in order to help women, or to help themselves at our expense? Are they an Underground Railroad or a female Mafia? ...In the absence of our own feminist law, we are open to exploitation by any female hooligans who come in the name of ‘sisterhood.’"

Olivia discusses holding companies at great length, proposing them as a possible "feminist business” alternative. By implication, they once again set up a false dichotomy—holding companies vs. competition. "Profit for the Women's Movement" is a fine idea, but just how do holding companies put power or money in the hands of all women?

A single paragraph is devoted to "the trashing tactic of calling 'fascism.'" Martha does not just throw the word around. She takes the time and effort to build a frame of reference for her use of the word. Only after carefully defining her terms does she conclude that FEN is fascist. We support her criteria for fascism. Olivia in effect says the use of the word fascism is so disgusting they will not deal with the charge at all.

"Trashing" has become an all too convenient phrase to use when any sort of criticism is leveled. When a criticism can be dismissed by shouting "trashing," the people or institutions being criticized are safe to ignore any criticism of themselves; they don't have to take it seriously, or change, or think about their own politics, or cope. They have shielded themselves safely behind a bent trashcan lid.

Olivia concludes with a vague synopsis of their relationship with the women of FEN. It is obvious from the tone of the Olivia article that they are in agreement with the women of FEN, but they do not state it directly nor deal with it in their writing. They do not answer any of Martha's criticisms of FEN, preferring to attack her research and sources rather than the questions she raises.

So why print the Olivia article? It is not from a liberal, both-sides-of-the-story stance that we have done this. Olivia is a nationally known group with whom all other feminist projects must have dealings. In the past, they have made numerous efforts to communicate their process and politics to other feminists.

We believe that this article shows Olivia's politics more clearly than any interview with collective members.

We wish to congratulate Olivia and FEN upon their meeting of minds and for the newspaper resulting from that coupling. However, we are still left wondering, just what is the relationship?

bnrr:
we were at

Hello this month again. We want to thank the women who came to our critique meeting two weeks ago, especially the two women who were not present or past members of the paper. Any future members out there? We have missed the energy and enthusiasm of collective member Vicki Piotter, who took a leave of absence from the paper this past month to do some re-evaluation. The hot rumor going around is that she will be rejoining us soon.

The typesetting fund continues to grow, but the rate is slow. Please, even though those tax rebates aren't coming any more, how about some of that tax refund money?

We are getting the knack of our strip-printer now, and our headlines are proving less of a hassle, although we still spend a lot of time in the bathroom with the lights out, using the machine. Come see how this new toy of ours works and stay to help us with production. It's the best time to be around here; everyone is here, and just slightly wacky with the press of the deadline.

Keep those cards and letters coming.

Racism Convict

Assata Shakur

You are Black; you are a woman; you are politically active. You are charged with murdering a state policeman. The evidence is on your side, but you are facing an openly hostile judge, an all-white jury, and the effect of a long history of sensational news reporting about Black liberation.

The result, for Black liberation leader Assata Shakur, was conviction on several counts of murder and assault, and a sentence of life imprisonment. The verdict was handed down by presiding Judge Theodore Appleby March 25 in New Brunswick, New Jersey. An appeal is underway.

"You have convicted a woman who had her hands in the air," Shakur responded to the verdict. Denouncing the jury as racist, she said, “I am ashamed that I have even taken part in this trial."

Appleby instructed court attendants to “remove the prisoner."

"The prisoner will walk away on her own feet," responded Shakur.

The charges arose from a 1973 "shoot first, ask questions later" attack by state troopers, who stopped the car she was riding in for "speeding" on the New Jersey turnpike. Two people died in the incident: Zayd Malik Shakur, former deputy minister of the New York Black Panther party, and State Trooper Werner Foerster. Another trooper, James Harper, was wounded, as was Shakur herself.

Assata Shakur was convicted despite the testimony of three medical experts, all of whom verified that her hands had been over her head when she was shot. Denying that she ever had a gun or fired a shot, Shakur testified that she was shot twice while she held her hands up and pressed against the car windshield under Trooper Harper's directions.

One of the medical experts, a neurologist, said that nerve damage in Shakur's shoulder was such that her arm would have been paralyzed for two hours after the shooting; she could not possibly have shot Harper as he had claimed.

Earlier in the trial, Harper admitted that on the directions of a superior officer, he had lied to the grand jury and also in his written report of the incident.

Originally he had stated that Shakur had reached into her purse for an ID and he sensed that she was pulling out a gun. But under cross-examination, he admitted that Shakur had no pocketbook and he didn't see a gun at that point.

After the verdict was reached, defense attorney William Kunstler announced he had evidence that a juror had twice left the Ramada Inn where the jury was sequestered, and had to be returned by sheriff's deputies.

Middlesex County Sheriff Joseph DeMarino claimed that the incident “never happened." DeMarino was the person in charge of the jury and security for Sundiata Acoli (Clark Squire)’s trial and has been accused of irregularities in that case also. Acoli was riding in the car with Shakur and was also convicted of murder in 1974.

DeMarino is also responsible for keeping Shakur in solitary confinement in the basement of the men's Middlesex County jail for the last year. A federal judge had ruled that Shakur's terms of confinement were unconstitutional and ordered changes in the severe conditions, but DeMarino ignored the ruling. Shakur has been held without bail since 1973—despite three acquittals on various robbery and kidnapping charges in New York.

Shakur's lawyers are planning an appeal based on several grounds. A major issue will be the hostility and bias of Judge Appleby. Some examples of his conduct:

Taking on the questioning of prospective jurors himself, he refused to ask questions which would have uncovered racist attitudes. Questions were compiled by the National Jury Project, which found high levels of racism and prejudice against Shakur in Middlesex County.

When defense lawyers presented evidence of illegal surveillance of jury project offices, Appleby dismissed it with the comment, "the office staff are a bunch of nervous girls."

During the first week of the trial, he forbade Shakur to wear African dress, and neither she nor her lawyers were allowed to read her opening statement. Tried under the name of Joanne Chesimard, she was forbidden to use her African name.

To fully understand Shakur's conviction, it's important to take a look at what was happening politically in the New York City area in 1973:

The name of the Black Liberation Army (BLA) first appeared in the New York press in May, 1971, when four policemen were killed in two separate incidents. A number of leaflets circulated with the signature of the Black Liberation Army. Some of these claimed responsibility for shooting police; others talked more generally about life in the ghetto and political struggle.

The shootings came at a time when the New York City Police department badly needed a facelift. Most of the political trials that the city had tried to pull off had ended in acquittals, including the Panther 21 case in which the jury needed only 2 hours to dismiss the 156 counts against the defendants. On top of that were the fast-breaking stories of police corruption.

Finally, in January, 1973, police announced that six Black people were being sought in connection with police ambushes and that they were "leaders of the Black Liberation Army." Assata Shakur was among the six.

"These people were politically significant people," said a Panther spokesperson at the time. “They worked in drug programs, breakfast programs, and housing and welfare programs."

Characterizing the six as "armed and dangerous" and wanted on a "shoot to kill" basis, there followed many shoot-outs with alleged BLA members. In most cases, the only people to describe what happened had been the police.

It was in this climate of shoot to kill and with a $50,000 price on her head, that Assata Shakur and her companions were stopped on the New Jersey turnpike.

The Assata Shakur defense committee can be contacted at 339 Lafayette St., New York, NY 10012.

(info from Liberation News Service Majority Report, Off Our Backs)

>

ISUBSCRIBE?
Sub. $8.00 per year

Sample copy $2.75 by mail.
Checks payable to:
Tomato Publications.

70 Barrow Street
New York, NY 10013

We are looking for graphic and written contributions. We pay for all work that we print. Write for details.

A MAGAZINE OF LESBIAN CULTURE AND ANALYSIS:

FALL '76: Making a Backpack @ Mouth Care @ Photos by Alice Auster @ Name Change @ Coming Out On Cethstond *Giving Up Kidze Plus: analysis, letters, reviews, humor.

WINTER '76-'77: Beautiful 4 color poster and magazine insert.

FUTURE ISSUES SPRING '77 Ethnic Dykes, copy deadline Feb. 1st. SUMMER '77 Animals, copy deadline May 1st.