National News

Mistrial Declared In

Helen Vozenilek

The trial of four Navajo women
from Big Mountain, Arizona came to
an unexpected end Saturday morning,
January 10, as a mistrial was de-
clared when one of the seven jurors
failed to appear for the second day
of court proceedings.

The trial is a result of an in-
cident in September, 1980, when
four women, sisters Marlene Bennal-
ly, 16; Louise Bennally, 19; Sally
Tsosie, 34; and their mother,

Alice Bennally, 62, were arrested
when attempting to prevent govern-
ment crews from fencing their home-
land. An elder Navajo woman,
Katherine Smith, was arrested a
year earlier after she fired a
rifle over the heads of the fencing
crew who had come to desecrate her
land. The elder Navajo women, into
whose care passes the family land,
are leading the struggle to retain
their spiritual and cultural iden-
tity against the amassed forces of
the Hopi Tribal Council, the U.S.
Government, and various energy
corporations.

The land in question, the Joint
Use Area (JUA), has been peacefully
cohabitated for centuries by the
Navajos and Hopis. With the dis-
covery of vast amounts of mineral
wealth beneath the land, particu-
larly coal, has come the push from
the Hopi Tribal Council, and the
business interests it represents,
to obtain exclusive ownership to
the land and minerals. The passage
of the "Navajo-Hopi Land Settle-
ment Act", Public Law 95-351, by
Congress in 1974, "authorized" the
forced relocation of 5600 Navajos
from the JUA. To date, 280 miles

‘Racial Superiority’ Theories Abound

Katherine Yih

While women eagerly searching for
"top notch" genes for their yet-to-
be conceived children have generated
a waiting list at an exclusive sperm
bank in California, workers in many
industries are being barred from cer-
tain jobs on the basis of their genes.

Major news publications, meanwhile,
earlier this month made much of the
recent findings of two psychologists
that "sex differences in achievement
and in attitude toward mathematics
result from superior male mathemati-
cal ability.”

of this land has been fenced: Big
Mountain resistance has thus far
kept the barbed wire from their terr-
itory.

The four women were charged with
seven different counts that includ-
ed: 1) assault, 2) battery, 3)
aiding and abetting, 4) disorderly
conduct, 5) violation of reguia-
tions, 6) interfering with offi-
cers, 7) interfering with fencing.
A conviction on this last charge,
interfering with fencing, could
set legal precedence for the future
trials that are bound to follow as
the government pushes to reach
their July deadline for fencing
completion.

The voir dire, or jury selection,
proved to be the most telling part
of the trial which, in itself, did
not proceed past the prosecution's
first witness. During questioning
it became evident that the major-
ity of the Navajos summoned to the
jury panel did not want to have
anything to do with the trial. A
wealth of Navajo sentiment was un-
leashed by Judge Edwin Lawrence's
inquiries whether any of the panel
members were related to the de-
fendants, and if there was any
reason why they would not be able
to give the defendants a fair
trial. Numerous Navajos rose and
expressed their unwillingness to
participate and general opposition
to the whole situation. One man
explained that; "Since he was
Navajo and they (the defendants)
are Navajo, he feels like they
are related. And because he is
an older man, he feels they are
his children." (translator's

for biological determinism had been
in Europe, there has been a similar,
though less blatant, increase in such
ideas in the U.S.

Sociobiology is based on the unfou-
nded presumption that complex social
behavior in both animals and humans
is strongly determined by genes and
is the product of natural selection.
The fundamental importance of human
cultural evolution is discounted.

Thus, sex roles, competition, hierar-
chy, xenophobia, and many other cha-
racteristics are seen as the result
of biology. Such traits can then be
justified as "natural" and, further-

Big Mountain Case

Defendants in the Big Mountain Case.

words). One woman referred to the
four women as her "grandchildren",
and another, as her “mothers”.

One of the most prophetic state-
ments came from a medicine man
who declared that: "Medicine men
only do good things. I do not
feel that this is a good thing.
As a medicine man, I don't like
this."

These statements were interrupted
by Judge Lawrence who warned that
he would declare a mistrial if any
more prejudicial statements were
made. His directives did have the
desired effect of intimidating the
prospective jurors, most of whom
remained silent for the duration of
the questioning. However, the Gov-
ernment's attempt to have the Nava-

Semites that sociobiology provides a
scientific basis for their prejudices.

But the anti-Semitic movement in
France is not the only group which
finds sociobiology useful. Throughout
Europe, many of the new fascist move-
ments are adopting the same approach.

In Spearhead, published by Britain's
fascist National Front, Richard Ver-
rall writes, "One only has to observe
qualities of male aggression and
female domesticity to understand
their fundamental biological basis.

Such observations quickly demonstrate
that 'feminist' talk of sexual roles
being conditioned by society itself
indirectly validate the U.S.
court system, through their presence
and participation, failed miserably.
The differences between the Navajo
way and the white man's way were
made patently clear.

The trial is expected to be re-
scheduled for sometime in February.
Support was widespread for the trial
as over eighty people came to Pinon,
Arizona for the event. It seems
clear that at some point, the U.S.
Government will abandon its pretens-
es at judicial fairness and swiftly
move to squelch all opposition. The
struggle of the Big Mountain women
and their people will intensify,
drums of Wounded Knee beating in the
background. We must be prepared for
that time.

Last summer's establishment of the
sperm bank for Nobel laureates, the
increasing use of genetic screening
of potential employees and the most
recent controversy over the link be-
tween genes and mathematical ability
are manifestations of the long-stand-
ing theory that genes are destiny.

With the worldwide ascendancy of
rightist ideology, this belief is win-
ning new favor in scientific and pop-
ular circles. "As social problems in-
tensify, we can expect ever-stronger
reactions from the right," says John
Vandermeer, a University of Michigan
Biology professor. "One of the wea-
pons they will use is biological de-
terminism. Whether it takes the form
of inheritance of intelligence, the
population bomb, or sociobiology, its
purpose will be the same - to locate
in biology the causes of and by impl-
ication the solutions to the crisis of
capitalism."

more, are presumed to be relatively
immutable.

"The life sciences reveal the nece-
ssity of a hierarchy of individuals
in all advanced animal societies as
in human societies," wrote the editor
of the French rightist magazine Fé-
gano recently. His comments reflected
the arguments of many French anti-

is the most puerile Marxist rubbish.”
The article is entitled, "Sociobiolo-
gy: The instincts in our genes."
Verrall's point is that equality is
unnatural. "The great question of our
times seems to be whether European
man, the pinnacle of evolution, will

-Houston Breakthrough

MORE ON PAGE 13

Sterilization Suit Seeks Safeguards

last spring. It brought the suit
against six state mental hospitals,
Governor John Dalton, two state of-
ficials and a state agency. The or-
ganization charges that the Common-
wealth of Virginia violated the con-
stitutional rights of the plaintiffs,
especially their right to equal pro-
tection under the 14th Amendment.
Putting aside for the moment the
issue of eugenics, or biological
determinist theories resulting in
mass involuntary sterilizations, the
ACLU contends that the people sing-
led out for sterilization were not
mentally “incompetent” or dangerous
to society. Most were only poor and
unemployed. According to the ACLU
brief, "Many of the men and women
who were involuntarily sterilized...
were selected for sterilization be-
cause they were characterized as
‘misfits', 'loose women’ or ‘incorri-

Karen Stallard appendectomy and was told "I had to
go through with the operation or they
wouldn't let me out. I didn't know
what to do," she said in a press
conference last week. "Later the aunt
and uncle I was living with told me

I wouldn't have any more children."

Doe was raped by her stepfather
when she was 12 and later delivered
a son. According to the ACLU the
Lynchburg facility classified Doe
as being “in an emotional and intell-
ectual loss" because of the birth of
her child, although the records also
say that she was "not basically de-
fective."

An estimated 65,000 people in the
U.S. have been the unwitting victims
of sterilizations since eugenic laws
upholding racist concepts of genetic
purity were implemented in the 1920s
according to the ACLU. More than 20

A class action suit on behalf of
over 8000 Virginia victims of invol-
untary sterilization operations was
recently filed in Richmond, VA.

The operations, performed primari-
ly on poor whites and some Blacks
between 1924 and 1972, were part of
a statewide program designed to elim-
inate "social misfits" through in-
voluntary eugenic sterilization. All
of the victims were institutional i-
zed at the time of the operations.

The Virginia American Civil Liber-
ties Union (ACLU) and the plaintiffs
it represents hope to change the
state laws that still allow sterili-
zations without the patient's know-
ledge. They are trying to create in-
stead legal safeguards restricting
mass sterilizations.

JUSTIFIES RACISM AND SEXISM

Sociobiology, genetic screening and
the decade-long controversy over the
use of IQ tests and the "breeding"
theories of eugenics are all outgrow-
ths of the concept of "biological de-
terminism." This is the general term
for the idea that behavior and social
arrangements are an expression of the
intrinsic nature of human beings and

therefore unchangeable.

These ideas have a history dating
back to Aristotle's time, and down
through the years they have been em-
ployed to justify racial inequities
and to bolster the demands of the ru-
ling elite.

Today, they are primarily used in
the scientific rationale for far-rea-
ching expressions of racism and sex-
ism, While the most virulent backing

The ACLU is also asking that the
state inform all persons sterilized
in the past without their knowledge.
The plaintiffs hope the case will
pressure the state to review its
records in search of sterilization
abuse victims and to contact those
victims. To date, the state has re-
sisted taking such measures.

The Virginia ACLU first uncovered
the massive eugenic sterilization

gibles.' Many were released from
(institutions) after their involun-
tary sterilization even though they
were . . . allegedly retarded or
unable to care for themselves."

One of the victims, Judith Doe (an
assumed name) was admitted to Vir-
ginia's Lynchburg Training School
and Hospital in 1949. She was led to
believe that she was undergoing an

states including Virginia continue

to perform involuntary sterilizations
on people in state hospitals and
reform schools. Utah, for example,
permits the operation on persons
identified as insane or having "de-
generate criminal tendencies."

(reprinted from the Guardian)