Celebration: Taking Back Our Day

There was criticism from women within and outside the coalition that the demands on the leaflet basically ignored the lesbian issue. Several women felt that the gay civil rights demand should have been more prominent. Other lesbian feminists felt that lesbianism should be raised from a radical feminist perspective.

March

The organizers were generally pleased with the turnout at the march. It was unclear whether the small turnout from minority communities was due to problems with outreach or whether women from minority communities, particularly the Chicano community, were hesitant to participate.

It was stated that although the issue of lesbianism was not a major demand, it should have been more clearly and politically represented. One woman noted that many of the lesbian feminists involved in the coalition were so embroiled in learning about issues of concern to other coalition groups that they did not push hard enough on some of their own issues. She further added that many of the lesbian feminists had understated the lesbian issue in coalition meetings so as not to alienate other coalition participants, particularly Chicana groups, who were having difficulty with lesbianism. In doing so, the lesbian feminists failed to be accountable to their own women's community they were representing in the coalition, she said.

Women from RIP said they could have supported a strong political demand around lesbian feminism. One woman noted that the responsibility for raising such demands is not only the responsibility of lesbians and that other women should have felt free to raise the issue.

Photo by Kate Sharp

It was suggested that future coalition actions hold meetings at different community places rather than centering all the meetings in the radical feminist community. It was also suggested that had transportation been provided to the march, more women would have participated, especially women with children. Another criticism was that leaflets were not available until a week before the action.

Most women felt the march was spirited and fairly well-organized. A major criticism turned to an incident where members of the coalition banner committee asked women carrying a large banner reading "Lesbians Are Everywhere" to walk outside or behind the march. The committee said they made this request because it had been agreed upon that only the seven major demands would be carried on large banners and that secondary demands would be carried on smaller placards.

The women did march with the sign, but coalition members agreed that the tense situation could have been avoided had there been less confusion around coalition process and communication. The making of banners and placards was open to whoever wanted to make them and general guidelines had never been clearly offered.

Rally

Women were pleased that the speeches at the rally represented a broad range of women's concerns and that the speeches carried an authority that showed the speakers were deeply involved with the issues they addressed.

The major criticism of the rally was that speeches tended to lack radical content—the speakers addressed the issues, but they did not generally offer radical analysis and solutions to the problems they outlined. Some of the IWD organizers felt that the coalition should have had more confidence in itself and presented speakers who had been involved in the coalition organizing.

Three participants in the rally were specifically criticized. The feminist poet who used the podium to plug her book and express her views that "politics" and demonstrations are not worthwhile was severely criticized by feminists within the coalition.

Some women from the Chicano community were uncomfortable with the march and rally (and the coalition) because they felt some statements were anti-male and anti-heterosexual. Specifically, they criticized two of the speeches: the speech where a Chicana stated she would not work with men until they “got their act together" concerning attitudes toward women and the use of the word “patriarchy” by the speaker from the Colorado Springs Women's Health Clinic, as well as her remark that women do not need penises for sex.

One coalition member felt that the Chicanas were not so much upset with the statements alone, but with the overwhelming response they got from the audience. Another member said that the comment that women don't need men for sex was part of a discussion of the myth of the vaginal orgasm, but agreed that it could have been interpreted as anti-male and could have been stated in a more constructive way.

The criticism of the word “patriarchy" was not valid as the fight to end patriarchy had been one of the points of unity of the coalition. It was noted that while it is important to reach out to as many groups of women as possible, that this cannot be done at the expense of the principles we are fighting for.

Evening

The evening activities were well received with special commendations going to the potluck dinner, the feminist theatre group, and the film, "Salt of the Earth." A number of women felt the theatre improvisations should have come earlier in the evening so that more people could have seen it.

Criticism centered mainly on the fact that entertainment was divided into two areas so that people had to choose between activities. One of the event organizers said that this division of activities had been consciously determined, but in practice it had not been a good idea.

In summing up IWD 1977, most women felt the activities were fairly successful, though a greater degree of unity had been developed among those women actively involved in the coalition organizing than among our respective communities. Most women agreed, however, that the education that went on between the various groups made it all worthwhile.

The coalition members hope to continue meeting once a month to discuss some of the political differences which arose during the coalition meetings. They hope to explore ways in which barriers between the lesbian feminist community and the Chicano community can be broken down and to explore the radical feminist and socialist perspectives on the issues of the family and of lesbianism.

Hopefully the meetings will determine if there is a basis for unity in actions, and minimally will provide increased communication between women in the left and the independent women's movement.

Photo by Cheryl