Alice In Frontera—Land

Marianne L. Hricko Stewart

Frontera is a make-believe town;  
not quite like Disneyland, not as much  
fun, without a mayor, without Demo-  
cracy; it is a place where logic and  
rationality are suspended, where log-  
istics and rationalization run wild.  
Sometimes it is widely believed,  
Frontera does not exist; this is when  
mail is returned to sender with  
"UNKNOWN" stamped on it. Sometimes,  
it is widely recognized, inhabitants  
do not exist; this is when they re-  
ceive no mail, or when they are told  
their citizenship rights, nearly all  
constitutional rights, labor rights,  
and human rights are left at the  
gates. But in exchange, they are given  
a number; this proves they exist.

The cottage-style appearance that  
resembles a college campus at C.I.W.  
is all facade. Most of the grounds  
are "out of bounds" and "write-ups"  
(disciplinary procedures) are given for  
sitting under the "wrong" trees or on  
the “wrong" grass. The tourists are  
impressed though; there are at least  
two tours a day through the prison.

It was suggested by one of the inhab-  
itants that lemonade, maps and sun-  
visors be sold, but entrepreneurship  
is discouraged here, as is free-enter-  
prise (sometimes known as "going out  
to court" or "picking up a case"). It  
never occurs to tourists that if they  
want to get a “true feeling" of the  
prison, they should be locked in the  
cells for a week or a year - or to  
come here in disguise, incognito: just  
knock over a liquor store and after  
the “true feeling" has occurred, tell  
the guards it was all done in a ges-  
ture of empathy.

Penologists and criminologists,  
"people from Sacramento", administra-  
tion aides from Washington and around  
the country, church groups, police  
academy students, M-2 sponsors (who  
will soon learn more about C.I.W. than  
all the above), etc. are im-  
pressed with our "nice place here".  
The brick buildings resemble cheaply-  
built army posts or mental institu-  
tions: completely lacking in imagina-  
tion or beauty. Some tourists are  
taken inside the “college-cottage"  
(where people are not fighting) to  
a cell room (that's not double-bunked)  
and shown how "nice and comfortable”  
the women are here - and the afghan  
on the bed proves it. The police  
academy students admire the (stolen)  
curtains; the church group admires  
the t.v. (someone sold their body  
for); the penologists catch the faint  
odor of something they themselves were  
just smoking last night.

Gracing C.I.W. is a swimming pool;  
since most of the women work 6-8 hours  
during the day and many cannot go out  
after 6 p.m., or it is closed at that  
time, it is available to most only on  
weekends. The 750 women on campus,  
of course, find it crowded. Also, the  
200 women in R.C. ("Receiving" Hous-  
ing) cannot use it, nor can the 40 -  
50 women in P.T.U. (Psychiatric Treat-  
ment Unit) unless they have "campus"  
passes. P.T.U. inmates are allowed  
these ONLY IF THEY "EARN THEM". This  
means smiling at the Mas'r a lot and  
doing the menial work capriciously  
and whimsically selected by guards.

“Destination” passes - even more  
restrictive - to the law library or  
the larger visiting room are also  
denied for punitive reasons. Some of  
these are: "write-ups", “bad atti-  
tudes", "disruptive behavior" (physi-  
cal or verbal confrontations by an-  
other inmate), not "programming" (not  
doing staff labor), and other spur-  
ious reasonings. Assertive inhabi-  
tants of Frontera-Land are termed  
“verbally aggressive" and "trouble-  
makers" and often placed in “Adminis-  
trative Segregation" in P.T.U. They  
are not allowed to attend educational  
classes, functions, or any campus  
sports events, recreation or holiday  
festivities. They are not allowed  
to go to cosmetology - even before  
parole - nor to meet with community/  
prison organizations which will help  
them find work, a place to live and  
clothes for their children.

Only about 12 of the women in P.T.U.  
are "psychiatric cases". They are  
termed this because they receive "med-  
ication". There is no therapy, only  
pills, and hobbycraft called "Occupa-  
tional therapy." And one psychiatrist  
for nearly 1,000 C.I.W. prisoners; he  
writes prescriptions and “reports”  
for the parole board. Half the time  

prison shrinks seem to be where the  
medication disappeared to. Even "psy-  
chiatric" prisoners are treated with  
illogical and punitive rules. One is  
not allowed a radio or t.v. because  
she is staying only 11½ months rather  
than a year. And F.L.U. (Family Living  
Unit - 72 hr.) visits were cancelled  
for all P.T.U. prisoners - to be given  
only with the shrink's and Superinten-  

dent's approval. There had never been  
any trouble; on the contrary, P.T.U.  
women behaved admirably. It was done  
only for the purpose of canceling the  
F.L.U. visits of two women the Super-  
intendent didn't care for, euphemisti-  
cally speaking.

Also, a Frontera-Land rule states  
that no brothers or fathers may visit  
inhabitants alone on a F.L.U. visit.  
One wonders why this rule was conjured  
up, and by whose mind.

Prisoners are assured that they are  
"sociopaths" and “psychopaths”,  
"immoral", “amoral"; "followers" if  
they have good friends, or show the  
normal human desires of needing some-  
one to trust, to touch, to love; with  
the God-given knowledge of the psychi-  
atrists that they are all of the above  
and less, crowded into a "manipulative  
criminal mind", what good will pills  
do emotionally or mentally disturbed  
women for 3 or 4 or 5 years?

And where do these women go to sup-  
port their habits upon release?

In the Dark Ages, the mentally dis-  
turbed were placed in prisons; Frontera-  
Land is a trip into the Past!

Truly, the inhabitants of this  
strange land are not made to feel they  
are pillars of society.

Responsibility is not cultivated in  
prison, either. "I know I can run a  
game, but can I make it to the office  
every day? Without accidentally running  
into my connection on purpose...It's  
been so long and I'm older now and I  
might be late or get tired..."

"I know I can mop a floor, I know I  
can be a whore, know - if I knock and  
they're not busy and they say 'Come in  
and if it's not locked, but then it  
couldn't be because they gave me per-  
mission and they said it was O.K.,  
just for a minute - I can open a door.  
--but how am I going to take care of  
my 9 and 12 year olds...and what if.."

Neither is functioning in society  
cultivated, nor self-assurance, nor  
self-esteem.

Prisoners are placed in solitary  
confinement for "homosexual activity".  
No credence is given to the fact that  
it is unnatural not to make love; it  
goes against basic human emotions not  
to make love. If babies die from not  
being touched or held, or if they  
grow up with serious emotional prob-  
lems, what does this say about human  
need? What are women to do in prison  
for 1 - 2 - 5 or 25 years? And what  
if their sexual preference was with  
women to begin with? Gay people are  
punished even further.

The other 28 - 38 prisoners in P.T.U.  
are in “Administrative Segregation":  
because of “high risk", such as escape,  
attempted escape or rumor of attempted  
escape - some rumors over a year old;  
because of protective custody; because  
of case-publicity; or because of  
"attitudes", being termed "behavior  
problems"...even their political be-  
liefs are used against them - which is  
illegal, but ignored since authority-  
figures are breaking the law.

“Appeal it", they say. "Take it to  
court", they laugh. The appeals process  
is a time-consuming joke; most appeals  
are denied or, if they hit a nerve,  
“lost”. Frontera-Land Appeals.

Some women have been sent to C.I.W.  
who aren't yet eighteen. They were  
children who were scared into plea/  
bargaining; they would have received  
less time if they took their case to  
a jury because they pleaded to things  
they didn't do - which were lesser  
offenses. But all total, they are doing  
more time, on more counts, than what  
they were originally accused of. They  
were ignorant of the law, like many,  
and also like many, illiterate. Some  
will be twenty-six or thirty or older  
before release from prison on bogus  
charges. To miss one's twenties, to  
walk through prison gates at seventeen  
or nineteen and step back out at thirty:  
There's something surreal and dodais-  
tic about a "civilization" which does  
this to people. Who would even do this  
to an animal? But we have better laws  
for animals than for children.

Women are not allowed to go to school  
full-time; they must work a half-day  
in menial slave labor...in "Industry",  
cutting threads, sewing buttons, making  
jackets, jeans, etc.; V.C. (Village  
Cafeteria) doing essentially KP work;  
ADM (Administration) where they type  
and file; J.T.C. (Janitorial Services)  
laundry: maintenance; or yard crew.  
All these "programs" will get them no-  
where - or a cup of coffee, if they  
have fifty cents when they get out.

Same La Verne College classes are  
held here. But once A.A. is attained,  
there are no classes toward a B.A.  
Courses by mail are available only if  
one can afford them. Some prisoners  
are interested in law, but often are  
not allowed to work in the law library  
because of their "attitude"; this means  
that they are not pro-prison. It also  
means they are kept from working where  
they are badly needed because of their  
logical belief and deep conviction  
that prisons are morally wrong and  
should not exist. After 30 - 40 hours  
of slave labor, however, some still  
find time to help and study law. Very  
revealing is what one woman said, "We  
study law. We become law students, but  
what do we learn? We know law and  
justice are on our side, but judges  
aren't. We sit here, with our useless  
knowledge, and wait. What do we learn?

Prisoners are "allowed" personal  
curtains because there are none fur-  
nished by the prison. Bedspreads are  
in short supply, so prisoners are  
"privileged" to use their own. Rugs  
are "allowed" because the floors are  
cement and untiled in many rooms. This  
of course, leaves out poor prisoners  
(some are poorer than others; some  
have no family or friends "outside").  
And 8¢/hour will not buy a month's  
worth of cigarettes and other canteen  
items. It will not buy services at  
Cosmetology, the "Records Office",  
the mailroom, nor items from "campus"  
sales, nor a dress from Sears. Inhab-  
itants here must work in slavery.  
Prison Administration/Frontera-Land  
Pimping, but this isn't against the  
law.

Money makes the prison-go-round...  
from the top to the bottom. Frontera-  
Lands are big business, and should be  
on the stock exchange.

Prisoners are not allowed make-up  
except what is bought at canteen and  
what is sent in at Christmas. The can-  
teen is the Company Store; overpriced  
by 12% - 25%. But with a captive audi-  
ence. Even mail orders of clothes and  
hobbycraft items have 10% - 15% added  
which allegedly goes to the Inmate  
Welfare Fund. Where that goes is be-  
yond proof. Movies? Ice Machines? No  
one knows, and inhabitants have been  
trying to verify rumors for years.

Being paid poorly also opens the  
doors of “hustles". Ingenious minds  
abound through necessity, and paid  
favors are everywhere. So are "paid"  
guards. And with the experience gained  
at "Wheeling and Dealing”, Fronterians  
will never be without street hustles  
refined in Frontera-Land.

If you're pregnant, diabetic, hypo-  
glycemic or have ulcers you're out of  
luck. There is no dietician here; doc-  
tors put inhabitants on diets staff  
and inmates don't understand. Diets  
exist in medical charts only.

Discipline is very important to the  
rulers of Frontera-Land. As if there  
wasn't enough already, discipline is  
doled out in 30, 60 and 90 day vaca-  
tions, with extensions, in solitary  
confinement and psychiatric isolation.  
(M.C.U. and "The Quiet Room".) Inhabi-  
tants win this prize for: “suspicion,”  
"allegations", "rumors", not "program-  
ming” and more ways than one can think  
of. The Wheel of Misfortune turns and  
there one is - lying on a two inch  
mattress on broken springs, in a bath-  

room - a prison within a prison.

"And Where To Now St. Peter?" An  
Elton John song floats by from another  
part of the prison called “Deep Six”...  
The old death row...waiting: The Bot-  
tomless Pool of Frontera-Land.

The strength and persistence of pri-  
soners' minds and emotions never cease  
to inspire amazement; they hold on,  
keep on, carry through, and somehow  
keep their sanity and sense of humor.  
Those few who come out “broken" are  
"broken" throughout their lives. So-  
ciety is pleased to know it has  
“taught them a lesson". But what les-  
son has it taught? Only the strong  
survive.

Doctors usually leave at 5 p.m., don't  
work weekends, and are overloaded with  
patients. Because of one doctor refus-  
ing to see various patients, the other  
doctor is overloaded. Frontera-Land  
doctors refuse stelazine to drug ad-  
dicts; they tell patients they have  
"beautiful breasts” and there's nothing  
wrong with them, and the patients soon  
need mastectomies; they tell patients  
they have ulcers and diabetes, and the  
patients die of cancer. They give pa-  
tients morphine so they'll forget the  
pain and lumps in their breasts. They  
send patients to mental hospitals to  
avoid the high cost of “outside”  
hospitalization in the prison budget.  
Street-doctors come in, as specialists  
and because they're good, everyone  
wants to see them. About the only  
thing the prison hospital is equipped  
for is a fire. And a wheelchair  
shower. Surgery is no longer done;  
there were too many staph infections.  
There is a note scribbled on a wall  
in solitary: "The doctors at C.I.W.  
are society's punishment for our  
crimes."

Fires strike P.T.U. infrequently -  
usually in rashes. But guards are us-  
ually baffled when it does strike, and  
in the confusion neglect to awaken  
sleeping and medicated women. A man  
"from Sacramento" traveled all the  
way to Frontera, on taxpayers' funds,  
to tell a prisoner that it would be  
too expensive to install posters in  
cottages telling people what to do in  
case of earthquake and fire.

Attorney phone calls are monitored  
unless “special permission" is given  
by the Superintendent. This would seem  
to be against the Sixth Amendment, but  
Enomoto (CDC Director) says there's  
no "evidence" of monitored attorney  
calls - so he won't get involved. The  
question arises: How do prisoners  
get "evidence"? On their cameras which  
are not allowed? On their highly soph-  
isticated electronic equipment (also  
not allowed)? Or on affidavits which  
strike terror at parole-board-time?

Frontera, unfortunately, inspires  
volumes. Surrounded by cow pastures,  
it is nestled in the desert heat of  
summer. The desert cold of winter is  
felt incisively when the heat is not  
working in solitary confinement and  
psychiatric isolation. There are only  
a few suicides here; many try. At  
night, you can hear other people's  
nightmares. Frontera-Land sleep.

There is no waiting-room for visit-  
ors while they are being searched.  
Both old and young are made to wait in  
line, sometimes over an hour, in the  
115° of summer, and the rain and winds  
of winter. Children sometimes faint,  
and often foster parents refuse to  
bring prisoners’ babies and children  
because of sheer distance from North-  
ern and Central California, or because  
they are subject to searches. Prison  

Administrators’ answer to the distance  
problem is to build more prisons.

Frontera-Land logic. But what was the  
question again?

See, Alice, the inhabitants of Fron-  
tera really exist, even though they  
seem only incidental to guards’ gossip,  
paperwork and paychecks. Body counts  
are taken