voices from our lives...
Classism, Racism & Lesbian Motherhood

The following article is an excerpt
from a speech by Manta Pena and Bar-
bara Carey. The entire speech was
printed in Off Our Backs in the June,
1979 issue.

In order to look more closely at
the topic of lesbians considering mo-
therhood, we decided to raise the is-
sues of racism and the idea of class
structure of this society. When Bar-
bara, who is a white woman from a mid-
dle class background, and I, a Puerto
Rican woman from a poor background, de-
cided to have kids, we had to examine
within ourselves more than the idea of
having a child. We had to analyze our
class status as women and as members
of minority groups. We had to think
of our race, and we had to think of
our sexual preference. We have spoken
with other lesbians who are consider-
ing motherhood. In speaking with them
we have found what we feel to be a
lack of race and class consciousness.

Many women we spoke with hate ra-
cism in the society and in themselves.
But at the same time we are terri-
fied at having interracial children.
We choose to live in integrated neigh-
borhoods because they are more flexi-
ble than the rigid neighborhoods which
most white middle class women come
from. What does it mean to boast of
living in a third world neighborhood
and then use all kinds of excuses for
not relating to the people around us?
We exclude the possibility of third
world sperm. We say to ourselves that
we can't face bringing up a child of

mixed race. We say we are white and
can't bring third world culture to
this child. Now we are living in a

third world
can't raise

Big Mama

From Page 1

water in her cell, the only water
being too hot to drink - a situation
which resulted in her developing a
kidney disease. While being treated
for this problem, she was given a
hallucinogenic drug without her

neighborhood but saying we
third world children. We

knowledge. Under the influence of the
drug, she injured a disc in her back,
for which she was denied medical

for several hours.

treatment

-LNS Photo

Lolita Lebron

When the jailers finally decided,
almost a day later, to get her medi-
cal attention, she was forced to walk
from her cell to the infirmary with-
out assistance, despite the fact that
she was in severe pain and hardly
able to move. Once in the infirmary,
she was bodily thrown onto a stretch-
er, the impact of which made her
feel that she was breaking apart in-
side. The doctor then asked about
the X-rays that he had ordered that
morning, but they had not been done.
So she was forced to wait hours more,
in constant pain. When it was finally
confirmed that a disc in her spine
had been injured, the doctor tried
to convince her that it was an “old,
old, old" injury, not a recent one
(and, in fact, they tried to further
explain away the injury by falsifying
her records to show that she was ten
years older than her true age).

go further and say that we cannot
birth third world children.

There are all kinds of excuses for
not relating to third world people--
because they are straight, because
they are men, because they are stri-
ving for middle class status. But then
we get to a place where we can't even
relate to third world lesbians who are
not striving and who are our equals.
We are so quick to write third world
people off. By not facing this contra-
diction we are, in fact, cooperating
in reproducing the class hierarchy
that we hate. We reproduce racism
which is a class category that tells
us that all third world people are
inferior. This class hierarchy with
racism as its center allows whites to
feel superior. The class category al-
lows many of us poor or middle class
whites to feel superior and close to
the white ruling class. What we are
trying to see, and get you to see,
is that racism is a two-sided coin.
Racism allows all whites regardless of
sexual preference and class to feel
superior, and it forces all third
world people regardless of sexual pre-
ference or class to feel inferior.

The way that society is structured
today, the people on the bottom be-
lieve they should be on the bottom.
The people on the higher rungs of the
ladder believe they should be there.
Aren't we as lesbians considering
parenthood reproducing the very
same structure? We are doing this
because we believe in racism and those
social and economic relationships we
have spoken about. We live among third
world people who are invisible to

Rag Talks

She told of being kept in the
"hole", in solitary confinement, for
a year and a half. The prison popu-
lation was so incited against her
that upon her release from solitary
confinement, she was forced to re-
quest a return to solitary "to avoid
any problems."

Asked about what organizing she
had done in prison, she replied that
she had done prisoners' rights, and
prison reform work; and that in 1971,
she had been a leader of a prison
strike in solidarity with the inmates
who had seized control of Attica.

She also spoke on the subject of
drugs in prison, saying that prison-
ers are continuously drugged-up as
a means of control. And that prison
officials have succeeded in sapping
the will of most prisoners, making
them pliant and docile -- non-danger-
ous. No attempt is made to keep
drugs from prisoners, with drug cab-
inets always unlocked. One woman,
demonstrating to Lebrón the ease
with which they could be obtained,
displayed a handful of pills that
she had stolen. Lebrón and the woman
flushed the pills down the toilet.

Next, Lebrón was asked about the
Nationalist Movement in Puerto Rico
and the role of armed struggle in re-
volution. Stating that the National-
ists cannot renounce the right to
arms, she emphasized that her people
must be prepared to use all available
means to defeat imperialism and that
armed struggle in Puerto Rico must
grow. However, she acknowledged that
“revolution is not only arms" and not
everybody can, or should, use weapons.
But, everyone can be a revolutionary
because there are different ways to
struggle within a movement. The im-
portant thing though is that the move-
ment as a whole assert their right
to bear and use arms against their
oppressors.

In speaking of her nation as a dom-
inion of the United States, she said
that "Puerto Rico is possessed and
invaded"; and that the electoral pro-
cess is set up by the U.S. government
as a way to re-affirm the colonial
status of Puerto Rico every four
years. While many people do vote, Le-
brón insists that they do not repre-
sent Puerto Rico or themselves, but
the United States. She says that they
are people whose “minds have been im-
planted", but who are in reality dor-

us so we cannot birth third world
children because of the excuse that
we won't be able to expose them to
third world culture.

Like racism, the nuclear family is
another class structure. The class
structure keeps us good little sol-
diers reproducing their hierarchy. The
structure of the nuclear family is
as follows: the patriarch or father
at the top; the mother, the Lieuten-

Big Mama Rag Vol.8 No.5

ant, who carries out his orders; and
the children, on the bottom, as the
privates.

The children are being molded ac-
cording to their race and class. They
are being molded to fit the same old

‘slots they have always filled in the

economic and social ladder. Many of

us fear raising children outside of
this mold. We use the excuse that the
child will hate us because every good
middle class person has a nuclear fa-
mily and a father and our children
will not. Some of us are clear that

we don't want the nuclear family. Like
racism, we still carry the idea that
somehow the nuclear family is right.
We have the opportunity now to develop
within our children the new idea that
they can function without patriarchal
authority. They will not have to deal
with its ideas. They can begin to think
for themselves. No longer do they have
to be taught what to think by a ruling
class of white men.

In separating ourselves from the nu-
clear family we'll be forced to see
our class position much more clearly.
We will have to take control of our
own economic needs and how to meet
them. Some of us will be laid off,
forced on welfare, or forced to keep
jobs that wear us down. We soon find
ourselves in the same dead-end jobs,
on the same welfare and unemployment
lines with our third world sisters,
facing a life without privilege or
a comfortable future. At this point
we will have to face that third world
people are our allies, and that we
are in a common struggle... We will
see more clearly that we are the same
as all oppressed workers.

With Lolita Lebrón

mant Puerto Ricans. She also spoke

of infiltrators who have divided the
Liberation Movement into many factions
by urging the use of rhetoric, not
arms.

When questioned about Cuba, Lebrón
enthusiastically recounted her visit,
made shortly after her release from
prison. She expressed pride in Fidel
Castro, calling him a "great repre-
sentative of the human race," and
telling us that she was "happily
shaken" by the high level of morality
and tranquility she saw in Cuban
streets and homes. Cubans are com-
mitted to building and creating their
country - and to the education of
their children. Lebrón told us of vi-
siting the schools and seeing child-
ren "who are more developed than any
of us politically and culturally."
Students between the ages of 7 and
14 demonstrated their ability to
work independently, and those between
14 and 17 are highly skilled in the
sciences. Lebrón watched these young
adults operate remote control air-
planes in a sophisticated war game.

In addressing the recent influx of
Cubans into the States, she stated
that every month, thousands of Puerto
Ricans emigrate to the U.S.; but of-
ficials choose not to use those sta-
tistics in comparison. Instead, they
point to the numbers of Cubans leaving
their homeland in order to discredit
the Castro regime. She pointed out
that Cuba is blockaded by the U.S.,
thus making fair trade impossible;
and that, compounded by the promotion
of "capitalist goodies" and the en-
couragement of their relatives to
join them, has prompted many Cubans
to leave to "find a better way of
life." Lebrón talked about the re-
cent riots in Miami saying, "It will
cost the United States," because
the Government has exploited the sit-
uation and used it to pit people
against each other, and to pit every-
one against National Liberation move-
ments everywhere.

Throughout the interview, we ques-
tioned Lebrón about the role of women
in nationalist movements. First, we
asked, "You have called on women to
work in revolutionary movements. But
it seems that so many of these move-
ments fail to address the oppression
of women by patriarchy, both in the

family and by men of the working class.

Many 'people's' revolutions have oc-
curred that have not measurably im-
proved the position of women. How are
we to unite to fight Capitalism and
Imperialism when many women do not

“have faith in the good intentions of

revolutionaries, at least as far as
women are concerned?"

First, Lebrón agreed that as a re-
sult of Imperialist and Traditional-
ist systems, women have been kept
down. But, she believes that women
must liberate themselves, and that
they have to help men to know that
they are not the only ones who can
be leaders. Insisting that "we cannot
wear our sex as our crown," and
that gender is not the most important
thing, Lebrón urges women to define
"liberation" and to make that defini-
tion universal.

MORE ON PAGE 25

-Cindy Fredrick/LNS