culture

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 3

Struggle -

Decoding The Messages Of Politics & Art

Constance Perenyi

A clean sheet of paper - I could play it straight, and safe, or I could
take another risk and open up. Why does it feel so dangerous this time? I've
gotten stronger, more confident in my politics as a feminist, and that should
make me more resilient. Why then am I so timid? I still get mixed messages
from other political women about personal expression - both in writing and
in visual art, although that is still pretty much overlooked.

And that is why I am writing another struggle column for the culture page.
I've let the mixed messages get in my way, and that in turn has put me at
odds with my art. I don't like that - for me, alienation from art is the
quickest route to exhaustion, both politically and emotionally. And so, I
find myself dealing with the same questions, all variations on the same theme
of integrating feminist politics and culture. After months of concentrating on
developing as a revolutionary feminist, and barely holding onto myself as
an artist, I understand why the culture page has been an albatross to past
collective members. Making the connections between art and politics is hard -
it shouldn't be, but it is. And it's even harder to answer these questions,
solve the dilemma in the context of art itself. Once again, at the risk of
being redundant, I'll ask the same questions I've asked in my writing before,
because now, I think I understand more, and at the same time, less.

In so many ways, it is clear to me what we don't want in the way of feminist
culture. At a recent anti-draft rally in Denver, women's presence was
clearly "cultural" rather than political; instead of making strong feminist
statements against the draft, its connections and consequences, women pro-
vided entertainment: a chorus, theater, poetry. Later on, another BMR collective
member made the criticism that at political events, feminist politics are
frequently diluted into the words of movement poets, playwrights, and songwriters.
I've thought about that observation a lot. As women's culture stands now,
the criticism is often valid - cultural expressions commonly seem an escape
from reality, or such an oversimplification of women's struggles that those
struggles lose universal political significance.

- Womanspirit

And what are those struggles? One of them is the fight against "traditional"
culture that has misogyny deeply embedded at its roots. Recently, another local
protest focused on "Windows", a United Artists film that is outrageously anti-
lesbian. (See BMR, Vol. 8, No. 2). The protest, like all those that women could
stage around the clock, day-in-and-day-out, was appropriate. But in many ways,
women protesting the most blatant examples of women-hatred often undercut
their efforts by missing the heart of the problem - and that is what happened
at the “Windows” action in Denver, and probably in other cities as well.

By dwelling on the fact that "Windows" is anti-lesbian, the women who org-
anized the action failed to make the connection that the film is essentially
an affront to all women. It should be the target of feminists who are strug-
gling with the issues of violence and rape within the context of a broader
social and economic analysis. In the leaflet prepared by the Committee for
Lesbian and Gay Human Rights, organizers quote Rocky Mountain News film re-
viewer William Gallo as commenting, "(Windows) is rough, cruel, effectively
shot . . . and it falls into the deadliest of traps: It comes very close to
endorsing what it condemns. Keep the rapists out of the theater for this one.”
There is no analysis in the leaflet of Gallo's inane statement - how do we
keep the rapists out? Out of theaters? Out of our homes? Off the streets? And
how do we know that Gallo is not a rapist himself? His words are naive, in-
sensitive to the problem, and clearly made by someone who has never had to
fear rape. Without an analysis, it is the leaflet that comes close to endors-
ing Gallo rather than pointing out how dangerous his review is.

Furthermore, the flier conveys the message that "we" can do something about
"Windows", and "a movie industry that insists upon censoring positive images
of Lesbians and gays in films," if (1) we contact the management of the
theaters showing the film to demand that age requirements be enforced to
protect young people. And (2) if we write to United Artists to express our
feelings about "Windows" and insist that they do not sell the movie to tele-
vision or cable distribution companies. This strategy, if we can call it that,
gets nowhere near the problem. The assumptions here are that peaceful, law-
abiding women can prevent the disease from spreading. Also assumed is that
films made in Hollywood could, if their makers did not censor "positive im-
ages", be sensitive to lesbian lifestyles, to women's concerns. We are still
asking them to consider what we want. And it seems to me that these are the
very attitudes that have kept women in place, for if we want "them" (any of
them) to listen to us, we are going to have to accept the fact that to fight
fire, we must fight with fire. The "Windows" action was passive at best.

And finally, I have to note that the word "feminist" was nowhere to be seen
in the leaflet, which is not surprising because there were no feminist poli-
tics either. Although the organizers stated that the film was "anti-woman",
I got the feeling that once again, we were supposed to assume that women
who protest something that is “anti-lesbian" are automatically feminists.
The old refusal to use the word feminist honestly, to develop a thorough
political analysis because that might just alienate someone who is comfortable
being gay, but not woman-identified in the truest sense of those words (which
to me translate as feminist).

And the ultimate expression of this edginess was not even printed in the
leaflet, but was pervasive as women at the action chanted, "Women do not ob-
jectify." It's true that women do not objectify in quite the same ways as men;
but it's absurd, and dangerous, to think that women are not guilty of objecti-
fying each other at all - we've grown up with few other examples to guide
our interactions with other women. And it takes hard work to identify and
root out the obvious, and hidden pitfalls of our own sexism. It is equally ab-
surd to think that we free ourselves from United Artists, or any other oppress-
ive control just by saying, "You're fucked, but we're OK because we're women."
The danger in this is that we cease to question our values, our politics - and
we resist growing into feminism.

In fact, it is this kind of "sisterhood at all costs" that thoroughly con-
fuses the principles of feminism, and challenges us to distinguish what is
in the best interests of women, and what is exploitation. There are a lot
of people, both men and women, who have cashed in on feminism as if women's
lives were just another trendy commodity. And so, when we deal with “women's
culture" we have to untangle what we want to keep for ourselves from what
we have to reject if we are going to survive.

I cannot go further without mentioning my struggle with the work of so-
called feminist Judy Chicago. The artist who conceived the Dinner Party (an
enormous triangular table that honors women out of history with their own
place settings of a vaginally-imaged plate and embroidered cloth runner and is
surrounded on the floor by names of women who are not as well known as those
seated at the main table), Chicago is also a woman steeped in the American
work ethic. She came up with a formula, and proceeded to get all she could
out of the concept. With the disciplined (apparently her discipline) help of
hundreds of craftspeople, Chicago created a monument to women, who have been
for the most part, monumentalized already in some way. She created a hierar-
chy to achieve the Dinner Party (she was the artist, the only one to design
the plates; the others were the workers, the ones who made the props); and
in so doing, she maintained both a history and a classism that have tradition-
ally held women away from feminism. Superficially, Chicago has done a great
thing for women - after all, she shed some light on a past that is forgotten
while she guided modern women working with her to artistic professionalism.
But right now, as I struggle with time to make art, I consider the "collec-
tive" efforts that went into Chicago's masterpiece (pun intended) to be
wasted. What kind of expressions would have been made by all those women, and
men, if J.C. had set them free to work on their own art?

And so, I have to look again at all that is wrong with women's approach
to culture (mainstream as well as movement) to get to what is right. Or
what could be right - I still have more questions than answers. And, I under-
stand, over and over again, why revolutionary feminists are suspicious of
culture, because over and over again, the same mistakes are made. But as an
artist, I am confused because I want support for my own struggle of trying to
put art and politics together. Just because I make art, I don't want to be
lumped into the same category as a Judy Chicago, nor do I want to spend all
my time in protest of films while I try to make the word “feminist” accepta-
ble.

And that seems hard right now because so few people seem willing to look at
art that is out of the mainstream. We may feel comfortable boycotting a par-
ticularly offensive movie, but the fact stands that our tastes - and our
values - are still dictated by pop culture. While many women watch TV to re-
lax, I feel as if I need to justify my time spent making art. Hence, I feel
the bind of double messages. It seems like we can accept differences in people
but that we do not accept anyone who is too different. We say that the poli-
tical is personal, but still warn each other not to be too personal. We all
know that for our own survival, we have to move away from the culture that
oppresses us; and yet, we seem unwilling to make breaks from our own means
of personal escape, even if those means continue to weaken us politically.

And lately, these contradictions threaten to cripple me as an artist. I
want my art to be political, to portray and relate to women's lives and
struggles; but there are so few precedents, and so little encouragement to
develop art in politics in art, and in turn, art from politics. Rather than
getting closer to this integration though, I find myself further alienated
from it. I make art that is clearly political, and then I make art that is
not so obviously derived from struggle. I feel like my political art has to
be "together" - like it has to be polished, yet reflective of searching.
There's an obvious contradiction here - and I can't seem to get around it.
In private, I allow myself the luxury of “escape art". For months, I have ten-
uously hung onto my identity as an artist by working slowly, and methodically
on a large quilt; and I understand the process thoroughly. I can let myself
wander and work things out in my mind, or I can focus on the pattern as I
piece - mostly, I can make something without having to challenge myself
every step of the way.

In

oa POX - Lilith

And yet, I am defensive about the quilt - I share it only with women I
trust, and who know how hard I am struggling with feminism. I am still afraid
to let too many women get that close to me or to my art because I fear that
they will deny, or negate my struggles. As I have worked at my own politics,
I have come to better understand that there are rights and wrongs, and that
we all have to keep working individually and collectively to arrive at what
is best for everyone. But I also believe that none of us is there yet, and
that we have a primary responsibility to all women to work through our
own crap. I want to be able to share my personal struggles as much as I want
to share in collective struggles. But I still get the feeling that we
expect each other to be "there" already, and that we should keep the process
quiet, to ourselves. And right now, that means that I don't show much of
my art.

I want to bridge the gap between the political and personal, and between
politics and culture. Most of all, I want to bring all my lives together in
as much as I can do that right now. And I want other women to do that too,
because somehow, that is what will make the difference in the end. Trust
is not automatic - it has to be earned and cultivated. And that means that
we can't automatically trust all women, but that we can grow into that trust
with those who are willing to work at it. And again, we're all in process.
What we're trying to do is hard. We've got to keep trying even if it seems
that the odds are stacked against us. And so, the struggle goes on.