Brainbomb + Woman Survival  
Glaeshia Lily O’Rourke  

| no longer am the giggling child of playsie/funsie/gamsie love of life.  
And yet I am.  

| no longer am the warm dreamy adolescent feeling the first gush of  
loving infinity through my body. And yet I am.  

If I am not the birthing infant and curiosity child and wondering  
teenager and angering young adult, then who am I?  

I am all those me's.  

Can you deny the facts of your personal evolution? Of course not. A  
tower skyscraper cannot deny the fact of its underground foundation.  
Yet we are brainwashed from childhood never to ask out loud the first  
question of our existence: “Who am I?”  

Ask it now. Out loud.  

Now write it down. On paper.  

For the first time in your society-controlled life take control of your  
own identity: past, present and future. Start with the most obvious, yet  
most cleverly avoided fact: “Who am I?” Once you take that first step,  
the next will be easier: “What do I want for my Self in this one and only  
chance at Life?” The final step is the easiest of all: getting it.  

But first things first. How do you do the step-by-step work of getting  
past the Fear that has been conditioned into you to block you from  
releasing the huge dormancy of your iceberg brain? Merely have the  
courage to ask the supreme first question, simply, truly and honestly:  
“Do I really want to know my Self?” If the answer is “yes,” you will not  
be satisfied until you have gone all the way down into your neurons and  
out toward the stars. Only then will your emotions rest in the joy-meaning  
of, “Now I know me.” You cannot lie to your emotions. But once the  
two of you are playing together like awed children in love with the daily  
game of survival and transcendence, then, and only then, will your  
emotions relax from child suck and turn toward mature giving: “How  
shall I help my sisters and brothers achieve whole brain maturity?”  

Method  

1. Wait. Let several days pass while these ideas soak deep into your  
“I want” needs and thoughts. Arrange your paper and writers.  

2. Jump. When the proper day and exciting moment comes, stop  
everything and plough into your past. Trust your emotions to tell you  
when the 100% right day comes. Don’t push. Relax. Let the words gush,  
naturally. Say anything and everything in whatever way you want. If  
profanity feels good, say it profanely. No one will ever read this docu-  
ment unless you choose to share it with a soulmate.  

3. Sleep. Retreat from the exhaustion of child re-birth: the new You.  
During sleep the brain computer automatically sorts, calculates and  
relates thoughts to emotions formed into larger matrices of self-  
meaning.  

4. Re-write. With refreshment, the flow will continue; increase. Get  
it all down. Above all, continually ask questions. Each question triggers  
a vast fecal impaction; releases a vast energy reservoir. Notice how the  
questions are 100% perfect to your needs. The brain is that way: an  
automatic, self-therapizing hunk of meat.  

5. Sensitivity Curve. On a scale of -10 to 0 to +10, define your  
feelings for each number. Document your sensitivity number each day;  
each part of each day. Graph the curve. Your eyes now can see the ups  
and downs of your self-therapy. Seeing is believing.  

6. Daily Power Accounting. For at least the next year, continue your  
backward self-therapy and forward self-growth to your self-chosen  
goals. Now merely add the playsie-funsie-gamsie behaviors of your  
adolescent good memories; of your child good memories; of your infant  
automatic/genetic drive to love Life. “Age-Looping.” Loop your brain  
back to prior memories to create delightful behaviors today. Do some  
each day. For that is who you are: Life Lover.  

Classifieds  

Classifieds are free for personal messages and for free services. All  
else is 10¢ per word. Mail to 8/g Mama Rag, 1724 Gaylord, Denver,  
80206 or call 322-2010. Ads must be received by the 20th of the month.  

WOMEN’S & OTHER POLITICAL  

Feminist silver: Sagaris, Undjat eye.  

RECORDS. Willie Tyson, Meg, Christian, Lavender Jane, Red Star  
Singers, others. SASE for full list. We're anti-profit, collectively-run  
store. BREAD & ROSES COMMUNITY MUSIC CENTER, 1724 20th St.  
NW, Dupont Circle, Columbia (DC) 20009.  

1548 Ogden for Feminists... Buffets  
$95/month inc. utilities/ $50  
deposit. Parking. Uretta, 832-2794.  

I am a woman dissatisfied with my  
present living situation. Myself and  
two children want to share a home  
with other women and children.  
(West) Jill 232-6064.  

Custom designed; Turquoise. San-  
dia, c/o BMR or 1800 Gaylord.  

Olivia Records 45; Meg Christian  
and Cris Williamson; available at  
BMR office, $1.50; or call Suzy 832-  
7102.  

Woman Who Paints for a living is  
getting poorer and poorer because of  
lack of work! Interior or exterior.  
Reasonable rates. Call Chocolate at  
744-3807 or 322-2010.  

Les Femmes - Sue meet me at Les  
Femmes, a new all women’s lounge.  
Formerly The Brew at 608 E. 13th on  
Friday or Saturday at 8:00.  

Community Media Meets  

Male “Left” Hassles  

Elissa Meyer  

Growing numbers of people  
are becoming familiar with video  
as a powerful tool for social  
change. Women’s images have  
been manipulated by powerful,  
male, moneyed interests.  
Women have watched lithe  
lovelies float across the screen,  
and prim housewives await the  
saving graces of Mr. Clean. With  
the advent of portable ½” video  
equipment, we can become our  
own image creators. Equipped  
with porta-paks, women can  
walk into our own reality and  
record the truth of what we are  
and what we are becoming.  

The 60's brought about ex-  
plosive awareness. Young peo-  
ple were exhausted by a barrage  
of contradictions — increasing  
education and decreasing jobs,  
speeches of peace and a fester-  
ing Indochinese war, an  
idealistic constitution and a  
nightmarish society full of racial  
and sexual prejudices. In a surge  
of energy, some people reclaim-  
ed the right to exercise control  
over their lives. We were not  
content to passively consume  
the propaganda of the American  
ruling class; we created a reality  
from our own experiences.  
Although there was a painful im-  
maturity in our work, the skills  
developed during that period  
were invaluable. People wrote  
their own music, published their  
own newspapers, and designed  
their own posters. Rather than  
being locked into conventional  
means of communication, we  
created our own.  

Community TV is an extension  
of this process. Television has  
always been a stronghold of es-  
tablished propagandists. Our  
emerging skills and the forces of  
change gained us access to  
some printing presses, and a few  
radio stations. With more access  
to the tools came maturing  
products, for example this  
newspaper. But television  
remained securely in the hands  
of so-called professionals. The  
overwhelming expense of televi-  
sion production, the deliberate  
mystification of technical infor-  
mation, and the prejudices of  
network backers all contributed  
to the inaccessibility of TV. Video  
can and does bypass a good  
deal of all these obstacles.  

Women and DCVC  

The Denver Community Video  
Center has attempted to give the  
community access to the tools  
and skills for television produc-  
tion. To me this has meant that  
I can produce my women’s view  
of the August Women’s Festival  
and I can create a script about  
my understanding of women’s  
culture without the hindrance of  
male producers and directors.  

And to the ill-fated Wazee  
Center — the refuge for skid-row  
residents — video meant that  
staff from Wazee could describe  
for television the culture of skid-  
row. Broadcast television has  
been notorious for ripping off  
the images of powerless  
derelicts and flashing those into  
the homes of TV viewers, some  
of them friends and relatives of  
the unfortunate, whom the in-  
dividual may be trying to avoid.  
But Wazee staff, knowing the  
heartbeat of skid row, presented  
a view which respects the life-  
style of this tiny minority.  

Tool for Change  

To the anti-war POWs video  
has afforded them freedom of  
speech, even though other es-  
tablished media have attempted  
to silence them. Repeatedly we  
heard from the returning POWs  
who wholeheartedly supported  
the U.S. Stand in Viet Nam, even  
though Congress is now  
repudiating that very stand and  
denying continued support for  
intervention. Did the patriots  
who in good conscience opposed  
the war have a fair say upon  
their return? With portable video  
it was possible to videotape anti-  
war POWs statements and  
make them available for public  
viewing.  

When police, equipped with  
video equipment, were record-  
ing the faces of demonstrators  
at a United Farmworkers rally,  
community people, also similarly  
equipped, recorded that there  
was no violation of the law. Tra-  
ffic was allowed to flow freely  
and people merely exercised  
their guaranteed right to a  
peaceful picket line.  

The Money Game  

Unfortunately, ½” video  
equipment, although con-  
siderably less expensive than 2”  
quad equipment (used by broad-  
cast TV), is still out of reach for  
the income of the average in-  
dividual. The DCVC has  
struggled for two years to put  
together a facility for the com-  
munity. This facility is operated  
and maintained at the lowest  
feasible cost and depends large-  
ly on the contributions and  
donations of friends, supporters,  
and community participants.  
The use of DCVC equipment is  
not free, but it is damn close. The  
minimal fees go into  
maintenance and equipment  
funds to guarantee the good  
working condition of the equip-  
ment and the purchase of ad-  
ditional equipment for com-  
munity use.  

In Denver, there is an in-  
dividual who has ½” video  
equipment. One piece, a Sony  
3650 editing deck, was purchas-  
ed by Bob Brown with funds  
given to him by two anonymous  
individuals on the condition that  
this equipment be available for  
the community to use for  
“revolutionary” purposes. At  
one time this editing deck resid-  
ed in Bob's closet for long  
stretches of time. It was then  
“loaned” to the Video Center  
(and I question his right to loan  
equipment which by rights  
belongs to the community) and  
was accessed by the community  
groups previously mentioned as  
well as many others. Then this  
deck, made available to Bob  
Brown on the same terms it is  
made available to any other in-  
dividual, was used by him to  
show some videotapes at an Oc-  
tober League gathering and  
never returned to the Video  
Center. My assumption is that  
he took the ‘football’ home and  
put it back in his closet where it  
sits unused as before. His  
charge was that he did not ap-  
prove of the Denver Community  
Video Center's politics. My reac-  
tion at the time was one of ex-  
treme anger and frustration and  
why? I would also like to public-  
ly renounce his actions.  

First, I maintain he has no  
basis for disapproving of DCVC  
politics since he neither knows  
what they are nor has he made  
any effort to find out. Over the  
phone, he refused to come and  
talk with the DCVC coordinating  
group and present his position.  

The Radical Mind Fuck  

I know Bob as a respected  
member of the radical communi-  
ty. Occasionally there are issues  

21  

on which we do agree. On the  
other hand, this action reeks of  
liberalism and lack of trust. It  
reminds me of the liberal foun-  
dation mentality which will fund  
a minority group out of guilt to  
give free breakfasts to children —  
making it appear to society  
that they are community minded  
do-gooders. But when the  
minority group starts serving  
political analysis with breakfast,  
the foundation cuts the purse  
strings because “they don’t like  
the politics” of the group. Bob  
Brown may feel that some of the  
organizations with which the  
video center has worked are not  
progressive in terms of his own  
politics. But for him to deny  
these disenfranchised groups  
access to resources is, in my  
framework of thinking, a most  
regressive action. When he  
claims that he will decide in a  
unilateral fashion who will use  
that equipment, he falls into the  
same if not worse category than  
the ruling class media  
themselves, especially since he  
is professing radical rhetoric.  
Broadcast television stations  
decide who they will give  
coverage to and who they will  
exclude; they color the images  
they do choose to broadcast to  
express their own bias. As a  
woman, I have experienced in  
my guts the results of this bias.  
I have seen my own image dis-  
torted beyond recognition. It is  
extremely distressing to dis-  
cover that a man, who I once  
considered an ally in struggle,  
claims to know better than I how  
to use television for the benefit  
of the community. I know he  
cannot tell my women’s story on  
videotape. And I seriously doubt  
if the other groups now denied  
the use of the equipment would  
choose to have Bob express their  
point of view as opposed to doing  
it for themselves. Monopoly of  
resources and skills is one of the  
issues I am struggling against. I  
trust that when women have  
access to both, particularly in  
terms of video, that the nature of  
television programming and  
production will change. I'm sorry  
that my esteemed friend does  
not share this trust. His personal  
paranoia is preventing him from  
practicing the very politics he  
professes.  

I doubt if this article will  
endear me to certain sectors of  
Denver's radical community. But  
I am personally sickened by the  
divisiveness which abounds  
when groups or individuals set  
themselves up to be judges of  
other groups and individuals  
regarding their politics. That in  
itself seems to me to be lousy  
politics.  

“Contempt prior to investiga-  
tion condemns a person to ig-  
norance!”  

At this time I would like to in-  
vite the community to a public  
discussion of this controversy.  
Since the tides of temper have  
subsided, I am anxious to hear  
the arguments for and against  
my present position. I reserve  
the right to change my mind. I  
just hope others are similarly in-  
clined.