struggle

Raising Children In The

Neva

I am me, and being me to the outside world means all the usual labels--late
30's, single (divorced after 13 years of marriage), somebody's sister, some-
body's daughter, somebody's lover--but always for the last 13 years of my
life--ALWAYS with all the joys and woes attached thereto, comes "Somebody's
mother."

The most pervasive label of all for me, besides "woman," is that of mother.

I am the person who bore three male children and choose to mother all three
of them to some extent or another. My sons are 13, 11, and 5; I chose to split
custody of them at the time of the divorce, and so the older two live most of
the time with their father; the younger one lives with me.

The two older children know of my lifestyle; they understand what the word
"Lesbian" is and that I am choosing to label myself as Lesbian. They seem
to be very much okay with that knowledge. The youngest son knows that he has
lots of women in his life because of our rather sizeable extended family in
the women's community where we live. He loves and has his own relationship
with my partner, just as he does with various other women in the community
who share somewhat in his nurturing. Now, it would be delightful to be able
to end this with that statement; doesn't it make a lovely picture?

It has not always been that way. It is not that way yet except on an indiv-
idual-to-individual basis. That is progress, and I am not about to open the
panacea of people having the right to choose not to relate to children--
especially to male children--and all those phrases. Of course, we have those
rights. I have lots of questions, however:

When can I stop carrying the banner of motherhood in the lesbian community?
When will we as a group face the fact that the rights of children and the
rights of women are indeed irrevocably linked? When can I plan to take ALL
my children, pubescent and pre-schooler and in-between with me to a community
holiday function without having to fear that they will not be welcomed?

Where can I find functions which combine women's process, women's rituals
and welcome my children? Why do people think that because my son now has be-
gun to have a deeper voice and grow hair in new places that he is suddenly an
ogre? When will women realize that two wrongs do not make a right?

Fantasy is fun and a sustenance to my soul at times, and I too would like
to be in a place where women share and are truly family, etc. However, the
truth is that we are not in a world of just women; we do live in a world with
males.

I wanted male children when I decided to have children.
for them or for that desire. Had I been able to program it, I could not have
done better. I have 3 beautiful sons, and I am proud of them. However,
while I feel the responsibility of those children 24 hours a day, I am not a
professional mother, nor a PTA stereotype by any means and sometimes, just

sometimes, I would like to have them so accepted in my world that I could
even forget that I have to be a mother--in the political sense.

I chose to reclaim my own identity and reclaim that part of myself which I
had denied for so long--the part of me who really loves women...to free my-
self to love women and to be with women. I chose to do that, and it was made
very easy (comparatively speaking) by a very active Lesbian/Feminist communi-
ty in my area. Knowing I had the support of women was enough to allow me to
let go of my upper middle-class husband and his handsome income and all the
accoutrements thereof. I decided to make that break in June. I found lots
of support here for what I was doing, and I assumed that that extended to my
children; I had no idea for a while what a "Separatist" is, what "male de-
fined" meant, etc.

Come Thanksgiving that year, the community had its annual Thanksgiving Day
dinner. I was informed politely but firmly that my sons would not be wel-
come, even though another woman in the community would be taking her daught-
ers. Because I could not get a baby-sitter on a holiday, I wound up spending
the better part of the day (and the week preceding it) trying to figure out
what it was all about.

Several women decided to find out how extensive the feeling was against the
male children in the community; they took a poll right there at that dinner,
and they found only about 3 women out of the 20+ in attendance who really
endorsed the fact that the male children should be excluded. We chose to
confront this directly.

I do not apologize.

-Carol Clement/Garfand Calendar 1976
Diana Press

We had a general community meeting a couple of weeks later, and for the
first time in this community that I know of, the issue of children in this
lesbian community was discussed. Consensus was that children would be either
included in all public functions or would have special child care arrange-
ments made for them. Since that time, we have had child care for all of our
coffeehouses, for all annual and/or publicly advertised functions or else
the children (male and female) have been welcomed for either all or a signifi-
cant portion of the event.

We have come a long way since that awful Thanksgiving 2 years ago, but not
far enough.

One mother was refused housing in a predominantly homosexual commune-type
house because she would have a child with her. You see, the double bind often
winds up being that the outside world asks us--demands sometimes, it seems--
that we hide our sexuality; the lesbian/gay world asks us to hide our parent-
ing, saying basically, “give away your male children;" or "it's okay if you
have kids, but I don't want to hear about it."

I had one heck of a time trying to explain to my 5-year-old why we could
not go to Michigan to the festival last year; I did not even mention the poss-
ibility this year. He loves women; he loves women's music; he has known
since he was 20 months old the warm, loving nurture of women who have chosen
to participate in his life. Now you try explaining to him why he can't go.
You try to make it sound as though he has deserved that kind of rejection
when he has not even reached school age. You try to explain to him how so-
and-so can be so loving and spend time with him, and yet refuse to allow him
to be in that space simply because he is male. I despair at it.

Our hope is in our children, and yet those kinds of actions are so difficult
to explain, because, truly there seems to be no explanation. It is that what
understanding, what freedom we have gained is being voided. Our children are
in a terrible bind. We say to them, "be gentle," "be loving," "be strong," "be
creative" ad infinitum—with our mouths only, it would seem sometimes. Then,
we do not support them. We do not replenish their stores of spiritual ener-
gy. They are spiritual persons, too, but we fail to realize that. As a
mother, I get weary. I get depleted. I get lonely. I don't want the commu-

You know, one of the
things that amazes me
most is that grown,
strong, independent-
minded women can be so
intimidated by offspring

of their friends, espec-

ially if those offspring

are males.

-Credit lost by us

nity, or the sub-culture to raise my children for me. I want them to lend a
hand with replenishing me by doing some of the training, some of the spiritual
support directly to the children.

When I have been ill physically, this community has been absolutely phenom-
enal in their tangible, loving support—in all aspects. They have taken turns
coming over to bathe and bed my son when I was too ill to lift him; they have
come and taken him for several hours of outings so that I could rest; they
have given him a home while I was in the hospital.

My son wants a cat; our landlord will not allow us to have cats or dogs; so
one of the women down the street shares her cats with him, and he goes over
to visit for about 30 minutes a week. It is enough for him and no burden for
her; it makes me feel good to know she is there. One woman each year gives
the moms here a night out during the bad months in February, March time frame; she
keeps them for about 2 hours once a week so that we can do whatever with that
time. She is my son's special friend. For the last two years some women who
live out in the country have had a slumber party for the kids. Another woman
offers and does do—finding babysitting while we go out once in a while.

My oldest son used the Michigan Music Festival as an example of prejudice
and how he had felt discriminated against. This was in his health class at
school. The teacher reacted by as much as calling him a liar; my son asked
that I verify it had happened. The teacher never apologized to my son after-
ward. Now, how do I go about teaching this child that such things are wrong;
he knows they are; he is the victim in this case, and HE KNOWS IT. Is that
what it is all about? Is it that women want men to be victims?

I live in fear that my sons will grow up to be insensitive to women's issues
in spite of what I have tried to teach them and in spite of what other women
have tried to show them here. It is these blows that will leave the ugly
marks. Somewhere the cycle of hate and violence has to end.

We went to a "Take Back the Night March" the other evening. My two older
sons had decided to march with me, at my invitation. The first thing upon
arriving that happened was that we were told that men had been asked not to
march at all with us. Both boys were disappointed; both boys felt like they
were not wanted there at that function. One marched with me anyway; the other
chose not to do so. What better way to educate our children than to have them
with us? My son who marched with us was appalled at the heckling, the barra-
cade of men at a frat house, the beer bottles thrown at us. Now, I could
have told him all those things exist, but he would never have seen it from my
perspective, had he not been there with us. I ask you, what better way to
teach them is there than that?

As a group, the moms in this community (or some of us) wrote an open letter
to the community in our newsletter, listing some of the things that we have
to deal with daily. We were not seeking revolution in an obvious way; we
wanted to do some consciousness raising. We met very negative reactions for
the most part. Women in this Lesbian community do not want to have their con-
sciousness raised. The women who have begun to deal with the issue of child-
ren among us have only just begun to scratch the surface, and there is no
resolution about what happens when the male children are adolescent? Are
they still welcome at community functions?

You know, one of the things that amazes me most is that grown, strong, ind-
ependent-minded women can be so intimidated by offspring of their friends,
especially if those offspring are males. That is really astounding to me!

I find this to be an issue about CHILDREN—generically, if you will. Women
who have not been around young children much are frightened of them for vari-
ous reasons, not trusting their own ability to relate to children as people
and fearing that they do not know how to care for the children properly. Sev-
eral women have said, “show me how to be with them/him/her." Perhaps that is
the key to some of this. Realizing that fear is at the root of much anger in the broader scope, and realizing on the more narrow scope that ignor-
ance about simply how to be with children is at the root of fear.

I somehow feel like, even though my children are not perfect, they are
interesting folks. Each has his own personality, and those women who have
grown to know them in this community have begun to have less of a problem
with the idea of adolescent boys being at our holiday functions, etc.

Now, the truth of the matter is that I have grown bone-tired. I do not
make enough money to afford to go out much. I certainly do not make enough
to hire a baby-sitter and go out. I cannot afford baby-sitters and therefore
cannot take night classes. When I chose to return to school for a Master's

Voy

13 f°) MORE ON PAGE 11