het biieis

Circle Supports Alpert

Twelve women have organized
a Circle of Support for Jane
Alpert. The Circle calls “for the
support of all women who can
identify with the courage of Jane
Alpert and who wish to clear the
name of a woman who has
chosen feminism over male
ideologies.” Activities thus far
have included compiling and
circulating a list of recommended
reading, including books,
pamphlets and articles.
Literature, news items and buttons
can be ordered from the
circle itself at 316 Fifth Ave.,
New York, NY 10001.

NZ Working Women Unite

The Working Women’s
Alliance is a new movement
which surfaced in New Zealand
in April of this year. The Alliance
has branches in Wellington and
Dunedin, and describes itself as
“an organization of working
women and housewives who
stand opposed to the exploitation
of working people and the
further discrimination that
women face.”

Mann Is A Pig

At a concert at the Hartford
Civic Center in Connecticut,
Herbie Mann, maestro of the
easy-listening jazz flute, announced
that the first 100 “chicks” to come
backstage would receive an
autographed copy of his album.
Furthermore, he announced that,
in every city he played, he would
be running a beauty contest with
himself as judge. Big Mama has
always preferred Alice Coltrane
anyway, but in future will definitely
be boycotting Herbie Mann.
— Atlanta, Connecticut

Dyke Comes Out

A new quarterly, devoted to
news and analysis of lesbian
culture, is due for publication in
the fall. Dyke, published by
Tomato Publications, 70 Barrow
St, New York, NY 10014, will be
in magazine format and will be
distributed nationally. All advertisers
and subscribers will be
women. Charter subscription is
$5.00 till November 30, thereafter
$8.00.

Court To Rule On Pregnancy

The U.S. Supreme Court has
agreed to rule on the question of
whether private employers can
treat pregnancy differently from
other temporary disabilities.
This fall the case of Wetzel v.
Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.
will be reviewed by the High
Court. District and appeals
courts have ruled that the company’s
income protection discriminated
against women.
— The Spokeswoman, Chicago

Herstorical Cards Available

Helaine Victoria is a California
feminist archive and postcard
publisher, dedicated to ‘making
information about women’s
history accessible—cheaply,
conveniently, interestingly, and
instructively.” Their postcards,
featuring pictures and descriptions
of historical women, are being
used as classroom aids, in
library displays and for correspondence.
Inquiries and ideas
should be directed to Helaine
Victoria Enterprises, P.O. Box
5747, Santa Monica, CA 90405.
A 10¢ stamp will buy an illustrated
brochure.

Women Win Backpay

The United States District
Court of Philadelphia has
ordered Temple University to pay
$35,147 in back pay to 76
women who perform custodial
duties at the University. The
women had been paid 11 cents
an hour less than men doing the
same work. The decree also
called for Temple to equalize
male and female wage rates.

Malay Women Farm Together

Eighteen months ago, sixty
Malay women settled on 5,000
acres of land in Johore state,
Malaysia, with the idea of
demonstrating that women
could be as good farmers as
men. The women, aged 18 to 25,
planted oil palms, vegetables,
tapioca and peanuts. The project
has done so well that more are
planned. It was sponsored by the
Johore state government at the
instigation of Kuam-lbu, the
women's section of Malaysia's
leading political party, the United
Malay National Organization.

Teach Them To Crochet

A study done by the Media
Action Project found that Bugs
Bunny, the Pink Panther and
several other children’s shows
average one hostile act every
minute. The average for all
Saturday morning shows was
one such act every 3½ minutes.

—LNS

Organize

“Organize! A Working
Women’s Handbook,” is now
available. It includes chapters on
How to Organize a Union — You
Can Do It If You Try; Writing and
Negotiating your Union Contract
(including strategy health and
safety); Learning the Rules and
Building a Caucus (including
rules of order, the key to rank
and file control, a short course in
parliamentary procedure, and
how to get out your own shop
newsletter); and bibliography.

The cost is $2.50 plus 25¢ on
mail orders. Ten or more, $2.00
plus postage. Special discount to
bookstores only, ten or more,
$1.75 plus postage. Write Union
WAGE Educational Committee,
P.O. Box 462, Berkeley, CA
94701.

Dyke Seeks NOW Office

Shepard Holderby, an open
lesbian, has been nominated by
the Colorado N.O.W. as a candidate
for the National Board.

Olivia Distributor

Olivia Records, the woman-owned
and operated record company
which produced Meg Christian's
I Know You Know, has an album
by Chris Williamson in the works.
Some of the studio's artists will be
touring in the next few months,
and we should see some of them
in Colorado. Meanwhile, keep in
touch with their activities by
contacting their new Colorado
distributor, Cheetah (444-4616).

Heterosexual Survival for Girl Scouts

Girl Scouts in Philadelphia
can now get a new merit badge
called “To Be A Woman.” To win
the badge, Scouts get to participate
in an educational course dealing
with sexual intercourse, pregnancy,
menstruation, VD, birth control,
rape and abortion (nothing, so far
as we know, on lesbianism). Parents’
permission is a prerequisite. The
local Roman Catholic authority,
upon hearing the news, directed
his flock to change to Campfire
Girls.

Activist Training

The Midwest Academy has
been established in Chicago to
train movement activists in
organizational skills. One of the
directors, feminist Heather
Booth, says that “the fundamental
challenge facing the women’s
movement is the translation of
consciousness into social action.”
Part of the purpose of the Academy
is to help give “permanence and
organizational force to the spontaneous
burst of the women’s
movement.” Information from
Heather Booth, Midwest
Academy, 600 W. Fullerton,
Chicago, IL 60614.

More Cancer News

Remember last month we told
you about polyvinyl chloride, the
cancer-producing chemical found
in food packaging? Well, we just
discovered you don't have to wait
for the food corporations to lay it
on you, you can wrap your food
in carcinogen right in the privacy
of your own home, by using such
plastic films as Saran Wrap. PVC
is also used in water pipes built
into most new housing.

TCE is a substance used,
among other things, to extract
caffeine from coffee. General
Foods, the largest producer of
decaffeinated coffee, denied that
TCE was a health hazard, but
announced all the same that it
would switch to methylene
chloride, a substance whose
effects are not yet known.

An unusually high incidence
of lung cancer has been found
among beauticians using commercial
hair dyes.

Lesbian Mothers Triumph

In court cases at opposite ends
of the country, lesbian mothers
have won out. A judge in
Washington State ruled, as a
matter of law, that homosexuality
per se is not a proper basis for
denying custody to a parent. In
Boston, a lesbian was granted
custody of her youngest
daughter because she proved
she was interested in the child's
welfare.

Wives Unprotected

According to a study by University
of Michigan law students, women
who are beaten, knifed, sexually
mutilated or otherwise attacked
by their husbands have virtually
no legal protection or recourse.
The study includes interviews
with 20 women who have been
assaulted by their husbands,
and with police, prosecution and
judges.

Women's Hall of Fame

The Women’s Hall of Fame in
Seneca Falls, NY, honors
American women who have
made major contributions to the
fields of arts, athletics, business,
education, government,
humanities, philanthropy and
science. For information, write
Women’s Hall of Fame, P.O. Box
335, Seneca Falls, NY 13148.

DOBNJ Dissolved

The Daughters of Bilitis, New
Jersey, has been dissolved, after
board members allegedly suffered
harassment at the hands of an
ex-member. Some executive
board members and friends have
replaced DOBNJ with an organization
called United Sisters, or US.
The new organization will continue
much of the work done by DOBNJ,
but will be open to members by
invitation only, and will be run by
a collective.

Goodbye Dixy Lee

Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, former chairperson
of the Atomic Energy
Commission, gave her resignation
from the State Department to
President Ford early in July this
year. In her letter of resignation,
which she later made public, she
sharply criticized the Administration’s
domestic policies and lack of
action in critical areas. She finally
quit because she was being ignored
in foreign policy, research and
development decisions. When
she asked to meet with Henry
Kissinger to discuss her
grievances, she was told instead
to prepare a “briefing paper.”
She has taken her two dogs and
her motorized home back to her
native Washington State, where
she plans to write a book called
Goodbye America.

struggle

a continuing forum

Peg Hickox, Blue and Woodwoman

Women who look to the women’s movement for indiscriminate
support may end up depriving themselves and the movement of something
more important. To protect ourselves and each other from
criticism and confrontation is an exercise in self-deception, which
limits growth on every level. It is crucial to our survival as a movement
that we learn to criticize ourselves and each other, to crystallize our
anxiety, frustration, anger and pain into specifics tangible enough to be
dealt with.

Our fear of confrontation, of possible anger, of possible pain, goes
back to the cradle. As girls, we were not expected to take risks; if we took
a risk we were expected to fall; if we fell we were expected to cry and not
to repeat the adventure which made us fall. We were taught to avoid
pain at all costs, even the cost of our own growth.

And yet, for all that, women’s capacity for enduring pain is enormous.
Still, the idea of taking active part in a process which might cause pain,
frightens us. But pain has many sources, and certainly fear of failure is
one of the most important. Rather than fail we refuse to risk; rather than
see others fail, we shrink from criticizing. Out of this passivity, failure is
inevitable.

Decision-making is an active process; often it is a painful process.
When we make decisions, we confront our own passivity and the
aggression of our oppressors. We also have to confront the criticism of
other women in the movement.

In order to be effective politically, we are obliged to make decisions,
important decisions about questions of right and wrong. Taking a
political stance is a three-part process: it means investigating the
question, forming a judgment, and then taking responsibility for the
action which emerges. The second part is central and also very
threatening: it opposes the liberal defense of everyone to Do Her Own
Thing; it means forfeiting the illusion of indiscriminate support.

To be sure that the decisions we are making are the right ones, we
have to be prepared first to take the risk that they might be wrong. Risk is
an inevitable part of growing, because growth is a process of
exploration and experimentation. In exploring and experimenting, it is
naive to think that we will not make mistakes. The important thing is not
the mistake but the attitude toward it.

It's alright to hurt for someone who is wrong, to empathize and to care
for her although you don’t care for her decision. It is a loving and also a
vitally necessary act to confront her with that which is wrong, just as
her responsibility must be to open to that confrontation, and to work
with it. Criticism is not the same as trashing — it is an invaluable tool for
all-round growth.

Here, again, individual responsibility comes in — each group, each
relationship is unique. Each one deserves a unique style of criticism.
We are all peculiar composites of tough and fragile. It must be the
personal responsibility of each member of a group or participant in a
process to attune herself to the dynamics of that particular situation, to
exercise her sensitivity and her discretion.

Participation in a dynamic of mutual criticism is a commitment to
recognizing one’s own personal priorities, strengths and weaknesses.
In the process of criticism — a process adopted by political people in
order to make themselves more effective — one is brought face-to-face
with one’s own intimate self-knowledge.

It is unrealistic to imagine that somehow one day we'll all find ourselves
in such perfect agreement and harmony that we'll be able to discard
structures; or that structure alone will do away with the need for
sometimes painful, but very necessary confrontation. The personal and
the political merge at the point where each of us takes individual
responsibility to make our structures work. Building in space for
criticism is essential to that dialectic.

We're talking about survival.

What do all these people

have in common?

® Dolores Pacileo designed and built soft fabric
playgrounds for city children.

® Barbara Starrett studied the “hanged woman.”

® Joyce Livak developed materials which humanize
the study of nutrition.

They earned a Ph.D. for their work,
from the Union Graduate School.

For information write:

UNION GRADUATE SCHOOL ~ WEST

c/o University of the Pacific
P.O. Box 7999
San Francisco, California 94120

Alicia’s
Mexican Restaurant

278 Downing 777-9904
“Good Home Made Food”