Page 14

Women &
_ Histor

Emma Goldman

Emma Goldman was a famed anarchist and feminist whose
revolutionary ideas and outspokenness made her a legend in her
own time. She was born in czarist Russia on June 27, 1869. When
she was seventeen, she left Russia and joined her sister in
Rochester, New York, fleeing a tyrannical father and an arranged
marriage. She went to work in a garment factory, as she had in
Russia, and soon married another immigrant. But after being
radicalized by the hanging of the Haymarket martyrs, she divorced
her husband and left for New York City, where she almost
immediately began her career as a lecturer and organizer, at first
working closely with Alexander Berkman and Johann Most, the
well-known anarchists. But very quickly, Emma was known, in her
own right, as a passionate speaker and dynamic organizer. She
spoke to the issues of draft resistance, feminism, the need for
birth control, “free love,” and anarchism. She was often arrested
as a matter of course when she was to speak somewhere — and
she claimed she always carried a book with her so if she was
arrested, she would have something to read in jail.

The Homestead massacre led her to co-conspire with
Berkman in plotting the assassination of industrialist Henry C.
Frick. Berkman spent fourteen years in prison for the shooting,
though Frick was only wounded and recovered quickly. Emma was
never tried for that plot but later was imprisoned for complicity in
the plot to kill President McKinley, though she was innocent of
that charge.

Emma Goldman was a nurse and midwife, and so witnessing
the tragedy of poor women having more babies than they wanted
or could care for, she spoke and wrote about the necessity of birth
control methods and safe abortions. She expressed her own regret
at not being able to perform abortions herself, but she knew of no
safe method to use. Perhaps what Emma is most well known for is
her analogy between marriage and prostitution, and she
contemptuously criticized the hypocrisy of those who harassed
and imprisoned prostitutes. Though she was disappointed in the
women's emancipation movement at the time, she expressed her
views of the importance of liberation in her essay “The Tragedy of
Woman Emancipation.” She wrote: “Emancipation should make it
possible for woman to be human in the truest sense. Everything
within her that craves assertion and activity should reach its
fullest expression; all artificial barriers should be broken, and the
road towards greater freedom cleared of every trace of centuries of
submission and slavery.”

“Red Emma,” as she was known, did speak and write in
support of Women’s Liberation, but her movement work was
primarily with male colleagues, and she believed very much in an
integrated revolutionary movement. Her autobiography, which is
intriguing reading, communicates her insight, spirit, and most
impressively, her incredible self-confidence.

Emma was deported back to Russia in 1919, and her
deportation hearing was presided over by J. Edgar Hoover
himself. As the boat pulled out, she thumbed her nose at a
congressman who had come to watch the exit of the deported
anarchists. Once in Russia, which had experienced a revolution,
she criticized the repression she saw there. She left Russia,
traveled around, and finally settled in France where she died. Her
body was shipped to the US, and she was buried in the same
cemetery with the Haymarket martyrs.

(reprinted from Uppity Women! A Legacy of Liberation.)

Women listen intently as Chocolate Waters reads her new poem, “To the
Man Reporter from the Denver Post.”

Photos by Sandia

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 4

Lesbian Writers
Come Out of

Their Closets

Chocolate Waters and Sandia

Lesbian writers have often
had to come out of a very
different type of closet. Many
of them, plagued with the
self-doubt that has followed
women throughout history,
have hid their poems, stories,
chapters of potential books
and essays in bureau drawers.
Others, knowing their chances
of being published were
poor because they were
women or because they feared
repercussions if their real
names were known, hid under
masculine pseudonyms. Mari
Kuda, an organizer of the
Lesbian Writers’ Conference
held in Chicago September
13-15, stated that one of the
main purposes of the confer-
ence was to encourage and
support these very women.

The conference began Fri-
day night with a talk by Valerie
Taylor, an author in her 60s
who has published seven
novels about women. Her
speech was punctuated with
humorous and informative
disclosures about Lesbians in
the world of letters. Ms.
Taylor, herself a Lesbian
grandmother, noted the proud
inheritance from our cultural
grandmothers and empha-
sized how we could learn from
their experiences.

She traced Lesbian writers
from the beginning of the
twentieth century, focusing
particularly on the 50s. It was
during the early part of this
period that the market was
flooded with badly written,
sensationalistic Lesbian nov-
els (most written by men)
which depicted “a beautiful
butch in black lace underwear
who never gets out of bed
long enough to send the
sheets to the laundry. In the
end, she renounces women,
finding true love with a male
instead.”

Long Impressive List

At the same time, Lesbian
writers were trying to incor-
porate the theme of women
loving women in a more
dignified and realistic way.
The list is long and impressive
although not well known to
most readers: Gayle Wilhelm,
May Sarton, Violette Le Duc,
Jeanette Foster, Djuna
Barnes, and Colette - to
mention a very few. It is
impossible to explain their
contributions in depth here.
For this reason, one of the
most important outgrowths of
the conference was the
bibliography Woman Loving
Woman, compiled by the
Chicago organizers. (Ed.
note: now available at the
BMR office).

The 60s, according to
Valerie Taylor, was a turning
point in the history of Lesbian
Literature because of the
Women’s Movement and the
Gay Liberation Movement.

Women were now beginning
to realize that Lesbianism was
not only a viable lifestyle, it
was also politically important
in the context of a male-dom-
inated world. Out of this
realization grew such books
as Lesbian Nation, Sappho
was a Right-On Woman, and
Lesbian Woman.

Her speech ended with a
challenge for writers of the
70s to continue with this
proud inheritance and to
develop not only Lesbian
themes, but to “write about
the whole world.”

Writing Explored

On Saturday, several work-
shops explored different as-
pects of writing including
criticism, poetry, articles,
fiction, and getting published.
One unique idea viewed
writing as a collective expres-
sion, and the fiction workshop
experimented with this idea
and composed a collective
story. The need for a feminist
aesthetic or a way in which
women can express feminine
values in their writing was a
theme which ran throughout
many of the workshops.

The conference, which end-
ed with women reading their
original works and singing
their own songs, was for the
most part quite successful.
The agenda was well organ-
ized and carefully planned
although structure did at
times prevent a free flow of
discussion. There also
seemed to be some underly-
ing political differences con-
cerning the relationship of art
to Lesbian Feminism, and
these unexpressed feelings
subtly inhibited the confer-
ence in some respects. The
organizers tactfully prevented
any disruptions from occur-
ring, but for the sake of the
Chicago women, we do hope
these differences will even-
tually be worked out.

Nevertheless, the Lesbian
Writers’ Conference demon-
strated that women all over
the country are indeed writ-
ing, and writing in a way
which is positively reflective
of the Lesbian in life and
literature today. Write-On!

Lesbian writers talk about being published: “Often you just have to know
somebody,” said Cindy Carr, an article writer for the Chicago Sun-Times.
Panelists from left to right are Andra Medea (co-author of Against Rape),
Valerie Taylor, author of seven Lesbian novels, Cindy Carr, and Claudia
Scott, author of Portraits.