4 NEWS —

To: The Denver Sustaining Fund

From: The BIG MAMA RAG Collective

The Big Mama Rag Collective has decided that it will not be
returning to the DSF for additional funding in the future.

BMR has also decided to withdraw its membership in the DSF
because we feel that such participation is a drain of our energies
and a waste of time. We will be working with the women’s
community to raise the money we need to continue.

This decision was made by an overwhelming majority of the
women present at our meeting of July 14, 1974.

BMR also wants to state officially that we deeply appreciate the
support and help we received from the many community women
who attended the July 10 meeting of the DSF and from Kathy De
Paolo and Jim McNulty of the Board of Directors of DSF.

THE BOARD

The boys were playing their inherited role as bankers. We
unfortunately fell into the position of answering their absurd
questions of financial projections in similar terms instead of our
own politics - the necessity and vision of a woman's world...

The boys are only interested in supporting their own sense of
self-importance, $400. per month worth while funding the sacred
community $200...

I think the main issues were not dealt with. The underlying
conflict was the leftist male analysis and with it their priorities -
which are the male-defined community and a class analysis which
excludes the real status and experience of women in a sexist
society.

Janet Sergi

When the women from different groups offered support to BMR
at the DSF meeting, I was very excited. While I’ve been in Denver, 
I have not seen support and strength to the degree I saw here. I felt
our roots growing together, strengthening the women’s
community. The fear I saw from some other people makes me
wonder how the DSF can presently hope to work with the
community if it is threatened by the community and the potentials
within it! The fund itself has a potential which won't be met until it
deals with its own fear...

Lynda Hartman

THE AUDIENCE

Putting out the newspaper is our first priority and the reason we
originally went to the DSF. Many hours of the staff’s time was
spent writing and reworking proposals. It was our feeling that the
constant demand for new proposals was a way of evading the
issue of funds for BMR...

It is hypocritical for groups within the DSF with no working
class basis to criticize BMR for not having that basis. To us,
working class can be defined as living from paycheck to
paycheck. This definition applies to many of the women who
read BMR. It can therefore be stated that we do have ties with the
working class. We doubt that this is true of most of the groups
within the DSF. 

- Carol Hansford, Kate Sharp

THE STORY

The following is a recapitulation of basic facts which led
to the controversy with the Denver Sustaining Fund:

1. BMR was a member of the
Denver Sustaining Fund
(DSF), a “radical” funding
source for “alternative”
groups.

2. June 18 - BMR found itself broke.
3. June 19 - BMR submitted a
proposal to DSF for money:
$3500.

4. July 19 - BMR sent home
with empty pockets.
5. June 20 - BMR pissed off -
wrote new proposal: $1500.
6. July 10 - BMR and 50
female supporters submitted
second proposal and raised
hell.
7. July 10 - Being a chip off
the old block, the DSF sent us
home with $250. Told us to
“Come again, ladies.”
8. July 14 - LIBERATION DAY!
BMR decided to bring it all
back home. i.e.,
   a.) to not return to the
   DSF
   b.) to withdraw from the
   DSF
   c.) to get it together with
   the sisters for support.

THE EDITORS

Bringing it all back home is what this confrontation has been
about. Though surfacely - and even in an unconscious lie to
themselves - the DSF feels ultimately liberated that they don’t
need to be educated, their actions show they are missing the
point. The “radicals” turned out to be the Establishment Wed.
night—their $250. A “no” to a vision. They did not see women
forced to go before them as anything more than the girls trying to
get their shit together. The terms for granting money were
superlatively capitalistic - the justifications were in terms
of money, cost flow charts, return probabilities, etc...

Men have had print since Gutenberg. They sought in the word a
reflection of themselves AND in 500 years have failed to make the
word real, to give back to the earth sinew and life. Since 1968, six
years of birthing, the Women’s Movement has realized the full
capacity of media and sisterhood to be unifying. That by joining
together with paper and bookstore as part of the focus, women
can renew the journey. This time around that train full of poetry,
not dialectic, calling women on board in true coalition, has
arrived.

Sandy Belgrade (“the woman in the purple shirt”)

I was under the impression that the DSF represented some sort
of counter culture community here in Denver. Upon closer
analysis, however, I find that the member groups do not seem to
represent any kind of broader community... Therefore, I believe
that we do not have anything to gain by dealing with this group of
people. We have a large and growing women’s community here in
Denver that is visible and supportive and ready to move. This is
the area we should concentrate on...

Basically I’m bored with the boys and with their games,
intellectual masturbation and static social hierarchies. I think we
can get alternative funding without demeaning ourselves or our
sisters. The DSF is basically a boy’s illusion and we've had the
privilege of exposing it.

Maureen Mrizek

I feel like I just been had and with my assistance. What fools! A
$250 “NO.”... For the kind of time and effort we have given the
DSF we could have brought together the entire women’s
community of Denver... I am saying right now that my life and my
energies are for women - not for the male ego and not for male
political games... BIG MAMA LIVES!

Linda Fowler

I hate to say I told you so but...
Chocolate