Di ;

Dissolution in the Women’s Movement

Faced with one of her most serious energy crises, Big Mama Rag called for a community meeting, which took place at Woman to Woman on March 19, 1979. At that meeting, two women proposed doing an issue around the theme of dissolution within the women's movement. Their offer to put the issue together was, as we saw it, intended to give over-worked collective members a break, as well as a means to use BMR as a forum for their own perspectives on what is happening to the movement.

Actually, this month has been far from a vacation for any of us putting out the issue. But, we are printing everything turned into us that deals with the theme in hopes that it will stimulate discussion, and

Carol Lease, Sandia, Janet Sergi, Jackie St. Joan

What happens in a women's "think tank?" What happens when several political women try to brainstorm an issue in Denver or a crisis in the movement?

We know what is said at parties, and we know how talk goes at a bar or among friends. But maybe not many of us are present at those urgent sessions where committed women gather to share ideas, to try and make sense of their lives--and then to find the words so they can share it with other women.

These are the notes from one such meeting.

Sandia: BMR is losing collective members. They need a couple of months to train new women and get back on their feet.

Sandia offered to get some women together to write articles for one issue. She suggested a theme issue on dissolution in the women's movement and/or the Denver community, to explore reasons for demise and troubles with the Colorado Feminist Federal Credit Union, Virago, the Velvet Hammer, BMR, presses, etc.

The purpose of the meeting is to explore some ideas for articles, how we can help BMR, deadlines, whatever.

ISSUES/PROBLEMS/CONCERNS

Carol: I wonder if we are being too hard on ourselves, too critical. I think the Colorado Feminist Federal Credit Union closed prematurely. But I want the articles not to be too critical, but to inspire.

We feel that another problem is that young women are not as political these days. Being political isn't "in." Those of us in this group are all the same age (30's), at the same stage, perhaps have a more realistic perspective now.

Jackie: Minneapolis has a very active, solid women's community. Organizations are, for the most part, growing, not dying out.

In terms of specific examples in the Denver community, Janet brought up problems with CETA grants and Virago, a group which produced cultural events in Denver.

Janet: When Virago was a volunteer group, members produced several concerts. But when they started getting paid through CETA, they didn't do much and had all kinds of internal conflicts. Some women thought it should be run as a business, others wanted to see it in terms of political culture. At least one person who was paid a salary did no work. When you're a volunteer, it's okay not to work; the community can't say anything. But when you are getting paid $10,000 a year, you should be accountable. CETA money makes a difference. We can't use the same ethics we use in a volunteer group when people are getting paid. Internal problems make a difference, they weaken groups.

Jackie: Internal problems do make a difference, but we also need to look at what they did and how effective they were.

Carol wants to focus on the impact of this issue (internal problems), not on whom we should blame.

Sandia agrees that we need to put the discussion in positive terms--where we are heading and what we can do.

IDEA OF A COMMUNITY

Jackie: In Minneapolis, if there were problems in a group, it wouldn't mean the group wouldn't survive. There seem to be more co-ops, etc., there, more support. There's no nurturance here.

Janet: Denver is a transient town. I wonder if it's just the times or a problem specific to Denver.

Carol: Denver is clique-ish. We don't know each other, there's no place to go to gather and meet each other. Also, Denver is a conservative town in a conservative state. The progressive movements were never very big here.

Jackie: Nothing exciting is going on now. Old political people are still around and would, given certain circumstances, get active again.

Janet: Denver seems to have no culture or identity of its own that distinguishes it from other places. Denver could be anywhere.

Sandia: I have a friend who came here and couldn't get child care, had trouble making friends. I hear that a lot from women. There's no sense of community here.

Janet: Denver is very individualistic and alienating. There were never collectives of women here. There seems to be a big couples syndrome here. Women in couples depend on each other for their needs because Denver is so alienating. But the same thing that makes them depend on each other puts a strain on their relationship and causes them to break up.

BMR PROBLEMS

Jackie: I don't know what feminism means anymore. What seems most real is what's going on in the real world--political system, newspapers, other institutions as they exist. Instead of writing for BMR, we should be sending letters to the editor, Straight Creek Journal or Westword where more people would read our ideas.

Carol: One problem with the paper is the women don't see it as a business, they aren't serious enough about what they are doing. Same with the bookstore. The bookstore could be a resource for the whole Rocky Mountain region. But they think something is immoral about making money.

Janet: The women are at a stage of purism, they're just learning about collective process and are most concerned about that.

Jackie: People have other concerns now--career, security, money. Some women have put a lot of time into efforts like the paper and have nothing to show for it. I don't know what the issues are for women 21 and 22.

Janet: Being a 21-year-old lesbian is easier now. We had to create everything from scratch, we were desperate.

Jackie: Maybe they don't think about why the credit union closed or the cost of hamburger. Maybe they are more concerned about getting a lover. The idea is that we start relating to them--that's where politics really happens. I don't think writing for BMR will do much good. If we can't have a strong women's newspaper I would rather do something for Westword, the Rocky Mountain News, or Straight Creek Journal.

Janet: Some people still need BMR. We still need alternative presses that will print controversial ideas.

Jackie: But doing a newspaper well takes knowledge and talent. Women at BMR are not journalists. If we had a group of women who were journalists in the traditional sense, they might be able to put out an effective women's newspaper.

Janet: Radicals need those skills.

Carol: I would like to take over the paper and make it a serious newspaper. I'd pay people. The women now are ‘playing’ newspaper. They don't have experience. The paper could really be powerful.

Janet: The paper is very important to Sue Goding and some others. They are just learning these skills.

Jackie: I have nothing against the women who are working on the paper. I just don't think it's a good paper. There's no news. A lot of things have been happening, but you won't read about them in BMR.

Sandia: That's part of the problem in the community--there's no outreach.

Janet: We need a radical organ--radical ideas filter down and finally get institutionalized. If we try to put something in Westword or Straight Creek Journal, they're going to get watered down. There's nothing exciting for young dykes to do.

Jackie: It's not going to get exciting again until we see a reaction against the backlash. But there are still things to do--art, politics, writing. I would like to read biographies of political women and men and learn how they sustained through difficult times.

Sandia: Being a lesbian and a feminist is another way of staying away from the norm. Maybe we have to realize we're in for a long haul--through hard times as well as the exciting ones.

Carol: Why do BMR and the bookstore seem to go through cyclical failures--what are the reasons? They could make money and pay women, but it's not happening. At one time, the bookstore insisted that to pay a woman was absolutely wrong. That kind of mentality has put us where we are. The credit union was a whole different thing.

Janet: Money corrupts. Besides, we're never going to be able to pay everybody to fight the multi-nationals, who are the real oppressors.

Jackie suggests paying the leaders or organizations and staffs, like NAACP, ACLU, etc. 

Carol: But there have to be checks and structure so there's some accountability.

Sandia: We are back to that nasty old issue--money. We need to look at it in other ways. Money is a barometer of how you're doing. If you're making money, you're doing well, you can maintain. We need to find ways of drawing in money without relinquishing our feminist principles.

Carol: I know money affects me. I can't go home and ask daddy to buy me a new couch. Some women can, but we never talk about that. I need a job.

Janet: The environment is affecting me more because I don't have the excitement of the community I had years ago. It's not a matter of being young, it's the losses we feel in the community. So we take it out on consuming. I have a new car because I'm afraid of being stranded and I know I would be in this community. Maybe I agree about the newspaper and the bookstore. But to have to pay somebody to try to make this a better world--there's something fundamentally messed up about that. Also, this era is corrupt, it's a lonely, decadent time. Witness disco. As with the depression, it's a cultural expression of a really sick time we are going to have ahead of us. That's why I want BMR to continue--we're going to need it. Why can't we get further? We have the analysis but we don't make the final push to revolution.

Carol: It's not because we are afraid to take power. We could get an incredible amount of opposition from the rest of the movement. We have an idea of how a newspaper should be run but I don't know if the community would accept it.

Jackie: There are lots of women's organizations--YWCA, Girl Scouts--that are doing a lot for women. Not from a feminist perspective, but from a service orientation. Radical ideas filter down to them and get accepted.

Sandia: I wonder if dissolution is the issue or is it just the times. At times we are more active and more visible. But we still keep going, we still affect people. Maybe this is just what we have to do to stay alive.

Janet: We need more public things to get our spirits up--the conference (Lesbians--Colorado) for one.

Carol: BMR sees itself as a feminist paper, but basically it reaches only lesbians. It could change its audience.

Janet: That's okay (if it only reaches lesbians). Radicals keep being radicals. I don't want to reach 500 women, I want to reach five radical women.

Carol doesn't think Janet’s attitude is common.

Carol: It's either one or the other. I went into the bookstore and the women there asked me why I went to Houston (for International Women's Year). Here's a group questioning my politics but they never asked me about my strategy. It's easier to criticize.

MORE ON PAGE 26