Courts cite their political beliefs among reasons.

Women May Lose Children

Julie Evening Lilly

Julie Evening Lilly is a young Na-
tive American woman who is facing
extradition to Virginia for allegedly
kidnapping her own daughter.

In 1972, Julie's ex-husband seized
the child in violation of a California
court order awarding custody of the
child, Erin, to Julie. Unaided by
California authorities who considered
her daughter's abduction only a "civil
matter," Julie spent three years
searching for Erin. After locating her
in Virginia, Julie was then forced to

-New Directions For Women-

Julie and Erin

wage a long and expensive legal battle
for recognition of her custody. These
efforts were rebuffed by a Virginia
judge who ruled that an Indian mother,
especially a “non-Christian,” could
never provide as "decent" a home as

a white father could.

In the meantime, Erin, by then six-
years old, was growing up in a home
where her Native American background
was being denied. Julie says she learned
that the child was regularly beaten.
Information pertaining to the child's
mother was systematically withheld. In
addition, Julie had to fight for the
right to see Erin. After finally ordering
visitation rights, the judge then
refused to enforce his own order. Be-
cause of this intolerable situation
and Julie's growing concern for the
physical safety of her daughter, mother
and daughter returned to California
in 1976.

A subsequent attempt by her ex-hus-
band to have Julie arrested in 1976
was rejected by California authorities
in light of the original legal custody
she possessed and which the California
courts reaffirmed in 1978. There
seemed to be little likelihood that
mother and daughter would again be
forcibly separated. The presumption
that this case had finally been settled
was, however, erroneous.

Julie Evening Lilly has chosen to
fight back against the continuing
oppression of her people. She was a
leading organizer in the defense of
Paul Skyhorse and Richard Mohawk, two
activists acquitted of murder in Los
Angeles, May 1978.

Because of Julie's involvement in
the Skyhorse-Mohawk case, her daughter
is in danger of being taken from her
mother in what can only be termed a
"legal" kidnapping by a Virginia
court which refuses to drop its charges
against Julie. Her ex-husband had
not even lived in Virginia for the
past few years and has made no attempt
to communicate with Erin. It is quite
obvious that political vindictiveness
lies at the root of Virginia's persistent
efforts to jail Julie and take
away her child.

Gov. Jerry Brown's office recognizing
the absurdity of the Virginia charges
and the conflicting claims of state
sovereignty involved, has so far
refused to sign the extradition
warrant. As Virginia continues to apply
pressure, eventual extradition seems
inevitable unless support is generated
for Julie's case. However, even if
Brown refuses to extradite Julie, Vir-
ginia authorities have stated that
they will "try to catch her in another
state...people like her belong in
jail." Thus Julie and Erin remain vir-
tual prisoners in the state of Calif-
ornia.

Julie Evening Lilly and Erin need
support in their fight to stay toge-
ther. Julie is facing a long legal
battle and a 10-year sentence for the
crime of wanting to raise her own
child of whom she has legal custody.
This is an issue of Native American
rights, children's rights and particu-
larly women's rights. The outcome of
this case will affect women everywhere,
notable in the state of Virginia. Your
help is vital. Send mailgrams to Gov-
ernor Brown demanding that he refuse
to extradite Julie. Mail to: Gov.
Jerry Brown, State Capitol, Sacramento
CA 95814.

Send mailgrams to Virginia authori-
ties demanding that they drop the
charges against Julie Evening Lilly.
Send them to: Randall Stowe, Common-
wealth Attorney, 411 Cedar Rd., PO
Box 15225, Chesapeake, VA 23320.

For further information, write
Evening Lilly Support, c/o P.O. Box
148, Riva, MD 21140.

(Reprinted from New Directions for
Women)

Kamalla Miller

Kamalla Miller goes on trial April
21 on charges of child stealing, bur-
glary, and interstate flight to avoid
prosecution in California. The charges
against Miller, a political acti-
vist, are the culmination of a six
year battle that she has waged against
her own parents and the courts to
regain custody of her daughter, Ishka.

The story begins in 1974, when
Kamalla and her husband temporarily
sent their then two children, Ishka
and Jason, to stay with Kamalla's
parents, the Moores. They did this
because of short term financial dif-
ficulties, long since resolved, which
made it seem to them that their child-
ren would be materially better off
with the Moores for a while.

When the Millers tried to get their
children back, they learned that the
Moores had sued for full custody. In
1975, the only evidence presented
against the Millers was in a study
done for the court which called Kamalla
unfit because she had been ill with
epilepsy and Arthur, her husband, was
described as "physically, mentally
and economically impoverished" (even
though he had a steady job as a pipe-
fitter) and as a "fanatical IWW
(International Workers of the World)
communist." These statements could
not even be contested in court.

In making his final decision, the
judge said that he did not have to
decide that Kamalla and Arthur were
unfit parents; he need only decide
which home was better--and since the
Moores made more money, they would

obviously provide the best home. He
then added that John D. Rockefeller
would obviously make the best parent
in the world. The judge also ruled
Arthur Miller responsible for full
child support, even though he had
just decided the Millers could not
keep their children because they didn't
have enough money.

The Millers tried to appeal but
couldn't afford the legal assistance
they needed. This situation is not
uncommon: class, political, and racial
bias are separating many children from
their parents today. Divorced women
are losing their kids to husbands who
make more money. Native Americans are
having their children “adopted” right
out of their homes and sent to "better" white homes.

The custody decision against the
Millers came in 1975. In October of
1977, Jason died, suffocating in a
plastic bag while in his grandparents'
custody. Though the death was ruled
accidental in 1977, a social worker
testified that Ishka told her she saw
grandma Moore kill her brother.
Kamalla felt urgently concerned to
get Ishka back while she was still
alive.

So in the summer of 1979, feeling
that she could no longer stand for
Ishka's being subjected to what Kam-
alla had faced growing up--her father's
alcoholism, his playing Russian rou-
lette with a loaded gun (he once pointed
the gun at Ishka and pulled the
trigger), the craziness that had made
her mother and father keep her sister
and herself confined to their house
for two years, not even letting them
out for school--Kamalla arrived in
California, removed the screen window
of her parents' California house, took
Ishka, and hitchhiked to Arkansas.
She and Ishka were discovered in
Eureka Springs, Arkansas and Kamalla
was arrested and held under $100,000
bail, a very high bail for a sentence
that would be at most, five years.
(A man accused of shooting two Minnea-
polis cops recently had bail set at
$50,000). She spent 35 days in jail
in Arkansas before her bail was reduced
to $5,000 and she was freed.
Hundreds of letters and petitions were
sent on her behalf to the governors
of Arkansas and California, but she
was extradited to California anyway.
Her daughter was placed in a foster
home in Arkansas, also awaiting the
court's decision.
Kamalla filed for custody of Ishka
in Arkansas late in 1979. While in
the Moores’ custody, four-year-old
Ishka tried to run away. Now six, she
raised such a fuss when the judge
ordered the social worker to take her
to see her grandparents that the visit
had to be abandoned. After a study of
the Moores, Orange County Social
Services recommended Ishka not be
returned there.

Additionally, Arkansas Social Ser-
vices recommended that Kamalla be
given custody.

Though Ishka's preference is clear,
and such testimony is significant,
the judge revealed that he could not
reverse the original custody award on
evidence of abuse before that decision.
He could only make a new decision
based on recent evidence, and Kamal-
la's case was based on testimony about
earlier abuse.

So the judge returned custody of
Ishka to the Moores. (He also com-
mented openly in court that he does
not like anarchists, which is the way
Kamalla defines herself.) Kamalla
hopes to appeal the original decision
in California, using new evidence.

Kamalla Miller is currently facing
1-10 years in prison for attempting to
protect her child. She is additionally
charged with burglary for taking a
screen off her parents’ window when
she took Ishka.

Kamalla needs your support. Money is
direly needed for legal fees. Women
are also encouraged to write to
Governor Jerry Brown of California in
protest, as he will be able to pardon
Kamalla, should she be convicted.

Time is short--Kamalla's trial is
scheduled to begin on April 21. She
may be contacted by calling or
writing: Committee to Support Kamalla
Miller/Flw Carlson, 1324 Powderhorn
Terrace, Minneapolis, MN 55407, (612)
729-4236.

(Information from GLC Voice and Min-
neapolis Women Against Violence
Against Women)

We would like to meet with other women for a discussion
on the subject of the autonomous women's movement:
the need for an autonomous women's movement, the strategy of
feminist separatism and whether lesbian politics are
feminist politics.
Woman, 2023 E.
1:00 pm.
Eileen at 831-4419.

The discussion will be held at Woman to
Colfax Ave on April 12th, Saturday at

For more information call Sue at 333-7656 or