Alcohol And Lesbians: The Brown Bag Readers’ Theatre Raises Many Issues

Bobbe Ross

The Brown Bag Readers' Theatre are eight women on a stage reading about alcoholism, eight lesbians reading about their experiences with recovering alcoholism as well as other lesbians’ experiences.

Some of the women are recovering alcoholics, some are co-alcoholics. A co-alcoholic is someone close to the alcoholic: lover, friend, family member, fellow worker. The role of the co-alcoholic, which doesn't necessarily imply a drinker, can be varied. The co-alcoholic may be a good support or someone who has taken on the task of "saving" the alcoholic. Many times the co-alcoholic is working out her needs and using the alcoholic as well as being used by the alcoholic. Like mamas, she may bail you out of jail, but also parade your faults, bad habits, and inabilities before your eyes, which in turn shows her sacrifice, her caring, and her goodness.

The group came into being 4 years ago after hearing Mothertongue Readers Theatre and three women of that group helped, in a workshop, show how to put a script together. The BBRT'ers are all from Sonoma County, CA and they have an impact, reading what they know, felt and suffered through and communicated it to the watchers. Most of the experiences deal with active alcoholism: what got them there, what it was like and how and why they needed to stop. The message is very clear, each dyke felt alone and until they found other alcoholics they couldn't begin to recover. When they asked for suggestions from us, one woman who is a recovering alcoholic said they needed to talk more of their ongoing recovery times. Running throughout the readings there were references to being busted and committed to jails and/or "mental hospitals".

At the end of their reading they requested other stories, from other women. Their own experiences, primarily white, need the experience of more women of color. They actively encouraged women in the audience to begin their own readings. They have received grants and have toured in their own area, going to high schools and rural communities.

In 1981, Brown Bag Readers' Theatre Support Network was formed and they help with fundraising, publicity, staffing tables at rallies and conferences.

If any of our readers want to contribute their own experiences, time, money, setting up gigs for the BBRT or writing their own scripts, contact BBRT, P.O. Box 6556, Coddingtown Station, Santa Rosa, CA 95406.

The audience I was in was small and many of the women were recovering alcoholics. I don't drink because I get drunk immediately and am very unpleasant. No one voiced their own experiences, but I hope they will consider, with other dykes, to work up a script for our community. I appreciate the work done by the BBRT and I don't want to take away from their work, experiences and time but there were connections I wish they had made.

The times we live in, even white, alcoholic lesbians have more privilege than alcoholic lesbians of color; how is the treatment in society different, the same? We know that alcoholic men are treated differently from alcoholic women. The courts "excuse" much in alcoholic men, from drunk driving to battering, rape and murder, depending of course on who the man is. Like all US justice, if it's a white man/"respected" in his community, his sentence is much different than that of a man of color or even a poor white man. And just as different is the attitude of society and the courts towards alcoholic women. The "care centers" for men are much more available. Since a woman's place is still in the home, an alcoholic woman is an abomination, she is not doing her prescribed duties, and an alcoholic dyke is even worse, she ain't doing nothing right. The most widely known program for alcoholics is Alcoholics Anonymous - AA. AA firmly has its roots in Christianity and patriarchy. Co-alcoholics are funneled into Al-Anon, following the same formula.

There is no denying that both programs help recovering alcoholics to varying degrees. A friend of mine, a recovering alcoholic, said that 97% of recovering alcoholics don't make it. That's a horrifying percentage; it's a waste of people.

The program uses peer counseling. Does that mean that it cuts across class lines, racism, anti-Semitism, woman-hating and homophobia? There are gay AA groups, not only in Denver, but throughout the country, and there are alcoholic groups that dykes have formed on their own. Spirituality, as defined by each individual woman, certainly comes into the programs. Since I have never believed in a god, I am at a loss when the word is used; when we are asked to bow our heads for a silent moment and think of whatever we are asked to reflect on. For me that stops the flow of communication, I certainly love verbal communication and am afraid that stops the anger from being more verbal. And I am afraid of Christianity - it is so smug and defines so many “moral" (political) facets of our life.

Alcohol is openly encouraged, alcoholism is ignored by society. The sale of alcohol makes money, not only for the manufacturers and growers, but also for the state, as it is heavily taxed. We can't have it both ways - buy the booze but don't get drunk. With liquor stores on every block either selling by the glass or by the bottle, the end result is going to be alcoholism for a great many people.

Lost your job...HAVE A DRINK

got a new job...HAVE A DRINK

feeling low...HAVE A DRINK

feeling good...HAVE A DRINK

Lost your lover...HAVE A DRINK

found a new lover...HAVE A DRINK....As part of the program by the BBRT it sounded familiar. Have a drink for any reason is our society's answer and even more so in the dyke community where much of social life revolves around the couple of women's bars. In the big world out there we see TV and movies of the rich with their large fancy dinner tables and wines for each course, as opposed to the alkie in the corner drinking out of a bottle in a paper bag. It isn't much comfort to know that our legislators, head military, big businessmen and all the boys, in common include a great number of active alcoholics, and that they decide much of our economic lives. We have priests, ministers, rabbis who administer advice, judges and shrinks that are all knowledgeable and surgeons who wield those expensive knives on us--it isn't bad enough that we have to put up with the patriarchy but an alcoholic patriarchy is too much...it shouldn't drive us to drink. But those boys are cushioned by their class and skin privilege and they have enough people they hire to cover for them and enough money when their alcoholism affects their body functions. Alcoholism is a tool of oppression, it is our society's drug of choice and since it is legal, it is most easily gotten. Unlike the men in power who are alcoholic, most alcoholics have no power. Alcoholism cuts across class lines but class still remains and the poor are victimized not only by alcohol but by a medical system that is indifferent to their problems. The real side effects of alcoholism are that it is a progressive disease that does permanent damage to the brain and body and alcoholism can be passed from mother to child, fetal alcoholism. The Journal of the American Medical Association has recently come up with the novel idea of registering alcoholics... "it's an out-of-the-closet situation for many, many people." The rationale is that docs could keep track of the treatment alcoholics are getting, the same as they do now with people who have cancer. The police are urging that kids be fingerprinted so if they are lost, kidnapped or runaway they would be easier to identify. The same type of registering is being pushed for "mental patients": all the lists that could be made, would be made. Gays and lesbians could be registered, Haitians and Mexicans are registered, Hitler registered Jews and Gypsies and there are other categories that they could think up. We could all carry different kinds of cards, maybe multi-colored cards if we fit into more than one category. As an older woman, Russian-Gypsy-Jewish descent, dyke, commie, I wonder what my card would look like! How easily we could all be rounded up, like so many cattle to the slaughterhouse.

During the performance one woman mentioned being busted and in jail and talked a bit about it, and as I said above, several women mentioned being committed to "mental hospitals"; I would like to hear more from the performing women, did they see themselves different from women in jail, in the psychiatric institutions because they were drunks, not insane, not criminals? Was their treatment different once inside either joint?

Those words, "crazy," "insane," came through a lot and I winced. Common, everyday words that define how we are viewed and who decides what to do with us and our using those words as labels for behavior that is different from ours, at the moment, and knowing that in a moment our behavior may change or may be viewed as changed by the patriarchy. No, for me it is too tricky to keep including those words when I speak, and how easily they slip out.

I don't know much about Carrie Nation, and probably I sound like I would like to take a hatchet to the local neighborhood bar, well that would be fun but the problem is more than that. Alcoholics are taught that their behavior, their drinking is an individual problem and they have to take responsibility and straighten themselves out, the same good advice that mental patients and "criminals" are preached about. Sure, we all have to take individual responsibility but since there are so many of us with problems we also have to see a society that encourages us to think in terms of individuality and discourages us from banding together to take unified action to control our lives.

We have to find a way to encourage recovering alcoholics into our social, political lives--to understand their addiction and support their efforts. Even harder, we have to look at our own lives and see how we aid the addictions that we have. I may not be an alkie but I may be a druggie. We have to find a life for ourselves that doesn't revolve around the bars. And we have to do it because the patriarchy doesn't give a damn about alcoholic women, let alone alcoholic dykes.

America held hostage day 1966

NanSee was busy polishing the silver because they had a visitor this month--Dicktator Magana from El Salvador came to town. He's the good ole boy that is making "admirable progress" towards democracy in the face of the red menace. So says RayGun who's given the OK to rebuild a base in Honduras and has sent 120 Green Berets to teach 2,400 El Salvadorian troops guerrilla warfare. They are also training Hondurans to guard the 200-acre base. No figures on cost in terms of $ or lives.

But hey there! it's like Senator Malcolm Wallop from WY said, "The death of USA soldiers is a risk that is required to assist free countries in remaining free, we got to do it, we got to protect the free interest of Central America." Hey there Mal, who must be the John Wayne of WY, glad to see you're so concerned about free enterprise, but what about the lives of El Salvador's people?

RayGun's buddy, former S. Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Coa Ky, now a resident of CA, said US of A liberals “put many obstacles" in the way of the administration from giving more financial aid to El Salvador. Apparently not enough! But really tootie, those boys really do need aid to rebuild villages they have destroyed in their pacification & reconstruction program. That program had such a blazing effect in Viet Nam they thought they would give it another go.

ISE, we got a secret base no one told us about, and in Egypt. They will do anything to help American lads see the world. The air base is for use in a Middle East crisis contingency (don't that word just roll off your tongue?). It has been used for a number of contingencies & training activities but no one told us when and to who! Rickety RayGun, what else are you doing for the good of the world? We know something is happening in Chile, are you helping that country too?

Local news was looking up. Senators felt that $60,663 was not a good wage so they voted to up their dole to $69,800, the House boys get that now. Cost of living increase?

We haven't been making binary nerve gas since 19 and 69 (are you positive?) and the House voted, by a very slim majority not to put $115 million into resuming that nasty business.

Such a busy month-headlines said "Va Says Orange Tests Take Time" "Home Subsidies Aid Well-to-Do" and from TN was a news item that "Nissan Trucks Rolls off Assembly line". Nissan Corp. President Marvin Runyon vows that the plant will never be union organized. Where is our Lech Walesa?

While scientists are trying to save the whooping cranes, those birds have picked WY as their summer home...whoop away from MX land, maybe you can survive--we sure as hell won't.

Big Mama Rag, July, 1983 - Page 5