voices

from our lives

Remember Momma -- A Daughter's

Sue Goding and Bobbe Ross

Katy Scarlett O'Hara was rushing home
to Tara, to her mother, because her mo-
ther would make things right. Not many

oral herstories

of us had mothers like Ellen O'Hara.
She didn't work, she had servants, she
led a very social life, but all the
while tended to the poor and sick on the
plantation. Being a good lady was her
style while enjoying the comforts that
enslaved people made possible.

Working class women, whether they work
outside the home or not, just don't have
the luxuries in life that ruling class
women have. Living in a woman's commun-
ity we've always talking about our mo-
thers, sometimes our grandmothers, and
each story is so different. Some stories
are so damn interesting that we felt
others should hear of them. Our mothers
pass on so many things to us, some good
and beautiful, some so horrendous we react
the rest of our lives and never make
peace with either our mother or the
damage done.

By the way, Ellen O'Hara failed poor
Scarlett. She didn't make things right,
she died.

Evelyn Green
When I was younger, it was real relig-

ious, my father was a Pentecostal minis-
ter, my mother was a housewife and art-

ist. ‘Course, she stopped painting when
I was really young ‘cause she had 8
children.

I grew up in a small town in Colorado,
La Junta. It was fun, I had a good time,
it was scary too, because I was really
scared of my parents, my mother was
really abusive. She was crazy, she was
this brilliant painter and she was mar-
ried to this plodding along preacher.
She was a black woman born at the com-
plete wrong time to be brilliant. She
used to paint and draw when I was younger
and after we got older and there were
many more children she stopped. She
would have rages and tear up the whole
house, the entire house and we'd have to
clean it up and she was just raging con-
stantly so I was afraid of her as a
child.

She loved us. She is largely respons-
ible for me having any kind of courage
as a black woman to succeed at anything.
She always told me no one was better
than I was, that I could do anything I
wanted to do, that I was bright, that I
was beautiful. She always told me those
kind of things although she was a really
abusive mother on a physical level and
on a lot of other levels, but she valued
us and she really loved us and she taught
us to value ourselves.

She always wanted to move, she hated
living in La Junta and my parents were
from the south. My father was from Ark-

Page 20 - Big Mama Rag, May, 1981

ansas and he had left Arkansas because
the KKK was after him. My mother had been
from Oklahoma and she came up to Oklahoma
City and that's where she met my father.
She wanted to be in a city, she wanted
her children to be around other black
people and there were no black people in
La Junta, especially out on the farm,
there was nobody. So she was real isol-
ated and I think she was unhappy about
her relationship with my father when we
were younger and so she wanted to move
and be around other people.

From what I gather talking to my mo-
ther, my grandfather was a real lazy
man, he owned 40 acres of land in Okla-
homa, my grandmother worked the farm,
and my grandfather drank too much and
didn't do anything, and she worked the
farm. And she was a real, real black
woman and my mother was very dark
complected like her, but my grandmother
was married to a very light complected
man so she had all these different
kinds of color in her family. There was
a pecking order according to how light
skinned you were, of course the lighter
skinned being the better. So my mother
was called Old Black Lucy all the time
when she was little and she vowed that
she would marry a man that was the
same complexion as her so that all her
children would be the same color so
there wouldn't be any problem with one
child thinking that he was better than
another child because of his skin
color. And that's what she did. So she
married a real dark man and all her
children were the same color. She was
always proud of herself because of
that.

She left home when she was really,
really young, 'cause her father was real
strict and a real drunk ass, she left
home when she was like 16 years old and
she had been gone a year and her mother
died. She always felt bad that she
wasn't home when her mother died. She
would always talk about how you don't
know what you've lost until you've lost
your mother. And she used to give us
these long lectures on how we should
treat her better because we didn't know
what we were going to do when we lost
our mother. She really loved her mother
and missed her a lot.

She used to make us laugh and laugh
and laugh and she had beautiful teeth
and she had gold in her mouth. She
used to throw her head back and laugh
and she used to make us laugh like that
too.

Being oppressed makes you crazy in a
certain way, because you have to become
sort of schizophrenic, you have to be-
come something that you're not in order
to survive. And you have to give up
things that are real important to you,
like she had to give up her art, and
she had to give up living in a city.
And she had to give up her freedom, she
basically didn't like children and she
had 8 of them, in fact she couldn't
stand them. When we got older she used
to tell us, birth control, where were
you when I needed you.

I think she was lonesome. I think
that in my mother's time, you used to
marry a man, try to marry a fairly de-
cent man, and my father was a real de-
cent man. He was really patriarchal,
and my mother was a fiery woman, she
was 5' in her stocking feet, and she
was real fiery and would not put up
with being bossed at all. I can remem-
ber my mother peeling potatoes and
telling me, Marriage is a partnership
Evelyn, don't let no man tell you what
to do, marriage is a partnership and
most of the time they don't know what
they're doing, men don't.

She used to fight all the time with
him. They would get into these huge
fights and she would rage and she would
tear up the whole house, and she would
leave and go to Denver to stay with her
sister. And my father would get in his
car and beat the train up there and
meet her at the station and get her
and take her back to La Junta.

They believed in expressing their
anger, they were real working class
people, and they loved each other a lot
and they respected each other. She
spent a great deal of her life molding
him and trying to help him learn to

~Kara Sisk/Big Mama Rag

have a relationship and by the time she
helped him learn to have a relationship
he caught cancer and died. And she went
a little crazier, I think, after he
died. Then she got real sad, she got
real sad and then she caught leukemia
herself and then she died 5 years after
he did. But she got real wild after my
father died, she started to smoke and
drink and smoke pot. And got real young
and I got angry with her for changing
from this real stable mother to this
wild, like not even older sister, like
really younger sister. Then just as we

were developing a relationship she died.

That was sort of hard. She had a good
time, she really believed in having a
good time.

She loved to dress, she loved to
dress, she had her clothes made and
everything had to match; bag, hat,

voices from our lives

gloves, everything and she used to dress
us up like that.

When we got older she loved us a lot.
When we got older and started being able
to talk with her and open her up to new
ideas she would talk to us and really
enjoy us, after we got a certain age.
She couldn't stand young children though
which was good that she lived in La Junta
because even though she had so many, she
just put us outside and wouldn't bother
us.

She canned, she made clothes, she made
bread every week, she cooked constantly,
that woman was an exquisite cook. When
you're poor you have to really learn to
cook well, so that you can make some
food out of nothing and she just could
really cook. Like she would make pan
gravy and cold water biscuits and that
would be dinner and it was good, it was
really good, so she was a good cook.

I have a lot of different feelings
about the way she raised me. I'm glad
she raised me the way she did, with the
attitudes she did about men and marriage.
That's what made me a lesbian today.

She gave very different values about men
than would have been given me normally.
She cowed me inside and broke, no not
broke, bent certain things in me, be-
cause I was so frightened of her I be-
came really devious and real manipu-
lative in terms of relationships. And it
took me a long, long time to get out of
being manipulative in relationships and
realizing that I would have to find
people that I would be able to say I
loved and not having to be afraid of be-
ing injured in some way, on a physical
or an emotional level, 'cause she was
real injurious to me as a child on that
level.

I think she raised me good, I wish she
hadn't been so physically abusive, I
wish she hadn't made me so frightened as
a child. I also wished she had spent more
time with me, but there were so many of
us that it was hard for her to spend
certain time with each child. I wish she
had been more loving on a physical level.
Her relationship with me makes me want to
have a daughter, so I liked her, I feel
good about her, I feel better about her
as I have grown into being a woman and
come to understand more things about what
the patriarchy is and how it affects us
and what it meant to be a black woman at
that time. I feel better about her as I
have more of an understanding of her
life and times. I loved that she taught
me how to laugh and that she taught me
to have a good time. I love all the dif-
ferent rhymes and things she taught us
as children, black people are always
saying something smart to their kids,
like you'll call your kid and your kid
will say, Who me? And she would say,
Yeah you, you ain't no big hen's chick-
en even if you do crow loud. And she
would say, Jesus wept, Moses crept and
John fell down the baptist step. She
would say that to us all the time and
just rhymes and stuff all the time. I

A Daughter For The Rest

like that. I wish I had more of a
relationship with her as I got older but
she died in the middle of that. I wish
she had been able to teach me to cook.

I love that I have her voice, she was a
really good singer. She would sing all
the time and we would hear her singing
blues songs all the time and spiritual
songs and in church she would sing and
sing and sing. I feel like it's too
bad that as I get older and as I get

further and further away from that back-
ground that it becomes harder for me to
have an opportunity to sing, 'cause I
think that you let out so much pain
when you're singing. But I do really
like her, I like her as a woman, espec-
ially as I get older I begin to like her
even more.

Clare Kaplan

The thing about my grandmother is that
I know very, very little about her life
because she never talked about herself
and nobody ever asked her about herself,
which is, I think, very much of what
happens not only to her but to women in
general. Women's personal histories,
even in our own families, get totally
buried because nobody cares what her
life was or where her family came from.
Everybody always talked about my grand-
father, partly because he died way be-
fore her so he was made into a legend
and everybody told stories. But very,
very basic things about her I don't know
so part of the story of my grandmother
is that I know very little about her
even though I was very close to her.

She had a brother and a sister and she
came from a Jewish family. She was born
in 1902 and came over from Austria when
she was 11. Her family was very poor.
She had very little education in Austria
and her education stopped in the 5th
grade. They came to Chicago.

She worked all of her life, my grand-
mother's whole life was work. She worked
as a young child and as soon as she came
over she did piece work both in sweatshop
factories and at home.

She married a man, Herman—my grandfat-

Of Her Life

her, and I think the story goes that he
with his brothers was one of the owners
of one of the small shops she was work-
ing in. They had a very rough time in
the depression, they just scrapped by.
My grandfather died about 20 years ago
and my grandmother never had any money.
I used to go to see her a lot. She lived
a couple of miles away from us, in Chi-
cago in Rogers Park, we lived in Evan-
ston. She first lived off of Howard St.
in an old building where my father and
his brother had grown up, it was the
apartment that they had lived in for
years and years and years. Everything
in the apartment was old and it just
seemed like her—it had a Murphy bed,
you know—one of those fold-down beds
and it was a really small apartment es-
pecially for me now, thinking about two
sons and her and my grandfather, it was
a small one-bedroom apartment. I remem-
ber they never really did have anything
extra, it was a comfortable apartment
but I live better now, as a young per-
son just starting out, than she ever
did. She moved. One thing I remember
happening and not understanding was what
happened when she moved. A new landlord
bought the building and I remember he
started putting up crucifixes up in the
courtyard. Decorating it in some sort
of Christian tacky motif. She moved to
a more modern apartment in an area that
was mostly old Jewish people.

She had very, very strong feelings
about racism. She couldn't understand
it and it fit in with anti-Semitism for
her. She would stand up on the issue
and if someone said a racist remark,
she'd be right there. My parents had
two friends, an interracial couple and
they were very close to her. She loved
them a whole lot. They were my parents'
age and went to visit her and she al-
ways asked about them. They married as
an interracial couple in the 40's-50's,
they had a very rough time and I know
that she was just outraged at some of
the racism they had to go through.

My grandmother, I always remember
working. What she did, that I remember
was she worked as a saleswoman in Mar-
shall Fields in Evanston, in the china
section. She really loved good china
and I didn't have any appreciation of
it then and she would always try to
get me to appreciate pieces that were
special. I'd appreciate them today,
now that it's too late. Too bad.

She worked with a number of other
women that all seemed similar to her. I
don't know if they were all Jewish but
they were all very short and kind of
stocky and wore dark suits that had to
be dry cleaned and always were called
girls, and they couldn't walk very well.
The women seemed like her and she was
close to them. Marshall Fields is a big
chain and I know they never paid my
grandmother much more than minimum wage
and with her education she felt lucky to
have that job and she felt very identi-
MORE ON PAGE 25

Big Mama Rag, May, 1981 - Page 21