letters home to mama

Coverage of Conference

Dear Collective,

Thank you for printing the
Lesbians-Colorado press release con-
cerning our response to the policy
concerning male children and an up-
date on the conference scheduled
for September 28-30, 1979.

However, no thank you for the
article that accompanied it, written
by Judy Barlow. Not only was the
article not factual, full of false-
hoods, and blatantly misrepresenta-
tive of the conference, but it also
showed a complete lack of any stan-
dard, feminist, lesbian-feminist,
male, straight, or otherwise, for
responsible journalism. And I sup-
pose that's the question--just what
BMR is--a newspaper or a modern ex-
ample of feminist yellow journalism-
trashing individuals or groups that
you do not either personally or
politically agree with or under-
stand. You not only do our politi-
cal movement an injustice but also
your readers who did not attend the
community meeting, and therefore de-
pend on you for good (or accurate)
coverage.

The article was inaccurate in
these respects: the planning com-
mittee has never determined which
workshops they wanted to see pre-
sented or the particular thrust of
the workshop. There are workshops
being presented that certainly don't
appeal to all lesbians but they will
still have the opportunity at this
conference to be presented. It has
only been in the past few days that
workshops have been final. And,
any woman who wants to present a
workshop other than what is sche-
duled can do so at the conference
itself, by scheduling it.

Secondly, the statement that the
planning committee was “now trying
to figure out ways to reach minor-
ity women," is libelous. Our meet-
ing minutes and other documents of
the planning of the conference are
open to the public and will be a-
vailable. Outreach to all lesbians
has included minority lesbians or
lesbians of color. To infer that
BMR collective members represent
the conscience of minority lesbians
in this state is racist, insulting,
and ludicrous. BMR, itself, is com-
posed of white women.

If the BMR collective had ever
taken the time to talk to any mem-
ber(s) of the Lesbians-Colorado
planning committee, and I suggested
this to Judy when she told me that
she was doing an article on the
community meeting, they would have
found different, politically viable
ideas, strategies, opinions on the
issues of feminism and lesbianism
and the lesbian-feminist role and
politics in the heterosexual femin-
ist movement. The simplistic ex-
planation of the conference that
appeared in the article doesn't

COLLECTIVE

exist.

In fact, when Judy approached me
with the idea that she was doing
this article, she said that it
wouldn't be judgmental. She admit-
ted that no member of the collec-
tive, most of which were present at
the meeting, had bothered to take
notes on the community meeting.

She also said that she went to the
meeting "with pencil poised" ready
to write down all our politically
incorrect stances, but, during the
hour-long presentation of the plan-
ning committee, could find nothing
she disagreed with until the dis-
cussion turned to male child pre-
sence during entertainment policy.
The tension and hostility that was
reported to be present during the
meeting was introduced, nurtured by
BMR collective members who, until
the last minutes of the meeting,
seemed bent on using every catch-
word in the feminist vocabulary to
discredit this conference and in-
dividuals associated with it. Cer-
tainly this personal vindictiveness
doesn't belong in the news pages of
a newspaper. But, then again, per-
haps I am operating under the as-
sumption that BMR, and the women
who use her, isn't supposed to be
accountable to the women who read
her.

To conclude all this, your re-
ference, Judy and the BMR collec-
tive, to the women who will attend
this conference and to the women
(over 60 of us) who are planning
and working on this conference, as
lesbian-fascists (your misspelling,
not mine) is so disgusting, trash-
ing, insensitive and painful that
it isn't worth further comment.
This type of treatment is usually
felt from heterosexual media and
woman-hating politics. I think you
all should seriously think about
what you have done, and its politi-
cal implications of community and
movement building.

Carol Lease

Edétonx's Reply: We stand by the con-
tent of the report on the Lesbians
Colorado Community Meeting. Two
BMR collective members took notes;
the facts presented in the story
were reported as stated by the con-
ference organizers at the meeting.
We can only report on what was said
directly at the meeting, not what
may have been intended. We believe
that the hostility and tension
mentioned surfaced as women asked
for more clarity on the issues of:
feminist content, workshops, out-
reach to Third World Lesbians and
male children. We deeply regret
the use of the word fascist, but
stand behind the belief that Les-
bianism alone is not a basis for
unity.

Judy Barlow, Fran Day, Sue Goding, Connie Perenyi, Vicki Piotter

CONTRIBUTORS

Crystal Arp, Kathy Riley, Susanna Smith, Pandoura, Janelle Lemken,
Pat Greer, Gail, Mary Szczepanski, Clair Kaplan, Joni Harlan, Bobbe
Poss, Margarita Resto Quinones, Dusty, Women Against Violence Against
Women, Alison Colbert, Tea Schook, Andrea Gabriel, Pam Solo, Kathy

Barr, Kay Young, Lori Bradford

INSIDE BMR

Local News
Letters

March on D.C...
Hot Briefs

International News....
Natl. Moratorium

National News

Culture

Behavior Mod.. c
Calendar pg 22
Classies, Ads....... pg 23

COCO SEE OHH EOO ESHEETS HOOOEHSOSOROSH SESH OS ESO HEHE EDO EOES

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation

Manuscripts and artwork

may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for
material will be announced each month in Where We’re At. Please enclose
a stamped, addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsi-
bility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6 per year for
individual subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada; and $12 to insti-
tutions. BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions.
This publication is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian
Women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Beet
and Howe. We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box

7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218

Advertising information is available from Sue at 335-7656.

Community Meeting

Criticized

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I am extremely disturbed by the
article in last month's BMR by Judy
Barlow on the community meeting for
Lesbians Colorado. The supposed
"facts" that were presented in the
article were almost totally inaccu-
rate and several crucial pieces of
information were omitted. I would
like to correct some of the major
inaccuracies, particularly in the
paragraph where my presentation on
the workshops committee was badly
misrepresented.

That paragraph read:

Kathy Bougher presented a list of

possible workshop topics. Topics
ranged from lesbian mothers to
political feminism to working
with the male-dominated gay com-
munity. Kathy stressed that if
no one was found to facilitate a

workshop in a particular area that

these particular workshops will
not be covered at the conference.

The planning committee has already

determined which workshops they
would like to see presented and
know what thrust that particular
workshop will have.

In actuality, I began by explain-
ing that the workshop committee, a

separate group from the planning com-

mittee, was still in the process of
formulating workshops and looking
for facilitators. I explained that
possible workshop topics had come
from input from the first community
meeting, outreach efforts and ideas
from women all around the state as
well as the committee's own brain-
storming efforts. I carefully ex-
plained that we were still in the
process of determining the thrust of
each workshop and that we were still
looking for input on the ideas we
were already working on and that we
would still welcome new workshop
ideas. I said that we were still
working out a process to be able to
add new workshops right up until the
last minute. I also said that we
were planning on having unscheduled
workshop spaces available so that
spontaneous workshops or discussions
could be held. In addition, I
stated that every workshop proposed
by a woman in the community to the
committee (as distinct from those
ideas generated by the committee)
would be scheduled. The list that

I presented was actually a list of
topics we wanted to see developed
and for which we needed further in-
put and suggestions for facilitators.
I also said that at that time we had
over 100 possible workshop topics
and that one way of paring this list
down to 60 was to eliminate those
for which we could not find a facili-

MORE ON PAGE 21

ah

PLELELLELELLELLE LES OLELSS

2023 E. COLFAX
Denver, CO 80206

320-5972

Rhbbboede

OMAN
feminist center

Feminist books, records, posters, newspapers, magazines,
nonsexist children's books, lending library, meeting
space, housing/jobs/events bulletin board, information.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 9

Criticism: Constructive
or Destructive?

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I feel that the overall goal of
criticism is to strengthen our unity,
not destroy it. “Criticism is essen-
tial to good political work and good
political discussion. But criticism
that is given as an attack is heard
defensively. It destroys both people
and movements. Criticism given con-
structively, out of a commitment to
the people and the movement involved
can be heard in safety and can then
be genuinely evaluated and integrated
into our feelings, thoughts and ac-
tions." (from a WAVPM leaflet)

I am very concerned about my sis-
ters in the community that are tear-
ing each other down. I agree that
constructive debate and disagreement
is healthy. However, I feel that the
constant conflict in the community is
not healthy at all but in fact very
destructive, not only to individuals
and groups but to the movement as a
whole.

We should ask ourselves two impor-
tant questions: Who is the enemy?
and Why are we draining our energies
fighting among ourselves?

Are the separate groups and indivi-
duals within the movement the ones
that should be destroyed or are we
fighting against the system that we
all hate so much? Whose work are we
doing? The movements? Or The Systems?
A good example of how consuming the
inner struggles can become is clear in
a statement made by a local feminist:
"I became more upset with Virago than
I was with the system."

Why are we doing the system's work?
Don't we realize that by destroying
each other (by "destroying" I mean
criticizing each other to the point
that we are afraid of speaking or do-
ing any projects or actions) we are
placing roadblocks in the way of the
unity that we need in order to fight
and overthrow the system that is op-
pressing all of us.

The problem we often run into is
that many people think in terms of
"either/or", "right/wrong", when in
reality most of us are somewhere in
between. There are no two individuals
or groups that are going to agree
with each other 100%. Just because
we do not agree with (or understand)
everything a group is doing, for
instance Lesbians Colorado or Virago,
does not mean that we should condemn
everything they are doing and possibly
prevent them from accomplishing any-
thing.

We should not condemn a group for
trying even though we may disagree
with some of their actions. We are
fighting a common foe, the system, and
we should keep that in mind whatever
we do.

In sisterhood,
Crystal Arp

LELLELLLLLLELLLLLELLELS ihe hati S

Mon-Th 10am - 8pm

Fri-Sun 10am-7pm

Fe GE Se Ge he So oe he ho he he Se he he Ho Bo ho eh he So BH GPP Ho

LeLLLLLELSLELE SS LS LHS SELSESE LL AH LES