hot briefs

Schooled Attack

The fight to retain Merle Woo, lecturer in Asian American/Ethnic Studies at UC Berkeley, is continuing, gathering support from many union, community, and campus groups. At the forum "Defend Feminism and Free Speech on the Job" at UC on May 27th, representatives from many groups demanded her retention.

Woo is charging that her termination is an unfair labor practice and is discriminatory. In her speech, she said that "the university is attacking three of the most basic of worker's rights-- freedom of speech, equal opportunity, and job security.

I am a socialist feminist, a member of Radical Women, a unionist, and a lesbian. My teaching and activism have flowed from who I am."

Attack On Gays

In Mexico City, fifty armed men attacked a rally held by the Comité de Lesbianas y Homosexuales en Apoyo a Rosario Ibarra (Committee of Lesbians and Gay Men in Support of Rosario Ibarra), a campaign group for gay candidates nominated by the Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores (Revolutionary Workers Party). The men hit lesbians and gay men with sticks and threw stones at them. Five of the attackers were arrested, but four of them were soon let go. After Party representatives protested, officials agreed to re-arrest them.

On March 27, a week later, 600 people rallied to protest the attack.

Squatters Resist

In Puerto Rico, riot police forcibly evicted 250 families who were residents of the squatter community known as Villa Sin Miedo (Village Without Fear). About 500 members of the riot squad equipped with automatic weapons, tear gas, and bulletproof vests took part in the eviction on May 18. They broke through a barricade of burning car tires and other debris set up by the residents around their 3-acre farm.

Residents first occupied the farm and set up Villa Sin Miedo because the government had failed to meet their housing needs. An estimated 50,000 Puerto Rican families are waiting for government housing.

Page 6 - Big Mama Rag, July, 1982

Exile Ended

Ida Nudel, a Soviet woman who demonstrated against KGB human rights violations by hanging a paper banner from her Moscow apartment balcony, has just been released from four years in exile in Siberia, the first year of which she spent as the only single woman in a barracks of 50 men. She received 10,000 letters of support from 40 countries while in exile.

A Small Step

Saleswomen at the Gujerat Handicrafts Emporium in New Delhi are organizing around issues of wages and hours. Sales in the last 6 years are up 33%, but the workers have received average increases of 2.6%. Some of the shop assistants have not been paid at all for 7 months! And, holidays are few and the workers often miss their lunch break with no compensation.

The workers have formed an association and are beginning to make slight progress -- a daily one-hour break.

The workers have given the management a time limit in which to deal with the major demands regarding pay scales.

Inmates at Purdy Treatment Center for Women in Washington state were denied their copies of the last issue of No More Cages and Through the Looking Glass.

In the last issue of NMC was printed a letter from a sister inside Purdy, who wrote that 3 women had tried to escape; one succeeded, and the one who didn't, Esther Woodle, attempted suicide. Her medical care was heard to be unsatisfactory.

The reasons stated by the prison for banning the journals are 1) that they concern plans for escape, and 2) that they encourage violence.

Please write in protest of the bans to:

Dedrikka H. Britt

Res. Programs Administrator

Dept. of Corrections

Purdy Treatment Center

P.O. Box 17

Gig Harbor, WA 98335

Seal Watt 2 Right

Interior Secretary James Watt has redesigned the official seal of his Dept. The American Buffalo, which has been facing left since 1894, now faces right.

Inmate Voices Banned More Plastic Terror

On April 16th in Derry (Ireland), a British Army patrol who had been investigating a hoax bomb fired two baton rounds at a small group of stone-throwers. When the kids ran off, 11-year-old Stephen McConomy was found lying on the ground with a head wound. He had been hit at close range by the supposedly 'minimum force weapon' the plastic bullet or baton round. Stephen died a few days later, the eighth victim of this 'plastic terror' in twelve months. Angry women staged a protest march demanding a ban on the use of plastic bullets by military and police.

Support To Abort

The Irish Women's Abortion Support Group was formed by several women in London late last year. It provides practical and emotional support for women coming from the 32 counties of Ireland (where abortion is illegal) to England for an abortion. They meet the woman on her arrival and accompany her to the clinic. The Irish women are faced with severe anti-Irish racism, and the Prevention of Terrorism Act, under which any Irish person can be held incommunicado for up to 7 days.

No Class-No Care

Women inmates of the Kentucky Correctional Institute for Women filed a class action suit contending that the prison has failed to provide decent conditions. There are only two vocational training programs: furniture upholstering and the use of business office equipment. The furniture class had no teacher for months, and the office class has outdated equipment.

They are also demanding better health services. A doctor comes only once per week and for at least 8 hours each day there are no medical personnel on the premises. Emergency care is non-existent.

Privileged Poor

Education Secretary Terrel H. Bell, defending Reagan's cutbacks in aid to college students: The more you rush in with mega-Federal dollars, the more you start pushing people aside and depriving them of the "privilege" of earning their own way.