13

‘No Longer Our

The second connection I make is even tougher because it applies so much to
the women's community as I know it. And most women are still unwilling to
admit how much this happens. When Su starts getting sober, Bettina is threat-
ened. Sister Gin has guaranteed Su's dependence upon Bettina; Gin has reversed
the roles, making Bettina "better" and Su "worse," and that's not something
Bettina is willing to give up after all this time. After all, until Su stops
drinking, it's Bettina's option to leave...

I remember this all too well.

She had a stake in keeping you drunk,
and so did I,
so did I.

If you stayed drunk
she'd never go back to you,
she wouldn't leave me
like she left you...
But you lost a child in the exchange
and so did I,
so did I.

We're a lot alike, you know,

On some level she used to say,

Whenever she couldn't deal with her feelings
about either one of us—

"Dependent Personalities," she'd say...
you were the drunk,
and I was suicidal,

and we were both hurting...

and sometimes, just sometimes,
she'd say that she was sorry
that she hurt you;
she'd let out just that much
and so did I,
so did I.
But I was just beginning
to understand.

We're the ones speaking out now,
both angry in our own ways.
We've never talked about this,
but it's always been there...

And now,
I want you to know that I admire you.
You got strong,
you got free
and so did I,
so did I.

Constance Perenyi, 1979

I spent last night talking about dependencies with a group of women who do
not consider dependencies a problem for themselves. We talked about good de-
pendencies and bad dependencies, we talked about alcohol and drug use in terms
of responsible and irresponsible. But I had a hard time hearing that because
I have also talked with women for whom dependencies are a problem, women who
have at one time abused alcohol, drugs, or themselves. Judgmental? Yes, I
am judgmental. But I didn't realize until the end of our conversation that I
do not judge each of us individually as much as I look at us collectively, in
terms of a women's culture which is not yet clear of the society we are chal-
lenging.

THE TROUBLE
WITH

is that they're all across the street from
the Pepsi Cola Bottling Company or

Joe's Electrical Heating Service or

right next door to the Climax Lounge

where loud women kiss on loud men

right out in front of God & everybody

then stare at you when they realize

you're not going into their bar but

into the "other one."

The trouble with women's bars in this town
is that they're the size of a bathroom

on a Greyhound and you never have a place to sit down
unless you arrive at four in the afternoon
and the drinks keep getting higher

but you don't.

WOMEN'S BARS IN THIS TOWN

Sister’s Keeper

We frequently talk about women as victims of violence; but when it comes
to dependencies, we still talk in terms of “us" and "them." When a woman is
an alcoholic or a drug abuser, it is her responsibility to get herself toge-
ther. Yes, ultimately that is true. But it is also the responsibility of her
community to support her and put her "problem" in a political context. And
that does not mean just providing non-alcoholic alternatives (which often
seems a minor concession). We all have to examine our emerging culture, to
check out our own opinions of ourselves and other women who use alcohol and/
or drugs. This struggle to provide truly alcohol and drug-free spaces means
thinking differently about what is acceptable and what is not. It means de-
coding the messages, all the messages, especially the ones that seem to hit
home in the most personal ways.

We may have come part of the way in recent years; after all, there are now
a few alternatives and women are speaking out for the rights of women who are
recovering from drug and alcohol abuse. But that is not enough. Although I
rarely drink or use drugs, although I am neither an alcoholic nor an addict, I
still have a "problem." Somewhere inside, I am still attracted to Sister Gin;
and I am actually relieved that June Arnold chooses to glamorize rather than
analyze her characters’ dependencies. And at times, when I just can't struggle
any more, I think, "Wouldn't it be easier... I could fly so much freer, rest so
much easier if I were drunk, if I were stoned or strung out...” I still don't
know how to let go as much as I want to; and at times, I envy women who can
spend an evening, a whole day, an entire lifetime “mellowed out." They seem
OK; I seem uptight.

And, damn it, I am angry about that. I am angry that there are so few mod-
els for me to follow; I am angry that even with women, I have so few alter-
natives. We've bought right into the social acceptance of alcohol and drugs—
and it seems like such a contradiction to me. I want to be free and healthy,
and I want other women to share that too. Somehow, I can't believe that wo-
men who have totally integrated a substance into their lives don't have prob-
lems even if they aren't dependent.

As far as I can see, if it is a problem for so many women in our communi-
ties, it is a problem for all of us. And acknowledging that is just a begin-
ning because it is going to be a struggle for every woman who commits her-
self to women.

And in this case, there are no exceptions.

The trouble with women's bars in this town

is that you're always running into somebody you
can't stand and wouldn't care if you never

saw again in your entire life or

dodging the woman in the corner who likes you

about as much as we all like the telephone company or
taking the risk of being impaled on a cue stick.

The trouble with women's bars in this town

is that you're constantly bumping into the pigs,
faggots, straight couples, drag queens or

a token policewoman who's probably a dyke herself but
wants to haul you in just to prove she's not,

And the trouble with women's bars in this town
is that we think

we don't deserve

anything

better.

Chocolate Waters...