more letters home

"This Bridge"

Letter To The Editor,

As many of you may already know, Persephone Press has ceased to operate. This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color, one of their best-selling titles (20,000 copies sold), has now been out of print for many months. The effort for us, as editors, to get our book back from Persephone has cost us thousands of dollars in royalties and lawyer's fees.

We originally conceived of Bridge as an organizing tool, and in our travels and correspondence since its appearance in the Spring, 1981, this has proven to be true. The support of the women's community -- its use of Bridge in classes, CR groups, union-organizing, community centers, etc. -- has helped provide the financial base with which we could not have otherwise so successfully reached so many people. People not generally touched by the movement -- many more women and men of color, people in prison, readers in the Third World -- were touched.

We want to see Bridge back in print as soon as possible (scheduled publication date November 1983) so that it can continue to do its job. (Bridge has been completely unavailable for classroom use this term.) Although there were other presses interested in Bridge because of its successful sales figures, we, as women of color, wanted to see the book published by women of color as well, so that this time around we could decide the fate of our own books.

Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press of New York has agreed to publish Bridge. With the closing of Persephone Press, Kitchen Table also acquired Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology edited by Barbara Smith. Since Kitchen Table could not have anticipated these changes, it is now under severe financial pressure to meet the demand for these titles. As you generously supported Bridge by using and passing the word, we ask you again to help us by contributing what you can to help Bridge continue to build bridges. It will cost $7,500 to publish Bridge. So far, we have received $1,000 toward this goal. Make checks payable to Kitchen Table or Working Women's Institute for tax-deductible donations. Low-interest loans are gratefully accepted.

Sincerely,

Gloria Anzaldúa and Cherrie Moraga

Write to: Kitchen Table Press Box 2753, Rockefeller Center Station, New York, N.Y. 10185

Maenad Folds

Dear Subscriber,

It is with sadness that we must inform you that MAENAD, A Women's Literary Journal, Ltd., ceased publication with our current issue No. 8, "A Fiction Issue On Bonding," VOL. II, No. 4. This issue completes two volumes of fine feminist publishing, due in large part to subscribers who supported us since 1980.

MAENAD has suffered from a severe lack of funding in 1982 and 1983, which has increased our debts to unmanageable proportions. Therefore, we have made the reluctant decision to discontinue publication.

We do have available back copies of issues #2-8 in limited quantities. We are offering to present subscribers who have unused paid subscriptions the opportunity to receive a number of these back copies (up to the amount of their unused paid subscription) for only the cost of the postage. Therefore, if you do have an unused paid subscription, please contact me and indicate the issues you want and the number of copies. A postal contribution of 75¢ per single copy, $1 for two copies, and $1.50 for three or more copies will be necessary. If your subscription has run out, or if you want more copies than are covered by your unused paid subscription, please enclose $4 for each copy, p-p.

Again, all of us at MAENAD would like to express our deepest regard to you all.

We could not have come this far to publish a nationally and internationally read journal such as MAENAD without your support. Thank you all, and please, if you wish copies, be prompt. Deadline is November 1, 1983. Our post office box will be open indefinitely.

Sisterly Regards, Paula Estey, Publisher

Lesbian Visibility

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I was attending a workshop in Boulder, Colorado for 3 weeks and I bought a copy of BMR before I left. Well, I lost it, but I thought for sure that I could pick up a copy in Boulder. I looked for days in Boulder to find a women's bookstore and also to connect with other lesbians.

I finally located Left Hand Books and they carried BMR. I would just like to say that it is very hard to be in a town and want to connect (just to talk) with other lesbians and not find them. I like to feel our network; I could feel it, but I couldn't see it.

So anyway, this letter is to say thank you for being the only friend I had for over a week. It is also to the women of Boulder....

I know the summer is different, and that Denver has more of an active visible women's community, and that there is

Canada, Mexico, Plain Brown Wrapper

Overseas

institutions

within US

Pay 83 /dl

U.S. $$$ only

Sample Copies and Back Issues...$1.25 (to cover issue and mailing)

Free to Prisoners and Psychiatric Inmates

Big Mama Rag, October 1983 - Page 19

a Lar (which by the way was very mellow and friendly) but PLEASE make yourself more visible. I was beginning to think I was expecting too much to be able to find other lesbians in Boulder.

So, I say again make your community more visible.

I live in Lawrence, Kansas and I am part of the collective bookstore Spinster's Books. If any woman is visiting or traveling through town, please contact our bookstore for local info and a connection.

P.S. Thanks to the women's line, I finally got some local info about Boulder and a hello to Kelly.

Stranger in a strange land. Laura Sagewomom Lawrence, KS.

Searching

Hello sisters,

I am a 27-year-old West Indian/native American dyke and I am searching to find some dykes who are proud of being mixed blooded, with Indian and Black.

All of the stories I have read were by Native American women and the emphasis seems to be on women who are mixed with white. I wonder when I will hear more from lesbians who have gotten themselves together about who they are as both Indian/Black women.

Could you send me a subscription form? Juana Paz told me how great your newspaper is, I'd love to see it.

For any woman who'd want to write me, write to: Flying Thunder Cloud Rdoc 3245 Lucius Rd #J-3 Columbia, S.C. 29201

SUBSCRIPTION FORM

ADDRESS

CITY, STATE, ZIP

AMOUNT

INDIVIDUAL or INSTITUTION

BIG MAMA RAG

1724 Gaylord Street Denver, CO 80206 (303) 322-2010

Mama Rag, October 1983 - Page 19

POSSSHSSSSHHSSSSHSSHSSSOSHSSHS OS HSHEOTHSOOHHSECHSES