Send Mama A

Holiday Gift !!!

Big Mama Rag is trying to gain power over her own production by  
investing in a strategic machine, a typesetter. Ownership of a typeset-  
ter would cut BMR costs considerably and also enable BMR to provide a  
much needed service to the women's community.

The typesetter would be housed at Woman to Woman Feminist Center,  
making it available to community individuals. It could provide skills  
and be useful as training in a graphic arts field.

BMR is currently being typed rather than phototypeset to save money  
towards the typesetter. Phototypesetting produces a superior quality  
product, being neater, more versatile, and most important, justifies  
the right hand margin which saves space. BMR would be able to get more  
information in the same number of pages and look better while saving  
money.

The model we feel would be of best use for the newspaper costs $8,200.  
We have raised $1,600 in personal donations. We have investigated credit  
possibilities and found that if we were to use the time payments from  
the company, we would be paying about $15,000, or giving the man twice  
as much as his machine is worth.

Interest being high, and our credit low, we would prefer to buy the  
machine outright and avoid all risk to the women's community. This  
means we need to raise $6,600 more in personal donations and/or loans.  
We also need contacts from publishers for future typesetting. We  
already have two interested parties and more would assure us of enough  

work to pay back loans and keep the machine busy.

Women having contacts with loan possibilities and other monetary re-  
sources, and women knowing of publications needing typesetting, should  
contact BMR this month at 1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO 80206, or call the  
office at 322-2010.

Here is my support in the amount of —  
dollars for the typesetting machine.

Please make checks payable to Big Mama Rag and specify that it is for the  
typesetting machine. Thank you.

Mama - M Rag Bulk Rate  
1724 Gaylord Street U.S. Postage:  
Denver, Colorado 80208 Denver, Colorado 80206 PAID  

Denver, Co.  
Permit no. 1812  

Zip:

SUBSCRIBE! SUBSCRIBE!

- $6.00 individual sub. $10.00 overseas  
$12.00 institution