Installers Demoted

Linda Fowler

Fifty Mountain Bell women installers have filed charges of sex discrimination with the Equal Opportunity Commission against Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph and the Communication Workers of America Local 8412. The charges were filed after a January 7 announcement by Mountain Bell Plant Department of a force adjustment plan which resulted in the downgrading of these women installers to lower paying clerical and operator positions.

The women were hired in the summer of 1974 as a result of Bell's Affirmative Action Program implemented by the Consent Decree between A.T.&T., the E.E.O.C., and the U.S. Dept. of Labor.

Mountain Bell claims “a drop in business, growth and workloads” as its reason for the force adjustment. Six male installers were given lateral transfers, that is, they were maintained in the same job of installer but moved to a different area where work was available. Although openings are now available for installers in Greeley and Ft. Collins, none of the women were offered these jobs. They were instead downgraded from their $140 a week jobs to more traditional women’s jobs of clerk and operator which pay a starting salary of $115-120 per week. According to one of the women, they were told, “You either take these jobs or you quit.”

The Consent Decree provides for collective bargaining agreements with individual Bell companies in this way: “This decree shall not be interpreted as requiring the abandonment of any provisions in any Bell companies' collective bargaining agreements except as required to maintain compliance with federal law, executive orders and regulations... pertaining to discrimination in employment... Nothing in this decree is intended to restrict the right of the Bell companies and the collective bargaining representatives of their employees to negotiate alternatives to the provisions of this decree which would also be in compliance with federal law.” This position was upheld by the Watkins case in Louisiana where the court ruled that a reduction in a workforce is not allowed if it has a discriminatory impact.

In compliance with the existing contract between Local 8412 and Mountain Bell, the women were moved down according to their length of time as company employees. A spokeswoman for the group stated, “The union seniority system, when applied to our situation, operates to discriminate against women by perpetuating past discrimination. Further, the contract states that, ‘neither the company nor the union shall unlawfully discriminate against any employee because of such employee's sex.’ (Of 5,700 installers in six states, 10 are women.)

“We have tried to file grievances with CWA because of our demotions and were told the force adjustment was in complete harmony with the terms of the contract, and a grievance could not be filed unless the contract was violated. The CWA communicator stated that upholding the contract nullifies the Consent Decree.” Mountain Bell was recently granted a $28 million rate hike and shortly thereafter declared they have been suffering a drop in business. More recently, they have publicly announced they are committed to a number of multi-million dollar expansion programs in 1975, including a $20 million direct distance dialing project for northeastern Colorado, the new Denver Service Center in the downtown Skyline area, a new operator services building in southwest Denver, equipment additions at many central call switching offices throughout the state, new microwave facilities in many areas and the upgrading of rural service from 8-party to 4-party in many Colorado telephone exchanges.

The total cost of these projects has been estimated at $182 million. Mountain Bell is also spending $162,000 on preparing and presenting its side of the recent Colorado rate increase. The group of women have this to say: “Mountain Bell's claims do not justify violating their obligation to maintain women in their Affirmative Action Programs. They are legally obligated to maintain us in these programs; however, they are not legally obligated to begin a multi-million dollar expansion program.” Mountain Bell itself has stated that “violation of the Consent Decree would make it liable for contempt of court citations.” A generous estimate of the total cost of the difference between our salaries for 1975 at the installer level and at the levels we have been downgraded to is approximately $31,000.

“This is not the reason, though, why the women are suing,” said Pat Butera, a spokeswoman for the group. “We are suing because the action Mountain Bell has taken is illegal. Women are not the cause of our economic dilemma and should not be blamed for it.”

What the women installers demand is that Mountain Bell and CWA meet their legal obligation and return them to the jobs for which they were trained and back pay since they were downgraded. The group said, “Customers for whom we have installed phones and who feel we did a good job and gave good service are encouraged to call or write Colorado P.U.C. and Mountain Bell. The action is endorsed by the National Organization for Women, the National Lawyers Guild, the Coalition of Labor Union Women, Colorado Workers Unity, and Better Jobs for Women.

Jo Anne Little

Jo Anne Little, a black woman who killed a jail guard who tried to rape her while she was being held in the Beaufort County jail in North Carolina, (see Dec.-Jan 8MAR) is scheduled to go on trial in a few weeks and is desperately in need of money for her defense.

Her lawyers need to hire a criminologist to reconstruct the case and need to pay an investigator to look into allegations that other inmates have been subjected to sexual abuse.

All contributions are tax deductible. Don’t put off sending even a dollar. The money is needed as soon as possible. Send all contributions to: The Southern Poverty Law Center, 119 S. McDonough St., Montgomery, Alabama, 36101.