RAPE

RAPE: The All-American Crime

From Page 3

The attraction of the male in our
culture to violence and death is a
tradition Manson and his admirers are
carrying on with tireless avidity (even
presuming Manson’s innocence, he
dreams of the purification of fire and
destruction). It was Malraux, in his
“Anti-Memoirs” who said that for the
male, facing death was the illumina-
ting experience analogous to child-
birth for the female. Certainly our
culture does glorify war and shroud
the agonies of the gun-fighter in veils
of mystery.

And in the spectrum of male
behavior, rape, the perfect combina-
tion of sex and violence, is the
penultimate act. Erotic pleasure
cannot be separated from culture, and
in our culture male eroticism is
wedded to power. Not only should a
man be taller and stronger than a
female in the perfect love-match, but
he must also demonstrate his superior
strength in gestures of dominance
which are perceived as amorous.
Though the law attempts to make a
clear division between rape and sexual
intercourse, in fact the courts find it
difficult to distinguish between a case
where the decision to copulate was
mutual and one where a man forced
himself upon his partner.

The scenario is even further
complicated by the expectation that,
not only does a woman mean “yes”
when she says “no,” but that a really
decent woman ought to begin by
saying “no,” and then be led down the
primrose path to acquiescence. Ovid,
the author of Western Civilization’s
most celebrated sex-manual, makes
this expectation perfectly clear:

..and when I beg you to say

“yes,” say “no.” Then let me lie

outside your bolted door....So

Love grows strong....

Rape in Heterosexual Relations

That the basic elements of rape
are involved in all heterosexual
relationships may explain why men
often identify with the offender in this
crime. But to regard the rapist as the
victim, a man driven by his inherent
sexual needs to take what will not be
given him, reveals a basic ignorance of
sexual politics. For in our culture
heterosexual love finds an erotic
expression through male dominance
and female submission. A man who
derives pleasure from raping a woman
clearly must enjoy force and domi-
nance as much or more than the
simple pleasures of the flesh. Coitus
cannot be experienced in isolation.
The weather, the state of the nation,
the level of sugar in the blood—all will
affect a man's ability to achieve
orgasm. If a man can achieve sexual
pleasure after terrorizing and humilia-
ting the object of his passion, and in
fact while inflicting pain upon her, one
must assume he derives pleasure
directly from terrorizing, humiliating
and harming a woman. According to
Amir's study of forcible rape, on a
statistical average the man who has
been convicted of rape was found to
have a normal sexual personality,
tending to be different from the
normal, well-adjusted male only in
having a greater tendency to express
violence and rage.

And if the professional rapist is
to be separated from the average
dominant heterosexual, it may be
mainly a quantitative difference. For
the existence of rape as an index to
masculinity is not entirely metaphori-
cal. Though this measure of masculi-
nity seems to be more publicly
exhibited among “bad boys” or aging
bikers who practice sexual initiation
through group rape, in fact, “good
boys” engage in the same rites to
prove their manhood.

In Stockton, a small town in
California which epitomizes silent
majority America, a bachelor party
was given last summer for a young
man about to be married. A woman
was hired to dance “topless” for the
amusement of the guests. At the high

point of the evening the bridegroom-
to-be dragged the woman into a
bedroom. No move was made by any
of his companions to stop what was
clearly going to be an attempted rape.
Far from it. As the woman described,
“I tried to keep him away—told him of
my Herpes Genitalis, et cetera, but he
couldn't face the guys if he didn't
screw me.” After the bridegroom had
finished raping the woman and
returned with her to the party, far from
chastizing him, his friends jeered the
woman and covered her with wine.

Force in Group Rape

It was fortunate for the dancer
that the bridegroom's friends did not
follow him into the bedroom for,
though one might suppose that in
group rape, since the victim is
outnumbered, less force would be
inflicted on her, in fact, Amir’s studies
indicate, “the most excessive degrees
of violence occurred in group rape.”
Far from discouraging violence, the
presence of other men may in fact
encourage sadism, and even cause the
behavior. In an unpublished study of
group rape by Gilbert Beis and Duncan
Cahpell, the authors refer to a study
by W.H. Blanchard which relates,
“The leader of the male group...appa-
rently precipitated and maintained the
activity, despite misgivings, because
of a need to fulfill the role that the
other two men had assigned to him. ‘I
was scared when it began to happen,’
he says. ‘I wanted to leave but I didn’t
want to say it to the other guys—you
know—that I was scared.’ ”

Thus it becomes clear that not
only does our culture teach men the
rudiments of rape, but society, or
more specifically other men, encour-
age the practice of it.

“Every man I meet wants to protect
me. Can't figure out what from.”
—Mae West

If a male society rewards
aggressive, domineering sexual beha-
vior, it contains within itself a sexual
schizophrenia. For the masculine man
is also expected to prove his mettle as
a protector of women. To the naive
eye, this dichotomy implies that men
fall into one of two categories: those
who rape and those who protect. In
fact, life does not prove so simple. In a
study euphemistically entitled “Sex
Aggression by College Men,” it was
discovered that men who believe in a
double standard of morality for men
and women, who in fact believe most
fervently in the ultimate value of
virginity, are more liable to commit
“this aggressive variety of sexual
exploitation.”

(At this point in our narrative it
should come as no surprise that Sir
Thomas Malory, creator of that classic
tale of chivalry, The Knights of the
Round Table, was himself arrested
and found guilty for repeated
incidents of rape.)

In the system of chivalry, men
protect women against men. This is

not unlike the protection relationship
which the mafia established with
small businesses in the early part of
this century. Indeed, chivalry is an
age-old protection racket which
depends for its existence on rape.
We Call It Chivalry
According to the male mytholo-
gy which defines and perpetuates rape,
it is an animal instinct inherent in the
male. The story goes that sometime in
our pre-historical past, the male, more
hirsute and burly than today’s
counterparts, roamed about an uncivi-
lized landscape until he found a

desirable female. (Oddly enough, this

female is not pictured as more
muscular than the modern woman).
Her mate does not bother with
courtship. He simply grabs her by the
hair and drags her to the closest cave.
Presumably, one of the major
advantages of modern civilization for
the female has been the civilizing of
the male. We call it chivalry.

But women do not get chivalry
for free. According to the logic of
sexual politics, we too have to civilize
our behavior. (Enter chastity. Enter
virginity. Enter monogamy.) For the
female, civilized behavior means
chastity before marriage and faithful-
ness within it. Chivalrous behavior in
the male is supposed to protect that
chastity from involuntary defilement.
The fly in the ointment of this
otherwise peaceful system is the
fallen woman. She does not behave.
Therefore, she does not deserve
protection. Or, to use another
argument, a major tenet of the same
value system: what has once been
defiled cannot again be violated. One
begins to suspect that it is the
behavior of the fallen woman and not
that of the male, that civilization aims
to control.

The assumption that a woman
who does not respect the double
standard deserves whatever she gets
(or at the very least “asks for it”)
operates in the courts today. While in
some states a man's previous rape
convictions are not considered admis-
sible evidence, the sexual reputation
of the rape victim is considered a
crucial element of the facts upon

which the court must decide inno-
cence or guilt...

According to the double stand-
ard a woman who has had sexual
intercourse out of wedlock cannot be
raped. Rape is not only a crime of
aggression against the body; it is a
transgression against chastity as
defined by men. When a woman is
forced into a sexual relationship, she
has, according to the male ethos,
been violated, but she is also defiled if
she does not behave according to the
double standard, by maintaining her
chastity, or confining her sexual
activities to a monogamous relation-
ship.

“Bad Girls” Get Raped

One should not assume, how-
ever, that a woman can avoid the
possibility of rape simply by behaving.
Though myth would have it that
mainly “bad girls” are raped, this
theory has no basis in fact. Available
statistics would lead one to believe
that a safer source is promiscuity. In a
study of rape done in the District of
Columbia, it was found that 82 percent
of the rape victims had a “good
reputation.” Even the Police Inspec-
tor’s advice to stay off the streets is
rather useless, for almost half of
reported rapes occur in the home of
the victim and are committed by a man
she has never before seen. Like
indiscriminate terrorism, rape can
happen to any woman, and few
women are ever without this knowledge...

Clearly the white man’s chivalry

is aimed only to protect the chastity of
“his” women. As a final irony that same
system of sexual values from which
chivalry is derived has also provided
womankind with an unwritten code of
behavior, called femininity, which
makes a feminine woman the perfect
victim of sexual aggression. If being
chaste does not ward off the
possibility of assault, being feminine
certainly increases the chances that it
will succeed. To be submissive is to
defer to masculine strength; is to lack
muscular development or any interest
in defending oneself; is to let doors
be opened, to have one’s arm held.

More on Page 23