ABORTION: who cont

women’s reproduction 7?!

Lisa Gould

Women's right to have an abortion is continually eroding, making abortion an immediate issue. While the Supreme Court in 1973 decided in Roe v. Wade that a woman's decision to have an abortion is a matter between her and her physician, don't kid yourself that abortion is currently a right for all women. Since that decision, anti-abortionists have been gathering and increasing in strength against this women's rights issue.

The result of pro-natalist sentiment is that in August 1978 the Hyde bill for federal appropriations grants federal reimbursement for women who become pregnant and bear children, but not to women who want abortions. Through extreme stricture against Medicaid funding, Califano, then head of HEW (US Department of Health, Education and Welfare) managed to disallow low-income women federally funded abortion, plus wives and dependents of military personnel, Peace Corps volunteers; legislation allows employers to exclude abortion coverage and demands that women who have been victims of rape or incest report this within 60 days to be eligible for funds.

As of May 1979, 39 states have denied women federal reimbursement of Medicaid funds for abortion. To begin to assess the effects of denying the use of Medicaid funds, which especially restricts poor women, one has to include the number of forced pregnancies and the increase of welfare children born. Between '72 and '76 Public Service estimates that the government paid for between 250,000 and 300,000 abortions. According to the ACLU, Medicaid funds for abortion dropped by 98% in 22 states by October 1978. Of the women who have been forced into illegal abortion attempts, there have been many maimings, and at least 3 deaths in the first 16 months of Medicaid cut-offs. These women couldn't pay for abortions, and the state refuses to pay. Around the country, legislatures such as in Nebraska and Akron, Ohio are passing into law "informed consent" bills which require that a woman seeking an abortion be shown a picture of the fetus taken at the time which she wishes an abortion, to be given a detailed description of the fetus by a doctor. She must wait a period of 24-48 hours to have an abortion, she must be told alternatives to abortion, and 2 physicians must be present at the abortion—1 to attend to the woman and the other to save the life of the fetus, when possible. This last measure serves to drive up the cost of abortion.

No such bill is passed to "inform" so carefully those who receive hysterectomies or appendectomies. In Massachusetts, no woman for any reason may receive federal reimbursement.

ABORTION ATTACKED

Anti-abortion groups are using violence and threats and harassment of clinic staff and physicians who perform abortions, as well as women who seek abortions. Clinics are burned to the ground, supposedly aborted fetuses are displayed at pro-life press conferences and demonstrations (that sanctity of life in practice). The war against abortion continues as 14 states have successfully petitioned for a Constitutional Convention to outlaw abortion completely (34 states are needed to call a convention).

And rabid anti-abortionists run for and are elected to office in state government, in the House and in Senate. Next will be threatened the rights of the middle-class women, those who can now afford to pay for abortion. The women who don't consider their rights to have been challenged by the federal legislature must realize abortion is a moral choice for all lives concerned. If some are in effect unable to make that choice because of lack of money, then women are not in control of their fate.

CHALLENGE OFFS

MEDICAID CUT

Not to be without a fight, a class action suit has been filed in Brooklyn, New York—McCrae vs. Califano to challenge Medicaid cutoffs. The case states that a separation has not been made between church and state, that the civil law passed denying federal reimbursement for abortion embodies religious doctrine. Although abortion neither advances nor prohibits religion, laws are passed to safeguard a particular religious belief. Currently, the law reflects the views of those theologies that teach that actual human life exists from the moment of conception. Yet in '73 the Supreme Court said that whether or not a woman was to have an abortion was a matter of privacy, with no interference from the state.

How soon will it be before all women are told that abortion and birth control are illegal? Implications for women in a world of compulsory pregnancy and life for life's sake is the cold reality of negligent quality of life. Women are forced to raise their children without assurance of necessities which are really pro-life: adequate medical care, nutrition, education, play and recreation, love and affection for herself and her children.

Abortion has been legal for only 6 years, yet already we are fighting for this right again. In any battle, one must recognize who one is fighting and what the opposition is claiming.

KNOWING THE ENEMY

The trick to knowing who the enemy is in understanding the broad political picture of who's to benefit from having abortion available and who's to benefit from them not being available. "It's shallow analysis,” said one Illinois Abortion Rights Coalition member, Esther Pats, “to think that anti-abortionists are simply anti-woman or that it is a religious issue. Those who conduct the pro-natalist and anti-natalist movements sweep this country over and beyond these particular misogynistic sentiments. For sure, pro-natalists include many who see abortion as a threat to motherhood and to women as homemakers, and there are those who are afraid there won't be enough babies to adopt, that abortion is murder, that there won't be enough people to contribute to social security if abortions continue to be legal. But these do not explain the large force of money and might behind the anti-abortion movement.

According to Marilyn, it is the multinationals who are in primary control of this country and for the time are tolerating anti-abortion activism because the way they benefit most clearly is by having the workers who have genuine reason to be dissatisfied with their dollar going less far being directed away from the source of the problem. Multinationals need to control the birth rate in this country—to keep growth from causing too much pressure and the needs of the people becoming too unwieldy. As the workers' attention is shunted away from the economy, the New Right grows larger and stronger with the attention directed towards abortion. This creates more freedom for exploitation by multinational corporations.

“While the multinational corporations are making their huge profit margins," continued Marilyn, “and we in the US are experiencing recession, there has to be some way for people to express discontent. So we have the rise of nationalism and the right wing as a way of letting the lid off that kind of discontent without directing it to the source of the problem.

At a state-wide anti-abortion convention I attended in San Jose, California, they literally said: the little man, the working man feels himself totally out of control of what is happening. You see the morality of the country going to hell, you see that you don't have any control over the bureaucracy or the government taxes, but this is something you can do, you can bring God back into the country, you can fight for the life of the fetus! With the multinationals keeping a watchful eye on what is happening with this pro-natalist activism." Sue added that, “You can see that if these population control forces are giving a little on abortion they're picking up the slack by offering sterilization but the end product is that they still want our population under their control.” Abortion happens to be one key tool to get the worker, the grassroots volunteer, to work for the Right Wing. Ah, the phenomena! Right Wing able to generate hundreds of thousands of dollars to elect or to remove from office conservatives and liberals, capable of rallying nationwide hue and cry against the Panama Canal Treaty, for SALT II, for nuclear power, against the Arabs, the Jews, and so on.

The Right Wing is seen as a national outburst of re-directed, carefully orchestrated grassroots activists who serve to promote the ruling class's economic and militaristic motives. Abortion is a tool to coalesce the Right Wing, to get people to fight for the Right Wing, never mind the supposed religious or moral fervor. Their names appear on computerized lists and huge mailings can be generated momentarily to "inform" people of issues and actions to fight or lobby Congress for.

Population controllers, such as those foundations which contribute to NARAL's and Planned Parenthood's budgets are not always the same forces which direct the Right Wing. Completely, the foundations can be seen working to strengthen pro-natalist forces: by giving $69,000 to a fall '79 Mobilization for Abortion Rights Week. But where was this money when Congress was inundated by anti-abortion activity during the Hyde appropriations bill? Just as the Rockefeller Foundation was learned to have bankrolled the '73 Supreme Court battle of Roe vs. Wade, to lend support of anti-natalist forces, we are continually experiencing population control forces.

Says ARM activist and founder, Carol Downer, "As feminists, ARM leadership knows that a patriarchal society will never allow women to completely control their own bodies. The needs of the nation for soldiers, as national leaders who want to revive the draft have recently been admitting, requires that women have more babies than they have been having in recent years, and conversely when there are not enough jobs or food to go around, leaders will want women to have fewer babies. Various national leaders have at different times offered incentives to women to have children, or to not have children, but primarily they rely on the church and the state to coerce women one way or the other. Therefore, even though we work for reform such as Medicaid for abortions, and liberalized abortion laws, we also work to give women the knowledge and technology to directly prevent or terminate unwanted pregnancy without medical intervention, to weaken the patriarchal control.”

Abortion is used as a pawn in the social, political, religious, and economic struggles for power of the ruling class. Corporations like the Roman Catholic Church, the national and the multinational companies, the politicians and the courts turn against equality of women, granting rights as if they were privileges to a few. As women, we must learn to rely on our own power for population control.

(Information from Nation, New York Times, MA, ARM: Action.)