12  
Women Say No  

Later in the planning stage, we decided to request that women and Third  
World men be allowed to speak first, chosen in a separate lottery from white  
men. This request was opposed at the last coalition meeting we attended on  
grounds that all but three of the 20 or so speakers were women or Third  
World men. We did not realize this when we talked among ourselves about  
making a separate lottery request. As a result, our unity broke down when  
we got to the coalition meeting: some of us thought a separate lottery was  
probably then unnecessary; others wanted women to go first, others argued  
for women, minority men and white men to have three separate lotteries. Our  
original point was to acknowledge the work and leadership of women and Third  
World groups—which, in the '60s at least, had not been done by a white male-  
dominated anti-war movement. But in our indecision, that point was lost; at  
least some of the other coalition members clearly felt we were being opport-  
unistic and divisive in view of the coalition's prior agreement on one lot-  
tery. Eventually, one lottery was held, with the exception that Third World  
women would be given the option of moving to the top of the list. (None, in  
fact, did. And the whole issue became moot on rally day when a white woman  
convinced the emcee that she ought to be allowed to go first.)  

While much of Women Say No's work did in fact focus on "logistics" as the  
BMR article said, often those logistics discussions had political implications.  
A major area for us was entertainment planning. The coalition had given us  
total control and responsibility for providing the sound system and enter-  
tainment "power" to get across a variety of feminist and anti-imperialist  
politics, both preceding and during the rally. We invited Ain't I A Woman  
Theater, which performed a powerful mime dealing with the manipulation of  
soldiers by corporate/military interests. We invited dramatic reader  
Evelyn Green, and she chose a woman's internal monologue about her own needs  
vs. those of the man she thinks she loves. Green and poet Pandoura Carpenter  
read a poem by Pat Parker dealing with black women's struggles. The women's  
choir—comprised of a substantial portion of the membership of Women Say No—  
performed songs of a number of different political struggles.  

In our discussions of the politics of entertainment, we considered other  
issues as well. Should we ask only women to perform, considering it was  
International Women's Day? How did we view the autonomy of Third World  
groups to choose groups that reflected their own politics? Did we, as a  
group of white women, have a right to tell them 'no men invited’? This was  
a question that many of us had never had to consider before, since our work  
was mostly done out of coalition.  

The discussion was a good one. We agreed to allow mixed groups of men and  
women, although some of us came away thinking that policy applied only to  
Third World groups, others thought it applied to all groups. Meanwhile, amid  
this misunderstanding, an all-white folk band of one woman and two men were  
allowed their request to play. They became the opening act, and many of us  
felt in retrospect that their music played into what much of the media chose  
to see of the day: a return to '60s nostalgia. Such reporting directly  
contradicted some of the issues we had hoped to stress: that the anti-war  
movement of the ‘80s will be different from the ‘60s; that a decade of femin-  
ism will have made a difference; that women and Third World men will take  
active, recognized roles in opposing the draft, and the connections between  
our struggles in this country will be apparent.  

We have some criticisms of BMR's coverage. Basically we believe that the  
coverage was wholly negative. We believe this bias was because members of  
the collective did not approve of our decision to work in a coalition, and  
particularly a coalition with the AFSC. BMR has in the past defended its  
right to be biased, but we believe the readership also has a right to more  
objective coverage.  

Some examples of bias are: Any previous International Women's Days have  
all had cover stories of the celebrations and positive publicity urging women  
to turn out for the day. The post-IWD issues have constructive criticism  
which focuses on the successes as well as the failures of each day's rally  
and workshops.  

In contrast, the March 1980 coverage was limited to a report on the commun-  
ity meeting by Judy Barlow with a factual error in it, and an analysis of  
feminist draft resistance by Judy Barlow, Lori Bradford, and Bobbe Ross which  
examines in detail the ways people can resist the draft, says that drafting  
women is a "false issue," and clearly questioned our "aligning" ourselves  
with pacifists and leftists. Mention was made of the rally time and place,  
but any perceptive reader could have picked up from these articles that the  
politically correct thing to do was to not touch the march or rally with a  
ten-foot pole.  

In the April 1980 issue, the march and rally were “covered” if you can call  
no cover story, one small picture, no credit given for extensive work we did  
on developing our politics, no mention being made of the women's march from  
the Capitol to the rally, or of the hour of women's political culture, attend-  
ed by about 200 people, "coverage": This hour, and the hour or more Women  
Say No members and other feminists contributed to the rally in song, poetry  
and mime, were dismissed by Constance Perenyi in her article as “mere enter-  
tainment." There was no mention made in Perenyi's or Sue Goding's (a Women  
Say No member) article that our banner with a women's liberation symbol domin-  
ated the stage area, which was the rally focus—that all of the people at the  
rally saw women doing the technical sound work—that 90% of the “mere enter-  
tainment" at the rally was performed by women and clearly expressed our  
pro-woman, pro-lesbian, anti-military, anti-imperialist, anti-racist politics,  
as it was intended to do. We did succeed in expressing our politics through  
culture and Sue Goding's statement that we could have had 2 hours of time at  
the rally and only took 5 minutes is not true.  

In fact, the "coverage" of the day was actually a criticism of the events  
leading to that day. No mention was made of the leaflet Women Say No put out  
or of the hard work and long meetings spent to jell our points of unity into  
a speech and leaflet. Sue's and Connie's articles left major misconceptions  
in the reader's minds, i.e. that it was a pacifist rally when in fact most of  
the 23 speakers stressed the need for complete social revolution although  
only a few spoke for armed struggle and illegal means of ending the draft.  
But by no means was the sense of the rally that to end all wars you must  
work within the system and obtain CO status. Indeed there was behind the  
scenes maneuvering by the AFSC. We did not challenge out-of-committee  
decisions made by the AFSC. AFSC represented themselves at the press confer-  
ence. Other groups did not represent themselves because of the problem of  
getting everyone's material together. We didn't do our own press release,  
therefore, the media got ONLY the AFSC view.  

Perenyi's article on culture had some curious contradictions in it. On the  
one hand, she says she wants her art to be political, to relate to women's  
lives and struggles, she wants to integrate her politics and art, gets little  
encouragement from feminists, feels defensive about her art, feels that it  
has to be polished and finds it very hard to keep working.  

Let me tell you, we can relate to this! Of those in the women's chorus,  
which performed much of the "mere entertainment" at the rally, some of us see  
ourselves as political artists, or are beginning to go in that direction.  

We know that our performance was not polished and we know why—because we  
had 2 weeks to practice while we were also all writing the speech, and leaf-  
let, coordinating entertainment, etc. We also were and are trying to inter-  
grate our politics and art. We believe that Holly Near's and Malvina  
Reynolds' songs did indeed say what we wanted to say, and do not constitute  
a “dilution” of energies or a "distraction" as Connie Perenyi and Sue Goding  
wrote in their articles.  

We believe, in fact, that political music can reach a level in the listeners'  
consciousness that cannot be reached by speeches. The most radical, right-on,  
well-rehearsed speeches go in one ear and out the other at a 4-hour rally.  
Music, theatre, and poetry, when well done, make people sit up and pay attent-  
ion. We cop to the fact that we had only one song with an anti-draft message:  
The Bankers and the Diplomats Are Going in the Army by Malvina Reynolds, and  
that this song is not from a feminist but rather a humanist view.  

But we can relate to the difficulty of combining our culture and politics.  
We can relate to the conflict between getting it polished and getting it out.  
And we can especially relate to feeling defensive and getting little encour-  
agement from feminists. That is why we were so hurt and angry when Perenyi  
dismissed our efforts as basically worthless politically.  

We were demoralized by BMR's coverage of the rally and march. This kind of  
one-sided, all-negative criticism is destructive and incorrect. To be use-  
ful, analysis and criticism should be accurate and should praise work done  
well as well as condemn. Otherwise, we end up too divided and suspicious to  
work together, too paralyzed to organize, and too apathetic to care, which  
is what happened to us in March of 1979 behind IWD 1978. We hope it will not  
happen again in March 1981, that is, that our struggles will become direct  
instead of in writing, leading to political growth and more understanding on  
both sides. We see that it boils down to this; we believe that it is OK to  
appear on the same platform with people we don't totally agree with, as long  
as we state our own politics strongly. Probably what will happen is that  
those of us who want to work in/with coalitions will do so, in an effort to  
break out of our isolation as lesbian feminists, and that those who see this  
as dangerous will not work in coalitions. We intend to learn through practice  
and wish those of our sisters who disagree with us will present their criticism  
in a straightforward and friendly way whose intent is clearly to "protect  
and educate" not undermine and demoralize.  

Of course there were points of agreement we had with Sue's article. We  
could have been more effective had we done our own publicity. Press releases  
and contact with commercial media from Women Say No, specifically might have  
countered the media's portrayal of the draft rally as merely a return to the  
'60s and a pacifist statement.  

When dealing in coalition with the AFSC and other groups, we should have been  
clearer on our group's consensus and been more principled in dealing within  
the coalition. We could have made our points of unity public to the coalition;  
stating that we weren't pacifists and why, and encouraged all coalition members  
to state their political views on the draft. Had we had more time, this would  
have been appropriate for coalition work.  

With as resourceful a women's community as ours, more radical feminist women  
could have been found and encouraged to speak on the platform.  

We felt BMR was short-sighted and slighting the successes of Women Say No  
and the success of the day's demonstration.  

The participation of WSN in the March 8 Stop the Draft demonstration created  
a strong feminist presence which would not have existed otherwise. There  
was feminist entertainment throughout the day and our banner was seen by all.  

Not only was women's feminist culture brought to the rally in the form of  
entertainment, but the day's demonstration became a celebration of International  
Women's Day and a march of over 100 women through the streets of downtown  
Denver. A radical feminist view was apparent. 50% of the speakers for the  
day were women. While that should be the norm for all events, in reality  
that is a victory on such a previously male-defined issue.  

And our successes do not end with the end of the day. The women's chorus  
singing feminist and other political songs has continued, and will be avail-  
able for future feminist events of all kinds.  

Women Say No has also continued to meet. We see WSN as a skeletal group  
for future political work. Suggestions on how to proceed setting up anti-  
draft education in high schools—using our points of unity as a base for a  
broader issued group—joining with other groups of women to establish a  
broader more permanent organization. All women interested in any of those  
alternatives are encouraged to come to WSN future meetings.  

We hope women in the community identify this article as recognition of our  
commitment to struggle towards a stronger and broader feminist movement.  

AF  

See From Page 11  

could do so; that the order of speak-  
ers would be chosen by lot; that a  
speaker's committee would take names  
of speakers; that other tasks would  
be divided according to volunteer  
resources; that the only group unity  
was opposition to the draft and  
registration plan; and that AFSC  
would do the press work for the rally.  

February 13-20: I learned that  
the Women Say No group had decided to  
join the February 6 ad-hoc group and  
that Connie had decided to not partic-  
ipate further. I communicated then  
with Kathy Riley as a representative  
of Women Say No.  

February 20 Speaker's Meeting and  
Rally planning meeting:  
I stated the meeting because at the Feb-  
ruary 13 meeting when I solicited other  
women and agreed to ask each organ-  
ization to send women speakers in  
order to fulfill the 50% requirement.  
At that point there were over 20  
speakers scheduled, representing about  
that many organizations. AFSC was  
the only pacifist organization  
scheduled to speak.  

This letter sufficiently details the  
facts about how the planning took  
place. I will write another letter to  
outline my political analysis of what  
happened, to detail some of the program  
work the AFSC carries out across the  
country, and to postulate how the  
politics of pacifism as defined by  
many women working for the AFSC are  
merging with the politics of feminism.  

Thank you,  

Mardie McCreary  
American Friends Service Committee  
Denver, CO  

Deft Analysis  
From Page 2  

ing what's already being done by  
groups with other perspectives, etc.,  
etc.  

I'd love to hear more about your  
ideas, plans, and how you process the  
above issues. I think it's really  
important for radical (and socialist)  
feminists to connect around the draft  
and militarism, especially since the  
liberal wing isn't being any help with  
their yes-women-should-be-drafted-if-  
men-are-oh-wow-another-opportunity-  
for-equality stance; and that's the  
position most visible to the people,  
unfortunately.  

Strength and health to you all!  

In sisterhood,  

Mary Burns for WORD  
Somerville, MA