Willie Tyson: It’s a Struggle

(Editor's Note: Following an inter-
view with Willie Tyson and Susan Abod
who played in concert with Robin
Flowers, in Denver Nov. 14 and 15,

The concert was produced by Virago
Productions, and sponsored by Wise
Women Enterprises, a women's recording
company which recently released
Debutante--music by Tyson, Abod, and
Flowers.}

By Gayle Novak and Kathy Riley

Kathy: (to Willie) First of all, I
want to say that I really love your
love songs. So, I was wondering, you
mentioned last night that since you
have learned to be more direct about
your feelings with people, that maybe
your anger won't come out in your
music so much. Why? This is part
of a general question of where your
music is going from here.

Willie: I don't know. I think I will
probably continue to write with that
kind of an attitude. When it's a wo-
man involved, you expect everything
to be perfect because you have a lot
of expectations of women and I think
that's true of relationships. You
have a lot of expectations, especially
of women you happen to love. But, I
think it's a lot smarter to be real-
istic and know that you're going to
have problems. And then if it doesn't
work out,--it's just good to have a
way to express feelings other than
disappointment in love or something
like that. It's part of us that we do
get angry and have resentments that
are founded or unfounded---it doesn't
matter---they still need a place where
they can be let out. Love songs with
a twist are real important for that,
and there just aren't that many of
them around. They're either extremely
nasty or extremely idealistic, and
neither one of those really suits me.
There's just more to it than that.
Relationships are just not simple.

Kathy: How do the three of you work
together as a group?

Willie: People have been talking
about us as a permanent group, and
we've been together less than a month.

from p. 8

is not arranged in alphabetical
order, which makes it a chore to
search out specific books and
articles.

But these are minor criticisms.
Overall, Women's Health Care is
a thorough, hard-hitting publi-
cation which will serve both as
a major information resource on
women's health and an impetus to
action. In producing it, Cowan has
taken a small step toward furthering
her own vision, stated in the
book's introduction: "Today, we
see a women's health revolution
in progress. Tomorrow, we will
see ‘medicine’ replaced with health.”

(The book can be ordered from
Anshen Publishing Co., 556 Second
St., Ann Arbor, Michigan 48103.
There is a 20 percent discount
on orders of at least 10 copies,
25 percent for bookstores, and a
30 percent discount for anyone
who cannot afford the $4.)

e Job readiness training

© Job placement

e Referrals for many types of jobs

Free services for Denver women ...Call a job developer at: 399-8303

Susan: When I met Willie, she gave
me a cassette tape of all her songs,
and I wrote bass parts to them. You
couldn't just play, 1-2 da-da-da, you
had to play a melodic line, or I had
to play a melodic line, because
Willie was just strumming guitar,

and there was no other melodic inter-
est except in vocals, so we worked

on harmonies, and I've actually com-
posed bass lines; and then when Robin
played, I basically worked with Robin
in getting ideas and stuff like that.
And Willie would come in to check out
what we were doing and then go back
to what she was doing. Then finally
we got the vocals down. It was sort
of like we did it piece by piece. It
was never like the three of us con-
stantly rehearsed together, Willie
was there as a guide - she was con-
stant - she relates to her songs in

a constant way--so that Merciful Mary
will basically be the same tonight
and tomorrow night. The vocal expres-
sion will change, but the musical con-
tent will not, so Robin and I could
work off of a tape and expect basi-
cally similar things, except maybe a
change in tempo. . . Robin's con-
stantly changing her parts, getting
herself more interested musically by
doing different solos and stuff, and
every once in a while when I don't
have to worry, I improvise . . . But,
essentially we're pretty tight and
we know what we're going to do.

Willie: We had a week to rehearse
before we went out on a few jobs on
the east coast, and it took three or
four jobs before everybody felt com-
fortable with the dynamics--with
three people on stage instead of two,
and the fact that I'm also telling
stories and rapping in between. Robin
and Susan had to feel comfortable in
terms of whether they could say some-
thing or not say something, or wheth-
er they felt comfortable saying some-
thing or comfortable just being quiet.
Finally, when it got relaxed and
everything, there's a feeling on
stage of kind of the three of us are
having a good time. . .

Gayle: Is this tour helping you
financially?

Willie: Wise Women is subsidizing
this tour as a promotional thing for
Debutante, which is part of my con-
tract. This is the only time they
have to do it. They don't really
have to do it after the 2nd or 3rd
one (album) because supposedly the
distributors will be more established
and there will be a network that I
can go on, . . they're subsidizing
the tour, so that Robin and Susan and
I are going to make money, no matter
what. It may not be much - we fly
on this tour, and if we had to take
what we made from the concerts, it
wouldn't cover the travel - so they
are paying all that, in hopes that it
will help album sales. Virago set up
a lot of interviews for us here, but
in some towns we've been in, we sat
and did nothing for a week, which was
really bad, because there we spent
the airfare and what we want is media
coverage - overground, underground,
wherever we can get it so that more
people will at least be aware of and
exposed to the albums and what we're
trying to do, and so that's worth it.
- . - it's real interesting. Some-
times I go through periods of de-
pression about what am I doing, be-
cause here I am - 30 - almost 31,
and I don't really do anything - and
when I'm 40 god knows who's going to
pay my bills. That's the way I was
raised, that you pay your own way,
and that's the way I like to do it,
but when I couldn't do it at first
when I was doing this music thing,

I really wanted to do the music and

I felt like it was important to do
it ‘cause I felt I had something to
offer, so I was willing to go into
debt, but now it's to the point where
I feel I'm old enough to make my own
way, and I don't want to go into debt
anymore, and I won't go into debt
anymore, unless it's borrowing to
repress records and I know I can
pay that money back.

Kathy: I was wondering about, do you
have any expectations - like here you
come into town and hundreds of women
come to hear you, and you're saying
something not only musically, but
politically, too. And sometimes I
wonder--what happens to all that en-

ergy? How do people relate to that
music and play it out in their lives?

Willie: Well, you don't know, that's
the thing. Actually when we first
started doing these concerts, women
would come up and say, “Oh, you made
an incredible--I never realized," all
kinds of statements like that, but
now I think--I don’t hear that as of-
ten. I get letters that say things
like that. It's still a thing that
happens, but it's no longer such a
new thing. That's one reason why I
like to do mixed gigs and overground
gigs, because that's where you encoun-
ter people who have never heard what
you're talking about. With all the
women's gigs, they just come to be
validated and reinforced--they al-
ready know what you're talking about
and you're not saying something that
different from what they believe or
have already heard or live daily, but
people overground, they don't know
what you're talking about. Some wo-
men have never been exposed--period.
So you do encounter some real
fear and hostility when you do that
kind of a job, and it ain't the fun-
nest thing in the world to do, but
more often than not, there's a couple
of people who you know you have rung
their bell . . . so you just have to
go through believing that it does
make a difference, and go through
your periods of discouragement.

Willie: I just want to say, in clos-
ing--we've been talking about how
horrible it is financially and all
that, but I don't want to make it
sound like it's such a horrible way
to live. There are a lot of good
things. Susan always says that it's
a privilege to be doing this, singing
women's music and being able to eat
and get along, and still do something
that you believe in. Like I don't
have to go to work each day from 9

to 5 and have somebody over me tell-
ing me what to do and worrying about
whether I can take a shit. I don't
have that hanging over me. All I
have to worry about is when am I go-
ing to have time to write, which is
a privilege in itself - the fact that
I can use my ideas and use my talents
to make at least a minimal living and
get out what I feel, instead of being
involved in a job where I feel a lot
of oppression.

Beal’s Angel And The Old Paranoia

By Andrea Chesman

Doubtless many women will say of
this book: “At last a feminist thril-
ler! A book with a real story line,
action." I myself have looked forward
to that kind of book, saying such
things as "I am tired of those inner
landscapes women lay out as novels. I
want a book with a plot." So I picked
up Beal's Angel Dance with a predis-
position to take it...And with Daugh-
ter's Seal of Approval on it, how
could it go wrong.

I did not like the book. I could not
put it down. Had to read it to the
bitter end, in one sitting. But, no,

I didn't like it.

Beal has created a feminist (?)
Nancy Drew. This admirable heroine (of
course a working-class lesbian whose
lineage is Chicano but undoubtedly re-
lated to Molly Bolt of Rubyfruit Jun-
gle fame) tracks down criminals in a
story which involves drugs, torture,
rape, castration and sex, to name a
few. To be a little more precise: the
plot was violence and the theme was
paranoia.

VIRGINIA NEAL BLUE RESOURCE CENTER
(800 Pontiac Street, Denver)

I'm not going to give the plot away,
that would be far too complicated,
and there were just a few loose ends.
And I'm not going to go into depth a-
bout the characters, because they were
not in-depth people. The book is nar-
rated by Kat, the detective-heroine-
revolutionary. One should know her
better; certainly one gets a chance to
follow her thoughts, but not her feel-
ings - the how, but not the whys. And
all this action takes place to protect
Angel, a woman whose feminist books
have authorities on edge (or are they?)
But Angel falls into the old "white-
middle-class-intellectual" category.
Her power is needed for the revolution
but she really isn't to be trusted.
Likewise, the reader is never entrust-
ed with any idea of where this femin-
ist vision arises from, how it is ap-
plied, what it means. Angel remains a
mystery, only partially explained by
the tortures she undergoes.

To be sure, it is great to read a
novel filled with feminist artifacts.
One loves the lesbian loving which is
in stark contrast to the many male-
raping-female scenarios. One loves to
read that Angel's book was reviewed in
OOB and Plexus. One loves a heroine
who can take on almost any violence a-

Virago

WOODY SIMMONS recorded "Oregon Mountains”
NANCY VOGEL, with Berkeley Women's Music Collective.

March 18
Free childcare

* $3.50 Donation

More to be announced

against her, who keeps the faith, who
is strong, and even lovable. But I
hate to think that that is what makes
a "feminist" novel.

Change some of the genders around
and Angel Dance is a fairly standard
good guy - bad guy story with the good
guys as revolutionaries or simply de-
cent working-class people, and the bad
guys are the Feds, the CIA, the imper-
ialists, the colonialists. Of course
the philosophical question is, why
can't women be allowed to write ordin-
ary thrillers? Why does everything a
woman creates have to be better than
what men create? Why not a novel like
Angel Dance?...I don't know. To me,
the blood runs the same, no matter who
does the spilling.

Channel 6 television
Mondays 10 p.m.

Louise Nevelson

Betye Saar

Alice Neel

"Anonymous Was A Woman"
Helen Frankenthaler
Georgia O'Keeffe