Ps

12  
Workshops...

From Page 11

Many are not doing so because they have problems with their sexuality. However, other problems which bring them to the therapist are influenced by their sexuality and the oppression that they suffer from society. For this reason, lesbian support groups are important. Lesbians may be isolated from each other and from the lesbian community in general. It is important for the therapist to let the lesbian know that a whole lesbian community exists, which she can plug into.

In the rare case where a woman comes to a therapist with questions about her sexuality, it is important that the therapist be in touch with her own sexuality. The woman who is still uncertain will need to do a great deal of exploring of her own sexuality, and this is no time for the therapist who is unsure of sexuality to feel threatened and begin pushing any one expression as the ‘best’ or the ‘most integrated or fulfilling.’ The therapist must accept the client’s sexuality as it is, without having any “hidden agendas” regarding what she would like the client to ultimately decide.

Before a lesbian entrusts herself to a therapist, there are three basic questions which she should ask the therapist:

1) How do you feel about my being gay?  
2) How do you feel about having a homosexual experience yourself?  
3) How would you feel if your child came to you and said that she was gay?  

A fourth important question is: Do you see lesbianism as personal or political? On the basis of the answer given to these questions, the lesbian should decide if the therapist is someone who can help her, and someone that she can trust.

Saturday Afternoon Workshops  
Anger

The anger workshop led by Janet Tate Hackney was scheduled to have 15 people in it. However, about 50 women (and one man) showed up. Eventually when the room was filled to capacity, the door had to be shut and locked. Anger was apparently an important topic to many women at the conference.

Hackney led the group in an exercise entitled, “Barbarous Rituals.” The first part of the exercise consisted of a handful of women sitting in a circle in the center of the room relating those stories about their socialization process which made them angry. One woman told of having her breasts develop but not being allowed to wear a bra. One woman told of the, “Don't be smart, boys won't like you,” advice she got from her mother. One woman related her guilty feelings about masturbation as she was growing up. Another woman said that when she told her father she was getting divorced he told her that she just hadn't known how to make her husband happy. A few more angry moments and events were related and then the workshop moved on to the next part of the exercise.

This part of the workshop consisted of another small group of women telling how they express their anger. Some women said they never really do. Several women said that as women they were never really given permission to be angry. One woman said she could recognize her anger now but that earlier in her life her anger came out as hurt feelings or depression. Still another woman said she was encouraging her children to get their anger out so that they could be in touch with their own anger as adults.

(includes postage)  
make check payable to:  

PROJECT NO. 1  

Preston Hollow NY 12469  

Linda Shear/  
A Lesbian Portrait  

TO BE SHARED BY AND SOLD TO WOMEN ONLY!  

"...I am not a Woman Musician, I am a LESBIAN MUSICIAN."  

"Linda Shear is one fierce dyke - and she can change your life if you're ready to listen, to meet her pride and vision, to love yourself."  

-Elana Dykewoman  

This tape is a thoughtful combination of Lesbian voice and piano. Through her own songs and the songs of Michell Brody, Linda explores and presents a strong, beautiful, and exciting LESBIAN PORTRAIT. Songs include, "Family of Woman," and "Lesbian Wombmoon," a Lesbian Chant. All of the work on this tape has been done by Lesbians.

45 minute Cassette - $5.00 Five or more - $4.75  

Reel to Reel Tapes - $7.00 Five or more - $6.75  
Please estimate and include postage.

OLD LADY BLUE JEANS  

a lesbian distributing process  

c/o VWU 200 Main Street  

Northampton  

ORDER:  

walTe For  
WHOLESALE  

Eg.  

PROJECT OF WT ry  

Mass. 01060  

The third part of the exercise consisted of several women pairing up to do thumb wrestling. This, Hackney explained, would help the anger process go on and would move it from the verbal (frustrating) level to the physical (concrete) level. Women laid with their bellies on the floor, facing each other. They grasped each other's fingers at second knuckle level and each attempted to pin the other's thumb down. This went on for several minutes until Hackney broke up the exercise for discussion. At this point some women said they preferred structural rage to structureless rage. Other women said they felt productive rather than powerless. Words like alive, competent, and in touch were used. This exercise was apparently the kind of thing women wanted to do or were used to doing to express their anger.

The final part of the exercise consisted of having the whole group divide up into triads for role-playing. One woman in the triad was the angry person, the second woman was the person angered at, and the third person was there to evaluate the other two women’s behavior. Women then proceeded to act out their angry situations. Each woman in the triad had the opportunity to be in each of the three categories.

After the exercise some women expressed amazement that they got as angry as they did while others expressed regret that they didn't get as angry as they could have. Some women said they felt ridiculous role-playing and that they couldn't get angry in a situation they knew wasn't real. Some women said they felt very close to the other people in the triad. Still other women said they had absolutely no trouble being in touch with or expressing their anger at individuals but it was the system and sexism itself they were enraged at and felt powerless to change. This part of the discussion was only very lightly touched upon. No one seemed to have any answers for it and people returned to those questions that were easier to answer, just as discussion of rage at women’s socialization processes evolved into an exercise in thumb wrestling.

Political Implications of Feminist Therapy

After stating her credentials and her struggles as a professional psychotherapist and a feminist, Lerman turned discussion toward the relationship between liberal feminist therapists and radicals. She described radicals as setting themselves up as experts and that they had no right to do that. Obviously emotionally involved in the controversy herself, she felt stereotyped as a professional person and attacked by Miriam Greenspan's speech, stating, “I don't like being trashed, especially by people who don’t know what I am.”

This opened up a very heated discussion with raised voices. Three women who classified themselves as professionals stressed that women within establishment organizations are trying to get changes done through working with those who now have the power — men. They felt put down by both sides — the men and also by the radical women.

The only objective the group seemed to agree on was that open discussion was necessary to get all the thoughts and feelings about the professionalism issue before the conference. However, when the question of who should call for the discussion at the next large meeting was brought up, the voices of the professional women were abruptly stilled.

Victim Psychology — How to Combat It

This workshop was presented by E. Kitch Childs, one of the few black women attending the conference.

The workshop discussed the basic characteristics of the “victim,” including how women come to see themselves as victims.

A victim is someone who is intensely preoccupied with a sense of personal deviance or difference. She sees the world in terms of what “they” are doing to “me.” She has a sense of complete worthlessness and helplessness, accepting her own status as a victim. To defend herself from “them,” she may adopt any one of a number of strategies, including clowning, projection, denial, or sabotage. All these strategies are more self-destructive than protective.

It is important that the therapist show the “victim” that she does have some power over her own life; that she is responsible for herself. If the woman can be shown that she can take control of some aspects of her life, it is possible to have her see that she can be an active “doer” rather than a passive object acted upon.

Sunday Workshops

Statement from the Gestalt Workshop:

This was a valuable workshop for women, both as a method of therapy and as a self-growing and exploratory experience.

This Gestalt therapy provides group support and caring, while women explore common fears, etc. This Gestalt therapy provides a setting and a method for clearing a woman of her emotional pain; it helps her to become centered, to become more clear. A most valuable technique for a feminist therapist.

Statement from workshop on Professionalism and Paraprofessionalism in Relation to Feminist Therapy:

We need to find ways to use our different resources and celebrate the differences.

We recommend that some way be found to open up and continue a meaningful dialogue among all the diverse political viewpoints and perspectives that are represented under the broad label of “feminist therapist.”

Statement from workshop on Men and Feminist Therapy:  
We addressed the issues of men and feminist therapy — both as therapists and clients, and found ourselves in varying agreement. Our shared feelings were that the needs of women remain our paramount concern, but that we have a vested interest in backing those males who are in process themselves and committed to the cause of supporting other males in a feminist way.

Our discussion also moved into another area, and while we cannot share the impact of being confronted with a very personal testimony on ageism toward middle-aged women, our group would like to recommend that feminist therapists recognize the need for information and concern about the specific needs of middle-aged women both in terms of our own futures and the feminist cause of working capably with the problems of women of all ages.

Statement from workshop on Feminism and Lesbianism:

As members of the workshop on Feminism and Lesbianism, we discourage pigeonholing and dualistic segmenting constructs of definitions concerning women loving women and endorse the pursuit, awareness, and acceptance of women loving women. We affirm those who wish to affirm or describe themselves as lesbian and urge feminist therapists to examine their own heterosexual bias and not assume that other women are heterosexual.

Furthermore, we affirm women who are raising children alone or with other women as a viable lifestyle, and it is imperative that feminist therapists support and endorse lesbian mothers in dealing with their emotional, sociopolitical, and legal realities.

Goals of feminist therapy — Based on the assumptions that women are constantly growing emotionally and that their growth can be blocked and retarded by the enculturation process (via family, school, church, mate, media, etc.) — which results in PAIN manifested in a variety of ways. We feel the goals of feminist therapy involve:

1) Helping a woman get in touch with her own unique growth process and asserting it.  
2) Aiding her in gaining awareness of how “society” and others close to her will/will try to inhibit her growth i.e., awareness of “women’s issues.”  
3) Assisting her in discovering ways in which she can further her growth by political awareness and action.  
4) Eliminating the need for a “therapist.”