Living Your Socialist Feminism

The following was presented as part of a panel entitled "Living Your Socialist Feminism," given by the Boulder Socialist Feminist Collective at a conference on socialist feminism at the R. Feather Institute, May 27-28, 1978. Each collective member chose to address a specific area to relate to the theme of the panel. Many of the ideas expressed here were worked out collectively. This article is the fourth in a series.

Living your socialist feminism with respect to sexuality and relationships means refusing to accept the old divisions of labor, power inequities, and rigid definitions common in most intimate relationships and friendships. It means that you are concerned about meeting each other's and your own needs in non-oppressive ways. But it means much more.

Any discussion of politics and personal relationships will have to start with a discussion of and definition of male- and female-identified women. Male-identified women I would define as women whose identity is determined by one of two patriarchal stereotypes. So-called “femininity” and "masculinity" are two sides to the same coin. A woman can gain male approval in one way by being "feminine," or if she feels that the current feminine stereotype is too limiting, e.g., she feels competent enough to open her own doors and balance her own checkbook, she will let men know she's competent by rejecting some or all of the so-called "feminine" characteristics and embracing certain so-called “masculine” ones. In both cases, women are trapped by the totally accurate realization that men hold the power to determine women's futures: professors, employers, potential mates. These male-identified women are both straight and gay. I want to emphasize that role playing and power inequities exist in gay relationships as well as straight. However, among the many kinds of power men have over women which tend to make women succumb to stereotypes, they have one less over lesbians.

This brings us to a definition of women-identified women. These are women who realize that patriarchal sexist stereotypes are destructive to their development personally and politically. It's difficult but I wouldn't want to say impossible for heterosexual women to be woman-identified. In our collective, we've observed that frequently it's the straight women among us who exhibit the most anger and hostility toward men. They are the ones whose lives are the most directly influenced by and involved with men: the ones in the "front" lines.

My relationships with men are intentionally minimal. But I frequently have to deal with them in some minor way. For instance, I don't always have a car and when I do, it doesn't always run. I have become directly dependent on men when I resort to hitchhiking, and when I'm fixing my car and need free advice from the parts man. I can feel my behavior changing in these situations: I smile when I don't feel like it, tend to conform more in my appearance and so forth. I find myself falling back into stereotypes to get what I need from men. Think how minor these incidents are compared to a situation of relating to men as present or potential lovers or spouses.

We spend an incredible amount of energy in cultivating social and sexual/affectional relationships. There are several reasons for this but I'll discuss three: One, many of our emotional and physical needs can't be met in the present system where human considerations come last. Even the alternative institutions of our subculture, existing as they do in a capitalist patriarchal system, are inadequate. Most of us have the feeling that there are ways we can depend on a lover or spouse that we can't depend on our movement friends or alternative institutions. Second, as a result of recent liberation struggles we see ourselves as observing a measure of personal happiness that has been minimized in the dominant Calvinist/Puritan/Protestant ethic history of this country. The divorce rate alone speaks to this: "I deserve a better life than I can have with this person." Third, there is a couples hegemony in our society, gay or straight; a feeling that happy couples are superior to non-coupled individuals. So we spend a lot of energy forming and maintaining intimate relationships. In heterosexual situations, women's energies will go partly into embracing certain stereotypical expectations which men raised in a sexist culture inevitably have, to some degree. Woman-identified women reject those stereotypes as a matter of psychological necessity, since they are so incredibly limiting and damaging to women, much more so than to men, who may even have the desire to reject them out of moral and political conscience but whose own psychological survival doesn’t depend on that rejection.

I should say a word here about roles. Though all roles, male and female, are limiting, the male role embodies all legitimate avenues for the expression of men's views of themselves, women, and the world! It is men who define reality in terms of our culture, history, science, religion, and politics. In order to reverse this, many things must happen. One is that women's perceptions must be validated, which can only happen in a non-male environment because even just the presence of men is a barrier to a woman's process of beginning to trust her own perceptions. Hence, the necessity for an autonomous women's movement. Another thing that must happen is that men must be exposed to situations where their male role function no longer applies; where "their only guides are their own feelings," from which men are alienated as a result of their role conditioning.

It is this kind of environment we're going to create later tonight. There will be two dances, one for men and one for women. (This announcement at the conference evoked everything from shock to disbelief to temporary partial homophobic panic among the leftist male participants.) In an event like this that is normally heterosexual, men will have to confront their own sexism and homophobia.

Is it hypocritical to proclaim to support gay liberation, yet feel just a little superior because one sleeps with the opposite sex? This becomes dramatically apparent, for example, in a situation where men feel uncomfortable because their heterosexuality is not obvious. Also, the confusion as to how to act will stem from the conflict between the tendency to relate to each other in a way defined by the event, the dance, and the tendency to relate to each other defined by who is present. Caught up in this conflict, hopefully some men will begin to question their role conditioning in relationships with both men and women. This is what the second wave of the women's movement has meant for most of us. Another way to discuss this is to say that the ways in which a man feels funny trying to relate to men in a social situation usually experienced as including women, are the ways in which his gut is trying to tell him, this is not the way to relate to a whole person in a healthy way.

To get back to sexual/affectional orientation and its bearing on a woman's consciousness, we can look at it from the point of view of "constituency." People's politics do not develop in a vacuum. If we define constituency as those (real or imagined) people we feel most aware of, responsible to, and in agreement with, or the people we think of when forming our political ideas and priorities, a heterosexual woman's constituency includes the men that form the pool from whom her potential and present friends, lovers, and spouses are drawn.

We also have to look very carefully at what it means for a woman to recognize that men oppress her, yet to still be attracted to them.

Is she attracted to qualities that are also used to oppress her? To qualities they possess simply by virtue of her own identity and self-image as a woman, and equally important, her respect and regard for her sisters? Many lesbians have chosen to organize themselves separately from straight women for these reasons. In our collective, however, we feel that it's important to affirm our sisterhood with all women, reflected both in our membership and our political priorities. We realize that none of us will be free as long as anyone remains oppressed economically, racially, or sexually.

Judy Chicago, Through the Flower (New York: Doubleday & Co., 1977) p. 128.

“Ibid., p. 131.

Allie the extreme of meetings.

Peg Averill/LNS

Rape Victim Tried

Lori Johnston Support Committee

A woman is forcibly raped, suffers extreme emotional trauma, sees the alleged rapist acquitted, undergoes a series of extensive operations for illnesses induced by her trauma, and is unable to work steadily to support herself and her son.

But her alleged rapist isn't through with her yet. Now Lori Johnston of Portland, Oregon, has to defend herself in court against a $60,000 suit by the alleged rapist for malicious prosecution. "It's a nightmare as I'm reliving this rape over and over again. I feel as though I'm being punished for being raped and reporting it," says Lori.

At the beginning of the rape trial in December 1976 in Portland, the case was dismissed and a judgment of acquittal was entered against the alleged rapist. In December 1978, Lori was served with a summons notifying her of the malicious prosecution charge.

Since the rape trial, Lori has been plagued with a series of illnesses which doctors have told her are the result of extreme stress—from the rape and the trial. She even suffered paralysis which, according to her doctor, was emotionally induced. Now Lori's stuck with unpaid medical bills, no job, and the prospect of incurring more legal expenses to defend herself in court. She is currently applying for disability payments.

The implications of Lori's case are clear—women who go through with the difficult decision and traumatic process of prosecuting their rapists run the risk of retaliation through the legal system if the accused rapists are acquitted. And rape cases are extremely difficult to prove.

A defense/support committee for Lori is being organized in Portland to provide education about rape, to raise funds for Lori's legal defense, and to push for change of rape laws. Lori has been actively contacting people and organizations for support and is interested in giving speeches to inform the public about her ordeal.

Lori is being represented by Cindy Cumfer of the Community Law Project, 1628 SE Ankeny, Portland 97214. (503) 233-4747. Donations and/or inquiries can be mailed to that address c/o Lori Johnston Defense Fund. Lori's committee asks for your support. No rape victim should be subjected to the additional outrage of legal retaliation.