“Movement Activist” ex-husband redbaits

Political Woman Struggles for Child Custody

Kathy Kahn has been working unskilled labor jobs since she was 16, and began developing a class consciousness around then. Since 1965, she has been working with other working-class people to change the conditions we're all forced to live under. For Kathy, getting involved in this struggle was not a matter of choice, but necessary for her survival. For the past six years, she has been doing a lot of music, along with organizing. She went to China in 1964 and sang songs of American workers’ struggles to the Chinese. She has been on innumerable picket lines around the country - from Georgia to New York to Mississippi to Colorado - and always takes her kids with her when she has them. Since the Coors strike began, Kathy has been working with the brewery workers. She went to Texas to organize the boycott there, and here in Colorado has made a 45 record of Coors strike songs. She is also the author of the well-known book Hillbilly Women. Kathy is now living in Denver.

We are printing this story of Kathy's custody struggle to help build a strong defense committee, by spreading the facts surrounding this unusual case. We also feel that there are lessons involved here for all progressive people, and that in spite of our reservations about "personal trashing,” we agree with Kathy that Si and Charlotte Kahn are dangerous people whose attacks against Kathy and a number of other movement people must be publicized.

BMR: Kathy, could you tell us something about yourself to let people know who you are, and why they should support you in this custody case? Maybe give us some biographical background information about you and Si.

Kathy: I was living in Georgia and working with Si on various labor and community organizing projects. We came from very different backgrounds, but we were working together. He comes from Chevy Chase and Harvard - that kind of background, and I had worked a lot of unskilled jobs that were really hard on me, and was just beginning to get a clear class consciousness.

I had had a baby by another man in that period of time. He wasn't around, but Si was around; he was a close friend of mine. At the hospital, he helped out a lot, etc. I ended up naming my first child after him, having no idea that we would be married later.

After my baby was about 5 months old, I decided to move to North Carolina to do some political work there. Just before I moved, Si and I decided that we were in love. Si always felt that he knew what was best as far as struggling, and considered me too militant. He was always preaching to me.

Anyway, I went to North Carolina and then lost my job there as a result of my political work. I was living with this old woman and her daughter, and me and my baby. We were pretty hungry there after I couldn't get a job; I got blacklisted in the area. Si in the meantime had been coming up every weekend and asking me to marry him. And here is this little mountain community that gets real impressed by this intelligent good-looking man who was courting me. The way we got married was at gunpoint with Auntie, this woman I was living with, holding her rusted-out .38 pistol on me, saying “It's time you settled down and got yourself a Daddy for this baby." So, there was all this pressure on me. I didn't want to marry him, I just wanted to live with him.

Si went out and ran down the deputy sheriff, who ran down the Justice of the Peace, who was very drunk. Auntie held her gun on me, and we went through this incredible marriage ceremony.

One thing I should say is that before we got married, Si had asked me to give up my baby. This is one thing that should have tipped me off to him. I was real upset. I finally just told him that it was a package deal, and that he would just have to adjust.

BMR: Could you give some examples, besides different class backgrounds, of how your politics differed?

Kathy: Well, right after our marriage Si had this Ford Foundation grant. As long as I had known him, he had never done any work, had any kind of job. In a way, it kind of impressed me that he could get away with that - what privilege and education does for you, but in a way I kind of resented it too. Anyway, he had this grant and had to go to California to a community organizing conference for Ford Foundation grantees. In California, I was expected to stay in this apartment with my child, while he went to all these bullshit organizing sessions. I had been doing political work for 6 years, and all of a sudden he told me that I was not invited to these sessions, although other people (men) were taking their wives, and that there must have been some incredible misunderstanding because we had agreed that after I got married I'd settle down and be a housewife, and nothing else! I was just shocked. It was the first argument we'd ever had. He started to be really disappointed that he'd married me when it became clear that I wasn't going to knuckle under and be what he wanted.

We went back to Georgia and I made it real clear that I wasn't going to give up my work. In California he'd really cut me off from everything - it was really his scene, so I was really glad to be back home. I'd been doing organizing work for years and years, but that didn't mean anything because I didn't have a grant.

Back in Georgia we finally agreed to keep working together, and he was also adjusting to having this kid around him. I wanted another baby. I got pregnant right away when we got back down South. This time he was really excited about having his own child.

Si really thought of himself as a good organizer. I'd say to him, "If you want to organize these people, why don't you go to work in the copper mines?" He'd say no, that he had to spend his time organizing, that there were better ways to do it than going to work and getting your hands dirty. So, he was into this trip, and he was into land speculation - really exploiting these people who had had the land for centuries. It ended up where he'd have me sign papers; he'd bought so much land in his name that he had to start using mine.

BMR: Si has legally adopted your first child, in addition to your son, which you had with him. Could you tell us about how that came about, since he's really changed from someone who originally didn't want any children in your life, to someone who's fighting you all the way over custody?

Kathy: When I was 6 months pregnant with Jesse, Si decided he wanted to adopt Cowboy. It made sense to me - I thought they might as well be legally brothers. But I told him he'd have to ask the father and see if it was all right with him. He tracked him down and sent him a legal form to sign. Well, he sent it back - refused to sign it. Si went to a lawyer and got some kind of threatening thing written up, and finally Si's lawyer got the adoption forced through. Well, at that point I knew something was wrong, but I still felt that we should all be one family. Later I realized it was another of Si's paper trips.

After Jesse was born I did some organizing in Kentucky around the coal fields. Mostly I was doing textile mill organizing in Georgia around brown lung, and also was working with the Women's Factory, that came out of the Levis strike.

When Jesse was about 6 months old we went to a town called Aragon, Georgia where the mill had just shut down.

I always took my kids everywhere with me when I was working. They learned from the day they were born what working-class struggle is all about.

I did all the work. I was nursing Jesse, and I took him around with me while Si and Cowboy stayed in the motel room. That was about when he really began to realize that I wasn't going to get into being a housewife. So, very quickly he got a washer and dryer, because if I wasn't going to be stuck with that work, he was. So, we got a washer and dryer in our little rundown shack, which was quite a contradiction. We had these before we had indoor plumbing, in fact. The house itself was a reflection of the contradictions that were going on. It was an old lumberman's shack that we had rebuilt, and yet it had all this equipment that our neighbors didn't have.

BMR: Tell us about the development of your music.

Kathy: The first album I made was all handled by him. All I did was open my mouth and sing. There was this strong element of competitiveness there. He would push me forward, and then compete with me on that level, whatever that level was.

After the album, people started asking me to do concerts. Si had all this musical background; he'd been trained at Harvard in music, etc. If I learned something by myself, he'd show me a better way to do it. We'd have arguments that I would really freak out over. I just got the impression that I was at fault. Something was really working to get me to feel that way. I don't think it came from having what Si would describe as an underprivileged background.

BMR: Was this about when you started seeing a psychiatrist at Si's insistence?

Kathy: Yes. When we were married he drew up this contract that had a part in it that said that if at any time we were having problems, and that one of us suggested that the other see a shrink, that the other person would agree to see one. Now of course, shrinks made absolutely no sense to me because they weren't part of my background or culture.

So, at that time things were pretty bad, and I went to see this shrink, who turned out to be a very good man. I went in by myself while Si sat outside in this supportive role of his. You know, he supported me because I was this weak, fucked-up, backward, underprivileged woman. The first time I went in to see this shrink he said that someone was running a real guilt number on me, and that life is just too short to suffer like that. The second time I saw him we spent the time talking about how we were going to rip off Governor Carter's mental health fund, to put into this poor area, and that’s all we did.

I was still in pretty bad shape, but me and Si continued to hide the problems that we were having. In fact, I knew several couples that got married and had kids because they thought that we were such a model revolutionary couple. It'd just kill me when the next woman would tell me that she was pregnant, and would thank us for being the kind of couple that most other people thought we were.

This shrink that I'd been seeing, and who had become a close friend, the only person to take my side in fact, died suddenly of a heart attack. Si's only reaction was that we'd have to get another shrink. Well, by this time my album had been out and I had been doing quite a bit of music. Si was also beginning to escalate his music trip at that time to make sure that he stayed caught up. This shrink that Si got for me next - his opinion was that I couldn't adjust to being a wife and mother, and that was my problem. I just wasn't the kind of wife and mother Si and the shrink wanted me to be, but I know me and the kids were real happy with each other. Even today, you can see the complaints that Si issues against me relate to me having psychological problems adjusting to being a wife and mother.

So, one day I went in to see this shrink and said that I'd just finished my book. His response was, so what! Well, I'd been working on my book, Hillbilly Women, for 2 1/2 years and this shrink started lecturing me on why didn't I settle down and be a good wife and mother. Well, I walked out on Si and that shrink. At that point my anger got stronger than my guilt.

BMR: Could you tell us about how the separation agreement was worked out when you left Si?

Kathy: Well, Si and I were trying to work out some type of a separation. When I married him I was totally independent, but at that point I had reached a point where I wasn't capable of doing things for myself alone. I needed that support. He'd go off and do his thing, but I couldn't go off and do mine, because I had temporarily lost that independence. The only way that my independence manifested itself was in these violent arguments that we were having more and more frequently. So, I left Si after one of these arguments. I packed my car and headed off for Texas. I was only going for a couple of weeks, at least for then, and Si begged me to not take the kids right away - to let them stay with him until I got back. Well, that was a mistake.

I was gone a couple of weeks. When I came back he had written up a separation agreement which included signing over a whole lot of property to him. We were trying to work out some type of shared custody over the kids. Well, I had the kids with me part of the time, and Si had them part of the time. He took them back to Georgia with him. I kept asking for a divorce but he wouldn't give me one. He would tell me that if I didn't come back to him, that I'd never see the kids again.

In 1973, Si finally agreed to a divorce and had the papers drawn up. The papers allowed for shared custody, but gave him the right to physical custody except for vacations. I told him that would be okay for the first year, and that the next year we could switch and then work out a permanent arrangement. He agreed to this verbally and said he'd have that put into the papers. He then asked me to sign the papers and said he would go right away and have the custody part changed. In good faith, I signed those divorce papers. I didn't see the papers again for three months, and then when they arrived he had not made the changes he had verbally agreed to.

Si remarried another woman named Charlotte. The kids were really upset. Every time I saw them they begged me to take them to live with me.

BMR: Did you do anything to fight this?

Kathy: Even when they (Si and Charlotte) were in contempt of court I didn't take any court action because I wanted to believe they'd be reasonable in time. I felt court actions were too traumatic for the kids, and also my reputation with the Georgia courts is very bad. My political work made me the target of a lot of red-baiting. But mainly I didn't believe the kids...