Photos by Kate Sharp

Women Against Violence Against Women  
Politics and Demands

Reprinted below is the text of the leaflet distributed by Women Against  
Violence Against Women at the July 29 march to reclaim the streets.

As women, none of us are safe on the streets. The threat of rape  
or attack is a daily fear for those of us who go out on the streets --  
particularly at night. This march is a recognition that we live under a  
social and political system that promotes and condones violence against  
us, and at the same time, encourages us to be passive against attack.  
How often have we been told that we are "inviting" rape if we assert our  
right to be on the street at night? How often have we been told that  
fighting back will further endanger our lives? How often have women who  
did fight back against the men who beat or raped them been arrested and  
jailed? We call upon women to join us in asserting our right to defend  
ourselves and in rejecting the view that we ought to stay home if we  
want to be safe. It is our civil right to be anywhere in our city at  
any time.

We recognize that violence against women in the streets is only  
a part of the violence that women are subject to daily in the home and on  
the job. We call upon women to join us in this march to reclaim the  
streets as a way of demonstrating our opposition to all forms of violence  
against us, wherever it may occur.

We recognize that the battering and rape of women are not crimes  
of “passion” by abnormal men. Rather they are crimes of violence  
stemming from a society that promotes the objectification and powerlessness  
of women. We believe that all men benefit, directly or indirectly  
from systems or institutions that keep us powerless. We call upon  
women to join us in reclaiming our power to defend ourselves.

This march is a recognition that as women, we must claim the power  
to make political, legal and medical institutions responsive to our needs.  
In organizing this march and rally, Women Against Violence Against Women  
makes the following demands:

1. Equal enforcement of sexual assault laws against all rapists.

The criminal justice system is sexist towards women who have been  
sexually assaulted. A woman should not have to face hostility, disbelief  
and discrediting by law enforcement agencies. We also acknowledge the  
racism of the legal system -- that while the majority of rapists arrested  
or convicted are poor or minority men, rapes by the white, rich and  
powerful often go unpunished or unrecognized.

2. Change of Colorado sexual assault laws to include force used on  
a married woman by a husband who is living with her.

It is nearly impossible for a married woman to charge her husband  
with rape. In refusing to acknowledge the possibility of rape within  
marriage, the law is really saying that a woman's sexual services are  
part of her husband's property. The law does allow a married woman to  
file a sexual assault charge against her husband if they are separated,  
but such charges are rarely, if ever, prosecuted.

3. Free medical treatment for all women who are sexually assaulted.

Free comprehensive health care should be widely available to all, and  
it should include medical treatment, abortion, counseling and related  
support services. Women are not responsible for rape, and any woman can be  
a victim of rape. Therefore, these medical costs should be borne by the  
entire community. Currently, free emergency room treatment is available  
only at Denver General Hospital, possibly after a long wait.  
This treatment is free only if the rape is reported to the police.

4. Establishment of self-defense and rape prevention courses in  
junior and senior high schools.

The knowledge of self-defense is a basic survival skill all women  
should have.

5. Decriminalization of prostitution.

While men continue to profit -- sexually and financially -- from  
prostitution, women are singled out to be picked up by police, dragged to  
court, fined and/or sentenced to jails. Decriminalization would protect  
prostitutes from arrests.

6. Protection of women on the job from non-physical assaults and  
sexual harassment.

We demand legal remedies to protect women on the job from non-physical  
assaults and sexual harassment.

7. The continuation of funding for existing safe houses and crisis  
facilities.

Facilities should be located in all areas of the city and operated  
without cost to women. An estimated 60,000 women are battered in Denver  
each year, yet currently there are resources to serve only 600 women per  
year, and those few are located in predominantly white neighborhoods.

8. Prompt and effective protection from the criminal justice  
system for battered women.

Rarely is a man arrested for battering a woman -- particularly if he  
lives with her. Frequently women are not even told what their legal rights  
are by police answering family disturbance calls.  
Those in the first stages of filing a complaint get little, if any, support from  
state or county prosecutors. Access to the courts should not depend on  
a woman's ability to pay if legal rights are to have any meaning, given  
the costs of pursuing a criminal or civil (i.e. divorce, child custody)  
action.

Others who do get through