IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

ians And The Gay Movement:

Big Mana Rag Vol.8.No.6

Are Lesbians Glad To Be “Gay”?

Vicki Piotter

"I'm not gay, I'm angry," shouted a
lesbian who was among the crowd of
100 women and 600 men who had assembled
to march Sunday, June 22, in Den-
ver's 1980 Gay Pride March. The chant
she shouted did not come from a crowd
of angry lesbians and faggots directed
to onlookers and gawkers lining
Colfax Avenue; nor was it directed
to the press, out covering a "kinky"
story for the evening news; nor to
the irritated drivers held up in traffic
because of the march. The chant
was directed to the gays themselves,
before the march ever got moving.

I asked her what it was she was
angry about. She replied that she was
angry at the floats dominating the
march; angry at the one sporting mot-
orcycles, sponsored by leather men,
some of whom wore the fashion of
Nazis; angry at the Metropolitan Com-
munity Church and their float with a
man dressed in monk costume surrounded
by paper mache sheep—his flock
following behind; angry at the dis-
play of American flags, which reminded
her of a "weird Fourth of July
parade."

She said she was angry at the drag
queens dressed in impractical cloth-
ing, and at the wolf whistles directed
at them, and at the atmosphere
which made a mockery of women; angry
that there were not banners or signs
telling of the struggles and pride of
lesbians—that there were no banners
at all reflecting the political
issues facing lesbians, feminists,
and gay men; angry at the men who
were irritated and flaunting their
sexism towards the few women who did
show up for this year's recognition
of Gay Pride; angry at the men who
showed up because it was a good place
to cruise on a sunny Sunday afternoon.

What really got to her, she said,
was the "circus atmosphere" which was
telling her not to be angry—that the
dominant message was that to be "gay"
means to deny her woman, let alone
her feminist, identity. I noticed
that she, and a few other women,
walked away from the gathering; other
lesbians were expressing dissatisfaction
with the men and disappointment
that more lesbians had not shown up,
while other women were obviously hav-
ing a good time. Together, they con-
tinued the march, blending in with
the feathers, the leathers, and the
men carrying banners pronouncing
"Gay Pride."

Gay Identity

A lesbian once said to me, "I wish
the word 'gay' would go back to mean-
ing ‘colorful dress.’” I asked anoth-
er lesbian if she felt like she had
a gay identity. She replied both
yes and no—yes, she identifies as
"gay" when it comes to outsiders—
people who have no understanding of
her lesbianism or of her need to have
her civil rights protected by law.

"I will identify with the gay move-
ment when it is under attack by
straight people," she said, "but, no,
within the gay community, I do not
feel ‘gay.’ 'Gay' to me means 'men.'"

Witch and the Chameleon

The gay movement has been forging
an identity visible to the public for
ten years. Most people credit the
rise of gay liberation with the riot
at the Stonewall Inn in New York City
one summer night in '69 in which faggots
and queens resisted the typical
harassment from the city police—they
fought back, not with words, but with
bricks and bottles and whatever other
weapons of resistance were within
reach.

It was a spontaneous action that
initiated the rise of several gay lib-
eration groups across the country, on
campuses and in the communities in
the cities where gay men lived in vis-
ible numbers. Lesbians, however, had
been creating their own identity,
perhaps more silently, but equally as
moving, within the context of the
Daughters of Bilitis, an organization
that grew from the 50's. It had
several chapters in cities sprinkled
throughout the country and provided
lesbians with the chance to meet away
from the bars, to have "rap" groups
where discussions of their oppression
as women, and as homosexuals, took
place. These issues, as well as poet-
ry and fiction about lesbian lives
were published in "The Ladder," a per-
iodical that kept many lesbians from
"going under" because it broke the
isolation that many lesbians today
cannot even begin to understand.

The increasing visibility of gay
liberation drew many women into the
groups which had been founded mostly
by faggots, although some groups had
been founded by both lesbians and gay
men. However, this unity did not last
long. Many lesbians split off from
these gay groups, angry over the "male
domination." In 1970, I had attended
just two meetings of the Gay Liberation
Front in Seattle, when the women
confronted the men with their sexism,
a big fight ensued, and the women
walked out determined to form their
own group, the Gay Women's Alliance,
that would have a feminist identity.
They did, as did other women across
the country. This movement away from
a "gay" identity joined forces with
many women who were discovering their
lesbianism after having gotten involv-
ed with the women's movement. Together
they created a new identity which
has come to be known as “lesbian fem-
inism."

Women issued a "Statement of Gay
Women's Liberation" in 1970 stating
that "gay women's liberation is a loose
confederation of small groups whose
common denominator is that we feel
love for other women and are oriented
to Women's Liberation. We first got
together at a Gay Liberation sympos-
ium and quickly realized it was just
another male dominated movement, and
could only stifle our needs."

Another paper said, "Only women can
give each other a new ‘sense of self.
That identity we have to develop with
reference to ourselves, and not in re-
lation to men...our energies must
flow toward our sisters, not backwards
towards our oppressors...this obviously
splits our energies and commit-
ments, leaving us unable to be commit-
ted to the construction of the new
patterns which will liberate us.”

These feelings in 1970 were typical
of the lesbians who had publicly "come
out" in favor of social and political
change to end oppression, seeing that
their oppression as lesbians was dir-
ectly linked to their oppression as
women. They had hostility towards the
gay men who dominated Gay Liberation
who would not acknowledge this link,
without which, the lesbians could only
see more years of denial.

Where "fighting it out" was necess-
ary, lesbians chose to do it within
the context of the women's movement,
which was hesitant to welcome lesbian
sisters, and at times used the label
"dyke" to frighten women into less
militant stands.

Lesbian Response

In ten years' time, lesbian response
to the gay movement is more varied.
I see three different categories of
women: 1) Women who identify as fem-
inists who will not work with gay men
in groups, but who have support for
the gay issue as lesbians, and will
work on specific issues from time to
time. 2) Women who identify as femin-
ists whose priority it is to work with
gay men, while doing battle with the
men's sexism, and to build more les-
bian support for the gay movement.

3) Women who are solely "gay" identi-
fied, who reject the "feminist" label,
and who work with gay men around the
single issue of gay civil rights.

For every woman working in a polit-
ical way around her lesbianism, the
motivation can vary from woman to wo-
man as to why she chooses to work
where she does, but some generaliza-
tions can be made.

In the last two years, the gay move-
ment has pulled in a number of les-
bians who up until that time were
not active, to work on the single
issue of repealing all laws that dis-
criminate against homosexuals. The
reasons are obvious; in the last two
years we have seen a stepped-up poli-
tical assault on the hard-fought gains
of the civil rights movement for homo-
sexuals and lesbians. The right-wing
forces, epitomized by Anita Bryant,
have been very effective in homophob-
izing the country. This has allowed
for a dramatic increase in the viol-
ence against homosexuals where many
"fag-killers" have been set free.
Attacks by street gangs have increas-
ed in places where there is an openly
visible gay population. This violence
against faggots was given a stamp of
approval by the verdict in the murder
trial of Dan White, the politician
who assassinated San Francisco Mayor
Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk.

One man said, "Look, it's like a
farm kid who proves his manhood by
going out and shooting a deer. There
are no wild animals in our cities, but
the society's values make the homo-
sexual a 'fag,' easy prey, an urban
animal."

Even though I know that in the next
three minutes a woman will be killed
for no other crime than simply being
born a woman, and while the dramatic
rate of assaults on women is at the
same rate it has been for years, it's
old news, in the paper every day, a
condition of life, nothing to get
alarmed about. What is alarming to
many people is that men have turned
this violence onto other men, "faggots,"
and women see that the axe might next
fall on them, as lesbians, as people of one sex choosing to relate to others of the same sex. (And
in some cases it has, for example,
the scores of Canadian lesbians who
were harassed by US border guards
when they tried to attend the Michi-
gan Women's Music Festival).

Many lesbians work in the gay move-
ment because they see it as an imme-
diate survival issue, and the single
issue that the gay movement addresses—
civil rights for lesbians and gay
men—is a demand that every lesbian
and faggot can support. The demands
of feminism are much more complicated
and debated than the single demand of
the gay movement, and many lesbians
do not see the immediacy of the iss-
ues feminism raises: the conditions
that keep women out of decent jobs;
that keep us constant victims of
male violence; that keep us at the
mercy of the medical establishment;
that keep our children locked in the
same sex-role stereotypes we were
forced to grow up with; that keep
us victims of the nuclear family;
and many, many more.

Because the majority of lesbians
have gotten an “immediate relief"
from oppressive relationships with
men on an intimate level, many do
not identify with the feminist demand
for control of our bodies. Many les-
bians have stated that the issues of
abortion and safe, effective birth
control are straight women's issues,
and have nothing to do with
sanctions against lesbianism. Because
many lesbians do not have children,
they do not identify with the need
for childcare or issues related to
the oppression of mothers; also, many
lesbians have only to provide a liv-
ing for themselves, so the concern
over decent jobs is not as great as
for women who have a family.

Many lesbians would rather work
in the context of the gay movement
rather than the feminist movement,
because, as the majority of people
in this society, they have contempt
for women and would rather be associ-
ated with men. The gay movement has
not challenged "male identification"
as has the women's movement. Also,
lesbians who are comfortable with
their adaptation of sex roles have
acceptance from gay men, whereas
lesbian feminists have challenged
the necessity for imitating hetero-
sexual standards of behavior.

One last reason as to why lesbians
work with men in the gay movement,
without also working as feminists,
is because the gay movement has pro-
vided a place for women to go
with the existence of gay community
centers, the bars, and various groups
that sprang up in response to the
attacks on civil rights legislation.
The feminist movement, however, is
lacking in places for women to come
in and sign up; feminism is open to
all women, yet it takes extreme per-
severance and insistence from women
to be able to get situated in a place
where she can get active.

Question of Unity

In the last couple of years, les-
bians who do identify as feminists
have also turned to the gay movement
as the place where they do political
work. The National Gay Task Force,
the gay movement's answer to the Na-
tional Organization for Women, dealt
with the charge of not recognizing
lesbians in the gay movement in the mid-
seventies by requiring half the lead-
ership be women. Although in 1979, only
21% of its 10,000 members were lesbian,
that figure represents a jump from
what it was before the emergence of
Anita Bryant. The task force credits
that jump with the presence of lesbian
feminist Jean O'Leary as co-executive
director, and with Lucia Valeska, who
replaced her as the woman-half of the
directorship in 1979.

For many women, the entrance in the
gay movement into leadership positions
was opportunistic in the sense that
the feminist movement was floundering
in momentum, and the gay movement was
recapturing momentum. They see their
involvement as a good chance to reach
out to lesbians, to mobilize a power
base for involvement in electoral pol-
itics, which feminism has not done.

Lucia Valeska, speaking in Colorado
last summer, said, "It's time to under-
stand the differences and work with
gay men. Oppression is the responsibi-
lity of the oppressed. We used to hear
in the sixties that it's not black
people's responsibility to teach white
people what racism is about—white
people have to deal with white racism."
Women then said to men, "We don't have
to teach you what sexism is and how
you oppress us," but guess what? We
are going to have to do it, because
if we don't, gay men won't deal with
sexism at all.

Many lesbians who are working with
gay men on gay issues believe that
a woman who is a lesbian is automat-
ically a feminist, and that her fem-
inism will carry over into whatever
work she does, but what needs
to be emphasized is the politicaliza-
tion of homosexuality.

This leads to the final category of
women, those lesbians who cannot work
with gay men, who choose to fight for
lesbian rights in the context of the
women's movement, and who echo the
sentiment of their sisters who were
struggling with the "gay" issue in
the late sixties. What needs to be
done is to look at the reasons why
many women are not glad to be gay and
what it is that makes lesbians doubt
that "gay is good."

Graphic: C. Curry Briden

Just as I was sitting down to write
up the rest of this article, I got a
phone call from a woman friend who
lives next door to me. She said it was
urgent that I come over to talk for
a few minutes. What she had to say was
that one of the women living on the
other side of me had just been raped
three days before in her laundry room
by a man all of us have seen as he
lives on the same block. He had been
very “friendly” lately, trying to en-
gage many women on the block in con-
versation, asking us where we lived,
were we married, did we live alone.

The woman reported the rape and id-
entified the man to the police. The
police told her not to prosecute be-
cause it was her word against his and
besides, she “didn't fight back." Two
days later the same man was back on
the block harassing the same woman he
had raped earlier in the week. Well,
the woman is going to take him to
trial, while the rest of us are figuring
out ways to protect each other
and give her support.

You might be wondering why this in-
cident is being told in an article on
the gay movement. No, it's not that
the rapist is "gay"—none of us know
what his sexual preference is. He may
very well be a "fag-killer" as well.
That's not the issue. The issue is one
of misogyny (the hatred of women),
male violence as one way of acting
out the hatred of women, and sexual
politics. This issue has been billed
as a "woman's issue" for many years, but
it is a “man's issue," one that is
a natural for the gay movement to
tackle. But the gay movement is sil-
ent.

Ten years ago lesbian feminists
called on gay men to "get off your
asses and start figuring out how you
have internalized male culture's def-
inition of yourselves and how it aff-
ects your attitudes toward your les-
bian sisters; until such time you
will be compromising and deceiving
any woman who works with you in the
interest of gay (male) rights."

A few men have come forward and are
to be commended for contributing to
understanding how the oppression of
homosexuals is connected to sexual
politics: relationships based on a
power structure whereby one group of
people is controlled by another group
of people. More specifically, rela-
tionships based on roles so that one
group (men) is the dominant and con-
trolling group while the other group
(women) are in the powerless role,
submissive and subordinate. These men
are the exception. The problem lies
in the movement which will not hear
them, a movement dominated by men
who do not challenge their own and
each other's misogyny and therefore
feed that power structure which keeps
male sexual domination