Afford? (Continued from Last Issue, Vol. 6 No. 4)

Lastly, insofar as Daughters Inc. produces women's work with feminist con-
tent and then sells this product back to the WLM, Daughters should be fin-
ancially accountable to the WLM. It seems fair for Daughters to produce a
brief financial statement that could be sent to the women's bookstores.
This statement should be in language understandable to those of us with no
experience in accounting and should come out regularly - such as every six
months. Hopefully, this will set a needed precedent and other women-owned
businesses will recognize similar accountability. Do you agree? If not,
why not?

The following questions are addressed specifically to CHAROLETTE BUNCH.
1. What is your position at Quest?

2. Is it true that IPS (Institute for Policy Studies), “a prestigious Wash-
ington 'think-tank'" - partially funds Quest?

3. Is IPS a United States government front? Have you considered this as a
possibility?

4. If so, can you speculate on the reasons why the U.S. government would
contribute to the support of Quest - a magazine of political thought
specific to feminism?

5. If IPS is not a government front, how do you explain the establishment
voluntarily contributing to the development of any political ideology -
such as feminism - which does not reflect or promote status-quo inter-
ests?

6. In the Times, you say that you are “a fellow (and the first woman to
receive tenure)" at IPS. Is this true? If so, what qualified you for
tenure? What is your job description?

7. Why are you working for this "think-tank"?

8. Do you think it is politically responsible for a feminist like yourself
to work for IPS? If so, explain.

9. Is it true that “Quest's male connection may, in fact, be severed
soon"? If so, what is "the moment of leap" that Quest's staff will be
“propelled" into?

Is “Daughters”
A Feminist Structure?

While I consider feminist business a political impossibility under the
political conditions that currently exist, when feminists such as yourselves
run women-owned businesses, I expect you to take your feminist conscious-
ness to work with you.

1. Do you consider Daughters Inc. to possess a feminist structure - one
that reflects “redistributed” privilege?

2. Does the structure of Daughters reflect feminist principles (for exam-
ple skills sharing)?

3. What are the requirements for membership/employment at Daughters?

4. What percentage of poor, working class, Third World or ethnic women are
on the Daughters collective/employed by Daughters? What percentage of
lesbians?

5. Women who have access to better jobs in the establishment business
structure are in that position because of any privileges which they
may have in the areas of race, class, age, heterosexual credentials,
etc. Therefore, do you take into consideration the kinds of jobs avail-
able to women within the establishment as being a significant factor
when deciding on prospective collective members/employees? Is preferen-
tial treatment shown less-privileged women? - If not, why not?

6. Parke, is it true that “you dream of creating...a prototype of feminist
business where women (and someday men) will work ‘successfully’..."?

If not, how did Lois Gould get this impression?

7. "...the women who run Daughters Inc. select manuscripts for form and
literary merit, as well as for ‘feminist content'. Others edit only for
clear political message - on the ground that style and artistic quality
are, at this moment in feminist time, beside the point.” --from the
New York Times

I believe that: (1) the primary aim of a feminist press should be to
raise political consciousness; (2) "form" is only important insofar as
the political message comes across clearly; and (3) "literary merit" is
a matter of cultural opinion. Do you agree? If not, why not?

8. Do you agree with the following statement?

A woman is not qualified to judge the style or content of the work of a
woman who is lower on the male pecking order when such judgments are
used as detriments in deciding what gets published and what doesn’t.
Classism and racism, for example, will inevitably influence this woman's
judgments - no matter how fair she tries to be. Therefore, a political
woman from a similar cultural background should be the one to evaluate
how clear the style is and how understandable the political message is.

If you agree, how is this understanding shown in the selection of manu-
scripts? Who makes the selections? What are the standards? For ex-
ample, are there Third World women, poor women, ethnic women, working
class women to judge the respective manuscripts of same? If not, why
not?

9. "...Daughters wants to discover new women - Third World women - women
whose books can't get published by men" (June Arnold) -- from the New
York Times

Books written by Third World women are noticeably absent from those that
Daughters has published. What is the reason for this? What are your
criteria for publication? How does Daughters discover new women
writers?

10. "(Daughters') books are all written, edited, composed and designed by
women, but until now they have been printed by a male printer and ship-
ped through the U.S. Post Office." --from the New York Times

Why is this so? Lois Gould describes you as now “working closely with
an expanding women's printing company, Tower Press." Is this true?
What took you so long?

11. "We (Lois Gould and the Daughters women) are talking about success -
or how to succeed without really sacrificing feminist principles. I ask
what would happen if Daughters and other feminist presses lured all the
major women writers away from the "male" press." --from the New York
Times

June looks surprised. “Why would we want to?” she asks. "Go after "ma-
jor" women writers? Stars who were built by the male press? We don't
need them." Patty says, half jokingly, “We use manmade machinery to
print our books..." “But we don't have to use their women,” says
June.

Why is it more feminist to have considered selling rights
to a male publisher than considering "their" women like Susan
Brownmiller as a woman to "go after?"

Parke, are there any women that you don't need? June, why did you
compare women to “man-made machinery"? Do you think some women
are "man-made"; and there are women who are “their women"? Furthermore, why wouldn't you go after "major" women writers? Why can
you afford to leave these women behind?

12. "Susan Brownmiller's book on rape" I (Lois Gould) persist. “Wouldn't
you have wanted to publish that?"..."Even a few could make a big dif-
ference - couldn't they?...money to grow on?" That word "money" a-
gain, June bristles. "We don't need their money. We don't need their
writers."

"You could give more women jobs - they could quit working for men,"
(Lois Gould says). June still shakes her head. "We can afford to grow
slowly. We can afford to do it our way."

June, whose money do you need? It is the responsibility of the femi-
nist press to lure every woman writer away from the male publishers.
Part of the responsibility of feminists is to share and exchange poli-
tical understandings and political conclusions. As feminists, we should
want every political woman to publish with women's presses. Daughters
may not need these women economically, but as you are feminists - how
can you not need these women politically?

13. What if, (Lois Gould suggests) "well-known establishment women came to
you voluntarily - if they were willing to take much less money than
they could get from a male publisher?” "Some of them do," Patty says.
"They give us books that their male publishers won't touch - themes
that aren't ‘commercial’. They come to the feminist presses when
they have to." "And they go back when they can," says June. “I
still don't see why we should go after women like that. “How could we
trust them?"

"I still don't see", (Lois Gould says) “How you can afford to say no
to so many - and what seem such easy ways to grow bigger and stronger."
June replies, "I can afford to say no to anything...women have to
learn that they can afford to say no.” (italics mine)

Bertha and June, a while back you both publicly said that
the idea that the male press pays more money is a myth. If this is true,
then why did you feed into this myth by talking about women being willing
to sacrifice money? What should have been said, is that feminists
certainly do want women to wean themselves of this need for male approval.
Do you agree?

Moreover, isn't it often a good sign when male publishers are not inter-
ested in publishing a particular woman's work? Isn't it possible that
the work in question does not represent either the stylistic or content
values of the status quo? Wouldn't this, in itself, make the manuscript
somewhat worthy of consideration by Daughters?

Furthermore, June, when you say "I can afford to say no (in reference
to the issues of money, success and compromise) to anything", you are
being insensitive to the majority of women - you obviously have privilege
that most women do not have.

While it is true that you have been financially generous to many movement
women, and WLM projects, that does not excuse your classist flaunting
of your ease of choice - ignoring the economic reality of most
women's lives. Furthermore, you reprimand women for not having the
strength of character to assert ourselves - as you do - and so "no".

You show an attitude of patronizing disapproval with the statement -
"Women have to learn they can afford to say no.”

I do not condemn any woman for her class background, but I do expect
women to examine their privilege and be sensitive to those women lower
on the male pecking order. If you can afford to do it your way, then
you can afford to do it in a feminist way.

Conclusion

After having read my analysis of your collective political actions,
do you still think that you were politically justified both in what you
did, and in what you said?

My Expectations of You

1. I expect you to make a clear political statement in the feminist
press which responds to my analysis.
2. I expect you to apologize, in the feminist press, to lesbian
separatists for your unprincipled public trashing of us.
3. I expect you to apologize, in the feminist press, to lesbians for
your irresponsible rendition - both overt and covert - of lesbianism.
MORE ON PAGE 10