international

Bastion Point: Maori Join Together

(Reprinted from Broadsheet - a New Zealand feminist magazine.)

Sandra Coney talked to three of the 13 women arrested at the recent reoccupation of Bastion Point.

After a public meeting attended by over 500 people, the Bastion Point Joint Working Group called for a mass reoccupation of land at Bastion Point belonging to Ngati Whatua, which the Government claims as its. The Housing Corporation had called for tenders for subdividing the land for high density, high cost private housing. This is the first major move on the Point which was the focus of a long reoccupation and massive arrests in 1978. On March 13 and 14 about 200 people gathered at Bastion Point for a 24-hour reoccupation to hold a church service; the protesters stayed out of the disputed area. However, at the end of the service, 12 women stayed on the land and were subsequently hauled off by the police and arrested for trespass. I spoke to three of the women arrested: Rebecca Evans, Sharon Hawke, and Lyn Schnauer.

Sandra: How did the decision for the group of women to occupy the disputed area of land come about?

Rebecca: The decision was made on the basis of past decisions. We went up there originally to reoccupy the land and reoccupation to us meant any piece of land. As far as we're concerned the Ngati Whatua own all the land. The Housing Corporation piece of land is the piece most at issue at the moment because that is the piece of land that the Government had specifically said that we're not allowed on, and that we'd be arrested immediately if we set foot on it. The most successful form of action in the past has been reoccupation.

Sandra: As things happened on the 13th and 14th, the whole group of protesters only occupied the disputed land briefly to hold a church service. Why then did a group of women continue to reoccupy the land?

Sharon: We organized before and during the temporary occupation by the whole group that we would remain there as long as we could. We carried out the original plan to maintain a 24-hour vigil on the land but that had happened on the other side of the fence. Our decision was to move onto the side of the fence where we'd been told we weren't allowed to go.

Sandra: A lot of people went up to Bastion Point thinking that the whole group would do that.

Sharon: We made a mistake in the first place in not going straight on. The Joint Working Group was waiting to see what sort of numbers we had and we felt at the time that there weren't enough, though looking back, it would have been.

Rebecca: The Joint Working Group was prepared to get into a situation where there were mass arrests. All of the people were to go onto the land called the Housing Corporation Land. But that didn't happen and most of the people left at 12 o'clock on Sunday.

Sandra: How did the women get together to do what they did do?

Sharon: During the service we went around all the women who we knew from experience, mainly from Waitangi, and asked them what their position would be if we made this decision.

Sandra: What sort of response did you get?

Sharon: Every woman I asked came along.

Rebecca: We decided that rather than get the issue debated by the whole group it was better to do it with a group that was committed to staying on the land, and prepared to face the possibility of being arrested.

Sharon: We weren't necessarily going for numbers, just a solid core.

Rebecca: The most important point that has to be made about the protest by the 13 women is that people have to be reminded that reoccupation, whether it be permanent or temporary, is the ultimate goal. Reoccupation by any mass movement is just a broader group of people reoccupying the land temporarily in the interests of the Ngati Whatua people.

Sandra: How did it become a women's protest?

Rebecca: Our closest allies are all women.

Sandra: Did any men want to join in?

Rebecca: Some men sat on the outside; they were prepared to support us but not actively to come on. Also, some men stayed back and looked after the kids.

Sandra: The strength of women in the whole movement was clear from the speeches on Saturday and who was giving them. What is happening with women within the land movement?

Rebecca: Within the last five years in particular, black women have been much more vocal in leadership roles. It's so obvious at Bastion Point because most of that leadership is Auckland-based at the moment. Bastion Point for most black women is a really burning issue. If we don't win this issue we won't win any other land issue. This is the key issue to all the other land issues.

Sandra: Women appear to be prepared to take the most militant action.

Rebecca: Although you will get men admitting that women are playing a very active role, there will only be lip service acknowledgment of it. When it comes to the crunch there's always a reassertion of male power. Whether it be in the form of saying that we have to listen to the elders or whether it be in terms of other relationships. Black men won't give up their power that easily, so we actively take power away from them and take decisions for ourselves.

The men will get up and go on for hours and hours about the wonders of black female leadership. You can see them standing up and there's a mat underneath their feet and it's just being whipped out from underneath them, but they like to believe that the mat's still there.

Sandra: Once you'd made the decision to stay, what happened?

Lyn: I'd always intended from days before that weekend, that once we got onto the so-called Housing Corporation Land, I would only be leaving by feet first. I had my tent ready and took it on when we went over for the service and never went off except in a police van.

Rebecca: As the service wound up, we put the tents up and dragged a whole lot of firewood onto our side. About 30 or 40 supporters stayed back on the other side of the fence. We had a meeting and we decided what our stance would be in the event of us being arrested, and in court and over bail. Then about 3:30 representatives of the Housing Corporation and the police came over and gave their obligatory warnings. First they did it verbally, then we did an amazing thing. The police and two men from the Housing Corporation were standing about 10 yards away from us. We were standing in two rows with a big banner. They gave us our first warning and we moved down in a long train and just encircled them and kept going round and round them, chanting the whole time. The Housing Corporation guys got very, very uncomfortable. They moved off up to the left-hand corner of the section; we pushed them off. Then we moved over to the police and the media and cleared them off onto the Council land. We went back to our original position and the police gave another warning. Then they went away and started arranging their troops.

Sharon: About 15 minutes later we saw the different squads coming in. One squad of 50 came up from the bottom, then three different squads came directly towards us. One part was to block off our supporters and another squad had fire extinguishers and, some said, tear gas. The squad that came in first made the arrests. They had little turkeys running around with signs telling us to get off and they gave the third warning. We couldn't hear anything because we were chanting nonstop, right up till we were put in the vans.

Sandra: Were spirits quite high as this was happening?

Lyn: Amazing, marvelous. I felt very threatened by the police; they were coming at us in waves. Hundreds and hundreds of them. But standing there with arms linked with the women beside me and arms around the woman in front of me, I felt really elated. A tremendous feeling of strength.

Sandra: Did it get harder for the few left when the numbers got whittled down? Were any of you among the last to be arrested?

Rebecca: Me, Lyn, Sharon, and Sophy were the last four.

Lyn: The strength remained right to the end.

Rebecca: Hinewhare was on the other side of the fence because she'd been told not to get arrested and she was spieling the whole time on the megaphone, so there was support from people who did not get arrested as well. We chanted right till we got put in the vans.

Sandra: Hinewhare got arrested though.

Rebecca: Yes, after we were taken away, five cops took her as she was getting ready to go home and they arrested her for insulting language.

Lyn: They couldn't let her get away with what she was saying over the megaphone; it was so threatening. She was supporting us the whole time, pointing out the overwhelming number of police for twelve women.

Sandra: Did you go peacefully?

Sharon: We held our links till it was physically impossible, then we just went dead.

Lyn: They looked fairly rough with them, if you're flat on your face, they pick you up by your arms so your arms are held right up behind your back.

Lyn: I felt as though my wrist was breaking and as though I was choking. Sophie nearly passed out outside the van from the pain.

Sandra: After you were refused bail, you were held overnight even though the charge was only trespass, then taken to the court in the morning. When was the decision made to do what you did in court?

Sharon: When we got to the court we talked about what things we could say in court. Two women took the stance of speaking in Maori, Ana Meihana and Waatara Mihi. They both got held in till 4:30 for contempt and Ana got 5 days.

Rebecca: When we were in the holding cells we could hear what was going on although we couldn't hear what was being said in the witness box. We were chanting the whole time. We all made political statements when asked to plead and those statements were all taken as not guilty pleas.

Sandra: At times there was so much noise coming from the holding cells, and so much coming from supporters outside the court that the judge had to ask people to move closer to be heard. That was really stressful because the whole time we were still as strong as ever when we went to court.

Sandra: The people cheered as you came in and greeted you with Kia Kaha.

Rebecca: Judge Callander threatened that they would be had up for contempt if they continued that behavior.

Sandra: When Hinewhare came in she said "Where's my baby?" and Zane (4 years) stood up and said "Kia Kaha" (be strong) and gave a clenched fist salute.

Rebecca: He was standing with us the whole time at the Point, fist in the air, when Hinewhare was being arrested. He was actually standing in our line at one stage and when they gave us our first warning we said go on, get off, and he just stood there; he didn't want to go.

Rebecca: The stance we've taken will be repeated. There is a delegation of City Council and Auckland Regional Authority people going tomorrow to negotiate with the Housing Corporation. The proposal is that the Corporation build low-cost medium density housing on the Council land and the Council would do their part up as a reserve.

Sandra: It's total return, no conditions.

Rebecca: If the Ngati Whatua people accept anything less than total return, that would mean three generations of fighting gone down the drain.

Sandra: Looking at the action being an all-women action, was it something that just arose under those circumstances?

Rebecca: There are no plans for an all-women's group because the women who are at present in a leadership role will maintain that at all costs.

Sandra: This was an action that was taken by mainly Maori women, but it was a joint action between Maori and Pakeha women. Have you any predictions about where those sorts of alliances are going?

Rebecca: In the past I've had some really harsh criticisms of white feminists as well as white lesbians. In the last five years there's been a lot of debate about feminism and racism but it's been verbal terms. What's happened in the last six months is that people have actively got in and done something physically on an anti-racist issue. White women have physically taken risks. We need whites who are going to fight with us on our issues on terms that we set down, who are also going to be mutineers in their own system. We're not asking them to paint their faces black or go around whipping themselves ten times a day for the fact that they are white; we're asking them to support Maori struggles, but they also have a role to play in breaking down their own system.

Lyn: I think white women want to be part of the struggle because they want to support blacks, and they are very clear about their responsibilities, which are changing their fellow whites.

Sandra: Most of the women are coming through feminism because the awareness of your own oppression makes you empathize with the oppression of blacks.

‘CONTINUED ON PAGE 20

Big Mama Rag, December 1982 - Page 9