RAPE |

RAPE: The All-American Crime

From Page 7

when crossing the street. To be
feminine is to wear shoes which make
it difficult to run; skirts which inhibit
one’s stride; underclothes which
inhibit the circulation. Is it not an
intriguing observation that those very
clothes which are thought to be
flattering to the female and attractive
to the male are those which make it
impossible for a woman to defend
herself against aggression?

Women Taught Fear

Each girl as she grows into
womanhood is taught fear. Fear is the
form in which the female internalizes
both chivalry and the double standard.
Since, biologically speaking, women
in fact have the same if not greater
potential for sexual expression as do
men, the woman who is taught that
she must behave differently from a
man must also learn to distrust her
own carnality. She fears herself. This
is the essence of passivity, and of
course, a woman’s passivity is not
simply sexual but functions to cripple
her from self-expression in every area
of her life.

Passivity itself prevents a woman
from ever considering her own
potential for self-defense and forces
her to look to men for protection. The
woman is taught fear, but this time
fear of the other; and yet her only
relief from this fear is to seek out the
other. Moreover, the passive woman is
taught to regard herself as impotent,
unable to act, unable even to perceive,
in no way self-sufficient, and, finally,
as the object and not the subject of
a woman is deprived of the status of a
human being. She is not free to be...

If the basic social unit is the
family, in which the woman is a
possession of her husband, the
superstructure of society is a male
hierarchy, in which men dominate
other men (or patriarchal families
dominate other patriarchal families).
And it is no small irony that, while the
very social fabric of our male-dominated
culture denies women equal
access to political, economic and
legal power, the literature, myth and
humor of our culture depicts women
not only as the power behind the
throne, but the real source of the
oppression of men. The religious
version of this fairy tale blames Eve for
both carnality and eating of the tree of
knowledge, at the same time making
her gullible to the obvious devices of a
serpent. Adam, of course, is merely
the trusting victim of love.

Certainly this is a biased story.
But no more biased than the one
television audiences receive today
from the latest slick comedians.
Through a media which is owned by
men, censored by a State dominated
by men, all the evils of this social
system which make a man’s life
unpleasant are blamed upon “the
wife.” The theory is: were it not for the
female who waits and plots to “trap”
the male into marriage, modern man
would be able to achieve Olympian
freedom. She is made the scapegoat
for a system which is in fact run by
men.

White Racist Attitudes

Nowhere is this more clear than
in the white racist use of the concept
of white womanhood. The white
male’s open rape of black women,
coupled with his overwhelming concern
for the chastity and protection of his
wife and daughters, represents an
extreme of sexist and racist hypocrisy.
While on the one hand she was held
up as the standard for purity and
virtue, on the other the Southern white
woman was never asked if she wanted
to be on a pedestal, and in fact any
deviance from the male-defined
standards for white womanhood was
treated severely. (It is a powerful
commentary on American racism that
the historical role of Blacks as slaves,
and thus possessions without power,
has robbed black women of legal and
economic protection through mar-
riage. 

Thus black women in Southern
society and in the ghettos of the
North have long been easy game for
white rapists.) The fear that black men
would rape white women was, and is,
classic paranoia. Quoting from Ann
Breen’s unpublished study of racism
and sexism in the South “The New
South: White Man's County,” Frederick
Douglass legitimately points out
that, had the black man wished to rape
white women, he had ample oppor-
tunity to do so during the Civil War
when white women, the wives, sisters,
daughters and mothers of the rebels,
were left in the care of Blacks. But yet
not a single act of rape was committed
during this time.

The Ku Klux Klan, who tarred
and feathered black men and lynched
them in the honor of the purity of
white womanhood, also applied tar
and feathers to a Southern white
woman accused of bigamy, which
leads one to suspect that Southern
white men were not so much outraged
by the violation of the woman as a
person, in the few instances where
rape was actually committed by black
men, but at the violation of his
property rights. In the situation
where a black man was found to be
having sexual relations with a white
woman, the white woman could
exercise skin privilege, and claim that
she had been raped, in which case the
black man was lynched. But if she did
not claim rape, she herself was
subject to lynching.

Myth of White Womanhood

In construction of the myth of
white womanhood so as to justify the
lynching and oppression of black men
and women, the white male has
created a convenient symbol of his
own power which has resulted in black
hostility toward the white “bitch,”
accompanied by an unreasonable fear
on the part of many white women of
the black rapist. Moreover, it is not
surprising that after being told for two
centuries that he wants to rape white
women, occasionally a black man
does actually commit that act. But it is
crucial to note that the frequency of
this practice is outrageously exaggerated
in the white myths. Ninety
percent of reported rape is intra- not
inter-racial.

In Soul on Ice, Eldridge Cleaver
has described the mixing of a rage
against white power with the
internalized sexism of a black man
raping a white woman. “Somehow I
arrived at the conclusion that, as a
matter of principle, it was of
paramount importance for me to have
an antagonist, ruthless attitude
toward white women... Rape was an
insurrectionary act. It delighted me
that I was defying and trampling upon
the white man’s law, upon his system
of values and that I was defiling his
women--and this point, I believe, was
the most satisfying to me because I
was very resentful over the historical
fact of how the white man has used
the black woman.” Thus a black man
uses white women to take out his rage
against white men. But in fact,
whenever a rape of a white woman by a
black man does take place, it is again
the white man who benefits.

First, the act itself terrorizes the
white woman and makes her more
dependent on the white male for
protection. Then, if the woman
prosecutes her attacker, the white
man is afforded legal opportunity to
exercise over racism. Of course the
knowledge of the rape helps to
perpetuate the two myths which are
beneficial to white male rule--the
bestiality of the black man and the
desirability of white women. Finally,
the white man surely benefits because
he himself is not the object of the
attack--he has been allowed to stay in
power.

Indeed, the existence of rape in
any form is beneficial to the ruling
class of white males. For rape is a
kind of terrorism which severely limits
the freedom of women and makes
women dependent on men. Moreover,
in the act of rape, the rage that one
man may harbor toward another higher
in the male hierarchy can be deflected
toward a female scapegoat. For every
man there is always someone lower on
the social scale on whom he can take
out his aggressions. And that is any
woman alive.

This oppressive attitude towards
women finds its institutionalization in
the traditional family. For it is
assumed that a man “wears the
pants” in his family--he exercises the
option of rule whenever he so
chooses. Not that he makes all the
decisions--clearly women make most
of the day-to-day decisions in a
family. But when a conflict of interest
arises, it is the man’s interest which
will prevail. His work, in itself, is more
powerful. He lords it over his wife in
the same way his boss lords it over
him, so that the very process of
exercising his power becomes as
important an act as obtaining
whatever it is in his power can get for
him.

This notion of power is key to
the male ego in this culture, for the
two acceptable measures of masculinity
are a man’s power over women
and his power over other men. A man
may boast to his friends that “I have 20
men working for me.” It is also
aggrandizement of his ego if he has
the financial power to clothe his wife
in furs and jewels. And, if a man lacks
the wherewithal to acquire such
power, he can always express his rage
through equally masculine activities--
rape and theft. Since male society
defines the female as a possession, it
is not surprising that the felony most
often committed together with rape is
theft. As the following classic tale of
rape points out, the elements of theft,
violence and forced sexual relations
merge into an indistinguishable
whole.

A Woman’s Story

The woman who told this story
was acquainted with the man who
tried to rape her. When the man
learned that she was going to be
staying alone for the weekend, he
began early in the day a polite
campaign to get her to go out with
him. When she continued to refuse his
request, his chivalrous mask dropped
away: “I had locked all the doors
because I was afraid, and I don’t know
how he got in; it was probably
through the screen door. When I woke
up, he was shaking my leg. His eyes
were red, and I knew he had been
drinking or smoking. I thought I would
try to talk my way out of it. He started
by saying that he wanted to sleep with
me, and then he got angrier and
angrier, until he started to say, ‘I want
pussy,’ ‘I want pussy.’ Then, I got
scared and tried to push him away.

That’s when he started to force
himself on me. It was awful. It was the
most humiliating, terrible feeling. He
was forcing my legs apart and ripping
my clothes off. And it was painful. I
did fight him--he was slightly drunk
and I was able to keep him away. I had
taken judo a few years back, but I was
afraid to throw a jab for fear that he'd
kill me. I could see he was getting
more and more violent. I was thinking
wildly of some way to get out of this
alive and then I said to him, ‘Do you
want money? I'll give you money.’ We
had money but I was also thinking that
if I got to the back room I could
telephone the police--as if the police
would even have helped. It was a
stupid thing to think of because
obviously he would follow me. And he
did. When he saw me pick up the
phone, he tried to tie the cord around
my neck. I screamed at him that I did
have the money in another room, that I
was going to call the police because I
was scared, but that I would never tell
anybody what happened. It would be
an absolute secret. He said okay, and I
went to get the money. But when he
got it, all of a sudden he got this crazy
look in his eye and he said to me,
‘Now I’m going to kill you.’ Then I
started saying my prayers. I knew
there was nothing I could do. He
started to hit me--I still wasn’t sure if
he wanted to rape me at this point--or
just to kill me. He was hurting me, but
he hadn't yet gotten me into a
stranglehold because he was still
drunk and off balance. Somehow he
pushed into the kitchen where I kept
looking at this big knife. But I didn’t
pick it up. Somehow, no matter how
much I hated him at that moment, I
still couldn't imagine putting the knife
into his flesh, and then I was afraid he
would grab it and stick it into me.
Then he was hitting me again and we
fell down the steps and that’s when he
started to strangle me. He was on top of me. He just went on and on until finally I lost conscious-
ness. I did scream, though my
screams sounded like whispers to me.
But what happened was that a cab
driver happened by and frightened him
away. The cab driver revived me--I was
out only a minute at the most. And
then I ran across the street and I
grabbed the woman who was our
neighbor and screamed at her, ‘Am I
alive? Am I still alive?’

Threat of Death

Rape is an act of aggression in which
the victim is denied her self-determination. It is an act of violence which, if
not actually followed by beatings or
murder, nevertheless always carries
with it the threat of death. And finally,
rape is a form of mass terrorism, for
the victims of rape are chosen
indiscriminately, but the propagandists
for male supremacy broadcast
that it's women who cause rape by
being unchaste or in the wrong place
at the wrong time--in essence, by
behaving as though they were free.

The threat of rape is used to
deny women unemployment. (In Cali-
fornia, the Berkeley Public Library,
until pushed by the Federal Employ-
ment Practices Commission, refused
to hire female shelvers because of
perverted men in the stacks.) The fear
of rape keeps women off the streets at
night. Keeps women at home. Keeps
women passive and modest for fear
that they be thought provocative.

It is part of human dignity to be
able to defend oneself and women are
learning. Some women have learned
karate; some to shoot guns. And yet
we will not be free until the threat of
rape and the atmosphere of violence is
ended, and to end that the nature of
male behavior must change.

But rape is not an isolated act
that can be rooted out from patriarchy
without ending patriarchy itself. Rape
is a classic act of domination where,
in the words of Kate Millett, “the
emotions of hatred, contempt and the
desire to break or violate personality,”
takes place. This breaking of the
personality characterizes modern life
itself. No simple reforms can
eliminate rape. As the symbolic
expression of the white male
hierarchy, rape is the quintessential
act of our civilization, one which,
Valerie Solanis warns, is in danger of
“humping itself to death.”