f Sound and Fury

Signifying...

Full of Sound and Fury, Signifying...
Colorado IWY Coalition Forms

Mary Wadding

On November 18-21, women from
throughout the nation will converge
on Houston, Texas to attend the
International Women's Year Convention.
If present indications are correct,
it will prove to be one of the most
interesting moves to be made by the
United States government.

The IWY Convention is shadowed by
the presence of many questions that
are difficult to answer due to the
dearth of information available. It
is not even certain what the conven-
tion is supposed to accomplish. From
the viewpoint of the observer, there
is the question of the goal of all
the planning and money that has been
spent. Exactly what is expected is
not being talked about, but the com-
mission in charge (made up of women
from different political levels and
leanings) has issued a statement that
defines the convention goal as to
identify the barriers that keep women
from full participation in American
life and to actively work to get rid
of those barriers.

The issues are not any clearer,
but judging by the state conferences,
it would seem that abortion and the
ERA will lead the considerations.
Lesbian rights will be among the
topics, to be brought up later if not
included among the major subjects.

The convention will be comprised
of delegates from the various states
(selected by the individual confer-
ences held earlier this year), alter-
nates, delegates-at-large, official
observers, and 6-7000 women who are
able to get into the convention hall
itself. Delegates, alternates and
at-large delegates have already been
selected, while the official observers
will be those women who worked on the
conferences in their own states. This
selection is a payoff in terms of al-
lowing those women the opportunity of
a guaranteed admission, leaving the
remaining seats to be filled on a
first-come, first-seated basis.

Earlier, it was decided by the
national commission in charge of the

convention that women desiring to

attend would have to contact them to
be granted ‘official observer’ status.
The decisions would be made by the
commission as to who would be given
such recognition.
As it stands now, subject to con-
stant change as the commission makes

Bakke Decision

further decisions, the convention

will begin with registration on the
18th and open Saturday morning, with
the first plenary session scheduled
for that morning.

The final session is scheduled to
adjourn at 5:00 pm on Sunday night.
New business is to be brought up at
the next to final plenary session.
It is thought that at that time if
lesbian rights have not been brought
up, they will then.

In addition to the convention,
the government has planned what has
been established as Seneca Falls
South. The purpose of this alternate
program is to provide for the over-
flow of women who will be unable to
get into the main convention hall.
Events have been scheduled at the
same time as the plenary sessions
for the delegates. Originally, Seneca
Falls was set up as a continuing
forum and showcase for female talent
in the performing arts. For the pre-
sent, it has been changed to a series
of speakouts, panels, and workshops.

It has been brought up in meetings
with women interested in going to the
convention, and women who attended
the convention in Mexico where essen-
tially the same type of set-up was
put together, that Seneca Falls is
there to take the pressure off the
convention. Unlike the Mexico Con-
vention, Seneca Falls is in the same
main area as the convention, allowing
easy access to the delegates and the
events of the convention.

Pressure and an uneasy atmosphere
seem to be part of the Houston gather-
ing. While many are wondering exact-
ly what is going to come of Houston,
there are a few incidents and pro-
cedures that have confused the se-
quence of events.

Information is constantly changing
and from one week to the next, it is
difficult to know what still is and
what is no longer going to happen.
The commission is exhibiting very
little in the way of strong and set
guidelines. The ‘official observer’
status is a good example. This has
changed from the decision of the
commission to a first-come situation.
The rumors floating around have not
made facts easier to follow.

As most followers of the state
conferences have known the delegation
from Mississippi is composed of five
men, members of the Klan, who have
had a challenge issued of their right
to be seated at the convention. The
commission, while deploring the fact,
has made the decision that they will
be seated as there occurred no elec-
tion fraud. Fraud is the only legal
ground on which they may not be allowed
to take part in the convention.

In their statement, the commission
cited the Mississippi delegation for
failing to represent the women of
the state on economic, racial and
other categories. The delegation
of five white, middle-class males
obviously does little to represent
the working class, black women of
that state.

“This is a clear example of the
type of action taken by the commis-
sion. In so far as information about
the convention, the constant updating
is very confusing and unclear. At
this time, the agenda and parliamen-
tary procedures have been established
but compared to the amount of infor-
mation yet to come out, this is
meager and of limited use.

In response to the set up of the
convention and the lack of provision
by the government for the masses of
women who will be in Houston, the
Colorado Lesbian Feminist Coalition
has formed.

The CLFC was organized by women
who recognized that the only way
these women would have a chance to
work on the issues and maintain a
voice would be to establish a coali-
tion of women who wanted to attend
the convention. Being cognizant that
only women who could be identifiable
as lesbians through their actions and
lobbying would there be any chance to
bring some awareness of the need for
discussion and recommendations for
lesbian rights. By sharing informa-
tion and setting down guidelines for
what action could be taken through
the convention and also at the Seneca
Falls workshops, the women of the
CLFC hope to build alliances with
women from other states who have es-
tablished similar goals.

The primary priority of CLFC is to
coordinate transportation for women
interested in attending the convention.
Rides and riders will be coordinated
to get as many women as possible to
Houston. Women's groups throughout
Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and Ne-
braska are being contacted by the
communications task force of CLFC
to find out how women are planning
to get to the convention. Women who
are driving and those needing a ride
should contact the coalition.

In addition to transportation coor-
dination, the coalition has two priori-
ties: lobbying at the convention for
recommendations with women from other
states that are similar to those that
the Colorado conference decided upon,
and, second, to establish communication
and information sharing at the Seneca
Falls. Energies are being placed in

more on page 14

Affirmative Action

quotas to enforce affirmative action
be declared unconstitutional, thus
supporting Bakke's contention that
enforced affirmative action programs
discriminate against white men.

Since the Bakke decision in Califor-
nia, a number of courts across the
country have been saddled with “reverse
discrimination” cases. Many have sud-
denly decided that affirmative action
has gone “too far" to ensure equality
of opportunity in education and employ-
ment for women and minorities. (The
Colorado Supreme Court is currently
hearing the case of a former Boulder
policeman who has charged he was un-
constitutionally barred from CU's
Law School special admissions program
because he was white, thus violating
his protections against racial discrim-
ination.)

In Boulder, a coalition of 13 minor-
ity and women’s groups have planned
a demonstration to overturn the Bakke
decision for October 7th, noon, at the
University Memorial Center on the
Boulder campus. The Boulder coalition
joins other groups who have planned a
national day of protest against Bakke,
realizing that now that the Bakke case
is in the lap of the Supreme Court the
idea of “reverse discrimination” could
become the law of the land, and what
little gains it took years to make will
be eliminated rather than strengthened.

(Next month BMR will report on some
recent developments in Boulder at the
University of Colorado concerning
"reverse discrimination").