WOMEN’S COFFEEHOUSE OPENS OCT. 8

There will be a place open to all women, older, gay or straight, young or from diverse sections of the Denver community, etc. Here women will be able to socialize freely with other women while being entertained.

Present This Coupon for a Free Treat!

Antique & Used

Old Time Furniture

Denver, Colorado 80209  
303/722-4026

* GRANDE GIOVANNIS *

Excellent Italian Cuisine.

3230 East Sixth Avenue,  
Denver, Colorado

reasonable prices

"GOOD HOME MADE MEXICAN FOOD!"

ALICIA'S MEXICAN FOOD  
Eat Here Or Take Out.

Phone: 777-9904 Located at 287 South Downing.

APPROACHING

LAVENDER

A Very Social Place.

* COFFEES... *  
* TEAS *  
* CHEESES *

Gay Coalition  
8-3 Fri. Night  
1122 E. 17th Ave.  
25¢ Contribution.

CATCH THE SUN!

Stained Glass by Cobweb Studios  
Paintings by Dorothy Trent  
Jewelry by Maida

Next door to The Woman's Voice

Cobweb Studios

665 So. Pearl; Denver

CONT. FROM PAGE 10

Feminist Reviews

are recorded that we are all too familiar with but which nonetheless need to be recounted.

A full two pages are given to a discussion of the psychology professions. Several appalling case histories are given and the truth revealed about the psychology professions' seemingly total ineptitude in dealing with homosexuality.

The bar scene is examined honestly for what it is and what it provides for women. In the bars, the book says, "booze flows, alcoholism is encouraged and sometimes fights break out." But while lamenting that there are few places that aren't out to make money off of us, we are reminded that "there is no other place to be with lots of other gay women, open and unashamed, to dance, hold each other close..."

The single longest topic division is the topic entitled “Loving.” Again, we find extremely moving stories from the lives of women dealing with such things as coming out, daring to fall in love with a woman, dealing with jealousy, and the dynamics of a loving lesbian relationship.

Also, in "In America They Call Us Dykes," a working-class woman describes her life and writes a poem criticizing middle-class women for their "liberalism" and ignorance of their own class privilege. Lesbian motherhood is the topic dealt with, and here we find discussions of informing one's children of one's lesbianism, raising children without a man, and lesbians' fight for the custody of their children.

At full value, Our Bodies, Our Selves is extremely honest and informative and breaks through the many previous taboos and unspoken issues of female sexuality, physiology, and health care. Some of the rest of the book may not be of TREMENDOUS interest to lesbians (chapters on birth control, childbearing, heterosexual sexuality) but certainly the chapters on nutrition, exercise, self-defense, menopause, the health care system, etc. pertain to lesbians as well as to heterosexual women. I only regret the first edition's liberal attitude toward and almost total dismissal of lesbianism. 

FINE CUSTOM JEWELRY  
at 723 E. 17th AVE, DENVER  
NOW CALLED THE SEERSUCKER  
KATHY PRUTCHETE — 10:30-6:00  
DESIGNER: JEWELER: soa  
in GOLD and