4 Can’t Walk Around Smiling All the Time...”
Warning: Your Job May Threaten Your Health

Clair Kaplan

"How would you like to iron a shirt a minute? Think of standing at a mangle just above the wash-room floor with hot steam pouring up through the floor for 10, 12, 14, and sometimes 17 hours a day! Sometimes the floors are made of cement and then it seems as though we were standing on hot coals, and the workers are dripping with perspiration. Perhaps you have complained about the chemicals used in the washing of your clothes which cause them to wear out quickly, but what do you suppose is the effect of these chemicals on the workers? They are...breathing air laden with particles of soda, ammonia, and other chemicals! The laundry workers union ---in one city reduced this long day to 9 hours and has increased the wage by 50 percent..."

Toward Better Working Conditions for Women, Women's Bureau Bulletin #252, 1909

from We Were There, by Barbara Mayer Wertheimer

LNS/Womens' Graphics

Some Common Exposures to Health Hazards by Laundry Workers: Today:
Acetic Acid

Bacteriocides

Bleaches (Chloride of Lime, Chlorine)

Hydrogen Fluorides

Oxalic Acid

Soaps

Sodium and Potassium Hydroxides

Acetic Acid (Chronic exposure to vapor can lead to chronic bronchitis. It has a severe caustic effect.)

The following is an interview with Juanita Gonzales, a 51-year-old Denver Chicana, who has worked all of her life in laundries.

BMR: You've worked all your life in laundries, right? Can you describe some of your jobs, especially your last one, and the health problems you've developed since working there?

Juanita: All of my life I have worked for laundries. In New Mexico when I was 16 I started working for laundries. I didn't have any education, so that’s the only kind of work that I can do. I worked in Colorado and New Mexico in laundry departments, and when my husband was over in the service, I worked in laundries in Kansas. To get paid you get such a long way;

When I started working at my last job at Uniclean, it was in 1969. My hearing was a little bad then, but nothing much. It was in the wintertime when they'd start leaving the doors open that it started to get bad. You'd always catch all that cold. They'd leave the doors open all winter. One day my legs were hurting me so bad that I had to leave and go down to the health center. They told me that I had some arthritis too. So from then on I started to get sicker. The more I worked there, the sicker I got. I used to hear fine, but now I can't really hear at all.

In 1973 I had to go for ear surgery. I didn't have anyone to take care of me, so I just stayed two days in the hospital and went back to work. I didn't have any choice.

They told me I had to go back, even though the doctor told me not to go back so soon. From that point on I started getting deafer. The doctors had told me that the operation would enable me to hear, but then two months later when I went back for more hearing tests, they said that I wouldn't be able to hear after all.

BMR: You've since been fired. Can you tell us what happened, why you were fired from that job?

Juanita: In November of last year I had to go down to Texas for a few days. Someone in my family was sick, and so they gave me a few days off from the laundry to go down. I left on a Friday afternoon so I wouldn't miss too much work. Well, my car broke down and so I called my boss, and he said he'd send my paycheck down there so I could get my car fixed to come back to work. Well, he just never did send the check. I called him back about it and he said he'd send it, but I waited two weeks and he never did send it. Finally, I borrowed some money from my aunt to fix my car so I could get back.

When I got back there I asked him why he never did send the check. Well, I owed him about $80 from some money that I had borrowed, and he said he wanted that money immediately, out of that check. I asked him why. Didn't I have a job? Well, all he would say is that he didn't have any openings. They never called me back either. I had worked there for almost nine years.

BMR: What's happened to you with the Welfare Department since you lost your job?

Juanita: On the 23rd of November I started to apply to Social Service. They said they couldn't help me, that I'd have to go to Social Security. I didn't have any groceries in the house by then. I hadn't eaten and I didn't have any money to pay my rent. So, I went to Social Security and Disability and still nobody wanted to help me. Social Security didn't believe that I was disabled. They kept sending me all over to doctors. Finally, they sent me to this one doctor who gave me a really good examination. He said I had a disc out in my back, loss of hearing, and a broken rib, and he wrote a letter to Social Security saying that I was disabled.

But I still haven't heard anything from them. That's been almost a year now. Finally in July Social Services said that they'd help me, but that I'd have to pay it all back to them if I got retroactive money from Social Security. So, finally in July I started getting $164.00/month from Social Services.

I'm behind in rent. My utilities went up. I had to let them take my phone away because I didn't have any money for anything. I had a hard time getting food stamps. I had gone to agencies to try and get some help when I broke my rib and when I had the surgery on my ear, so that I wouldn't have to go back to work so soon, but they didn't want to help me.

UPA/LNS

Sometimes I think it's really terrible what people think about poor people. Rich people don't even care if we die because they have everything they need and we don't have anything.

When they did the last surgery on my ear it took 4 hours instead of 2 1/2. They said the infection was very close to my brain, and that they weren't trying to help my hearing anymore, but that they were just trying to keep the infection away from my brain. They said they could help me so that at least I could use a hearing aid to hear some, but sometimes I have money to buy the batteries and sometimes I don't. So sometimes I can't even use it when I can't even buy the batteries.

BMR: When welfare wouldn't help you after getting fired, and Social Security was insisting that you weren't disabled, did you try looking for another job?

Juanita: After I got fired, I went looking for another job, but people didn't want to give me a job, with me being like this. I didn't tell people that I was deaf, but they could tell. I didn't answer their questions right. At one place, when the man started to give me a polygraph, I couldn't answer the questions right. I read lips a lot, and sometimes I can hear if people talk loudly enough, but I couldn't see the man who was giving me the polygraph, and he talked pretty soft. He asked me what was wrong with my hearing, and so I had to tell him the truth. Everywhere I went they noticed me right away and wouldn't hire me.

When I had to work, I liked my work, but no one will hire me now.

I think I wouldn't be deaf now if I hadn't had to go right back to work after my surgery, but work wouldn't let me off and welfare wouldn't help me, not even with food stamps. I should never have had to go right back to work. All that noise and then all the steam and then cold air from the open doors in the winter. You're not supposed to be working in a place like that after surgery. I used to catch colds real easily, and that's also why I got arthritis.

They think you are made out of iron. So, finally my hearing got worse and worse, until my other ear got infected too. I'd feel it bothering me down into my throat and into my sinuses. Standing all the time at work, my knees would get so weak that my legs would shake. Even walking here in the house I'd fall over. My joints go out.

BMR: Why do you think you were fired? Do you think it was because of your hearing?

Juanita: My hearing, and probably because I was so old, or probably that he just wanted someone new. Also everyone would ignore me and talk about me behind my back because of my not hearing. No one was friendly to me there.

In hiring they'd go for the good-looking young girls, not for experience. At Uniclean, like all the other laundries I've worked at, in the departments that I worked in like shirt pressing, there were only women in those departments. Men had different jobs from the women's jobs.

At Uniclean they would call the other women up to the office to talk about wages, but they'd never call me. One time they said they were going to give us a raise, and do you know what they gave us? A raise of 2¢ an hour one year and that was it. Other women used to get more money than I did. When I started there I started with $1.35 an hour. The highest I ever got to was $2.35 an hour with all the years that I had worked there. And I knew that many other women were getting more than me; some who hadn't worked any longer there than me, and some who were newer.

BMR: Did any of the women ever try to organize a union, or do anything else to try and get better conditions there?

MORE ON PAGE 14
The J. P. Stevens Company has been found guilty of violating the National Labor Relations Act 15 times more than any other company in American history. It has been convicted of tax evasion, discriminatory employment practices, the firing and threatening of pro-union employees, and the coercion of employees through interrogation.

Wages in the Stevens plant average 31% below the average national factory wage, and health hazards are three times as high as the national minimum health standards allow.

Please boycott J.P. Stevens products. As the national boycott against J. P. Stevens grows, the company uses more and more names under which to sell its products to fool consumers. Please clip the card, reproduced below, and carry it with you to watch for and avoid products made by Stevens. To join in pickets being planned to coincide with January white sales, please call 321-7467, or 355-8209.

Boycott

J.P. STEVENS
PRODUCTS