Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 10

Microelectronics—Does It Byte,

Advances in sensor technology over
the last 30 years have influenced al-
most all aspects of working life. Many
jobs have been completely automated
and many more are now carried out with
the aid of computers. Jobs have actual
ly been created both through the grow-
th of the computer industry itself,
and through the expansion of tasks
which are now made feasible as a re-
sult of the introduction of computers.
Making and selling computers is very
big business: it is reckoned to be
second only to oil on the world market.

The impact on working life that has
taken place so far is likely to be
overshadowed by the future impact of
new developments in technology. Fears
that computers were taking over in the
1950s were common but those views were
discredited or forgotten when drastic
changes did not occur. However, mach-
ines are now being developed capable
of storing large quantities of infor-
mation on a few square millimeters of
a silicon chip and these can be manu-
factured at a fraction of the cost of
the circuits of traditional computers.
These developments make available a
new generation of computer. These are
built up from pre-programmed micro-
computers or microprocessors capable
of undertaking specific tasks previ-
ously unsuitable for automation. The
cost of one microprocessor is now
around $8 - the 1977 sales reached
$235 million. It is these miniature
circuits which enable desktop calcu-
lating machines which would have cost
several hundred dollars ten years ago
to be replaced now by a pocket calcu-
lator.

Because of the prospective changes
in working patterns and employment,
some observers are heralding the se-
cond industrial revolution - age of
information - for a whole range of
tasks which are now performed either
mechanically or manually will soon
be performed electronically.

Micros can control production lines
and the assembly process - an indus-
trial robot can assemble eight parts
of a typewriter in 45 seconds. Factory
maintenance staff will become obsolete
since the computer can be programmed
to look after itself. All that will
be required is a small group of highly
skilled technicians/programmers.

All clerical work is vulnerable.
Many information handling tasks have
already been mechanized - indexing
systems, accounting machines - but
machines now available will fundament-
ally transform secretarial work. Simi-
lar radical changes will occur in
banks, large stores, travel agencies
and hotels. Technical work is similar-
ly threatened - in design, the number
of draftspersons required will decline
as even a simple computer system can
"draw" 25 times faster than a skilled
person. Cheaper microprocessors will
lead to an expansion of computer sales
to smaller organizations.

It is possible that the reduced
number of jobs available that may
result from the introduction of micro-
electronics into industry could be
compensated for by the creation of
new jobs, such as the manufacture of
consumer goods capitalizing on the
new technology: TV games, pocket
calculators, digital watches. Alter-
natively, workers could transfer to
other work. After all, new technology
in agriculture, mining, railways,
textiles and energy production has
repeatedly changed the nature of
work in these areas and microelectro-
nics could simply be another fairly
slow and gradual process of adapta-
tion.

However, this may not happen. In
the past, displaced workers have
been absorbed by the labor-intensive
service industries, the major growth
area since the war. However, now it
is these areas which will be affected.
Over half the workforce is now employ
ed in services of some kind, compared
with 30% in 1964 - the majority of
these workers are women.

Before discussing the possible
effects of the age of information on
women's lives, it is worth looking
at some likely areas of change in
employment.

There is a direct application of
computerized techniques to routine
office work, previously relatively
unautomated. The development of word
processing machinery is having the
most significant effect on office
work. A word processing machine is
an electric typewriter with a memory.
The operator types the required text
into the machine and previously
typed passages can be edited or new
material included. The machine can
reproduce stored passages in differ-
ent typefaces and to specified
column widths. A word processor can
perform typing tasks at ten times
the rate of an average secretary.
With the introduction of these
machines, it becomes feasible to
store progressively more information
electronically, and this will enable
direct access by users to informa-
tion, making obsolete many filing,
library and secretarial staff.

The service industries (employ-
ing most women) will be the
most affected by this second
industrial “revolution.”

Word processors also remove any
element of skill or experience from
typing - page layout is done by the
machine. The typist loses control
over the machine and is restricted to
merely feeding the processor with
words.

Although ideally workers should be
relieved of tedious, repetitive work,
the effects on employees is not al-
ways ideal. In England, one union
demanded that Word Process Operators
be paid "danger pay" as compensation
for the extra strains they experienc-
ed at the job. The payment of this
danger money as compensation for ill
health resulting from the introduc-
tion of new office machinery seems a
very short-sighted and reactionary
tactic for a trade union to adopt.
Unfortunately, there are many parallel
examples to be found in industry
health and safety. Campaigns need to
be mounted to eradicate the basic
hazards, not absorb them for a few
extra dollars a year.

One further stage in the automation
of office work is the integration of
word processing machinery into the
telecommunications network. Satellite
mail can transfer, for example, a
letter from one office to another any-
where in the world - eliminating the
need for postal staff. Manufacturers
are encouraged by the fact that equip-
ment costs continue to fall.

Another new development involves
the capabilities of computers linked
to a modified television set via the
telephone. This will affect office
work as well as being available to
private households. This new medium,
viewdata, has been devised for pro-
ducing, storing and communicating
selected information from a vast data
bank. The system is currently being
exploited by television companies
and the post office in England.

Banking has been at the forefront
of computerization with a wide-spread
switch to electronic storage of in-
formation on customer accounts. Non-
cash transactions are estimated to
triple between 1970 and 1980. The
first stage was the creation of cen-
tral records of customer accounts
accessed by terminals located in bank
branches. The second area of compu-
terization has been inter-bank trans-
fers. Data transmission between com-
puter centers is now taking over from
postal communication as the main
method of transferring money between
banks. Cash dispensers can identify
customers and carry out transactions.
Electronic funds transfer systems
could be introduced where cash trans-
actions are replaced by credit at the
point of sale, with the funds being
transferred from buyer to seller
electronically.

In insurance, the introduction of
computers has followed a similar
pattern. The Nora report on "L'infor-
matisation de la société," commissioned
by the French Government predicted
that the banking and insurance sec-
tions would lose 30 percent of their
employees over the next ten years as
a result of automation.

In commerce, the most significant
development has been the link of auto-
matic inventory control cash registers.
Sales recorded on cash registers in
the store can be automatically relay-
ed to a computer in a central ware-
house. This calculates the demand
for replacement goods from the manu-
facturer and issues orders for goods
to be delivered to the store when its
stock levels fall to a minimum level.
These surveillance techniques also
record how fast and accurately each
employee works.

So far, large employment reductions
as a result of technological change
have been restricted to particular
industries, such as printing and pub-
lishing or the watch industry in
Switzerland. In future, the changes
in productivity resulting from the
application of the new technologies
are likely to have a very significant
impact on employment in the labor-in-
tensive service industries. If the
rate of growth of output in the office
sector continues at the past rate of
approximately six percent, then em-
ployment of office staff could fall
by 20-25% over the next ten years.
This could mean that of the 18-19
million typists and secretaries in
Western Europe, five million could
lose their jobs in the next ten years.
The estimates for the manufacturing
sector are equally high.

Although the development of micro-
processors may lead to new markets
for information products and conse-
quently increased employment in some
areas, contrarily, their application
in new industries or services will
lead to decreased employment. The
microprocessor manufacturing industry
itself is not apparently labor-inten-
sive. One forecast suggests that the
mass market in 1981 for the most
advanced silicon chip will be 20,000
devices a year and will require less
than 1,000 people to manufacture.
Unlike the 19th century industrial
revolution where steam power replaced
physical labor, but was associated
with such an expansion in demand and
markets that there was increased
demand for labor to tend the machines,
in the new industrial "revolution"
more jobs are likely to be lost than
gained.

Demographic trends compound the
situation. The labor force will be
younger and 2.4 million larger by
1991 and an even higher proportion
of married women will be seeking
work.

How will women be affected or
involved? Women now comprise about
two-fifths of the workforce. Most of
these women's earnings are essential
to the family budget. Women work
primarily in service industries and
particularly in those likely to be
adversely affected by microelectronics.

It is not unlikely that the hoary
old attitudes will be resurrected.
Women are often considered a soft
option for unemployment. As after
the wars, women will no longer be
needed in the labor force, so charg-
es may be made that women are "steal-
ing" jobs from men; there may be
increased emphasis on the importance
of mothers personally caring for their
young children; the limited effects
of the Equal Pay and Sex Discrimination
Acts could be partially dissipated as
women workers in offices, banks and
shops will find their traditional job
opportunities blocked and their promotional prospects lessened still further.

The health of women workers who
stay in employment could suffer.
Visual display unit operators -
mainly women - feel stress, resulting
in eye problems, dizziness, fatigue,
claustrophobia, although it is argued
that a properly sited VDU, coupled
with sufficient and frequent rest
periods, would not be harmful.

Some companies screen workers for
eye defects before employing them on
VDUs. However, screened workers are as
vulnerable to the health risks creat-
ed by these machines as those who
were rejected. As with the payment of
danger money, it is again a diversion
from the need to work for the elimina-
tion of any health hazard.

Where the computer does not elimina-
te the need for a human operator al-
together, it has been associated with
an increase in the intensity of work,
whether this be for design engineer
or typist. Automation has been obser-
ved to make jobs short-cycled and
repetitive. The room for decision
making is reduced, the pace of work
and attitude to work becomes determin-
ed by the machine. Work performance
can be recorded and monitored. All
this creates feelings of frustration,
alienation and stress, and this af-
fects the worker's health.

One area in which the scope for
female employment may increase is
education. People of all ages from 5
upwards will need to be trained or
retrained; will need to learn how to
live with computers in their homes;
will have to adapt to a leisure so-
ciety and to learn how to fill the
space left by work. Some believe that
knowledge will replace land, labor
and capital as the fundamental element
in industry, creating long-term struc-
tural unemployment, so we must engage
in a massive and therefore labor
intensive expansion of the education
system. Such a system should be
relevant to current social needs,
pleasurable and designed to upgrade
the all-essential knowledge base.
Whether this will happen is another
question.

If this rate of technological
change does become an accepted part
of our lives, it could produce other
positive changes in women's employ-
ment prospects. An environment where
workers would expect to perform sev-
eral different types of jobs during
their working lives, punctuated by
periods of appropriate training, may
emerge. In this environment, years
spent raising children would not
have the same dramatic effect on
mother's career prospects as happens
now.

Microelectronics will also affect
women in the other side of their
working lives - at home. It has been
argued that certain occupations and
professions could become home-based
"cottage" industries. This could
have both positive and negative
implications - it enables people who
are tied to their homes - mothers
breastfeeding, with young children,
handicapped - to enter the workforce.
However, workers could become isola-
ted despite sophisticated communica-
tion methods. Apart from losing any
potential social pleasure or stimu-
lus which may be derived from work,
workers are very susceptible to ex-
ploitation where trade unions cannot
organize effectively (as homeworkers
find now).

With employment prospects shrinking,
women should perhaps be looking for-
ward to starting all those activities
that they have been unable to begin
for so long. However, there would
have to be a considerable change in
emphasis in the male-oriented and
costly leisure business before this
could happen. At present, women usual-
ly make it possible for men to have
leisure while they stay at home with
the children, do the garden, look
after the house.

It is the way that we cope with the
"temporary employee displacement"
that is so important. In Britain,
attempts to understand and plan for
the future are now being made. They
have provided for a study of advanced
office technology looking at how tele-
communications might enable more
people to work at home and the train-
ing they would require. But such
worthwhile initiatives appear minimal, set
against the potential for future
change.

We must fight how we distribute
the wealth within this country, un-
less we want a few millionaire chip
designers and everyone else out of
work.

A basic social wage should be
developed, available to all those
who do not work - this should alter
the prevailing attitude which pro-
motes the desirability of work. Women
must become fully involved in their
trade unions, wherever possible.

We should work toward the eradication
of basic health hazards, better con-
ditions for part-time workers, the
swift creation of retraining schemes
for workers with outmoded skills.

Although it is possible that some
greatly desired social ideals could
be incorporated into this future,
it seems unlikely that this will
happen unless we start asserting our-
selves and demand control of all
aspects of our lives.

Reprinted from Women's Report, a
feminist newspaper from England.