IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

Rules:
1. Fix obvious OCR errors (like '0' instead of 'O', '1' instead of 'l')
2. Preserve the original line breaks and text blocks.
3. Preserve the original meaning and historical context.
4. Do not add any additional text.
5. Do not delete any text.
6. Process EVERY line - do not skip any content.

Corrected text:

Gamesmanship Spells Defeat

Working Women's Action Group

The Women's Workforce Organizing
Committee, a newly formed group in
Denver, distributed a critical book
review at a nursing conference held
the first week of December.

Among the management-oriented books
which are required reading for nur-
sing students at Colorado General Hos-
pital is one that outdoes all others
in putting women down and in opposing
efforts to better the conditions of
work for the vast majority of women.
The title of the book, written by
Betty Lehan Harragan, is Games Mother
Never Taught You: Corporate Games-
manship for Women. It is being vigor-
ously promoted in government "affir-
mative action" projects across the
country, apparently in an effort to
undermine union organizing. The book
offers women the illusive promise of
personal success instead of giving us
the skills and vision necessary to
assure improvement in the working
conditions and opportunities of wo-
men in general.

In reviewing critically the contents
of this book, the Committee hoped to
alert women to the way feminist goals
are being turned upside down by ed-
ucators who attempt to further indi-
vidual and corporate interests in
the name of “women's liberation.”

The first chapter of the book is
titled "Working is a game women never
learned to play." The idea is
that being an executive is the only
"work" worthy of the name. Women are
warned not to get into unionized jobs
even if they pay better than non-
unionized ones, because if you are in
a job that is unionized you “have no
place to go" careerwise. This holds
for all skilled work, manual work,
and service work, as well as staff
positions in education, research, or
other professional areas (like nur-
sing, which is called a "narrow pro-
fession"). Only jobs having to do
with management and promotion are
worthy of our aspirations as women.
In pursuing the "CEO" (Chief Exec-
utive Position), "Many women will
discover that they have a knack for
the game; others will need more and
longer practice sessions; some may
decide they'll never be any good and
drop out entirely. But even this last
group will benefit from understanding
the game because everyone who works
for pay in American organizations
is part of this national sport, if
only a cheerleader or part of the
clean-up force." (p.35)

The author's thesis is an attack
on affirmative action because her
thrust is to describe the grim reality
of "getting ahead" in terms which
automatically exclude the majority of
working people, and then to convince
the losers that they just weren't per-
severing enough, clever enough, etc.
It is an attack on women because we
are made to feel "deficient" if we
balk at getting into big-time manager-
ial work (even if this means dis-
regarding quality patient care, for
instance, in the case of nurses). At
the same time, we are given false
promises that if we behave like men
we'll be treated like men. Actually,
we would probably be laughed off the
stage as she suggests.

We are also promised by Ms. Harragan
that if we play the game well, some-
day we may be in a position to change
the rules. There is no evidence to
support that—the only times institu-
tions we work in have become less bru-
talizing is when many people, primar-
ily workers, have organized to change
the rules. The author has not an ounce
of respect for people who actually do
the work in our society, and even less
for those who attempt to organize in
their own interests or for the public
in general who demand quality perfor-
mance from us.

PUBLIC INTEREST

Besides attacking working people as
losers, and depreciating those of
us who would like to do "meaningful
work" in the public interest instead
of pursuing “careers,” the author de-
grades us as human beings over and
over again by discounting working peo-
ples' struggles for better conditions.
She declares that the drive for money
is the only goal worthy of our ener-
gies. “Facing up to the brutal reality
that the unemotional accumulation of
money is a prime indicator of female
coming-of-age may be agonizingly
hard for many women, but every teen-
ager can tell you that growing up is a
painful experience." (p.230)

What about working peoples’ strug-
gles against harmful chemicals in
the factories or fields, against un-
safe machinery, bad lighting, intol-
erable noise levels, heat, cold, lack
of childcare, and lack of sanitary fac-
ilities? What about struggles against
speed-up, involuntary overtime, har-
assment and systematic discrimination?
These are not mentioned at all in a
book whose first chapter is titled
“Working is a game women never learned
to play."

We are told that the quickest route
to success is to cater to our immed-
iate supervisors, even if this means
crass manipulation to protect her/
his ego at the expense of other wo-
men. We are told to eat lunch and so-
cialize only with people on our own
level or above, to learn the language
and deceptive habits of men, while all
the time "keeping your eye on the
ball" (getting ahead). Whose interests
are really served when nursing instru-
ctors separate themselves from stud-
ents, when RNs separate themselves
from LPNs, and when head nurses sep-
arate themselves from staff? Is this
the kind of "liberation" we are look-
ing for as women?

FREQUENT CHANGES

Ms. Harragan advises women to change
jobs frequently and not lay stress on
the development of expertise in the
work we do. Men get ahead by defending
their prerogatives and using their
wits, she says, not by offering val-
uable services to the public. Women
should do likewise. Such advice, be-
sides dehumanizing us, discounts the
very real obstacles women face as a
group and the very real risks we run
when we attempt to play it cool and
rough. One false move and we could be
out on the street, or begging for a
job of any kind, at minimum wage.

All this makes little difference to

the author of Games Mother Never Taught

You because it is evident to the read-
er by the time she has read through to
the end that Ms. Harragan is not in-
terested in educating us as she is in
entertaining us, and in serving the
companies and institutional bureau-
cracies we work in by keeping us down
and out, unorganized and powerless,
and awestruck by the fact that a few
women are being permitted to "rise a-
bove their station" and get into pos-

itions where they can push other people

around for their own advantage. In
short, her only interest is in selling
her book.

We are not told what Ms. Harragan's
own experience is in the “corporate
game," but on the last page of her
book we are informed: “Betty Lehan
Harragan is a management consultant
devoted to women's equal participa-

tion in the private enterprise system.

She teaches a course on corporate
gamesmanship at the Womanschool and
lives in New York City." Working wo-
men can do without her and the teams
of women living high off government
grants, promoting books such as hers
in the name of “nursing leadership,"
“executive nursing," and the so-
called "affirmative action" for women.

The Women's Workforce Organizing
Committee suggests that readers look
critically at other books assigned to

CU nursing students, such as Manag-
ing Woman and The Executive Nurse, both

of which also attempt to draw nurses
into corporate-style thinking. On the
positive side, articles criticizing
this perspective can be found in Wo-
men and Health, a journal which can be
found at the Denison Library, Colorado
General, published by SUNY, College at
Old Westbury, Old Westbury, N.Y., 11568,
and Science for the People (especial-
ly March/April and May/June issues,
1978), published at 897 Main St., Cam-

bridge MA., 02139. These latter are pre-

dictably, not assigned to CU students.
Women interested in working with

others to better conditions in nursing

and other occupations can contact the

Women's Workforce Organizing Committee,

722-3210 or 572-1440. The group meets
at the Mennonite Church, 9th Avenue

and Elati, the first Saturday of every

month, 11:00 a.m. Childcare is pro-
vided in the same location.

Daly: Voyaging Beyond

Gyn/Ecology: The Metaethics of Rad-
ical Feminism

Mary Daly

Beacon Press, 1978

$14.95/Cloth

Judith McDaniel

"This book voyages beyond Beyond
God the Father," Mary Daly announces
in the Preface of Gyn/Ecology: The
Metaethics of Radical Feminism. She
is right. The book is a voyage and a
voyage beyond.

Friends have said to me, "I don't
agree with the Preface" or “the way
she uses words is awkward to me."
Please, keep reading. The center of
this book contains material no woman
should be without. No political theo-

ry or action can ever be approached
in the same--pre-Gyn/Ecology--way
again.

The voyage to the center of the
book is difficult. Mary Daly has to
use an archaic/awkward language,
which she recreates and reclaims. One
wishes for her a form neither poetry
nor prose, for much of the beginning
of the book is a Meta-linguistic poem
written without poetic lines.

The center of the book--the physical
and emotional center--is horrifying.
The facts are horrible: the "prac-
tice" of suttee in India (widow mur-
der); the "practice" of footbinding
in China; genital mutilation of wo-
men in Africa; European witchburning
and American gynecology/gynocide as
practiced by the medical and psych-
ological “professions.” All done in
the name of ritual, of common prac-
tice, all done to create in woman a
man's idea of normality. The repe-
tition, re-naming of the details of
centuries of woman hating/killing
will rivet the voyager. And following
each horror is always Mary Daly's
voice, her analysis—not distant,
not cool—but heated and brilliantly
pointed. Nothing, she shows us
again and again, in these "common
practices" is common or natural.

They are cruel and unusual punish-
ments meted out to women because we
are women: none escape.

And after each horror, she shows us
the collusion: the scholars who—in
the name of science or art or theolo-
gy—approve, minimize or distort the
effect of these “common practices" on
millions of women.

It was difficult for me to follow
Mary Daly out of the center of this
book. I felt weighted, overwhelmed
with unwanted knowledge I never went
to be without.

To voyage, I am reminded, is diffi-
cult. But not to voyage is to die of
stasis.

The final section of this book is
crafted to spin us out beyond this
new knowledge into a time/space in
which such genocide is exorcised and
female bonding begins to create anew.

I confess to being unspun/undone
by the journey. But the book sits
here on my desk. And I shall try
again. And again.

WINGS...
a janitorial service

| specializing in small businesses/apartment complexes
..free estimates...

364-4965