national

Women Shut Down Military Recruiters

Women Against Imperialism

Fifty angry women and children converged on the Armed Forces Recruiting Station in Oakland, California on Saturday, August 20th pouring blood on the walls and forcing the recruiters to lock their doors for over an hour. No sooner had the picket line been formed than two ten-foot ladders appeared against the wall of the recruiting station. Women scrambled up the ladders to put up a huge banner: “Victory to the FMLN/FDR! Defend Nicaragua! U.S. Imperialism Out of Central America!" At this, the Oakland Police came pushing into the demonstration throwing one woman to the ground. As a policeman grabbed the banner from the wall, the entire demonstration surrounded him and chased him up the block, pointing fingers and chanting “Who are the real terrorists? The Oakland Police!" This incident was a vivid reminder of the fact that the police are very much a part of the military machine.

A spokeswoman explained: "We came out today as women to say NO! to the war machine, and to show our support for the people struggling in Central America, and to say that we are determined to be liberated as women. We won't stand quietly by while the U.S.

Support The

Women Against Imperialism

We are women determined to confront the U.S. war machine. We can no longer stand to live in a country that spends 400 billion dollars a year on war, but that "can't afford" human necessities like health care, food and housing: a country that's cut 97% of federal funding for abortion, but that's sterilized Black, Puerto Rican, Mexican and Native American women at rates of 20-45%. We're sick of watching Congress send Marines and CIA agents to prop up the bloodiest dictatorships and sends millions of dollars of military aid to El Salvador while the CIA leads 12,000 contras to destabilize the revolutionary government of Nicaragua. We say "Nicaragua is Free Today! Quarantine the U.S.A!" Holding up a World War I recruiting poster entitled "Feminine Patriotism" (depicting three women: one with a broom, a soldier, and a nurse), the speaker said: "This country wants us as women to play a certain role in this war drive. It wants us to be the patriotic mothers, the ones who keep the home fires burning as the boys go off to war. It wants us to be the sex objects and punching bags to absorb the frustrations of a violent society in crisis. When we reject these things, they say fine, be liberated. You can join the police. You can be Private Benjamin. Help patrol Third World people. Help kill people in El Salvador. But we reject all of these roles. We want something different for ourselves, for our children, for our little girls. We know from the example of the revolutionary women of Central America that women don't have to put up with this violence. We can join with people all around the world who are fighting this disgusting system. We're determined to participate in liberating all of society and ourselves as women."

Before the demonstration ended, women in the picket line poured blood on the recruiting station wall. A spokeswoman said: "We remember the 40,000 killed by Salvadoran death squads trained and funded by the CIA; we remember Commandante Ana Maria, leader of the FMLN, stabbed 81 times with an icepick; we remember the 2000 massacred at Sabra and Shatila. We know these armed forces have blood on their hands. We as women won't allow business as usual while this genocide continues!"

The demonstration, called by Women Against Imperialism, was part of an ongoing women's campaign to confront the U.S. war machine. The organizers said "We want to confront U.S. militarism everywhere it goes, whether it's military recruiters in their offices or on our campuses, the CIA, the FBI, or the police. Today they had to lock their doors for an hour, but we'll be back again and again. We remember the movement of the '60s, in which women played a leading role in obstructing the war machine at home. We want to build a campaign and a movement which will fight until this disgusting system is defeated." Contact Women Against Imperialism about ways to get involved in the campaign, or contact us about similar work going on in your area: 3543 18th St. #14; San Francisco, CA 94110; 415-652-4401 ex. 656.

Fight Against American War Makers

in the world. In America today, every institution is becoming militarized--post offices function as draft registration centers, colleges identify and punish resisters, police on the buses and in the schools, killer cops murdering 400 Black and Mexican people every year! We want this country and our lives to change, and that is why we are building a women's campaign to oppose this country's drive towards war.

The U.S. war machine is headquartered here, where we live. The counterinsurgency wars that are killing thousands of oppressed people around the world begin in the recruiting stations in our neighborhoods, conjured up by the expressions "Flag and Family," “God, Home, and Country," "as American as Motherhood and apple pie." When Ronald Reagan calls for “Moral Rearmament," he is saying that the U.S. desperately needs us to be the kind of White Womanhood who will “help America become Number One again." Our rulers need white working-class women to be subordinate partners in an oppressive system: cheerleaders for war, the ones who keep the home fires burning, raise the next generation of little soldiers and police, and work low-paid, dead-end "women's jobs." The only kind of "liberation" America holds out is equal participation in all the “rights and responsibilities" of the empire--"equal rights" to be killer cops, to be members of the armed forces, to

MORE ON PAGE 20