international

Wages, Strikes, Pickets And Occupations

(reprinted from Gaining Ground produced independently by Anarcha-Feminists, Ireland)

As the economic recession deepens all Maggie Thatcher can tell us to do is tighten

ireland

our belts—as if there is any room left to tighten! The unemployment figures in Northern Ireland have been soaring bringing increased poverty and depression, on top of which significant cuts in public spending, in housing, social services and health care have brought many people to their knees. Of all the groups affected none have been hit more so than women—they have had to carry the burden of unemployment and public spending cuts.

Firstly women are most likely to be unemployed—they work in the most vulnerable sectors, catering, nursing etc., and many women workers do so on a part-time basis—and part-time workers are always easier to get rid of. In the home they are coping with lower wages, rising costs, poor housing and when governments talk about cuts in welfare they mean that women will now have to look after the sick and the disabled who can't have hospital beds, the elderly who can't have home helps, and the children who can't have nurseries, as well as their husbands, sons and daughters who can't find work.

It is no wonder that the use of tranquilisers has been rising at an alarming rate in Northern Ireland for many women it's the only way that they can cope with the realities around them. Over the past week three groups of women workers have taken action (sometimes, along with men) and have refused to accept the decisions of others.

STITCHERS

Women who work in the clothing and allied trades in Northern Ireland have been feeling the pinch of unemployment for some time now, and for many the result has been poverty for their families as often their wage is what keeps them just above the poverty line. In times of recession, women have always been hit first and hardest of all workers.

Women stitchers are sitting in at the moment in Romac and in Crawford and Harte to demand assurances about their holiday pay and wages. This situation has arisen because of the close-down of two other firms owned by the same company—Dima and S.O. McCabes. These two employ 50 people between them making garments and they have informed workers after a receiver had been called in that the firms will close down next week.

Incensed by the short notice and by the precarious nature of their jobs, women in Romac and Crawford and Harte decided to sit in until they had assurances that they were getting their week's wages and holiday pay.

The owners of the firms maintain that both are viable but the workers' union, the National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers is not so sure given the number of stitching firms which have closed in the last few months. As yet the sit-in has not been given official recognition.

PURDYSBURN NURSES

While the government is busy cutting jobs, complaining of wastage, many workers are finding that they are working twice as hard making up for understaffing. This very issue has prompted the threatened strike by nurses in Purdysburn Hospital, where severe understaffing is causing problems for both staff and patients. The COHSE spokesperson in the hospital—the union that represents most of the staff there—said that the patients are receiving no psychiatric care at the moment as all the nursing staff can manage to do is to keep the patients quiet, (that usually means administering large doses of drugs). For example on one three-hour shift, one nurse was expected to take care of 39 patients on a ward, some of whom were diabetic, epileptic, and some needed special care! Another nurse received hospital treatment after being attacked in the special unit for violent patients—when staffing was not up to the required minimum. As well as this, skin complaints have developed in patients from lack of baths again due to poor staffing.

Understaffing has always been a problem but because of recent government cuts overtime in the hospital was axed 7 months ago which only served to make the whole situation worse. This treatment has been the same in many psychiatric hospitals and indicates the priorities which the government has—the mentally ill come very far down the list because often they cannot speak out for themselves. Similarly the government has always come down hard on nurses knowing that they tend to put their patients first and so are less likely to take strike action. A mass meeting and walkout is planned for the weekend but they will continue to provide emergency cover on the wards during any action they may take.

In the same hospital a woman died at the end of May from drug abuse—when two drugs were prescribed simultaneously which reacted together fatally. It was described as unfortunate that the doctor who prescribed the drugs was not at the inquest to answer questions. It was declared that the doctor was unaware that a combination of the two drugs was fatal—despite the fact that in the past few years medical journals had carried reports to that effect.

The woman, Clare Campbell was admitted to Purdysburn suffering from postnatal depression and died three weeks later. If doctors spent more time talking and listening to their patients instead of using them as guinea pigs or keeping them quiet with drugs Clare Campbell might still be alive.

BALMORAL TESTING CENTRE

As part of the Civil Servants' dispute over pay, eight women from the Vehicle Testing Centre at Balmoral Road, came out on June 12th—the first of a series of pickets and token strikes leading up to an all-out strike at the end of the month. Workers at the centre voted 21-6 for an all-out strike.

Work has been disrupted at the centre no appointments are being made, no post is allowed through, nothing being collected and PSV forms for lorries and large vehicles are not being processed. The women have been fairly successful in stopping the large goods lorries from entering the centre—they estimate around 75% successful, those who did force their way through belonged to small businesses. The T&GWU have already come out in support of the strike.

Disruption at Balmoral Road is likely to continue and the campaign will continue throughout the North's 15 centres with the proposed telephone ban. The women are demanding a 15% improvement with an underpinning minimum increase of £10 per week. The British Government has refused to negotiate or allow the unions the right to go to arbitration. On top of that the government is cutting 75,000 jobs over the next three years—that's around 3,000 in Northern Ireland putting more workers on the dole.

THE

BRITISH GOVERNMENT

SAYS THOSE WHO OPPOSE THEM IN THE NORTH OF IRELAND ARE CRIMINALS

Yet there is LEGISLATION

SPECIAL HOLDING POWERS

SUPPORT THE IRISH HUNGER STRIKERS’ CALL FOR SPECIAL STATUS—

POLITICAL STATUS

~Anarchist Information Group