health

Mental Illness: Myth Or Madness

Lori Bradford

My purpose in writing this article is
to begin to analyze the questions:

How does therapy translate into psy-
chiatric oppression? What are the
feminist therapy movement and the anti-
psychiatric movement? What are the

(or are there any) political connec-
tions between the feminist therapy
movement, the women's movement, and the
anti-psychiatric movement? Can we
create a feminist analysis of psychia-
tric oppression that can be expressed
in the politics of the women's move-
ment?

I think it was about 1972, when I re-
alized I could never grow up and become
a shrink, I must have been about 19 or
20 at the time. I came to this reality
after having already spent two years
of my life in a fairly Freudian psycho-
analysis (going 2 or 3 times a week)
and months of those years in and out of
Colorado Psychiatric Hospital.

In spite of all the therapy I was re-
ceiving, I was still moving in and out
of madness. I began reading lots of
psychoanalytic theories, especially
those on suicide. I also loved to read
all the case histories I could get my
hands on (one of the best is A Mind
That Saved Itself written about 1929
by Clifford Beers) in an attempt to un-
derstand what was happening to me--try-
ing to cure myself.

I was an out-patient when I started
night school. Since I had some practi-
cal experience in dealing with crazy
people, I decided to take an entry level
course in a two-year mental health
worker program, called "Survey of Insti-
tutions". Psychology was the only area
that I was interested in and had
background in. Sounded like a good cure.

Class requirements were to visit sever-
al institutions. Institutions that
housed the mentally ill, the retarded,
the criminal--at the county jail and
juvenile detention homes--were all on
the list. The purpose of the class was
to give the student exposure to working
conditions with patients in different
institutions. I felt terrible during the
entire class, like we were viewing ani-
mals in the zoo.

All too clear in my mind were visions
from the other side. Life in a psy-
chiatric facility, you must understand,
is awful, is boring, is always incredi-
ble. Countless hours of therapy and
playing gin rummy to 5000 still cannot
fill the day. For entertainment we used
to sit around and plot how to “act out"
(engage in some unusual behavior) when
we were expecting visitors or student
nurses on the ward for a while.

Colorado Psychiatric Hospital was a pit
with bars on the windows, no curtains. Once
when a "head shrink" was giving a tour
we acted out a scene to convince the
guests that one of us had recently set
fire to all the curtains. We got into

Page 14 - Big Mama Rag, May 1981

scaring people. And maybe that does
sound bizarre. But, for us, it was like
taking advantage of a stereotype that
only punished us, a little grab at power.

I had a real good friend who got out
of the hospital and moved into an apart-
ment building right across the street
(for a false sense of security). The
landlord informed all his tenants to
leave the porch lights on all night
because there were two mental hospitals
in the neighborhood (Mount Airy was
just down the street) and that you ne-
ver knew when one of "them" might have
escaped. Lou never responded in order
to keep the apartment, but was always
in a running battle to turn off the
porch lights.

Now I suppose if the staff had rea-
lized that we were organizing group
scare tactics, it would have been
viewed as part of our "mad symptomology".
But to people locked up together in a
drugged environment that was enforced
by the threat of physical violence
you do what you can for a little relief.
The most resented were the student
nurses because we had to talk to them
as part of our therapy and their train-
ing.

So anyway, the reality that hit me
at this beginning stage of my education
was that I just couldn't study and
train to be a mental health worker.

The training itself was, to me, as op-
pressive as the hospital conditions

we were being trained to eventually en-
force. I came out as an ex-inmate to
the class, voiced my objections to the
program, and got out quick.

About 20 women shared one large bed-
room at the hospital. We had these
ugly beds, with bars at the head
and foot. The practice of psychiatry
for women is to drug, shock, and talk
them right back into the lifestyle
that drove them crazy in the first
place; back to maintain the nuclear
family and the role of motherhood. One
woman, Janice, came to Denver to a con-
vention with her husband. She finally
cracked up and her husband committed
her to the hospital and returned after
the weekend to the east coast. Her
symptoms were a gradual, yet increasing
inability to do anything but be depres-
sed. She couldn't care for her kids,
or cook, or enter a grocery or depart-
ment store without panicking. Her
panic eventually left her housebound.
Her therapy was Librium by day, chlor-
alhydrates by night, and practice
trips to the store in a drugged fog.
One night she was drugged so heavily
that she slept through her own bowel
movement; she woke covered with feces.
She was re-socialized and returned to
her husband. Success in therapy as
she finally came to view her problems
as her own, learning to live with op-
pression.

Another woman brought in by her hus-
band (both in their 50's)--he complain-

“Laurie White/Big Mama Rag
ed she wasn't keeping the house right.
He demanded they (the hospital) put
her back to normal or he wouldn't take
her back. They began electroconvul-
sive therapy (shock) on her nearly
immediately. As she would come out
of her shock fog during the day, part
of her treatment was to wipe down the
tables in the patient's eating areas.
We often felt sorry for her and tried
to help with her duties; the staff
frowned on our interference. I never
saw any males forced into such a
treatment program.

For a while, the shock removed what-
ever had been troubling her from her
memory; she was released and went home.
Two months later, she was back. They
tried shock again, but it proved inef-
fective. She just wouldn't straighten
out. Her man divorced her and left her
in the hands of a sexist psychiatric
system that would probably have her
hospitalized for life.

Therapy turned oppression, not
through the bad practices of a few evil
psychiatrists, but by an entire system
that turns the social and emotional
problems of countless people into an
illness. The society freed of all ac-
countability allows the medical pro-
fession to apply a cure to the indivi-
dual that belongs to the society.

Professionalism and technology that
favor profit over people are expected
to present a cure. Psychiatry must be
seen in its full role, not just indivi-
dual by individual, but as a system

health

--A Legacy

that maintains traditional social pat-
terns and controls. This aspect of
social control through the miracle of
modern psychiatry has resulted in
heightened psychiatric oppression that
comes in the form of psychosurgery,
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and
over-drugging and forced drugging.
Inmates are faced, in both civil and
criminal commitment (determined unfit
to stand trial or not guilty by reason
of insanity) with an undetermined
length of incarceration. Within the
confines of any psychiatric institution,
patients have no rights to refuse any
treatment or drug experimentation.
Refusal of any treatment is seen as a
symptom of mental disease.

ECT is one form of "treatment" offer-
ed. Many patients are given shock
without informed consent. In other
words, without any real idea of the da-
mage to brain cells, temporary or per-
manent memory loss, and behavioral and
physical "side-effects" that are sure
to follow in one form or another. Con-
venient for the shock therapist, the
patient who refused shock the night
before won't recall her objections
afterwards. Women are the primary
victims of shock treatment.

An older woman I was hospitalized
with had been shocked approximately
every seven years for over half her
life (she was in her 60's). Then
after years on this treatment schedule
they refused to administer any more
ECT--told her it wasn't doing any good.
She begged and begged for shock, and
eventually tried to kill herself after
their continual refusal. She frighten-
ed all of us, to beg for shock...oh
what they can addict you to. It seems
the shrinks can legislate any degree
of adjustment to life that suits them,
and then take it away at will. "Cure"
becomes a tenuous deal at best.

Shock is supposed to ensure
a quick, painless relief of depression
and a faster return to the real world.
In fact, memory loss renders the pa-
tient unable to return to work, school,
home, and social life. (Imagine going to
your bridge club, or any number of
things, and not remembering how to play
the game).

70 to 130 watts of electricity are
passed into the patient's brain through
electrodes attached to the temples for
1/10 to 5/10 of a second, which is
enough to induce convulsions and coma.
The drug anectine is used in conjunc-
tion with shock as a muscle relaxant.
This drug paralyzes the patient's brea-
thing muscles for 2-4 minutes. Anec-
tine is also used in behavior modifi-
cation programs in mental institutions
and jails. The therapist uses the
short period when the patient's breath-
ing stops and is experiencing panic
with a sense of suffocation or drown-
ing, to tell the patient what new or
changed behavior is expected. Anectine

Of Psychiatric Abuse

is a derivative of the South American
poison, curare.

ECT is rarely a cure. Doctors don't
really know what effect ECT has on the
brain. Inmates will tell you it is
torture, not treatment, and yet this is
a standard medical practice.

The ultimate experimental field in
the search to control those institu-
tionalized is psychosurgery. Psycho-
surgery is also a good example of how
psychiatric technology functions for
societal control. Psychosurgery is the
mutilation of non-diseased tissue
which changes the overall emotional
and intellectual responsiveness of the
brain. The variety of operations is
enormous. One neurosurgeon places a
net of electrodes across the frontal
lobes and gradually coagulates the
patient's brain over a period of
months. In Jackson, MS, a neurosurge-
on uses a mutilating operation on
hyperactive children as
young as age five. He describes one
child whose brain he coagulated with
electrodes half a dozen times. The
child is now easier to manage on the
ward, but intellectually he is now
deteriorating. The neurosurgeon re-
fuses to answer questions about the
race of his young patients and de-
clines to let reporters and investiga-
tors see them. But someone slips onto
the wards and discovers three of the
children are black.

Others still use the old-fashioned
knife on the frontal lobes. The area
of the brain attacked also varies
widely, including deeper portions of
it. Even the most refined operations
(amygdalactomy), which avoids damag-
ing the higher centers of the frontal
lobes, still result in effects similar

-Tea Schook/Big Mama Rag

to those of a lobotomy. In Louisville,
a woman is blinded by a pre-frontal
lobotomy. Testimony in a lawsuit
against her surgeon indicates that
this 30-year-old woman was lobotomized
for pain of psychological origin with-
out being given an opportunity for
psychotherapy. In Boston, a depressed
woman is operated on several times
with chronically implanted electrodes
until she refuses further surgery,
tells her surgeon she never wants to
see him again, and expresses rage at
her psychiatrist as well. She kills
herself the first chance she gets, but
the case is reported as gratifying by
her doctors who argue that the woman
must have been recovering from her de-
pression, otherwise she would not have
the energy to kill herself.

Just because it is surgery doesn't
mean that it's therapeutic. Experiments
are underway with permanently im-
planted electrodes in the patient
which will potentially control and
modify the patient’s behavior 24 hours
a day, allowing for both electronic
and physical control over behavior
from a distance without physical con-
tact. This is also seen as the future
method for controlling prisoners out
on parole, under the catch-all therapy
behavior modification. A group of
Boston psychosurgeons writes in the
Journal of the American Medical Assoc-
iation that ghetto riots cannot be
caused by political factors alone and
that violent rioters may suffer from
brain disease. The Justice Department
rewards them with a grant to develop
“screening methods" to find the vio-
lent prone among us and to develop
psychological means for their control.
Even Congress gets into the act and
awards them $500,000 one year and a
million the next. It is no surprise
that ghetto rioters were the first con-
cern of the Boston psychosurgeons,
that black prisoners and children are
among the first victims as psychosur-
geons move into prisons and children's
institutions, and that women and older
people dominate the statistics in the
new wave of psychiatric surgery.

Forced drugging and over-drugging is
the final "treatment" in this list of
horrors. Many hospitals require man-
datory drugging upon admission. Drugs
received in a short-term mandatory
(3-30 days) commitment can leave be-
hind enough "side-effects" to
make anyone appear crazy, and this
symptomology can be reason enough to
be kept for further therapy (see fol-
lowing article on phenothiazines).
Most wards depend on heavy drugging to
keep life at the hospital running
smoothly. Thorazine is advertised as
the modern weapon against mental ill-
ness. Physical violence is frequently
used in the forced administration of
drugs.

Continued next page.

Big Mama Rag, May 1981 - Page 15