Diana Press Letter

On August 10, Elizabeth D'Alessio signed for my letter. I received a letter from her postmarked August 11, but dated July 26. It accompanied a brochure of Diana Press’ Fall 1977 publications, in which my novel was advertised. Her letter neither referred to mine, nor answered one point that I raised. It ended: "Is a visit west in your plans? We'd love for you to see the shop. It is beautiful. Everyone here is doing well." I hope it's the same with you."

Next, I received a letter postmarked August 25 but dated August 15. It began: "We just received your letter!" It was from Laura Kay Brown, who was henceforth to be my contact with Diana Press. Our relationship appeared to improve temporarily. She wrote that the publication date would be "a date no later than October 31, 1977."

At the end of September 1977, I received a bound copy of Seed of a Woman. Copies, Laura told me, had been sent to paperback houses for reprint considerations, and to reviewers. When my attorney saw the book, she pointed out that the copyright was in the name of R.S. Geller and Diana Press, which was a direct contradiction to the terms of the written agreement. When I pointed this out to Laura Brown, she gave no satisfactory explanation as to why copyright had been jointly placed. Given the situation, I requested that Diana Press send a final copy of the book prior to publication. She refused.

bn:

from p.2

At the end of October, Laura Brown went to New York City, she stated, to do publicity for my novel. She was then to come to Buffalo so that we could hopefully clear up some of the problems. On October 26, 1977, five days before the publication date, she called from New York and told me of the attack on Diana Press. On October 28, she called again to inform me that the destruction was quite extensive and my typesetting plates had been destroyed. She said that although Diana Press was insured, they were unsure as to whether they could reschedule my novel for publication. At one point in the conversation, she suggested I might look for another publisher. When I expressed anger at her offhand manner, she replied: "I don't like your attitude." She reassured me that she would definitely come to Buffalo.

I was distraught. I was desperate for more information, but assumed that Diana's phones had been destroyed. Not knowing who else to call, I phoned the Oakland police. After speaking to the investigating officer I realized that their destruction was selective, and their phones might in fact be working.

I phoned Diana Press and spoke to a woman who identified herself as Ann Bernard. She said that while the destruction was quite bad, the loss would be covered by insurance money. She said that they had already begun typesetting anew, and there would probably be only a three-week delay on my novel. The conversation was very amiable and I was greatly encouraged that Diana Press and I would resolve any existing problems. I offered my sympathy and support and asked her to relay this to the rest of the women at Diana Press.

That was the last personal contact I had with anyone from Diana Press. Laura Brown never came to Buffalo and in mid-November, Diana Press sent back my manuscript along with a letter from Laura Brown that stated they could not publish my letter at this time due to the vandalism of the press. The letter ended: "...I know that we would have difficulty making the situation of working with you possible in the future based on our knowledge of your total and complete lack of trust for the women at Diana Press. When a woman feels it is necessary to verify the information she received from a representative of a feminist institution with the police department, the situation is beyond repair."

"At this moment, when the women of Diana Press needed more than ever the support of not only the women's movement at large but those women we directly dealt with, we found that we not only did not have that support, but were thought to be so untrustworthy that we could not even assess the wreckage of our lives ourselves. Therefore, I cannot wish you well in the future. Perhaps after our recovery, women will feel more solicitous and kind, but at the moment, I am unable to wish you well or good luck of any kind."

That was the last I heard from Diana Press.

* * - * * *

I write this letter neither to cause division in the women's movement nor to engage in public debate with Diana Press, but to caution women writers and to inform women in general. I most definitely deplore the vandalism of Diana Press; I, too, am its victim. But the vandalism does not excuse their behavior toward me.

Prisoners: Send Us Stories!

BMR would like to have an issue on women in prison. We want input from as many women prisoners as possible, especially those of you who have not yet raised your voices. Even if you have never written before, please consider writing us a letter on any topic. We would like to hear from those of you who are in jails and prisons in states where there are no support groups on the outside, and those of you in behavioral modification centers across the country.

June 15 is the deadline for copy and graphics. We will not print your name if you don't want to be identified with your letter or story.

Let us hear from you!

(303) 861-1166

Vol. 6 No. 5

The relationship between publisher and author is traditionally an adverse one, similar to that of management and labor. The publisher (management) has the advantage in terms of power, money, and control. I was aware of this and hoped that a feminist press would deal with these things in a more forthright manner. This was not the case. In fact, Diana Press exerted a double control over me: they could break a legal contract with little fear of legal reprisal because if I attempted to receive compensation from a feminist press, especially after the vandalism, I might be branded as a traitor to feminism.

I don't think that I could ever convey the anguish I felt when I thought that my seven years of committed labor on Seed of a Woman had culminated in that last letter from Diana Press. There is no question that my relationship with them was emotionally destructive to me and caused a tremendous setback in my work. But my personal feelings and my work are only part of my concern here.

As a member of the women's movement, I see it as my responsibility to offer criticism of a feminist business. It is difficult to know exactly what the nature of a feminist business should be, but one thing seems sure: if such a feminist business owes its survival to the support of the women's movement, then it must be responsible to us, all of us, the women's movement as a whole, as well as individual women with whom it does business.

Finally, I am determined that Diana Press compensate me for my losses. My attorney has requested that they contact her, but they have not even given us the courtesy of a response. I urge them to contact my attorney within a reasonable amount of time so that I have an alternative in resolving this situation, and am not forced to resort to the legal system.

In Sisterhood and Struggle,  
Ruth Geller  
Buffalo

Conference on Working Women

On Saturday, June 3, the National Commission on Working Women will hold a regional conference in Denver.

The conference will be held to explore and publicize the needs of working women, especially those women on the lower end of the pay scale. Another of its purposes is to formulate policy recommendations at the federal, state, and corporate level concerning the conditions of working women.

150 participants will be selected from women in the following fields: clerical work, service work, retail sales, factory, and trade work. Selection will be based on criteria set by the NCWW. Each individual will be evaluated according to her application.

Travel, meals, and lodging will be paid for selected participants as needed. Childcare will be provided. The conference itself is free.

For applications and more information call the Colorado Commission on Women, 839-2821.

Kathy Pritchett  
723 E. 17th Ave  
Denver, CO 80203