Health Conf. Set

Romey Rainwater

The members of the committee spon-
soring the Womyn's Health and Healing
Conference (WHHC) in Denver this fall
are busy coordinating workshops,
space, tasks and all the logistics
that need to be organized before the
conference begins on October 14th.
These tired but exuberant womyn will
continue to put forth their energies
to provide a conference that will be
meaningful to all womyn.

The theme of the conference is two-
fold: The first emphasis is to bridge
the gap and create pathways between
the political and spiritual dichoto-
mies that presently exist within the
womyn's health care system. The sec-
ond emphasis of the conference is to
develop communications between the
professional and lay womyn in the
health care and other related areas.
The conference committee believes
womyn have a right to information they
can use on a practical basis. This
information will be provided via work-
shops, films, and skits. An example
of some of these workshops are femi-
nism and nursing, womyn in martial
arts, and psychic healing.

It is hoped that the WHHC will bring
womyn from various backgrounds to-
gether to build a strong womyn's
health care system, by drawing on wo-
myn who are involved in the spiritual
and political aspects of health care
as well as womyn who are formal health
care workers. In addition, it is
hoped that the information made avail-

$$$

AND ALL

$$$$$$3$3$

THANK YOU! THANK YOU! THANK YOU! THANK YOU! THANK YOU! THANK YOU! THANK YOU!
TO ALL THE WONDERFUL PEOPLE WHO HELPED WITH OUR BENEFIT:

Velvet Hammer, Leslie Aguiland, June Sommers, Jackie Earkey, Susanne
Pierson, Kathy Kahn, Marie, Deborah Whitman, Pandora, Helen Wolcott, —

Linda Lane, Akice Preston, woodwoman, Dona Calacone, Laurie Wehman, Eileen
Bresnahan, Vicki Piotter, Penni Haworth, Kathy Pritchett, Cindy Cooper,

Lex Taylor's apple pie recipe, Virago, Emerging Woman Press, Mountain

Bell Women Installers Defense Fund, Brewery Workers Local #366 (Coors),
Radical Information Project Bookstore, Judy Bartow, East Denver NOW,

Lith, Woman to Woman, Whole Earth Foods, Alicia's Mexican Restaurant,
Joe's Hair Affair, Saba and Soupy, Women's Health Services Clinic, Woman-
thology, Cedar Barstow, KoLeen, Betty Siever

THE MANY OTHER PEOPLE WHO HELPED US, DONATED, AND BOUGHT

able through this conference will in-
spire womyn to channel their energies
to a more political direction and in-
crease their awareness of health is-
sues. The womyn organizing the con-
ference believe that the dissemination
of this information will enable womyn
to take control of their own bodies,
thereby making revolutionary changes
in the present patriarchal health care
system and create viable alternatives
to better meet womyn's health care
needs.

The conference is being co-sponsored
by the WHHC Committee and the Associ-
ated Women Students of Metropolitan
State College. It will take place at
the Auraria Higher Education Complex
near downtown Denver. Registration
will begin at noon on Friday, October
14th in the Student Activities Center
located on 9th Street between Lawrence
and Larimer, in room 330, and continue
through Sunday, October 16th. Regis-
tration fee and meals are on a sliding
scale. Child-care will be provided.
Saturday night, October 15th, in con-
junction with the conference, Virago
Productions is bringing to Denver a
concert by the Berkeley Women's Music
Collective. Packets containing work-
shop and entertainment schedules will
be available at registration. Friday
evening at 6pm, there will be a wine
and cheese party at the St. Francis
Interfaith Center located on campus at
1060 11th St. All women are invited
to come and register early. For
further information call: 832-2725,
377-1006, 629-3317, or 355-3150.

THINGS.

13th MOON

A LITERARY MAGAZINE PUBLISHING WOMEN
WHOEVER WE CHOOSE TO BE

Poetry @ Reviews @ Fiction @ Graphics

13th Moon is a literary
magazine publishing quality
work by women. Its name is
derived from the lunar
calendar, which has thirteen
months. It commemorates the
time when the moon, as
mediator of our bodies’
rhythms, was the symbol of
spiritual transformation. It
celebrates the opening of an
age where women have all their energies at their
command.

The goal of 13th Moon is to strengthen a women’s
sensibility in literature. We hope that by exploring the
special relationship women have to themselves and to the
world, we will discover literature that is unique, that is
female—that is ours.

Our current issue contains prose by Bernadette
Mayer, poetry by Marge Piercy, Sharon Barba, Louise
Simons, Joyce Odam, Anita Skeen, Louise Bernikow, and
Sandra M. Gilbert, numerous graphics, selections from the
International Exhibition of Visual Writing by Women, and
an extensive review section of small press books,
including a profile of Red Clay Books by Carol J. Pierman.
13th Moon is 96pp, perfect bound with a two-color cover.

( ) subscription 3 issues $4.50

(_) subscription $9.00/institutions
() current issue $1.75

Name
Address

Zip
P.O. Box 3 ® Inwood Station @ New York, N.Y. 10034

struggle

A LESBIAN DOES NOT A FEMINIST MAKE

Vicki Piotter
(This article was written with the acknowledgment that many women are ex-
cused from the criticisms raised here.)

Very rarely in a women's community can you count the number of open les-
bians on ten fingers anymore. The number of open lesbians in 1977 is
staggering when compared to the number in ‘67, '72, or for that matter,

6 months ago. While I am excited to see more women discover the beauty
involved with loving other women, my enthusiasm for our multiplying num-
bers has been challenged the past few years by trends within the movement
to the point where my enthusiasm is definitely guarded.

It is a fact that more and more women are coming out sexually as lesbi-
ans. It is also a fact that our newly formed set of social "rules" allow,
and even encourage, a woman's “coming out" process to stop at that level.
Fewer and fewer of us are being challenged (by other women and by our
“women's culture") to “come out" as radical feminists, under the premise
that being a lesbian is “enough”. In fact, many women who once proudly
identified as lesbian feminists have even more proudly rejected the femi-
nist part of their identity.

Something has happened to our "Army of Lovers," which was at one point
preparing to do battle with the "enemy" (sexism and economic exploitation,
just to name two.) While there still exist armies of women scattered
throughout the country, we have gone through a metamorphosis whereby the
term “Sorority of Lovers" best describes our collective condition. Many
of us do not feel it imperative that debate, analysis and action continue
to occur around questions concerning the oppression of all women, the in-
stitutions and methods currently in use that keep women down, our rela-
tionship to other movements, goals, etc. etc.

While we are turning out by the hundreds for women's music festivals
and concerts, and are willing to strive for unity, by the thousands, with
the gay movement, despite its ever-present waves of woman-hatred, we are,
for example, withholding support in the form of bodies for the line, for
demonstrations around the current abortion backlash because it is a
heterosexual (and poor) woman's issue. Although our decision not to at-
tend an abortion rally, a speakout for daycare, etc., might not be a con-
scious one, the fact that our members are not there tells a lot about who
we are and where our identification lies.

In the early seventies when lesbians started separating from the women's
movement the reasons were to better analyze our special added oppression,
get relief from those women terrified of the "lavender menace," work on
building trusting relationships with other lesbians and to create a cult-
ural atmosphere which affirmed that lesbian part of our identity as women.

When this separation first became evident to me I was convinced that it
would only be a temporary change. Although it was a painful split (and
one I did not personally go along with), I was hopeful that in the long
run radical feminists and lesbians would be reunited with a new under-
standing of each other, and of the incredible tasks at hand. Along the
way, however, we outdid ourselves. The analysis which resulted from this
separation is that lesbians are superior to heterosexual women, and that
lesbians who choose to continue working with heterosexual women are not
quite as superior as lesbian separatists, but superior to their co-work-
ers, nonetheless. Leaving all the fascist overtones aside, this analysis
is directly responsible for another symptom, which I consider to be equal-
ly dangerous and crippling: a "lesbian" vs. a "woman" identification,
whereby lesbianism is our total identity and where we consider 'woman' to
be other than ourselves. What we are left with, and should be struggling
against, is a self-created "third sex" category which allows for little,
if any, room for growth.

from: Talk Among
The Women Folk,

by Susan Saxe

Maybe it's time to get back to definitions. A lesbian is a woman who
has sexual relations with other women. Period. I fail to see how the
simple act of sleeping with another woman, in and of itself, changes ex-
ternal conditions that keep women out of decent jobs, or any job at all,
keep us victims of the nuclear family, keep us at the mercy of the medi-
cal establishment and keep our children in the same sex-role stereotypes
we were forced to grow up with.

As lesbians, it is true that many of us have chosen not to, or to no
longer experience the oppression of the nuclear family as wives (although
some of us choose that role model for our own relationships, thus lesbians
can be imitation husbands, as well as wives.) It is also true that per-
sonal worry about birth control, abortion, etc., does not come close to
the worry that a sexually active heterosexual woman experiences; there are many lesbians without children, so concerns over the quantity
and quality of daycare, sexism in schools, motherhood oppression are not
as real as they are for women with children.

So, while we have given ourselves some relief from these types of sit-
uations, I suggest that instead of using that space to grow more isolated,
which only reinforces the distorted view of women as “other,” that we put
to good use the energy that comes from loving other women.

It is time for reentry into the women's movement through further study
of feminism, participation in actions, consciousness raising, taking
chances, and not being afraid to work with women who are in lifestyles
different than our own.

It will be a big mistake for us to continue spearing the idea that
it's somehow a different patriarchy and capitalism telling us that lesbi-
ans do not have a right to exist, than the one telling a mother of four
that $2.50 an hour is enough money for her and her family to survive on.

It is time to “woman-identified” again, as opposed to the idea in one of
our "women's" songs, which states, "But soon they'll see that we're woman
loving women, and that's all we'll be." I certainly hope we have the
courage to be more than that.