Pages

WOMEN & FINANCE

a column

Kathleen Richardson

Income protection to me is one of the most important
assets that any individual, married or single, can have. Only eight
out of a hundred people in the United States are financially
secure—that leaves the rest of us only a couple of paychecks away
from financial disaster.

Almost everyone has hospitalization protection through
their employer or on an individual basis. This helps with the
medical bills while in the hospital. What is there to take care of
other bills when you are out and cannot go back to work for a
couple of months? The rent, mortgage, taxes, time payments, and
groceries still continue.

Some people have savings accounts, but how long will that
last? Others could count on their borrowing power—but consider
who would loan money to someone disabled, and how would you
pay it back? Still others have affluent parents they can rely on...
most of us do not.

The whole concept of income protection is just what it
says—to protect your income in case something should happen to
your earning power. Stop and think for a moment, if you were to
be in one of the accidents Sky Spy reports every morning and
could not work for several months, what money would there be for
you to continue paying the bills?

Most income protection plans will cover 50% of your
income; some go as high as 66%. All the benefits received will be
tax-free to you.

There are several things to look for when considering an
income protection policy. The first one is to make sure that it is a
noncancellable and a guaranteed renewable. This will keep an
insurance company from refusing to renew your policy for any
reason and from raising your premiums. The non-cancellable
provision keeps them from cancelling you if they feel you have
become too costly. A retroactive waiver of premium will refund the premiums
that have been paid during a period of disability and will continue
to pay the premium for you until you are able to do so yourself.

A rehabilitation benefit provision can be a benefit if, after a
disability, you cannot resume your previous employment. This
benefit usually runs approximately six months and will help with
the cost of educating and training you for other employment.
Another provision to look for is house confinement. Some policies
state that you have to be confined in a hospital, a convalescent
facility, or a home. Look for one that does not require this
confinement. This is a situation that should be left up to you and
your doctor.

The waiting periods that you select for your income
protection policy is an individual consideration. The longer the
waiting periods, the more drastically the cost drops. No waiting
period versus a waiting period of six months can make a
significant difference in the premium rates. However, how long a
time you can remain financially independent while not working
should be your primary consideration. If you are living from pay
check to pay check, I would recommend a shorter waiting period
than if you have five months' salary tucked away in the bank. The
waiting period itself is divided into two types. One for sickness

and one for accident. Most people prefer a first-day accident
coverage with the seven to fourteen-day sickness waiting period.
The reasoning on the longer waiting period for sickness is that
most of us are sick for only a few days at a time and this is usually
covered by sick leave accumulated at work. But accidents can
cause an extended time away from our jobs and should be covered
immediately.

There are several optional benefits for a relatively low cost.
The first one is Guarantee of Future Insurability... this rider
guarantees a right at periodic times in the future to increase
monthly benefits without medical evidence of insurability. A
partial accident and sickness rider pays 50% of the monthly
benefit allowing a period of total disability when you can perform
only some of the regular duties of your occupation. A partial
accident rider covers accidents only; an accident death and
dismemberment rider provides, in addition to your monthly
benefit, a lump sum payment to your beneficiary in the event of any
accidental death, or a percentage of this amount for the loss of
body members. Finally, another common optional benefit is a
convalescent benefit. This pays for a percentage of a convalescent
facility should you require additional care but not enough to
warrant staying in the hospital.

There are standard exceptions to coverage, including war
and military service, self-inflicted injuries, special exclusions as
outlined by the policy.

What each individual must consider is the losses they
would suffer if they physically could not work for an extended
period of time. Savings last only so long; creditors want to see
payments being made on any loans made to you, and accepting
charity is undesirable for most people. Perhaps you cannot
escape disability, but you can avoid the effects of it.

KATHY PRITCHETT
(303) 572-4906

723 E. 17th AVE.
DENVER, COLO. 80203

Squatter’s Rights

Pay to Pee?

The Women’s Coalition to
End Pay Toilets (WCEPT) has
begun its attack on the city of
Denver with a demonstration
protesting the discrimination
women face at public facilities.
A stand-in action was held
at Stapleton Airport in Octob-
er.

The coalition recently con-
ducted a survey which shows
that the airport contains 84
pay facilities for women and
only 36 for men. There are 70
free urinals for men and only
16 for women.

According to Linda Meyer, a
spokesperson for the coali-
tion, this means that women
are charged almost four times
as often as men for the use of
toilet facilities.

The coalition has asked the
city to reconsider its contract
with Pacific Nik-o-Lok, but so
far nothing has happened.
“We tried to talk to Mayor
McNichols, but he never
called us back,” says Maryann
Tavery, another coalition
member. Tavery talked to her
councilman who subsequently
offered to set up a meeting
of the Stapleton Committee,
the part of the City Council
that deals with the airport,
with the WCEPT to discuss
the issue. So far, nothing has
come of that either.

The city grosses about
$60,000 a year from the pay
facilities, 90% of which goes
to the city, the rest to the
owning company.

The coalition feels that this
unequal economic burden
placed on women violates the
Public Accommodations Law
which prohibits unequal en-
joyment of services and
facilities in a place of public
accommodations because of
sex. The coalition also be-
lieves that the unfair practice
violates the Colorado Equal
Rights Amendment. Finally,
the Women’s Coalition to End
Pay Toilets feels the contract
isn’t keeping with the spirit of
City Ordinance 555 which
calls for non-discrimination in
city contracts.

The coalition questions the
existence of pay toilets for
anyone. According to their
position paper, the first pay
toilets locks in the United
States were installed in
railroad stations in 1910 when
indoor plumbing was rare.
This supposedly discouraged
non-passengers from using
the indoor facilities. Passengers
had the doors unlocked
for their use.

The coalition plans to bring
the issue into the courts in
civil suits. Because the
validity of class action suits is
being questioned, 75 ag-
grieved parties have signed
notarized complaints alleging
discrimination. If the case is
settled in favor of the
complainants, they are all
entitled to monetary com-
pensation under the provisions of
the Public Accommodations
Law. Other cities, counties
and states such as Chicago,
Florida, Nevada, and Las
Vegas have seen the discrim-
inatory effects of pay toilet
facilities on women and have
eliminated them. The coali-

The
Very Feminine
Question of

Life Insurance

In these liberated times, no woman need
settle for weak, ineffective financial
planning. Developing financial
independence and estate security for the
future is as important for women as it is
for men. Your Fidelity Union Life Field
Associate knows that and can help you
achieve a CollegeMaster® or other
program which will meet your needs now

and in the future.

Call the Fidelity Union Field Associate
in your area:

Janet Holzworth

or
Naomi Weinert

455-7400

428-5966

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 5

tion questions why it is so
hard for the city of Denver to
see the discrimination also.
Members of the WCEPT
include the Metro Denver
National Organization for Wo-
men, the Gray Panthers, the
Minority Women’s Task
Force, Federally Employed
Women, the Pueblo National
Organization for Women, and
the Aunt Clara Brown National
Organization for Women.

Photo by Babs Nash
Women’s Coalition to End Pay

Toilets holds a stand-in at
Stapleton airport.

Action Taken
Against
Dalkon IUD

Controversy over the poten-
tial dangers of the Dalkon
Shield IUD has moved to the
courts.

A.H. Robins Company,
manufacturers of the device,
have become the target of
what may be the first class
action suit by a doctor against
a pharmaceutical firm.

The action came when a
Wichita, Kansas woman be-
came pregnant shortly after
she’d had the Dalkon Shield
inserted. The woman filed a
malpractice suit asking
$40,000 in damages from her
obstetrician and $250,000
from A.H. Robins.

Her doctor then filed a
cross claim against A.H.
Robins asking $300,000 in
actual damages and $2 million
in punitive damages on behalf
of other doctors who may face
malpractice suits from pa-
tients for whom they’ve
prescribed the device.

His suit charges that the
company promotes the Dal-
kon Shield without adequate
testing and “without warning
the medical profession of all
the risks associated with the
use (of the shield) such as
partial perforation or embed-
ment of the uterus upon
insertion and post-insertion
migration.”