Susan Saxe Fights On

Woodwoman

On June 9, 1975, Susan Saxe
pleaded guilty in Philadelphia to
three charges: possession of a
destructive device (a Molotov
cocktail), aiding and abetting
armed robbery, and conspiracy
in a bank robbery. To each count
read out by Federal Judge
Luongo, she replied, “Within the
context of your laws, guilty.”
She was sentenced to ten years’
imprisonment, to run concurrent
with a two-year sentence for
theft and related crimes at an
arsenal in Newburyport,
Massachusetts. She is soon to be
tried for a holdup in Boston, in
which $26,000 was stolen and a
policeman killed. Although the
fatal shots were fired by William
Gilday, and not by Susan, the
shape of the conspiracy laws
means that she will stand trial
for murder when her case comes
up, probably in the fall.

The Government's deal of the
plea bargain is that Susan will
not be prosecuted for her part in
alleged crimes in Illinois, California,
and Oregon; she will not be
called upon to testify against
anyone she has known or knows
about in the last five years; and
the FBI will call off its investigation
of the women's and lesbian
communities in Philadelphia.

The Government's agreement
not to call upon her to testify
against her friends pertains
especially to Kathy Power, who
is still being sought in connection
with the September 1970
Philadelphia bank robbery and
the Boston holdup.

Harassment Not New

The history behind the plea
bargaining begins well before
Susan made her famous state-
ment that she would “fight on in
every way as a lesbian, a
feminist, and an Amazon.” The
FBI was harassing women’s and
gay communities in Kentucky
and Connecticut before her
arrest, and their increased ac-
tivities in Philadelphia would
appear to be more an extension
of that harassment than any
newly focused attention
brought about by Susan’s arrest
and statement. It is important to
remember that Susan herself
never implicated the movement.
She identified with it. It was the
FBI and the straight media who
hinted at a national lesbian
feminist conspiracy to rob banks,
shelter fugitives, and kill
policemen.

By pleading guilty, Susan let
her sisters off the hook. By
forcing her into a position where

Susan Saxe Statement

she had to choose between her
own personal interests and
those of Kathy Power and the
women of Philadelphia, the
Government has clarified for us,
once again, that we, as women,
are inextricably bound up with
each other in the struggle.

The women’s community in

Graphic by Otter

Philadelphia has taken the cue.
The Penn Women’s Center of
the University of Pennsylvania
issued this statement:
Since the arrest of Susan
Edith Saxe in Philadelphia,
efforts by Federal agents to
harass and intimidate the
feminist and lesbian com-

munities have intensified.
The Penn Women’s Center
protests this harassment
because these actions
attempt to:
invade our privacy
distract (us) from our
sincere efforts toward con-
structive social change
waste our time.
Our position is that we have
no comment whatsoever to
make to the FBI and the
other Federal authorities.
We are continuing our work
within the community,
informing all citizens, but
especially women, of their
right to remain silent. We
will not be distracted from
our efforts to eliminate
sexism and racism in our
society. We are confident in
the strength and vitality and
love of our community and
its power to sustain us.
White Men Again
The prosecutor at Susan's trial
said that the criteria used to
establish the FBI's “10 Most
Wanted” list constitute
“privileged material.” Whose
privilege? When more than 50
tax-paying U.S. citizens, sup-
porters of Susan Saxe, turned up

More on Page 6

...And Reaffirms Her Commitment

The most significant point of this plea agreement is that the United
States government realizes that I am not and never will be a
collaborator. I have made it clear to them that if I am called as a witness
in any government proceeding, I will refuse to testify. It has been stated that I will not be held in contempt for this refusal. In return, I have agreed to enter a guilty plea and receive a ten-year and a two-year
sentence. The length of the sentences is a direct result of my refusal to
talk.

Today I am in effect pleading guilty in federal court to charges
stemming from a period five years ago when I believed, as I still do, that
armed struggle against the Amerikan State was a valid and necessary
escalation of the politics of the ‘60s. I understood at the time that the
Amerikan Government was the most dangerous, powerful, organized,
violent opponent of people’s liberation around the world. I also felt at
that time that the liberation of women, to which I was already deeply
and personally committed, could best be achieved by our full
participation in and leadership of what I then perceived as a worldwide
humanistic economic and cultural revolution led by the Third World and
aimed against the Yankee Empire.

Over the course of the last five years, four and a half of which have
been lived underground in Amerika, I, like many other women who
came to politics through socialist, anti-racist, and anti-imperialist
causes, have changed, have grown, have emerged a feminist. Like
these thousands of other sisters, I am no longer content to be just one
strong woman fighting for a revolution which, though it is just and
necessary, does not speak to my own highest aspirations, my own most
personal and immediate needs. Over the past five years, then, I have
emerged a feminist, a lesbian, a woman-identified woman. This was
not a “conversion,” but a development, a natural process that followed
my previous commitment as day follows night.

There have been many women throughout history who have taken
great risks, put great faith and energy into movements that spoke to
our liberation as workers, as poor people, as members of every
oppressed race and class, as everything but women. And while many of
these struggles have moved our people forward, have improved our real
lives in concrete ways, and therefore, by definition, been in the interest
of women, no struggle but our own, independent of others, and just and
necessary in its own right can ever hope to meet all our needs. We have
a right to this struggle, a right to self-determination and self-definition
as women, for women, a right to a new world of our own creation.

I am only one of many women who have come through these changes
in the past several years. Unlike many others, though, a few of us have
been brought up sharply, face to face with our past and had to confront
our former selves, for better or for worse in the public eye and under
rather dramatic and serious circumstances. At the same time and
around the same issues, a deep and significant split has developed in
the women’s movement. On the one hand are women who like Jane
Alpert feel that the Amerikan system can peacefully accommodate their
feminist demands and that women as women have no obligation to
support or protect any peoples’ struggle that is not explicitly feminist in
ideology or even separatist in practice. These women feel that it is
permissible, even desirable, to collaborate with the state in the name of
feminism, and that it is in the interest of feminist revolution to
dissociate itself from any forces or individuals which are identified as
enemies of the state on the assumption that it is we who bring down
state repression on a movement that otherwise could comfortably exist
within the belly of the beast.

On the other hand, we are women whose growth into feminism has
made us even more determined not to give in, not to accommodate
ourselves to Amerika, not to collaborate against sisters and brothers
who are our natural allies in revolution, not to repudiate our past, cut
ourselves off at our own roots. For me, feminism is a commitment to be
even more radical, to strike more deeply at the root of our oppression.
My feminism does not make me regret economic “crimes” against one
institution of capitalism; it makes me even more determined to see that

I am no longer content
to be just one strong
woman fighting for a
revolution which
does not speak to my
own highest aspira-
tions, my own most
personal and immedi-
ate needs.

... The enemy cannot

isolate and terrorize us,
cannot walk among us
with impunity.

For me, feminism is a
commitment to be
even more radical, to
strike more deeply at
the root of our oppres-
sion.

See page 4 for more

whole system uprooted forever. My feminism does not make me regret
the theft of classified documents that exposed the U.S. government's
treachery against the people, including U.S. Army O Plan G —
Operation Geronimo Bravo — contingency plans for counterinsurgency
operations against the civilian population of the Boston area in the
event of martial law. My feminism doesn’t make me regret the
destruction of a single National Guard Armory; it only makes me wish to
see every last vestige of patriarchal militarism permanently blotted
from the face of the earth.

But most importantly, my feminism does not permit me to collaborate
with the Man in order to reduce the amount of time I will have to spend
in his prisons. The agreement I am entering into today is made on the
condition that I will never testify against Kathy Power or give any
information concerning anyone I have known or known about in the
past five years. And the ten-year and two-year sentences are based on
the government's understanding that I will give them nothing, ever, not
in ten years, not in a hundred years.

My feminism does not drive me into the arms of the state, but even
further from it.

My guilty plea is predicated upon my understanding that as of this
date the government has agreed to end its investigation in Philadelphia.
This means no grand jury, no harboring prosecutions, no legal torture of
sisters who refuse to speak to the FBI. The credit for this victory goes to
the feminist community here, and to the sisters in New Haven,
Connecticut, and in Lexington, Kentucky, whose courage in the face of
FBI and government harassment has been an example to us all. Their
resistance has given us time to prepare to protect our communities, our
sisters, and ourselves. The government would never have agreed to end
its investigation here if it had any hope of success. We have made it
clear to them that we are together and unafraid, that our community is
closed to their threats, closed to their lies, closed to divisive tactics, that
we will stand together and protect what is ours, our homes, our
organizations, our friends and lovers, our private lives. The enemy
cannot isolate and terrorize us, cannot walk among us with impunity.

We have shown those few desperate, self-serving terrified women
who have urged us to collaborate, to rush to preserve ourselves as
individuals, to dissociate ourselves from anyone who poses a real threat
to the state, we have shown these frightened women that there is an
alternative. When we place the blame for repression squarely on the
enemy, not on his targets, when we unite to oppose him, he can be
driven away. But when we run to the Man for shelter, when we betray
ourselves to appease him, we only expose others to his tactics and
increase the danger to us all.

Feminism is not collaboration. Ellen Grusse, Terry Turgeon, and Diana
Perkins in New Haven, Gail Cohee, Debbie Hands, Linda Link, Jill
Raymond, Marla Seymour, and a gay brother James Carey Junkin in
Lexington have shown us the way. Jill Raymond is still imprisoned in a
Kentucky hell-hole and Ellen, Terry, and Diana still face more time in
the pastel fascism of Niantic Prison in Connecticut. Write to these
sisters, send love and encouragement. Let them know about our victory
here and about their role in making it possible. Support them the whole
time they are in jail and when they get out, invite them to Philly for a
huge celebration. Our victories should be marked and our heroes
honored.

And now, I'd like to reaffirm the statement I made at the time of my
arrest:

First, a greeting of love and strength to all my sisters — courage for
our warriors, hope for our people and especially for all my sisters and
brothers underground in Amerika. Keep on fighting, stay free, stay
strong. I promise you a courage to match your own. I intend to fight on in
every way as a lesbian, a feminist, an Amazon.

The love that I share with my sisters, my people, is a far more
powerful weapon than any the police state can bring to bear against us.
What else can I say but, once again, that I love you. We are strong and
we are not afraid.