With Candidates, Catholics, and Roses

Abortion Foes Renew Fight Against Choice

Terra

Renewing their push to outlaw abortions, the National Right to Life Committee, Inc. declared a memorial day on January 22, “in memory of all the unborn children who have been and continue to be so callously and deliberately killed in the United States by abortion, and to devote

save lives, it will save America itself,” thus equating anti-abortion beliefs with patriotism. In the national protest at Washington, D.C., thousands of Right to Lifers are reported to have converged on the Capitol with thousands of red roses for members of Congress

this day to prayer and mourning.”

In Denver, Right to Lifers visited congresspeople with red roses on that day. Forty to fifty of them picketed Denver General Hospital with signs including their usual photos of aborted fetuses to protest that public hospitals perform abortions. A Catholic high school was dismissed for the day to allow students to protest. __

At their evening memorial service, addressed by all male speakers, abortion was linked with euthanasia, slavery (of the fetus to the mother), the replacement of children with pet rocks, and the extermination of Jews by Hitler. Frank Bolles of Boulder closed his speech with the exclamation that “The drive to end abortion will do more than

Shackled to Bed

— photo by Kate Sharp

Church Anti-abortion activities Such displays are only the most visible signs of the anti-abortion campaign. Funding of this campaign by the tax-exempt Roman Catholic Church is being increased, according to a December 15, 1975 Planned Parenthood Washington Memo report. The National Council of Catholic Bishops and the U.S. Catholic Conference have approved a plan for all Catholic agencies to work towards passing a constitutional amendment outlawing abortion, pushing for laws and administrative policy restricting abortion procedures, researching Supreme Court interpretations on abortion, and supporting legislation that provides alternatives to abortion. (from The Spokeswoman, Jan 15, 1976) This is to be accomplished from the local level on up, by organized “pro-life” groups who are “to organize people to help persuade the elected representatives.” This campaign is, in effect, a plan for the Catholic Church to lobby through front organizations with its funding, which is legally questionable.

While Denver Right to Life representatives deny any heavy contribution by the Catholic Church, an item in the Pennsylvania N.O.W. newsletter (March, 1975) points out a history of financial ties between Right to Life and the Church: At the Third Annual National Right to Life Committee meeting in Philadelphia, Dr. Kilroy of Colorado, in response to demands for incorporation of the Right To Life Committee said, “the budget is $50-60,000 but that if they incorporated they would need to disclose sources of funds and it would not be advisable in view of the fact that most of the money comes from the Catholic Bishops Fund; some contributions dribble in.”

The right of women to choose termination of pregnancy is far from assured. While the estimated one million abortions performed per year in the U.S. have been legal since the January 22, 1973 Supreme Court decision, there has been not only a constant attempt to pass constitutional amendments to abolish abortion, but also restrictions on the use of federal money for obtaining an abortion, and the still widespread refusal by some doctors and many private hospitals to deliver abortion services.

“Poor women are the ones to feel the greatest impact of Right to Life efforts. They are the ones most dependent on government aid for medical care. They are more liable to have the more dangerous second trimester abortions, while those with money for private care usually have their abortions done as out

Girl Exposes Police/ Medical Handling

An 11-year-old girl being treated for suspected abuse was shackled to an examination table at Denver General Hospital. The girl was restrained in this manner because the sheriff’s office felt it was possible the girl might run away if not restrained. After questioning by the child's social worker, Sheriff's deputies at Denver General indicated that it is the policy of the Sheriff's Office to shackle any abused child who comes to the hospital on a police hold order and is old enough to walk away. The restraints then act as a punishment for the child who is the victim rather than the perpetrator of a crime.

There were many questionable actions in this recent case. First, the child was brought to the hospital's emergency room, rather than its pediatric section where all abused children should be treated. And then, there were difficulties in starting the examination. Three different doctors participated in doing parts of the examination.

In speaking with this 11-year-old suspected abuse case, BMR learned something about the general procedure used when a child abuse case is taken to the hospital. The girl related how her bruises were questioned at school, and how the police were summoned to investigate. After being taken to the police station, and photographed nude (while handcuffed), the police then took her to DGH. Her story is as follows: “I was put on a bed and they handcuffed my arm and my leg was chained too. I told the cop I wasn't an animal and that I'd tell my mom. He told me to stop being a loud-mouth and not to get smart. And I wasn't even fighting, I was perfectly calm.

Then different doctors and nurses looked at me. I asked the doctors why I was handcuffed and the doctors also said, ‘Don’t get smart.’”

Frank Elzi, principal attorney for Denver Child Welfare, recently stated that he'd sent in form of a letter a request to the Denver Sheriff's Department to change the policy of shackling all abused children on a police hold order.

Patients during the first trimester. Studies link the 750,000 to over one million unwanted births and the million or more abortions performed annually in the U.S. with inability to support another family member financially or disturbed relations within the family. In addition, unwanted pregnancies are more often physically dangerous to the mother and may also have adverse effects on the fetus (Hern, Family Planning Perspectives, Vol. 3, No. 1, Jan., 1971). Obviously, “right to life” refers to quantity, not quality.

One justification for the original laws restricting abortions was to protect women from the dangers of a surgical technique which was then much more threatening to their lives than full-term pregnancy was. Today the dangers of abortion, especially in the first trimester, are less than those of a full-term pregnancy. Another, more mercenary reason for the outlawing of abortion was to ensure business for the fledgling specialty of obstetrics.

Veronica Vigil

Kate Sharp

Veronica Vigil has been in jail since September 10, 1975 (see October BMR) for refusing to cooperate with a Federal grand jury in what it claims is an investigation of the 1974 bombings in Boulder resulting in the deaths of ‘Los Seis’ (The Six). According to a newsletter from the Veronica Vigil Defense Committee, “the Federal grand jury was convened, not to find the murderers of Los Seis de Boulder, but to gather information on Chicano leaders and organizations.” Under the guise of believing persons active in the Chicano community to be responsible for the deaths of Los Seis, the grand jury is attempting to gather information on leaders of El Movimiento Chicano.

The newsletter further reads, Veronica refuses to talk to the grand jury for the same reason she refused to talk to the FBI, because the questions asked of her are not as to who killed our brothers and sisters, but who were their associates and was she aware of any other persons or groups determined to use force or violence to accomplish their goals. Instead of investigating the deaths of Los Seis as they have claimed they are doing, the government is using their death as a means to force Chicanos into continuing legal complications which divert

This year may prove to be especially important in the battle between pro-choice and anti-abortion forces: Besides the Catholic Bishops’ campaign, there is a specifically anti-abortion Democratic Party candidate for the Presidency, Ellen

— photo by Kate Sharp

McCormack. With enough support to get federal campaign subsidies, she will be able to use public money to spread anti-abortion propaganda. As McCormack puts it, “Not one of the other candidates will discuss abortion if they can get away with it.” No other Democrat is in favor of complete abolition of abortion. President Ford played his middle-of-the-road trip by coming out against constitutional amendments restricting abortion while leaving it to the states to set their own laws. Ronald Reagan, however, blatantly endorses such a constitutional amendment.

With anti-abortion pressure on, and election year, the importance of support and visibility of pro-choice forces is greater than ever.

Stands Firm

the movement from more constructive goals.” The newsletter also describes how in October of 1975 an FBI agent introducing himself as Miguel Ramirez paid a visit to Vigil's cousin. Ramirez advised the cousin of her right not to speak to him, and then went on to explain that he was “personally interested” in the case and felt that Vigil was a “victim of misplaced loyalties and poor legal advice.” He suggested that Vigil replace her National Lawyers Guild attorneys with a private attorney. He further told the cousin that if Vigil would be willing to meet with him in prison, the whole matter of her incarceration could be resolved. Vigil, however, refused to meet the agent and her attorneys informed the FBI that they should contact Vigil only through her lawyers while she was in prison.

Despite numerous attempts to coerce Veronica Vigil into talking and despite numerous forms of governmental harassment, Vigil stands firm in her refusal to cooperate. Veronica Vigil may end up spending as much as forty-seven months in jail for her refusal to testify. Letters of support or money can be sent to: Veronica Vigil Defense Committee, 1475 Folsom #264, Boulder, Colorado 80302.