Women

Nancy Bills

I'm frustrated. How do I start? From the beginning. When I started this article for Big Mama Rag, I knew no more about what was happening in legislation affecting women than that the Equal Rights Amendment had been passed in Colorado but hadn't been ratified in enough states to make it a constitutional amendment.

I interviewed Bonnie Andrikopoulos for the information I needed. She’s the NOW lobbyist for this year. Bonnie called this “the unfeminine year” regarding any legislative action on women's issues. It wasn’t very encouraging but we went on anyway. Buzz Wilder (Governor Vanderhoof’s legislative assistant) told Ms. Andrikopoulos that the governor did not want anything on his call that didn’t relate to the land issue, the energy crisis, prison reorganization, and the Denver annexation problem.

He felt that if the legislators concentrated on just these issues it would be enough for them to handle this session. The basic tenets of Feminism as I see them (comprehensive child care, fair laws covering all people, and adequate, safe medical care for all) begin at least to cover our human needs. But this attitude is a hard one to push in a society concerned with the outward mechanics of things.

There are essentially only three major areas up for work in the Colorado legislature that even begins to look like progress for feminism. One, involving the reorganization of the prison system, isn't very far-reaching at all. The other two, requests for increases of funding by the Colorado Social Services Department for their Day Care Fund and by the Family Planning Services of Colorado for expansion of their Planned Parenthood Centers, go a little deeper into our issues.

In the House of Representatives, Carl Gustafson has sponsored HB1080 and HB1081 concerning the prison reorganization. They concentrate on administrative changes in the divisions of the departments and in abolishing old departments and creating new ones. (This is the “mechanics of things” that I was talking about.) Ms. Andrikopoulos said NOW wants to see more programmatic changes instituted to give women better rehabilitative work programs and to have the women’s facilities moved from Canon City to Denver where they would have more chances to work. In the Senate, Ralph Cole introduced SB11 which goes deeper into the idea of reorganization by asking for the establishment of a diagnostic center for rape offenders. Ms. Andrikopoulos said NOW will be watching the funding on this bill closely, urging its passage.

UNFEMININE YEAR: Ms. Bonnie Andrikopoulos, lobbyist for NOW, called this “the unfeminine year” regarding legislative action on women’s issues.

The Family Planning Council is asking for funding to set up Planned Parenthood Clinics in towns that presently are without them. Southern Colorado is especially uncovered by Planned Parenthood. The need for women in these towns to get adequate birth control information is probably great in light of the trend of small-town communities to suppress an open expression of sexuality. Not understanding the mechanics or consequences of sex can lead to a very painful and unnecessary end. People all over explore and act upon their sexuality whether or not mama and papa said it’s OK to do so. We all have the choice — I'd like to see that women have the means for carrying through their choices.

The Colorado State Social Services Department is asking for $1.2 million dollars more than this year’s estimated total expenditure of $5.3 million dollars for their Day Care Fund. That’s $6.5 million dollars and it’s to cover the care of an average of 92,016 children per month at $59.01 per month per child. This is to provide aid and incentive to low-income and AFDC parents to work and establish financial independence. The Social Services Department funds children through independent or non-profit child-care organizations. There are no state-sponsored child care centers as yet in Colorado. Ms. Andrikopoulos talked highly of the Social Services practice of licensing women on welfare to open home day-care centers if they want to. They also offer basic training in nutrition and psychology to help these women meet state qualifications. If the home doesn’t have what the state deems adequate facilities, then Social Services has the State Licensing Committee come in and help implement the necessary changes. This way these women gain an income and at the same time can provide solid care for children in a home atmosphere. NOW sees these home centers as being very important in providing the kind of complete care needed by children. They’re working for the whole child as well as the whole woman. Ms. Andrikopoulos told me about a home center she visited in Greeley. She said, “The love in that center was beautiful. I bet it costs her (the woman who heads it) money at the end of every month.” But the woman cares and the people involved put in long hours towards keeping the center running. The impetus behind this center is the change that came for the parents. When they were free to work and able to earn an adequate income to pay their bills, provide food and clothing for their children, they could finally feel their independence and self-worth. This brought a change in their children. When their parents felt good, they could feel good. Ms. Andrikopoulos said “more legislators need to know what's happening here. More people need to see what can happen when help is given in the right direction. We've become so depersonalized and unfeeling that we can’t see one another.”

On the national level I found a little more to be happening, both pro and con, for feminism. Senate Bill 2101, Title III has passed the senate and is now in the House Banking and Currency Committee. This bill is to end discrimination by credit companies based on an individual’s sex hopefully making it easier for women to obtain financial credit on our own. Unlike two similar bills proposed in Colorado (HB 1128 and HB 1129), this bill still includes the stipulation that discrimination cannot be based upon a person’s marital status. This is important in that single, divorced or widowed women are looked upon as even greater financially sound without a man behind her name.

Even though the marital status section was amended it’s important to note that they were the first bills NOW has ever lobbied for in Colorado and both were passed. I learned that the chairperson of the HB & C Committee is Lenore Sullivan who is definitely not a feminist. There may be problems in getting SB 2101 out of her committee and we are urged to write our representatives supporting this bill without amendment.

What I found interesting is the Flexible Hours Employment Act (SB 2022) introduced by Senator John Tunney (D-Cal.). The bill would require within five years of its passage that ten percent of the positions in every level in every executive agency of the federal government be made available on a part-time basis - part-time being defined as either four hours per work day or one to four days per work week. A flexible hours job is one which is a permanent responsible position with standard civil service protections and prorated fringe benefits. Senator Tunney declared that the bill would help “end the discrimination, particularly against women with children imposed by the basic pattern of working hours in our society.” NOW feels that the bill could especially benefit parents in leaving both free to contribute to the raising of their children and to the income of their family.

The Right to Life Committee is really moving in Washington. Ms. Andrikopoulos said the committee is introducing amendments to any funding bill they can to prohibit the use of any federal monies for abortions. This is after the Supreme Court has ruled laws prohibiting abortions to be unconstitutional. A woman now has the right to choose abortion or not, but the Right to Life Committee is insisting that poverty-level women still get the shaft because they don't have the resources to pay for an abortion. So out comes the closet abortion, deadly for any woman. The committee was successful in attaching such an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1973. Fortunately (though they would like it to be otherwise), federal funds can still be used to dispense contraceptives. Last year, just before the Social Security Act Amendments were going to the conference committee, Senator James Buckley (C-NY) introduced section 193 to the act reading “None of the funds under title 19 (Medicaid) may be used for the performance of abortions.”

Senator Buckley went on to say “that if Congress felt that federal funds ought not to be used abroad on abortions on foreign women, then at least we could accord the same protection to our own women.” The amendment was agreed to by voice vote with no hearings or even discussion on the senate floor. The Right to Life Committee is also working hard for a constitutional amendment to make abortion illegal by guaranteeing the life of the fetus from the moment of conception. I agree the life of a fetus is precious if it’s created in love. The pain of an unloved child is too great. Until we have the means, physically and spiritually, to provide birth control to every woman, I feel there’s a need to keep abortion as an option for any woman who chooses it. It would be a real waste of energy if we had to face the question of legal abortions again. Let your legislators know that you support the Supreme Court Decision of January 22, 1973. Finally, The Equal Rights Amendment is here. Two more states ratified it last year, leaving 6 of the 38 states needed to make it a constitutional amendment. There’s a good chance it will go through this year. The ERA brought together a lot of different groups that have never worked with one another before. This gives us a good basis for making a strong coalition in the future on other issues.

Lastly, NOW will be concentrating on rape this year. There will be a kick-off coalition meeting March 2 at the United Way Auditorium at 1375 Delaware. It's open to the public and the conference is scheduled the full day from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.