book reviews...

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 8

A Potpourri Of Books On Control Of Our Bodies

Witches, Midwives, & Nurses

Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English  
The Feminist Press  
$1.25/paper  

Upon first reflection, the virtual  
absence of women's leadership and  
non-subservient participation in medi-  
cine would appear to be simply one  
more example of the exclusion of wo-  
men from “male" fields. And yet, Bar-  
bara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English  
inform us in Witches, Midwives and  
Nurses that healing was once the  
realm of women, and that rather than  
being excluded from medicine, we have also been systematically  
forced out of medicine.  

As early as the 14th Century, and  
through the 17th Century, women heal-  
ers (witches) were killed in great  
numbers, because, as organized women,  
they posed a sizable threat to those  
struggling to establish patriarchy  
(including male dominance in the heal-  
ing profession). This massive attack  
on women healers was followed in the  
17th Century by moves to validate the  
work of male, ruling class, universi-  
ty "trained" healers and invalidate  
the work of peasant women healers.  
This move occurred despite the fact  
that women were far more empirical  
and scientifically based in their  
practices than were their rather in-  
effectual and often "dangerous" male  
counterparts.  

The establishment of medicine as a  
profession was the downfall of female  
leadership in healing. This move was  
followed by the comparatively recent  
establishment of nursing as a separ-  
ate function from healing (a function  
obviously viewed as especially suited  
to women) and the widespread discrim-  
ination against women's participation  
in "serious" medicine. The medical  
establishment has managed to take  
healing out of the hands of women who  
once practiced safe, inexpensive and  
humane medicine and has placed it in  
the hands of men who practice expen-  
sive, inaccessible and largely imper-  

WITCHES  
MIDWIVES  
AND  

A HISTORY OF WOMEN HEALERS  

sonal medicine. Imagine how strong  

the self-health movement could have  
become if it had not been tampered  
with over the centuries by "establish-  
ment" medicine!  

Witches, Midwives and Nurses pro-  
vides us with an excellent, but tra-  
gic, history of women as healers and  
the subversion of people's medicine  
by professional medicine. Not only  
does this study parallel the decline  
of women as healers with the rise of  
patriarchy, it also provides us with  
an excellent class analysis throughout  
and gives us some insight into the  
rise of capitalism. Witches, Midwives  
and Nurses is an excellent radicaliz-  
ing and angering book about women,  
health, patriarchy and the rise of  
Western medicine.  

RAPE: The price of coercive sexuality  

Lorenne Clark and Debra Lewis  
The Women's Press / Toronto, Canada  
1977 / Paper  

Lorenne Clark and Debra Lewis are  
both criminologists connected with  
the Centre of Criminology at the  
University of Toronto, Canada. In  
their belief that the fear of rape  
affects all women, Clark and Lewis  
undertook to create a statistical  
study to examine what kinds of rape  
situations and victims were seen as  
credible (i.e. make a good case in  
court). "The traditional attitude  
of maintaining silence on the issue  
of rape maintains the assumption of  
society—that more knowledge about  
rape would not allow us to do any-  
thing about it...a view which accepts  
rape as an inevitable accompaniment  
of human society."  

Part 1 of this book presents a sta-  
tistical overview of a "filtering  
system which allows only some rape  
cases to come to court. The reason  
why this filtering system operates  
as it does is analyzed in Part 2.  

The reasons given or implied for  
the police classification of a rape  
case as "unfounded" was the unsuita-  
bility of the victim as a witness.  
Thus only 17 out of approximately  
260 rapists (7%) are likely to be  
convicted in Metropolitan Toronto.  
Some of the implications (findings)  
of their statistics are as follows:  
- Specific location is a significant  
factor in police classification...a  
rape in the victim's residence is  
more likely to be classified as a  
“real rape."  

- Police are more inclined to classify  
the reported rape as founded when it  
is accompanied by a theft because re-  
covery of stolen goods constitutes  
corroboration of the victim's testi-  
mony.  

- Cases involving other sex acts be-  
sides vaginal penetration were more  
often founded.  

- Cases in which the rapist displayed  
direct physical violence, involving  
a weapon, were more often classified  
as founded.  

- The most credible rape victims are  
in fact dependent children of solidly  
middle-class families.  

- Women who are professionals are most  
likely believed.  

- Victims of low economic and social  
status are not seen as credible.  

- Past history of mental illness or  
present psychiatric care render the  
victim “unrapeable."  

In summary, men who assault women that  
society does not care to protect  

avoid the penalties of law.  

From the statistical evidence gen-  
erated by their study, Clark and Lewis  
connect the reality of the rape vic-  
tim now to an historical overview of  
women as private property. The early  
legal injunctions against rape did  
not recognize rape as an assault on  
women and awarded all compensation to  
the husband or father. Victims were  
required to marry their rapists but  
lost their dowries as they entered  
that marriage. Women constituted val-  
uable property only in their virginal  
state and rape was a financial matter  
to be settled with the owner.  

Women as forms of private property  
transformed marriage into a market  
leaving women's sexuality and repro-  
ductivity controlled by others. Un-  
der patriarchy/capitalism we must re-  
cognize that it will remain so. The  
study of the attitudes of the rapists  
provided the information that most  
rapists do not consider that they  
have done any wrong—that women ‘get  
what they "really wanted or deserved.’  
And furthermore that the attitudes  
of rapists were similar to those  
shared by men at large in our society.  

Clark and Lewis state that as  
long as private property exists, sex-  
ual inequality and rape will continue.  
To get rid of rape we must change the  
system that produces it. This book  
challenges the women's movement to  
make the issue of rape an issue that  
must connect with an economic as well  
as a psychiatric/social analysis of  
the oppression/exploitation of women.  

Our Bodies, Ourselves  

The Boston Women's Health Collective  
Simon and Schuster  
$4.95/paper  

The early bible of the women's self-  
health movement, Our Bodies, Ourselves  
remains the most useful book around  
for basic information on the function-  
ing of our women's bodies. Originally  
published in 1970 by the New England  
Press, the demand for the book soon  
became so great that it was necessary  
to publish it commercially. It has  
since been published in numerous edi-  
tions, including a recently published  
Spanish language edition.  

Combining feminist politics with  
valuable information and advice, the  
book covers such topics as abortion,  
childbearing, rape, fitness, nutrition,  
lesbianism, and menopause. There is  
also a chapter on basic anatomy and  

Physiology, as well as a discussion on  

Against Our Will  

Susan Brownmiller  
Simon and Schuster  
$2.75/paper  

First published in 1975, Against  
Our Will is an exhaustive study of  
rape as practiced by men of the United  
States, both at home and abroad.  

Brownmiller's book is both a history  
and a political analysis, with chapters  
on such topics as law, war, the "po-  
lice blotter" rapist, and "women fight  
back." Her research was extensive, and  
she covers the subject of rape as well  
as it has ever been covered.  

A serious problem with this book,  

*Rape, Racism and the Capitalist  

"Deciding Whether to Have Children"  
and "Women and Health Care."  

This book is written not by tradi-  
tional health care professionals, but  
by a group of women who initially got  
together as a discussion group on  
"women and their bodies" at a women's  
conference in 1969. They decided to  
keep meeting after the conference, and  
in the course of their discussions,  
came to realize how much they all had  
to learn about their own bodies. They  
decided to find out all they could of  
what they didn't know, discuss it with  
the group, write papers from these  
discussions, and ultimately, teach a  
course for women on “women and their  
bodies." All of which they did - and  
out of their papers and the course  
was born Our Bodies, Ourselves, A  
Book By Women For Women.  

Thank you, Boston Women's Health  
Book Collective.  

However, is that it has been widely  

criticized for racism. No one should  
read it without also reading Angela  

Davis' critique of it which appeared  
in the Black Scholar.*  

Despite this problem, obviously ma-  
jor, the book is well worth a reading.  
Brownmiller's style is very readable,  
and her subject fascinating (like  
watching a rattlesnake). It is a “radi-  
calizing" book as we are confronted  
again and again with the enormity of  
crimes committed against women.  

There are other books which have  
provided a more complete political  
analysis of rape, but none which has  
provided as good an overview of the  
entire subject.  

Setting by Angela Davis The Black Scholar, April 1978 pp 24-30  

The Political Economy of Population  

Control in Latin America  

Bonnie Mass  
Reprinted by Women's Press (Toronto)  
1975 paper  

Bonnie Mass, in The Political Econ-  
omy of Population Control in Latin  
America, first published in 1972,  
asks an important question: why  
would such arch enemies of women's  
struggles for liberation, like Ford,  
Rockefeller, Chase Manhattan Bank, be  
among the most active and vocal sup-  
porters of women's demand for free  
birth control? Is it possible that  
feminists and the ruling class of to-  
day's greatest imperialist power have  
a similar interest they have yet to  
recognize?  

Of course not, but Bonnie Mass  
points out how “enemies of women's  
liberation" have pushed the demand  
for abortion and free contraceptives  
through the International Planned Par-  
enthood Foundation, the Rockefeller  
Foundation, and other American agenc-  
ies where low-cost birth control pro-  
grams are in practice to the tune of  
millions of dollars—primarily in  
Latin America. She cites many examples  
of how the meanings of women's libera-  
tion have been used and distorted and  
we feminists had better become aware  
of it.  

She asks who is behind the recent  
world-wide panic around the "popula-  
tion explosion" and why. She cites the  
belief many people have that "family  

planning" programs around the world  
are "humane" without having real know-  
ledge of the practical implementations  
of programs or of the multi-million  
dollar agencies that support them.  

Bonnie Mass gives us that informa-  
tion with documentation on how the  
directors and trustees of these agenc-  
ies are directly connected with Ameri-  
can foreign policy in areas such as  
Africa, Southeast Asia and Latin Amer-  
ica and how this connection is not  
accidental. She gives us history,  
quotes from women in Latin American  
countries and groups fighting the pop-  
ulation controllers, and statements  
from the population controllers them-  
selves, like this gem from the World  
Bank: "We are conscious of the fact  
that family planning programs will  
yield high economic return."  

Are the population control agencies  
operating in poor countries for the  
benefit of the women living there—  
giving them control over their bodies  
and over their lives? After reading  
this booklet, which Bonnie Mass sub-  
stantiates very well, you are left  
with no doubt that "in effort to main-  
tain economic and political control  
over ‘less developed countries’ the  
‘humane’ agencies have developed  
strategies for keeping the world's  
future population within ‘acceptable  
limits’ in order to ensure a multi-  

national system of exploitation."  

- The Political Economy of Popula-  

tion Control in Latin America