12

a column

Chocolate Waters

Beauty and the Beastly — A recent feature in Parade magazine entitled
“Newswomen and Television — Beauty on the Tube” featured photos
of four women with the caption “Beauty Above All — Four of Today's
Typical Female Reporters." In the same article, the photos of four men
were presented with the caption “Expertise Above All — Four Male TV
Reporters.” Above all, the article was disgusting.

Fired for Hairy Legs — Judith Quist, a waitress fired in Sommers,
Conn., has filed a sex discrimination suit against the Plaza restaurant.
The owner said he fired Quist after several customers complained
about her unshaven legs. Quist claimed that “it’s silly to remove
something from your skin just because men believe you look better for
it.” (LVS, Mar. 8) The condition of her armpits was not reported.

Who's Afraid of Flying? — Not Erica Jong. “It has been reported that
when she received her first royalty check for Fear of Flying, she hired a
publicity agent and has been following its advice ever since.”
(Women’s Press, Feb.) The paperback edition of this wonderful book ex-
hibits a half-draped woman’s torso with an enlightening comment by
John Updike (no relation!), something about the best erotic novel ever
written by a woman. And how the boys do love it. Erica does too. The last
time I saw her, she was draped across People magazine, zippering her
fly and grinning. So who is afraid of flying — all the way to the bank too.

WADDA

MEAN you
WONT is
You use ME Lance

Rants & Raves

Turn Yer Radio On

Lois Lane
Da, da, dee dum, dum... la, la, la... uh oh, here it comes again.
Another commercial... yuch! Presto chango... dee dee dee, dah um,

um, um... Phooey, the Archies... push another button... !**! another
male voice... “Yes, though women received the right to vote over a
half-century ago, the ERA has not been ratified...” hmm... that
sounds interesting... female voice... “What are some of the ways
women are legally handicapped by this? hmm... peruse car radio
buttons... an AM station? KHOW?!! But I thought they fired Barney?
Anyway, that doesn't sound like her...

That's because it’s Pa. Shamburg! Yes, folks, there is a commercial
radio station in Denver with an intelligent feminist on the air. But it
isn't KHOW’s fault. Shamburg, as editor of the D.U. Law School's paper,
became moderator of “Hearsay” in January of this year, almost by
default. Normally, the editor of the Forum gets to moderate the show;
but during the ‘73-'74 school year, the editor did not want the double
responsibility. When the man who took over “Hearsay” decided to quit
in December ‘74, Shamburg requested the job.

Armed with her previous experience at KCCS in Columbia, Mo., no
FCC license, but some good ideas and guts, Shamburg has produced
one show per week for the past four months, including several shows
on women and different aspects of the law, Indian law — both U.S.
imposed and cultural, and legal education. She engineers the pre-taped
program herself. KHOW has placed one stipulation on Shamburg, and
that is that she advise the station of any controversial subjects
discussed. Shamburg says that so far she hasn't discussed anything she
feels is controversial.

With the exception of a few of the clerical women, Shamburg said she
hasn't been introduced to anyone at KHOW, though she’s been doing
“Hearsay” since January.

“When I'm in the station, I get the impression people don't know what
I'm in there for. If I go back to get a cup of coffee for a guest, I get the
impression that they're nodding their heads, ‘That’s right. That's what
you're supposed to do.’”

On top of that, she gets some rather interesting reactions when
people ask her what she “does.” When Shamburg mentions law
school, she usually first draws a blank, then “oh,” and a second blank
look. On not so rare occasions, she gets the patronizing male: “How
wonderful... I think women should get into more important work. Why
if women ran the world, it wouldn't be in such a mess.” And of course,
there’s always the skeptic... and we've all run into those. Sometimes
she runs into a person who will treat this as no special accomplishment
FOR A WOMAN... those rare individuals usually become her friends.

Then, when she tells them of her radio program, their eyes grow
wide. Shamburg usually explains that it’s no big deal, but seems to have
a hard time trying to convince them that with brains and effort, other
women can and have done radio. Reaction: “For a woman with a
prestige job, it’s ‘how do I greet her?’”

So, if you're not frightened of an intelligent feminist discussing legal
problems that may deal directly or indirectly with you, listen on Sunday
nights at 8 p.m. on AM and 10 p.m. on FM to “Hearsay” on KHOW.

Next month: more on commercial radio in Denver.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A No. 4

Women Sue General Motors
To Halt Layoffs

“If we stick together, I believe
things can change,” proclaimed
Juanita Hernandez, one of eight
women auto workers filing a sex
discrimination suit against
General Motors.

She and her children live in one
of the many maze-like apar-
tment complexes in suburban
Fremont, California, near the GM
plant. Her experiences as an auto
worker during the past two years
have opened Juanita’s eyes to
the many problems confronting
women entering male-
dominated trades.

The GM management has
vigorously resisted the
integration of women into the
plant. For example, they were
slow to provide adequate
bathrooms and in supplying
gloves and other protective
clothing for the new women
workers. There was also discr-
imination in the promotion of
women: only seven were
promoted from 1970-1973.

Because the women were
scattered throughout the plant,
joining together to fight these
and other problems was difficult.
Then, on January 13, GM laid off
all workers at Fremont who were
hired since 1966. This affected
2,300 out of the plant's 4,466

workers. All 441 women
production workers were laid off.

Eight of these women filed a
sex discrimination suit under
Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights
Act. All eight are affiliated with
the Southern Alameda chapter of
the Coalition of Labor Union
Women (CLUW). Since it is a
class action suit, the eight
plaintiffs are filing on behalf of all
the women laid off as well as all
who filed applications at GM
from May, 1972 and were never
hired.

The Complaint

The complaint states that GM
did not hire women until 1968,
and that the Civil Rights Act's
affirmative action hiring should
have begun in 1964. GM
responded that the protective
laws of California did not change
until 1968, so women were not
allowed to work overtime or lift
over 50 pounds on the job. The
women contend that many men
were hired to fill jobs which
required neither overtime nor
heavy lifting.

During the first layoffs in early
1974, all production women
were laid off because of their low
seniority. These workers were
called back later in the year, only
to be laid off in January, 1975.

In Court

Court proceedings began on
January 10, 1975 with a request
for a temporary injunction to halt
the layoffs. This request was
denied by Federal Judge Zirpoli.

A few days before the court
action, the United Auto Workers
Union (UAW) expressed
opposition to the suit on the
grounds that it would destroy the
seniority system. At the hearing,
UAW and GM lawyers sat on the
same side. Also, throughout the
proceedings, Judge Zirpoli’s patron-
izing attitude showed his
disrespect not only for the
women plaintiffs, but also for
their female counsel.

Opponents of the suit have
accused the women of wanting
to “take jobs from men.”
However, when the suit came to
trial on March 14, the plaintiffs
offered four alternatives that
would protect all workers,
regardless of seniority. These
included a “share the work
plan,” in which all workers would
work 20 hours a week for 36
hours’ pay; a plan allowing shifts
to work alternative weeks while
other workers could collect
unemployment; a “proportional”
plan in which the company would
rehire the same percentage of
women that worked before the
layoffs; and a plan whereby high-
seniority men would volunteer to
be laid off while collecting
supplemental unemployment
benefits totaling 95 percent of
their regular wage. The est-

LNS
imated cost to the company was
included with each plan.

Juanita Hernandez favors the
“share the work” plan, since it
would keep everyone working.
But she feels the “proportional”
alternative is the most feasible,
and it has a precedent. In a
federal court decision in
Louisiana, a judge ordered
reinstatement and back pay for
seven blacks laid off because of
lack of seniority due to the
company’s previously discriminatory hiring practices.

With respect to women, for
example, the policy is often to
hire and fire them before their
probationary period is up.
Probation can last as long as six
months or even one year, and
during that time a worker can be
summarily fired. Workers on
probation have no recourse to
arbitration or to grievance
procedures, since they can't join
the union until probation is up.
And, of course, the company
does not have to pay union wages
to workers on probation.

In cases where the company
must keep women workers
beyond the probationary period
due to long and costly training
programs and/or short
probation periods won by the
union, the company can pursue
the following strategy: hold off
hiring women until as many jobs
as possible have been filled by
men, and then start hiring
women. This way, if a layoff

becomes necessary, the women
will be fired first, and will never
be able to accumulate seniority.
The same policy is followed with
Third World men.

The following story of Hester
Butterfield, a worker at a General
Electric (GE) plant, illustrates the
process:

Up to three weeks ago I was
GE's token woman machinist at
the Star Equipment Plant in
Cleveland. I was originally hired
because I answered an ad for
Outside Diameter (OD) grinders
— which I had had a year’s
experience with — but GE
decided not to put me in the plant
that needed OD grinders
because they had a couple of
women there already. Instead,
they placed me at the Star plant,
where there are no women, and
had me learn a different machine
(surface grinder).

During my six-month
probation period, I learned the
surface grinder well enough to do
work normally done by grades
“A” and “B” grinders (competent
workers with five, ten or more
years experience) without any
rejections by inspection — even
though I was being paid at sub-
“C” rate.

My foreman usually treated
me as though I couldn't learn
anything — he’d drop
complicated jobs on my bench
with no explanation, but would
deliver long lectures on very
simple matters. But in early
December he wrote me a review
which indicated that all of my
work was satisfactory except for
my quantity of production, which
he said “would improve with
experience.” This review,
unchanged when my foreman
discussed it with me on January
28, said my quality of work,
initiative, attitude, cooperation,
attendance, etc., were all
satisfactory.

Then, one week later on
February 5, two weeks before the
end of my six-month probation, I
was fired for “poor productivity.”
Last week, at the second level of
grievance hearings, GE started
claiming I was away from my
machine too much. The good
review says my attitude,
cooperation, etc. are good— now
they start claiming I was away
from my machine. The review
says my quantity of production
will improve with experience — a
week later I'm fired for “poor
productivity.” Something’s really fishy.

I think GE thought it would be
easy to fire a woman, a real
pushover, and they didn't expect
the guys in the shop or the union
to back me up. Management had
already tried to split me off from
some of the white workers by
telling them they (management)
didn’t like me “talking to the
colored guys” so much. The
foreman hassled me in petty
ways — from shouting at me
(which he doesn’t do to the men)
to treating me like I didn’t know
much.

And now I’ve heard a rumor
going around the shop that the
real reason I was fired was that a
couple of guys had a big sexual
attraction for me that interfered
with their work. This new rumor
is being used to discourage guys
from supporting me — either
“another one of those females,”
or “better she not get her job
back; she might get hurt, or the
two guys might get fired.”

But it wasn't just because I'm a
woman that I was fired. The
company knew I was a good
unionist: I joined the
International Union of Electrical
Workers (IUE) in my first month
despite the six months probation
and the open shop we have. I
went to all union meetings; was
part of a small group who wanted
to start an in-shop newsletter
(which we had to abandon when

More on Page 13