letters home to mama

Virago Meeting

I am writing in response to your
editorial in April's issue.

I was also present at the Virago
workshop at Woman To Woman. Your ed-
itorial criticized Virago for not be-
ing able to explain their politics,
for being in the process of defining
their politics. I hope all of us are
constantly working on defining and up-
dating our politics.

You criticized them for not sharing
info about criteria for selecting per-
formers and info concerning methods of
outreach. They told us how and when
they advertise and also who they
choose to perform. I agree some
additional info on why they choose
would be good but I don't feel like
they told us nothing. Did you ask
them why they don't use BMR?

You criticized them for being
cliquish, for being defensive, how
they say and the length of the meet-
ing. I think statements like cliquish
go into the realm of personalities.
I have not felt they have been
cliquish towards me. Womyn in Denver
to my knowledge, in recent years have
never met to share politics. After
reading an editorial like the April
editorial, it would seem no wonder
they were defensive. You are really
getting picky when you criticize for
the length of the meeting and how they
sat. You may not have thought the
meeting was short enough but I've
never heard nor read of any rule about
how long a workshop should be or where
the presenting group should sit. ‘Wo-
man To Woman asked the meeting to last
two hours, isn't that enough?

I felt like Virago shared honestly
what they felt and knowledge about
their politics. I agree some of it
was ambiguous and needs work but
would you rather they came with a
speech prepared only to please the

Inside BMR

International Women's Day
Community Meetings

Forced Sterilization race
Where We're At......eeseees tee

COLLECTIVE

Dona Calacone
Corinne Coston, Lynn

Culture:
Finances:
Office:

Local News:
Advertising: Sue Goding
National/International:

Production Coordination:
Member-at-Large: Peggy Shannon

CONTRIBUTORS

Clair Kaplan, Dona Calacone
Susanna Smith, Sue Goding

community disregarding what they
really are or are not doing?

Then you propose we all get togeth-
er beforehand and discuss our crit-
icism of each group. That sounds
like a real defensive bitch sermon to
me. You never mentioned any support
of Virago, any offer to help them
pull their politics together or sug-
gest that womyn of the community do so.

I feel like we need to learn from
each other by listening and helping.
We need to unite on a Womyn's com-
munity in Denver. We are never going
to reach that goal by attacking each
other as your article has done. Come
on lighten up—share what you know and
listen to what others have to offer.
Let's help Virago form their politics
around the CETA funding, outreach,
selection rather than blasting them
and dismissing them.

Judy Vernon
Denver

How Is Your
Subscription?

Dear Sisters:

Thank you for reminding me of my
expiring subscription. I am enclosing
a check for six dollar subscription,
plus an extra dollar for contribution.
I think you are doing a wonderful job
and you have some marvelous projects
going out here. Keep up the good
work. I for one, and I am sure that
all of us in the Sisterhood of
Wom(b)an appreciate what you are doing.
The brotherhood of "Man" keeps on no
matter what happens and so must the
Sisterhood of Wom(b)an.

Best wishes, sincerely,

Kathleen McDaniel
Hollis Queens, NY

Hot Briefs

Just What Can Feminists Afford....6
To Be A Sister-Peru... 8
UDP Ce ciate wisia tte Pelg s-tc'a. sy ovarclar atdjs/aiace a
CRNGHIG AST cathe i etcs a aber ans sana

Judy Barlow, Clair Kaplan
Lynn, Susanna Smith, Corinne Coston

Clare Raulerson, Vicki Piotter, Bobbe Ross, Pandoura, Jan Mellard, Bev
Renick, Marina Franchild, Andrea Gabriel, Constance Perenyi, Deb Taylor,

Paula Williams

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.
Manuscripts may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Co.
(Note: At this time we no longer accept poetry submissions)
Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.
Subscription rates are $6 per year for individuals in the U.S., $10 in Canada, and $12 to institutions.
Subscriptions are free to women in prison and in mental institutions.

Manuscripts and artwork are accepted for unsolicited material.

This publication is available at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago

and is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell.

We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218.

Office hours at BMR are Monday 10 am - 1 pm and 7-9 pm;
Wednesday 1-3 pm; and Thursday 5-7 pm. Advertising information is available from Sue 333-7656.

Author Charges Diana Press

Editor's Note: BMR called Diana Press
and the phone was answered by Coletta
Reid. She refused to give any infor-
mation saying she was the only one
at Diana Press then and couldn't
speak on her own. She said that her
"experience with BMR is so bad I
don’t see why I should give you any
information.” When asked if Diana
Press intended to compensate Rith Gekkern for any losses she replied,
"What compensation is she due anyway?" BMR does want to hear Diana
Press' story. We hope they, someone
connected with them or someone new
to the situation will talk to us.

Sisters:

The following is an account of my
relationship with Diana Press, Inc.,
both before and during the time I was
under contract with them for the pub-
lication of my first novel, Seed of
a Woman. I reconstruct this history
from my file of letters and notes on
phone calls.

In July, 1973, Coletta Reid first
contacted me regarding Diana Press'
publishing my novel. When the novel
was completed I sent it to them, and
in August, 1976, Coletta wrote to me
accepting my manuscript, stating the
basic points of the contract: the
copyright would be in my name, and I
would receive 50% of a profit-sharing
arrangement. In order for the publi-
cation date to be April, 1977, they
told me they had to receive the re-
written manuscript by December 1st;
and all that fall I rewrote, working
according to their criticisms, and
without a formal contract.

Three months went by and I received
no contract. When I questioned Col-
etta, she explained that the delay was
because they were writing a special
contract for me, one avoiding legal-
istic terms the average woman could
not understand. I was concerned about
maintaining control over subsidiary
rights (i.e.: possible future adap-
tations) and when I questioned her,
she responded that the copyright would
be in my name. What I did not know
then is that this was irrelevant: the
copyright can be in your name and you
can have no control over subsidiary
rights. She said that the contract
would be a simple one and that I need
not hire an attorney.

The contract arrived in mid-Novem-
ber. It was a legalistic form contract
and did not conform to the agreed up-
on points, for example: the share of
proceeds would be divided 50% to pub-
lisher, 40% to author and 10% to cov-
er illustrator, presumably an in-house
artist. The subsidiary clause read in

part: "The publisher shall maintain
responsibility for the disposition of
all subsidiary rights... In the event
of a sale the publisher will submit
copies of the contract to the author
for approval and such approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld or de-
layed..." (italics mine). This would
have given them virtual control to the
future rights of the book. In addition,
subsidiary proceeds were to be divid-
ed 40/60, the larger share going to
the publisher. Another clause read:
"The Author agrees to give the Publ-
isher the first option of her next
fiction manuscript. The Author shall
not withhold her signature from any
reasonable contract..." (italics mine).
This would have locked me into a fut-
ure relationship with Diana Press in
which I had little, if any, negotiat-
ing control.

At that point I hired an attorney.
She reviewed the contract, not only
confirming my fears about what I was
able to understand, but pointing out
the extremely unfavorable terms in
other clauses. My attorney suggested I
renegotiate the contract, and I in-
structed her to base this renegotiat-
ion on my verbal agreement with Col-
etta Reid. For example, I had agreed
to pay 100% of all fees for copyright-
ed music permissions for the four songs
quoted in the novel, and I did not
want this renegotiated, desiring to
indicate to Diana Press that I was
acting in good faith and would not back
down on my word.

The new contract was signed, and I
complied with my responsibility, which
was to deliver to them the completed
manuscript. The book was originally
due to be published in April, 1977. The
winter months were on, and I heard no-
thing from them. I called numerous times
either connecting with a recording ma-
chine, or a human being who had never
heard of either me or my novel. Before
and after sending me the galleys, they
responded to none of my messages. On
March 3, 1977, I got a recording giv-
ing me their new phone number, area
code 415. That was how I learned they
had moved from Maryland to California.
April passed, and my book was not pub-
lished.

Finally, on July 18, 1977, I sent a
registered letter expressing my deep
frustration at their irresponsibility
in communication, and disregard of
contract (i.e.: according to contract
they were to have sent me cover sug-
gestions by January 1. As of July,)

I had received nothing). I demanded
to be informed about publication date,
cover, verification of galley cor-
rections and publicity.

MORE ON PAGE 4

38th &.. CHESTNUT

ENTERTAINMENT:

May 7th - The Sunday Ladies 9pm. $2

May 14th - Suzanne Pierson and Saba,
the Sisters of Light. 9pm. $1.50

May 30th and 31st - BABA YAGA, a
women's jazz group. 8pm $2.50

HAPPY HOUR: 6 to 8 pm weekdays with...
MIDNIGHT SPECIAL 12pm to 1am Fridays
and Saturdays.

SPAGHETTI NIGHT: Every Wednesday,
all you can eat for $1.50. Check out
the pool tournaments.

GROUP MEETINGS WELCOME
NEW HOURS:

Sunday: 4pm to midnight

Tues-Fri: 5pm to 2am
Saturday: 4pm to 2am