bmr:

where we’re at

We were so busy last month that we didn't even realize
it was our 11th birthday. HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO US! We don't
have much money, we are in cramped space, we are all tired,
but subs keep coming in, letters, graphics and articles
arrive daily and women keep supporting us, either singly
or as groups. Some of our supporters held a garage sale
and reaped $108, while the Women's Eye Film Group gave us
$40. Money seems to be rolling in, but it's just an illu-
sion. It goes from one hand to the other very fast, we
certainly don't want to discourage anyone from sending in
their monthly contribution—it is welcome, appreciated and
always needed.

Having 5 of us on the collective and women helping dur-
ing production/mailing, a film group that is an indepen-
dent group, but has shown much support of BMR, makes us
feel like an active, alive community. That isn’t even
counting the women who talk and listen to/with us at the
drop of a hat, or at least at the drop of a dinner invi-
tation. Thank you all!!

Last month in WHERE WE'RE AT we wrote about trashing/
criticism/ political responsibility/revolution. Looking at
ourselves and our project we know we have to talk more
with other people and projects. We can only grow politi-
cally if we are confronted, if we confront others that are
our allies or potential allies. We have been doing this,
it's been an on-going practice and sometimes we have done
it well, sometimes it was done badly.

In our immediate community in Denver many women feel
that BMR is divisive and acts righteously. They criticize
that we don't print objectively, that we include our ana-
lysis in a news story instead of giving a straight news
story, that we slant articles. Others feel we are a clique,
a closed collective, and that by saying we are political
we take the license to attack our "sisters." Many women
feel we should back projects and businesses that are done
by women because women have such a slim chance of succeed-
ing in our society, either on a personal or group level.
Inside and outside of our community we have received crit-
icism that we have ducked the issues of anti-Semitism/
Zionism/Israel/Palestine/racism. Another criticism is
that we will not print revolutionary language, insisting
that we must educate others by using that language so that
those words grow into everyone's vocabulary. Criticism has
also been that we print primarily the personal instead of
theory. By doing so they think we are furthering the in-
dividualistic attitude of our society by saying the per-
sonal is political. The white women's movement has tradi-
tionally used that slogan and abused it to excuse the rac-
ism, classism and anti-Semitism that exists in the move-
ment.

We acknowledge that we do have a bias, that our articles
are slanted, that news stories are not objective. Unlike
the traditional news journals we have never pretended to be
objective. We are writing, and reproducing articles about
women's lives and the conditions we live under. We also
want a people's revolution and as much as we want that we
still feel that many view revolutionary language as rhe-
torical, alienating, classist, and boring. We feel we have
used rhetoric ourselves often and wish there were bet-
ter ways of saying some of the words, most of them sound
so academic and removed. It's hard for us to decide what
language to use. We want to be easily read, we want words

BMR would like to acknowledge and thank the
following publications and artists whose works
appear in the collage on this month's cover.
Bulldozer, Spare Rib/Raissa Page, The Iron Fist and the Vel

vet Glove, New Women's Times, Madness Network
News Reader/Topor. Thanks!!

collective: Bobbe Ross, Lori Bradford,

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Joan Pettijohn

Supporters: Sue Goding, Sue Doell, Linda
Lane, Kay Young, Claire Ellington, Liz Lewis,
Candy McCullough, Rozz Leight, Dee Berman,
Morgan Jiavonna, Kathy Riley, Marti Frumhoff

contributors: Vickie Barriga, Patricia Silva,
Louise Knapp, T. J. Feuerborn

BIG MAMA RAG is a feminist periodical published monthly
by BIG MAMA RAG, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Man-
uscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724
Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material sub-
mission will generally fall between the 15th and 18th of
the preceding month. Please enclose a stamped, self-add-
ressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is
accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to
edit all material for length with the input of the author.
subscription rates are $3/year (11 issues) for individuals

Page 2 - BIG MAMA RAG: November, 1983

that mean something to all of us. We don't want to have to
have a dictionary or a "movement heavy" standing by to
tell us what certain words mean. But words are vital. The
government uses "terrorist," we must counteract that with
"freedom fighter." The government is the terrorist, the
people are fighting for their freedom. Words like “imper-
ialism," “patriarchy,” “white supremacy," have specific
meanings which are/need to be incorporated into our vocab-
ulary. The government doesn't want us to understand the
real meaning of these words, because they are indictments
of the system/society we all live in/under.

We know that we have ducked the issue of anti-Semitism/
Zionism/Israel/Palestine/racism but we plan in the next
issue to begin to write about these issues. We feel also,
that we have to confront other women, sometimes even busi-
nesses that use women's issues for their profit because
it's false, to us, to think that every woman is a sister.
We recognize that many white women have profited by
picking the brains, time and energy of women and have
turned politics into a business, and they damn well should
be confronted.

At BMR we feel we need to look at ourselves, our atti-
tudes, check it out more than ever—talk more and listen
harder. On paper all of the above looks like so many
words, what does it mean? For many of us it means being
real careful how we use our words, either in print or vo-
cally. It means speaking out when we know it is risky
to support women and issues when it's not comfortable/
popular to do so. We have been talking with ourselves and
others about levels of trust, trying also to connect
issues that are important to us with events in our daily
lives and see how they fit into revolutionary thought and
actions. And by the way, what does revolution mean to us,
to you?

Revolution or evolution, change or band-aid reforms! Do
we measure up to our own ideals, do our friends, our po-
litical co-workers? How do we struggle, with who, when?

Do we drop friends who “don't measure up," will they drop
us/me? Are we really willing to struggle? Hidden fears
among the political issues! None of this is new but with
every issue before us and others around the corner we find
we have to talk more and more with more people, evaluate
our own motives at each step. Long ago we learned no one
is pure, brave, truthful, clear-thinking, noble etc., all
of the time and it's rare when any of us are any of those
things at the same time. We have to settle for being hu-
man and willing to learn and try to cut the crap.

We are all so angry about so many things that we should
never forget that anger, it's justified! The anger that's
inside each of us should give us the guts to act and speak
out, we should never try to muffle it, or let anyone tell

us that anger is not justified.
MORE ON PAGE 16

oops

Last month in WHERE WE'RE AT we misspelled the

newspaper The Guardian's name twice. The Guardian-
Independent Radical Newspaper is published in New
York City.

inside BMR:

Where We're At............2
Letters Home ..........3,14
Women in Cages

Lonnie Woods 055 Jamicen of
National

Upfront.................5

America Held Hostage...13
Voices

Saralinda Grimes........6

St. Patrick's Day 5238427
Hot Bricks: desk osc.) ceeeS,9-

International
Women in the Philippines
eet, sing LOS
Struggle of
Living Where Insides are
Locked in Fear......15
Judi Chamberlin speech
eae ate etakerea ee
Calendar.....seceeeeeeeeel7
Classifieds & Ads.....18,19
PREGOU COG «ue lara| © eis even sins oO

in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, 
$18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and
$26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons
or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New
Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is

available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct. '72 through July '79)
directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternat—
ive Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our
phone # is 303-322-2010.