Why Does Everything Seem to Fall Apart?

Sandia

It was hard to remember which of our
efforts folded before the other, only
that at the end of a long winter we
were filled with folding and dying and
the energy was one of dissolution all
around us.

We could limit our concern to Den--
ver: the demise of the Credit Union,
the loss of Virago, the breakup of
Diana's Grove, the closing of the Vel-
vet Hammer, and for a short time, we
thought, maybe BMR itself, one of the
country's oldest continuing women's
newspapers: but it is not just Den
ver's problem. We are not some odd
community that can't get it together.
Nationally, there is the incidence of
women's presses folding, all the
daughters and Dianas experiencing di f-
ficulty.

We could say, the stars are favoring
dissolution right now, as well they
are. Or that the political climate in
this country is not conducive to women
rightists abound, tight money, gas and
oil shortages, the Commission on Women
sunsetted, the backlash in person.
What has happened to the Revolution?
The last revolution we heard about was
in Iran where the women had to take to
the streets to remind their holy, holy
leader that, hadn't he forgotten some
thing? Wasn't freedom for them, too?
Surely he couldn't mean back into pur-
dah, this was the 20th Century.

We have all the scapegoats we need
outside of us in the world, and in
truth there is much in the male system
responsible. But we must, as we have
reminded the men, also look to our-
selves--not for blame, but to see where
the roots are, and the solutions. We
have within us, I know you believe it,
answers there for the whole earth.
What I suggest is a review of our past
and present responses as barometers of
where we might be headed now.

Separatism was one of our first sol-
utions. The fact that it did not al-
ways work, nor that it did not last
does not negate it (an important point
to keep in mind throughout this discus-
sion, since nothing is permanent or
lasting, though we keep thinking it
will be.) Separatism was valid and
necessary. Parallels to Black Separ-
atism are there for sure, but spec-
ifically for women it taught us some
valuable lessons we still respect: the
tendencies developed toward reliance
on ourselves, towards the establish--
ment of our own support systems, and
our own methodology. It allowed for
the release of a substantial amount of
anger that had mounted for the phallo-
centric world. It was an extremism
that draws people toward a more center
position. It allowed for the defin-
itions of wimmin's space. In short,

it drew boundaries in the war--only we
found that the revolution was going

to take longer than our initial ideal-
ism anticipated. We were in it for
the long haul.

The next stage was dealing with that
reality which had so cut into the sep-
aratist vision. Since we weren't
going to change the world overnight,
we began injecting feminism into the
everyday aspects of life. We didn't
shave our heads anymore, but the look
was definitely ours. We sparred with
institutions rather than hostilely con-
fronting them. We began tentatively
building our own alternatives within
the world--a kind of boundary exist-
ence where we weren't “outre" but we
weren't exactly in the mainstream,
either. This was our biggest spurt in
growth. This is the phase where news-
papers flourished, a large number of
women's presses formed, and other nat-
ional communication networks sprang
up, such as Olivia.

But the notion of capitalism and the
disdain we felt from other so-called
leftist groups still made us reluctant
to enter the system as previously
defined. So we sought other ways of
bringing ourselves together. The era
of collectivity had begun. Everyone
was either in a bookstore collective,
newspaper collective, cultural or pol-
itical collective. Everyone was doing
process. For a while the energy was
high. Meetings were numerous. We
were everywhere.

What happened? Is the question:
what did we fail to do? Or, and this
seems more likely than casting around
for blame, are we just entering a new
phase? And if so, why the phases pas-
sing so quickly and with so much de-
molishment of personal effort, often
to the point where a whole community
seems at the brink of disaster?

One thing is outrageously clear: we
have no method of passing along con-
tinuity or assuring survivorship.
Every new effort, every grand scheme,
begins, peaks, and dies. And, more
important, we remain on the boundary,
the fringes, when clearly what we need
is to be so mainstream, so relevant to
every woman's life, so endemic to the
health of our society and planet, that
life without us, without feminism, is
no longer viable or imaginable.

Where does it all lead? The answers
are myriad, and, I suggest, lie in the
problems themselves, and our responses.
We are women giving birth to our-
selves, as just as a child has to
learn to maintain, we are learning
skills of survival and maintenance.
This is not to suggest that women are
children, but that in our newly earned
freedom, we are still taking the first
tentative steps. And lest we forget,
our models are few, and often we have

PR For CR: It Is Time Again

Sandia

Within one week, two articulate
women writers made the same observ-
ation: there is no consciousness
raising happening anymore.

Both Marge Piercy and Kate Millett
noted, each in her own way, that it is
not that women have no energy for the
movement, but that women in the move-
ment no longer have energy for them.

That is, after all, how we were all
politicized and radicalized. This is
a mental universe, not the rational
mind but the mind of consciousness:

--consciousness is what separates

us, or joins us.

--consciousness raising is what

brought the movement where it is.

--when we ask, what made the light-

bulb go on in us, it is the light
of consciousness.

--consciousness moves out of the

bounds of the body and time.

--it is the link; it is the revolu-

tion.

--throughout history there have been
people who lived in a conscious-
ness removed from the mass, dull,
imprisoning consciousness of
their contemporaries.

--that is what revolution is about

--even if I were not a Lesbian, I
would have found some other way
to separate myself from the mass
consciousness. Many of us moving
out of the norm all our lives.
Meeting each other on the fringes,
on the boundaries.

--but we don't do CR anymore. We
think, women have only to read our
books and it will be enough--but
they aren't even reading.

--why are we doing other things
besides the one thing that got us
here in the first place?

--would you do it again?
friend? For yourself?

--remember the rush you got when
the lightbulb did go on?

--back to basics.

--Save energy and share a lightbulb
with a friend.

For a

PO SSS SSSSSSSCSOSSSOSSOSSSSSOOSSD

to learn through trial and error,
rather than example.

Consciousness raising (a term never
to be taken for granted or diminished
as old hat) was one of our first dis-
coveries. For the new race of women,
it was more powerful than we realized.
It brought most of us to where we are
now, never to return to the old ways
again. It is the one thing that stays
with us, even though surface forms
appear to come and go. It was the
mother, perhaps the midwife, that
birthed feminism. Our ism. It is in-
teresting to note that the terminology
of the antinuclear forces is replete
with such feministic terms as raising
consciousness: the left that shunned
women as leaders in the anti-war move-
ment of the 60's has integrated fem-
inism part and parcel in the "no-nukes
movement of the 70's.

And this leads to our next phase.
When does consciousness raising go
from a particularly women's mode to a
world mode? In the phases just dis-
cussed we went through all the isms.
Separatism was the isolationism of the
purists. We divorced ourselves from
money and capitalism. Money was evil;
materialism was to be shunned. For
many, it was only from the depths of
poverty, when we started suffering
from having no money for dentists or
doctors or clothes or shelter or up-
keep, that we came back to the "sys-
tem."

In the next phase we sought alter-
natives to the hierarchical patterns in
capitalism and competition. We used
bartering and collectivities. We kept
avoiding isms, particularly capital-
ism, less so socialism. We were
trapped into thinking feminism was an
ism separate and apart. The paradox
is that it is and it is not. Feminism
is an attitude one brings to life and
to our vision of life and issues. It
is not a stagnant ism, but one of
process. Feminism does not mean giv-
ing up all other isms necessarily, or
withdrawing from the world. It is the
consciousness that we bring to all
other isms. (For a longer discussion
of this, see my essay, "Feminism as
Frame.")

That is why we survive. It appears
as if everything is going or falling
apart, but in truth we survive to take
on new forms because we carry the
vision behind the forms with us.

Now for structure. In avoiding cap-
italism, we shunned learning how to
deal and survive in a capitalist soc-
iety. We had trouble running busi-
nesses, competing, paying bills,
learning to pay women for their work.
In short, using the tools at hand that
keep one alive in a competitive soc-
iety--competitive because we want fem-
inism to compete on the idea market.
Other isms are not equal to feminism,
but feminism must be available in the
marketplace of ideas. We are learning
we can be feminists and new agists and
socialists and environmentalists all
at once. As feminism led us to our-
selves, I believe it can lead us to
another plateau in theory and strat-
egy--beyond Ti-Grace, beyond Marx,
beyond Daly.

And if those names mean nothing to
you, don't ask someone else for the
solutions. As the new child in the
world learns about form and structure
from those who came before, we can
learn from those offering us vision
and structure, and then we need only
the confidence that we can take what
we need and let the rest go by.

That's why there is dissolution.

Every effort meets some need, and when
the need is nourished, we have to, by
laws of nature, move on. If we fail,
it will only be because our vision
fails, and in my deepest heart of
hearts, I know feminism will survive.
There were feminists in medieval
Europe, there were feminists in Amer-
ica of the 1800's, and there will be

feminists on the moon. We do not
spring from nowhere. If today, we
seem caught in some transition be-
tween phases and growing pains, part
of that growth plateau seems to be
learning how to translate conscious-
ness into isms. It's not an easy
task, and we have thousands of years
of history behind us where feminism
could not be so outspoken and omni-
present. I feel we are about to enter

an era of maturity, of feminism as
vision, and I cannot think of a more
exciting challenge.

Long

We were going to change the whole world overnight.
We were right;

We were strong.

The sky was the limit.

Trouble

Some even declared war on us.
We had to dig in.

The worst assaults were yet to come.

It was then we realized:

It wouldn’t be easy.

It wouldn't come soon.

We were in it for the long haul.

-Sandia

Not everyone heard or agreed.