Culture

Feminist Criticism: New Meanings and Possibilities

From the Center  
Feminist Essays on Women's Art  
Lucy R. Lippard  

E.P. Dutton and Co.,  
Inc., 1976  

Constance Perenyi  

At times in my life, I have been  
a vampire. I have stood hungrily in  
front of an art piece, sucking the  
artist's lifeblood into my parasitic  
self, and leaving nothing behind but  
dry academic teeth marks.  

I am not really sure what led me  
into art history and criticism, except  
perhaps a longing to be close to  
visual art. What happened though is  
that I began to resent everything I  
saw - I literally loathed the artist  
who was free enough to pull imagery  
from life experience. And I began to  
detest the historian/critic who could  
not get free enough from rigid train-  
ing to see art as an act of freedom.  

Until I started to deal with wo-  
men's art, I was locked into a per-  
spective that made me hate what I  
loved. It was unavoidable; the sys-  
tem had reserved a plot with my name  
on it. With the proper education,  
and an appropriate suspicion of the  
creative process, I could take my  
place alongside all the other vampires  
who condense other people's talents  
into cans of Campbell's tomato soup.  

Perhaps it was this feeling of pre-  
destination and doom that pushed me  
beyond an introductory survey of wo-  
men's art and into the writings of a  
critic who was expressing the very  
thoughts I left safely unarticulated.  
Her name is Lucy Lippard, and in the  
introduction to From the Center, she  
admits that she has never had much  
faith in art criticism as a primary  
form because it entails leaning on  
someone else's work. She says, "I  
can't think of any criticism that has  
ever stood up in the long run as a  
real parallel to the art." She goes  
on to say that this feeling, coupled  
with her involvement in the women's  
movement, has changed her approach to  

criticism. "It may not show too  
clearly from the outside; I'm still  
working on that. But, from the in-  
side, from where I live, there is a  
new freedom to say how I feel, and to  
respond to art on a far more personal  
level. I'm more willing to be con-  
fessional, vulnerable, autobiograph-  
ical, even embarrassing, if that  
seems called for."  

What does seem called for in  
Lippard's work is a personal reaction  
unlike any criticism written before.  
In approaching the introduction, I  
was skeptical. After all, Lucy Lip-  
pard is a big name art person. She  
wrote for Artforum for years, and she  
ascended the ladder to "success" just  
like a male critic, or so I thought.  
Likewise, she had never before been  
sympathetic to women artists, except  
perhaps to Eva Hesse; but by then it  
was too late because before Lippard  
had finished her lengthy monograph on  
Hesse, the artist had died. So, Lip-  
pard was just another established  
person who was going to cash in on  
feminism, or so I thought.  

But, as I began to understand Lip-  
pard's stance, I realized that she  
was challenging me to look at women's  
art, and women's criticism in a new  
light. From the beginning, she re-  
fuses to attack her subjects with tra-  
ditional art historical ploys. She  
does this first by establishing a dia-  
logue with the work itself, without  
constructing comparisons to other  
pieces; second, by committing herself  
to the principle of forging a separ-  
ate feminist aesthetic; and third, by  
resisting the impulse to bring women's  
art, with all its newborn sensitivity,  
into a history that has rejected its  
sources.  

From The Center is a collection of  
essays, ranging in topic from female  
imagery to the politics of sexual art  
style. Actually, many of the first  
articles hearken back to the same  
lament - how difficult it is for a  
woman artist to have her work taken  
seriously. In a “Letter to a Young  

Woman Artist", she says, "I hope  
you're angry but get over it fast and  
use it while you've got it. I hope  
you don't stop being angry now and  
then until things are better for all  
women, not just artists; I hope you're  
working from yourself and know how to  
fuck the art world pressures when you  
get out there; and I hope you're work-  
ing for everyone else too..."  

The second half of the book con-  
sists of monographs and interviews  
with women artists, and is, shall we  
say, the proof of Lippard's pudding.  
No longer just dealing with theory,  
she puts into practice what she says  
about women's art in the first half  
of her essays. Initially, I was  
struck with the diversity of women  
represented, and with Lippard's work-  
ing redefinition of art. As a critic,  
she has touched work that tradition-  
ally would never be considered within  
the narrow limits of visual art. As  
an example I offer an interview with  
Adrian Piper, an artist working with  
psychological street theater.  
Throughout the conversation, Lippard  
takes Piper's often outrageous ap-  
proach seriously, and is clearly in-  
volved with the artist's means and  
messages.  

Most remarkable about Lippard's  
attitude is her newly found level of  
personal involvement. In a review of  
works by Ree Morton, she writes a  
relatively straight story, leaving a  
wide margin to the right of the page  
to record spontaneous reactions to  
Morton's art, and to her own writing  
about it. And in an interview with  
Judy Chicago, Lippard delves into her  
own feelings about Chicago's work.  

No longer distanced and aloof as a  
critic is supposed to be, she identi-  
fies with the artist's struggle ad-  
mitting, "I love and admire the art-  
ist as a person." Realizing the con-  
sequences of her relationship to  
Chicago, she says, "Such personal 'ad-  
missions' will be seen by some as  
damaging, which just goes to show how  
far from emotional realities art  

criticism has drifted. It is an ad-  
mission I might have made about most  
of the art and artists I've written  
about in the past, but did not, for  
obvious reasons.  

It is this that gives me faith in  
the future of feminist criticism.  
For a long time, I proclaimed: the ‘un-  
limited powers of the feminist critic  
who was in the ultimate position of  
shaping a new aesthetic. But From  
The Center makes me aware of new meanings  
of criticism. In talking about her  
initial lack of involvement with ‘Wo-  
men's work, Lippard admits that she  
did not take the artist seriously.  

"I was, I think now, unconsciously  
responding to her sense of inférior-  
ity and insecurity as well as to my  
own." And in dealing with her own  
self-doubts and fears, Lippard be-  
comes very real. She tells of writ-  
ing her fictions, of her unwilling-  
ness to either share them, or take  
them seriously, until she could re-  
move herself from the oppression of  
the New York art scene. In her vul-  
nerability and openness, she becomes  
an artist, a creative woman - she is  
no longer a vampire.  

While I am still convinced of the  
critic's responsibility to feminist  
art, I am now aware that as feminists,  
we too have a responsibility to the  
critic emerging through her own per-  
sonal struggle. As Lippard says,  
"The women's movement has allowed me  
to be much more exposed about my own  
feelings, less afraid of what people  
think, more out front with emotional  
reaction to art, which has been hid-  
den away in the last decade or so of  
criticism. It is the sort of writing  
I could only allow myself until now...  
it won't change the world either, but  
it's a breakthrough for  

A MAGAZINE OF LESBIAN BEATS  

ANALYSIS AND INTERVIEWS  

Written by Ione Spretnak  
Women’s Review of Books, Edited by Geever  
$4.95: from Women-in Distribution,  
P.O. Box 885%, Washington, D.C 20004  
add 15¢ postage handling (overseas, $1)  

PROUDLY ANNOUNCING THE FIFTH  
NATIONAL WOMEN’S  
MUSIC FESTIVAL  

Champaign, Illinois JUNE 13-18  

ALIVE!  
CASSE CULVER  
KAY GARDNER  

Six days of fine feminist music  

Registration: $30 ($40 after June 11)  
Weekend passes available.  

For more information contact  

NWMF; P.O. Box 2721, Station A  
Champaign, IL 61820  
(217) 333-6443