national

Conference Against Repression

A "National Conference Against Repression and Fascism" sponsored by a nationwide coalition of anti-imperialist organizations will be held in Denver on the weekend of May 28-30. The conference will focus on the decline of bourgeois democracy, the growing likelihood of imperialist world war, and the increasing conditions of fascism faced primarily by colonized Third World peoples inside the U.S. It will contribute to the process of building strategic unity among the revolutionary movements of Puerto Rican, Chicano-Mexicano and Black peoples and their anti-imperialist North American allies.

The conference comes at a time when imperialism's response to its economic and political crisis is the slashing of crucial social services, intensified repression and military attacks on domestic and international liberation struggles, and grassroots mobilization of white supremacy.

The conference aims to develop a national strategy to build a movement against repression that will take the offensive and increase support for the building people's wars that will defeat and tear apart the imperialist system.

Workshop topics include grand juries, prisoners of war, repressive legislation, paramilitary and white supremacist organizations, women and repression, U.S. international terror, prisoners, repression and labor, repression and youth.

Sponsoring organizations include the National Committee Against Repression, National Committee to Free Puerto Rican POWs, Committee to Defend New African Freedom Fighters, and New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican Independence and Socialism.

For more information on plans for the conference or to arrange transportation or registration, contact: The New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rico, 3543 18th St. #17, San Francisco, CA 94110 (415-561-9055 weekdays); Box 295, 2520 N. Lincoln Ave., Chicago, IL 60614 (312-278-6706 days); P.O. Box 18072, Denver, CO 80218; or P.O. Box 2512 Cadman Plaza, Brooklyn, NY 11202.

day 431

Headstart adds up to disaster for thousands of parents, children and daycare centers across the country.

One area that has escaped budget cuts is Raygun's travel fund. A typical two-week trip to California for NanSee and RonKnee costs taxpayers $300,000 - not to mention the $750,000 already spent equipping Raygun's own private western ranchette with a Secret Service command post and a communications center.

Haitian women (whose trip to this country cost considerable taxpayer money) are being held in "prison camps" and subjected to "federally-funded, forced abortions." Meanwhile, the Senate Judiciary Committee voted in favor of the Human Life Federalism Amendment (Hatch Amendment), an abortion constitutional amendment; which if passed could effectively end ALL legal abortions, while forced sterilization remains a “legal” tactic.

1982

Poona dancing

an anti-

Torres Receives

After months of demands to prison officials for quality health care, Puerto Rican prisoner of war, Haydee Torres' medical condition has dramatically improved. A diet and medication prescribed by the non-prison doctor who finally treated Haydee resulted in the stabilization of her condition.

Haydee's own determination, backed up by hundreds of letters and telegrams in her support, made her recovery possible. The New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican Independence and Socialism thanks all those whose participation enabled the letter writing campaign to accomplish its goal.

Since the fall of 1981, prison doctors limited their treatment of Haydee to general antibiotics, tranquilizers, interrogations, and the threatening "diagnosis" of a precancerous condition.

“Sisters United’

Lori Bradford

Sometime ago Spinsters Ink, (a woman's publishing outfit) contacted us with information about Sisters United, a woman's paper coming out of Galena, Kansas. Sisters United has blatantly re-embraced fundamentalist Christian Doctrine, doctrine that pushes racism in the name of God. Recent copy of Sisters United includes statements such as: "It is said that Cain of the Bible, was the first man to turn black when God put a mark on him because of his sin. I am of the opinion that God did this as a SIGN unto all peoples that SIN is indeed black." Statements like this are compounded by writings that claim, for instance, that Jewish peoples will be "elevated" by intermarrying with non-Jews.

Medical Care

Haydee never saw the doctor of her choice, but pressure from the letter writing campaign forced the prison administration at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in San Diego to allow a visit by a non-prison doctor who saw no signs of cancer.

Haydee is serving a life term in prison as one of the 11 Puerto Rican POWs who are accused of membership in the FALN, a Puerto Rican armed underground organization. As a captured Puerto Rican freedom fighter, she is just one example of how the denial of medical care is used as a weapon to attack and even murder prisoners of war and political prisoners. The impact of our response this time points out how critical our solidarity can be.

(Info from the New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican Independence and Socialism)

Is Racist

Some of our exchanges (BMR trades subs with lots of other publications and journals) are still showing ads for Sisters United. We urge all feminist media to demand an end to support for such blatant racism (and all the subtle racism too!), for women to challenge white supremacist doctrine every time it happens in the feminist/women's press.

Religion regularly serves as an arm of repression for the state. Moral ethics and systems of beliefs and values that come out of religion are tied to the needs of a racist, sexist and classist economic system. And it is certainly clear that the men who run down Reagonomics have a vested interest in keeping people divided by their own oppression.