Birth Technology Dangers Exposed  
Feminists Arrested In Hospital ‘Inspection’

By Kathy Riley

Four feminist health workers were  
scheduled to go on trial May 19 on  
charges of criminal trespass during a  
feminist "inspection" of a hospital  
maternity ward in Tallahassee, Florida.

The inspection, conducted during a  
national conference of WATCH (Women  
Acting Together to Combat Harassment)  
in Tallahassee March 7, was aimed at  
focusing public attention on the rou-  
tine use of costly and dangerous tech-  
nology in normal births. (See story  
below).

The action was also aimed at estab-  
lishing the right of feminists and  
citizens groups to inspect and evaluate  
health facilities.

Although the 10-minute inspection  
was conducted without incident by a  
group of 30 women and one man, four of  
the women were arrested two days later  
and released on $1,000 bail each. If  
convicted on the trespass charge (a  
misdemeanor), they could get a maximum  
sentence of one year in prison and a  
fine of $1,000.

Arrested in the action at Tallahassee  
Memorial Hospital were: Carol Downer,  
a director of the Los Angeles Feminist  
Women's Health Center (FWHC); Ginny  
Cassidy, a founder of Womancare, a  
feminist-controlled home birth program  
in San Diego; Linda Curtis, a director  
of the Tallahassee FWHC, and Janice  
Cohen of the Feminist Media Express in  
New York.

The inspection exposed hospital  
practices such as the drugging of women  
in labor, the separation of mothers  
from babies and the misuse of fetal  
heart monitors which is tied to in-  
creasing Caesarean section rates in  
hospitals across the country.

"The hospital officials must have  
really been threatened to have us ar-  
rested for merely walking through the  
hallways of their maternity ward," said  
Cassidy. “What were they afraid we  
would find?"

Since the arrests, feminist support  
has mobilized around the defendants  
and the issues they raised. Work is  
being coordinated by members of WATCH,  
a group founded a year ago as a nation-  
al support system for feminist health  
activists and as a base for confronting  
institutions which oppose woman-con-  
trolled health facilities. One of the  
major battles has been fought in Talla-  
hassee where last year the local branch  
of the AMA pressured doctors not to  
work for the Tallahassee FWHC. The  
feminists had to fly doctors in from as  
far away as Jacksonville to staff the  
weekly abortion clinic--which had been  
charging the lowest rates in town.  
The FWHC responded by suing five gyne-  
cologists for conspiracy to monopolize  
medical care; but the suit was thrown  
out of court last November.

New support for the Tallahassee  
women is coming from Mother, a group  
organized in San Diego around the  
goal of women's control over child-  
birth. Two of its members have begun  
a national tour to talk about strategy  
and to encourage local groups working  
on the same issues. (They can be  
reached at P.O. Box 99405, San Diego,  
CA 92109).

Defense workers in Tallahassee say  
that adequate and cooperative legal  
counsel has been hard to find. Three  
of the women are using a public de-  
fender; Downer was considered ineli-  
gible for the defender and is repre-  
senting herself with the help of femin-  
ist lawyers. Contributions and letters  
of support can be sent to WATCH, 1017  
Thomasville Road, Tallahassee, FL 32303.

Powerful Interests Oppose Low Cost  
Woman-Controlled Home Birth Programs

Some "change," but not the kind of  
change the Tallahassee women are talk-  
ing about. Never underestimate the  
power of institutions to coopt.

The April 1977 issue of Medical  
World News says that the “rising num-  
ber of home births in California” has  
led to the adoption of hospital-based  
"homestyle" delivery programs. That  
means that hospital rooms are "furnished  
like homes," that stays are shorter,  
family members can come and go more  
easily, and there is less emphasis on  
drugs and instruments.

But there's a hitch: "homestyle"  
costs more ($700 versus $550 for ‘con-  
ventional services’ at one hospital--  
not counting doctor's fees). The re-  
sult is not change, but tokenism, af-  
fordable by few.

Debate Over Fetal Monitors

There are powerful interests op-  
posing the growth of safe, widespread  
and low-cost home birth programs--  
whether or not they're feminist con-  
trolled.

A major reason is the proliferation  
and high cost of hospital technology,  
which can save lives in high risk  
births. For example, the average price  
of a fetal heart monitor is $6,000,  
and the central equipment to follow  
several mothers in labor costs three  
to four times that much. The result is  
a built-in incentive to recoup costs  
from as many patients (and insurance  
policies) as possible.

The Chicago Maternity Center Story  
(Kartemquin Films), shown once in  
Denver this spring, was an excellent  
analysis of why home birth programs--  
like the 78-year-old Chicago center--  
have no place in today's medical sys-  
tem. In short, there's no money in it.

In Chicago, before the center closed,  
some women paid as little as $50. An  
average home delivery "package" costs  
$375 in California. And even at the  
higher-priced Maternity Center Associa-  
tion in New York City, the total pack-  
age cost of $750 is one-third of the  
fees for private care at a medical cen-  
ter nearby.

The Chicago Maternity Center Story  
showed how the directors of hospitals  
and the directors of drug companies  
sit on each other's boards--creating a  
situation similar to the relationship  
of the Pentagon and Boeing Aircraft.

Fetal heart monitors are machines which electronically record the fetus’  
heart rate during labor.

There are two varieties:  
external and internal.

In the external variety, an upper belt records the intensity of uterine  
contractions and the lower strap contains an ultrasonic device which moni-  
tors the baby's heart rate.

There is no evidence that the ultrasonic device has no long-range effects on the baby.  
Internal monitors are electrodes inserted vaginally and attached to the  
baby's head by metal screws or clips.

No one has bothered to find out if  
this causes pain to the fetus; however, common side effects include a post-  
delivery rash on the baby where the electrodes were attached, and possibly  
scalp abscesses.

In order for the electrodes to be attached, the water bag must be broken, adding to the possibility of infection.  
There are studies showing that the use of fetal monitors has decreased  
the newborn death rate and the number of brain damaged children.

By warning the obstetrician that the fetus may be in trouble, they indicate whether  
an emergency delivery may be needed.

However, according to the Boston Women's Health Collective, “some of  
the fetal stress picked up by the monitor might itself be a product of the  
placement and operation of the monitor or other hospital procedures. As  
examples, the collective cites the artificial rupture of membranes, unwise  
use of labor induction drugs, sedation of the mother (which reaches the  
baby in proportionately higher doses) and the use of some forms of anes-  
thesia that can create oxygen problems for the baby.

The result is some "rescue" Caesarean prompted by practices which are responsible for  
the emergency in the first place.

Apparently, however, hospitals differ in their use of monitoring equip-  
ment.

A nurse at Colorado General Hospital in Denver said that monitors  
are used only in specific circumstances at CG, and not routinely as was  
the case at Tallahassee Memorial.

(CG does only high-risk births; and for  
the reasons behind that, see Phyllis Kadison's story in this issue.)  
Women interested in researching hospital practices in Colorado can send  
a note to BMR, and we will put you in touch with each other.

--Information based on the Boston  
Women's Health Collective “Gur  
Les, Ow Svluce”

Obstetricians are men and are trained in  
pathology--not normal births. It's not  
surprising that in 1976, the American  
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists announced that "any physician  
with OB privileges who intentionally  
participates in a non-emergency home  
delivery will be viewed as no longer  
fulfilling the professional expecta-  
tions of the OB staff of the hospital  
and will immediately have OB admitting  
privileges revoked."

In California, picketing feminists  
at a meeting of the California Medical  
Association March 9 scored an unex-  
pected victory when the Association re-  
fused to pass a similar resolution.  
(However, it has been sent back to  
committee).

The recent inspection in Tallahassee  
points to the need for aggressive  
action to change hospitals and to win  
the right to safe alternatives.

The US ranks 15th among the indus-  
trialized countries in infant mortal-  
ity, despite the so-called miracles of  
modern obstetrical care, described on  
a recent CBS special.

Carol Downer, one of the Tallahassee  
defendants, termed it a "disgusting  
hard sell for expensive gadgetry. . .  
The narrator described horrendous prac-  
tices in a soothing tone with tranquil  
music as background.

"In fact, giving birth in a hospi-  
tal is a noisy, painful, confusing  
and frightening experience."

“American women are being stampeded  
into deciding to have dehumanized and  
dangerous births. Doctors fear only  
loss of license and malpractice suits.

"Their usual defense is that they  
are going by community standards. As  
the majority of doctors choose to em-  
ploy practices such as labor induction,  
intravenous drips to hasten labor,  
drugs to tranquilize mothers and sur-  
gery, community standards change ac-  
cordingly. Soon a doctor will be  
able to perform C-sections in the maj-  
ority of his cases without fear of  
losing his license or being sued. At  
that point, birth will become the most  
dangerous event in a woman's life.”