- New Proposals Would Weaken A.A.

Affirmative Action Is Under Attack

Peg: Hickox

(Editors note: Most of the information for this article came from Spokeswoman, November 1976.)

Civil rights groups and feminists are strongly protesting the government's recent attacks on anti-discrimination programs. New government regulations considerably weaken both Affirmative Action and the Equal Employment Opportunities Commission (EEOC). Although both programs have always been limited in scope and have never been adequately enforced, the new regulations are Washington's strongest attempts to date to eliminate the goal of equal employment opportunity.

A Guide to Women’s Literature in Australia, by Penny Ryan,

Affirmative Action was established by Executive Order in 1965. It requires any company that contracts to do work for the government to take “affirmative action" to provide equal job opportunities. About 30 million workers, or one-third of the nation's total civilian workforce, are affected by this program.

On September 17th, the US Department of Labor proposed a number of changes in the regulations for enforcing affirmative action. A decision on the new regulations is expected by the first of the year. Currently, affirmative action affects all employers with 50 or more employees. Under the new regulations, only employers with 100 or more employees are required to have affirmative action plans.

Currently, all companies with contracts of one million dollars have to show that they are implementing affirmative action programs. Under the new rules, pre-contract clearance is only required for contracts of ten million or more.

In effect, only a few large universities could be subject to pre-contract clearance if the revised rules become effective.

Investigations

Under the new regulations, investigation of affirmative action complaints is no longer required but will be optional. Moreover, companies will no longer be given specific goals and timetables for achieving non-discriminatory hiring practices.

Additional changes in the rules are all designed to permit more bureaucratic maneuvering by companies to avoid complying with affirmative action requirements.

In sum, the new rules give up any pretense of real enforcement of affirmative action, returning to the concept of "good faith efforts" on the part of those employers who have profited from discriminatory labor practices for years.

The EEOC's revised regulations went into effect last August and are similar in purpose to the proposed affirmative action revisions. Under the new rules, persons charging discrimination are contacted by letter to see if they wish to pursue the charge. If not, the EEOC drops the case. There is no indication of how much, if any, effort is made to locate the charging parties.

Another revised regulation requires the charging party to show adequate cause for claiming discrimination, effectively requiring the employee to conduct the investigation (which is supposedly the job of the EEOC) before the EEOC will even bring charges.

The new procedures are also designed to eliminate on-the-spot investigation of companies, relying on phone calls and letters to determine whether there is discrimination in the case.

The newsletter was drastically cut down in size to one legal-size sheet of paper. The newsletter has an outstanding bill with the printer currently for several months of printing.

Size Problems

The other matter at the October meeting which raised a great deal of controversy was the suggestion to break the Denver chapter of NOW into six smaller neighborhood chapters. There would still be a chapter for the Denver Metro area which could serve as an umbrella organization for the other chapters under this plan.

One of the largest complaints about the Denver NOW was its size and impersonalness. Women complained that it was hard to meet other women, that the once-a-month orientation meetings for new members were not effective, and that no outreach programs were going on. Some women feel that the smaller groups will be more intimate and encourage more women to join.

Smaller groups might also allow different groups to work out different politics: one chapter might develop more socialist politics, another more "liberal" politics. This is seen as one way of resolving conflicts over different political orientations within Denver NOW.

Some women have expressed the fear, however, that if one group has trouble with administration and finances, seven groups will only add to the problem.

In areas where the new rules have been put into effect, an inordinately high number of cases have been dropped, 80 to 90%.

Protests

Although the government has tried to sneak these revisions by with minimal publicity, there have been strong protests. Women's groups are demanding more public hearings before the Affirmative Action revisions go into effect. Some groups are planning demonstrations at local Department of Labor offices.

NOW has filed an injunction to prevent implementation of the new EEOC procedures and EEOC employees themselves are protesting the "illegal work speed-up" that the new policies require, claiming that the new rules force them to "violate civil rights laws by treating discrimination cases too hastily."

The combined attacks on the two major anti-discrimination programs are seen by many as a real threat to gains for women and minorities. Lynne Darcy from NOW contends that the new EEOC regulations, combined with the latest move on affirmative action, point to an intensive, conscious effort to deny civil rights.

Discrimination

Denver discriminates against women and minorities while accepting federal revenue-sharing funds which prohibit such discrimination, according to the Metro Denver Urban Coalition.

The city has also failed to get public input on deciding how revenue-sharing funds should be spent.

On November 9, the Coalition presented the results of a survey it conducted in Denver to city officials, showing that the number of women and minorities in revenue-sharing funded jobs did not reflect the percentages of women and minorities found in the Denver workforce. The study said that Denver has received $67 million in federal revenue-sharing funds which the city has put into its general fund. The funds have gone to administration, engineering, public works, parks and recreation, theater, arenas, and other city agencies.

When women and minorities are hired, the report cites, they tend to be in the lower echelon jobs, blue-collar, skilled service, and maintenance jobs, with the bulk of women employees holding nursing or office and clerical positions.

It was found that Anglo men hold 79.9% of the top-level executive and administrative jobs even though they comprise only 44% of the Denver workforce.

At the other end of the spectrum, the study showed Spanish-surnamed women, apparently faring the worst, hold no top-level positions and only 2% of the professional positions. They comprise 4.8% of Denver's workforce.

It was reported in the Denver Post that the city official responsible for enforcing the equal opportunity provisions of the revenue-sharing program said he never has been instructed on what steps to take if a discrimination complaint is received. Nor, reportedly, has he ever been told what city agencies and programs use revenue-sharing funds.

Warren Alexander, executive director of the Coalition, blames federal officials for failing to enforce equal opportunity policies.

Denver NOW Reorganizes; Closes Office

To the public, NOW members have known a crisis was pending. There have been differing views expressed as to why this crisis arose. The activity of a lot of NOW women in the ERA Colorado campaign undoubtedly drew some energy and money away from NOW. Also, although there are over 300 members in Denver NOW, there are only about 50 really active members. Some women have expressed the opinion that weak leadership was partly to blame, that fundraising was way down from what it has been in previous years.

One subject of general consensus is that NOW needs to draw in new members and energy. How this will be done is part of the discussion around restructuring of NOW.

Various plans are also being talked of for opening the office again. Francis spoke of the possibility of making arrangements with a college so that sociology students, for example, could get work/study credit for staffing the NOW office. Grants are always another possibility, but they are not easily obtained.

Fundraiser

NOW is having a fundraising party on December 16, 8 pm at 909 Logan St. in the party room. There is a $5 donation at the door with hors d'oeuvres and free drinks being served. There will be canned music, decorations, and general festivities.

Anyone wishing to get in touch with NOW for further information and future meeting dates can drop a line to P.O. Box 3101, Denver, CO 80201.