4

66y,

BN Be tle Ee A 2
e were not violent, we were outraged. . .”

=]
3
a

3

Night of Terror and Fury in San Francisco

Lynn Anderson  
Corinne Coston  

One can be a political woman for a long time, and on some levels find it  
difficult to believe the most hideous and bloody injustices.  

Perhaps these  
feelings of disbelief come out of women with white, naive backgrounds, who  
were taught so thoroughly that the police are good, upright citizens, and  
that the government is fair.  

In the articles, we keep emphasizing our ob-  
jective sources and corroborating our opinions because this whole story is,  
on that level, so very hard to believe.  
But the cold, hard reality is, we know that it happens every day.  

First, the trial of Dan White  

Corinne Coston  

On December 25, angry that Moscone  
had decided not to reinstate him as  
supervisor, Dan White packed his  
.38 special and extra ammunition; to  
avoid the metal detector at City  
Hall, he climbed through a basement  
window and went to confront Moscone.  
He shot Moscone several times, re-  
loaded, and walked down the hall to  
Milk's office. White claimed that  
Milk smirked at him, thus eliciting  
the same violent response. He turned  
himself into the police shortly af-  
terwards, and gave his confession to  
a friend and ex-coach. While he was  
in jail, he received special treat-  
ment. And cops wearing "Free Dan  
White" tee-shirts appeared.  

Excerpt from "San Francisco: Right-  
Wing Backlash in One City," written  
by a member of San Francisco Les-  
bians Against Police Violence  

The Letter of the Law  

When is murder murder and when is  
it manslaughter? This is the deter-  
mination that motivated everybody.  
There was no doubt that Harvey Milk  
and George Moscone were dead and Dan  
White did it. The degree of criminal  
responsibility determines murder or  
manslaughter. Murder is the “unlaw-  
ful killing of a human being with  
malice (either expressed or implied)  
aforethought." Malice is the “delib-  
erate intention to unlawfully take  
the life of a human being." The jury's  
verdict was based on the contention  
that no malice existed; and that the  
crime was manslaughter - "the unlaw-  
ful killing of a human being without  
malice, upon a sudden quarrel  
or heat of passion." The law and the  
facts are the only black and white,  
concrete part of these proceedings  
that we have. The rest of the parti-  
cipants were people who were subject  
to the riotous emotional and politi-  
cal pressures of this case.  

The defense was clear-cut - they  
knew their goals - to get Dan White  
off. Given the law, and the facts,  
the best way to do that was a) prove  
Dan White was under an abnormal am-  
ount of "strain," b) pick the jury  
who would empathize with White's  
feelings. In both of these they were,  
oddly enough, assisted by the prose-  

cution.  
MORE ON PAGE 20  

Harvey Milk. Immediately lesbians and  
gay men began gathering and marching  
down Market Street to City Hall. By  
the time they got there the crowd  
had grown and eventually the essen-  
tially spontaneous protest was more  
than 5,000 strong. Posters bore slo-  
gans like “When Blacks, Browns, Poor  
Kill, They Are Murderers", "Dan White  
Is Depressed." As the night progres-  
sed, the angry crowd turned into a  
riot. Speakers weren't listened to,  
words weren't wanted. The first po-  
lice car was burned about 10:45 p.m.  
By the end of the day, more than one  
million dollars worth of damage had  
been done.  

During most of the night, police  
were restrained by Police Chief Cha-  
rles Gains. Against their wills. They  
were itching to be allowed to control  
the mob, and obviously very angry at  
being restrained. Just after 11 p.m.  
they were unleashed; hundreds of them  
were screaming, “Now it's our turn."  
According to the Berkeley Barb, all  
discipline went to hell and police  
went on a rampage, clubbing anyone  
within reach. Demonstrators scatter-  
ed, but it was at least 1 a.m. before  
things quieted down at City Hall and  
later still before the police riot  
on Castro Street was over.  

The City Hall riot occurred out of  
lesbian and gay rage, but not only  
over the Dan White verdict. Since  
December, police harassment of les-  
bians and gays has escalated. One  
example occurred several months ago  
when a group of off-duty police offi-  
cers invaded Peg's Place, a lesbian  
bar, harassing lesbian patrons and  
ending up badly beating two women.  
There have apparently been numerous  
incidents of brutality against indi-  
vidual lesbians and gay men daily and  
nightly on the streets.  

Information from The San Francisco  
Chronicle, The San Francisco Examiner  
and the Berkeley Barb  

& Police Revenge on Castro St.  

Lynn Anderson  

Castro Street, a major gay neigh-  
borhood in San Francisco, was quiet-  
er than usual late on the night of  
May 21. The riot at City Hall was  
still going on though even then be-  
ing thinned out by riot police. A few  
people were walking around, the bars  
were doing a quiet business. Police  
cars started trickling into the area,  
all of them full, some of them packed  
with three cops in the front and  
three in the back. By 11:45 p.m. the  
street was full of cruising police  
cars, with police officers hanging  
out of their car windows yelling in-  
sults. A crowd was growing for the  
second time that night; people from  
City Hall, people from the bars,  
neighborhood residents. The insults  
started to be returned, bottles being  
thrown. Shortly after midnight at  
least eight cars of policemen in  
full riot gear rolled in and unloaded  
their cargoes, directed by Captain  
George Jeffries of the San Francisco  
Police Department. At this point the  
crowd was yelling "Go home!" The pol-  
ice then let loose a violent, mis-  
placed attack, not only on the gays  
and lesbians in the street, but also  
on the forcibly ejected gays from the  
bars. Property was again destroyed,  
but this time with no excuse. Many  
of these people were nowhere near  
City Hall that night.  

According to The San Francisco  
Chronicle, Jack Webb, an ex-policeman  
who was on the scene observing, made  
his way through police ranks to Cap-  
tain Jeffries and asked, "George,  
what the hell are you doing? A lot  
of these kids are drunk and there's  
just been a mean scene downtown. It  
was all quiet before you sent these  
guys in here. What kind of police  
work is this?" Jeffries replied,  
"We lost the battle at City Hall. We  
are not going to lose this one."  

At about 1:20 p.m. more than a do-  
zen riot police charged into the  
Elephant Walk Bar at 18th and Castro,  
with cries of "Seig Heil" and "Bonsai."  
Witnesses said that the cops swung  
their riot clubs indiscriminately at  
patrons huddled under tables, scream-  
ing, "Get out you goddamn queers."  
All of the doors and windows of the  
bar were smashed and tables overturned  
and broken. One patron called it  
a planned military attack.  

MORE ON PAGE 20  

Open Letter from San Francisco  

Hello Sisters,  

You may have heard briefly on the news about the "Battle of City Hall" in  
San Francisco on May 21st. The media wants us to believe it wasn't really a  
riot - "just a mob of leftist provocateurs and violent street gangs looting."  
We will not be robbed of the history we made: It was a gay riot 10,000 strong:  
The city government does not want people to know about the powerful show of  
force we took against the injustice of the justice system that gave Dan White,  
a white middle-class ex-cop an easy verdict of Manslaughter for murdering May-  
or Moscone and the only gay supervisor, Harvey Milk. Manslaughter is what you  
get for hit and run not murder with a gun: If Dan White was black, he'd be on  
death row. Why did Dan White get special treatment? Because he represents big  
business and the right wing in San Francisco. During the trial he was portray-  
ed as a clean-cut family man for law and order. It's no wonder the police  
wore "Free Dan White" tee shirts. It's obvious that to some, Dan White is a  
hero for assassinating a progressive mayor and a gay activist, and for putting  
the right wing back in power in San Francisco.  

After the murders at City Hall last November, police violence towards les-  
bians increased dramatically. Women have been beaten and falsely arrested  
outside of lesbian bars. Off-duty police have raided lesbian bars attacking  
women. Twenty police were called in to arrest one gay man for posting a fly-  
er on Castro Street. When the Dan White verdict came in, it was the last  
straw. If an ex-cop can murder the mayor of a large city in cold blood and  
only serve about 5 years in actual confinement (he'll never see San Quentin) -  
Then what can't the police do to individual "queers" on the streets?  

10,000 of us took to the streets and marched on City Hall. Last time we  
had gathered there holding candles in mourning for the loss of Harvey. We were  
peaceful then. But when phony hand-picked “gay leaders” tried to calm our  
rage that night, it didn't work.  

Many of us had tried for years to use the system and vote ourselves into  
supervisor roles. What happened? Years of work were destroyed by the violent  
murder of Milk.  

When rows of police in riot squad gear came swinging clubs at us, we linked  
arms and resisted the best we could. We smashed the windows of City Hall while  
the police cracked heads. The police singled out women for the worst beatings.  
I watched powerless while eight police clubbed one woman to the ground and  
left her needing 55 stitches in her head.  

And in the paper they say we were violent because we burned 12 police cars  
and did a million dollars worth of damage to city property. Violence is po-  
lice breaking ribs, puncturing lungs, multiple skull wounds, tear gassing and  
clubbing! I will never forget watching the police afterwards marching in  
storm trooper style shouting: "Why are we happy? Because Danny is free!" And  
then the smoke from the burnt squad cars, I saw them goose-step shouting:  
"Bonsai" and "Seig Heil" celebrating their victory!  

Now that the riot is history, the police are moving quick to infiltrate and  
divide the lesbian and gay men’s community. The chief of police and the mayor  
are having meetings (at the women's building no less!) with co-opted phony  
gay “leaders” to restore "peace." They've even set up a fund for queers to pay  
back City Hall for the damage!  

Meanwhile, a grand jury investigation is underway trying to find out the  
source of any violence done at the riot - including police brutality! Unfor-  
tunately, some gays are tricked into talking because they are afraid and frus-  
trated and want to see action taken against the police department. Instead,  
any information most likely will be used to bring charges against gays for  
“inciting a riot." There are many groups informing gays not to talk to the  
police. Many are listening!  

The "Battle of City Hall” was just the continuation of resistance to viol-  
ence from the police and city officials. It is no longer safe to be an open  
lesbian in San Francisco, “Queer Capitol of the World." What begins here will  
spread across the country. We need to form a strong network. We need your  
support. 19 people were arrested Monday night, many on felonies. Money is  
needed for defense and a civil action suit against the police department. Many  
of us are under investigation. I have been followed and harassed continuously.  
We are keeping quiet and nameless because of the grand jury. We are fright-  
ened but strong in our conviction that if we stand together we will continue  
what began ten years ago at Stonewall. We will not be turned back. We will  
not live invisible lives of fear anymore:  

*I cannot at this time sign my name,  
but I am only one Lesbian among millions!