movement

Politically Concerned Lesbians Make

Lois Anne Addison

For many years, and for many reasons I did not read very much. What I did read was written by women - actually mostly by lesbians. In

book reviews

my life struggles I focused on things immediately experienced in my own life. Although I was always aware of connections between life in the USA and life in other places, I stopped updating my information far too long ago. I would say things like "There is too much to keep up with"..."it is a distraction away from the struggles here." I also found it difficult to read material because of jargon and rhetoric, not to mention the sexism and queer-hating.

Last spring my lover and I decided that we wanted to increase our understanding and knowledge of the world and the role the US plays in that world. We went to the local bookstore and got a big wall map of the world and then one of the Middle East. We started to read a variety of material never mentioned or reviewed in the lesbian press - things that are never seen in women's bookstores. We wanted to make sure that we shared what we read, so the two of us agreed to meet together formally once a week to discuss what we were reading and thinking about.

I have mentioned the magazines and books to friends in letters and in conversation. But the seriousness of the subject needs more than just brief exchanges in letters. Today with Reagan wanting to increase military aid to the government of El Salvador, supporting other repressive regimes as well as attempting to "destabilize" Nicaragua, it is more important than ever to see what this country has been doing for years in other parts of the world...and to see how all of this connects up with protecting US corporations and investment.

The information available through the regular media - the so-called best US newspapers and the TV network news is nothing more than systematic disinformation. The following list of books and magazines is an attempt to break through that disinformation network. I do not pretend to "review" any of them. None of it is written by feminists let alone political lesbians. The material includes a variety of objectionable assumptions, not just about heterosexuality, but about the sanctity of the family, religion, to name only a few. Each reader will have to perform her own critical analysis.

The material listed below is about people's lives and is remarkably free of jargon. I am no longer willing to have the discussion of the issues raised in these books and magazines be the sole prerogative of the Left. WE AS POLITICALLY CONCERNED LESBIANS NEED TO RECLAIM THEM. I would like to see lesbians in struggle begin to share, talk about, and develop our own strategies related to these issues. These things touch our everyday lives.

As a minimal beginning, I would like to see us (1) ask local women's/lesbian bookstores to start ordering material like this so it is more readily available to us; (2) write articles and make sure that discussion of these issues becomes part of the lesbian press; and (3) form small groups to talk about the issues raised in this material - and its meaning for our daily life; (4) create small libraries among ourselves to offset the cost.

So the following list is some of what I have been reading lately and which I strongly recommend to anyone who is interested in learning more about what role this country plays in the rest of the world.

GENERAL BACKGROUND:

-Cry of the People: The Struggle for Human Rights in Latin America: The Catholic Church in Conflict with U.S. Policy, Penny Lernoux, Penguin paperback, $6.95, 1980. She describes much more than what has happened to the Roman Catholic Church since it made the commitment to work with the poor in Latin America. Throughout this tapestry is the constant destructive thread of the US government and corporate interests. If you read nothing else, please read this.

-Inside the Company: CIA Diary, Philip Agee (former CIA agent), Bantam paperback, 1975, $3.50. An oldie - but the sheer detail of this description of how this country routinely interferes, on a day-to-day basis, in the internal affairs of other countries is mind-boggling. Since it describes an earlier era ('57-'67) it cuts against a presently popular idea that US interference and support for atrocities are due to the presence of Reagan in the White House.

-The Real Terror Network - Terrorism in Fact and Propaganda, Edward Herman, South End Press paperback, 1982, $7.50. This book focuses on what are called "National Security States," i.e. states that are seen as vital to the national security of the US. Most of the information relates to activity in Latin America.

-NACLA Report on the Americas (a bi-monthly journal published by the North American Congress on Latin America, 151 W. 19th St., 9th Flr., NY, NY 10011, subscription $15/year - $3.75 for single issue). This is an excellent non-jargony source of information. It has long articles on a specific topic, an update section and a list of resources.

movement

Connections To Many Peoples’ Fights

CHILE
-Death in Washington: The Murder of Orlando Letelier, Donald Freed, Lawrence Hill & Co. paperback, 1980, $6.95. This is about the murder of Orlando Letelier, former Chilean Ambassador to the US from the Allende government, and Ronni Moffitt, researcher, in Washington, DC. It helps explain how the US undermined the Allende government.

EL SALVADOR

El Salvador: The Face of Revolution, R. Armstrong and J. Shenk, South End Press paperback, 1982, $7.50. This is a very readable description of the background history and present-day realities in El Salvador. It is hard not to feel chills or to choke back tears as you are taken through the efforts of ordinary people to stop the atrocities of the government and other right-wing death squads.

GUATEMALA
Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala, S. Schlesinger and S. Kinzer, Doubleday paperback, 1982. This is about the US-led overthrow of an elected government in 1954. It is full of concrete details, including embassy conversations and reports gained from documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.

NICARAGUA
-Now We Can Speak: (A Journey Through the New Nicaragua), F.M. Lappé and J. Collins, 1982 Institute for Food and Development paperback, $4.95. This is a series of conversations with a variety of people in Nicaragua. It is very readable and down to earth. It is unquestionably one of the best books that I have read in this area.

For an excellent source of information about struggles on another continent, Southern Africa Magazine. It is published 11 times/year. Subscriptions $10/year, 198 Broadway, NY, NY 10038.

There are other books, but I have not read them and so don't feel comfortable mentioning them. As I read more, I would like to add to this list - a kind of running update. It would be great if other readers who have found different books which they have found helpful would write in and add to the list. Sometimes finding decent books is the hardest thing.

All of this reading and discussing, of course, prompted us to try to figure out ways that we could feel comfortable working with various support groups. I am a lab tech and have become somewhat known in the medical center where I work as a political lesbian. A medical student who was going to Nicaragua for two months on a rotation came to me and asked me to teach her some basic lab skills. I did that and gathered up a bunch of books and also gave her an old monocular microscope that I had to take with her and leave there. It was exciting to do something out of my everyday normal activity. I also had enormous fun because I took a purple marker and drew lesbian symbols on all of the books. I etched a lesbian symbol on the stage of the microscope. She said that if we wanted to write something she would take it with her. As part of our activity we sent the following message to Nicaragua. (See box below) I will be having lunch with this medical student sometime soon and will learn how people responded.

1982
N.C.

26 December,
Durham,

Lois Anne Addison
Callie Justice

Collecting the various things we are sending to Nicaragua has gotten us to thinking about the connections between the concerns we feel for people in countries other than the USA and being lesbians. We want the people who use this material in Nicaragua to know that it was sent by lesbians. Lesbians who feel responsible for the actions of the government and people of the USA...lesbians who strongly oppose the USA long time building of its own power and wealth on the poverty and exploitation of other people. We are very aware of how the comforts and ease of our lives depend on the constant interference, destruction and stealing from others.

We read to learn about how the USA does all these things. We tell other people about what we learn and encourage them to oppose what the government and corporations and people of the USA do to control life in other countries. We are lesbians who work for change in our own lives and in the USA...we want to end such interferences.

Being lesbians is a big part of the kinds of change we work for. In part it means being a living challenge to the domination of women by men. Being a lesbian is an attack on the social rules that tell everyone they can only bond with others in heterosexual - blood related small groups called families. The battle lines are often hard to find in this country - there are so many of them and they exist not only in the institutions of the society - but in the minds of all of us.

As lesbians we are not accepted here - by being open - by saying to the people that we work with "we are lesbians" we peel off some of the protection of our skin color and our class...we also assault the basic assumptions and attitudes that all weave together to form a pattern of destruction and oppression. These institutions, assumptions and attitudes are embedded into the structures of every country we know about, in the whole world.

In November we went to a meeting of a local lesbian-feminist group which meets every month. A film about Nicaragua - "Women in Arms" was shown. We recommended other films and books to read to help lesbians to learn more about Central and South America and what the USA does.

Just as we want to bring our opposition to USA interference to the conversations and meetings we have with other lesbians, we also want to bring our strong feelings about the meaning/challenge of lesbianism to this activity of sharing our medical knowledge and materials with you who will be using them in Nicaragua. We know many other lesbians who share these concerns and commitments. We would like for you to know that we are here and that we are working.

Big Mama Rag, April, 1983 - Page 11