for art’s sake

Mary Cassatt

at .

Home

by Vivian Ducat

‘Superb exposition...sound workmanship...
supple and virile design, the masculine
palette...a masterly skill that reminds us of
Manet, Renoir and...Degas.’ The opening
of Mary Cassatt’s first one-woman show in
Paris in 1893 had the critics raving; her work
was as good as a man’s! Now, eighty-five
years later, many of the same works are
included in an exhibit at Boston’s Museum
of Fine Arts entitled ‘Mary Cassatt at
Home.’ The paintings still warrant the same
level of praise although a slightly different
vocabulary could be used to describe them.

Although Mary Cassatt is generally
thought of as one of America’s best woman
painters, she actually spent very little of her
professional life in this country. She moved
to Paris from her native Pittsburgh in 1866 at
the age of twenty-two to study the superior
collections at the Louvre. With brief inter-
ruptions, she spent the rest of her life
abroad. In 1877 she was joined by her family
who remained a central focus of her
attention and work throughout most of her
life.

Cassatt holds the distinction of being the
only American to exhibit with the Impres-
sionists beginning with the Fourth Impres-
sionist exhibit of 1879. She was also one of
only two women Impressionists, the other
being Berthe Morisot. Cassatt and Morisot
were close friends and attended art openings
together. Their styles, however, remained
very different. While Morisot mostly did
watercolors of outdoor scenes, Cassatt
tended to depict interiors in either oils,

pastels or prints.

The single most influential artist in
Cassatt’s career was undoubtedly Edgar
Degas. Although he is credited with the
statement, ‘I am not willing to admit that a
woman can draw that well,’ referring to a
print of Cassatt’s, he invited her to join the
group of independent artists known as the
Impressionists. Degas and Cassatt develop-
ed a strong professional and personal
relationship and their work reflects this
bond. Some of the qualities they shared
include the use of mirrors, the motif of a
picture within a picture and asymmetric
composition.

Mary Cassatt is most often associated
with paintings of a mother and child, a
theme which she developed beyond any of
her contemporaries. The current exhibition
at the Museum of Fine Arts, however,
explores a less popular common denomina-
tor of her work, the use of interiors,
specifically the setting of her own country
and city houses.

To emphasize their importance, curator
Barbara Shapiro has gathered many of the
original furnishings which appear in the
paintings and prints. She located vases,
dishes and a tea set, as well as larger items
such as a chair, a desk and a Japanese
screen, all from private collections and the
Cassatt family. Although no attempt is made
within the gallery to recreate the arrange-
ment of the larger artifacts, the presence of
the materials which inspired the artist adds
an interesting touch to the exhibit.

A complementary theme of the exhibit is
the identification of the individuals who
appear in the home settings. Cassatt rarely
painted still lifes, but rather chose to focus
on the living part of the home scene, her

Teg

® photocomposition
® camera services
® layout & design

* mechanicals

186 Alewife Brook Pkwy.

Cambridge, MA 02138 * (617) 661-0410

WE’RE DOING

family and close friends. Curator Shapiro
feels strongly that the vitality of the colors
and facial expressions of these models are a
direct result of the intensity of the artist’s
feelings for them. Later in life, when most of
her immediate family had died, Cassatt
resorted to painting women and children in
the village where she lived. But Shapiro
finds these works much less successful than
the portraits of her loved ones.

Mary Cassatt is also famous for her
prints inspired by Japanese woodcuts.
When Cassatt was first exposed to these in
Paris in 1890, several of her contemporaries
were already familiar with the work and
imitating the style. But few were as taken
with it as Cassatt. The current exhibit at the
MFA includes a number of original Japanese
prints from Cassatt’s personal collection as
well as some of her own interpretations of
that style. In a few instances, Shapiro has
arranged a series of prints in various stages
of completion. (Cassatt was known to have
developed her own process for imitating the
Japanese style, one which has not been
entirely reconstructed by today’s art histori-
ans.)

Lastly, the exhibit contains a number of
letters written by Cassatt which give the visitor
more insight into her personality. Perhaps
the most notable letter is one in which
Cassatt politely declines the opportunity to
serve on a panel of judges for an art show
sponsored by the Carnegie Institute in
Pittsburgh. She strongly objected to such
exhibits, suggesting to the director, John
Beatty that he ‘fancy a writer not being able
to have an article published unless passed by
a jury, not to say rivals.’

Although Mary Cassatt was always an
independent thinker, throughout her life
she often found herself caught between her
role as proper Victorian lady and the job of
establishing her position as a single profes-
sional woman. As she grew older, she
became more involved in women’s politics.
According to art historian E. John Bullard,
‘As the war (World War I) dragged on, she
became convinced that only women — by
gaining the vote and taking an active role in
government could prevent another such
catastrophe.’

In 1915, a close friend, Mrs. H.O.
Havemeyer put together an exhibit in New
York of the work of Cassatt and Degas to
benefit the cause of the suffragettes.
Although Cassatt remained in Paris until her
death in 1926, she was at heart ‘an
American, definitely and frankly Ameri-
can,’ and identified with the primary issue
facing American women at that time.

Mary Cassatt was always disappointed
by her lack of acclaim in America, although
she did live to see her work purchased by
American museums (among them the MFA
which acquired one of her paintings in 1910).
After her death, her popularity grew, and
there have been numerous exhibits of her
work in cities throughout the U.S. Noting
her increasing recognition as an important
woman in the American art scene in 1954,
Forbes Watson, a lifetime friend, noted
collector and editor of the publication Art
News, commented that ‘much more inter-
esting would be a list of the men who painted
better than Mary. It would be a very short
list.’

IT AGAIN!

Second career seminar — Sept. 14, 9am-12:30
special guest SHARON KING of WOMAN ’78
It’s free. Call for reservations.
742-7300 876-640)

SERVICES

Free Stereo
Advice
HARBOR SOUND
742-6887

The
People

Preservation Courses
ph ich Rates ls

Evening and daytime courses
for all levels of interest in
architectural history, antiques,
and preservation strategies.
Registration begins Septem-
ber 15. Write for free bro-

phone 492-2599

Equal Times September 11, 1978

erewhon

natural foods
1731 Mass. Ave., Cambridge

chure:
Society for the Preservation
of New England Antiquities
141 Cambridge Street
Boston, MA 02114

or call: 227-3956

15