hot briefs...

Double Standard

In a recent decision, the Massachusetts Supreme Court upheld the conviction of two women accused of participating in the gang-rape of an 18-year-old woman. The Court stated that the Massachusetts rape law applied to both sexes. The women, Denise Whitehead and Mary Conolly, both began serving life sentences after their convictions in 1978. Of three men accused in the case, one was acquitted, a youth was tried as a juvenile, and one received a life sentence. "We are outraged," said Nancy Gertner, Conolly's attorney. “Men don't get life sentences for first offense rape." She said they would appeal the decision.

Was He Sleeping?

The deposed Shah of Iran's twin sister, Ashraf, said in an interview with the Chicago Tribune: "My brother is a very mystical man, a very religious man. He would never kill people deliberately."

An Unnatural Act

Senator Alan Cranston (D-CA) has introduced legislation aimed at the repeal of language in the Immigration and Naturalization Act of 1952 which is used to perpetuate the exclusion of lesbians and gay male aliens. The bill, S2210, would repeal that section of the Immigration Act which provides for the exclusion of “persons afflicted with psychopathic personality, sexual deviation or mental defect." Under Cranston's proposal, the words “sexual deviation" would be deleted.

The Baby Business

The California Senate's Business and Professions Committee has killed a bill which would have allowed midwives to deliver babies less expensively at home. Currently, licensed midwives can deliver babies in hospitals. Strong opposition to the bill came from groups representing male obstetricians and pediatricians.

-Lesbian Schoolworkers Logo by Kathy Prior/Through the Looking Glass

The Sanity of Women

The Hawaii feminist magazine, Ferity, in its March issue, reports that women and men at the Honolulu Community College were recently surveyed for their attitudes about the possible drafting of men and women. Of the women polled, only 22% approved of bringing back any kind of draft. 53% of the women said they opposed including women in any future draft. When asked if they would register if called upon to do so, a full 42% said they would refuse. Ferity said the survey indicates female students are "far more resistant" than men to the idea of being drafted for military service.

Silencing a Nation

President Carter said at a press conference in Washington May 15th that only upstanding citizens can "knock down" anti-ERA arguments. Carter said the “main obstacle” to ratification of the ERA in states like Illinois and Georgia was “the allegation that it is only supported by radical kinds of people." He said the arguments ERA opponents use about homosexuality, abortion and shared bathrooms "can best be knocked down by a person who's known to be sound and committed and balanced and patriotic with a stable family and a good job." He urged all such persons to "speak out" for the ERA.

ERA-Yes

An estimated 50,000 supporters of the Equal Rights Amendment marched and rallied in Chicago on May 10th. The event - the largest Midwestern ERA rally ever - was organized by the National Organization for Women in a last-ditch effort to seek ratification of the constitutional amendment. Ratification in Illinois, the only hold-out among northern industrial states, is considered crucial. The inability of the ERA to be ratified (3 more states are needed by June 1982) has increased the significance of this reform. Its failure can be seen as symbolic of the rise of the right and the failure of all oppressed people to achieve economic and political equality.

Divide and Conquer

A proposed family law bill, to be introduced into the New Brunswick, Canada legislature this session, has been criticized because it could be seen as legalizing homosexual marriages. The proposed legislation is designed to provide a more equal division of property acquired during a marriage. It would allow married or common-law couples to draw up ownership contracts to be dealt with upon divorce or separation. While same-sex couples are not mentioned in the bill, the word "spouse" is not given a gender identification, and opponents argue that it could then give same-sex couples the same right. Critics of the legislation are thought to be raising the issue of gay marriage to discredit the bill which would provide women with more equality in marriage.

Broken-Hearted

The dual burden of raising a family and working outside the home doubles the chance of heart disease among working women, a federally sponsored study has concluded. The incidence of heart attacks was highest among women who work in clerical jobs. The researchers say that stress caused by the economic necessity of getting a job, coupled with the poor working conditions generally found in clerical positions and family responsibilities, led to a doubling in the heart attack rate.

Tea Training

Nippon Electric Kyushu, Ltd, of Japan does not encourage its 1200 female workers to pursue their education, claiming that most of the women will marry and leave their jobs in two to three years. So, the company only teaches the women the basics of integrated circuit-making while stressing additional domestic on-the-job training, which includes instruction in flower-arranging, tea ceremony and cooking. Male technicians, on the other hand, can expect advanced electronics training with regular raises and promotions, plus a 30 to 35 year career with the firm.

DES Decision

Four drug manufacturers agreed in May in an out-of-court settlement to pay $260,000 to a Cleveland woman who was stricken with vaginal cancer as a result of her mother taking the drug DES to prevent miscarriage in 1955. Cindy Dettelbach, who underwent surgery for vaginal cancer in 1978 and faces the possibility of similar cancer developing, filed a $5 million suit in US District Court in March 1976. The suit charged that four companies - Eli Lilly, Merck and Co., E.R. Squibb & Sons, and the Upjohn Co. - were negligent in the development, manufacture and testing of the drug DES and marketed it recklessly. About 2 million pregnant women took DES before the Food and Drug Administration banned it in '71.

Meat-Eaters Beware

Monfort of Colorado, most recently in the news for their attempts to bust the United Food and Commercial Workers Local 641 union in Greeley, is in the news again for endangering the lives of people by placing profit first. According to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Monfort callously disregarded the safety of meat consumers in this country by illegally implanting cancer-causing DES in over 80,000 head of cattle. DES, a hormone, when implanted in an animal's ear, causes rapid growth development. It also causes cancer in humans and has been banned for animal use since last November by the FDA.

Cover-Up

Family Circle will no longer tell its readers how to make afghans. Because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the magazine is “doing some creative thinking to come up with alternatives." Telling readers how to make “coverlets" is the leading contender.

40 Acres and a Mule

For the first time in its history, the 63-year-old Quaker Service Organization, the American Friends Service Committee has appointed a woman as its chief executive director. In her acceptance, Asia Bennett said, "Work on peace and social justice has become extremely complicated by economic interests, which are inextricably linked to the moral, social and political issues which the AFSC addresses." She continued, "The entitlement of the poor and minorities in the United States to a better life involves a lot of women and children. We must help them." Bennett takes the helm of AFSC's struggle to work with the poor as former director Lou Schneider retires to his farm in Glenmoore, Pennsylvania where he will be spending time riding his new horse, Whiskey Sour, presented to him by the AFSC Board of Directors.

5

, ~Newroots/CPF
Rough Going

Singer Roberta Flack told a conference in Baltimore recently that black women must not only fight sexism and racism, but also “the black man who has made it." Flack said that such a man will “do anything, say anything, if he feels his position is threatened." She told the Black Women's Consciousness Raising Association that black women will find the going particularly rough in show business - "Most black women in show business are given the business," she said.

Rape Confrontation

A British Columbia feminist group Rape Relief is using a tactic called “rape confrontation" in order to expose rapists who often go unpunished because of a victim's reluctance to press charges. On request from the victim, a group of women appear at the home of the man who committed the rape but was not charged. When the man answers the door, they chant such things as "we know what you did," “we know who you are," and "we are watching you." The man is then given a phone number he can use to contact men who support Rape Relief and with whom he can discuss the rape.

Trials and Tribulations

A trial in Britain which resulted in a police raid in which a member of the House of Lords, a minister and an Irish politician were nabbed in a brothel, has ended in a prison sentence for the madam. The men's names were not revealed.

Porn Fighters Fiasco

Three women who were arrested on February 7th in Hartford, CT for pouring human blood on a display mannequin, books and films at the Bare Facts lingerie shop (see Hot Briefs, BMR Vol. 8 No. 3), in an anti-porn demonstration, are now faced with a felony charge. Jane Quinn, Linda Hand, and Shell Wildwomoon have been charged with criminal mischief, interfering with an officer, and criminal trespass, a Class D felony. The felony charge could mean five years in jail and a $5000 fine. The arrests occurred at the store where women were protesting the continued exploitation of women because of "men's nights" and the selling of weapons of violence (whips, dildos with spiked tips, etc.) as well as books and movies which portray women as victims of rape and wife-beating.

More hot briefs page 23