Hostility

It would seem that a major obstacle to the growth of the women’s movement today is what Flo Kennedy would call the horizontal hostility currently manifesting itself within it. By her analysis, horizontal hostility, negative energy vented by members of a movement on each other, is a reaction to vertical oppression, that which comes down on us from outside, and against which we feel ourselves powerless. We feel so frustrated as feminists in the heart of the patriarchy, then, that we release our rage where it will at least have some effect: on each other. If this is so, it must, however, point to other weaknesses in our process. A healthy movement finds other ways to channel its fury than by turning it within. If we expect to be alive 20 years from now, we'd better get healthy fast.

Defensiveness

The feminist movement is the first major political movement to challenge its membership in the area of their personal lifestyles and relationships, as well as in that of their political ideology. It is an immense and even a frightening responsibility, to have to define one’s politics. When challenged to live by them at our most intimate levels of functioning, surely it is understandable that we feel ourselves threatened, that we tend to become defensive. This defensiveness is further aggravated by the fact that we have no common definition of or shared strategy for revolution. So there is no right or wrong, except in our own eyes and in the eyes of the woman sitting next to us in a conference workshop. It is as likely as not that her view will oppose our own. So, in order to protect our positions, we have retreated into rigidity, and evolved an elaborate vocabulary of adjectives to do the work of defining our politics for us. Thus we have a movement full of separatist / vegetarian / anti-imperialist / matriarchist / socialist / anarchist / lesbian / whatever feminists, and these labels have become the trenches in which we crouch as we hurl rhetoric at each other.

In fact, most of us are unsure about exactly where we stand on most of the vastly complex issues facing us as feminists, and understandably so. It is not politically unsound to be confused. It is politically suicidal to pretend not to be. In dealing with questions of Right and Wrong, it might be helpful to consider morality as the degree to which we take responsibility for our own feelings, actions and convictions. The concept of a correct or an incorrect political stance then becomes a false issue.

Gut Feminism

In order to draw strength from our differences, we need first to clarify that which we hold in common. One way to begin channeling our scattered energy might be to work on a formula for revolution, so that we know what it is we're working toward and can count on every other woman who calls herself a feminist to be working toward the same end. At this point perhaps we could begin to examine the content of our disagreements rather than question each other's motivations.

One thing we do hold in common is that our reasons for becoming feminists came from our guts. At a time when our attacks on each other are becoming more and more intellectual acrobatics, it might be pertinent to remember where we're coming from. Sisterhood, though definitely not a warm fuzzy blanket, does exist. Perhaps we began by expecting too much from it, and have become disillusioned. As we take more of our responsibility for our lives back into our own hands, we come back to our need of each other out of our strengths, rather than our weaknesses.

Mlivhé Webb babe

After a shaky past few months, Big Mama is back on her feet and enjoying a new surge of energy. Our problems since the new collective took over from the old two-coordinator system in June have centered mainly around incomplete definitions of structure, collectivity and power. We found our energies bound up in our process rather than going into the product, the newspaper. We were united in our rejection of patriarchal forms of structure, but unclear about how we could work together in a way which would most efficiently produce the paper and which at the same time would satisfy our commitment to working within truly alternative, feminist forms.

Early in September five collective members met to determine, once and for all, a structure with which we could all comfortably work. What we came up with was, basically, a division of the functions of the paper's production into three areas of power: business, editorial and artistic. We decided that members of the collective would be wholly responsible for each of these three areas — two of us will handle business, two the editorial functions of the paper, and one the actual technical production, in all its phases. This won't, of course, mean that the five of us will ourselves do all the necessary work in our respective areas, but that we will be responsible for seeing that the work is done. The collective as a whole will make all major decisions, and each member will be answerable for ensuring that these decisions are carried out in her field of operations. In order to give concrete substance to the concept of accountability to the collective, each member will sign a contract detailing her duties and listing our collective definitions of goals, process and strategy. Every member will then be expected to subscribe to these definitions and to answer for all goings-on within her very clearly defined area of responsibility.

We have also decided to begin meeting twice a week: once, as before, to deal with the everyday realities of producing the newspaper, and once to discuss our editorial policy and specific politics. In this way we expect to keep in constant touch with the changing, growing analyses out of which we determine our content, to be always aware of our context and our perspective.

We have come, finally, to realize that there is no way any structure can take the place of mutual trust and respect. It is part of our vast responsibility as feminists to engage in healthy criticism of ourselves and of each other within collectives. The Big Mama Rag collective, now closed until such time as we feel solid enough with our new structure to open it again, sees itself as still in process, still learning about the dynamics of power, responsibility and collectivity. Our growing goes in spirals, back again and again to the same lessons, but each time with a fuller perspective, a deeper understanding, a more informed commitment.

Clare Strawn

The Second Annual Colorado Women’s Festival was held at East High School August 24th. It was even more successful than the festival last year. There were eighty-seven booths, almost evenly divided between information stands sponsored by Denver organizations and individuals displaying their arts and crafts. Better Jobs for Women had people earning their watermelon by hammering a big cement nail through two 2 x 6 planks. Other off-stage events included a karate workshop and pro-volleyball and VW tune-up demonstrations.

Photo by Babs Nash

The events on stage were M.C.'d by Sookie Luen, Ellen Maresh, Janice Zolazo and Beth Sheker. A nice variety of entertainment was presented, including folk, rock, classical and ethnic music, a speech by congresswoman Pat Schroeder and the announcements of the annual NOW awards. Raw Honey appeared for their first anniversary of success in dazzling white costumes with sequined red roses. Congratulations Raw Honey. Many men were present enjoying the festival and a few were seen in booths. I asked a few unidentified women how they felt about men participating in a women’s festival. The answers were as varied and interesting as the people who came to the festival. Here are a few:

“The thought of men participating in a women’s festival distresses me. I don't particularly like to be around men a lot. I don’t feel that there are enough non-sexist men to even spread around a women’s festival.”

“I feel that men participating in a women’s festival is A-OK as long as they are trying to help us. We need all the help we can get and since we don't live in a one-gender world, I think it is very important that we align ourselves and get along with each other.”

“I am really negative about men being at a women’s festival. I guess specifically because we've had so little time to be alone with each other and talk on a really good level. With men there it inhibits a lot of women. You can't get just women being with women when you have men there, you can’t get the same feeling. I guess I shouldn't be so negative because it is good that men should grow and learn about women, that women are people, and women have strength, and women can do things. But still, in all, they have had about 2,000 years to learn this and they haven't learned, so I guess it’s time to learn about it ourselves.”

The festival had two major purposes this year, that of an informal sharing of the needs and ideas of Denver women and that of a fundraiser to help fill the needs. The net profit of $860.44 is more than twice as much as was made last year, and will be channeled back into the community. The festival committee decided that half of the proceeds will be used for the feminist switchboard located at the new book center, and the other half will be held in an emergency fund for the Woman to Woman book center itself. The second half is also expected to be available for the third annual women’s festival next year. It looks as though the yearly women’s festival can be counted on as a future source of funds for the feminist community. Denver feminists owe a note of thanks to the festival committee for the hard work that made this year’s festival possible. Thank you Barb Campbell, Jeannie Branson, K.C. Awes, Ceder Barstow, Kate Fox, Risi Johnson, Patti Kemmeter and Ronnie Martin.

Feminists Kicked Off KCFR

Unfortunately, that kind of support is not possible here, according to Vicki and Peg. “KCFR is not exactly a radical station and we haven't been around the station very long. Even those staff members who expressed support of our shows don’t want to rock the boat.”

“We do feel that the kind of programming we do is important and deserves air time. We've had some good comments on the show, both from KCFR staff and from listeners. Two prison groups — one in San Francisco and the employ ex-cons group here in Denver — have already requested copies of the show we did on women in prison.

“If we can’t take legal action against KCFR to get the show reinstated — and we're certainly going to try — we plan to raise as much public protest as possible to try to shake KCFR out of its ivory tower. Letters of community support would probably help, but please be sure to send them directly to us, care of Woman to Woman Bookcenter.”

“We're sorry you won't be able to get Wycisk’s side of the story — just to keep everything ‘objective’ — but he left town for three weeks, right before he sent one of the other staff members over to let us know we didn't have a show this month. That's just one indication of the way Wycisk has treated this whole episode.”

Meanwhile, you can still hear Peg, Vicki and Clare doing feminist news every Sunday afternoon at 4 pm on KFML-AM.