hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter

Little Parolled

Joan Little has been paroled from
the North Carolina Correction Center
for Women where she had been serving
a 7 to 20 year sentence for breaking
and entering. In 1975, while she was
imprisoned, Little was acquitted of
the stabbing death of Clarence Alli-
good who had sexually assaulted her
in her cell. Little will soon begin
work as a file clerk for an unidenti-
fied New York law firm; she will be
under intensive supervision for at
least two years before she will be el-
igible for release from parole.

-Gay Community News

Barring Love

Federal prisons are developing new
programs for mothers which allow fe-
male prisoners to remain, or spend
more time, with their children. Sta-
tistics reveal, however, that more
than 21,000 children in the US have
mothers in prison. These children,
psychologists now report, are the
victims of their mother's incarcera-
tions as much as the women themselves
are. New programs, such as one in
New Jersey, which allows certain in-
mates to go camping with their child-
ren, aim to decrease the alienation
between mothers and children.

While these programs are essential
to the emotional well-being of thous-
ands of incarcerated mothers, they
still tend to reinforce the current
law enforcement practices which un-
necessarily put many women behind
bars in the first place.

-Longest Revolution

Rent Strike Rights

In an attempt to prevent rent
strikes by welfare recipients, Bronx
landlords are calling on the New York
City mayor to support their plan to
provide automatic rent payments to
landlords before people receive their
checks. The slumlords have already
pressured the city to create policies
which now force 50,000 welfare famil-
ies to accept restricted checks. If
they are successful in this new fight,

the number will increase substantially.

The dispute seems to hinge on wheth-
er one feels; 1) a welfare recipient
should have the right to control their
income and apartment or 2) welfare
recipients are socially irresponsible,
spending their money on such frivolous
items as food, clothing and medical
care.

-Shelterforce

bmr:

Diseased Biologist

The Institute for the Study of Med-
ical Ethics has assailed a proposal
by Dr. Saul Krugman of the New York
School of Medicine to inject retarded
children with an untried experimental
vaccine made from the diseased blood
of hepatitis victims.

The proposal, which he made before
the Bureau of Biologics earlier this
year, would involve injecting retard-
ed children on waiting lists for
places in state institutions with the
untested vaccines. His plans echo an
earlier experiment he conducted at
Willowbrook State Hospital in New
York, when in 1955 retarded children
were deliberately infected with act-
ive hepatitis virus as part of a
study of the disease.

-Madness Network News

Rape Rapping

A new proposed treatment for rapists
and child molesters is conversation
and assertiveness training. According
to a program director at the National
Center for the Prevention and Control
of Rape, the goal of assertiveness
training and conversation for rapists
is to teach them to see women as full
human beings by holding workshops to
teach good social behavior.

When asked about the new therapy,
a spokeswoman for the New York Women
Against Rape said "Giving a rapist
assertiveness training is like sending
the Pope to Sunday school."

Hersay

Popeycock

Addressing 6,000 women at the 10th
National Congress of Italian Domes-
tic Workers, Pope John Paul II said:
"Certainly domestic work must be seen
not as an implacable and inexorable
imposition, as slavery, but as a free
choice...which fully realizes women's
nature, and fulfills their needs."

-AWP Newsletter

Penis Envy?

How much is a phallus worth? Slight-
ly less than a displaced belly-button.
A Pittsburgh man whose penis was in-
advertently amputated during surgery
was awarded $825,000, but a woman was
awarded $854,000 in a judgment
against a plastic surgeon who gave
her an off-center navel.

-AWP Newsletter

where we’re at

Another month, another Mama.

Things have been buzzing at 1724 Gaylord, and spaces between production

seem to be getting narrower each month.

For one thing, we're putting out

a longer, more complete paper (remember Little Mama Rag of not so long ago?)

and we're really working to be on time.

What we need right now are women

who can help us get ready for production each month, especially women who
can type galley in advance. As always, any and all assistance is welcome.

This issue around the International Year of the Child has proven a chal-
lenging experience for all of us. The idea behind the theme was to draw the
connections between the oppression of children and women - and initially,
we solicited material from women of all ages (three of our contributors this
month are 11 years old) and seemingly all experiences. What we ended up ad-
dressing more oppression and pain than we had fathomed. Our original cover
design was a warm photograph of a mother and child - but the picture did not
fit the content of the issue. Hence the more realistic, cracked image; and
a whole lot of self-examination on the part of individual collective members.

We have not received much of a response to our plea for sustainers - and
your support is more important than ever, especially with increasing costs
of production and larger issues. Also, we're taking to the streets soon
(thanks to Dona our news boxes are ready), so look for BMR at various lo-
cations in the metro area.

We have really missed Sue Goding this month, and look forward to her re-
turn from vacation for the next issue (hopefully without the killer whale -
Denver already has enough visitors). And speaking of next month, the theme
is Women and Work and we are asking for pictures of women doing their jobs.
Also, we need to start contacting women in "technological-type" jobs for
our women in technology issue (September issue).

Don't forget the Community meeting at Woman to Woman, 2023 East Colfax,
on July 11 at 7:30 p.m. -- Come give us your criticisms and support!

Massive March

Women Against Violence in Porno-
graphy and Media is joining with all
feminists on the East Coast to organ-
ize a Massive March of Feminists
Against Pornography. The March is
set for Saturday, October 20, 1979,
to be held in Times Square. 20,000
women are expected to participate in
the March, as well as attend the
planned Symposium on Pornography to
be held the weekend of October 19th -
21st.

-WAVPM Newspage

“One does not sell the earth upon which the people walk.”

Crazy Horse

Save the Hills

The Black Hills Alliance is calling
for a national gathering of people
July 6, 7 and 8 in Rapid City, South
Dakota. Extensive uranium explora-
tion is now underway in the Black
Hills region and mining is set to be-
gin in 1980; the Black Hills is under
consideration for nuclear power plant
siting and nuclear waste disposal.
The Black Hills, a sacred place of
prayer for the Lakota People, will
become a radioactive desert if these
plans are not stopped.

Among the many activities planned,
on Saturday the 7th, there will be
a 25 mile walk from Rapid City to
Nemo Canyon, a beautiful area slated
for extensive mining. For info and
carpooling call 832-4508 or 443-6664
in Denver.

Afraid of Nothing

Tess, the Shopping Bag Lady, also
known as Lily Tomlin appeared last
month at an anti-nuclear rally at the
Hollywood Bowl. "I always hated the
expression, 'We have nothing to fear
but fear itself'," Tess commented.

“If we have nothin’ to fear, why bring
up the subject?" If nuclear develop-
ment keeps up, she warned, "we'll
have nothin' to fear but nothin’
itself."

-Newsweek

Nuclear Casualty

Twenty-three-year-old Gladis del
Estal, one of 6,000 nuclear protest-
ers who demonstrated in Teluda, Spain
June 3rd, is dead for her efforts.
After staging an impromptu sit-in,
with 25 others, to protest Civil
Guard attempts to break up their dem-
onstration, the group was attacked
by members of the Guard. According to
eyewitnesses, one guard, beating Del
Estal, called her "tia buena” (good
looking chick). “Hijo puta" (son of a
bitch), Del Estal angrily responded.
At that, eyewitnesses reported, the
guard responded with a fatal gun
blast to her face.

-The Guardian

But If Pregnant?

A circuit court judge in Michigan
has ruled that John Piggi must stand
trial for wife rape, saying that "Sex
is for two purposes. One is for pro-
creation, the other for enjoyment. It
doesn't seem either happened here."
An appeal has delayed the original
trial date. Michigan state law says
that spouses are immune from prosecu-
tion for sexual assault unless they
live apart, but the judge refused to
dismiss the charges, claiming the leg-
islature intended to protect spouses
from violence, not condone it.

-Hersay

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 6

Hard Hatting It

For the first time in California,
a woman construction worker was ele-
cted to a Building Trades Council.
Rayna Lehman, 28, was elected by the
Redwood City Painters local 1146 and
will take her seat next to officials
from every construction union in San
Mateo County June 28th. Lehman acce-
pted the seat to further the cause
of women in the building trades. Five
years ago she was hired on a bet that
she couldn't do the work. She won the
bet and became the first woman to
finish the 3-year apprenticeship
program; in her final exam, she got
the top score in the country. She
is now only the second woman in the
US to sit on a council.

Hormonal Harassment

Aprile de Puoti, an Italian journ-
alist, thought she was on her way to
becoming the first spokeswoman of
a Government department-- the Depart-
ment of Labor-- in a traditionally
male-dominated bureaucracy but the
promised job has been withheld be-
cause she refused the sexual advances
of the Labor Minister Vincenzo Scotti.

De Puoti was promised the job as
head of Scotti's press office when
the post became vacant, however, she
became so annoyed with Scotti's sex-
ual advances that she complained
about them to Prime Minister Giulio
Andreotti. Andreotti listened polite-
ly but told her he was not in a posi-
tion to control "the hormonal discom-
forts" of his cabinet minister.
Scotti thereupon reneged on the job
offer.

-National NOW Times

Livelihood Sewed Up

In a contract settlement that is
expected to set the pattern for 250,
000 unionized garment workers across
the country, the International Ladies
Garment Workers Union agreed to ac-
cept pay increases within the Carter
administration's 7% per year wage
guidelines. Garment workers in the
ILGWU remain among the lowest paid
industrial workers in the country,
with an average wage of about $3.90
an hour. The average manufacturing

wage in the US for both union and non-
union workers is $6.47.
-Guardian

Farmworking Women

"Campesinas: Women Farmworkers in
the California Agricultural Labor
Force" is a report just released by
the California Commission on the Sta-
tus of Women. It reports that women
farmworkers, as compared to men farm-
workers, receive less pay, work fewer
weeks during the year, and are large-
ly excluded from training programs to
gain better jobs. Yet 1/3 of the wo-
men are heads of households, and the
majority work to provide basic main-
tenance to families.

Interviews with employers revealed
that they generally believe that the
higher paying, more skilled tasks
are beyond a woman's physical capabil-
ities. The women, with an average
yearly income of $3,000, feel, how-
ever, that they are capable of learn-
ing and performing more physically
and mentally demanding tasks.

-Runes