Second In A Series

Feminism, Sexuality And Art

Constance Perenyi

For many years, art historians and critics have argued about gender manifestations in art. They banter back and forth, challenging each other to determine differences between the works of women and men. The issue has become a game-show joke, a kind of visual “Name That Image."

But what is really a joke is that the challenge is issued at all. Once asked, the question about female vs. male iconography is skirted by the critic who automatically insists that good art is universal, no matter who makes it. Smacking suspiciously of patriarchally defined humanism, the critics' assertion makes us realize how dangerous traditional value judgments are.

Over and over again, words like "good" and "universal" are used to keep women in place. To assume that a woman can express her individualism in art is to acknowledge that she has a self to express. That idea will never be incorporated into a history that claims equality while rooting itself in the principles of male exclusiveness.

What critics are really asking is whether there is anything outside of men's experience in visual expression. Within their limited definition of art, the only place for women is in the prisons designed by men to enslave their objects. The victims and venuses of men's graphic imaginations, women, have been forced into the narrowed roles created by male projection. As we find unbroken histories of visual images developed by men and for men in almost every culture we examine, the word "universal" becomes increasingly ludicrous.

For many women, the painful lessons of history are a starting point in the development of a feminist consciousness. As poet Judy Grahn explains, it is the question of male domination that makes everybody (all women) angry. But to develop the themes of that domination is to give men more energy and credit than they deserve. And so we must listen to critic Lucy Lippard when she tells us to stop being so afraid of being other than men.

To the woman artist, this self-assertion has many implications. It is a direct result of the feminist realization that male imagery has traditionally been used against women.

In an attempt to reverse the process of sexploitation, the woman artist has the option of using her imagery against her oppressor.

One artist who has accepted the responsibility of transforming the present role situation in her work is Lynda Benglis. For her, the transformation of roles is highly dependent upon the development of specific imagery, and in her hands, the use of shock tactics. Having been refused advertising space in the bulk of a 1972 Artforum preview of her upcoming show, Benglis purchased the frontispiece of the issue to make her proclamation. The image she chose astounded and embarrassed the editorial board of Artforum. Alongside their consumers, the editors opened the magazine to be greeted by a well-oiled Lynda Benglis standing defiantly with a large phallus between her nude legs. Her message to Artforum and the rest of the male art world was as clear as an obscene gesture—Benglis was standing her own ground as flamboyantly as she could. Lawrence Alloway had to apologize to the journal's readers, but Benglis would not take back her insult.

Actually, the Artforum incident is an example of role transformation at its most extreme; but it does underline one of the alternatives being explored by one branch of the feminist artists. What Lynda Benglis did with phallic imagery is what men have done with female iconography for centuries—both examples represent a conscious effort to symbolically objectify and reduce human sexuality. Benglis was striking back at the generations of male-dominated art which held woman in contempt and imprisoned her in the role of sex object. For many women artists, feminism signifies an opportunity to turn the tables.

The victims and venuses of men's graphic imaginations, women, have been forced into the narrowed roles created by male projection. As we find unbroken histories of visual images developed by men and for men in almost every culture we examine, the word "universal" becomes increasingly ludicrous.

For many women, the painful lessons of history are a starting point in the development of a feminist consciousness. As poet Judy Grahn explains, it is the question of male domination that makes everybody (all women) angry. But to develop the themes of that domination is to give men more energy and credit than they deserve. And so we must listen to critic Lucy Lippard when she tells us to stop being so afraid of being other than men.

To the woman artist, this self-assertion has many implications. It is a direct result of the feminist realization that male imagery has traditionally been used against women.

In an attempt to reverse the process of sexploitation, the woman artist has the option of using her imagery against her oppressor.

One artist who has accepted the responsibility of transforming the present role situation in her work is Lynda Benglis. For her, the transformation of roles is highly dependent upon the development of specific imagery, and in her hands, the use of shock tactics. Having been refused advertising space in the bulk of a 1972 Artforum preview of her upcoming show, Benglis purchased the frontispiece of the issue to make her proclamation. The image she chose astounded and embarrassed the editorial board of Artforum. Alongside their consumers, the editors opened the magazine to be greeted by a well-oiled Lynda Benglis standing defiantly with a large phallus between her nude legs. Her message to Artforum and the rest of the male art world was as clear as an obscene gesture—Benglis was standing her own ground as flamboyantly as she could. Lawrence Alloway had to apologize to the journal's readers, but Benglis would not take back her insult.

Actually, the Artforum incident is an example of role transformation at its most extreme; but it does underline one of the alternatives being explored by one branch of the feminist artists. What Lynda Benglis did with phallic imagery is what men have done with female iconography for centuries—both examples represent a conscious effort to symbolically objectify and reduce human sexuality. Benglis was striking back at the generations of male-dominated art which held woman in contempt and imprisoned her in the role of sex object. For many women artists, feminism signifies an opportunity to turn the tables.

It is in the field of serious figure painting that we find women who are most consciously reversing roles. In her own way, realist painter Sylvia Sleigh challenges the art world to rethink its definitions of what is “natural,” “acceptable,” and “correct”; and she is doing it by painting male nudity in less than heroic terms. Sleigh’s models become languid creatures of the bedroom; she literally denies their existence as the privileged consumers that they have been for centuries.

In demanding that we as viewers reassess the question of sexual objectivity, Sylvia Sleigh has brought a barrage of negative critical responses upon her style. She is accused of being technically inept, of being campy and weak. Actually, what she is doing is threatening the powers that be with her portraits of men who lose their dignity in her translation. She is doing something men have done forever by trivializing and sexualizing their objects; and by reversing the process, Sleigh provokes us into a new awareness of the meanings of prostitution in art.

For Benglis and Sleigh, the question of sexuality in art is highly political.

Using perceptions that are well-suited to their feminism, they are pioneering an alternative in women's art. They do not question whether there is a difference between women and men—they know there is. And they know how to use that awareness.

HOT OFF THE PRESSES

Andrea Chesman

What American women don’t know about feminist culture and politics in Canada could fill a book. And that is not only too bad; it is plain unnecessary. Behind Canadian feminism is a strong press (frequently state-subsidized) which has produced some excellent books by women. New Star Books is one such press.

Like feminism in America, the women's movement in Canada is different things to different people. Generally speaking, Canadian feminists are strongly allied with the Canadian Left. The result of this alliance has been some very powerful books dealing with working-class experiences of Canadian women. Although New Star Books, as a Leftist press, also publishes poetry, Canadian labor history, and books on political economy and anti-imperialism, I have only seen their books about women/by women; and it is those that I will write about.

Leading New Star's seven women's titles is Feminism and Marxism by Dorothy Smith. According to one of the New Star collective members, this essay (originally given as a speech in the spring of 1977) best explains feminism in Canada. Unlike some discussions which begin with a similar title, this little book is indeed written from a feminist viewpoint. Some of Ms. Smith's comments on the political basis of sisterhood are particularly astute: "It is difficult if you make it (sisterhood) merely a sentimental basis for relations among women because it doesn't work for very long. It doesn't work if you treat sisterhood as something that organizes a political basis across class, across time, because you can't unite with all women politically. It certainly doesn't make sense to Marxists, and it has proved in our experience working in the women's movement not to make sense in practice... Nevertheless sisterhood is that understanding of your relation to other women which comes prior to taking up a political position... Sisterhood is that first moment of discovery upon everything else depends."

From theory to experience, New Star brings A Very Ordinary Life by Phyllis Knight and Rolf Knight (her son). This book, autobiography, history, and herstory, is, in its own way, extraordinary. Transcribed from taped conversations, A Very Ordinary Life is the herstory of a working-class woman, spanning two continents and seventy years. Apart from necessary editing, little was done to alter Phyllis' story. "To start with," she warns, "I'm an old lady now, pretty well used up... Besides there wasn't anything in my life that happened to me personally that was extraordinary. At least nothing that millions and tens of millions of other people didn't experience themselves. I always lived a very ordinary life."

It is that very ordinariness that gives this book its appeal. Historians are just beginning to incorporate the idea that the experience of the majority is the true history of the world. With a long tradition of stereotyping working-class people as backward, illiterate, culturally deprived, noble peasants, historians can hardly be trusted with recording the experiences of the majority. It is important that the "true stories" are written by the participants of the events themselves—the ordinary people. A Very Ordinary Life documents the awareness of people who have a very clear understanding of who has power, who runs the country, who oppresses whom.

Taxi! by Helen Potrebenko is a fictionalized account of her experiences as a cab driver in Vancouver. From her vantage point behind the wheel, she earned her living by dealing with the people who are most directly affected by every social and political problem facing Canada in 1975. Her insightful commentary has the rhythm of a day with traffic and the nervous quality of a coffee high: "Isn't it an unusual job for a girl?" the man from Grosvenor asked. "What's usual? Waiting around to be screwed?" Oh, he said with acute embarrassment, "You're women's lib." "Liberation," she growled. Don't expect much feminist analysis from Taxi!, but do expect some powerful writing (mixed with some less than powerful writing) and a good deal of shrewd commentary on how a capitalist society can keep people down. (No Streets of Gold, A Social History of Ukrainians in Alberta by Helen Potrebenko will be out soon through New Star.)

From Margaret Randall are two books: With Our Hands and Spirit of the People. With Our Hands is a book of political poetry, with a good deal more politics than poetry.

But Spirit of the People is a wonderful book about women in revolutionary Vietnam. "Vietnamese women, collectively, have done more on page 14."

NON-SEXIST
LESBIAN

HOLIDAY

A LARGE SELECTION

CHILDREN'S SPACE
READING ROOM