18

Struggle...
From page 5

partner is becomes unimportant—all that is important is the
role that she is playing. It amounts to sexual objectification.
Roles

Defenders of “lesbian feminist sado-masochism” do not deny
that the whole “game” revolves around roles. But they claim
that “lesbian feminist sado-masochism” is egalitarian because
the partners are free to switch roles. “Liberated” as this might
be, the problem comes in the very existence of the roles,
regardless of who is playing which one at any given moment.
Switching roles doesn’t eliminate them. It's a reform tactic at
best, rather than a revolutionary one. The roles of
sado-masochism are absolute and totally static. Rather than
being in process, they epitomize the feminine/passive-
masculine/dominant tradition. Equating such roles with
feminism, because a woman can play the “sadistic” role, (and,
supposedly, experience power) is degrading feminism into an
attempt for women to become like the men who oppress us.
Inherent in the dominating role is the need for someone to
dominate—that someone is, of course, a woman.

The truly frightening thing about it is that the “Sadist” does
not truly experience power. The only dynamic at work is that of
the “masochist” giving up her power, and the responsibility for
her pleasure, to the roles which she and her partner play. The
“dominant” person is not enhancing her own personal
power—her only power belongs to her role. It is all unreal.

To say that this sort of role-playing enables women to feel what
it is like to have power is absurd. The power of the sadist is
artificial; it is power which has been given up by her partner to
the situation rather than to her. In contrast to this, feminism
seeks to reclaim our own power—real power, not just the feeling
of power—in such a way that does not require the subjugation of
others.

Therapy

The possibility has been suggested that through sado-
masochistic game-playing, problems in the relationship in
general may be acted out and dealt with. This amounts to a
desire to avoid the risks which are often involved in the process
of change. When sex is used as a means of solving
interpersonal or personal problems, it reduces the amount of
personal responsibility that people are taking in the problem-
solving. It then becomes a personal solution, specific to only the
one problem, the one relationship. It is like the pillow-punching
of liberal psychotherapy—non-productive in the long run,
designed to change the relationship or the person, without
questioning the patriarchal structure which is the source of the
problems. Do we really expect to cure the damage done by the
patriarchy by using the tools of the patriarchy?

Trust

Lipschutz describes sado-masochism as the “ritualistic union
of sexual pleasure and ultimate trust.” This theme of trust is
one which comes up in all discussions of the subject. The
reasoning goes something like: you really have to trust
someone to allow them to tie you up and hit you. Goddess,
deliver us all from that kind of trust! Trust which permits us to

allow someone to hurt us because we trust them not to hurt us

seriously.

In the patriarchy, trust is often incompatible with survival.
This is not to say that we should not trust those who have shown
themselves worthy of trust. But to trust anyone,
indiscriminately, is frequently dangerous. The subtle
implication that a high level of trust somehow results from the
sado-masochistic relationship is misrepresentation. Trust must
first be present, it would seem, before any reasonable person
would embark on such an “adventure.” Such trust would result
from aspects of the relationship totally apart from the sado-
masochistic games.

Sex/Violence

Sado-masochism in any form is a reinforcement of the sex-
violence link which is an integral component of male-defined
sexuality. In the goal-oriented psychology of male sex, the only
important thing is the satisfaction of the male. Means are
irrelevant. This is the psychology which leads to rape and all
forms of sexual intimidation and objectification. For feminists
to play with these forms, make games of them, is as stupid as it
is dangerous. We will not overcome patriarchy by adopting its
forms. We will not become free by wallowing in oppression.

Lesbianism

Sado-masochism is in no way a component of lesbian/feminism. We are lesbians because we love women, because we
have no desire to play the violent dominance games which come
with hetero sex. We are feminists first, in that we love women
as our sisters, our only true friends, our strength, and our
future. Taken to its natural conclusion, this woman-loving
expresses itself in lesbianism. Lesbianism and sado-masochism
are as diametrically opposed as feminism and sado-masochism.

The Movement

What is terrifying about the whole issue is that women who are
feminists feel comfortable if not downright righteous in
defending what is called “lesbian feminist sado-masochism.”
There is a trend in the movement which has been developing in
the last few years which for want of a better title we might call
the “If it feels good, do it” school of feminism. This school has
little concern with analysis or values. Its basic precept might be
stated as, “If a lesbian does it, then it must be feminist.” This
trend is dangerous to the movement in many ways. Since it
proposes that a woman is a feminist just because she says she
is, it works to make the word feminist meaningless. This is all
very nice; it is also very liberal. Radicals do make judgments,
they do study causes, they do seek answers. We are not afraid
to say that sado-masochism is not feminist—indeed, that it
cannot be feminist.

What people do in their bedrooms does affect us all, if in the
process of defending their actions they misrepresent feminism.
Our quarrel is not with what two consenting women choose to
do; our quarrel is with their analysis of their actions. The
personal is political—haven't we known that all along?

Letters...
From page 2

something about the quality of
your work—also says some-
thing about my choice of
reading material. I will,
probably be getting in touch
with you once my moving is

complete. I'll bring you some
of my student's analysis of
your rhetoric,
In Sisterhood,
Gail Bundy.

From page 15

that fact. And the court did
not do that. So, that was the
other major issue that we had
in the first two courts.

Now, when we went to the
Supreme Court of the U.S. we
limited ourselves to the

first three which I’ve men-
tioned: the electronic surveil-
lance, the husband-wife issue,
and the due process issue.
Primarily, because you just
cannot give the United States
Supreme Court that many
issues and expect them to be
able to deal with it. They try
not to have more than two, so
we were really straining it to
have three. They never did
decide that because the case
became mooted before it
would have been time for
them to decide whether they
were going to hear it or not.
The way that it became
mooted is that we had asked
several intermediary motions,
and those included what is
called the Grumbles motion.
Now, the Grumbles motion is
based on the fact that she’s
being held in civil contempt,
and civil contempt is for
purpose of forcing someone to
talk. It's not to punish
them—it’s to force them to
talk. It’s coercive, not puni-
tive. But, if a person is not
going to talk, then you are not
going to be able to coerce
them and it becomes punitive
to hold them in jail. There's
no point in holding them in
jail, other than to punish
them, if they’re absolutely not
going to talk, no matter how
long you hold them. And we
said that she was not going to
talk. And I think that there is
plenty of evidence that she
was not. She'd been in jail for

a long time, she was very firm
in her convictions, she was a
very principled person, she
had never had any hesitancy
about it whatever, and was not
going to talk.

One of the other motions is
that somebody be released if
they have not had a right to a
jury trial when they’ve been
incarcerated more than six
months. Now, in criminal
cases there’s no question
about it, if somebody is facing
the risk that they may go to jail
for more than six months, they
have the right to a jury trial.
Now, this is civil contempt, so,
because it's civil, not criminal,
the theory of the courts has
always been that they didn’t
have the right to a jury trial.
But our theory is, if you're
going to put her in jail, she’s
in jail, and it doesn’t make any
difference if you label it
‘civil’ or ‘criminal’, the
label is just a matter of
legalisms and a way of looking
at it, and should not affect her
Constitutional rights. Her
Constitutional right not to go
to jail without a jury trial
should be enforced when she’s
been in jail more than six
months.

BMR: On which of these
motions was she released?
RB: Neither!

She was also not released on
the cruel and unusual punish-
ment (motion), which was our
third claim. What the judge
did was very strange... He
decided that the legal basis for
all of our motions was poor
and that he was going to
decide against us. I don't

Big Mama Rag Vol.4 No.6

Editorial...
From page 4

speculum factory would have benefited women more than does
the City Club building.
Evaluation

The purchase and operation of the building must be seen, at
best, as a reform. In examining it as such, we have applied
Charlotte Bunch’s general criteria for evaluating reforms (see

“The Reform Tool Kit” in Quest, v.1 no.1).
1. Does this reform materially improve the lives of women, and
if so, which women and how many?

There are many urgent problems facing women. As we have
already pointed out, the services provided by the building can
hardly be taken as seriously improving the material conditions
with which women are struggling daily. It serves a privileged
few.

We contend that, in removing from circulation a large sum of
credit union money, the purchase actually sabotaged the
material power potential of the credit union’s members.

2. Does it build an individual woman’s self-respect, strength,
and confidence?

The answer to this one depends on which individual women
we’re talking about. We doubt whether the acquisition of the
building has improved the self-image of more than the handful
of women who pulled off the deal and those women who define
success in patriarchal terms.

Charlotte Bunch qualifies this criterion by adding that “it is
vital that these (reform) activities not be done in isolation from a
political perspective.” A business enterprise does not become
political merely because women, rather than men, own and
operate it.

3. Does it give women a sense of power, strength, and
imagination as a group and help build structures for further
change?

We suspect that the power, strength and imagination are
confined to the same elite described above. And we see no
evidence that the City Club building venture is in any way
geared to effect change. If anything, it caters to entrenched
societal convention.

4. Does it educate women politically, enhancing our ability to
criticize and challenge the system in the future?

Nothing in the purchase or operation of the building has
proved anything but that women, too, can do things the
capitalist way. It is more likely to prompt the women involved to
expound and defend capitalism than to oppose it.

5. Does it weaken patriarchal control of society’s institutions
and help women gain power over them?

We would say that the maintenance of an enterprise of this
type by feminists strengthens patriarchal control, by co-opting
our political movement. It does nothing toward gaining power
over the institutions which oppress us, but rather contributes
to women’s stake in the status quo. Basically, a few women who
started off with a piece of the pie (in terms of economic
privilege) now have a bigger piece.

If the revolution were to spark fires in the streets, we want to
know whether the City Club building’s owners, proprietors, and
members would be out there fanning the flames, or busy
pouring water on their investment. The specter of co-optation is
even more frightening if we view the building as a first step in
the establishment of an economic power base for women, in
accordance with FEN’s stated aims.

Foundation Needed

Clearly, within the women’s movement there is much energy
for economic progress. Women are making major time and
financial commitments in pursuit of viable options which can be
called feminist. However, we do not yet have an economic
analysis.

We find it hard to accept the purported leadership of FEN
when its chief project in no way challenges the social or
economic status quo, and in fact depends for its very existence
on the capitalist system.

We urge all women to examine our economic reality in the light
of existing feminist analyses, and to recognize as an urgent
priority the need to develop a cogent economic analysis on which
to build our revolution.

I don’t

think he’s correct on that, but
he decided that. That he had
no legal duty to release her
because it was punitive, or
anything else. But he decided
that the facts that we were
raising were correct: that she
was, in fact, not going to talk;
that, in fact, the US Attorney
was not pursuing any kind of
investigation here, that he had
not called any other witnesses;
that, in fact, she’d been in jail
more than six months; that, in

fact, it would serve no useful

purpose to keep her. Well,
that’s what we said — all that
is what we said in the
Grumbles motion. But then he
decided that didn't mean that
he had to release her legally,
but that, in his exercise of his
discretion, he would release
her — because he wanted to.
So that’s what he did.

BMR: Do you think it is
likely that Veronica will have
more trouble with the FBI or
the grand jury?

RB: Well, it’s difficult to
say. I suspect that the FBI and
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Fire-
arms have a file on her and
will continue to have a file on
her. In terms of her actually
being called in front of the
grand jury, I think it’s un-
likely. Now, this judge is
retiring at the end of the
summer, and the new grand
jury does start in September,
so I suppose that they could

call her again, but I
think that they will. I es-
pecially think that because of
the fact of the national pub-
licity and public sentiment
about this case and Congres-
sional inquiries. There were
people in both the House and
Senate Judiciary Committees
who became interested in this
case, and I know that some of
them actually made inquiry of
the Department of Justice as
to why they were holding her
and whether it was not puni-
tive at that particular point,
and so forth. And I think that
that had a lot to do with the US
Attorney's decision not to
oppose the judge releasing
her. Now, they said they
didn't want to give us any-
thing in terms of our having
any legal rights, but if the
judge wanted to release her in
his discretion, they would not
oppose it... So, I think that
what has happened is that
they are really aware of public
pressure, and they know that
they would have to deal with
the whole thing when she
wouldn’t talk again. And it
would look really bad to have
had her released on the basis
that she was not going to talk,
and then try it again — even if
they had a new judge to try it
in front of. And, of course,
we'd raise the exact same
issues again. So, I don't think
they'll do it.