BMR on

HER MOTHERS

E.M. Broner  
Berkley-Medallion $1.75  
(Available at Woman to Woman)

Culture

Peg Hickox

"I'm pregnant, mother."  
"Have a girl."

"Why?"

"A girl should have a girl."

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a girl."  
"How old is she?"

"Seventeen years old."

"Then you are pregnant with me."

-Country Women

Every six months, revolutionary cynicism sets in unless I can find a visionary fix, preferably a good feminist novel. It had been almost a year since Woman on the Edge of Time when I ran across a 1975 novel by E.M. Broner called Her Mothers. E.M. Broner is really an alias for Beatrix Palmer, the heroine and author of Her Mothers.

Beatrix Palmer's story is the story of all daughters' and mothers' search for their identity as women. Beatrix's quest takes her on a stream of consciousness odyssey through the remembered past of her 1944 high school yearbook and albums of her daughter growing up, through the historical past of her feminist and Jewish foremothers, to the present where she is a successful middle-aged woman writer, where her real-life daughter has rejected her and left her with an occasional postcard and the fear of failure as a mother and as an individual.

Throughout the novel Beatrix carries on a running dialogue where she, Beatrix the daughter, asks her mother (her biological mother? her historical mothers? the mother within herself?) for advice to pass on to her daughter (her biological daughter? the daughter within herself?). These dialogues become generations of mother/daughter conversations on what it means to be a woman:

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl."  
"Does she have a date for New Year's Eve?"  
"No."

"Does she have a date for the Senior Prom?"  
"No."

"Then tell her not to be born."

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl."

"How is she spending her time?"

"Visiting with girl friends."

"What are they doing?"

"Loving each other."

"How?"

"They talk, they console, they caress, they kiss."  
"Is your baby rich or poor?"

"Poor."

"Only the rich can afford such a friendship."

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl and she wants to be a writer."  
"That's penis envy."

"But she wants to write cookbooks."

"Then that's an acceptable degree of penis envy."

"But her doctor wants to write cookbooks with her."  
"That's womb envy."

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl and she wants to learn to cook."

"Don't let her."

"She wants to prepare breakfast."

"Then she'll have to carry it upstairs on a tray."

"She wants to bake a birthday cake."

"Then she'll have to carry it into the dining room for the guests with its candles blazing."

"She wants to roast the Thanksgiving turkey."

"Then she can carve her future on its carcass."

"She is not allowed to carve the turkey. The man must carve. She enjoys serving the meal."

"Good, then she's prepared to be a servant."

"Mother, I'm pregnant with a baby girl and she wants information."  
"What does she want to know?"

"What does it mean when men say, Up against the wall, MF?"

"It means, Margaret Fuller."

"But why?"

"They're afraid of her."

Beatrix's lifelong search takes her from the 1940's world of a New York high school with its Senior Prom as well as Eugene Debs' politics, World War II, and concentration camp survivors, to the 1960's world of academia with its author's lecture circuit, literary histories of Margaret Fuller and Emily Dickinson, and Freudian psychiatrist's couches. From a room in her parent's home with her husband and child, to a kibbutz in Israel, to an efficiency apartment for “oldies” in Florida. Although her worlds of life experience belong specifically to her personal heritage, she speaks to the mother/daughter/woman in all of us.

An aging Beatrix Palmer, collecting shells on the Florida Keys, imagines the final meeting between mother/daughter. The struggle to flee motherhood for both mother and daughter continues:

“Beatrix will shell, walking as she always does, head down, early mornings or early evenings. As she will walk head turned downward, there will be an obstinate shadow before her that will not move. She will step to one side. So will the shadow. She will look up into the eyes of a shadowed green sun hat, a bikini, a sneering smile, a daughter.”

"I wonder where...I wonder when..." says the mother.

"Nowhere," says the daughter.

“Have you eaten," asks Beatrix.

“Same mother," says Lena.

“Same daughter," says Beatrix.

“She wishes Lena would wash up, comb her hair. She wishes her daughter would take off the mother's green sun hat."

"There will be a bite underwater, the mouth will turn on the mother's arm and bite it until the hand lets go of the hair. The daughter will slowly ascend to the surface, floating upward, while the mother will rub the teeth marks in her arm...The daughter will pick up her mother's sun hat and put it on her wet hair.

ART and SEXUAL POLITICS

Elizabeth Baker, Thomas Hess, eds.  
MacMillan Publishing $3.95

(Available at Woman to Woman Feminist Library and Litith: Womyn's Shatone):

Gayle Novak

Art and Sexual Politics is an excellent anthology of short essays by women artists and art historians. The editors are also contributors, and the final essay by Lee Hall examines the place of the woman artist in the university.

The artists contributing essays are Elaine de Kooning in a dialogue with Rosalyn Drexler, Bridget Riley, Louise Nevelson, Eleanor Antin, Suzi Gablik, Sylvia Stone, Marjorie Strider, Linda Benglis, and Rosemarie Castoro. The some seventy-five reproductions illustrating the anthology are of excellent quality.

The opening essay, to which all the contributors respond, is by Linda Nochlin and asks the provocative and perhaps infuriating question, “Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?" Ms. Nochlin first examines and questions the patriarchal ramifications inherent in the existing, yet changing, definitions of "great artist" and “genius”.

"Underlying the question about women as artists, we find the whole myth of the Great Artist-- subject of a hundred monographs, unique, godlike-- bearing within his person since birth a mysterious essence, rather like the golden nugget in Mrs. Grass' chicken soup, called 'Genius.'"

Examining primarily the last 500 years of art herstory, Ms. Nochlin then casts “a dispassionate eye on the actual societal and institutional situation in which important art has existed..." She points out that most "great artists" were from middle-class or working-class backgrounds, and, like most other trades or professions, the work and skills were traditionally passed from father to son.

Ms. Nochlin has a most vivid example of discrimination against aspiring women artists of the nineteenth century-- they were not allowed to draw from the nude:

"Let us examine such a simple but critical issue as availability of the nude model to aspiring women artists, in the period extending from the Renaissance until near the end of the nineteenth century. During this period, careful and prolonged study of the nude model was essential to the production of any work with pretensions to grandeur, and the very essence of History Painting, then generally accepted as the highest category of art.

Big Mama Rag Vol.5 No.6

Central to the training programs of academies of art since their inception late in the sixteenth and early in the seventeenth centuries was life drawing from the nude, generally male, model... while individual artists and private academies employed female models extensively, the female nude was forbidden in almost all public art schools as late as 1850 and after-- a state of affairs which Pevsner rightly designates as ‘hardly believable."

The portrait of Charlotte du Val d'Ognes by Constance-Marie Charpentier in 1800. (From "Art and Sexual Politics.")

Far more believable, unfortunately, was the complete unavailability to aspiring women artists of any nude models at all. As late as 1893, 'lady' students were not admitted to life drawing at the official academy in London, and even when they were, after that date, the model had to be partially draped... To be deprived of this ultimate state of training meant to be deprived of the possibility of creating major art-- or simply, as with most of the few women aspiring to be painters, to be restricted to the 'minor' and less highly regarded fields of portraiture, genre, landscape, or still life."

Ms. Nochlin proceeds to make another point:

"It also becomes apparent why women were able to compete on far more equal terms with men-- and even become innovators-- in literature. While art-making has traditionally demanded the learning of specific techniques and skills-- in a certain sequence, in an institutional setting outside the

More on page 13

photo by Deb Taylor

Mattie Sue Athan, left, and Seapu Pierson, right, are shown above with examples of their art work. Mattie Sue talked about putting feminist content into stained glass..."Twenty years ago the entry people doing stained glass belonged to the Stained Glass Guild, and to become a member you had to be a white male descendant of an existing member of the Guild... so much of the stained glass is patriarchic symbols and the men are always bitching about how women are invading their field."

Her statement on Mesa Hartman’s work is the soul of the world with Seapu Peterson's descent.

I have a sisterhood with that as I painted her...

I want to do tulips... so my "Mary" conditions of the art-- encouraging tulips.”

"Ka Meek Bank's Daughter"  
"It's a young Indian woman on her word, very fragile, just...

and it was a bonding reaction."

Not Amazon Mountain Studies, 5229 W. 25th, Denver  
I can be contacted at Sisters of Light, 46 Sky-