26

publications

The February 3rd Press announces  
the publication of: Top Ranking-  
A Collection of Articles on Racism  
and Classism in the Lesbian Commun-  
ity, which includes articles from  
a variety of women and women's  
groups. Price is $2.50 (more if you  
can, less if you can't). Make checks  
payable to Sara Bennett and Joan  
Gibbs and send to February 3rd Press,  
306 Lafayette, Brooklyn, NY 11238.

Manushi is a bi-monthly feminist  
magazine published in Delhi, India,  
by a collective of Indian women. The  
third issue has been out for a while  
in Hindi and English editions, and  
contains features, interviews, fic-  
tion, poems and has reports on women  
prisoners, protests women have organ-  
ized against the dowry system, sex-  
ist advertising and women's role in  
a peasant movement of the '40s. For  
subscription information write to  
Manushi, A-5 Nizamuddin East, New  
Delhi 110013, India.

Seal Press presses on with a new  
book of short stories called Backbone II. All authors are women res-  
iding in the Northwest, although a-  
lot of the stories involve people in  
other parts of the world, from Kan-  
sas to Kuala Lumpur. The stories  
span a wide range of ages and social  
groups. You wind up with a lot of in-  
formation about women, plus sixteen  
good short stories. Available at  
$4.95 from Seal Press (a woman's  
press), Box 13, Seattle, WA 98111.

Midnight Birds- Stories of Contemp-  
orary Black Women Writers, edited  
with an introduction by Mary Helen  
Washington, is available in paper-  
back for $4.50 as of May 16th. Each  
story has been chosen to reflect the  
efforts of black women to liberate  
themselves from the structures and  
constraints of the past. These are  
not stories about victims but posi-  
tive stories of and by those women  
who have provided models of how to  
live. The writers include Paulette  
Childress White, Alexis De Veaux,  
Alice Walker, Ntozake Shange, Gayl  
Jones, Frenchy Hodges, Toni Morrison,  
Toni Cade Bambara and Sherley Anne  
Williams.

The Status of Clerical Workers is  
a report analyzing research findings  
on wages, job titles and duties,  
work conditions and motivation, job  
training and recruitment, among  
other topics. It is available for  
$2.50 from the Business and Profes-  
sional Women's Foundation, Sales  
Order Department 2802, 2012 Massa-  
chusetts Ave. N.W., Wash DC 20036.

Getting Uncle Sam to Enforce Your  
Civil Rights is a guidebook which  
discusses how and where to file dis-  
crimination complaints and explains  
some rights protected by federal law  
in credit, education, employment,  
housing, law enforcement and voting.  
Free copies are available from US  
Commission on Civil Rights, Publica-  
tions Management Division, Room 700,  
1121 Vermont N.W., Wash DC 20425.

A wall chart with detailed explan-  
ations of federal laws and regula-  
tions which forbid sex discrimina-  
tion is available for $2.00 from the  
Women's Equity Action League, Suite  
822, 805 15th N.W., Wash DC 20005.

groups-projects

A new national organization has  
been formed for women plumbers, car-  
penters, and sheet metal workers,  
along with other women who have brok-  
en sex barriers in the trades. It's  
called Tradeswomen and the organiza-  
tion already has 300 members. Trades-  
women can be reached by writing Box  
4724, Santa Rosa, CA 95402.

resources

The '80s Front is a group of  
socialist feminists in Hong Kong  
who are putting their feminism to  
practice by starting an organiza-  
tional relationship with women work-  
ers in the electronics, textile and  
toy factories in Hong Kong, where  
factory conditions are barbaric and  
wages low. They plan also to start  
a regular section in the '80s Bi-  
weekly specifically on women, and  
would like to begin correspondence  
with other women's liberationists  
internationally. Their address is  
The '80s Front, c/o 1984 Bookshop,  
180 Lockhart Rd., 1st Floor, Wanchai  
Hong Kong.

The Lesbian-Feminist Study Clear-  
inghouse is a non-profit clearing-  
house. Its purpose is to foster and  
publicize the study of lesbian ex-  
perience from a feminist perspective.  
For information on how to submit  
articles and what they have avail-  
able contact: Coralyn Fontaine,  

LFSC Women's Studies, 1012 CL, U of  
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260.

The National Women's Health Net-  
work has agreed to sponsor the Mass-  
achusetts DES Daughter Identifica-  
tion Program- an effort to encourage  
DES daughters to become part of a  
Massachusetts class action lawsuit.  
Any Massachusetts DES daughter may  
participate provided she has not de-  
veloped uterine or vaginal cancer,  
and was exposed to DES in the state  
of Massachusetts. This lawsuit is  
the first class action of its kind  
in the country. The case enables  
women who would otherwise be finan-  
cially unable to go to court, to sue  
for damages. Write or call: DES  
Daughter Identification Project, PO  
Box 309, Cambridge, MA 02138. Phone  
(617) 354-2937.

woman's  
body

woman’s

business

The D.C. Area Feminist Alliance  
wants to establish communication  
ties with radical, multi-issue fem-  
inist groups for the political work  
which we all will be doing in the  
coming decade. They want to connect  
with other groups which share their  
political beliefs to discuss future  
strategies for the women's move-  
ment and create at least an inform-  
al national network. From their  
press release: "We have not adopted  
any of the traditional labels for  
feminist organizations. We, as an  
organization, do not characterize  
ourselves as socialist feminist,  
although opposition to capitalism  
is a central part of our politics;  
nor have we self-defined as a les-  
bian feminist organization, although  
a majority of our members are les-  
bian; nor do we call the Alliance  
radical feminist, although most of  
us probably came from that part of  
the movement. We try to let our be-  
liefs and our actions describe our  
politics, in part because all of  
these labels are imprecise and sus-  
ceptible to many meanings, often  
different ones in different cities.  
We are committed, however, to keep-  
ing a multi-issue focus and to pre-  
senting a feminist, left, anti-rac-  
ist and pro-lesbian and gay voice  
in local political work.”

The D.C. Area Feminist Alliance  
is asking women who are a part of  
such organizations to contact  
them at 1225 Newton Street N.E.,  
Washington DC 20017.

Seventeen lesbians and other women  
from across the country attended  
the First Feminist Fat Activists  
Working Meeting in New Haven, CT  
last April. From their press re-  
lease: “This is and was truly a her-  
storic event and I expect that your  
publication is willing to publicize  
this information so that other fat  
lesbians and women can be made a-  
ware of our existence and can see  
our process and progress as the Fat  
Liberation Movement." For info about  
this meeting or about Fat Libera-  
tion, contact any of the groups  
listed below: Fat Liberator Public-  
ations, PO Box 7232, Minneapolis,  
MN 55407; Boston Fat Liberation  
Front, 137 Tremont St., Cambridge,  
MA 02139; Minneapolis Fat Dykes,  

c/o Lesbian Resource Center, 2104  
Stevens Ave South, Minneapolis, MN  
55404.

culture

ESA Productions is planning a  
Summer Solstice celebration in Santa  
Fe, New Mexico at the Institute of  
American Indian Art on June 21st at  
the Soleri Theatre. The theatre is  
an outdoor amphitheater with in-  
credible acoustics and architectural  
design. Appearing on June 21st in  
this unique theatre for an evening  
concert will be Kay Gardner, music-  
ian, flutist and composer, Womime  
Theatre Troupe and Las Companeras.  
Featured earlier in the day will be  
workshops and booths for display  
of various artists' work. For more  
info call (505) 988-2337.

Sambayan, and Friends of the Fil-  
ipino People, two anti-martial law  
organizations, have announced an  
exhibition of prints and photographs  
to be held in New York City from  
May 18th through June 29th. IMAGES  
will be exhibited at Gallery 345,  

a political art gallery at 345 Lafa-  
yette Street in Manhattan. "We wish  
to present the real situation of the  
people in the Philippines, not a  
glorified view of the 'New Society’  
of President Marcos," said the press  
release. The organizers of this ex-  
hibit hope to reach not only the  

New York Filipino community but also  
gallery-goers in the city who are  
interested in realistic art with a  
message. Contact Peg Averill (212)  
673-7354 for more info.

Call to Women Playwrights! At The  
Foot of the Mountain, a profession-  
al experimental women's theatre, is  
now accepting original scripts for  
two events in its 1980/1981 season.  
The first is a series of monthly  
staged readings of scripts by women  
and the other is a fully-mounted  
production in Feb/Mar, 1981, of a  
new full-length script by a woman  
playwright. The theatre is looking  
for plays which, in content, explore  
women's feelings and women's issues  
with roles that can be performed by  
female actors. They are also eager  
to find plays which, in concept,  
explore new (or ancient) forms of  
dramatic structure and experience.  
The deadline for all scripts is  
September 15, 1980. Mail scripts to  
At the Foot of the Mountain, 3144  
Tenth Ave South, Minneapolis, MN  
55407. Phone (612) 825-2820.

At the Foot of the Mountain's  
much acclaimed production, RAPED:  
A WOMAN'S LOOK AT BERTOLT BRECHT'S  
"THE EXCEPTION AND THE RULE,” will  
re-open this summer on Friday, June  
27th, for a four week run at the  
Olympia Theatre in downtown Minne-  
apolis. Performances will continue  
Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sun-  
day evenings at 8 P.M. through July  
20th. For reservations and more  
information call (612) 332-7483.

Big Mama Rag Vol 1.8 No.5

As part of the New York Feminist  
Art Institute's series of summer  
workshops and events, there will be  
three special events with a $3 ad-  
mission charge. June 5, 8 P.M., a  
panel discussion- Art and Politics:  
Do We Have to Choose Between the  
Two- with Joan Braderman, Betsy Hess,  
Candace Hall-Montgomery, Lucy Lip-  
pard, Beverly Naidus and May Stevens.  
On June 7 at 8:30 P.M. there will  
be a performance- Disband and on  
July 18 at 8 P.M. there will be a  
slide lecture by Kay Brown on the  
Black Woman Artists' Movement. For  
information on these and other work-  
shops and events contact the New  
York Feminist Art Institute, 325  
Spring St., New York, NY 10013.

conferences

A panel of Ku Klux Klan victims  
will speak at a June 14 anti-Klan  
conference at St. Joseph's Church in  
Seattle, Washington. The all-day con-  
ference, sponsored by the Anti-Klan  
Network and the Seattle Chapter of  
the National Anti-Racist Organizing  
Committee (NAROC), will also feature  
cultural workshops, a film and other  
activities. The public is invited to  
attend. A NAROC organizer said, “It  
is extremely important for people to  
get involved in learning about the  
re-emergence of the Klan, not just  
because of the physical threat they  
present, but also because of the  
Klan mentality of racism which they  
are trying to promote." It is import-  
ant to organize within community or-  
ganizations and labor unions against  
the Klan, the spokeswoman said. For  
more information, contact: NAROC,  

P.O. Box 22194, Seattle, WA 98122.

The Second Annual Southeastern  
Lesbian Writers Workshop will be  
held June 5-8 in Central Georgia.  
Total cost is $20. For more info  
write: Womanwriters, PO Box 5502,  
Atlanta, GA 30307.

The Third National Lesbian and  
Gay Health Conference will be held  
in San Francisco June 19-22. Its  
goals are to further clarify and ed-  
ucate one another about lesbian and  
gay health issues, to organize for  
social change in the health care de-  
livery system, and to construct com-  
munication and support networks. For  
those needing or willing to provide  
accommodations, write: The National  
Lesbian and Gay Health Conference,  
PO Box 6189, San Francisco, CA 94101  
or call Ann Polivka (415) 282-3913.

The 2nd Annual Women in Crisis Con-  
ference will be held June 5-8 at the  
Shoreham in Washington D.C. It will  
focus on Women and Justice, Women  
and Mental Health, Women and Alcohol  
and Women and Drug Abuse. For more  
info contact: Women in Crisis, 444  
Park Ave South, New York, NY 10016.  
(212) 686-1942.

The White House Conference on Fam-  
ilies, June 5- July 12, is three  
conferences scheduled across the  
country to "strengthen and support"  
American family life. The 1980  
conference may well be a step back-  
ward for those concerned with child  
welfare and women's rights. At doz-  
ens of mini-conferences set up to  
elect delegates to the three big  
ones in various states across the  
country, they have turned into a  
battleground with right-wing con-  
servative groups forcing statements  
against the ERA, abortion and gay  
civil rights. For example, in Arkan-  
sas, all twelve delegates elected to  
go to the national conference in  
Minneapolis were members of FLAG-  
Family Life America and God,