owes

The Draft, The Military,

Susan Goding

Registration for the draft was stopped in 1973. This year the Pentagon and hawks in Congress have renewed the campaign to register men and women for the armed services. Eight bills have been introduced to revive the draft this year; three have included women.

Even if the bill only includes men, women would still be in jeopardy of being registered. The courts have been applying the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment to sex discrimination cases. It is likely that excluding women from registration and the draft would be considered discrimination against men and ruled unconstitutional.

Since the Vietnam War there has been little attention paid to military policies, except for nuclear weaponry. There the push has been to end nuclear production specifically, with no overall analysis for stopping all military weapons production.

A lot has been written lately in the feminist, left, and straight presses in opposition to the bills calling for registration. Much energy and organization is being used to educate and lobby against these bills. There seems to be a pervasive feeling that the All Volunteer Army is “enough.” More strategies are being developed around how people can attain Conscientious Objector status and developing support groups for people who will choose to resist (as pacifists) conscription, than in developing a strategy to subvert the military itself.

The passage of one bill may cause all women to directly experience military service. The introduction of these bills has been met with short-sighted solutions, that is organizing to keep these bills from being passed.

Although all the bills have been defeated, they bring home the need for women to start dealing with the issue of the armed forces. In the past there has been a tendency by feminists to label the military and its weaponry as "male" and dismiss it. Regardless of our reasons for dismissing or ignoring the military, it has the power to significantly affect our lives. It has the information about us to enforce any decisions made about the uses of our lives.

One of the bills introduced suggested that the Privacy Act should be waived so that young people could be automatically registered for the draft without their knowledge or consent.

The San Francisco Chronicle exposed the whorehouse run by the C.I.A. in San Francisco last year; people were disbelieving. Whenever I told a specific person, they'd say, "Oh, probably, sure, Alta.” And when I told them the place and who documented it, they'd say "WHAT?!" Well, they're bad guys. That's all there is to it, they

In a press release from Congressperson Pat Schroeder's office (CO-D) dated July 17, 1979, it was stated that with the upgraded computer capacity requested in the Fiscal Year 1980 budget, the United States would have the ability to mobilize an effective active force without peacetime registration. The U.S. Congressional Budget Office reports that the U.S. gains only 13 days in mobilization capacity if it reinstates peacetime registration.

With or without our knowledge, with or without registration, when the government decides they want us, they will know who we are and where to find us.

Strategies for destroying the armed forces need to be developed. This includes the All Volunteer Army and exposing it for the dangerous institution it is.

The All Volunteer Army is not an acceptable compromise. While it may sound like a good idea that only those who want to serve in the military, any dispute over land or resources will necessarily affect those of us who live on or near them. Another major point is who would volunteer.

The only persons who would volunteer for armed service are the poor and unskilled or persons infatuated with militarism.

Unskilled workers will make up the support type work. They can be trained to machine certain parts of a devastating weapon without having the overall knowledge to question or challenge its morality.

Persons with an education who join the military are automatically considered officer material. Military types would be more willing to carry out orders and would be more likely to attain positions in decision-making. Poor pay and an unstable life subject to transfer at any time have supposedly made the military a poor employer for skilled and educated people. That the military "will make a man of you" and give people the "opportunity to protect the good old U.S. of A" have been the selling points for the military and people keep joining.

While the U.S. armed services have been called a peacekeeping force, they have more often been sent into countries to keep markets and resources available for U.S. industries. For these same reasons efforts are being made to start the draft again. The U.S. needs to have guaranteed access to oil and petroleum. With the new strength and independence of OPEC this supply is threatened. With a roster of people eligible for conscription the U.S. could gather up troops more quickly for a Middle East invasion.

In all its endeavors the best weapon the government has had is its secrecy. The military itself touts secrecy as its best weapon. If no one has "the" weapon but the U.S., democracy is safe. Yet the principle of democracy is that informed people make the decisions. The major enemies of the U.S. have many weapons the U.S. has. Many governments have the nuclear bomb, arsenals of various gases, etc. The governments have them; the secret is being kept only from the people of these countries. Only in secret can government protect and perpetuate the production of its weaponry unquestioned.

The military is now working on more effective means to keep its secrets. It is developing behavior control methods for entire populations. These can be as easily used on Americans, especially since they do not destroy crops or workers.

It is naive at best to believe that we can boycott the military out of existence. Becoming a conscientious objector or draft resister will not destroy the military. Opposing the draft is not a concrete step toward a peaceful society.

The draft is immoral because the military is immoral. We have little input into the decisions the military makes; we need to prepare for the eventuality of the draft. Instead of expending energy defeating draft legislation we need to develop or give support to groups who are struggling to erode the strength of the armed services.

With the draft the ranks of the military would more likely have dispersed in all fields people who oppose war; who would question the morality of the commands they are asked to carry out.

As women, we can be instrumental in this struggle. Women are still mostly placed in the traditional women's jobs as secretaries, clerks, etc. In these positions we are in an ideal situation to leak information. Karen Silkwood is an example of the power we may have to expose information about dangers or secrets made dangerous because of our ignorance (behavior control methods for example). As secretaries to generals we will better be able to discover their motives and thoughts on the actual use of weapons, not just hear what they tell the press and media.

Once information is leaked we need the skills and means to disseminate the information via the press, radio, and film.

Women familiar with technology will be able to interpret the information.

Importantly, we need to develop and sustain support for the women who risk doing this.

When the people have information about what kind of technology the military is developing then we can develop means to invalidate it. In the early 70's radical people who had information explained how to determine if a telephone is tapped.

We need to discover how to determine if and when weapons are being used; we need to find out where weapons are being stored and how to destroy them. And we need to discover who the men are behind this, know their plans before they can implement them and sabotage them.

Only when we are informed will we know how to fight back. The military will be exposed as not the benevolent protectorate it is advertised as, but as the means the government has at its disposal to keep us subjugated. Regardless of whether any law is passed that might affect us, we must start to include in feminist analysis what we are going to do about the military.

THE U.S. GOVERNMENT THIS YEAR WILL SPEND $31.24 PER HOUSEHOLD ON MILITARY EXPENDITURES, AND $31 PER HOUSEHOLD ON HEALTH RESEARCH.

Research C.I.A.,

White would write in his journal, "Clarisse gets horrors, Janice gets sky high!" "We were experimenting," adds another agent, "to get a person to go against their own moral training; indeed, against their own self-preservation.” At Cornell, other men in the C.I.A. were studying the effects of isolation on “breaking a person; you can get people to do almost anything, admit to anything. We wanted eventually to precondition and control U.S. Chinese, in order to send them to China as agents."

A woman who was the object of some of these experiments cried, "Damn it all, I could have maybe had a different kind of life! When I learned the experiments (in the mental hospital) on me were financed by the C.I.A., I thought, that bastard doctor! He knew what he was doing! I can't believe it, and yet it's true. Such experimentation does not have to be done on people who were totally defenseless. I cannot comprehend those human beings." One doctor, when asked what was in the injections given to unsuspecting people, or to mental patients, said, "We had no idea what the substance was. They couldn't tell us, you see, or it wouldn't have been a controlled experiment. We didn't know whether it was dog piss." One woman had electrodes planted in her brain, then was given LSD. "They were told they'd be given some medication which might make them feel worse. We were looking for an incapacitating agent.” When Paul Altmeyer asked one doctor if he had no moral qualms about these experiments that occasionally ended in death, the esteemed doctor replied: "If you define killing in a state of war as murder, then it's murder."

The "safe houses," in San Francisco and New York, presumably have been closed, after being exposed. Where the women are is a question we all get to ask ourselves, just as any feminist asks herself where those of us who disappear go to. Maybe Lesbos has risen from the sea, and there are women together in a safe place, creating and loving, without being observed by these boys with their war games. But the rest of us have to make our own homes habitable, our own cities safe, and these guys are part of what we are up against.

Reprinted from Plexis