Letters Home...

From Page 4

FRUSTRATION IN ASPEN

Dear People,

I am not good with words,  
but I would like to describe to  
you my frustration after  
attending several meetings of  
the Aspen Women’s Caucus.

I entered a plush office with  
six or seven rather wealthy  
women sitting and talking. I  
had just come from the First  
Annual Colorado Women’s  
Festival in Denver, at which I  
was extremely impressed by  
the strong feelings of sister-  
hood or woman power or  
both. I wanted to extend these  
feelings to them and give a  
thorough description of the  
festival. I lost their interest  
after about one minute.

These are women who think  
that looking natural is a new  
style of make-up application.

The majority of jobs in  
Aspen “for women” are maids  
and waitresses, emphasizing  
hard fast work, low pay and  
lots of bullshit. The women of  
the Caucus haven't had to take  
these jobs - they feel no need  
to worry about, discuss, much  
less fight for the causes of a  
poor sector of women.

What depressed me most  
was their competition for the  
floor, to hear themselves  
speak of themselves. They  
want this more than to hear  
new ideas. I’m about five to  
ten years younger than most of  
them and have no kids to  
discuss.

The really poor part of the  
whole thing is that Aspen is  
full of world and country-wide  
travelers who bring ideas, but  
if they aren’t a big name or  
look influential, they sure the  
hell don’t get any attention  
from the more long-term  
Aspen Women’s Caucus-ers.

I'd really like to start a new  
group of NOW in Aspen. I’ve  
met several others who are  
interested. Rather than sitting  
on the sidelines listening to  
the Aspen Women’s Caucus  
people discuss their affect-  
atious problems of make-up  
and men we could be acting -  
filing discrimination suits.  
(The men here simply say “We  
don't hire women.” and “I hate  
to even be asked the ques-  
tion.”)

Aspen is set in some  
beautiful mountains, but that  
is the only good thing about  
it. The rest is damn sour  
grapes for everyone who  
works for a living and even  
some who don’t.

Carolyn M. Irwin  
Member of NOW

GOOD WORK!

Dear BMR,

You're doing something  
very important with BMR.  
What you extend to Colorado  
women is invaluable, and I  
hope their support shows you  
eventually.

I hope to be able to  
contribute more later... I am  
new to Denver and am still  
getting my bearings. I never  
thought I would enjoy being  
stared at, but it’s a great trip  
when I walk into Jerry’s to get  
the latest BMR (and Playgirl -  
I get Amazon Quarterly at  
home): all the guys really give  
me the once-over. They’re just  
jealous - they don’t under-  
stand!

Keep on truckin’ women -  
there are clamoring readers  
out here who need you!

In Sappho’s Love,  
gingerlox

~ esoteric

READER BLASTS BMR

Dear BMR,

In view of the feminist  
school meeting I attended at  
BMR, the Denver Post article  
on BMR, several editorials by  
Janet Sergi (Ed. note: col-  
umns by individuals are not  
editorials) and Linda Fowler  
which appeared in BMR I  
would like to say:

1.) I do not believe in some  
“pie-in-the-sky”  
the “feminine principle.” I do  
not like cryptic generalizations.  
I do not like being categorized--  
“All women are close to  
the earth, cooperative, sup-  
portive, expressive, non-de-  
structive.” I am a person!?! I  
would like to think I am a  
person and I would like the  
right to define myself. Please  
stop being so chauvinistic!

2.) I feel the Denver Post  
article was basically accurate.  
I do feel sorry that BMR’s  
problems--once only her  
problems--are now public  
knowledge.

3.) I disagree with the  
statement (in one of your  
editorials) that “Lesbians are  
women whose primary com-  
mitment is to other women.”  
This may be true, but not  
necessarily so. Are all Les-  
bians feminists? Is sexual  
behavior the center of life;  
does it determine everything  
else? What about friendships,  
feelings, and ideas? I respect  
Lesbians as people and those  
that are working in the  
feminist movement. However,  
I do not like being made to  
feel put down or guilty  
because I’m not Lesbian. You  
(BMR) have created a hier-  
archy 1.) Lesbian Feminists  
2.) feminists 3.) non-femin-  
ists.

4.) I do feel it is necessary  
for most American women,  
Lesbian or not, to learn to  
co-exist with men because  
we can't get away from them.  
That's why I believe a feminist  
school should be both boys  
and girls together so girls can  
actively and aggressively learn  
to cope with boys so they  
won't be destroyed and boys  
learn to live and play with girls  
without exploiting and  
hurting them. BMR has  
already created a hierarchy of  
schools: 1.) feminist 2.)  
non-sexist. Will you need to  
carry the hierarchy further? 1.)  
daughters of Lesbian Femin-  
ists only, 2.) daughters of  
feminists 3.) sons and  
daughters of feminists 4.)  
daughters and sons of any-  
body!

5.) I do not feel that there is  
only one perfect man who is  
perfectly non-sexist. I do feel,  
however, that there are men  
who have qualities of cooper-  
ation, expression, support-  
iveness, and who really try not  
to be destructive to women. I  
do not feel that there is only  
one perfect woman, Lesbian  
or non-Lesbian, who is  
perfectly non-sexist either. In  
fact, I have met some real  
women pigs--Lesbian and  
non-Lesbian. I have been  
deeply hurt and exploited by  
women, Lesbian and non-les-  
bian.

6.) I feel some of the  
statements that have ap-  
peared in BMR are female  
chauvinism. “You know  
women are all alike--besides  
being born with vaginas and  
clitorises they all come out of  
the womb stamped in pink  
‘feminine principle.’ Then  
there are little pink stamps all  
over them which say, COOP-  
ERATIVE, NON-DESTRUCT-  
IVE, CLOSE TO EARTH,  
EXPRESSIVE, PROTECTIVE.”  
Yvonne Stith  
(ADMITTED NON-LESBIAN)

POST REPORTER SAYS WHAT HE  
REALLY THINKS ABOUT BMR

Ed. Note: The following is a personal note to Ivan Goldman  
following his Denver Post article of Sept. 8, and the reply received  
which was written on Post stationery!

Dear Mr. Goldman,

I find your lack of integrity appalling. Your misrepresenta-  

Sept. 11

tions were both numerous and disgusting.

Oct. 1, 1974  
Dear Ms. Fowler,

I just returned from vacation to receive your little note. It was so  
moving I thought I'd let you know that the CIA is out to get you.  
You're that important. So watch the bastards. They're devious.  
I'd tell you more, but I’ve jeopardized myself too much already.

And, just in case you still don’t understand (which I’m sure is  
quite possible) enjoy your paranoia. It’s all you've got.

Best,

Ivan Goldman  
Reporter

HEW EXPERIMENTS

WITH DES

From Page 7

make a significant change in  
Lilly’s sales or profits.”  
Presently, the company faces  
a lawsuit brought by a Royal,  
Michigan woman who has  
vaginal cancer because her  
mother took DES during her  
pregnancy.

Clinics are allowed to  
administer DES for emergency  
contraceptive use - but sup-  
posedly only in extremely  
controlled and carefully fol-  
lowed-up medical experi-  
ments. Yet it is reported that  

follow-up procedures are in-  
adequate, and prior warnings  
are few. Women are not  
warned of the cancer risk to  
themselves or to the fetus,  
should the pill fail.

Although all of the women  
in the Connecticut experiment  
must consent to an abortion  
should the conception occur,  
the service is not provided by  
Planned Parenthood, stated  
its Connecticut director,  
Kenneth Pruett. Only advice  
will be offered.

Page 17

NEWS  
FROM AROUND

THE COUNTRY

a column

Chocolate Waters

Police Attack Women, Then Try to Charge the Women With  
Battery-- Two employees of the Woman's Building in LA were beaten  
up by three peace officers in an “unprovoked attack” early in Aug.  
The officers then tried to charge the women with battery at a  
hearing attended by 100 supporters on Sept. 12. Cheryl Swanneck,  
one of the feminists involved, gives this account: “I had been  
welding. A police car began to cruise alongside of us when we  
were locking up. We said we worked in the building and went in to  
get our things... We thought the police had left but they suddenly  
banged on the door and threatened to “break it down"... When  
they tried to take Marge Elliot out to the parking lot, I told her she  
didn’t have to go. An officer grabbed Margie and threw her face  
down and then began to strangle her. Another hit her on the back.  
I began to scream; they dropped Margie, lifted me off the steps,  
crashed me down on the steps, broke my glasses and began to  
strangle me. I passed out and fell down the steps. They tortured  
me with, “Are you going to cooperate now, little girl?” I was crying  
hysterically. * The police report of the incident said that two  
possible burglary suspects who “looked like men” were reported  
“looking suspicious.” The report further stated that one woman  
(Swanneck) was asked to step outside; she refused and struck the  
officer. A wristlock was then used on the woman. It was further  
reported in the police account that as a result of the struggle one  
officer sustained an injury to his right middle finger.” * The  
hearing determined that no charges should be brought against the  
women, but Swanneck and Elliot are filing their own civil suit  
against the three policemen involved. (Sister, Sept. and Oct. '74)

Jumping Rope May Be Hazardous to Your Health!-- Physicians  
say that the nerves of the limbs or of the spine may be paralyzed  
by jumping or skipping rope. The delicate nerves of the foot are  
also liable to suffer permanent injury from the jar of jumping, and  
the amusement puts a strain on other nerves of the body which  
may cause paralysis. (The Ruined Maid by Geoffrey Eley,  
England, ’70)

The Times Has A Limited Vocabulary-- Women in Washington  
recently protested the advertising policies of the Seattle Times  
after the newspaper singled out and removed the phrase “Lesbian  
literature” from a list of material advertised by the “Madwoman”  
feminist bookstore. The Times then charged the bookstore $2.50  
extra for the editing. About 50 women and children marched  
through the downtown area singing songs and carrying signs  
such as “Lesbians Are Everywhere-- But In The Times,” “The  
Times Has a Limited Vocabulary,” and “The Times Is Behind The  
Times.” (LNS and Pandora)

It Only Took Two Centuries-- After 210 years of publishing, the  
Hartford Courant in Conn. finally named a woman (Laura Johnson)  
as director. (Media Report to Women, Oct. 1, '74)

Creep of the Month Award-- goes to Red Fenwick for his recent  
column in the Denver Post called “Protestors Boil at Pay Toilet.”  
Proving his minimal understanding of the Women's Movement,  
Ridin’-the-Range-Red disparaged the WM by reducing the issues  
to matters of lighting cigarettes and integrating public toilets (a  
ridiculous notion promulgated by the male media for their own  
ends). Further demonstrating his total ignorance on the subject,  
Fen then went on to claim the movement had “reached a climax 2  
years ago.” A “believer in male equality” himself, Mr. Wick’s  
supposedly satirical column was replete with insults to women  
and was extremely offensive to anyone with intelligent  
sensibilities. Personally, I think the issue of pay toilets is a low  
level priority in relationship to the goals of the Women’s  
Movement, but to the male media the toilet issue was just their  
cup of tea. I'm not surprised--that’s usually where heads are at  
anyway. (Denver Post, Oct. 13, '74)

All Male Senate Hurts Women-- With not one woman in the U.S.  
Senate, the men voted 50 to 34 to deny Health, Education and  
Welfare funds to be used by women for abortions. With Bella  
Abzug battling in the House, however, a similar amendment was  
defeated. Voting to deny abortion funding were such “friends” as  
McGovern, Eagleton, McIntyre, Montoya, Pastore, Byrd, Church,  
Hartke, Huddleston, Mansfield, McGee, and Muskie. Other  
senatorial “friends” not voting were Tunney, Ribicoff, Bayh,  
Bentson, and Nelson. The bill will now go to conference to resolve  
the difference between the House and Senate votes. (The Woman  
Activist, Sept. 15, 74) Quotation marks around the word “friends”  
are mine. WA, oddly enough, did not see any contradictions in the  
use of the word to describe these senators.

A. A. VILLAGE STRIPPER  
1930 SO. BROADWAY  

DENVER, COLORADO 80210  

[303] 744-9911  

SAY BIG MAMA RAG  
FOR 10% OFF