Class Struggle: Our Shared Responsibility Cont.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 5

To Get That Foot Off Our Neck Means We

My activism around mental patient rights led me into feminism, and lesbianism. When I thought back at this point about treatment/therapy in the hospital I could clearly see that most of the women and men I had done time with had problems that were not rooted in the personality, but in the society. Women who responded to an oppressive marriage by going crazy were drugged and trained to re-enter that same situation. Men on the ward were allowed more aggressive outbursts than women before they were drugged.

Female patients were encouraged to cook for everyone on the ward as a part of occupational therapy. One man had committed himself because he was afraid he would sexually assault his two daughters (they didn't deal with how society has condoned incest in many ways). One woman, in the first reasonable decision I had heard her make, that of having her tubes tied, was not allowed to by her psychiatrists.

Therapy is also often dispensed along class lines. Those without funds are more likely to be kept on a permanent basis by the state, in a state institution; those with money or insurance receive better and more consistent care than those without. Poor and minorities who are institutionalized are usually left with a worse record than their wealthier counterparts. The upper classes are more often labeled eccentric when the same symptoms from a lower class individual are more often labeled schizophrenic. The psychiatrist I had seen on a one-to-one basis, sometimes daily, at Colorado Psychiatric Hospital was transferred to the Colorado State Hospital in Pueblo where she had as many as 400 patients whom she "tried to see monthly."

Just as the job of jails is not rehabilitation, and the job of schools is not education, neither is the job of state hospitals treatment—all serve to indoctrinate—to maintain the classes in their place.

Finally, when I knew that lesbianism was okay and my shrinks did not, I was able to get out of therapy. I was saved by analysis, political analysis that is. I know that my perspective on my psychoanalytic history gave me insight into how I understand the making of political growth and change. Merely having your consciousness raised is not particularly freeing unless you have a process for making your life different. Information alone does not constitute change; I think connecting information/consciousness raising to politics is how and when change can take place. Hopefully that connection will take that internal growth and put it out where other women can benefit from it, and make therapy/feminist therapy more than a solution for a few individuals. I tell you things can't be different enough to free all women under capitalism.

In studying classism and becoming consciously involved in class struggle, I am freer now than I ever have been in my life. My politics are stronger and more coherent and I feel more of that personally also. This business of being coherent/making sense is important to me because I went through a long period, not that far removed, when nothing inside or outside of me made sense except being self-destructive. I am willing to continue struggling personally and politically, however and wherever I have to, so that life can keep making sense for me. This does not make it any easier, but it does leave me in control. I am less frightened of being crazy like I was before, a fear I have carried for years. I don't have to love people who are against my self-interest just because they are family, and I can have better relationships with those who care for me with our self-interest at heart. Through class struggle, I see with absolute clarity that therapy must be tied to a political analysis to really let the “patient” know how and where their struggles are supported by society, and especially that the submission of women is a part of the picture of women's health rather than their ills.

Classism further points out the dangers of individual solutions to what must be viewed in a broader context. Women in the movement, and the radical movement itself, must proceed past understanding our psychological oppression and connect it to an understanding of our economic exploitation, for the same ruling class benefits from both. The community's responsibility to women in struggle is not just sympathetic understanding and support, but we also must work politically to make real change possible for more than just some of us who have access to personal therapy.

I can now let go of my career as an ex-mental patient. I can see that my psychiatric episode interrupted my class connections, but did not break them sufficiently as therapy supports the individual solutions, and professional-manager-bossman to client-employee-worker relationships established by the economic, male-dominated system we live with. I have abandoned my intellectual dreams, with little regret, for a more working-class reality. I am a printer; I feel for the first time that I am capable of caring for myself.

It continues to frighten me when I see our politics fall into a psychoanalytic trap. Our process and our anger must be directed against our real enemies, and let all of our mothers off the hook.

Growing up in Chicago 52 years ago, I was taught by my parents, the school system, and the media that working-class people were dumb, lazy, and dirty; this also applied to other nationalities and races. All these powers also taught me that unions were “un-American” and corrupt.

During World War II, workers were glorified as long as they were working on government defense projects. Women were praised for working in the factories and replacing men so that they could go to war, but they were always presented to us as being temporary in the workforce. My mother had always worked out of the house and most of my friends' mothers worked before the war began, and I never thought that women didn't belong in the workforce. When I was 18, I left my parents' home and worked until I was 27, when I had my first child. During that time, my work helped put my then-husband through college. I had a high school education.

I worked blue and white-collar jobs. It didn't really matter to me; the pay was always bad, the jobs were boring, and the supervisors and bosses were lousy. I was either quitting a job or being fired. Everyone in authority treated me and the other workers as if we had no brains; it wasn't for nothing they called us "girls," because that's how they treated us. I felt ashamed of myself because I always had trouble on the job; I was called a troublemaker and it was always my fault. I had had much the same type of trouble in school.

I went to night school for one year and business school for 3 months, but I continued to do the same kind of jobs, 8 to 5, hourly pay whether it was in an office or a factory or in the fields.

When I became a mother, I also became an unpaid laborer in the house, and I was still being treated as a "girl." I got in trouble with my husband time and time again because I never understood that his word was law. He was the one I had helped put through college.

When I met professional people, or worked with them, I took it for granted that they were smarter than me, and I was envious of them and in awe of them, but I resented them. I had to listen to them, but they didn't have to listen to me, and again it was my fault... if I only sat still and listened, I would learn something.

After much struggle, I find that I respect myself as a woman, as a lesbian, as a radical feminist, and as a blue-collar worker with a trade. I am a printer and I support my 12-year-old daughter and myself, standing 8 hours a day at a press with dirty fingernails. Like millions of other women, I stand 8 hours a day at a machine with dirty hands, being given orders from the big bosses who relay to the boss over me. The struggle to respect myself as a woman and as a worker has been hard because society doesn't respect me, nor do I feel that respect from many women in the movement. I am now making $5 an hour, which is the most I have ever earned, and it wasn't too long ago I had been on welfare, food stamps, and unemployment. I have worked politically with the male-dominated left and with liberals who used reform as their political base, and all the while I had a hard time understanding their process. Now I realize that their process has to be very thorough so as not to endanger their class interest and patriarchy.

I still have a left perspective and consider myself a communist. I am a white woman whose father was middle class and whose mother was a white-collar worker and whose grandparents were peasants in Russia. Since coming to Denver 3 years ago, I have functioned in a women's community.

I thought when I came to Denver that I had finally found someplace where my feelings of class division would stop. At that time, I didn't even think in those terms, because in my past political activity no one had dealt with class consciousness.

More and more I have felt alienated from women I have worked with politically and knew socially. To be alienated from women who I should be close to has been hard for me to deal with. To be asked, as a printer, to take money to print jobs for conferences that I had refused to print originally because of their political content, in thinking that the money would make me overlook bad politics. The conferences were for professional women and did not include me, as a community member, and were priced out of my means; showed that they clearly valued the skills of some women over others. To know that I had nothing to say to women I like has been frightening; to come to some understanding of the separation has been healthy but torturous.

Everyone talks of revolution, but no one talks of goals; the revolution is not our goal, but a means to our goal. How we get to a revolutionary point, at least for me, is the crucial issue. For me, it is not to do political actions or demonstrations without a political understanding. I see around me women planning events that cost money, which leaves out poor women. I see women going to events that poor women don't have the assurance they too can go. I am a poor woman. I see a community where only a few do more than give lip service to the needs of women with children. I see a community that is threatened by political discussions that directly concern their private lives.

Nobody does something for nothing; we are all involved in self-interest.

I want our movement to continue. Men have buried our history and I don't want that to happen again. We are not the first feminist movement, but I didn't know that. I want the next generation of young women to know they are a link of a chain, not the originators of a new movement because ours had died and was buried. But even more, I choose to live my life with women—to talk, work, love, and socialize with women—I have no other community and want no other community. Without that community, I would be a lonely, unhappy, aging woman, and that is not the kind of life I will live.