Diana Press Vandalized

(Editor's Note: The following press
release from Diana Press is reprinted
verbatim.)

Diana Press, the women's press lo-
cated in Oakland, Ca., was vandalized
during the early morning of Oct. 25,
1977. The plant was broken into and
the presses damaged and much of the
equipment and stock of books were de-
stroyed. Included in the destruction
were 5000 copies of Plain Brown Rapper
by Rita Mae Brown.

Vandals evidently entered by a side
loading dock that was improperly wired
by the alarm company. They systemati-
cally and methodically worked their
way through the shop, starting with
Judy Grahn's office which they rifled.
In the bindery they poured gallons of
solvent and every other chemical avail-
able on the 5000 books plus ink and
solvent on 4500 copies of the first 96
pages of Lesbian Lives; From there
they moved into the press room where
they poured paint, ink, solvent and
Comet cleanser into the presses.

In the paste-up and layout area,
the vandals pulled out the typesetting,
paste-up books, negatives and plates
that were stored there from five years
of work. Pasted up copies from early
work like Songs to a Handsome Woman
by Rita Mae Brown were destroyed as
well as negatives from She Who: A
Graphic Book of Poems by Judy Grahn
and the cover plates of all books in-
cluding The Ladder Anthology. The
typesetting of three fall books—

Seed of a Woman by R. S. Geller,
Lesbian Separation: An Amazon Analysis
and Woman at the Top of the Hike by
Kathy Kozachenko—was methodically
ripped up page by page.

In the typesetting room, the vandals
poured ink into both typesetting com-
posers. In the production office they
poured ink into an adding machine, and
drove a screwdriver through its mech-
anisms. They pulled out drawers and
rifled material in Casey Czarnik's of-
fice. The distribution and sales desks,
the bookkeeping area and Coletta Reid's
desk, were also vandalized. Her coffee
cup was dipped into a five-pound can of
blue printer's ink and the ink was poured
on the telephone, Rolodex, chair and
floor.

The identity of the vandals is not
known. It seems, however, that they
were women. Their footprints found on
a shelf and a sheet of paper were far
too small for most men. Speculation
as to who could have done such a thing
centers around three primary possibil-
ities:

(1) Government agents, (2) Women
in the movement who are opposed to
Diana Press and FEN (The Feminist
Economic Network) and (3) A combina-
tion of agent provocateurs and women
who felt they were saving the move-
ment from "feminist capitalism." It
is not at all unimaginable that the
government broke in, as it is now
clear that they vandalized Big Mama
Rag in 1975. Nor does it seem unimag-
inable, if the hostility reported in
the feminist press is any indication,
that women who consider themselves
feminist could perpetrate such an act
of violence. Regardless of who per-
sonally and individually is responsi-
ble for this particular act of physi-
cal violence, it was made possible by
the climate of gossip, trashing, back-
biting and verbal violence that the
movement has encouraged about Diana
Press and FEN for the last two years.
The movement is subject to infiltra-
tion only when it is divided against
itself and unable to deal with politi-
cal differences constructively.

As a press, we who work here have
been repeatedly asked in the last week
whether we are going to close. It
seems that only our determination to
continue is keeping us going. Our fi-
nancial situation is desperate at this
point. The vandals were precise in
knowing exactly what to hit to hurt
us financially. They did not, for
example, run screwdrivers through
the presses and break them. It would

More On Diana Press

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 7

have been much easier for us to collect
insurance if some clear, definable part
of the presses had been destroyed,
rather than their systems mucked up.
Instead, they got cleanser in the ink
and water system, bearings and oil
systems, making it difficult to col-
lect from the insurance company and
causing extremely time-consuming and
frustrating work to get the presses
running again. They made it impossible
for us to generate immediate cash
through our normal business by destroy-
ing Plain Brown Rapper. (We had over
1000 copies backordered). Because our
presses are down, we cannot print com-
mercial work in order to keep going.
Because the pasted up copies, negatives
and plates of many of our past books
were destroyed, it is going to take a
great deal of work to be able to re-
print past titles. Because three of
our fall books that were ready to
print were ripped up, we can only pub-
lish half of our fall line.

Any one of these acts of violence
would have been a severe setback for
us, but all of them together has meant
a real disaster for us. The vandalism
has been a tremendous blow to our
morale and emotional ability to contin-
ue. In spite of this crippling blow
to our very work, we all feel that we
cannot close; we feel that what we are
doing is too important to give up. In
the last analysis it is the women's
community who will decide for us; for,
without the help of thousands of women
all across the country, we will not be
able to make it through this crisis.

We need women to send us donations;
we need women to organize benefits in
our behalf; we need women to order our
books directly; we need women to ask
bookstores and libraries to order and
stock our books; we need women to re-
view our books in the women's and
other media. Please send orders and
donations to Diana Press, 4400 Market
St., Oakland, CA 94608.

We are beginning mid-winter with fewer collective members than usual. We
would love to hear from you out there - your comments on articles, layout,
and ideas about the paper. You can't imagine how good it is to get a letter
even if it is critical. We need help with the paper in all areas. Any of
you women out there interested??

Our thanks go to the woman who unfortunately must remain anonymous, who
has offered massages to all of us, to help ease our muscles through the
strain of production.

Tea has left BMR after two years of work. The longest-lived member of the
collective, Tea gave so many diverse things to the paper: her 3 AM endurance,
her honesty, her creative sense of humor, her love of women and the paper when
things got rough... We'll miss you, Tea.

Deb Taylor has stayed with the paper while the search for more collective
members goes on. She will stay until the first of the year, when Sue Godding
joins us. Also, we have learned that Bobbe Ross is going to take the plunge
into our collective process in December. Her vitality is a welcome addition.
We can't wait for all this new good energy. Also, Linda Rechter has promised
to join a task force. Anyone else out there curious about the paper, into
learning to write better, or wanting an incredible political growing exper-
ience... we need you!! Photographers, writers or unskilled like the rest
of us, give any of us a call. Or leave a message at Woman to Woman Feminist
Center - 320-5972. Our home phone numbers are 321-7467, 355-8209, 837-8405,
and 832-6598. We haven't had enough woman time to keep the office well
staffed, so we're often not here, and difficult to reach. We do open and
answer our mail even when we're not here enough to keep the phone answered,
so mail is a good way to reach us too.

The typesetter fundraising drive still goes on.
Make your check out to the BMR typesetter fund. If you would like to make
your donation tax deductible, please write us at the office for details.
Also, we would like to find someone interested in starting a typesetting
business - we see such a business as crucial for organizing the use of the
typesetter. We would like the typesetter to serve feminist and movement
groups, and to maintain political ties to BMR. If you have any ideas or
energy to make our typesetter operation a reality, please call us. A woman
could earn a living and do movement work at the same time...

Keep those cards and letters coming, and also please send us your ‘Dear
Mama’ articles about your personal and political struggles - at work, home,
or any part of your life. If we print it, we'll send you a free one year's
subscription.

Our distribution is picking up. Pandora and Dona did distribution last
issue, and are adding many new outlets for the paper. Please send us any
suggestions of good places for the paper, and urge people to carry it. We
also can give you free back issues for promotional purposes for us. Some
good places where we'd like to give out old issues of the paper are schools,
workplaces, laundromats, community centers, among political groups, bars, etc.
Please contact us if you have a place where you would like to distribute
free back issues.

This issue is a double issue because of our small collective needing more
space between grueling productions. Hopefully our January issue will be on
time, although we often come out late in the month. If you get your BMRs
in the mail 2 or 3 weeks into the month it's probably not the result of the
FBI intercepting all your mail, but more a result of our not coming out until
well into the month - especially bad months. We're trying to get better.

Please send us any ex-
We still need $4000; we have already raised $3200.

Editorial

The recent vandalization of Diana Press, a women's press in Oakland, California,
is a severe loss to the feminist community. Diana suffered extensive damage
to its presses, production and office equipment as well as its new line of books.
Clearly, basic survival will be a long and time-consuming process.

As of now, the identity of the vandals remains unknown. However, some evidence
points to the likelihood that they were women who knew exactly how to put a press
out of commission. Speculation from the women at Diana points to the possibility
of (1) agents (2) women angry at Diana Press and its association with FEN (The
Feminist Economic Network) or (3) a combination of both.

In any case, the destruction is inexcusable. And we join
with other feminists across the country who are donating time, money and energy to Diana. We also support Diana's campaign to make the vandalization a political issue: if in fact the damage was done out of political anger, it's time for all of us to define once
again the limits of political debate in this community.

However, we do take issue with part of the press release that Diana has issued
and is printed in full in this issue. In that statement, Diana charges that the
"movement" has "encouraged" a climate of "gossip, trashing, backbiting and verbal
violence about Diana Press and FEN for the last two years"--a climate that makes
such acts of political revenge possible.

In a conversation between Big Mama Rag and Elizabeth D'Allessio of Diana Press,
she named articles printed in BMR, the Bay Area paper Ptexus and 10% Our Backs
as contributing to that climate. In particular, she labeled “irresponsible journ-
alism" the three-part series written by Martha Shelley which ran in the March,
April and May issues of BMR this year. The article was strongly critical of FEN
--which, like Shelley, we also see as a form of “feminist capitalism" directly
antithetical to some of our deepest commitments as feminists: collectivity,
worker control and struggle against the exploitation of this country's economic
system. In reprinting an edited version of Martha Shelley's research, we sup-
ported her political point of view and the basic integrity of her approach. We
also printed an extensive critique of the article from the women of Olivia Records
(May, 1977), a critique we did not agree with, but supported as a contribution
to radical feminist knowledge and discussion.

We think Diana Press, in its bid for support, owes the feminist community an
apology for its failure or refusal to define or distinguish between "trashing"
and political debate, and for its accusation that "the movement" has encouraged
a climate that made the destruction of its presses possible.

“The Juna Press
Bex Sit, Kenmore Station
Boston, MA. 02219

The 1978 lunar Calendar:
Dedicated to the Goddess in her many guises

Available Now! The second annual edition...featuring the
13 Lunar Months, Solstice & Equinox, Cross-Quarters,
Pagan Fests...Poetry, Prose, Art, Graphics, Photography,
Bibliography... a 36-page Moon-Book!

$6.50 plus 1. p-h (Mass. tax). Discounts on sliding scale.