10

Analysis — Therapists Conference

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4, No. 3

The “Feminist” Conference That Wasn’t

E. Bresnahan, P. Hickox, V. Piotter, K. Sharp

The first Feminist Therapists’ Conference, held in Boulder, Colorado, the weekend of January 23, was an object lesson in how not to plan a conference which calls itself feminist. The story of the conference can be told in terms of who was not invited, rather than who was.

The conference planners, the Women's Institute for Alternative Psychotherapy (WIAP), aimed the conference at “professional feminist therapists.” The problem came in WIAP’s definition of “professional” almost as much as in their definition of “feminist.”

The women invited were, in the main, those who had the inclination and the privilege to go to school and get degrees which would enable them to practice therapy in the system. They were professional in the traditional, patriarchal sense of the word. Where were the third world women, the para-professionals, the rape and abortion counselors, in other words, all those women who do therapy outside the system of credentials which has robbed women of their arts by insisting that they are sciences?

WIAP double excluded these women, first by not inviting them, and secondly by insisting that those who, by fluke or association, did happen to hear about the conference, come up with an inflexible $40 registration fee. There was some provision made for “bartering” for the waiver of the fee, but many women who asked were offered only child-care as an alternative to coming up with the bucks.

So, once again, those who controlled capital escaped the job of caring for the children. The effect was to reinforce the class division which already existed in the conference. Some of the women there, because they had access to money, were free to fully participate in the conference, while others had to miss parts. Would it not have been more fair and, indeed, more feminist, to make child-care the responsibility of everyone attending, rather than parcel it out on an economic basis?

A WIAP newsletter that came out immediately following the conference contains a revelation of where WIAP stands on the issue of class privilege. It states that at a meeting of the WIAP members before the conference, the issue of the waiver of fees was discussed. WIAP officially decided that women would be excluded from the conference if they couldn't pay the $40. However, the WIAP Board of Directors and “other influential” persons would be invited to attend free. So, those who could afford to pay, didn’t, and those who couldn't afford it, did — or stayed home.

All objections that women made along financial lines were lost on the women of WIAP. They were so middle class in their thought that they could not conceive of a practicing therapist too poor to spend $40 on a conference. While excluding women, they included a man (reportedly “somebody's husband”) and paid him $15 per hour to do video-taping.

When Ann Sprague of WIAP was asked why a woman hadn't been hired for the video-taping job, she replied that there were no women in the area who were “qualified” to do the job — despite the fact that Denver has a Community Video Center with at least two women technicians on its staff, and the fact that a woman conference participant had offered to trade her video skills in exchange for a waiver of the conference fee. The tape recording of the workshops was

Workshop Reports from

Saturday Morning Workshops
The Oppression of Mothers

The workshop on the Oppression of Mothers was led by women from the Mother's Emergency Stress Service (MESS) in Sacramento, California and began with the women from MESS giving the group some history of their organization's inception and work. The MESS women explained that they had worked for one year without salary, counseling mothers with crises and caring for each other’s children. A year later they received a $74,000 grant and began a 24-hour mothers’ crisis line, referral service and support group. They spoke about some of the needs of the women who call the MESS crisis line. Among those needs mentioned were: women who have been beaten by their husbands and/or whose children have been beaten and must leave home immediately, mothers whose welfare checks have been stolen, mothers looking for day care or a babysitting co-op, women who need help with hyper-active children, mothers looking for a rap group so that they can talk about their isolation and frustrations at home, and mothers who fear they may commit child abuse. The women from MESS, however, expressed regret that their organization had not yet developed into more of a feminist organizing tool.

After this brief introduction, a discussion followed on the topic of ways women are oppressed as mothers and ways in which this oppression can be eliminated. Women expressed feelings of rage and resentment toward a system that nearly demands mandatory motherhood without eliminating, lessening, or even warning of the isolation and boundaries to fulfillment and potential inherent in traditional child-rearing. Women told the group that they often feel resentment toward their children, and then experience guilty feelings due to the original resentment. Some mothers told of the enormous pressures on them from relatives to be “model mothers.” Other mothers told of their struggle to break out of that role and begin regarding their own lives as being as important as their children’s. Some women expressed anger toward childless women in the women’s movement who systematically refuse to help out in the care and/or raising of children within the community. Some single mothers talked about their fears of handling the enormous responsibilities of motherhood alone.

Still other women spoke of their children’s resentment toward them as mothers who have broken out of the mother role. Several women spoke of their recurring hesitancies to “burden” close friends with their children and expressed their desire/need to let go of that notion.

Some solutions to the problems inherent in traditional mothering were discussed. One woman from MESS urged the mothers present to fantasize about alternatives to their situations and then realize that whatever can be fantasized can be made to happen. Some fantasies included: living in groups and sharing all (including emotional) responsibilities for the children, encouraging children to seek out adults with similar interests to their own so that “entertaining and educating” responsibilities do not fall solely on the parents, getting interested persons (possibly the father) to take the children for a few months, several years or possibly forever, forming a “teenager exchange” for mothers who are freaked out by their own teenagers, evolving truly new and workable ideas on child-rearing that would allow for both the needs of the children and of those raising the children, urging people who don’t have children to take equal responsibility for other people’s children, setting up “private eye” groups to help locate fathers who have skipped out on their child support payments, urging that children be incorporated more fully into society, etc. The ideas were boundless and creative. The central theme running through all the ideas was the need to set up a mutual support network for mothers. It was not enough that women expressed their feelings about mothering; they were urged to come up with whatever fantasies they could about changing their situation and encouraged to implement their fantasies. Political changes and struggle were seen as imperative to the life of the individual oppressed mother.

Counseling the Victim of Sexual Assault

Unfortunately, this workshop drew only three participants,

GION

119 WEST 57 STREET NY NY 10009

their share of it back, as they did not want to finance any of WIAP's planned projects — projects which they were sure they wouldn't want their money to go, based on what they had learned of WIAP at the conference.

A few of the women whom the conference planners had sought to exclude through omission were present, nonetheless. They were angry, and justifiably so. Though they attempted to raise the issues of financial accountability, exploitation, class and race, and professionalism a number of times, they were met only with silence or half-answers from WIAP, and impatience from many of the women attending the conference. Most of the women present clearly felt that they were there to discuss therapy and not feminism. They resented the questions raised as distractions from “the work of the conference.”

A particularly revealing confrontation was that which took place following the speech by Hogie Wycoff, on the second day of the conference. Wycoff said a lot of good things, notable among them, “I get my orgasms from political activism.” When, however, after her speech, a political conflict broke out, revolving around basic issues of class, privilege, and accountability, Wycoff couldn't handle it. Instead of just letting women speak, she quickly leapt into the role of a ‘facilitator’ of the “discussion.” She, along with many of the other women present, appeared to want everything to be nice. Her numerous interruptions of the flow of the dialogue served only to confuse, soften, and squelch the protest. After the meeting broke up, it was very easy to be angry with Wycoff. She had put herself in an exposed position. But the fault was not hers alone — she was reflecting the view of perhaps a majority of the women attending the conference. A view which held that legitimate concerns should only be presented if they could be presented politely, and that they should only be discussed if everyone felt like doing it. (You do your thing, I'll do mine...) or (“Excuse me, sir, but you're standing on my neck.” “I'm sorry but I don't feel like discussing that right now.”)

This was symptomatic of perhaps the single greatest problem of the conference — most of the women were there with their heads but not with their guts. They knew what to say and how to say it, but that’s as far as it went. They didn’t want anyone to get angry, they didn't want the conference planners to be asked any embarrassing questions. They wanted everything to be sweetness and light. By their criteria, a woman is a feminist therapist just because she says she is. To ask her to follow through on her words with action was considered to be in bad taste.

As it turned out, though there was much discussion of objections that were raised, no definitive answers were ever arrived at. Even the statement which was finally drafted by the dissenting group was more of an exercise in “getting your feelings out” than a demand for accountability. The whole episode had an aura of unreality around it, like a giant exercise in “role-playing.” Not that the women who were concerned about the political side of therapy and of the conference didn’t have valid points to make, but that the rest of the women refused to take them seriously — they were glad to see that the dissidents had run out of opportunities for their “acting out,” and that everyone could go home and get back to the work of punching pillows.

Therapists Conference |

straight. Homophobia affects many aspects of therapy, including the relation of the client and the therapist, the group the client is in, the issues that the lesbian client will bring up, and how lesbians respond to each other. There was discussion of how therapists should deal with homophobia in themselves and in their clients.

There was discussion of specific problems which lesbians have in this society. Some of these problems mentioned were that lesbians have no role models, that there is no societally sanctioned lesbian committed relationship.

It was generally agreed that most lesbians who go into therapy are seeking to understand their own experiences and to find ways to cope with the challenges they face in a society that often marginalizes them.

More on Page 12

Once you put The Nature Shoe by Glen on your feet, the feeling goes straight to your face. In the form of one enormous grin.

The Nature Shoe is a carefully designed form for your feet which takes into consideration the way your foot is shaped and the way you were meant to walk in the first place.

Your foot has an arch, so The Nature Shoe has an arch.

Your foot has a heel, so The Nature Shoe makes room for your heel. And the heel is slightly lower than the toe because that's how your weight is most naturally distributed.

The Nature Shoe comes in lots of different styles, and each one is made with the finest quality materials for maximum comfort.