The Hazards Of Hospital Work

A study conducted for the Canadian  
Union of Public Employees described a  
terrifying array of illnesses, acci-  
dents and stresses that hospital  
workers are subjected to on the job.  

While technicians may be knowledgeable  
about x-rays and radiation and  
provided with proper protection, other  
hospital workers may not be and may  
be exposed due to lack of knowledge  
about the equipment or carelessness  
by the technician.  

Many hospitals, while providing  
patients with the most advanced  
health care equipment, do not provide  
their workers with such basics as non-  
slip floors or adequate ventilation.  

Below are described some of the  
work hazards of hospital workers.  

INFECTIONS  

There are hundreds of possible infec-  
tions to which hospital workers are  
exposed. Some are quite common: colds,  
the 'flu' and sore throats are picked  
up regularly by workers on pediatric  
(children's) wards. Others are more  
exotic, which are more difficult to  
diagnose and treat, and may result in  
wide-spread contamination of hospital  
workers before the patient is isolated.  

Infection may be picked up by direct  
contact with patients. High risk areas  
include emergency departments, kidney  
dialysis units (hepatitis) and pedia-  

tric wards. In the latter, pregnant  
women workers may be particularly at  
risk of picking up infections such as  
rubella (German measles) which can  
cause birth defects.  
But infection is also spread by con-  

tact with various waste materials.  
Contaminated hypodermic needles turn  

up in linen bags injuring laundry wor-  
kers, or poke through plastic garbage  
bags to hurt maintenance workers and  
porters. Contaminated bed linen is ano-  
ther hazard if it isn't separated, lab-  
eled and handled with special precau-  
tions by trained laundry workers. Lab-  
oratory workers may be harmed by  
exposure to infectious blood samples,  
urine or other specimens and cultures.  
While staff in direct patient care  
are often carefully trained in infec-  
tion control, most non-professional  
workers are not educated about the  
nature and control of infection hazards.  

STRAINS AND FALLS  

Almost 50% of compensated disorders  
among hospital workers are back  
injuries. Many of these are sustained  
by nurses, R.N.A.s and orderlies when  
lifting patients without help. Falls  
on wet or cluttered floors also cause  
some serious accidents. In addition,  
a large number of hospital workers  
suffer from leg ailments caused by  
being on their feet all day.  

One important factor in these pro-  
blems is cutbacks in hospital spending.  
Understaffing increases the pace of  
work and encourages short cuts in  
lifting and transport of patients and  
heavy equipment.  

Though most hospitals have established  

'safety' procedures in washing  
floors, few have invested in non-slip  
flooring, a more fundamental control  
against falls. Labs, offices and stor-  
age facilities are often overcrowded  
with boxes of supplies, cabinet doors  

and portable equipment and tables which  

ENERGY HAZARDS  

Stressed workers often have slowed  
reaction times and poor coordination,  
which increase the frequency of acci-  
dents. Emotional problems such as  
anger, frustration, depression or  
anxiety, sometimes requiring medica-  
tion, may also result.  

Hospital workers experience stress  
as a result of the emotionally charged  
life-and-death atmosphere of the  
workplace. In addition, shift work,  
irregular and long work cycles, and  
understaffing are problems for many  
hospital workers.  

Poor staff-patient ratios mean de-  
personalized patient care, delays in  
response to patient needs or hurried  
attention and probably a general de-  
cline in levels of care. This can  

create tripping hazards.  

These include  
hazards described above.  
In kitchens may  

TOXIC MATERIALS  

In addition, workers may also be  
exposed to non-ionizing radiation such  
as that from microwave ovens or infrared heating.  
Both of these can cause cataracts  
(an opaque film in the lens of the eye)  
resulting in loss of vision. Microwaves  
may interfere with surgically implanted  
pacemakers or heat other metal implants.  
Heat is often a problem in hospital  
boiler rooms, kitchens and laundries.  
The heat stress response may include  

fatigue, headaches, dizziness,  
nausea, loss of appetite, apathy, poor judge-  
ment and irritability. Workers under  
heat stress may be more susceptible  
to accidents.  

Noise is an energy hazard not often  
associated with hospitals. And yet  
the boiler rooms of these institutions  
may often be well above the legal max-  
imum of 90 decibels for eight hours.  
(This limit is by no means a ‘safe  
limit since as many as one in ten  
workers may suffer permanent hearing  
damage when exposed to 90 dB over  
a prolonged period). Machine shops  
may also have noise at hazardous  
levels.  

STRESS  

Stress is not often seriously consid-  

ered as an occupational health hazard.  
Yet it is strongly linked with many  
health problems, including coronary  
heart disease, the leading single  
cause of death in the industrial  
world. Stressful working conditions  

result in patient insecurity or  
hostility, sometimes expressed in the  
verbal or physical abuse of those  
workers who care for them.  

Cutbacks also cause disruptions in  
the scheduling of work, availability  
of free weekends and vacation time.  
All of these can cause strain outside  
the workplace, among families and  
friends of hospital workers.  

The very nature of hospitals neces-  
sitates 24 hour patient care, and thus  
conditions such as shift work and  
weekend work cannot be entirely done  
away with. Nonetheless, virtually all  
of these conditions can be improved.  
For example, shift work can be  
minimized by establishing voluntary  
evening and night shifts on a perman-  
ent basis for as many workers who  
might find it convenient. Shorter hours,  
extra days off and longer holidays  
all help reduce the fatigue and  
stress of shift work. Evening and  
night work should be made as pleasant  
as possible by maintaining employee  
services such as cafeteria service  
(rather than vending machines in the  
basement), pleasant rest rooms for  
breaks, and so on.  

OTHER HAZARDS  

There are many other occupational  
health problems which affect hospital  
workers. Some of these, such as  
cuts, scrapes and puncture wounds are  

frequent occurrences resulting from  
improper disposal of syringes and  
other sharp instruments or in kitchens  
where the pace of work leads to un-  
safe handling of knives.  

Electrical shocks occur in many  
parts of the hospital, especially in  
intensive-care units full of electri-  
cally operated life-support equipment  
or in kitchens.  

Accidents occur with the use of  
moving equipment which is not well-  
maintained or in poorly-designed  
corridors and passageways.  

Stress may also give rise to fatigue,  
insomnia, indigestion, ulcers, backaches,  
skin rashes, high blood pressure and in-  
creased susceptibility to infection.  

While x-ray technicians and workers in  
nuclear medicine are usually well-monitored  
and protected, other hospital workers may be care-  

lessly exposed. Nurses and orderlies  
may position patients or hold babies  
for x-rays; operating room staff may  
be exposed when portable x-ray equip-  
ment is used; cleaning and maintenance  
staff may come into contact with radio-  
active substances in storage; morgue  
attendants may handle radioactive  
bodies.  

Workers can demand a number of chang-  

es in hospital procedures in order to  
decrease their exposure to many of  
these substances. First, they should  
establish the right to know about  
substances they work with, and the  
dangers they represent. All chemicals  
should be clearly labeled with chemical  
as well as trade names, information  
about possible hazardous effects, and  
clear instructions for safe use. Where-  

ever possible, substitution of less  
hazardous substances for known toxic  
ones should be the practice. Good  
ventilation will decrease problems in  
areas such as operating rooms where  
"scavenger" systems can remove waste  
gases. In labs and hospital machine  
shops, special ventilation hoods can  
take away toxic gases or vapors. (Of  
course, a good maintenance program for  
ventilation equipment is also essential  
once it has been installed). Eyewash  
baths, emergency showers and special  
cleanup equipment should be made  
available wherever toxic substances  
are in use. Lead screening and aprons  
must be used around all radioactive  
materials and frequent monitoring must  
be practiced.  

Women's Occupational Health  
Resource Center Newsletter  

Checklists For Health Workers  

Health and safety checklists and  
flowsheet diagrams, which can be  
used by workers and others as a  
guide to inspect their laboratories  
for hazards have been developed by  
the Women's Occupational Health  
Resource Center.  

The checklists cover general  
working conditions such as noise,  
ventilation, chemical showers, etc.  
Safety checklists also inventory  
general lab procedures such as  
pipetting and disposal of contamin-  
ated materials, protective clothing  
and employee regulations.  

Flowsheets designed to follow  
the flow of biological samples  
through hospital routines from  
patient areas to the laboratory  
were also constructed. Using  
these flowsheets, the potential  
route of infection can be traced  
and sources of disease pinpointed  
and eliminated.  

The flowsheets are available  
from the Women's Occupational  
Health Resource Center, American  
Health Foundation, 320 East 43rd  
Street, New York, N.Y. 10017.