Politics of Health

Additives Spell Profit for Food Industry, Dangers to Health

Nicki Stoner

Historically food producers and consumers have been at war with each other. Cheaper substances have traditionally been substituted for more expensive ones, and governments have occasionally interceded when outright dishonesty became blatant. In England the notorious dishonesty of bakers led to such stiff penalties that bakers began selling thirteen cakes to a dozen out of fear of reprisals, hence the ‘baker's dozen.’ In simpler times a careful consumer could, at least, rely upon her own judgment and senses to determine whether the butter she bought was rancid or if the pepper contained charcoal. Now it is almost impossible to know what you are eating. We have been led to believe that all the ingredients must be on the label and that the government protects us from dangerous additives. I began to question both those assumptions when I noticed that many labels do not list any ingredients at all.

Protection?

Like the other bureaucracy-ridden regulatory agencies of the U.S. government, the Food and Drug Administration, despite the original intent, protects the industry it supposedly regulates more than it does consumers. Its lack of concern for consumers is shown by the cyclamate controversy. In 1969 the use of cyclamates was banned. Cyclamates had been suspected of being carcinogenic (cancer causing) for at least fifteen years prior to that and had never been authorized for use in Great Britain. Yet it took massive public pressure to finally get it off the market.

Producers invariably argue that the use of additives is for the benefit of the consumers. They reduce the cost of food by extending its shelf life and reducing shipping costs, they make foods safer by helping to prevent food from rotting and to prevent botulism, they allow you to have a much greater variety of food, from tropical fruits to a new breakfast food or whipped topping, and they add nutrition by supplementing vitamins and minerals.

This is all true, but in the vast majority of cases additives are used solely to increase the profits of the producers. Artificial coloring is added to enhance the attractiveness of hot dogs, orange skins, ice cream, candy, canned peas, butter and so on, and are of no nutritive value. They are used to tempt consumers to buy or worse, to mask stale or rancid food.

Labels cannot be relied upon to tell you what is in the food you are buying. The FDA has a fat, complicated set of regulations that say that some additives need not be on labels, some must appear on some kinds of foods but not on others, and some need not be precisely identified.

Ice cream contains a host of emulsifiers, stabilizers, preservatives, antioxidants, artificial coloring and flavoring, but the only substances that must be on the label are microcrystalline and unspecified artificial flavors. This lack of full and consistent labeling denies us the right to know what we are putting into our own bodies. In addition, the public is not allowed to see industry's reports of specific additives because they are routinely stamped confidential by the FDA.

Testing

Before 1958 the industry could use any substance it wished and it was up to the FDA to prove it was dangerous. Now a company must establish the safety of a new substance before it can be introduced. This seems to be an improvement, but without public scrutiny there is no guarantee that the necessary care is taken in testing, or that ambivalent results are not overlooked. In fact, given the complexity in determining the long-term carcinogenic, teratogenic (causing birth defects) and mutagenic (causing changes in the genetic structure) effects, it is impossible to prove that any given chemical is completely safe. Present testing methods are not sufficiently stringent to give one a feeling of security. In the more rigorous studies, controlled tests are made on twenty-five to several hundred test animals of one or more species. Genetic studies include mating of test animals and their progeny. Chemicals are also analyzed to see whether they resemble others that are known to be either harmful or harmless. There are a number of problems connected with these studies.

Tests on animals do not necessarily show how chemicals will affect a large, heterogeneous population of human beings. Different species metabolize substances in different ways. A chemical that is carcinogenic in rats or dogs or people may or may not be harmful to any other species. The number of test animals used is too small, they receive otherwise pure and adequate diets, and are in good health at the outset of testing.

Chemicals are often only harmful to a small number of highly susceptible people because they may be malnourished, suffer from diseases and infections, and have vast differences in their genetic makeup. The diet of Americans is not pure; we ingest literally thousands of different artificial and natural additives which may act together to form carcinogens and other harmful chemicals in the body.

The latest public concern is that nitrites and nitrates, used in almost all preserved and processed meats, combine with amines, found in coffee, cold tablets and many other ingested items, to form nitrosamines which are highly carcinogenic.

Finally, when studies do indicate harmful effects, the industry is often given time extensions to continue using the offending chemical while further studies are made. They are allowed to sell out their present stocks containing the additive, and/or they are often allowed to reduce the use of an additive when often its use should be eradicated altogether.

Where To Start

It may be impossible to avoid food additives entirely, but you can avoid those that are known to be harmful by informing yourself (there are now several good books on the subject) and by avoiding processed foods in general. Each time food is handled by processors, ingredients are added. Fresh peas may be washed in detergent, but canned peas probably have artificial color, flavor, and preservatives as well.

A summary of the various types of additives is provided below as a very rough guide to the additives that are in the food you eat.

Artificial Coloring

Ninety percent of the dyes used in food are synthetic and most of those are coal tar derivatives. They have been suspect since they were first introduced in the nineteenth century because their chemical structure differs so much from those of any natural substances. Experiments have shown that a number of coal tar dyes are harmful, and several have been taken off the market. Most recently, testing has indicated the carcinogenic effects of red dye 2, a very widely used dye found in everything from hot dogs to chocolate ice cream. Given the lack of adequate testing and the number of dangerous dyes discovered, it is wise to avoid foods with artificial color, by reading the labels and by eating fresh foods.

Emulsifiers

The basic property of emulsifiers is that they allow oil-like and water-like liquids to mix. Synthetic emulsifiers are used in most convenience and manufactured foods. They are found in bakery goods, non-dairy creamers, salad dressings and mayonnaise, processed meat, pet foods, ice cream, shortening, margarine and many other foods.

In the 1950s tests on polysorbates indicated that they may cause diarrhea, inflammation, bladder stones, and other problems. However, subsequent tests proved to the satisfaction of the FDA that these harmful effects only occurred because of the exceedingly high dosages.

Less dramatic dangers exist. In bread and peanut butter the substitution of emulsifiers for natural fats significantly reduces their nutritive value. Bakery goods are made to appear fresh with their use. If you are concerned about nutrition, foods containing emulsifiers are a bad buy.

Stabilizers

Stabilizers are thickening agents that are used in yogurt, ice cream, soups, whipped topping mixes, cake and baby food. They are undigestible materials which are not really necessary except in some purely manufactured foods. The more carefully prepared ice cream and yogurts, for example, are made without the use of thickening agents and are consequently more nutritious and have better flavor.

Preservatives

There are two kinds of preservatives: antimicrobial preservatives inhibit the growth of microorganisms, and antioxidants prevent rancidity in fats. Several quite harmless preservatives are calcium and sodium propionate and the parabens.

Sulfur dioxide destroys vitamin A, sodium bisulfite destroys vitamin B1, and sodium nitrates and nitrites are quite dangerous. Nitrite is one of the few additives known to have actually caused deaths in the United States.

Nitrosamines, formed in the body in the presence of other common additives, are highly carcinogenic. Nitrates and nitrites are still legal because they prevent botulism; however, many people argue that with proper handling and refrigeration botulism should not be a problem.

Given existing knowledge, the most important restriction you can make in your diet is the elimination of any foods which contain sodium nitrates and nitrites. Almost all processed and smoked meats as well as many other foods contain these chemicals, which must be noted on labels.

The most common antioxidants are BHA, BHT, citric acid, EDTA, propyl gallate and stannous chloride. They are found in most foods containing oil or fat, shortening, salad dressing, potato chips, margarine, crackers, soup bases, chewing gum, enriched rice, breakfast cereals, etc. BHA and BHT must be noted on labels so it is possible and advisable to reduce your intake of these chemicals. These substances accumulate in fat tissue, and they have not been adequately tested, despite tests in the 1950s suggesting that BHT is harmful.

BHA and BHT are superfluous in most foods and could be substituted with less harmful additives in the rest. Propyl gallate has not been adequately tested although an initial study indicated the possibility of mutagenic effects. The other antioxidants seem to be safe.

A subsequent article will discuss some forms of action that can be or which are being taken to reduce this wholesale adulteration of the food with which we try to nourish our bodies.

National Conference on Women and the Law Planned for March

More than 1,500 law students, lawyers, legal workers and other interested persons from across the country are expected to attend the Seventh National Conference on Women and the Law at the Temple University School of Law on March 12-14, 1976.

“The conference provides a unique forum to examine women’s current status in the American legal, political and economic system,” according to Arlene Groch, Conference Coordinator. It is an opportunity for the participants to share expertise on substantive legal issues and to develop strategies for litigation and political action.

Eleanor Holmes Norton, attorney and Commissioner of the New York Commission on Human Rights will be the featured speaker at the Conference.

One of the highlights of the Conference will be a mock trial presenting the Joan Little case from a feminist perspective. Karen Galloway, Ms. Little’s attorney will conduct a workshop entitled “What Happens When Women Fight Back?” comparing the mock trial to the actual one.

Nationally prominent attorneys and social scientists will conduct 95 workshops dealing with current legal issues. For example, Ruth Bader Ginsburg of Columbia Law School who has participated in almost every major women’s case which has come before the United States Supreme Court, including Frontiero v. Richardson, will lead several workshops on constitutional law. Harriet Rabb, an attorney at the Employment Rights Project in New York City, will conduct workshops about Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Ms. Rabb is currently representing Diane Serafin Blank, an attorney and a member of the Steering Committee of the Seventh National Conference on Women and the Law, in a lawsuit against Sullivan & Cromwell, a prestigious old-line Wall Street law firm. The firm is charged with illegal sex discrimination in its hiring.

The workshops are designed to enable participants to develop an in-depth knowledge of the topic areas. Individual workshops will be organized in “clusters” around related topics. For example, the “Economic Problems of Women” cluster will consist of individual workshops on Credit, Insurance, Tax, Housing, and Government Benefits. In addition to the clusters, single “free-standing” workshops will be offered on other topics such as the “Techniques of Law Reform” which will consider lobbying techniques, legislative research, drafting statutes and organizing support for specific changes in the law. Other workshops will include such topics as employment discrimination, domestic relations, the effect of the passage of the ERA and rape laws.

The Conference was originated by students at the New York University Law School in 1969 as an attempt to establish a regular communication network through which women law students could exchange information about the expanding field of sex discrimination law, get to know one another, and plan efforts to open up the legal community to women. The associations generated by the Conference have led to the creation of the first law firms in the country which specialize in sex discrimination cases. Attendance has increased from 10 in 1969 to 1000 in 1975.

Registration fees are $15.00 for law students and $25.00 for other participants. Each fee increases by $10.00 after February 1, 1976. Further information may be obtained by writing or calling the Women's Law Caucus at Temple University School of Law.