struggle

Self-Criticism Of Mid-East Coverage

Deb Luger for the Big Mama Rag Collective

It's been a long time coming for Big Mama Rag to write about a very crucial global issue...the politics of Palestine and Israel.

process

For over a year now, we have been plagued with the knowledge that this issue must be dealt with within our pages, and yet its complexity has been overwhelming. We've made references in "Where We're At" numerous times about our confusion and silences, but have always been way too brief and sometimes evasive.

On many political issues involving peoples' liberation movements we've been strongly aligned with "the Left" or national liberation movements. But the issue of self-determination for the Palestinian people has been equal, in our minds, with the right of self-determination for the Jewish people, and yet this position seems contradictory in terms of strategy. Our process in covering either a pro-PLO or a pro-Zionist political stand has been lacking, due to this complexity.

Our coverage on both racism and anti-Semitism has been pretty poor and has exposed BMR collective as both racist and anti-Semitic in practice.

Let me go into some of the details of our past process: In November and December issues of 1981, we had a theme on Racism and Anti-Semitism - Two Sides of the Same Coin. We received much criticism over those two issues being put back to back showing racism and anti-Semitism as equal for excluding racism against Third World Peoples, specifically Black and Chicano/Mexicano people.

While we did not agree with the thought that Jewish women are women of color, (a dominant voice in many feminist presses at the time) nor did we see racism and anti-Semitism as the same, our coverage and title presented that view. We do however see many connections between racism and anti-Semitism and see it more than coincidence that the KKK and neo-Nazi groups, for example, attack Blacks, Jews and communists. We believe that fascism is a white supremacist Christian oppressive politic and thus see common enemies when fighting against racism and anti-Semitism.

But our coverage on racism was lacking. Living here in Colorado, with a large Chicano/Mexicano population, a strong and active revolutionary movement and the knowledge that Colorado is actually U.S. occupied Mexico and Native American land... and not covering those issues for example was in fact racism on our part. And we were called on it.

In March and April 1982, BMR covered the themes of spirituality and religion. After receiving articles on the topics, and deciding what to print and what not to, the majority of the copy OKed by the collective was on spirituality from a Christian perspective. Although most of the articles received were on creating a new spirituality, the ones from a Jewish perspective were rejected, while those from a Christian perspective were accepted.

While the entire issue of spirituality and religion within our pages was controversial, the collective managed to show its anti-Semitism through omission and censorship. The issues were controversial for the paper because of some of the collective members' views that spirituality and religion are either oppressive and/or passive, non-struggle, anti-activist ways of being... contrary to our politics. But other members felt that spirituality and political analysis and activism are not contradictory, and merely deal with some different parts of us as persons.

To compensate for our omission of copy from a Jewish perspective and try and make up for our anti-Semitism, the paper later printed some of the articles previously omitted, but "better late than never" does not always apply. And in this case the timing couldn't have been worse, for it was at that time the Israeli invasion of both Beirut and Lebanon took place.

So we then received further criticism, this time from local pro-PLO groups, for being pro-Zionist and against the Palestinian revolutionary people.

So here we are, an all white collective, until a year ago an all gentile collective... and of course our politics have shown that, and we have been overwhelmed with criticism from all directions.

Our process and coverage has in fact, been both racist and anti-Semitic.

And this all fits in with our lack of coverage on the politics of Palestine and Israel, for not only were we confused about the issues, but the criticisms we have received led us to a poor process, once again... this time to silence about the issues. But with this issue of BMR we believe our process is changing. For in this issue and in issues to come we will be silent no more.

In order to sort all of this through, we'll be writing individually for the next few months, and then bring together a collective analysis. We will also once again sort through all the copy, here in the office sent to us... all the copy which we have previously censored due to our enormous confusion.

In the coming months we will write on the following:
- the history of anti-Semitism and the Jewish people
- the history of the Palestinian people, the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) theory and strategy
- the theory and practice of Zionism
- various progressive Jewish political movements
- U.S. imperialism, genocidal politics, differences between racism and anti-Semitism, patriarchy

We wanted to start by covering anti-Semitism because we feel this sets an ancient historical framework for present day conflicts. But even now I see the limitations of our collective being all white. For there is racism in the white world's acceptance of anti-Semitism meaning only anti-Jewishness. In fact, Semitic peoples include both those of Hebrew and Arabic descent. So while the article will focus on historical persecution of the Jews, it must also look at that of the Arabs.

We will next look at the history of the Palestinian people. We must go centuries back since historically the Palestinian people have been subject to persecution and colonization.

This section will also review the development of the PLO - who are they, who are they aligned with politically, what is their theory and practice.

Next we will cover the history of Zionism. And separately various progressive Jewish political movements.

Since Zionism is the theory that created "the Jewish State" of Israel, it is generally assumed that all Jews are Zionist. This is a narrow and untrue view of Jewish peoples’ politics. So while looking deeply into the history of Zionism, we must also look at various progressive Jewish political stands.

Zionism is a theory and strategy that developed due

MORE ON PAGE 20