letters home to mama

Disagreement About Professional Feminists

Dear BMR:

This is a thanks to Vicki Piotter for a fine job of editing a very rambling, often argumentative 3-hour panel on changes in feminist theory and practice over the past 10 years.

I was on the panel -- maybe informal rap would be a better word -- along with Pandoura Carpenter, Janet Sergi, Eileen Bresnahan and Kate Sharp. (Is the Movement Facing an Identity Crisis, Jan-Feb, 1980, BMR).

I did want to add a clarification, though, since the article didn't and couldn't reflect all the debate we had over the issue of professional women in the movement. Eileen's assertions that "grass roots women's projects... get sold out by professional women" and that "the way the state takes over is to reach women who are professional feminists" were criticized quite a bit throughout the evening. I agree that women who apply their feminism to paid "professional" jobs are under constant pressure to water down their struggles and ideas. Some of them give in. But to say or strongly imply that professionals per se are sell-outs or agents of state cooptation is divisive and just plain wrong. If there's anything I've learned from feminism in the '70s it's that we're all part of "the system"; our value to the movement is not in our job titles (or lack of them), but in the ways we apply our abilities, opportunities and/or privilege to further feminist change.

Kathy Riley

Eileen responds: I stand behind everything I said in the discussion. Professional women, particularly "professional feminists," cannot help but be co-opted by their jobs--they invariably push liberal, "in system" politics because that's the only way they can keep those jobs. By their visibility, the status that the patriarchy gives them, their class identification, and their greater access to the media and other resources, they have potential to seriously misrepresent and co-opt the movement itself--which they frequently do, for they are less answerable to the movement than to those who pay their salaries. This is understandable because their status and power come from their degrees and not from their work in the movement. (One of their favorite methods in the acquisition of this position is by putting their names on the work of grass-roots, working class, women.)

While we all do live within “the system," we have some control over how much we become a part of “the system." We can say no to jobs and situations that remove us from the working class, that cause us to become instruments of the state in the exploitation of other people (management jobs and police work), or that advance U.S. imperialism ("defense" industries and the military).

I am not saying that people in these jobs (unreliable people) will not at some point be necessary to further our cause, but they have no place in the leadership of our movements--because the people don't trust them, they cannot be counted on in the long haul, and because their illegitimate privilege carries over into illegitimate power in movement groups.

Instincts A Benefit

Dear Sisters,

This letter is in response to an inspiring article by Carol Ester - Pot Smoking: Highs and Love in the Jan/Feb issue of Commonwoman (Box 242, Winooski, VT 05404) and the entire Dec, 79 issue of Big Mama Rag.

I'm writing for the purpose of adding our instincts to the list of benefits that come from breaking our habits of dependencies. If we as women are going to continue to survive the patriarchy our instincts have to play a very important part. Our instincts make us react to outward stimuli. Then we respond in some way. We must pay attention to what instinct is telling us. Our instincts will jolt us (away from danger for instance). Our instincts will delicately guide us into and through our relationships, and out of them when necessary. Our instincts will calm us when the environment is truly safe.

Consuming coffee, cigarettes, sugar, pot, alcohol, meat (a stimulant), anything that is "processed" or dead assaults the instincts, making our responses inappropriate. Not to mention the havoc caused by the habit of dependence. The habit indeed runs over into relationships.

And responding to instinct (the point of all this) is a real indulgence - a true and delightful gratification. Being “in tune", tapping our spiritual energy, being guided by what we are absolutely sure is accurate is the essence of women in the state of a viable revolution.

We need another of the benefits (clarity of thought - overlapping as it is) in order to articulate the advantage of breaking the dependency habits so time should reveal much, much more.

“In sisterhood,
Pat Styer

Afghanistan........ 12
Support Work...... 13
International..... 14,15

year for ‘ $10 in Canada and $12 to institutions. BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions. This publication is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box

situations that remove us from the working class, that cause us to become instruments of the state in the exploitation of other people (management jobs and police work), or that advance U.S. imperialism ("defense" industries and the military).

I am not saying that people in these jobs (unreliable people) will not at some point be necessary to further our cause, but they have no place in the leadership of our movements--because the people don't trust them, they cannot be counted on in the long haul, and because their illegitimate privilege carries over into illegitimate power in movement groups.

Is Therapy Feminist?

Dear BMR,

The local women's bookstore is near my therapist's office and I usually stop in to pick up a newspaper after my session. When I read Ms. Perenyi's article on therapy I was not surprised by what she said: Mary Daly said essentially the same thing in Gyn/Ecology. It was only when I read "Bloodroot's" reply in the February issue that I actually got angry enough to write; that I began to feel that things had gone far enough, and that the other side concerning women and therapy needed to be told.

The attitude that feminism and therapy are inconsistent and, even worse, that a "true-feminist" has no real need of therapy is condescending and elitist in the worst sense of both words. Who is anyone to tell anyone else how they should handle their pain? Sure, everyone experiences mental pain and sure, sisterhood helps. But, there are times when either sisterhood is not available; i.e. one is not living in a supportive environment, or sisterhood is not enough, as in when someone is just too miserable to be helped by love alone. Some women need more than crisis counseling that Daly, et al, have been generous enough to leave us with. Might it not be better to get to someone before they feel that dying is the only answer for them? What right has anyone to offer otherwise under the guise of a politically correct line?

And about the personal/political question. I have found that I can't work effectively when my own head is not clear and that fighting women's oppression does not do a damn thing for me when my own life is hopelessly out of line. Not all personal problems have political solutions - women need real help, not uplifting dogma.

Yes, there are therapists who are status-quo oriented vis-a-vis women's life situations. But these days there are more and more who aren't. My therapist, an older woman who does not call herself a feminist, has done more in helping me see new ways of living and growing than anyone I've known. Therapists don't claim to have the answers - the good ones won't even consider giving answers. They'll just help ask the questions that need to be asked - questions that dear friends and loving sisters just may not know or even know how to ask.

I am a feminist and I dearly love women. To those of you who are hurting, hang in there. Don't be afraid to seek help. Yes, use feminism for survival, but when we're talking about doing more than just surviving, when we're talking about being truly happy with oneself, don’t be afraid to look for this and find it wherever you can. And damnit - don’t let anyone, even someone who calls themselves a feminist, tell you what you should and shouldn't do in your struggle. We don’t need feminist oppression as well as all the other kinds.

Sincerely,
Lee
N.Y.C.

Connie responds: Were I to write the article on therapy now, I would make it an even stronger statement against feminist therapy. In the last three months, I have further identified the lingering, negative effects of my "therapeutic" experience, and stand behind my belief that the best way for women to work through “personal problems" is to develop a strong feminist and political perspective.

No Paper In Jan.

Dear Women,

I want to express my disappointment (and sometimes anger) in the mailing situation. I subscribed to your paper in October. Since then I've received only one or two issues, the last being December's! What's happening?!

I took the holidays into consideration but here it is Feb 10 and I still have no paper, no words from you. I would like to support my sisters and will continue to do so but when I pay $ in exchange for something I'd like to see it come through. I subscribed to a paper, I did not make a donation. Please let me hear from you. Thanks.

Morena King

- P.S. Just before I mailed this, I received my January copy of Big Mama Rag. On Feb. 11?! Come on sisters!

Editor's Note: In the issues previous to January 1st we announced that we would not be printing an issue that month. However, we confused everyone when we put January 1980 on the Feb issue by mistake. We did mail that issue out on the 1st. To speed things up we are now in the process of obtaining a second class mailing permit.

2023 E. COLFAX
Denver, CO 80206

feminist center

WOMAN TO WOMAN BENEFIT
MARCH 29th 8-11:30pm
ST. FRANCIS INTERFAITH CENTER, AURARIA
FOOD, ENTERTAINMENT, BEVERAGES
CHILDCARE PROVIDED
$3

(more if you can, less if you can't)

320-5972

Mon-Th 10am - 8pm
Fri-Sun 410am-7pm