Notes From The Third Year

International Women’s Day

Peg Hickox and Vicki Piotter

On March 5th, 300 women, children
and men participated in the historical
International Women's Day march from
East High School to the State Capitol
in support of working women's rights.

The march, which extended at times
for three blocks, was spirited with
marchers chanting and singing "Power
to the Women, Power to the Working
Class." Slogans and banners represented
many issues from "Fight Healthcare,
Daycare, Welfare Cutbacks" to "End
Lesbian Oppression" to "Stop Deportation
of Undocumented Workers" and
"Ratify the ERA But Don't Stop There.”

This was the first coalition effort
between the feminist and left communist
communities since the Joann Little support
rally and the first coalition effort

in which radical feminists were major
organizers in several years.

There was large participation from
the radical feminist community, good
participation from the left, and some
participation from the Chicano community.

Following the march, a rally was
held in front of the State Capitol.
The rally began with the crowd singing
a number of old union songs.
Speakers at the rally represented a
broad range of women's concerns.

Diane McDaniels spoke briefly on the
history of IWD, reminding women of the
first march on the Lower East Side of
New York in 1908 when women fought
for better working conditions for
women and children and for the right
to vote.

Yvonne Ofgiun, a Chicana and feminist,
spoke of the need for men in the
Chicano community to change their
attitudes towards their Chicana sisters.

A member of the Colorado Springs
Women's Health Clinic, who drew warm
response from the audience, discussed
the need to fight healthcare, daycare,
and welfare cutbacks. In her speech
she noted that this is sometimes
especially difficult since we have so
few social services in these areas to
begin with.

Helen Lindgren, an 83-year-old woman
who has marched on IWD since it began,

was a surprise speaker who was cheered
by the crowd. "I was delighted to
hear you sing ‘Union Maid'," she said.

Ruth Buechler, from the National
Lawyers Guild, spoke on women's right
to self-defense in rape cases, citing
the victories in the Joann Little and
Inez Garcia cases. (Inez Garcia, it
was announced at the rally, had won
her freedom the day before.) She also
spoke of peoples’ rights to self-defense
against police harassment and
of lesbians’ legal rights to their
children.

A woman from the Manzo Defense
Committee spoke on the problems of
undocumented workers, mostly Chicanos,
and the racist and imperialist implications
of immigration and deportation laws.

Elsa Blum, from the Communication
Workers of America, spoke on the need
to support the ERA and Karen Hennessey
discussed the need for women to support
the women installer's sex discrimination
suit against Mountain Bell.

Helen Giran from the People's
Community Organization expressed the
support of Communists and Chicanos
for women's concerns.

The rally concluded with poetry and
music from "The Sisters of Light."

The evening events drew 200 people.
During the film showing of "Salt of
the Earth", the audience cheered and
supported both the struggles of
Chicano miners against the company
and the struggles of Chicanas to win
their rights as women.

The Feminist Improvisational Theatre
Group was also outstanding. Skits
dealt with everyday concerns of women
trying to get a doctor's appointment,
a dramatic monologue/dance mime dealing
with rape and self-defense, a

Photo by Kate Sharp

moving monologue about the red tape
faced by welfare mothers, and a well-done
role reversal of a heterosexual
woman "coming out" to her lesbian
friend.

The daycare and dinner were both
handled primarily by men. The dinner
was a big success and women appreciated
having childcare which truly involved
the children.

After a long day and night, International
Women's Day came to a close.

Critique
On March 12th about 15 women, most
of whom were coalition members, attended
the open criticism, self-criticism
session in regards to the march, rally,
evening events and the IWD coalition
itself.

During this session, there was input
from four major political groups that
had been active in the coalition:
women working primarily in the radical
feminist community (including Lesbian
Feminist Workers), women from the Socialist
Workers Party, women involved

in the New Left from the Radical Information
Project (RIP), and women with a
Marxist-Leninist perspective.

The majority of coalition members agreed
that the IWD activities were a
positive learning experience. One woman
noted the importance of having the
women's community organizing IWD.

Photo by Kate Sharp

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 3

Everyone agreed that it was a major
step forward from the past two years
events which resulted in confrontations
between the October League (a Marxist-
Leninist group organizing the activities)
and lesbian feminists when OL
refused to allow feminists and lesbians

Photo by Cheryl

to participate openly in the march.
(See Bur April, 1976).

Criticism and discussion of this
year's activities primarily focused on
issues regarding the ways in which
lesbian feminism was represented (or
not represented) in the demands and
activities, the lack of broad-based
Third World participation, publicity,
outreach, and coalition process.

Demands

With the exception of women from the
SWP, the coalition reaffirmed that the
seven major demands drawn up for IWD
were good demands that warranted support.
The SWP women felt that the demands of the
march, as well as the coalition, left out
whole segments of women, such as the National
Organization for Women, and did little to
unify women. They said that the leaflet
of demands did not reach out to
those not as politically sophisticated
as the coalition members and that terms
like "fascism" and "imperialism" do
not speak to the immediate concerns of
women.

One woman noted that the demands
would have been more balanced had words
like “patriarchy" and “sexism” been
included. In hindsight, several women
felt that the demands were too rhetorical.

A number of radical feminists felt
that women's issues were well represented
in the demands, but that the
more specifically feminist demands
should have been given top priority.
One woman added that many feminists
and lesbian feminists who criticized
lesbians in the coalition for being
“coopted by the ‘male left'", used
this “red-baiting" tactic as an excuse
to avoid dealing with the issues
raised in the demands.