Another Look At the Law Conference

Women Address Key Issues

Jackie St. Joan

The first weekend in October, about 75-100 women from the legal and feminist communities met at the Regency Inn in Denver for what was intended to be a “feminist consciousness-raiser" on political issues of feminism, racism, lesbianism, professionalism, and classism. The conference, which was billed as "the Sixth Annual Western Regional Conference on Women and the Law," was unique in that it was specifically directed at the issues of feminism and radical change, rather than at merely providing a time for brushing up on one's legal skills.

“I never worry too much about being fair-minded, because I know that in the end justice always triumphs.”

The conference was also unique in that it was financed almost entirely by the law schools themselves, so that women who could not afford high conference fees could attend for free. Committed to offering a conference “with a difference," the organizers had to fight their respective school administrations, student bar associations, and resistance from their own women's law caucuses, in order to address such controversial issues as lesbianism and class. Poor attendance at the conference by local law students can be traced most directly to the radical political nature of the conference theme itself, and to the fact that only a few women would associate themselves with the conference’s organizing.

The nervousness on opening night was apparent when one woman from the audience rose to object to the issue of lesbianism being on the agenda. Another woman echoed her concern and soon another and another. What looked like mutiny at the Regency, however, turned out to be the inventive and supportive guerrilla theater of the Boulder Socialist/Feminists, doing a little consciousness-raising of its own. The theater group then took over the stage with an exciting performance addressed to the very issues the conference was focused on—how the system buys off female and minority workers, sexism in unions, the difficulties of being an upfront lesbian. By taking the fears out of the closet early, the group keynoted the conference as no keynote “address" could have.

After their performance, Catherine Rorabach next addressed the conference, trying to give some framework for the participants to work within, drawing in part on her own extensive history of 25 years of trial work with many cases involving political radicals (including Erika Huggins and Susan Saxe). In addition, she addressed the history of female leadership, successes, and disappointments in the labor union movement, particularly during the mid-1800s.

Saturday and Sunday the conference featured three major speakers and some 20 workshops. Some of the most popular workshops were: “Handling Racism in a Trial," "The Politics of Lesbian Feminism," "Money, Class, and Power: The Colorado Feminist Federal Credit Union," and “Legal Reform or Revolution: The War Between Reformists and Radicals."

Saturday morning, Martha Cortera, a Chicana feminist from Texas, sparked the participants with her perspective on professional organizing, and how she and others in her community have used political power, professional influence, and just plain hard work to improve conditions for Chicanas and Chicanos in Texas. In particular, she revealed the effects of racism and classism on a materially impoverished community, and the grassroots organizing which forms the basis for the only Chicano-controlled county in Texas. Martha's enthusiasm communicated the lessons which this kind of organizing could have for feminists. Lastly, Martha, drawing from her own book on the history of Chicanas, educated the group about the lives and works of individuals.

More on page 14

Where We're At

“As we reported in last month's Where We're At, Big Mama Rag has undergone a change in structure.

The new structure is designed to divide up the shit-work more evenly and to hopefully bring more women into the paper.

It goes something like this: The paper has been divided up into seven areas of work.

These are: National/International News, Local/Regional News, Cover/Features, Culture, Advertising, Office Work, and Finances.

Each of these areas is under the direction of up to four women, at least one of whom is a collective member. To be on a task force a woman need only commit some work or time to the paper. No woman may be on more than two task forces.

It is a BMR priority that every woman who works on the paper for any length of time gain all the knowledge and skills necessary to enable her to do an entire paper by herself. Because of this, it is mandatory that all women on the task forces rotate every six months.

The order of rotation is such that women will move from a "more desirable" task force (e.g. National/International News) to a "less desirable" one (e.g. Office Work) or vice versa.

It is also hoped that, besides facilitating the sharing of skills, such rotation will prevent power blocks forming in the task forces and, of course, distribute the shit-work.

(Speaking of shit-work, the new structure also eliminates the position of production coordinator since each task force will do its own production.) As before, final responsibility for paper content rests with the collective.

Any woman on a task force may become a collective member provided she is willing to make a primary commitment to BMR. This includes serving a one-month probationary period on the collective, attending two mandatory meetings per week and agreeing to stay with the paper for one year.

BMR is seeking women who would like to work with the paper, either on a collective or task force level. We can't pay any money, but we guarantee a few good laughs.

For more information call 322-2010 (if a man answers, hang up—you've obviously got the wrong number).

Feminist Fiction & Poetry

GOOD READING...

The ODYSSEY OF Kacinou Kalokovich

YESTERDAY'S LESSONS THE SINK

Susan Griffin

UNITED SISTERS 4213 W. BAY AVE. TAMPA, FL

by Sharon Isabell

Six Short Stories $1.50

SHAMELESS HUSSY PRESS BOX 424 SAN LORENZO, CA 94580

WOMEN’S PRESS COLLECTIVE 5251 BROADWAY OAKLAND, CA 94618

A FORTY ACRES and a MULE

Claudia Scott

LAVENDER PRESS BOX 60206 E. Sharon Gomillion CHICAGO, IL 60660

ALICE JAMES BOOKS 138 MT. AUBURN ST. CAMBRIDGE, MA 02138

and the Carpenter

Wallpaper by Charlotte Perkins Gilman Afterword by Elaine R. Hedges

“I COULDN'T HAVE SAID IT BETTER MYSELF THOUGH I WOULD HAVE SAID IT DIFFERENTLY”

FEMINIST PRESS SUNY COLLEGE BOX 334 OLD WESTBURY, NY 11568

DAUGHTERS, INC. PLAINFIELD, VT 05667

FROM OUR Feminist Presses & Publishers