fi wif 4-© foV

ps ama pia

Respond |

Feminists Clarify Role

Dear BMR,

We feel that it is necessary for us to respond to “Little Freed; Feminism Raped”, September, 1975 issue. We are several members of Triangle Area Lesbian Feminists (TALF) Durham, North Carolina, who think that the role of feminist involvement with Joan Little’s case was misrepresented by this article.

It is a co-optation of the word rape to say that feminism was raped during the process of supporting Joan. We were not in any position of power, but we were not raped. Rape implies a serious violation of self that is not on the same level as what we experienced.

The Joan Little case brought local feminists together with local black leaders for the first time. It seemed as if they had more confidence or experience in being leaders, and their ability to relate to a larger community and draw mass support to the case was greater than ours. Information Restricted

Feminists weren't the only people systematically cut off from opportunities for involvement. Up-to-date information seemed to be restricted to the few people, black and white, who were closest to the defense lawyers.

There were mistakes in how the Defense Committee handled Joan's case, but the case was an important one for blacks as well as for women, and to create hostility because two groups didn’t work together any better than they did seems destructive.

We feel that the tone of the last third of the article is racist. One example is the author's reaction to the statement by Karen Galloway that a white woman would have been treated much differently than Joan. There is truth in Karen’s statement and this should be recognized. Another example is the portrayal of Larry Little and Black Panther men in general. Larry Little was real purpose — freeing Joan Little.

I did not pit racism against sexism. The defense and the fund did an excellent job of that themselves. The national press had a field day in reporting it and quoting defense lawyer Karen Galloway as saying that the real issue in the trial was racism, not sexism. Surely you, too, could see, after talking to at least one member of the JLDF, that the fund gave racism a priority over sexism and made that policy quite clear over and over again before and during the trial.

It is not the article and Raleigh feminists who failed to present “the total situation of the black woman,” which I interpret to mean her oppression as a woman and as a black person, but rather the JLDF you and your criticism, which fail to see her total situation. The defense fund because it did not deal with the simple fact that Little was raped because she is a woman; and your letter because it defends the fund’s inactivity and blames local feminists, both black and white, for not being able to do more than they did.

The article clearly pointed out why there was a lack of both black and white feminists at the trial. It showed just how effective “white-baiting” can be. The responsibility for raising the issue of sexism didn't rest solely with feminists. It is just this kind of white feminist guilt-tripping that actually keeps the issues of racism and sexism as separate as they are now in the movement.

Money

I'm accused of pitting racism against sexism, whereas this was actually a conscious policy of the defense. I reported it. They themselves encouraged working from a different analysis than ours. He worked very hard just the same and should be recognized for that even while criticized for his sexism. The examples we told the author about Larry Little were meant to convey only our feelings about his sexism and not to give a complete picture of the work he was doing. We weren’t asked by the author our opinion of the effectiveness of his work, and we didn't give it. We want to make it clear that we do not like Larry Little’s or the Black Panther’s attitude toward women. We don’t condone their sexism, but we do want to support the struggles of black people. Negative Approach

The entire article took on a negative tone, and contained much misleading and incoherent information. What information is there to lead to the accusation that certain people were there not out of concern for Joan, but to get publicity for themselves? In the section “All-White Indictment”, the defense is credited with a survey which was actually conducted by the Jury Project outside the courtroom well before the trial began.

The last third of the article is concerned with how two groups, feminist and black liberation, failed to work together on an issue of mutual interest. If the conflict was going to be more than just mentioned, then the author should have gone into more depth about the issues. If the author is going to lend weight to her conclusions, she needs to base them on more than selected examples.

We hope that this letter has clarified the circumstances surrounding the support of Joan Little.

Liz Brown

Portia McKnight  
Kathy Hyatt  

Lee Bowers  
Barbara Hedman  

“destructive political diatribes concerning which is the more serious oppression.” Rape and sexism were used by the JLDF to raise money and get publicity and were ultimately obscured by the issue of racism. This is a fact. It is my understanding that the NBFO has recently issued a statement criticizing the defense for not dealing with the issue of sexism in the trial.

An accounting of the collection and expenditures of possibly a quarter of a million dollars (a figure the JLDF says was needed for the defense) is not a “nit-picking” point. Groups that raise money for political trials should give responsible accountings. In the 2½ weeks I was at the trial I presented hand-written requests for such information, as did other members of the press, and received nothing. I do not think that anything grossly dishonest was done with JLDF money, but the lack of a comprehensive, public statement (as of September, 1975) is certainly open to commentary in the press.

My biggest failure in writing the article was in not acknowledging the good, long, hard work that the defense team put into Little’s defense. This omission, I feel, is the biggest fault in the article; not giving credit to good work that led to Little’s acquittal.

A conclusion you make is that feminists need to relate to “black” issues so that minority communities will take feminists seriously and both groups can work together. But sexism is an issue that crosses all race and class lines. It was not feminists:

More on Page 15

New York (LNS) — California health officials were ordered to revamp some of its guidelines for the voluntary sterilization of women on October 13. The order came in response to a class action suit filed by ten Chicana women charging that they were either coerced or deceived into being sterilized.

U.S. District Judge E. Avery Crary ordered that state health officials halt use of federal funds for the voluntary sterilization of women between 18 and 21 years old. State funds could still be used in voluntary sterilizations of women over 18.

Post Rally  
From Page 4  
March on Post

Upon completion of the address, the crowd of approximately 30 marched en masse to the front of the Denver Post. The women chanted slogans urging discontinuation of Post subscriptions, and a public apology. The women who organized the protest, Kathleen Rindy, Jean Bartholomew, Deborah Periman, and Karen Vasotura, were allowed inside the building for a conference with the people in charge at the Post.

After an hour, the women emerged to announce that the Post had no intention of any sort of apology and “that asshole thought it was all a big joke.” Reilly stated her feeling that the articles were nothing more than bait to set up the more militant feminists and make them appear ridiculous through more biased news coverage. She felt that anything so obviously biased had to have been done on purpose to make an effect.

The demonstration disbanded shortly after the announcement. JoHanna Reilly had the final statement concerning the protest: “We are not specifically enraged by this article; we are insulted by the fact that we are forced to stoop so low to be enraged.”

8351°7019  
605 E. AVE.

VISIT US SOON

CHa,  
#7é,

ALE TIMES

Teatey- 18-6

RIP BOOKSTORE  
737 E. 17th Ave.  
ALs0 Boos Ss (BS RATSS  
‘ a,  
CUBE, IIETHAN, MARS,  
AWAREM ISH, 0.3. pars Serpe  
Ati Books 20% off ar

Lori Windle

Letters

From Page 2

It's been so confusing and difficult coming back home, I couldn't make any sense of anything to write in time for the August issue — but slowly things are settling down. When I got back I wanted to open a feminist bar with pool, a coffeehouse and bookstore, a radio station, a switchboard, and organize a socialist feminist conference, all in the first week!

London seems old, slow and a bit tired after two months talking to women across the States — at first I felt that I should administer a shot in the arm to the women's movement — I was what the movement needed! Now that my goddess-like self-image is evaporating, I am less pessimistic about the movement. Things are happening, but they happen between the lines here as distinct from in the headlines in your world.

We are being taken a little

We have a chance to produce a 1½ hour program on local London radio in the autumn, to explain what the movement is about and to answer questions from the “opposition” (we’re not quite sure what this “opposition” is going to look like!) A women’s dance continues twice weekly, and arguments and discussion are flowing highly charged on lesbian/feminist issues. The workshop survives week by week, always running out of money, always precarious but full of energy and somehow getting out its weekly newsletter more seriously. In June the National Abortion Campaign managed to get over 20,000 people out on the streets to demonstrate against an amendment to our abortion act, that would make abortion even harder to obtain than it is already. There are signs that this amendment will not now get through Parliament. This campaign includes a huge variety of women which perhaps no other issue would have brought together — it is demanding and getting fair treatment from the press, which I think is spilling over into other areas of the movement.

Chicanas Deceived into Sterilizations

and federal funds in cases of women over 21.

The judge also ordered the State to rewrite the Spanish-language sterilization consent forms to an easily understandable level.

Left still to be decided by the court is the amount of financial damages to be awarded the plaintiffs. Four of the women say they never signed consent forms and discovered only weeks afterwards that they had been sterilized. The others charged that they had been lied to and coerced into signing consent forms for the sterilizations.

— the only information bulletin we have. The Kingsgate Women’s Centre has folded, the Essex Road Centre is getting on its feet. I think we're getting stronger every day and it makes me feel good to write that down, knowing you'll read it.  
Love,  
Liz Cooper

Open Letter

To: The Feminist Movement

“Are you going to cater to the whims and prejudices of people who have no intelligent knowledge of what they condemn? If we do not inspire in woman a broad spirit, they will fail .... You would better educate the women into the practice of liberal principles than to organize ten thousand on a platform of intolerance and bigotry.”

Susan B. Anthony, 1896

I have known Gloria Steinem for at least five years and have always been impressed with her real love for women and for justice. She is a tireless and highly effective worker — and therefore ever so vulnerable, ever so magnetic a target for the disorganized wrath of the oppressed and the more organized violence of the State.

Sisters: surely it is clear that the most dangerous enemies we have are not C.I.A. agents, real or imagined, but a debilitating absence of information, experience, money, power, and generosity. To my sorrow, I do not see “Redstockings” addressing themselves to these, our most formidable enemies. Instead, “Redstockings” wastes presumably revolutionary energy in holding press conferences! — to denounce rather than to announce ...

If there are undercover agents in our Feminist midst, Gloria Steinem is certainly not one of them. In fact, I sometimes think that no real agents are needed at all. So many Feminists seem to do themselves and each other in quite well, without any assistance from their enemies.

Sisters: now is a time for very careful thinking. Gestures will no longer do. Fascism and hysteria will never see us through this long, cold winter.

Phyllis Chesler

poocoocene  
;BLACK WO  
¥The Sisterhood Alliance Media.

(Box 398, Forest Park Station, Springfield, Mass. 01108).

An independent magazine ing and affairs concerning Black Women.