8

EMERGING WOMAN PRESS

P.O. Box 18236, Denver 80218  
Lori - 388-8678 (before 7:30 A.M.)  
Karen - 377-5527  

Emerging Woman Press does printing work, and serves as an information resource to the community on printing problems. The collective trains women and offers counseling in graphic arts as a career. The collective owns a table top offset press that can print a maximum size of 10 x 14" of medium quality.

The collective does its printing at cost for political work and marks up the price for non-political work. For the definition of political work, see them. They consider themselves radical feminists with left leanings. For a copy of their principles of unity, please write them.

Camera ready copy is required. The collective has a copy rapid platemaker and has made a plate burner for printing half-tones. They are desperate for acquiring more equipment so they can do better quality work.

They are funded by fundraising and printing work. They have a $350 loan from the Denver Sustaining Fund.

The collective is all volunteer and is not paid for its work. Donations or gifts of used equipment are tax deductible.

DIANAH'S GROVE

Deidre Reilly 320-5625  
Romy Rainwater 377-9754  
Vickie McConnell 458-0415  

Dianah's Grove is a group of twelve women who are meeting regularly to discuss how they can raise money to create a women's coffee house and women's building in Denver. Currently, they are working on producing the upcoming Annual Women's Festive in September from which they hope to raise some money.

This group sees the coffee house as just a first step in a long-range plan to create a woman's building much like the Women's Building in Los Angeles. This woman's space would house a variety of women's groups and businesses — like the credit union, a woman's clinic, transient housing, art gallery, rifle shooting range, photography lab, etc. Women's businesses could rent space.

No men would be allowed. The aim is to make it a place where all women would feel comfortable: apolitical and political. A-political women would not feel threatened by radicals. It would impress women with the power of feminism. It would be an alternative to the bars and Olivia concerts and Woman to Woman. Straight women would be encouraged. Childcare would be provided.

The group has had several fundraising events so far this spring: a women's dance and the play "The Return of Gloria Gaywoman."

VIRAGO PRODUCTIONS

c/o Ronnie Storey  

1233 Ogden, Denver  

832-7633 Ronnie or Sadie Falion  
837-8405 Gayle Novak  

333-9704 K.T. Panzer or Connie Hoes  
399-9586 Sprout Haymes  

Virago Productions brings feminist performers, artists, and speakers to the Denver/Boulder women's community. Also, whenever possible, they try to bring these productions to sisters at Colorado Women's Correctional Institution at Canon City.

Virago has brought Meg Christian, Teresa Trull, and Margie Adam to Denver since the collective was formed in February 1977. Also, Virago has used local performers as opening acts to these concerts: the Denver Feminist Theatre, and other guest artists.

They provide free childcare and distribute a program which lists ongoing organizations of interest and service to women.

Virago's collective of ten women is now "deeply committed to bringing more third world women and heterosexual women into the women's movement through the dissemination of the emerging women's culture; therefore, most of our future productions will be open (to men and women) unless otherwise requested by the performer being produced."

For women who cannot afford to pay for tickets, Virago has arranged a work exchange program.

Virago has made $105 from Teresa Trull and $234 from Margie Adam concerts this spring. Their financial policy is that "Any money Virago makes outside of production expenses will be used to pay for sound expenses and transportation to take productions to the women's prison in Canon City (near Colorado Springs) and to subsidize lesser-known performers and artists coming to Denver who possibly might not draw an audience sufficient to pay production expenses."

Virago's future plans include a benefit showing of the new Iris Film "In the Best Interests of the Children" for the Lesbian Mother's Defense Fund. On October 15, the Berkeley Women's Music Collective will perform and on Nov. 19 Willie Tyson, Alive and Kay Gardner.

HOMEMAKERS FOR THE ERA  
6950 W 62nd Ave  
Arvada, 80003  

This group has a speakers bureau. It believes that no stigma should be attached to staying at home. Members will talk to housewives about the ERA and why they should support it.

WORKING WOMEN'S ACTION COALITION  
333-6758 Clare  
321-7467 Clair  

This is an ongoing group originating in the International Woman's Day Coalition of last year. They meet every two weeks to discuss feminist/socialist issues, learn about other groups in Denver, and plan for next year's march. Issues the group has discussed have included lesbianism, the Left, and Third World nationalist struggles.

THE COLORADO FEMINIST CREDIT UNION  
1458 Pennsylvania, Denver  
837-0622  

The Feminist Credit Union offers women a place to save their money where it can be invested in the needs of women. Women can borrow at the CFFCU whereas they would not be able to at regular banks where they would be considered “bad credit risks." There is a feminist consciousness of the needs and problems of women which make this financial institution more accessible to women.

The credit union is open Tuesday - Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.

In order to join the credit union, you must first join an organization that is affiliated with the credit union such as the Women's Health Service in Colorado Springs (for $1) or NOW (for $15). There is a $5 entrance fee and you must buy at least a $5 share in the C.U. which earns your savings.

In order to obtain a loan from the credit union, you must have been a member of CFFCU for at least three months. The interest on loans is much lower than you can obtain in regular lending institutions like Household Finance (12% versus 18%).

A political statement of the CU is that "feminist credit unions can strengthen the economic power base of the feminist movement." They have created a Feminist Economic Fund through which grant monies and tax-deductible donations can be channeled into feminist projects. This Fund was restructured from the Aton Foundation.

Most of the 148 women who have received loans in the first nine months couldn't have gotten them elsewhere because they had no collateral, no credit rating, a low income, or because their loan was too small for a bank to bother with. The average loan has been $500 for maintenance purposes like buying a car.

The credit union does outreach to other women through regular monthly workshops about women and money—such as the process one goes through in buying a house and how to organize a union.

Lesbians

PARENTS OF GAYS  
831-4787 MCC  
831-8576 Betty Fairchild  

A group for parents of gay children to get together and discuss their feelings.

Also, Betty will talk with lesbians about troubling family situations from a parent's point of view.

LESBIAN CR GROUPS  

1) 333-6758 Leave your name for  
388-7714 Mary Sassatelli  
Meets Monday night in Capital Hill, Denver  

2) 321-6413 Ruth, 8-5  
733-3102 Karen  
A CR group for lesbians and straight women, Denver.  

3) Lesbian Caucus of the Women's Liberation Coalition of CU, Boulder helps organize CR groups and coming out groups. Call 492-7735 around noon-2 P.M., M-F.  

4) Woman to Woman Bookcenter often has Lesbian CR groups starting.  
320-5972 10-8, M-S, Denver.  

LESBIAN THERAPY GROUP  

449-5283 Donna Smith MSW  
This group is for lesbians only and meets on Tuesday nights in Boulder.  

LESBIAN CAUCUS  
492-7735 Boulder  

The Lesbian Caucus is affiliated with the Women's Liberation Coalition of CU, Boulder and uses their office. You can hang out in comfortable chairs and use their library and get to know women in Boulder. The best time to go is noon time. They organize women’s dances and start Lesbian CR groups.

GREELEY GAY ALLIANCE  
P.O. Box 1855  
Greeley, 80631  
353-1631  

LESBIAN/GAY LEGAL WORKERS  
861-0700 9-5, M-F & answering service 24 hours/day  
This group provides referral to legal services for lesbians, gay males, and other sexual minorities. The fee scales vary according to the attorney to whom the client is referred; some cases with political implications will be free but the majority are standard fees. Their goals are feminist in that we see oppression of gays and lesbians related to oppression of women and society's need to keep males and females in sex roles and sexually determined economic relationships to society.

A volunteer collective.

Battered Women

WOMEN IN CRISIS CENTER  
1426 Pierce St, Lakewood  
234-1494  

Women In Crisis is opening a safe home for battered women and their children in August in Lakewood. The safe home will provide a secure place to stay for up to 15 women and their families. Advocates for the women in the home will help them obtain employment, legal counseling, life planning skills, and permanent housing. The 24-hour hotline phone number to call is 232-0996 or 232-0997. You may call this number at any time. Transportation to the home will be provided if you are in danger. The phone number for the safe home is 232-0961.

The home is open to anyone in Colorado with those in Jefferson County being given priority. The woman will be charged on a sliding scale; those who cannot afford to pay will not be charged. The policy is that a woman should plan to stay in the home between two to four weeks.

Food and emergency clothing will be provided. Counseling will stress decision making.

BRANDON HOUSE  
832-7826  

This is an emergency housing facility for women and children in crisis or transition. Housing is available for one to two weeks. You can live anywhere in Colorado to apply.

Many of the women have been battered. This fall Brandon House will open up a safe home for battered women which will be more secure from angry husbands.

Big Mama Rag vol 5. No 7  

Call 832-7826 at any time. Sometimes there is a waiting list. The counselors have all been trained to deal with battered women and women who are in a crisis situation and need immediate support.

YORK ST. CENTER  
1632 York St, Denver  

333-6626 Battered Women 24 Hour Line  
321-8191 Rape Victims 24 Hour Line  

York St. Center provides 24-hour support for women who are victims of battering or family disturbance, crime, and rape. "A woman who contacts the Center can expect to talk with a counselor who will help her assess her most immediate needs and assist her in finding ways of meeting those needs. This could include temporary emergency housing, medical care, legal services, emotional support, etc."

York St. provides information and referrals and short-term counseling. Also, counselors will accompany women to the hospital, police, and through court proceedings. There is a staff attorney who will advise women of their legal rights.

Women may come into the Center seven days a week from 8:30 to 5 P.M. The hotlines are always staffed. There are no fees. In order to qualify for service, however, you must be a resident of Denver.

Approximately 35% of the clients are Third World. A major source of referrals is the Denver police who answer family disturbance calls. York St. does a lot of community education about the problems and needs of battered women and rape victims.

Rape

YORK ST. RAPE HOTLINE  
321-8191 24 hours/day  

See description of York St. Center above.

HIGH ST. PARISH  
255-2765  

Rape Crisis Line  

BOULDER RAPE CRISIS  
447-1663 24 hours/day  

These all-women volunteers provide 24-hour/day counseling services to women who have been raped in Boulder County. They will go to where the woman is (her home or wherever) and will take her to the hospital and police station if she wishes. They encourage reporting the crime in order to prevent future rapes, but leave the decision up to the victim.

There are no fees. They are supported by a small budget through the Mental Health Center in Boulder for phone lines, xeroxing, and mailings, etc. A consultant from the MHC gives five hours of training and consultation a week to the volunteer staff. This consultant (a woman) teaches crisis intervention, medical, legal, and psychological aspects of rape. She says about the staff, "We are not a political organization and are not radical feminists, although we view rape as a male crime against women. Most of the women are fairly conservative politically."

When you call the MHC crisis line, 447-1665, the person who answers the phone will take your number and call the crisis counselor who will then call the victim back. Someone is available at all times. There are only about two calls a month.

They serve the population of Boulder County on request and there have been no requests from Third World women in the past two years. This reflects the population of Boulder County which is about 98% white.

They have done counseling with lesbian rape victims and provide speakers for lesbian organizations.