8 dai

To Be A Sister ‘Recollections From Peru

Andrea Gabriel

In recent land takeovers led by Peru's peasant union (Confederación Campesina del Perú), women have been in the front ranks of battle, sneaking into the landlord's mansion at night and tying the whole family to their beds while awaiting the arrival at dawn of the full force of farmworkers to appear on the scene and read out their demands before the government. When government troops intervene, women have been known to drive them off by lunging at their balls. These are accounts very believable to me after knowing farm women in Peru and living with them in daily struggle.

Women's militant role in struggle is not reflected, however, in their participation in union deliberations.

In fact, I observed at one union meeting that nearly half of those who attended the morning session were not even farmworkers. Since Peruvian farmworkers typically cannot read or write, the agrarian reform law has to be interpreted for them by people whom they trust as allies in their fight against the landlords, the government, and the foreign monopolies. During the morning, a group of farm women occupied one end of the huge tent that sheltered the meeting from the sun, cooking chicken and rice and soup in huge kettles over open fires. Several other women sat with the men consulting over resolutions that were to be presented to the afternoon assembly. By afternoon, some of the city people had left, many more farmworkers had arrived, and a row of women sat along the side of the assembly to observe the proceedings. At a morning workshop, one woman named Esperanza had complained that although she, as a widow and therefore "family head," was eligible to vote and to run for office in the cooperativa (expropriated farm), she had been denied that right on flimsy grounds and was pleading for support by the union because "We women need to be represented, too." Her complaint had been passed over, but she was assisted during the noon break to put it in the form of a resolution to present at the afternoon assembly. It was placed at the end of the agenda. Esperanza was undaunted by that, however, because she hoped the women who were still cleaning up after the meal would be in attendance by then and would give her support even if they were not union members. When they did come in, however, a prestigious older man stood up and led in a round of applause for the women, thanking them for a good meal and excusing them from the meeting so they could "rest up from a hard day's work and get the children to bed." There was some restlessness over this, and an attempt to turn things around so the women would feel comfortable about staying at the meeting, but most of them left. Finally, at Esperanza's insistence her resolution was read and discussed, but referred to the directiva of her farm "for further information." There was an informal caucus afterward among the women from Esperanza's farm, who invited me to visit them on a specific day the following week when they would organize a meeting of all the women to tell me about their work, and to discuss their problems. One of the men agreed to meet me at the bus station on that day and drive me to the farm. On the appointed day, on which I came accompanied by another woman from the union staff, no one was there to meet us. We found our way hitch-hiking to the farm and discovered that another meeting had been called there by the government but the women were happy to see us and organized an impromptu "speak bitterness" session.

The women had a list of complaints that made the boycott of our plans very understandable. Chief among them was the fact that when the farm was first expropriated, literacy classes were organized and women were encouraged to attend, but a year later the classes were cancelled by the directiva because "the women were neglecting their work at home." All the women did productive farm work alongside the men, but were classified as eventuales (contract laborers) and thus received much lower pay and had no voice in running the farm.

Of course, agrarian reform was not intended to give the farmworkers real control over production, and certainly not over marketing, all of which was run on a strictly capitalist basis, but the women expected to at least rank with men as wage-earners and to regain the right to study and to raise questions of special interest to them, such as collective childcare during working hours. As it was, children wandered around and were more or less under the care of each other (younger children cared for by older children).

It was clear to me that the women needed to meet on a regular basis as women to formulate their demands and to join the union and insist that it represent them in fighting for their demands. I did not know how much resistance there would be on both sides to planning such a strategy. Within the political parties active in the union there was no long-range program regarding women's emancipation. It did seem, however, that Esperanza's desire to become a member of the directiva was not the only issue at stake, and certainly not the most important one.

Before any of these questions could be answered, a great many crises occurred among Peru's peasants, as among all of Peru's working poor. Their leadership was jailed, many peasants were killed, farms were occupied, and the peasant union was driven completely underground... It remains, however, one of the major vehicles through which revolutionary change is occurring for women as well as men.

I remember with awe the intensity of the union's refrain, ¡Vencerás o morirás! (you will win or you will die) and wonder what new verses have been occasioned by new struggles on Peru's farms:

Levante la pala, levante el pico  
Levante las manos para luchar  
No te contentes con los regalos  
Que a tu boca le hacen callar  

¡Vencerás o morirás; vencerás o morirás!  

Caen la lluvia, suenan los truenos  
¡La tierra es tuya, el fruto también!  
No se engañen con tierras estériles  
Y ya no sirvas al hombre vil  

¡Vencerás o morirás; vencerás o morirás!  

Mira el futuro, el de tus hijos  
Ven a la lucha con fe y lealtad  
Por este pueblo y por sus tierras  
Y por la nuestra que ya cayó  

¡Vencerás o morirás; vencerás o morirás!  

Translation:

Raise shovel and pick and hands in struggle  
Don't be fooled by gifts given to keep you quiet  
Rain falls, thunder sounds  
The land is yours—it's fruit too  
Don't be cheated with sterile land  
The Man is no longer your boss  

Look to the future, that of your children  
Join the struggle in faith  
For these our people, for this our land  
And for she who has already fallen in battle.  

There is a song in Quechua with a plaintive melody that translates as follows:

You took me to have a bath because you thought I was dirty.  
(chorus): (girl says about herself)  
Fool, stupid  

You took me to church on Sunday; I thought it was time for Mass.  
Fool, stupid.  

The band played, I thought it was your birthday.  
Fool, stupid.  

When we lit the candles, I thought it was because it was dark.  
Fool, stupid.  

When the rice fell on my head I thought it was hailing.  
Fool, stupid.  

When your house was filled with bees I thought it was my birthday.  
Fool, stupid.  

When we got into bed I thought it was because I was afraid and you were comforting me.  
Fool, stupid.  

I heard Mama Juana sing that song to herself as she sat before her witch's candles at night, cushioned from the cold earthen floor of her bedroom by sheepskins, and surrounded by her three shaggy dogs, a bottle of spirits, and a pile of coca leaves. As she sang the last lines, her voice broke and she fell into weeping.

On other nights, I danced with her and she sang her witch's version of a popular song brought to the village by her grandson from the city. She sang only the refrain, and lost all sense of melody as we danced wildly around her bedroom: "¿Cacaso por eso el sol no va a venir? (Just because of this maybe the sun won't rise?)

Mama Juana was my compañero’s grandmother, but she had reared him as a youth because he had become unmanageable for his mother in the city. Juana had let him go off to the hills for “a school holiday" which was actually a guerrilla campaign, and never broke confidence with him about it. When the guerrillas were defeated, she buried his ammunition belt wordlessly just as she buried other treasures of unknown significance to outsiders, and went on about her work muttering to the chickens and guinea pigs and tending her fires.

I once wrote a poem about Mama Juana that conveys something of her character to anyone who understands Spanish:

No me llames “abuelita", carajo.  
¿Acaso soy vieja ya?  
Mis dientes no más se pierden  
y no te escucho bien.  

¿Tengo que hacer entiendes?  
No me fastidies ya.  
¿No sabes aún prender el fuego  
sin llamarme "abuelita, abuelita"?  
¡Que aprendas, pues!  

"Abuelita", me dice,  
Carajo.  

The poem translates:

Don't call me "grandmother," for goodness sake!  
You think I'm old already just because I'm losing my teeth and I don't hear well?  
I have a lot to do and I don't want to be bothered.  
Understand?  
You don't even know how to start the fire without calling me,  
"grandmother, grandmother!"  
Well, learn then!  
"Grandmother," you call me.  
Carajo!  

When I married Mama Juana's grandson, she refused to come to the wedding, but she cooked us a big dinner of roasted guinea pig, roasted corn and habas (a kind of bean), sweet potatoes, and salad. She didn't approve of our marriage because she said we argued all the time and that he was not grown up enough to be married. When I left the marriage, she cursed us both and hasn't spoken to him since. She is probably the strongest and most independent woman I have ever known and she is hated by most of the people in her village. She was jailed and interrogated by the police after I left the village when her grandson was being sought for holding political meetings in violation of security regulations. She never broke and has not been bothered since.

Only a month before leaving Peru, I was voted in, along with my compañero as a member of the Indian community where Mama Juana lived. I hugged her and told her I was an Indian now.

MORE ON PAGE 10

FEMINIST HORIZONS—World’s most complete feminist gift store. Jewelry, T-shirts, Patches, Ceramics, Novelties. Mail Order Catalog, 25¢. 10586% West Pico Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90064.