Ella Ellison is Freed

Which a Boston policeman
, on the testimony of two
of the holdup men. They have since
recanted their testimony and she has
finally been freed from a Massachu-
setts prison where she had been ser-
ving a term of five life sentences.
The following is a newsletter from
the Ella Ellison Support Committee.

On September 21, 1978 the District
Attorney's office of Suffolk County,
Mass., had Anthony Irving and Nathan-
iel Williams brought into court and
put on the stand. They were asked if
they would testify against Ella El-
lison if there were a new trial. When
they both answered no, that she had
not been a participant in the 1973
holdup, the D.A. was given a 19 min-
ute recess. When the court readjourned
he moved for all charges to be dropped.

And so - long overdue - this case is

going with benefits, signing and circu-
lating petitions, working on mailings
and the phone tree, and monitoring the
court hearings. Your support and en-
ergy have been vital to bringing this
about.

As we have said over and over in
this newsletter and elsewhere: Ella
Ellison's case is not an isolated
case. What happened to her - the pre-
sumption of guilt, the setting of an
exorbitant bail, the outrageous sen-
tence, the suppression of valuable
evidence, the use of plea bargaining
to get a conviction at any price, the
racist atmosphere that surrounded the
trial - these things happen daily to
people. It would be very difficult to
find anyone in the Massachusetts pri-
sons who had not been subject in some
way to the injustice of the criminal
justice system. And that is a crime

on a larger
scale. Let us remember the struggle
does not end here.

In November, 1976, at the motion
for a new trial hearing, Nathaniel
Williams and Anthony Irving recanted
their testimony against Ella Ellison.
Suffolk Superior Court Judge Donahue
ordered that they be charged with per-
jury for saying that Ella Ellison was
not a participant in the 1973 robbery.

In September, 1977, they were in-
dicted and arraigned on these perjury
charges, which are still pending.

Perhaps the threat of these charges
was supposed to frighten the two men
back into cooperation with the state.
If so, the tactic did not work.

It has always seemed to us that
these charges were brought as a def-
ensive attempt to bolster the prose-
cution's non-existent case against

Maximum Security Unit to Close

Bureau of Prisons officials stated
on October 20, 1978, that they will
“in all likelihood" be closing the
long term Maximum Security Unit at
the Federal Correctional Institution
for women at Alderson, West Virginia,
within the next year.

The announcement follows nearly a
year and a half of public criticism
and opposition from the legal commun-
ity to the MSU. The National Prison
Project has worked intensively against
the unit almost since its opening in
July, 1977. We celebrate the news that
it will be dismantled, and hope that
its closing will set an example for
all state as well as federal correc-
tional administrators who ever again
contemplate the use of long term, high
security confinement units for so-
called "notorious" prisoners.

Those organizations who have public-
ly voiced strong opposition to the
purpose and operation of the MSU at
Alderson include the National Council
on Crime and Delinquency, San Franci-
sco Neighborhood Legal Assistance
Foundation, The Southern Coalition on
Jails and Prisons, the Grand Jury Pro-
ject of the National Lawyers’ Guild,
the Boston Prisoners Rights Project,
the Women's Prison Project, and the
Coalition for Prisoners' Rights, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, Union Women's Alliance

to Gain Equality, the Coalition to
Stop Institutional Violence, and the
Moratorium on Prison Construction
(Unitarian Universalist Service Comm-
ittee), as well as a number of indiv-
iduals who have contacted the Bureau
of Prisons to express themselves as
private citizens. The clear rejection
by the public of the Bureau's use of
this control unit forced it to close
the MSU.

The Maximum Security Unit was open-
ed in the midst of a wave of rhetoric
from the criminal justice system,
since disproven, claiming that women
were committing violent crimes at an
increasing rate. The Bureau of Pri-
sons was already operating a control
unit at its maximum security peniten-
tiary in Marion, Ill. The conditions
of confinement and procedures for
placement at the Marion unit were the
subject of a legal attack by the
National Prison Project. Recently,
Federal District Judge James Foreman
found that many of the criteria and
placement policies governing the con-
trol unit violated prisoners’ rights
to due process. Criteria for place-
ment in the MSU at Alderson are strik-
ingly similar to those applied at Mar-
ion. Women who were involved in "sub-
versive" activities, who are "notor-
ious" or high publicity cases, as

well as women who are simply serving
long sentences, are all candidates
for the MSU. Of course the prison
system is full of such prisoners -
some, but certainly not all, were
arbitrarily selected by prison auth-
orities to fill the unit at Alderson.
They had no concrete hopes of being
released to general population, and
some faced many, many years confined
to the three hallways making up the
MSU.

The Maximum Security Unit is an
abomination. We hope that the Bureau
will now move in a more progressive
direction with its handling of women
prisoners in the federal system. The
Prison Project intends to monitor
closely its future use of the first
floor of Davis Hall, which housed
the Maximum Security Unit, and its
treatment of those women who are to
be released from the unit into the
general population.

The National Prison Project

November 27, 1978 - The Bureau of
Prisons has still not announced a
date for the closing of the Maximum
Security Unit. Continue to write
them asking for an affirmative

response.

It is long past time that these
charges be dropped.

Please write District Attorney
Garrett Byrne (before January) at
the Suffolk County Courthouse, Pem-
berton Square, Boston, Mass., 02108.
Urge that the perjury charges against
Nathaniel Williams and Anthony Irving
be dropped. (Please send a copy of
your letter to us, at One Warwick St
Roxbury, Mass. 02108.)

We really want to thank all of you
who have given generously throughout
the years and particularly those who
responded to our last newsletter's
appeal. We hate to continue asking
for money, but we are forced to. We
still have legal expenses outstand-
ing.

As well as your individual donation
we could really use help with fund-
raising events. We'd all like to put
these debts behind us and close this
case. With your help, we will.

Is Syst a kind
of home for poor

people.

Peg Averill/LNS

Protesters against Rocky Flats

Nuclear Weapons Plant have been sit-
ting on the railroad tracks leading
into the plant since the massive
April 29 - 30th anti-nuclear demon-
stration at Rocky Flats. Ten of these
protesters are on trial in Golden,
Colorado. On November 21, after three
days of preliminary hearings, Jeffer-
son County Judge Kim L. Goldberger
decided that the ten anti-nuclear
protesters charged with trespassing
at Rocky Flats cannot use the state's
so-called "choice of evils" law. That
doctrine excuses an unlawful act if
it was necessary to prevent imminent
public or private harm so serious in
nature as to outweigh the unlawful
conduct in question. The judge also
ruled that even if the peril were
immediate, the defendants' alleged
blockage of a railroad spur wouldn't
have closed the plant or alleviated
the hazard.

After taking time to prepare a new
defense after the Goldberger ruling,
the demonstrators will take the wit-
ness stand in their own defense to
explain why they occupied the site.
It is expected that the trial will
conclude by the end of November.

Protesters go to Trial

If a Jury protects

people's rights by taking
them away,

Peg Averill/LNS

MY

Peg Averill/LNS