bmr:

This month's theme is about women in prisons and psychiatric

institutions. Previously we had separated the two; we had
printed themes on Women in Prison and included information a-
bout and by women in psychiatric institutions under health. A
year ago, in the 2nd part of our Health theme, was the first
time we began to connect the two. Since then a number of
things have happened to make these issues and our work more
imperative. Among them include budget cuts to “social ser-
vices," the closing of safe houses all over the country, the
attempted Brinks expropriation, the ever-increasing power of
the right wing and its press and media, as well as the help-
ful criticisms from the New Movement in Solidarity with Puer-
to Rican Independence and Socialism, which caused us to ex-

pand our analysis of feminism to support for nationalist stru-

ggles.

In the Health issue we printed an article by the Coalition
To Stop Institutional Violence. In that article they stated,
"The psychiatric system and the correctional system pretend
to help individuals and protect society. ‘Curing mental ill-
ness' and ‘rehabilitating criminals' are parallel lies claim-
ing that people who are troublesome have personal problems
for which there are only individual solutions. The goal of
both systems is individual adjustment or pacification. There
is complete denial of the context of social and political in-
justice within an individual's life." The "rehabilitation"
techniques of forced drugging, electro-shock, psycho-surgery,
stripping of rights which are returned as “privileges," ex-
tensive step systems, and sensory deprivation through isola-
tion and denial of reality can be found in both correctional
and psychiatric institutions. We have completed our analysis
of these institutions and the role they serve for the ruling

class by concluding that all prisoners and inmates of psychia-

tric institutions are political prisoners. The root of our

problems lies in the systems of oppression through patriarchy,

racism, genocide, classism, looksism, ageism, anti-Semitism,
and capitalism/imperialism which puts profits above people.

OOPS!

having been forced to OD all
my life on the lies and dis-
information of the media,
educational system, psychi-
atric system, government,
etc. Surely the naked truth
is one of our most powerful
weapons in fighting these
systems. To insert, see BMR
March 1982, Vol. 10 No. 3,
“Criticism, Self-Criticism."

In printing Jenny's
letter about editing of her
article, we somehow badly
garbled two sentences at

the end of the second para-
graph. They should read:
"I was horrified for a num-
ber of reasons. One, I have
a very strong emotional
allegiance to the truth,

“Escaped," by Suzanne Jackson, 1969,
acrylic wash on canvas, 35"X32".

jcollective:

> Goding,

lcover:

Bobbe Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford

isSupporters:

Stone,

Ross,

Judy Barlow,

Eden Ina Smith, Kim Womantree-

Wendy Highby

contributors: vicki

T.d. Feuerborn,

Blair Northwood,

Clara Kaplan, Deb Taylor, Kathy Riley,

Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-
erally fall between the 15th and 19th of the preceding
month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope, with
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicit-
ed material. We reserve the right to edit all material for
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, April 1982

|

|

i

|

where we're at

By political prisoners we are not exonerating anyone for
crimes against people. People who commit violence against us,
such as rapists and "insane" killers, such as snipers, must
be held responsible for their actions. Rape is a political
act that serves the state by keeping us in fear and restric-
ting our rights to walk around, be at home, and in general
live free from fear. "Senseless" violence can happen out of
alienation and lack of a sense of community. These reasons
may be simplifications, but the point is that the state is
responsible for alienation, lack of any sense of community,
and for the powerlessness we have in our lives and in meet-
ing our needs.

In the meantime, the boogeyman concept of the "violent"
mental patient or criminal is used to smear, cover up, lock-
up and drug the vast majority of former and current prisoners -
and psychiatric inmates who have no history of violence. This
popular myth fuels fear that former prisoners and psychiatric
inmates (especially) in our community may be violent crimin-
als in disguise. It allows the invalidation and creates sus-
picion of any anger ex-inmates may feel and express.

The real crimes of robbing 3rd World countries and peoples
of their wealth, genocide of people of color, destruction of
the environment, ad nauseam, go unpunished. While for the
"crime" of stealing (even when there's plenty left on the
shelf) or for the "crime" of killing a battering husband or
lover in self-defense a woman can be locked up in either a
prison or psychiatric institution.

Recently, the New York Post (which has a circulation larger
than the New York Times and Washington Post combined) printed
a 5-part series which described the May 19th Communist Organ-
ization, “a bizarre cult", “armies of hate", "the group be-
longs with the Moonies", "white cult in black struggle." Un-
der the words, "The Post continues its special probe of the
secret network behind the Brink's massacre" was the large

headline, "Bizarre Sex Attitudes Of May 19 Cult." The implica-

tion is clear—members of radical groups, anyone supporting
communism, and anyone supporting black liberation are weird,
not normal, crazy.

There is a complete denial of the context of social and po-
litical injustice within an individual's, within women's,
within people of color, within workers’ lives.

We have also seen that the idea that people who fight these
injustices and are labeled crazy or criminal deserve what they
get. In letter after letter from ex-psychiatric inmates it
is clear that they are/have been invalidated by the women's
movement. In the December 1981 issue of Off Our Backs was an

article which said that the people involved in the attempted —

Brink's expropriation deserved what they got. Author Janis
Kelly called Kathy Boudin and her comrades, "terrorists."

MORE ON PAGE 26

inside BMR:

Where We're At
National
Rita D. Brown...
Anti-Repression

Statements, 13a g LOSLT
Letters, Poems, and

Journal Entries... 14-17
VOICEG ia. (eaters ee 18819
Mothers: In Prison... 21
Conference Langu

tro=-Shock....

Cover Artist

Classifieds

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.
funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA
and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1#1 Oct. 1972 through
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is index-
ed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010.