Nuclear Radiation

A Daily Threat To Every Mother’s Child

Terra

In this International Year of the
Child, it is urgent to recognize the
truth about nuclear power. That truth
is shown in scientific facts, by docu-
mentation of government cover-ups, by
the inefficiency of nuclear plants them-
selves, and in the growing numbers of
casualties in this silent, domestic
war. The nuclear industry knowingly threa-
tens and is already injuring and kill-
ing not only the children and adults
of today, but also those of genera-
tions to come.

Resource Center for Nonviolence

HOW RADIATION WORKS

All radiation is a form of energy.
It is released in the form of waves
and particles. The waves are of differ-
ent wavelengths - longer wavelengths
include visible light and electric
waves. Shorter wavelengths can pene-
trate through matter and include X-rays
and gamma rays.

Radiation occurs naturally - a fact
that the nuclear industry is fond of
telling us. However, our technology
has been and is producing more and
more artificially induced radiation,
as well as mining uranium from its
safe home, deep in the earth.

The health effects of radiation are
due to waves and particles bombarding
the living organism. In so doing, they
tear away electrons from molecules or
atoms and thus alter the atoms and
molecules from their original and
functional form. Radiation may also
change the energy level of molecular
electrons, which can dangerously
alter normal functioning. When the
effects occur in the genetic material
of cells, the DNA programming which
controls the cell's growth, reproduc-
tion, and function is disrupted. This
may cause somatic damage to this gen-
eration including cancer and leukemia.
It may also cause genetic damage when
the DNA of sperm or ova cells are al-
tered, creating deformities and great-
er susceptibility in many generations
to come.

The effects of radiation exposure
are cumulative. Many or continuous
small doses can equal the effects of
one big one.

The result is an acceleration of the
aging process, according to the Tri-
state Leukemia Study. Leukemia was a
secondary effect (meaning: caused by
the accelerated aging), as were heart
disease, hardening of the arteries,
diabetes, respiratory diseases, benign
and malignant tumors (cancer), cata-
racts, and gray hair.

Injury to a cell may not lead to
leukemia for 3-5 years after irradia-
tion or cancer for 10-15 years. It
takes only one damaged cell to produce
a cancer. Thus statements by power
company and government officials
that there were no casualties at Three
Mile Island's recent nuclear accident
are a bit premature.

Radiation affects developing fetuses
more than children, and children more
than adults. This is because they
are still growing, and damage to the
DNA program leads to a greater prop-
ortion of missing or mistakenly made
tissues and organs in their bodies.

Studies also show that those over
55 or 60 are more susceptible to radia-
tion effects. And some individuals who
have histories of allergies or suscep-
tibility to infectious diseases, es-
pecially among children, have been
clearly shown to have a five or ten-
fold greater risk than normal.

THE NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE

The nuclear industry includes not
only nuclear plants themselves, but
uranium mining, milling, conversion
and enrichment, manufacture of fuel
rods, transport of radioactive mater-
ials, and storage of nuclear wastes.
During this fuel cycle there is rou-
tine release of radioactive materials,
not including any accidents. Workers
are allowed to receive thirty times
the level of radiation as the general
public - and pay the health conseque-
nces.

Uranium mining and milling leaves
literally tons of radioactive tailings
to be dealt with. The American Phys-
ical Society has estimated that by the
year 2000 we will have one billion
tons of waste from uranium mining a-
lone. Too much to bury, the mining
companies cover it up with a thin
layer of soil and vegetation. Unfor-
tunately, this has shown to be ineffec-
tive, since the plants die, radiation
seeps into the groundwater, the local
background radiation level increases
and wind-blown particles spread radio-
activity wherever the wind might blow
them, including places where our food
is grown.

According to the Uranium Information
Network, Colorado's uranium mines and
mills produce approximately one million
tons of radioactive waste annually.
As Colorado now stands to grant five
new mill applications, this will in-
crease to over ten million tons per
year. There are also presently sever-
al thousand uranium exploration wells
being drilled - as the first steps
towards mining - in the South Platte
watershed, the source of two-thirds
of Denver's water supply. Every uran-
ium mining and milling project has
been associated with radioactive and
chemical contamination of local water
supplies.

Karen Silkwood died on her way to
deliver information concerning un-
safe manufacture of faulty radioactive
fuel rods. She was one of 73 workers
contaminated in four years at the Kerr
McGee Plant where she worked. In April
1972, two maintenance men repairing a
pump at the plant were splashed with
an invisible rain of plutonium parti-
cles, which settled on their hands,
faces, hair, and clothes. At noon
they left the plant for lunch, not
discovering their contamination until
they returned. They were scrubbed
clean, along with their car. But Kerr-
McGee neglected to check out the
restaurant where the men had eaten.
This is only one example of many of
the carelessness with the deadliest
substance known.

Mobilization for Survival

"SMALL" ACCIDENTS

Nuclear plants have also had many
"small" accidents which they have
shown to be neglectful of reporting
to local health and government offi-
cials. At Fort Saint Vrain, our local
nuclear plant, January 23, 1978, 250
workers were evacuated from the plant
after water leaking into the coolant
system damaged a valve, causing ra-
dioactive gas to escape into the reac-
tor building and through the ventila-
tion system into the atmosphere.

While investigating the incident,
the Nuclear Regulatory Agency found
numerous safety violations. The plant
management did not follow proper eme-
rgency procedures. The Weld County
Authorities and the Colorado Health
Department were not notified until
45 minutes after the gas had begun
leaking. The Platteville police and
the Adams County authorities were not
notified at all. These agencies were
all supposed to have been contacted
immediately, according to an emergen-
cy response plan drafted in May 1977.
(from Ft. St. Vrain factsheet by En-
ergy Task Force of Boulder Mobiliza-
tion for Survival).

Besides accidents, plant licenses
by the government allow the release
of a certain amount of radioactivity
during routine operations, and it is
actually released from all the opera-
ting nuclear plants.

DANGEROUS MOVES

Transport along the nuclear fuel
cycle also leads to contamination.
Transport is usually by truck or air.
Local authorities are not notified.
Again, accidents do happen. And some-
times nuclear materials get lost in
shipping. The Atomic Energy Commis-
sion spent several thousand dollars
trying to find two small radioactive
cobalt capsules. Henry Espindola of
Mexico City found such a capsule in a
town dump. Espindola brought the cap-
sule home, and his mother placed it in
the kitchen. Henry was dead within a
month and a half, and the entire fam-
ily was dead within six months. Accor-
ding to Leo Goodman in "Radiation in
Modern Industry", April 26, 1967, 88
of these capsules had been lost by
1967. (from "Nuclear Power: the Invi-
sible Killer," by People and Energy,
Washington, D.C.).

DANGEROUS WASTES

Nuclear waste disposal is also a
major problem. Even if all nuclear
production was halted right now, we
would still have all the wastes al-
ready produced to deal with. Pluton-
ium alone is dangerous for 240,000 to
480,000 years. Each nuclear reactor
makes 400-500 pounds of plutonium ev-
ery year. At the present rate, by the
year 2020 U.S. nuclear industry will
have made 30,000 tons of it.

Other wastes include iodine 131, da-
ngerous for a couple of weeks; stron-
tium 90, and cesium 137, both danger-
ous for several hundred years.

Several methods of storage have
been tried. Sixty-seven thousand bar-
rels of radioactive junk were dumped
into the ocean, some 120 miles from
the Maryland coast and the rest 35
miles off San Francisco. Twenty-five
percent of the barrels have imploded.
Giant sponges, some up to four feet
across, have been discovered growing
on the barrels. Ordinary sponges are
closer to four inches. W.D. Rowe, head
of Environmental Protection Agency
radiation programs, admitted that
eating fish caught in the area could
be hazardous.

At Hanford, Washington, wastes from
government nuclear weapons production
is stored. In one 13-month period
there were 48 nuclear related acci-
dents, and the facility leaked a to-
tal of 425,000 gallons of radioactive
wastes. The worst single leak spilled
115,000 gallons into the ground in
May and June of 1973 and went undetec-
ted for a month. Tank storage has not
proved a fool-proof method.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 6

Land-buried wastes also tend to
leak. For example, in Oregon, radioac-
tive cobalt was discovered in algae,
concentrated 20,000 times, near the
Trojan nuclear reactor. And at Han-
ford, badgers or coyotes burrowed
into trenches filled with radioactive
wastes to get at the salt cake, which
was contaminated with radionuclides.
Radioactive feces, urine, and bone
fragments from jackrabbits and coyotes
have been discovered around the area.
(Waste info from "Nuclear Power:

The Invisible Killer").

MELTDOWN VS. LOW LEVEL EFFECTS

The recent Three Mile Island nuc-
lear accident and the movie "The
China Syndrome" have called to the
public's attention the risks of a
nuclear plant meltdown, in which the
cooling systems in a nuclear reactor
do not prevent the nuclear fuel core
from melting and possibly releasing
large amounts of radiation.

In such a meltdown in a highly pop-
ulated area, according to Dr. Helen
Caldicott, MD, in New Age Magazine,
December 1977, "...thousands of
people would die instantly. Two weeks
later, thousands more would die from
what is called acute radiation ill-
ness, where all the rapidly dividing
cells of the body die. It was des-
cribed after the Hiroshima bomb
dropped: the hair falls out, the skin
sloughs off in big ulcers, you get
vomiting and diarrhea and your blood
cells die. So you die of infection
and/or bleeding - like you die when you
have leukemia. Five years later there
would be an epidemic of leukemia.
Fifteen to forty years later there
would be an epidemic of cancers -
breast, lung, bowel, et cetera. Gen-
erations hence, there would almost
certainly be increased incidences of
genetic and inherited diseases."

Luckily, in the U.S. there has
been no such accident - yet, another
favorite fact of nuclear industrial-
ists. However, they are not known
to publicize the effects of long term
low-level radiation exposure, some-
thing that is occurring every day
(especially in Denver, where, accor-
ding to an Associated Press story,
radiation levels normally equal those
at Three Mile Island during the acci-
dent, when pregnant women and young
children were evacuated).

Any exposure to nuclear radiation
is harmful to any life system. Dr.
John William Gofman did a study to
find out how much cancer and leu-
kemia and genetic injury could be
produced by radiation in 1979 under
the permissible level of .17 units of
radiation a year. Initially he and
his co-worker Dr. Tamplin said 16,000
cancer plus leukemia deaths would
occur if everybody in the U.S. got,
on the average, the permissible dose.
With further work they got 32,000 as
their best estimate. They now know
from studies of Hanford workers that
that were two or three times too low
in estimating the hazard. (from
Shutdown, the Book Publishing Co.,

Summertown, TN.). MORE ON PAGE 21

Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Facilities in the United States

— FB-11) Main Operating Bases

© = Tactical Bases and Naval Air Stations A. ~ Weapons Laboratories

© — SAC Satellite Bases
D = Naval Facilities
(O) = Weapons Production Facilities

(}] — Missile Test Sites

— SSN or SSM Bases

<= Special Nuclear Materials Facilities
fi — Home ports of Nuclear-Capable Carriers
K — Army Storage Sites

(LQ) — Navy Depots

— Nuclear Waste Storage Facilities

DH — AF Depots

© — Nuclear Power Plants in Operation
(Possible sources of weapons’ materials)

The increasingly wide dispersal of nuclear facilities presents a growing security problem in the United States. Each
symbol represents a fixed location for materials which are highly hazardous. Source: Center for Defense Information,

Defense Monitor, 4:2. (February 1975). 10° ~°