14

ANDREA GABRIEL...

From Page 12

oriented sexually simply can't be
denied.

BMR: But, if you are approaching it
scientifically, what made you per-
sonally decide that lesbianism is
not a “bourgeois decadent" life--
style, as the Marxist-Leninist
parties describe it?

Andrea: I see the lesbian movement
in this country-- it has to be called
a lesbian movement-- in the nature
of a strike that women are pulling
off, and it has been effective. I
think we've won a lot by that activ-
ity. We need to respect the lesbians
who have taken that position.

A lot of men have been scared by
it. That is why they have wanted to
avoid facing up to the issue of
whether homosexuality is decadent
or not because it hurts them. It is
threatening to them. We have to
overcome their position, maybe by
giving them some assurances, but
not that we're necessarily going to
give up the "validity" of lesbianism
at some future date. But we don't
need to continue using it openly as
a threat. There has to be some com-
promise right now. Women realize now
that they need men in order to make
the revolution-- it isn't that men
just need women in order to be happy
sexually.

BMR: What would you like to say to
women who are now in a position of
trying to reevaluate and trying to
integrate their class consciousness
and their dedication to that strug-
gle and their feminism and their
dedication to that?

Andrea: We have to recognize and to
see the reactionary elements that do
exist in the Women's Movement and

to root those out ruthlessly. We
have to combat mother-worship, fe-
male goddess cults, turning the
Women's Movement into a cultural,
religious movement instead of a
political movement. We are just
playing games with ourselves if we
separate ourselves from the struggle
in a kind of holier-than-thou way
and develop this tremendous woman-
feeling which can become an anti-
human feeling. We have to accept
that men have a right to exist in
the world, that half of our own
children are male, and that men
aren't biologically, innately evil,
though it often seems that this is
the case. We have to ruthlessly root
out those tendencies in the movement
because unless we defeat capitalism,
unless we defeat imperialism, we
will never defeat the oppression
that we experience from men.

MR INTERVIEW...

From Page 10

that this country could provide ad-
equate childcare without oppressing
women, unless we overhaul the entire
economic and patriarchal system.
BMR: Is it an objective of the women
you are working with to establish
some form of a socialist state?

MR: It is necessary to create a soc-
ialist revolution and end the private
property system if we want to end
our oppression as women. Most of
our oppression is directly caused by
the economic system we live under.
Some of the women I work with are
working toward a socialist state;
others are not. But I don't think
things always work like that. What
is an objective is that we are all
concerned about ending our oppres-
sion and that we need to stand up
for ourselves as women.

The Women's Movement has been
very, very valuable. At times we
get critical of each other, that we
haven't developed far enough, fast
enough, and we look at the reaction-
ary things in our movement where
women use it as an individual spring-
board and don't take it seriously.
But when I look around and see the
number of women who have committed
their lives, both on the level of
personal changes and political work,
it's been very important and has
affected social movements and change
in this country considerably. The
strategy of separatism has been ex-
tremely effective. I'm worried now

The Women's Movement has come up
with new ideas and approaches to
politics. While that's good, we
haven't used the historical experi-
ence of other social action move-
ments because we have isolated our-
selves so extremely. We haven't been
able to learn from them. The Left
has a more unified understanding of

Elsa:

ELSA BLUM...

From Page 8

BMR: So your focus is to work with
other groups, to put a radical in-
fluence in them.

Elsa: I guess so. Our perspective
is that we want to reach other people,
and we can't stay home and talk to
each other if that's what we want to
do.

BMR: The idea of moving into another
group makes me uncomfortable; to move
in, to bring in some kind of influence
that might not be there already. How
has that worked for you?

Elsa: I think I understand that. I
know I was really sensitive on that
point and felt very resentful and
suspicious of women from other organ-
izations who came into Oakland Women's
Liberation, for example. But I have
to realize that I was influenced by
many of their ideas. That is, in the
long run, I made them my ideas. I
want to share them and convince other
people that they should make them
their ideas too. I know that I didn't
feel very open-minded at the time to
ideas and suggestions that didn't come
from my friends, or people I trusted.
But changing society is such a tre-
mendous undertaking that we better be
open to every idea we can, and weigh
and test them all, no matter where
they come from.

Also, when I take part in another
organization like NOW, I mean it when
I say I really want NOW to grow and
get bigger and more powerful: to
reach out to campus women, working
women, to housewives as much as pos-
sible. And I'll put my energies into
seeing that the work gets done. I
don't just go to NOW meetings to com-
plain and criticize. I go to propose
activities and projects like the ERA
vigil on Aug. 28 last year, and then
I work like hell on them.

BMR: There seems to be more of a
meeting between feminism and the left
recently, and more discussion of how
and when to work in coalitions to-
gether. What are your feelings
about that?

I think it's essential, and
I'm glad to see it happening. I
think that the key ingredients to co-
alition work, to make a common pro-
ject possible, are a clear focus --
for example, to protest this Supreme
Court ruling on pregnancy; a policy
of including everyone who wants to
work on that, and then, making an ef-
fort to draw in as broad forces as
possible who agree on this issue;
and then, open discussion of all sug-
gestions and votes on different pro-
posals, if necessary.

the ways people are exploited and a
method for action. These are things
we need to know. Women who have been
active in the Left do women without
that experience a disservice when
they criticize the Left and don't
talk about the positive things they
learned.
BMR: Do you think it necessary at
some point for feminism and the Left
to merge? You maintain that an
independent Women's Movement is
necessary right now. At what point
do you see the two merging?
MR: The two are not mutually exclus-
ive. You can still have an indepen-
dent Women's Movement and still have
a merging with Left politics. If
you mean a complete integration
between feminism and socialism, yes,
it is necessary sometime soon. I
hesitate to even say that publicly
at this point because it can be so
easily misconstrued. I don't mean
that we run back to the Left, join
in and say, “Yes, you were right all
along. I had to get myself liberated
individually and I'm coming back
now that I'm a strong, little woman
and capable of working by your side."
If the Women's Movement becomes
reintegrated with other social move-
ments there has to be a true inte-
gration of the issues feminism has
brought to light. The questions
surrounding the family and hetero-
sexism have to be recognized and acted
upon. At the same time, feminists
have to act upon and to understand
the class struggle and racial strug-
gle. This is going to take very
heavy changes on the parts of both
socialists and feminists to have
that become a reality. We have to
succeed in getting beyond these
difficulties, because either per-
spective alone will be ultimately
reactionary.

STRUGGLE...

certainly needs to include this point.
decisive factors in a woman's decision to arm herself.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 1

Class background and race can be

The women on the

Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, for example, are not sitting around dis-

cussing the pros and cons.

Every home on Pine Ridge has a gun.

When you

are in the middle of a battle zone, the real choices become clear. Al-
though many women are in the middle of that zone, as a movement we have

managed to stay on the edges--so far.

It would be to our advantage to have
some skills before the barricades go up.

This brings us to another topic that doesn't get discussed often or clear-

ly; armed struggle.

There is, of course, good reason to be silent and un-

certain with Senate Bill 1 lurking in the corner, but there is also good rea-
son to remember that SB1's happen because paranoia is one of the govern-

ment's favorite tools.

I am not advocating the immediate formation of

armed groups that are going to rush out and take power just like that, but
I am advocating the use of common sense in seeing how limited our choices

really are.

Michelle Whitnack, who served five months in jail in Seattle for refusing
to talk to a Grand Jury, recently wrote a letter replying to an article in

a local paper that criticized armed struggle as a tactic.

Michelle wrote,

"You say that you...'do not see this country even close to a state of armed

struggle.

Just who are you talking to?

Other lefties? Do you have any

contact to speak of with the people locked up in prison anywhere across

the country?

Do you hear the Black or Native American communities unan-
imously voting to ‘postpone violence until a receptive time?'

After more

than three years in the prison movement, I won't say that my impression is
any less one-sided than yours; but I sure as hell will say that there's
plenty of people in this country, in and out of prisons, who wouldn't
quite agree with your analysis, and I don't hear you even considering them.
What I do hear you saying is that it's all right for poor and oppressed
people to fight--just so long as the fighting's not too close to home,
where it might be a threat to all the folks who've been mouthing left
rhetoric for years without realizing that to one hell of a lot of people
in this country, every day is next to intolerable and the concept of revol-
ution is not a romantic abstract ego trip."

DEMYSTIFYING...

From Page 13

isolated in what has become an in-
creasingly privatized family exis-
tence (even when they work outside
the home too). It is, in many key
instances, women's skills (productive
skills, healing, midwifery, etc)
which have been discredited or banned
to make way for commodities. It is,
above all, women who are encouraged
to be utterly passive/uncritical/de-
pendent (i.e. "feminine") in the face
of the pervasive capitalist penetra-
tion of private life. Historically,
late capitalist penetration of work-
ing class life has singled out women
as prime targets of pacification/
"feminization" because women are the
culture bearers of their class.

4. It follows that there is a
fundamental interconnection between
women's struggle and what is tradi-
tionally conceived as class struggle.
Not all women's struggles have an
inherently anti-capitalist thrust
(particularly not those which seek
only to advance the power and wealth
of special groups of women), but all
those which build collectivity and

CLAIR KAPLAN...

From Page 9

of being single women in a society
that's economically structured so that
it penalizes single women.

I think there is some kind of built-

in potential for class consciousness
based on what happens to us. And I'm
hoping that will be a real positive
way to get class consciousness into
the feminist movement.
One of the stronger Marxist-Lenin-
ist groups in Denver, the October
League, attacks lesbianism based on--

as some members have put it--that les-

bianism is anti-working class, when

in fact, it can help create class con-

sciousness.

But I don't know how to work out
the kinds of hostility that straight,
family, working class people have a-
bout cultural lifestyles. That's an
old problem.
ity of life issues relevant to the
rest of the working class? It seems

like as we get more progressive in our

JACKIE ST. JOAN...
From Page 41

I think lesbian feminists have a
better opportunity to develop
politically because of not having
as much need for male approval and
because our psychological base is
with women. Personally, that's why
I can trust a dyke in my gut; more
than I can a heterosexual woman.
It's this assumption of heterosex-
uality, the analogous assumption
of the wealth of the ruling class,
which lesbian feminism challenges
directly. There are a lot of
assumptions we operate on that are
false--and need to be challenged
in order for us to grow.
BMR: Like?
Jackie: Well, one assumption is
that we are a movement. I'm not
really sure that we are a movement,
in the sense of having an impact
on society as a whole, and being a
wide-ranging social force which is
gaining strength and numbers. We

How do we make our qual-

collective confidence among women are
vitally important to the building of
class consciousness. Conversely, not
all class struggles have an inherent-
ly anti-sexist thrust (especially not
those which cling to pre-industrial
patriarchal values) but all those
which seek to build the social and
cultural autonomy of the working class
are necessarily linked to the strug-
gle for women's liberation.

This, in very rough outline, is one
direction which socialist feminist
analysis is taking. No one is expect-
ing a synthesis to emerge which will
collapse socialist and feminist strug-
gle into the same thing. But there is
enough of a synthesis, both in what we
think and what we do, for us to begin
to have a self-confident identity as
socialist feminists. 
Barbara Ehrenreich is the co-author of
Witches, Midwives and Nurses and The
Politics of Sickness, published by
The Feminist Press. This article was
reprinted from WIN magazine, June, 1976,
with the permission of the author.

quality of life issues, the further
we get from being able to talk to some
coworker that we need to be able to talk
is.

I know a couple of women in Boulder
who are now doing factory organizing
and renounce all of the really pro-
gressive cultural developments that
they went through, and are more back-
ward. They wear make-up, try to
act like the “working class" and are
really patronizing. I really under-
stand why they're doing it; they're
doing it for the right reasons, but in
a way that seems really crazy to me.

I don't see how I can be politically
effective as a very culturally differ-
ent person with what we usually think
of as the traditional working class.

I can't. But I can be politically ef-
fective as a left lesbian feminist
within the lesbian community and the
lesbian-feminist movement, bringing up
issues there.

are not capturing the imagination
and support of the masses of women
in this country. I think our im-
pact on each other is much more
significant than our impact on
society.

BMR: What do you think of the
women's movement now?

Jackie: I think we need to think
about quality (our depths of under-
standing and excellence of our work)
and less about quantity (we don't
have to convince the whole world
right away or have approval from
and answers for everybody). We're
into something real--we have to
work and let it happen. That's
one of the problems of discussing
feminism with socialists--we don’t
have all the answers. They have

a theory which has been tried and
been successful (by their standards)
in numerous countries, but we want
more than that. We want it all!