voices from our lives

Invisible Prisons - Poverty, Prostitution,

Marianne L. Stewart ers can't be telling the truth or right. Welfare people can't be intelligent -- they are "clever." They can't be honest -- they are "using the truth to their own ends." They can't ask for appeal bonds -- they are "using the system to their own benefit." (Which I thought was the whole idea of the system; is it founded to be to the benefit of some and the detriment of others? Are the poor supposed to use the system to their own detriment? Or found another?) And they can't be good mothers -- they are "just trying to convince the neighbors." Besides, "no mother who loved her children would choose to bring them up in slums, barrios or government projects."

“The poor shouldn't have children" -- unless they want an abortion. Then, the government feels, they should be made to have the child. Good/rich people will be more than happy to adopt it -- especially if it's white.

And if the child is not adopted, foster homes provide food, clothing and shelter -- and lack of boredom if the child is shifted from one to another often. Most importantly for the government in America, it provides jobs for bureaucrats and also non-taxed money to foster parents.

Tom Jefferson accused business persons of placing profit before all other worthwhile human emotions. Nothing has changed -- except for government now being a business. Because of this,

class oppression

anxiety, apprehension and foreboding have always been constant companions of the poor in America's capitalistic political system.

Bells have tolled consistently; we've been dying on our feet a long time. Sometimes it's a more painful death; sometimes a less painful torture -- like when one wonders where she'll be in a year. Or where her two-year-old daughter will be.

Being on welfare (and going to school so that a piece of paper officially makes one worth enough to support a family) is an anxious and apprehensive place. Two children are still missing -- who were taken illegally by the courts of Orange County -- who were given to a father who had more important places for his child support money.

Being in prison is a real disturbing place to be also; upstanding-God-fearing-citizens (the same kind that burnt witches) feel that prosecutors can't be lying or wrong/feel that welfare moth-

Feminists Paying The Price

we are the losers. We can be

crest of the Second wave.

Playboy doesn't contribute to the women's movement because of its high ideals of equality, even though it helped fund an ERA luncheon with Benjamin Spock. If books it publishes lose money, it is good business -- there are tax write-offs. If the books make good, then there is profit and prestige. If a feminist project is funded, there is an ever-reminder where the money comes from.

No group is getting over when it uses dirty money. We are laundering it just as surely as the Nixon administration laundered their money and organized crime launders its money. We help the boys look good while all the time

It's capitalistically productive. So why even try getting the kids adopted?

Although "fraud" among childless wealthy people using 50 names may exist,

co-opted, anyone in need of funds can be co-opted.

BMR feels that those groups who have/are taking money from Playboy should make it known in the feminist community. Each community should demand to know how their feminist projects are being funded and where the money is going. Each project must be accountable to its community.

We have to know who to trust, where to place our energies. We challenge foundation and government monies: motives are never for our good, we have to be careful of the information we give out. In the times we live in; grand jury abuses, witch-

Page 14 - Big Mama Rag, February, 1982

"fraud" among welfare mothers does not exist. Examples of fraud are the laws of America which throw the poor/powerless into the capitalistic industry of prison-concentration camps. One of the greatest examples of fraud is the one carried on by the United States government against minority and poor people by forcing them to work in prisons as slaves, or burying them alive in the tombs of concentration camps throughout the country. The crime is, and has always been committed by the emperors of America's plutocracy. And by the cross-burners of all ages who call themselves by changing names.

One waits in anticipation of the new laws -- the Governor's, the President's, the file clerk's at the welfare department. The newsman said welfare grants will be cut, or non-existent, if we rent from friends or relatives; tomorrow I will look for another place, and it really doesn't matter that landlords don't want children, or students, or welfare mothers or that I can't afford more than a room to live in. First thing tomorrow, I'll go looking for an enemy to rent from.

This, of course, violates my 1st Amendment right to freedom of association, and others like privacy and liberty and the pursuit of happiness. But I knew when Reagan planned his dismantling of Legal Aid, he also planned on dismantling welfare; he planned on putting thousands upon thousands of poor women into jails and prisons, and taking as many of their children -- permanently -- as he could get his capitalistic hands on.

Women have had a lower crime rate than men. Penologists wonder why. Well, for one thing, a woman has certain economic options for survival which men don't. If poor women are starving, and there is no work, they can: (1) Get married; (2) Become prostitutes (which may be the same thing); or (3) Go on welfare (if they have a child or are pregnant). Since men are not in grand demand: (1) By women desiring to marry and support them; or (2) As prostitutes (although this trend is changing); and since it is very nearly impossible to receive welfare unless one has dependents or is disabled -- these survival options are not open to men.

And, lest we forget, under America's economic system, 6% to 12% of employable people will always be unemployed. No matter how many want-ads there are people will not be hired -- because of racism, classism, sexism, lack of adequate educations, etc. In minority neighborhoods, unemployment may reach 60%. Also, people who must support a family on minimum wages will have to apply for welfare to put food on the table because their check has gone to pay the rent -- in their often rent-

ee

hunts, closing social programs, cutbacks on welfare, housing and food stamps -- watch out, they mean us no good.

We need all the feminist projects, political groups and national support groups - that are fighting for the people -- groups whose politics are fighting patriarchy, white supremacy, capitalism and imperialism in a non-sexist, non-anti-Semitic way with class consciousness.

Wow, that's a lot to ask, but our struggles are certainly not looked at with favor, to say the least, and we are all struggling financially. We have to give to each other, not only money but physical support, time and effort. We are not being pious or "politically correct," we are being cautious and protective of our own interests.

Voices from our lives Crime, Welfare, - Our Economic “Choices’

gouged slum, owned by capitalistic Moral-Majority types. Their alternative, of course, is crime. (Reagan has just declared these working poor ineligible for supplemental payments and food stamps).

Welfare grants have always been sub-subsistence (and appallingly lower in the South). Some welfare mothers supplement their income by drug-dealing or prostitution. It's not because they are terrible people; it's because this is going on all around them. It's the norm, it's necessary, and it is survival employment in desperate circumstances. These "crimes" have a lower report rate than crimes men are busted for. They take a toll, however, eventually -- psychologically, in lack of self-esteem, self-respect and other negative emotional qualities; and physically as well as psychologically, in addiction.

When Reagan dismantles Welfare (and most people on Welfare are children, the disabled, and children's mothers), poor women will then enter the "crime" field in full force. Actually, since prostitution is still against the law -- primarily because middle and upper-class women have kept their arrogant moral views -- Reagan and his cohorts will, in essence, dictate that all poor women must go to prison or get married.

And we will go to prison.

Missing, of course, will be the middle-class view of going to concentration camps "for a cause." Poor women have been in invisible prisons all their lives. (Lack of dollars intensely limits one's lifestyle). Our friends will not rally around, picketing outside, and calling the 6 o'clock news; they will be inside with us -- powerless and hurting, with children in foster homes or adopted and lost in bureaucracies somewhere. They will be in solitary confinement (for refusing to be slaves -- forgotten by the 13th Amendment); they will be in psychiatric isolation (force-drugged because they told other prisoners they had a few Constitutional rights); and they will be forced to have their babies at the prisons where doctors and hospitals have lost their licenses. They will be transferred to other states for being "agitators" (daring to ask "why" or knowing about the law, economics and politics); they will be sent to mental institutions (because they are administrative problems, without proper and correct inmate behaviors) --

a

beautiful children.

When was the last time a group of women traveled into a slum or barrio and asked welfare mothers, "What is wrong with the welfare system and what can we do to help?" When was the first time?

Ne NQ’ At THIS ALL WRONG Note iti ae

AMERICAN INSTITUTION — WEIARE/

6
£&

with civil-rights legal objections termed "frivolous." And they will be found to have “committed suicide" in their cells (with bruises all over their bodies.)

Will any of our upper-class sisters, our upper middle-class sisters, reach out to help us; be outraged and powerful for us?

No, not any more than they voted for low-income housing or told us this wasn't an "all-adult" apartment complex; or spent as much money changing prostitution laws as they spent on their cosmetic and hairdressing bills. Not any more than the amount of time and money they spent lobbying for the poor in state capitals is greater than the time and money spent selecting clothes for charity balls. They do not have time to think about irrelevant, immaterial things like life and death -- or that the quality of their life exists only because of the exploitation of millions in America and in Third World countries.

No, they will adopt our children (mostly the white ones) and feel it is a shame how their mothers are in prison. . .they're such

-Peg Averill/LNS

And why are there no “crisis centers" serving as a liaison between women in prison and powerful women's organizations such as NOW?

No one is your sister if you forget her existence.

Clearly, wealthy women feel, there is work for Everywoman of the lower-class (those people) type. Obviously maids, waitresses, babysitters, housekeepers and factory workers will always be needed. And a good cook is hard to find. And they probably agree with Reagan's cutting of Medi-Cal. if you give people the opportunity, they'll just get sick." (But most doctors and hospitals don't accept Medi-Cal anyway because the state pays only 60% to 80% of the charges, and the doctors and hospitals must take a loss; also, the state takes forever to pay up.)

If women are propagandized by the misogyny of men in government and business, by the bigotry of men controlling the media, by the prejudices of classism and racism, we will not survive except in prison or in chains. And though I know I am guilty of classism, to a self-survival degree only, my sincere friendship reaches out to those courageous sisters who -- comfortable and privileged and able to make choices -- choose to trade their time, their liberty, and sometimes their lives in the determination of equality for all people.

‘The fundamental point of all this is: "The Hangman Theory." If women are not outraged to the point of action because of laws against all women (not only those laws fashionable and politically correct to be against) we will all fall one by one. If women do not “get uncomfortable," and -- when they organize -- do not stop rearranging chairs on the Titanic, tomorrow, we will all go down. All women will suffer, inconceivably, in the class war on the other side of the decade.

There comes a time to make choices about the future: for oneself, one's sons and daughters, one's ideals. Poor women do not have the luxury of time to make these decisions; life is not theories of ethics; wolves sometimes take days to kick in the door, sometimes seconds. When children are hungry, there is no theory. When there is no roof and the welfare department is taking your child, there are no ethics. When it's cold, cold.

But -- we do not have to work on the prison plantations, unless to grab the weapons and break for liberty; we do not have to shine boots in the bunkers, unless it's to plant briefcases under the tables; we do not have to watch our families sick and dying on reservations -- no matter what those reservations are called. And with unity, we can be certain those in power see and hear us -- not like those unseen and unheard dying in Africa, Asia and Latin America. I am convinced that Lincoln proclaimed people free, and I am convinced that those in power keep looking for slaves.

And I, for one, live on my knees.

(Editors' note: the author of this article can be reached at P. O. Box 11737, Costa Mesa, CA 92627).

it's

will never

‘Big Mama Rag, February, 1982 - Page 15