Anne Sexton

life opened inside  
me like an egg”

Suzanne Juhasz

THE GREAT GODDESS

BMR regrets that not all original block prints of the Great Goddess were properly identified in the December-  
January issue. Page one shows the Goddess of Plenty, on page 26 is the Goddess Creating and the Great  
Mother. The centerfold calendar featured Demeter and Kore.

The blocks are hand printed on fine rice paper and cloth. The cloth prints are mounted on pieces of bamboo  
ready to be hung, while the paper prints, unmounted, are suitable for framing. The artists’ chop marks are  
stamped on each print and the prints are each accompanied by a description of the imagery and symbolism written  
by each artist.

The cloth prints are $5.00 each and the paper are $3.00. Note that the prints may be ironed on the reverse  
side with a warm iron in case of wrinkles.

Anne Sexton killed herself on October 5, 1974. My response to her  
death, like that of many women, has been intense. It matters on a per-  
sonal level that she is dead, because Anne Sexton's poetry — and by  
means of the poetry, Anne — mattered to many of us at that same per-  
sonal level. By exploring, creating her own self with her art, she had  
reached out with language’s incisive finger and touched each one of us.  
She was and remains important especially because she made her art  
from the very source of herself: her woman's experience.

Sexton's early poetry (not so “early,” really; she was twenty-eight  
when she began to write at the suggestion of her therapist) happened  
because she needed a way, a form, a voice with which to deal with the  
fact of being a woman. A suburban housewife and mother, she was in  
therapy because, out of the despair and guilt of her sense of failure,  
meaninglessness, lack of identity, she had tried on several occasions to  
kill herself.

Her poems begin as extensions of the therapy situation: through  
them she tries to come to know herself by exploring the interpersonal  
relationships that entwine her life, creating its meaning and her own.  
She describes her mother (and herself as daughter): “That was the  
winter / that my mother died, / half mad on morphine, / blown up, at  
last / like a pregnant pig. / I was her evil eye” ("Flee on Your Donkey”).  
She describes her daughter (and herself as mother): “... just pretend-  
ed / you, small piglet, butterfly / girl with jelly bean cheeks” (“The Dou-  
ble Image”). In the early poems (70 Bedlam and Part Way Back, All My  
Pretty Ones, Live or Die) she never solves the conflicts and complexities  
of her life roles, but she does reach a closer understanding of them  
through language, even as, simultaneously, we come to understand  
her. Her knowledge gives her the desire to live, an affirmation that is as  
much founded in her womanhood as was her desire to die.

Today life opened inside me like an egg

and there inside

after considerable digging

I found the answer.

What a bargain!

There was the sun,

her yolk moving feverishly,

tumbling her prize —

and you realize that she does this daily!

I'd known she was a purifier

but I hadn't thought she was solid,

but I hadn't known she was an answer. (“Live”)

She discovers that life comes from inside her: life is egg, egg is sun,  
sun is life — there for her to deliver, make it happen. She says “Live, / live  
because of the sun, / the dream, the excitable gift” (“Live”).

Though Sexton's poetry began as therapy for her personal salvation,  
because it is a public act it reaches out to others. Yet it is always rooted  
in her personal self, her private life, as is the sun. It does not, like much  
of the “confessional” poetry of men, abstract or generalize upon its own  
experiences, either explicitly or implicitly; nevertheless, it com-  
municates to others and offers its gifts.

In the poems from Transformations to The Death Notebooks her  
speaking voice grows always more powerful as she projects herself as  
middle-aged woman: the poet as witch. A witch is wise-woman, story-  
teller, seer. She works magic, and her magic is that of words. The  
witch/poet’s spells make things happen, they plant “words in you like a  
grass seed” ("Iron Hans”). This is the source of Sexton's power, as the  
talking voice of the earlier poems, immersing itself in memory and ex-  
perience transforms itself into a singing, chanting voice that is now  
creating myths from woman’s experience. Yet still the poems refuse to  
generalize or abstract.

More and more Sexton explores the death with which she has con-  
tinued to live if not die. She does not deny her own aging, the fact that  
her mother has died, that her daughters, Linda and Joyce, have become  
women:

Linda, you are leaving

your old body now.

You've picked my pocket clean

and you've racked up all my

poker chips and left me empty.

(“Mother and Daughter”)

She does not deny the ambiguity and conflict of her woman's ex-  
perience as it has been defined for her by her culture and as she herself  
has attempted to define it.

In a late poem like “The Death Baby” Sexton gives birth, not to a sun  
or an orange, but a death baby, whom she rocks and by whom she is  
rocked.

I rock. I rock.

We plunge back and forth

comforting each other.

We are stone.

We are carved, a pieta

that swings and swings.

This woman's myth seeks to reconcile the death that must grow from  
life. One is born with one’s death inside oneself (like an egg, or a baby).  
Through the process of living one transforms oneself into one’s own  
death, through a process of hardening, stiffening (rocking is the  
primary act of the poem, an extraordinary pun on the word rock that can  
link stone and maternity). Each birth only hastens the process, and so  
one grows from baby to child to daughter to mother. In the last act of  
birth, a mother delivers her own death, a death baby.

Sexton's poems were a triumph of life over death, because by means  
of them she moved from the dependence and powerlessness of her  
woman’s situation to independence and power derived from her role as  
woman poet. Now it is apparent that death’s destructive power (always  
present as a possibility, as her poems attest) grew too strong, despite  
the poetry. Yet her death negates neither her art nor the strength that  
she achieved through it. For the years in which she wrote, she held  
death at bay, even as she explored its relation to her life. Most impor-  
tantly, I think, during these years she created herself with her poetry as  
much as her self created the poems: a reciprocal process which makes  
it impossible for those of us who mourn her now to differentiate  
between “poet” and “person,” for both were one, and both were a  
woman.

*

NAME  
ADDRESS

ORDER BLANK

Demeter and Kore  
Goddess and Bull  
Goddess and Son

Cloth @ $5.00 ea.

TOTAL $

Great Mother

Shiva-The Void

Mays

Goddess Creating  
Goddess of Plenty

PLEASE MAIL CHECK OR MONEY ORDER TO:

Joanne Kunz

Hudgeons Creek Farm  
Alto Pass, Illinois 62905

ORDERS WILL BE FILLED IMMEDIATELY

BMR Sponsors  
Cultural Event

From Page 1

On the 24th of this month,  
several local poets including  
Chocolate, Lallo, Beth Sheker,  
Marty Durlin, Angela Wilson,  
and Sandia will read. Other  
poets are encouraged to join  
them and to join with the  
audience in the beginnings of a  
dialogue between artist and  
audience.

A few women are all that is  
needed to start such a series, but  
a community of women is need-  
ed to keep it alive. Women who  
are filmmakers or writers or who  
have ideas to contribute are en-  
couraged to contact BMA early  
enough so that adequate publici-  
ty can be given in the paper or  
the Folklore calendar. Hopefully  
the women who do not feel they  
are artists will feel the joy in  
developing this aspect of  
womanculture and realize that  
for great art there must also be  
great audiences.

THE  
LESBIAN  
TIDE

A VOICE OF THE  
FEMINIST LESBIAN  
COMMUNITY

sisters subscribe now!

$7.50 per year in U.S.  
$ .65 for sample copy  
$10.00 Institutional rate

send to: tide collective

373 No. Western @ Room 202  
Los Angeles, Calif. 90004

bulk rates available  
upon request

Sub Total  
Shipping Charge

LIVING

A LESBIAN NEWSLETTER

ADDRESS:  
P.O. Box 7124  
Balto, Md., 21218

SUBSCRIPTIONS:  
$3 for 6 issues  
Bulk: $1.50 for 10 copies,

Paid My Dues

QUARTERLY JOURNAL of  
WOMEN & MUSIC

WOMAN'S SOUL PUBLISHING INC  
Box 5476 Milwaukee WI 53211

$4/yr US $4.50 Beyond.