Women in Spain

Second Feminist Conference Was Held

Jenny Fortune and Celmira Anandea

Spanish feminists held their second
national conference in Granada, South-
ern Spain, December 1979. Some 3,000
women attended, a number which sur-
prised everyone. The two of us, one
Briton and one Chilean, were invited.
We spent a week in Granada, a few
days sussing out the general atmos-
phere, then three days at the confer-
ence.

What does "liberation" mean to wo-
men in Spain, where they have endured
40 years of fascism and hundreds of
years of Catholicism? The state struc-
tures which oppress women are clear:
no possibility of divorce; abortions
are illegal; contraception available
only for married or "mature" women;
no equal rights legislation at all;
no social security or welfare system.

You can imagine what this situation
means for women in everyday life. But
since Franco's death and the move to-
wards social democracy, things are
changing fast. The fear of speaking
out in public is not as strong, though
still there. There is a great flower-
ing of ideas and attitudes amongst
younger people who want to experience
the freedom and pleasures they see
available to young people in other
European countries. At the same time,
people want to forget that fascism
ever existed, and only look to the
future. But fascism hasn't disappear-
ed, either from the state or from
people's behavior.

In many of the discussions at the
conference, there was a conflict
between women from political organiza-
tions such as the CPE (Communist
Party) stressing the fight for reforms
and “Mujeres Independientes" (Indepen-
dent Women) stressing the importance
of transforming relationships between
people and building practical support
between women.

The way the conference was structur-
ed made it difficult for women there
to express themselves. All of the
discussions were held in a massive
meeting with women reading papers from
the platform. This led to extreme
frustration and antagonism, with many
feminists going off and organizing

Women in Japan

their own independent discussions.
Women's difficulties in expressing
themselves personally in front of
masses of people, coupled with the
deep-rooted fear of expressing radical
ideas in public, came to a crucial
point with the discussion on sexuality
when after the papers had been read
nobody said a word!

However, there were many joyful and
exuberant moments, with spontaneous
singing and dancing and processions
through the town. It was obviously
a wonderful experience for Spanish
women to meet together in thousands

and talk about women's liberation -

it is perhaps an even more profound

liberation than we've experienced in
good old social democratic Britain,
where state oppression isn't so clear.

MARRIAGE AND THE FAMILY

All the speakers totally rejected
marriage and family as repressive
institutions for women. There was a lot
of discussion about domestic labor

and the need to fight for divorce,

abortion, social services, nurseries
and so on. But many women rejected
this as a further extension of state
control of women's lives, and talked
about collective child-rearing and trans-

Sexist “Educational”’

Editors' Note: The following is a letter which BMR received from
sisters in Japan, regarding an action against Japanese public
television. Also included is a translation of a protest letter,
which these women sent to the television corporation protesting
the continued sexist stereotyping of Japanese women.

character.

On April 13, about 50 feminists held a sit-in at N.H.K.
(Broadcasting Corporation) protesting a
program and demanding it be cancelled because of its discriminatory

(Japan
English conversation

Please read the enclosed translation of our protest letter to
N.H.K. You can easily see the sexist contents of the program.

Despite our protest, N.H.K. did telecast the program. Omitting the
sentence, "A man has got the right to treat his wife as he sees
fit" from the repeating exercise does not change the discriminatory
character of the whole conversation. Apparently they did not under-
stand our point, or to say it more exactly, they did not listen to
us. N.H.K. ignored our continued protest and retelecast the program
on April 16th.
As N.H.K. is Japan's public broadcasting system and more than
100,000 people are watching the program all over Japan, we regard
this as a very serious breach of human rights. We are now making
protests against N.H.K. not only to protest this program but to
prevent further discrimination in the mass media.

The staff of the program asserted repeatedly that the contents
were not sexist and that they were confident of it even being
judged so internationally.

We decided to ask for help and cooperation from abroad. In Asia, the
stereotyped concept of women is much stronger than in American and
European countries, and we feminists are still very much in the
minority. We need your help and cooperation!

We would appreciate it very much if you would support us in pro-
testing by writing letters to N.H.K. Address the letters to:

N.H.K.

English Conversation Program
Jinnan Shibuya-ku

Tokyo, Japan

Thank you very much!!

International Women's Year Action Group - Japan
Mitsue Yamada Miriko Higuchi

forming relationships between men and
women. Forty years of state control of
women's lives in Spain has made them a
great deal more wary about calling for
state provision of any kind.

ABORTION

This is one of the most important
fights for them now: it is crucial to
make it legal. They link this with the
need to confront prejudices from Catho-
licism which make women feel abortion
is a sin. Women have to have abortions
in secret - women in Madrid have just

received up to 11 years in prison for
performing and obtaining abortions,
women in Bilbao are still on trial.
Those who have the money go to private
clinics in other countries. Many of
those who have come to Britain had
bad and frightening experiences and
feel strongly the need for support
from women in Britain.

SEXUALITY

They are clear that abortion and
contraception can only liberate women
from their reproductive role. The re-
discovery of sexual pleasure will only
come through changing their relation-
ships and controlling their own lives.
A number of papers were written on
lesbianism but only one woman spoke as
a lesbian and she read a poem ques-
tioning whether the women's movement
was the right place for her. It wasn't
possible to tell how many other les-
bians were there, perhaps because of
the structure of the conference.

The papers themselves were quite
positive, putting forward the import-
ant role of lesbians in the movement,
confronting sexist, patriarchal
attitudes perhaps more clearly than
other women do. Homosexuality in
Spain seems to be hated and feared
much more strongly than it is here.
Lesbians are called “tortilleras",
meaning two tortillas squashed toget-
her (this is, women can't possibly
experience sexual pleasure without
penetration), or "marimachos" meaning
the same as “butch dyke".

Clearly gay women didn't feel much
confidence, even at the conference.
However, a gay festival was held in
Barcelona two weeks later attended
by 5,000 people, the majority of them
men.

WOMEN AND CLASS STRUGGLE

This workshop drew a big crowd, but
just as in Britain, there was conflict
between women in political parties
and those who reject them as male
dominated. There were some interest-
ing accounts of workplace organization
but on the whole the discussion was
rather unsatisfying and superficial.

We left the conference elated by
the atmosphere and strength and
activity there, but also depressed
at seeing exactly the same problems
and conflicts experienced by the
women's movement here a few years ago,
and still going on to some extent.
We felt we had a lot to say to
Spanish women about our experiences
here, and they were interested to
learn about the practical forms of
support we've developed. Building
international links is clearly going
to enrich women's movements in all
countries.

(Reprinted from Spare Rib, from
England)

Programs Protested

The contents of an English conversa-
tion program on Japan Broadcasting
Corporation (N.H.K.) telecast on 13
and 16 are obviously sexist. We believe
that telecasting such a discrimina-
tory educational program not only
preserves the sexist reality in Japan
but also encourages it.

We protest against its contents
strongly and demand that the program
be cancelled.

The lesson is titled "The Domineer-
ing Husband" and its contents are
conversations between an American wo-
man journalist and Japanese wife and
husband.

We protest the discriminatory con-
tents because of the following reasons:
1) There are many sexist expressions
in the textbook, such as, "A man has
the right to treat his wife as he sees
fit", "It's her job to serve me", "A
woman must regard her husband as her
lord and master...", "Your husband
seems to think of you as a servant",
etc. Women's rights and dignity are
totally ignored in these sentences. To
let the audience repeat these discrimi-
native sentences as a practice in
English conversation is nothing but
encouraging sexual discrimination in
it especially implants discrimi-
native concepts in young students and
audiences.

N.H.K., as Japan's public broadcast-
ing system, must be accused of irres-
ponsibility in broadcasting such a
discriminative educational program.

2) The stereotyped concept, "men should
go out to work and women should stay
at home” fixes women’s lives as to
staying at home and serving their hus-
bands, and it denies a basic human
right - women's right to work - the
right to lead economically independent
lives. This stereotyped, discriminative
concept was put into the conversation
as a matter of course.

Moreover, they described women's jobs
at home as women's special right,
though in reality all the housekeeping
chores and taking care of children are
great burdens on women's shoulders.

By distorting this reality, they hide
the essential qualities of sexual dis-
crimination and weaken women's natural
angers. Judy's anger was turned into
false understanding of the situation
in which the wife is the real control-
ler of the house.

On the other hand, expressions like
"He is just a great big baby", “She
does everything for me. I don't think
I could live without her", "Without
me nothing would be done in this
house after all" tease the husband's
inability to do everyday chores and
make it seem like women have more
power at home. They hide the husband's
power supported by economic back-
ground. These conversations play a
big role in preserving and fixing the
present discriminative situation and
the stereotyped roles of men and women.
3) In the preface of the textbook
titled "To the audience of English
conversation II" it says “This year's
English conversation II will have
lessons in supposed situations where
we explain Japanese concepts to for-
eigners in Japan". However, the con-
tents give false information about
the discriminated situation of Japan-
ese housewives.

In Japan, husbands give the salary,
not necessarily all of it, to their
wives and the wives have to decide
how much money should be spent on
food, education, clothes, etc. However,
it does not mean that Japanese wives
have the “purse strings”. In most
cases, when a wife wants to spend
some money she has to have her husband's
approval. It is the wives who have to
make a budget within a limited amount
of money; husbands get rid of those
troubles. As long as the husbands are
the ones who go out and earn money,