19

Black Women Working to Debunk Myths

Janet Singleton

Michele Wallace asserts that there  
is a deep distrust and even hatred  
between black men and women that has  
been historically encouraged by white  
racism. Her premise is not a revela-  
tion. She is not saying anything  
that other young, black women are  
not, with growing frequency, expres-  
sing among ourselves in places from  
kitchens to dorm rooms. Yet, print  
seems to lend the declaration more  
credibility and gravity. The pages  
of “Black Macho and the Myth of the  
Superwoman" also bespeak courage and  
leadership. It is one thing to talk  
among one's girlfriends but it is  
quite another thing to delineate  
one's beliefs through a book which  
some defensive black men are inevit-  
ably going to denounce as "divisive"  
and "negative."

Wallace, a 26-year-old native of  
Harlem, is interested in separating  
legend from precise reality. So are  
many sociopolitical writers. What  
makes her different is that the focus  
of her quest concerns the interaction  
of sexism and racism. Her book is a  
direct confrontation of the crude  
stereotypes that have been imposed  
upon black women and men to accomo-  
date society's racial and sexual  
mythology.

In the first half of the book she  
explores what is likely the racist  
stereotype that black men happily  
embrace—the myth of the black male  
as a sexually potent primitive. An  
image that emerged in all its fist-  
waving, flamboyant glory during the  
black power upheaval of the 60s.  
According to Wallace, it was then that  
black men decided that a top politi-  
cal priority was the retrieval of  
their “manhood.”

One obstacle to that manhood, they  
believed, was their women. The Moyn-  
ihan Report of 1965, a political  
thesis portraying the black woman as  
the favored matriarch of the black  
family, exacerbated the hostility.  
There grew a demand that the black  
female become more like a traditional  
woman, i.e., a passive, male-domin-  
ated, darker Doris Day.

Born of this was an era of accom-  
modation in which black women tried  
to be what they thought they weren't  
but should be. If black men have  
cherished their sexual image, black  
women have cringed in shame before  
ours. Wallace paints a poignant pic-  
ture of women trying to live down an  
unattractive reputation and become  
the B-movie versions of femininity  
that men said they wanted.

The period of placation wrought no  
salvation of male-female relation-  
ships, as Wallace sees it. Black  
women got neither the appreciation or  
male-provided financial security that  
had been hoped for and became bitter-  
ly disappointed.

As for the quest for manhood, Wal-  
lace shows that the black male has  
attained the comic book symbols of  
hypermasculinity, as she puts it,  
“access to white women sexually and  
the systematic subjugation and sup-  
pression of black women." It is  
emphasized, however, that they have  
not achieved the true American sub-  
stance of manhood—their represent-  
ative share of money and power.

Predictably, Michele Wallace feels  
obligated to anatomize and attack the  
Moynihan Report. She does an excel-  
lent job. However, it is sad to  
think that black women will continue  
to dutifully dispute the racist-sexist  
dialectic of a man who lacks any in-  
timate acquaintance with the Afro-  
American community. It would be for  
the best if Moynihan would simply die  
of his own concentrated evil and have  
his "Report" cremated along with him.

The fatal misunderstanding between  
the predominantly white women's lib-  
eration movement and black women,  
Wallace points out, concerned the  
issue of jobs. When white women de-  
manded the right to work, some black  
women assumed that they, themselves,  
were “already liberated," because  
they "had always worked." Liberation  
came to mean the continuation of men-  
ial labor to which they were accus-  
tomed. The movement had been referring to access to  
white collar positions and high pay-  
ing blue collar ones—not the low  
wage drudgery of black women.

A bit too briefly, the dangers of  
growing up black and female are dis-  
cussed. It is presented that to  
become whole, healthy adults many  
girls must transcend the lures and  
brutalities of the streets and the  
malevolent apathy of society. Some  
don't make the goal. Thus, it is  
womanchild, as much as manchild, who  
is victimized in the promised land.

An important criticism of “Black  
Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman”  
is that, though what is there is val-  
id and powerful, there is not enough  
of it. The pervasive flaw is a lack  
of depth. If one is to expect the  
contents to live up to the title,  
"Black Macho" is less than a half-  
told story.

Wallace does not nearly carry the  
nemesis of “Black Macho” to the lim-  
its of its consequences. For in-  
stance, the machismo mentality prob-  
ably accounts for a high proportion  
of ghetto crime. In large cities the  
highest homicide rate is usually  
among black males under 25, killed by  
peers. The gun is another accessible  
symbol of manhood.

Academic failure and intellectual  
repression may also, in part, be  
traced to misguided notions of mas-  
culinity. To many inner-city males,  
reading is something that women and  
sissies do.

It is unfortunate that the machismo-  
driven male is shown only as an  
enemy to women and not exposed as the  
destroyer of himself. Through white  
society's definition of him as fil-  
tered down through his peer group,  
the black male has suffered the ult-  
imate manipulation. He has been de-  
nied the freedom to be himself. In  
place of this choice he has been  
given the role of the suicidal, macho  
clown.

Though Wallace draws a very apt  
sketch of the black woman of the  
60s, she fails to adequately por-  
tray the current mood and the slowly  
emerging sense of self. In fact,  
she doesn't give sufficient attention  
to the developing black feminist  
consciousness of which her very own  
book is proof.

From an overview, however, the book  
is a basic triumph. Michele Wallace  
is a bold, articulate voice among us  
who have long been voiceless. Like  
“For Colored Girls Who Have Consid-  
ered Suicide When the Rainbow is  
Enuf," her work is born of the black  
female's painful history of survival  
and the whirlwind culmination of  
events of the last two decades. It  
is essential reading for black people  
and enlightening exposure for whites.

Writers Begging, Borrowing, and Daring to Dream

Kady van Deurs is a Lesbian feminist  
anarchist silversmith and writer.

She lives in a cabin in the woods  
with another old writer woman who has  
long white hair. They need money.  
Kady van Deurs

Last August, as my book came off  
the press, I wrote to one hundred wo-  
men's bookstores (you can buy a list  
for $4 from Feminist Bookstores News-  
letter, c/o Old Wives Tales, 532 Va-  
lencia, San Francisco, California  
94110) and I told them that their  
order would help to pay the printer.  
Since then, 29 of them have ordered  
from me. I sent a free copy to Women  
in Distribution (P.O. Box 8858, Wash-  
ington D.C. 20003) and they put the  
book on page 22 of their catalogue.  
They get 15%. The bookstore gets 40%.  
Postage runs about 48¢ a copy. 48¢  
times one thousand copies is $480.  
Remember that when you put a price  
on your book. I sent free copies to  
almost all the women’s magazines and  
newspapers, expecting reviews. Almost  
nothing happened. Six months later,  
I wrote to the magazines and newspa-  
pers again, telling them that my book  
is beautiful and sending a photograph  
of myself, "in case you might want  
to run it with a review."

Hundreds of complicated letters and  
some beautiful reviews (See the April  
issues of Our Backs and Big Mama  
Rag; New Women's Times, October 1978;  
New Women’s Times Feminist Review,  
November 1978; Lesbian Tide I've for-  
gotten the date; Gay Community News,  
November 11, 1978) have made me feel  
so good that I often forget that I  
might starve.

The biggest order came from Toni  
McNaron who decided to use my book in  
her lesbian literature class. She ord-  
ered 60 copies, retail. She said she  
wanted me to get as much money as  
possible from the deal.

The review in Conditions 4 was most-  
ly good though she didn't like what I  
said about Marxism and feminism. A  
bookseller woman in Binghamton says  
that's her favorite part.

And I have been trying to buy some  
ads. I didn't allow any money for ad-  
vertising when I figured the price  
of my book. The back cover of Lesbian  
Tide cost $96. I got my money back,  
but I didn't make anything. Usually,  
I buy classifieds for 10¢ or 20¢ a  
word. I sent $41.60 to Lesbian Connec-  
tion for a long classified ad (where is  
that magazine?) because I figured  
they need the money. The same ad in  
Sojourner cost $10—and I ran it 3 times.

Sinister Wisdom and Keminari printed  
excerpts in the last issue and Black  
Macho will print parts in the next  
issue.

Sometimes women send for 5 more  
copies to give to friends and one wo-  
man sent for 19 more and one of her  
friends sent for 10 more.

I am amazed that we have sold out  
the first edition of one thousand cop-  
ies. I lost $500. I owe $800 more than  
I have. I had hoped to pay the author  
one thousand dollars, but I couldn't.  
So I guess I lost $1590. I did pay  
the photographer two hundred. I have  
borrowed another $700 and have printed  
a second thousand. I thought, well,  
if we can sell one thousand, maybe we  
can sell another. Now I am sitting  
here with one thousand copies feeling  
scared.

You can get my book The Notebooks That  
Emma Gave Me, The Autobiography of a  
Lesbian, at your women's bookstore.  

If you don't have a women's bookstore,  
send me $5 (K. van Deurs, Box 99, Rd 1,  
Monticello, NY 12701) and I will send  
you a copy in a plain brown jiffy bag.  
If you have read my book, please write  
and tell me how we are going to get  
free. If you could tell another wo-  
man about the book, or leave it ly-  
ing around where they can see it,  
that would help.

I hope that somehow, someday, a women's  
press will print an edition on fine  
paper so that Diana Davies’ beautiful  
photographs will look as good as they  
are. That edition will have many more  
photographs and beautiful big print.  
It's difficult, but important, to dare  
to dream.