10

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 5

Jean V. Cox: dancer, teacher

Story by Nancy Heine  
Photos by Glenna Booth

“Avoir, Madame Cox.”  
“Avoir, Madame Cox.”

“Avoir, Stacy,” replies the teacher, extending carefully limp fingers.  
“Avoir, Tasha.” She moves down the row of chubby, top-knotted dancers.

By the end of the Saturday morning pre-ballet class, Jean Cox had pulled grace from unbridled four-year-old energy. It happened during a final “walking to the music” exercise. Pointing toes out, pulling one foot in front of the other and dipping hips slightly as they moved, the tiny students strained to make muscles do new things.

“Slowly, slowly. That’s right. To the music,” chanted Cox, as a scratchy piano piece played in the background. After all the giggling and “Girls, dancers must learn to be polite throughout the session,” there was, finally, determined concentration.

Cox watched carefully. Her pleasure could not be hidden as one dancer moved out ahead of the rest, in perfect time to the music, arms held lightly in a circle, fingertips barely touching. “Very good.” The child beamed but did not break step.

“Teaching dance,” explained Cox after the last parent had picked up the last student, “is much different than actually dancing.” The lithe, though muscled, Jean V. Cox should know. For as far back as she can remember, she’s performed in both arenas.

After years of dancing and teaching for others, Cox has joined the ranks of the leading Denver dancers. April marked the one-year anniversary of the Jean V. Cox Modern Jazz Ensemble and the grand opening of the Jean V. Cox School of Dance and the Performing Arts.

The road to the formation of her own dance ensemble and studio has been a long one. Born in Detroit, Michigan, “there was never anything but dance” for Jean Cox. “I always knew I didn't want to be a teacher or a nurse,” said Cox, “Just a dancer.”

But when she moved to Philadelphia after high school, she enrolled in a business college as well as Ray's New York School of Dance. “It was in the fifties,” she explained, “In those days, there was no chance for a Black ballet dancer to perform.”

When Ray's closed, Cox turned, like many Black dancers, to modern jazz which was “acceptable to white audiences.” She began a career performing on the East Coast and in the Midwest. In 1967, her teaching career was born on the Soesterberg Air Force Base in Holland.

“The Americans stationed there wanted their children to learn dance but didn’t want to put them through the difficult experience of learning it in another language,” said Cox. “When they heard about me, they asked me to teach.” So, she began taking lessons herself from Dutch dancers — lessons in teaching dance.

When Cox returned to the United States and settled in Colorado, she continued teaching — at the YWCA, the New Dance Theatre, and the Red Shoes School of Ballet.

Last year, the Jean V. Cox Modern Jazz Ensemble was formed and made its debut at a Shriner benefit honoring Richard A. Harvey, a Denver promoter of Blacks in the arts. Since then, the group has performed for hospitals, schools, and benefits.

“Yes,” admitted Cox, “There's big turnover in dancers.” None of the original ensemble members (except herself) stayed, she said. “We have a lot of little problems.”

“I must admit, I'm pretty strict,” said Cox. To prove her point, she pulled out a two-page list of “Dancer's Needs” (which include no less than thirteen cosmetic products). All items on the lengthy list are required.

Jean Cox is equally strict with her students but said serious students are in the minority at her school. “Most of my students are adults who want exercise or to develop grace,” she said.

Besides ballet and modern jazz, Cox and her teachers hold classes in yoga, soul dance, drama, modeling, and tumbling. Classes are held to eight students or fewer to facilitate instruction.

Operating out of one of Denver's grand old homes at 1818 Gaylord St., the school’s big project now is fundraising. In order to receive state or federal grant monies, the school must prove it can generate money on its own.

Jean V. Cox clearly loves dance. And her audiences “always want to know when the next performance will be.” She is another Denver woman, doing what's most important to her, making it, on her talent and tenacity. Denver benefits.