Champaign Melodies Of 1977  
Women’s Music: Much More Than Meets The Ear  

By Kathy Riley  

Picture the words “women's music" and several names automatically come to mind: among them, Cris Williamson, Margie Adam and Meg Christian. Automatic associations which are hard to break, even when you know that women's music is becoming much, much more.  

For many of us who attended the 4th annual National Women's Music Festival in Champaign, Illinois, this June, those connections were immeasurably expanded.  

—graphic by M Corlin  

By the end of the 6-day festival of concerts and workshops, it was clear that women’s music has not only grown in terms of the number of women producing and hearing it, but it has also grown in form and content and in the connections it makes with other political struggles.  

Women’s music has grown beyond its beginnings with strong women singing about our deepest experiences as women and the strengths we gain from each other.  

Women's music is also Lucha, five women from Washington, D.C., who combine Latin forms with material on such issues as grand juries, forced sterilization and global politics.  

A Closer Look At The Women Of  

By Kathy Riley and Clair Kaplan  

Three years ago, the five women musicians who now perform together as Lucha had just returned to Washington D.C. after varied experiences in Latin America: Jeb had spent a year in Colombia as a student, Diane lived in Brazil and Micronesia during and after a stint with the Peace Corps, Mary returned from Chile after the Allende years ended in a coup, Patty had spent nine weeks with the Venceremos Brigade in Cuba and Barbara had lived in Peru for six years.  

As vocalists, they came together to share music for a women's theater group performance of a cantata dealing with the struggles of the Chilean people. Several months later, they were asked to perform during the 1975 International Women's Day celebration in D.C., and that event led to the beginning of their work as a performing group.  

Since then they have toured the country, including a stop in Denver last February where they performed at Loretto Heights College and at Our Lady of Guadalupe church.  

Lucha has a powerful sound, rooted in Latin musical forms, and focused on the struggles of Third World people. For those who missed Lucha's Denver concerts or who want to hear them again, a tape of their music is available at Woman to Woman bookstore.  

This summer they performed for the National Women's Music Festival, where the following interview took place. The excerpts below deal with how they view their music in relation to the political work each woman does in D.C. and with the use of concerts to build contacts between women's and mixed political groups.  

Right now the women of Lucha do not support themselves through their music. All have other jobs: Mary and Barbara work in a bilingual day care center; Jeb and Diane work with a research and solidarity group on the Caribbean, and Patty staffs in a worker-run food store.  

BMR: Do you see yourselves as eventually becoming self-supporting at music, or do you see music as a political commitment that you expect to keep separate from the whole business of making a living?  

LUCHA: This is a question we've talked about a lot from the very beginning. At the basis of it is the reality that people's music—cultural work—from our political perspective is not really a viable financial alternative at this point. But beyond that, the struggle that we have gone through over and over again is really critically asking ourselves, Does it make sense to do cultural work in isolation of other very substantial political work?  

We have up to this point come to a firm decision that the jobs that we have and whatever political work that we do outside of our music not only feeds the political music itself, but also feeds our politics that come out through the music.  

We also check our music against those political experiences in our other work. I'll give you an example: Washington D.C. is pretty unique in this country, not just because it's the nation's capital, but because it's a city that's anywhere from 80 to 90% Black. The left movement community in Washington is pretty scattered. There's a pretty homogeneous white community; there are a goodly number of Black political people who are coming from the perspective of everything from African liberation to the indigenous struggles of Washington in terms of racism.  

We have found that as five white North American women, it would be disastrous for us to be isolated in our own little music thing, you know, living in that community. We try to speak to national issues; we try to  

More on page 14  

Sweet Honey In The Rock  

By Shirley Hargrove  

My first exposure to Sweet Honey in the Rock was at the National Women's Music Festival.  

They formed in 1974 to sing original and traditional songs of the Black experience. Their sound is an exciting range of a cappella vocal styles with occasional instrumental accompaniment. An original and evocative song is Joanne Little:  

Joanne Little, she's my sister  
Joanne Little, she's our mama  
Joanne Little, she's your lover  
Joanne the woman who's gonna carry your child  

I've always been told since the day I was born  
Leave them no good women alone  
Child you better keep your nose clean  
Keep your butt off the street  
You gonna be judged by the company you keep  

Said I always walked by the golden rule  
Steered clear of controversy I stayed neat cool  
Till along came this woman Little  
Over five feet tall  
Charged and jailed with breaking the law  
And the next thing I heard as it came over the news  
First degree murder she was on the loose  

Tell me who is this girl?  
And what is she to you?  

At the music festival, the group was involved in leading a workshop on third world women and social change. The main spokeswoman was Bernice Reagon, an intelligent, aggressive, sensitive woman. She addressed a number of issues: that of being a performer, women's culture and coalition politics.  

As an entertainer, Reagon was primarily interested in the voice as an instrument, urging women to get rid of the women's "stereotyped sound" and to rediscover our own voices.  

Reagon sees women's culture as evolving, a personal investigation of who you are and what your strongest forte is. It's an examination  

More on Page 14