Women to Explore

Options

With great fanfare, the  
Department of Health, Educa-  
tion, and Welfare (HEW) releas-  
ed regulations June 3 for ending  
sex bias in the nation’s schools  
and colleges. But the  
regulations, which have been  
severely weakened since a first  
draft was proposed a year ago,  
have been denounced by  
women's groups as largely in-  
effective. They are scheduled for  
hearings beginning June 21  
before Congress, which has 45  
days to decide whether or not to  
accept them.

The proposed regulations will  
require equal treatment for  
women in school admissions,  
employment, financial aid,  
vocational and academic  
counseling and athletics. They  
would allow pregnant students  
to attend school — something  
that is now forbidden in many  
communities.

Marital status could no longer  
be used as a basis for denying  
admission to a school, or the  
employment of teachers. And  
the regulations would prohibit  
separate curfew times for men  
and women, require equal hous-  
ing provisions and mandate  

equal financial aid and  
scholarships.

“Good Faith”  
The main problem, critics  

charge, is the lack of provisions  
by which HEW will enforce the  
regulations. Secretary of HEW,  
Caspar Weinberger, explained  
that the regulations were  
written with the assumption of  
“good faith” on the part of the  
nation’s schools. Under the  
proposed regulations all schools  
are required to begin “internal  
evaluations” to identify any sex  
discriminatory policies or prac-  

Fifty Cents An Hour?

tices within their institutions.  
These reports, however, need  
not be made public or submitted  
to HEW for review.

Even more controversial than  
the regulations themselves is an  
announcement made by HEW at  
the same time, that it would stop  
investigating individual bias  
complaints filed with its in-  
vestigative arm, the Office of  

Civil Rights.

Educated Women vs.  
Minorities

HEW officials justify the  
procedural change, which will  
apply to racial discrimination as  
well as those involving sex bias,  
partially on the grounds that a  
disproportionate amount of  
complaints come from educated  
women rather than other dis-  
criminated groups. In addition,  
they claim that the revision will  
free them to investigate broader  
patterns of discrimination in-  
stead of getting bogged down in  
specifics.

Women and minorities  
charge, however, that since the  
HEW Office of Civil Rights has  
not shown a commitment to  
investigating complaints — in  
either the individual or systemic  
way, the proposed change would  
take away the individual's only  
weapon for relief short of going  
to court.

“They're playing dis-  
criminated groups against each  
other,” explained Judy Lichtman  
of the Women’s Legal Defense  
Fund. “I think they fear an  
onslaught of complaints, and  
we're not going to play their  
game. If you have legitimate  
complaints you have to act on  
them. By their (HEW’s) own  
account, 50% of the complaints  
they receive are legitimate.”

— LNS

Mexican Women Ripped

While the big party is going full  
force in Mexico City to honor the  
United Nations “generous”  
proclamation of International  
Women’s Year, to the north a  
few hundred miles, Mexican  
women are fighting American  
companies for the right to a  
decent living wage.

IBM, General Electric and RCA  
are just a few of the 450 U.S.  
corporations which have been  
using Mexican labor, mostly  
women between the ages of 17  
and 24, to maintain their  
assembly plants inside Mexico  
along the 2,000 mile Mexican-  
American border.

Manufacturers Seek Greener  
Fields  
During the past 18 months,  
the women organized and  

doubled their wage to just under  
$1 per hour. However, the U.S.  

Brillig  
Works  

companies are complaining that  
the wage is too high and say they  
can again find labor for less than  
50 cents an hour. As a result, the  
manufacturers, who fled from  
high U.S. wages to the narrow  
duty-free zone along the border,  
are now closing down and  
moving to the Mexican interior,  
Central America, Ireland, and  
the Far East.

In February, Mattel, Inc. clos-  
ed its toy assembly plant in  
Mexicali following a strike by  
2,000 workers demanding sub-  
sistence wages. Mattel’s plant is  
now operating in South Korea.

Last month, the police fought  
a demonstration of angry  
workers who had been laid off at  
the Nogales plants of the Bow-  
mar International Corporation,  
owned by an American com-  
pany. The subsidiary had cut its  

labor force at Nogales to 500  
from 1300.

Below the California border,  
near Tijuana and Mexicali the  
work force at U.S. company  
plants has been reduced by  
18,000.

Women Workers Prostituted

The companies are citing the  
American recession and the  
demands for higher wages as  
reasons for forcing thousands of  
Mexican women out of work. Yet  
these same companies are  
spending millions of dollars to  
set up new production facilities  
overseas. As long as other  
countries are willing to  
prostitute their women workers  
for the U.S. dollar and as long as  
U.S. corporations are able to find  
unorganized labor, the choice for  
women will be 50 cents an  
hour or no work at all.

NEWS  
FROM AROUND  

THE COUNTRY  

Chocolate Waters

Save the Trees But Get That Ugly Woman Out of There — A  
camerawoman in Jacksonville, Florida was assigned to cover a Save-  
the-Trees campaign in that city recently. Members of the community  
were invited to dig up a tree in an area marked for a new highway and  
replant the tree elsewhere. Said Jamie Robinson of WJXT-TV, “I got  
some shots of a heavy-set woman digging up one of the trees and  
carrying it off. When I got back to the station, I edited the piece together  
only to be told it was unaesthetic: ‘Couldn't you get an attractive woman  
to shoot?’ The outcome was that the film was re-edited and the shots of  
her cut out. (Media Report to Women, April 75)

Pig Country Bans the Pill — The World Moslem League recently ruled  
that “birth control was invented by the enemies of Islam,” and Saudi  
Arabia immediately banned the use or importation of birth control pills  
or contraceptive devices. (We think that the World Moslem League and  
Saudi Arabia were invented by the enemies of women.)

You're the Right Sex Sweetie But You're Just Too Young —  
Responding to the half-dozen same-sex marriages which have been  
authorized in Boulder recently, a cowboy arrived at the County Clerk's  
office with a request to marry his favorite horse. Unfortunately the  
request was denied on the grounds that the mare was underage. Looks  
like men are finally learning to marry for companionship.

Secretaries Unite! — In a satire called ‘Secrets of a Super Secretary,”  
Liza Wier of the Women’s News Journal advises the secretary to  
“demonstrate an attitude of respect for your boss and his position. The  
man you work for has intelligence and a great deal of knowledge or he  
would not have attained the top rung on the ladder of success.” She  
goes on to say that the super secretary should do the “little things that  
add up to kindness and consideration like pulling the drapes so the sun  
won't shine in his serious blue eyes.” I have this fantasy that one  
morning every secretary in the world will remove her boss from his  
plush armchair and plug him into the typewriter. She could probably do  
his job better than he could, but he sure wouldn't be able to do hers and  
every business in the country would shut down.

Sink the Navy — The following is the slogan of the SOS Garderie, a  
coalition of 65 non-profit day care centers in Quebec seeking adequate  
funding for their facilities from the Ministry of Social Affairs: “It'll be a  
great day when our centers have all the money they need and the Navy  
has to hold a bake sale to buy a battleship.” (Feminist Communication  
Collective, Montreal, Quebec)

“You Know You're A Radical Feminist When — The last time you  
went to a dance you only danced with her twice because you were  
handing out leaflets ... when a man offers you his seat on the bus and  
you take it... when the only ‘women's club’ you know about is four feet  
long and three inches thick... when you can match the snapshots in  
your photo album with those in the post office.” (Pody Molina, Sister,  
May 75) 

P.S. — Due to the overwhelming response to my offer last month to talk  
with any woman about the easy avoidance of contraception, steriliza-  
tion, VD, and abortion, I am now going straight. P.P.S. Pauline, wherever  
you are, I love you.

Alicia’s  
Mexican Restaurant  

278 Downing 777-9904  
“Good Home Made Food”

Big Mama Makes Waves

throughout the week, as well,  
and negotiations are still in  
progress around this.

As of last month, Big Mama  
has had her own radio program.  
For 15 minutes every Sunday,  
and possibly soon for half an  
hour, the air-waves of radio  
KFML, Denver, bring you our  
very own women's radio show.  
The program, entitled Women  
Everywhere, is aired at 4 p.m.  
and is to be found at 1390 on  
your AM dial.

The show is the result of the  
hard work of two women, Peggy  
Hickox and Vicki Piotter, former-  
ly of the Lesbian Feminist Radio  
Collective in Seattle. At the start,  
they taped the shows beforehand,  
but have since taken to airing  
them live. Content is mainly  
news, news of interest to  
women from all over the coun-  
try. The station has approached  
Peg and Vicki to make a weekly  
tape which could be run  

The Boys Don’t Like It

As is always the case when  
women break into a traditionally  
male field, there has been some  
trouble. Some masculine egos at  
the radio station, threatened by  
the strength and competence of  
the women, have erupted ugly,  
ugly enough to threaten the  
smooth running of the show on  
more than one occasion. Plans  
are afoot, however, to send a  
supportive Big Mama Rag delega-  
tion along to the next broadcast.

So turn on and tune in next  
Sunday. This radio show is our  
very own, and it’s up to us where  
it goes from here. Peg and Vicki  
welcome feedback — write c/o  
Big Mama Rag.