struggle = Rape And Patriarchy

with no immediate cause --by Ntozake Shange

every 3 minutes a woman is beaten  
every five minutes a  
woman is raped/every ten minutes  
a little girl is molested  
yet I rode the subway today  
I sat next to an old man who  
may have beaten his old wife  
3 minutes ago on 3 days/30 years ago  
he might have sodomized his  
daughter but I sat there  
'cause the young men on the train  
might beat some young women  
later in the day or tomorrow  
I might not shut my door fast  
enough push hard enough  
every 3 minutes it happens  
some woman's innocence  
rushes to her cheeks/  
pours from her mouth  
Like the Betsy Wetsy dolls have been torn  
apart/ their mouths  
menses red & split/ every  
three minutes a shoulder  
is jammed through plaster &  
the oven door/  
chains push through the rib cage/  
hot water on  
boiling sperm decorate her body  
I rode the subway today  
& bought a paper from an  
East Indian man who might  
have held his old lady onto  
a hot pressing iron/ I don't know  
maybe he catches little girls in the  
park & rips open their behinds  
with steel rods/ I couldn't decide  
what he might have done I only  
know every 3 minutes  
every 5 minutes every 10 minutes  
I bought the paper  
Looking for the announcement  
there has to be an announcement  
of the women's bodies found  
yesterday the missing little girl  
I sat in a restaurant with my  
paper Looking for the announcement  
a young man served me coffee  
I wondered did he pour the boiling  
coffee on the woman 'cause she was stupid  
did he put the infant girl in  
the coffee pot 'cause she cried too much  
what exactly did he do with hot coffee  
I looked for the announcement  
the discovery of the dismembered  
woman's body the  
victims have not all been  
identified today they are  
naked & dead/ some refuse to  
testify one girl out of 10's not  
coherent/ I took the coffee  
& spit it up I found an  
announcement/ not the women's  
not the child bleeding in the  
59th street corridor/ not the baby  
broken on the saloon/  
"there is some concern  
that alleged battered women  
might start to murder their  
husbands & lovers with no  
immediate cause"  
I spit up I vomit I am screaming  
we all have immediate cause  
every 3 minutes  
every 5 minutes  
every 10 minutes  
every day  
women's bodies are found  
in alleys & bedrooms/  
at the top of the stairs  
before I ride the subway  
buy a paper or drink  
coffee from your hands I must know  
have you hurt a woman today  
did you beat a woman today  
throw a child across a room  
and the little girl's pants  
in your pocket  
did you hurt a woman today  
I have to ask these obscene questions  
I must know you see  
the authorities require us to  
establish  
immediate cause  

every three minutes  
every five minutes  
every ten minutes  
every day  

Fran Day  

(Editors' Note: This month we are printing part one of the struggle column,  
Rape and Patriarchy. Next month the Judicial System and Strategies women are  
using to fight rape will be covered.)  

Introduction  

Violence against women in America takes many forms--verbal, physical, sex-  
ual, and underlying all, psychological. "Of the multiple assaults by men on  
women, none are more feared, none more vicious or traumatic, than the crimes  
of rape and sexual brutality."  

Rape is the most frequently committed crime against American women today.  

A reported rape occurs every four minutes in this country; 619 rapes were  
recorded in Denver in 1978. Many reported rapes are dismissed and never tal-  
lied, due to “lack of sufficient evidence". In addition, only a fraction of  
all rapes are reported; estimates run as high as ten unreported rapes for  
every one reported.  

No woman is immune from rape. The fear of rape affects all women; it inhi-  
bits their actions and limits their freedom. It affects the routes they take  
and the hours they keep.  

However, there has been a conspiracy of silence surrounding the whole issue  
of rape. The topic has either been considered taboo, sensationalized or treat-  
ed as a joke. Recognition of rape as a widespread and serious problem was  
initiated by the women's movement in the late 1960s.  

Feminists continue to challenge the basic assumptions which dominate offi-  
cial attitudes toward rape and rape victims. We demand that rape be viewed in  
a social, economic and political context.  

Those in control of our society have a vested interest in maintaining the  
status quo; "in order to preserve and enhance male supremacy, rape must be  
both possible and probable--it must remind women who has the power over them  
and keep them solidly in their places". All men in a patriarchal society ben-  
efit from rape as a part of the process of intimidation that keeps all women  
in a state of fear.  

This article will examine the relationships between rape and the patriarchy.  
The ways in which the law enforcement, medical and judicial systems reinforce  
violence against women are outlined. The methods women have devised for com-  
bating assault are discussed. The role women are playing in eradicating rape  
from society is explored.  

The Crime  

"In rape, the emotions of aggression, hatred, contempt and the desire to  
break or violate personality, take a form consummately appropriate to sexual  
politics." ~Kate Millett in Sexual Politics  

"It's the final humiliation, the final showing you that you're worthless and  
that you're there to be used by whoever wants you. In general, I think rape  
is a political act on the part of the man." -rape victim  

What is rape? The word "rape" has a variety of connotations depending upon  
the user's perspective. The symbolic use of the word - the "rape of the  
earth and its natural resources - has been overdramatized and has contributed  
to the conspiracy of silence surrounding the true definition. The number of  
books in the Denver Public Library dealing with this symbolic defini-  
tion of rape outnumber those dealing with it in its human context.  

In this article, rape will be defined as any sexual intimacy forced on a fe-  
male by a male. Rape is the deprivation of a woman's sexual self-determina-  
tion; it is the male expression of all the hatred, contempt and oppression  
of females in the society concentrated in one violent act. This includes not  
only vaginal penetration with any object (penis, finger, bottle, etc.) but  
also fellatio, cunnilingus, oral copulation, anal penetration, self-masturba-  
tion by the offender and genital manipulation of the victim by the offender.  

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE