FBI Continues Investigations

This is an open Letter written by the Grand Jury Project to the Director of the FBI, William Webster. BHR does not have the List of organizations that have signed the Letter.

We, the undersigned organizations and individuals, are writing to protest continuing efforts by agents of the FBI to harass and threaten individuals and disrupt the feminist and gay movements. In 1975, eight people were jailed in New Haven, Connecticut and Lexington, Kentucky because they resisted abuses of the federal grand juries by agents of the FBI. This August, harassment of many of the same groups and individuals was renewed and intensified.

The ostensible purpose of the investigations -- both in 1975 and now -- is the apprehension of Katherine Power, a lesbian-feminist who was active in the student protests against the war in Southeast Asia and who has been charged with a 1970 bank robbery which resulted in the death of a Boston policeman. We believe that these investigations are in fact part of a larger effort to eradicate the history of popular resistance to the war in Southeast Asia, and to fan the flames of anti-woman, anti-gay sentiment promoted by an increasingly powerful alliance of big business and conservative politicians.

The tactics used in recent months against members of the feminist and gay communities are remarkably similar to those of the FBI's illegal and allegedly discontinued COINTELPRO program. In mid-August 1978, Richard Bates, Special Agent in Charge of the Boston FBI office, announced his determination to "penetrate that curtain of silence" met by investigators in the women's and gay communities. Since that time, members of those communities have been subjected to a wide variety of "investigative" techniques, ranging from physical assault on a 50-year-old woman to surreptitious (and illegal) searches of cars, suitcases, and private papers. The FBI has obtained records of long-distance phone calls made by many people, including the 81-year-old grandmother of a woman jailed for refusing to cooperate with the 1975 investigations. Its only purpose in doing so is further intelligence gathering and "fishing" for more names of people to interrogate.

The harassment of the feminist and gay communities to date is less extreme than the COINTELPRO assaults against the Black, Hispanic, and Native American people who have struggled long and hard against injustice. But both flow from the long-standing tendency of the FBI to act as an unlicensed thought-police agency which is more dedicated to rooting out dissent than injustice.

The “curtain of silence" Agent Bates is determined to "penetrate" is nothing more sinister than the exercise of Constitutional rights by citizens engaging in political dialogue and social activities without governmental oversight. What is truly sinister and threatening to us all is the "Big Brother" mentality which makes government officials immune from accountability for their criminal acts, while the people are required to account to the government for their every move.

THERE WERE NO

Why, after eight years, has the "Katherine Power" investigation suddenly been made an FBI priority? The recent FBI tactics belie any claim that this is a "routine criminal investigation." This case would never have been given such national prominence if it had not been a political prosecution from the beginning. It certainly would not be dredged up eight years later in a climate of threats and intimidation if there were not a political motive behind it now.

1978 is the year of critical votes on the Equal Rights Amendment and attempts to rescind or prevent gay rights legislation. Big business has taken the initiative in proposing “right to work" laws that would invalidate union contracts, and Nazis are organizing openly in public high schools. We believe that the ongoing "investigation" in the women's and gay communities amounts to nothing less than a calculated effort to isolate progressive forces which have traditionally joined together to resist such forms of oppression. We have witnessed the partial success of similar efforts in what we now refer to as "the McCarthy era." We will not participate in another witch hunt to pay for the illusion of domestic tranquility. And surely it would be no more than an illusion in the hands of those who engineered and defended the war in Southeast Asia, and now seek support for repressive regimes in South Africa and Latin America.

We therefore demand an immediate end to the harassment of the feminist and gay communities. We suggest that you monitor closely the activities of agents in Boston, New Haven, New York, Baltimore, Washington D.C., and Lexington, Kentucky in this regard. We have every reason to believe that COINTELPRO has not been discontinued in those places -- or anywhere? We do not call on you to refrain from this harassment because we trust in your goodwill; we demand it because we believe in exercising our rights.

Don’t Talk to the FBI

1) You have the right to refuse to answer questions and to refuse to talk to the FBI and police. If they come to your home or job, just say, "Please leave. I do not want to talk to you."

2) Do not tell the FBI or police that you "don't know." If this is false, you can be prosecuted for giving false information to law enforcement officials.

3) You can be prosecuted for giving false information (perjury if a sworn statement) if you make a mistake in the information you give. It is better to say nothing.

4) If you receive a subpoena to a Grand Jury, you must respond to it. Call an attorney immediately. Good attorneys can be obtained through Woman to Woman, 320-5972, or the National Lawyers Guild, 320-4071.

5) Remember that non-collaboration protects you, your friends, and the movement. The only way to stop Grand Jury abuse, jailing of persons who have committed no crime, is to refuse to collaborate and thus make this tactic useless to the state.

The power to force you to talk. If you refuse to talk on the basis that what you say may incriminate you (pleading the Fifth Amendment), then the DA can ask the court to give you immunity.

Immunity means that what you say to the grand jury will not be used against you. If you are given immunity and decide to talk, you may end up giving the government information that could put other sisters in jail. If you refuse to talk after you have been given immunity, then the DA asks the court to find you in contempt. If you are found in contempt, you may end up going to jail for the life of the grand jury (grand juries are empaneled for 18 months).

In the long run, it is better not to talk to the grand jury. The risk of giving valuable information is too high. The recent history of grand juries over the last few years has proven this to be true.

In front of a grand jury, you are not entitled to the protections accorded to a defendant in a criminal trial because you have not been charged with a crime. You need not be told the purpose of the investigation or even if you are a possible target of the investigation. You cannot have a lawyer with you inside the hearing room, although the prosecutor can subject you to unlimited questioning. No judge is in the room to rule on the legality of the proceedings.

All those present in the grand jury room except the witness are sworn to secrecy, but under an exception written into the rules, the prosecutor is allowed to feed information to the government memory banks and the FBI.

As a grand jury witness, you have extremely limited rights. A grand jury