help wanted

Affirmative Action Manager  
Unique opportunity with the Industrial Relations function of one of New England's major SALEM STATE COMMUNITY COLLEGE  

multi-division engineering/manufacturing organizations to further the design, development, SALEM, MA  

and implementation; with full management support; of a sophisticated and effective COUNSELING PSYCHOLOGIST or  
affirmative action activity responsible for identifying and analyzing the scope, accomplishment, and impact of current affirmative action programs and for conceptualizing, developing, and implementing meaningful accomplishment programs. Masters Degree required; Doctorate preferred; equivalent experience considered. Starting salary: $14,500 — $16,000.  
Full time 12 month position.  

and the implications of affirmative action legislation relative to the business process. Starting date: Oct. 1, 1978. Position is tentative subject to  

This is an excellent position for the hands-on professional who is ready to move to broader, results-oriented management. It offers personal and professional growth, visibility, and satisfaction found in accomplishment, and will afford you prime opportunity to enhance your industrial relations knowledge and negotiating skills. Responsibilities include: short term personal, vocational and educational counseling; training of and consultation of peer counseling program; assist in Center’s outreach functions  

Industrial Relations Representative Applications due Sept. 8, 1978. Please send letters of  

This growth position is responsible for three major areas of employment activity: 1.) development and coordination of this technical organization’s college recruiting program, 2.) recruiting responsibility for several major departments’ exempt staffing needs, and 3.) coordination and analysis of computerized recruiting information including sources of candidates, age of requisitions, recruiter staffing averages, and cost-per-hire data.  

To qualify for this position, you must have a 4-year college degree, preferably in Industrial Relations, Business Administration, or a technical discipline; familiarity with manual and computer systems and their application and at least two years of recruiting experience for industrial candidates.  

Salem State College is An Affirmative Action / Equal Opportunity Employer and is in compliance with Title IX of the federal law  

We offer exceptional growth potential and excellent salary and benefits for the successful candidate.  

If interested, please send a detailed history of your accomplishments and salary growth, including current compensation to:  

BOX #H  
c/o Equal Times  
235 Park Square Building  
Boston, Mass. 02116  

YOUTH COORDINATOR  
Duties: Plan, coordinate and supervise the implementation of a comprehensive youth program; coordinate and monitor all Youth Work Experience personnel and activities in accordance with Federal rules and regulations; develop and maintain cooperative relationships and collaborative activities with area schools, employers and training worksites; provide internal and external reports and information; monitor all YWE participant folders.  

We have an excellent career opportunity for an individual with previous personnel experience to join our Personnel staff. Your responsibilities will cover all facets of personnel at our New England Regional Office in Concord, Massachusetts. Emphasis will be on: supervisory/administrative experience; Proven ability to communicate clearly on paper/ Skills in vocational counseling and/or its administration/ Knowledge of manpower programs preferred/Norwood CETA residency preferred/ Flexible schedules required.  
Salary: Grade 8, $13,296.64  

Apply by August 30 by sending a resume, two (2) job-related letters of recommendation and this ad to:  
Executive Director  
Norwood C.E.T.A. Consortium  
P.O. Box 740  

to conduct research and policy analysis in MIT's Center for Policy Alternatives, a multidisciplinary research center involved in the study of environmental/occupational health and safety, regulatory policy, technological innovation and problems related to the use of human capital in the work environment.  

A Master's degree or PhD in biochemistry as well as graduate education in policy analysis emphasizing quantitative skills will be required. Demonstrated writing and communications skills also necessary.  

Please submit resume and writing sample to:  

MIT Personnel Office  
400 Main Street  
Cambridge, MA 02139  
Attn: Job No. R78-166  

an equal opportunity/ affirmative action employer  

individual and offers competitive salary and excellent benefit package.  
Norwood, MA 02062  

Consortium Towns: Bellingham, Canton, Dedham, Foxborough, Franklin, Medfield, Medway, Millis, Norfolk, Norwood, Plainville, Sharon, Walpole, Westwood.  

Please submit resume including salary history to Mrs. Dale Arsenault, Sentry Insurance, P.O. BOX 740  

AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER  
An Affirmative Action Employer  

Whether your last job ended 15 years ago or just yesterday, a call to Kelly Services could be the best call you can make. Because you’ve got typing skills, and Kelly can help you put those skills to work.  

We call it “temporary” work. For you that means a flexible work schedule that fits your life. And a freedom that working people seldom find.  

COORDINATOR OF PROJECT GRANTSMANSHIP  
Part-time in the Division of Continuing Education commences Oct. 1, 1978. Meet with community organization leaders, screen and select instructors and secretary, advertise and recruit participants, oversee contract compliance, schedule grantsmanship workshop, ensure that instructional materials are available, select and oversee the activities of the independent evaluation. Salary: $4,415.04 for 48 weeks.  
Qualifications:  

Demonstrated organizational ability, experience in grant administration and proposal writing, knowledge of community resources. Please submit resumes by Sept. 8, 1978 to:  

Mr. James Yess  
Massasoit Community College  
Classroom Bldg C  
290 Thatcher St.  
Brockton, MA 02402  

An affirmative action, equal opportunity employer.  

TEMPORARIES!!!  
FALL FORECAST!!!  

Starting now...we can brighten up the outlook! We'll be looking for over 100 TEMPORARY people to begin working now...for 3-4 months! We'll need Secys, Typists, Clerks, and Data Entry Ops, and more...Some may even become permanent. Call Today!  

3 Park St. 1430 Mass. Ave.  
Boston Cambridge  
742-7300 876-6400  

OFFICE SPECIALISTS  
Part of our total service is helping you. Another way to help people.  

120 Tremont St., Boston  
357-8300  
or  
18 Brattle St., Cambridge  
354-7215  

An Equal Opportunity Employer M/F  

This ad appears at no cost to the Commonwealth  

22 Equal Times September 11, 1978