Page 20

a column

Janet Sergi

Taking my own advice, I read Yesterday's Lessons by Sharon Sabell.  
It is a novel written in the rhythm of the working class. A brilliant class  
analysis threads throughout the work using pithy dialogue and an utter-  
ly honest first-person narrator.

Sharon is a working-class dyke with hope in the face of many terrors,  
a brutal father, a poverty-stricken childhood, and many false friends. Yet  
she has a burning desire to write, and an innate love of women,  
children, animals, and old people. This novel is exciting because it is the  
beginnings of the new woman's novel: where form and content blend  
harmoniously into a new woman vision. The book reads like the private  
scribblings we all do for ourselves in our notebooks and diaries. Sharon  
tells us (herself) of her desire to write in the face of social ridicule:

“I showed my book to my English teacher. She said,  
I sure made a lot of grammar mistakes... I was going to  
keep on writing even if everyone thought I was crazy.”

In this woman's novel, a common scene becomes the testing grounds  
for bourgeoisie snobbing. A working-class bar is created in the mind's  
eye by the subtle and skillful use of white lower-class dialect. The  
dialogue is straight out of daily life, yet when endowed with a woman-  
s revolutionary consciousness and poetic insight, it changes the or-  
dinary into the extraordinary.

Insult becomes solidarity.

“I used to go to this bar and sit. It was dimly lit and the  
people that went in there seemed to be singing this  
sad song together. It was a straight bar but I felt at  
home there. This one night everyone sat talking about  
their jobs and at that moment I found out another  
thing we all had in common.

“I work in a garage and people call me a grease  
monkey.”

“I'm a barmaid and people think I'm a slut.”

“I'm a truck driver and people think I’m crude.”

“I work in construction and people think I'm tough.”

“I'm a Navy wife and people think I run around with  
other men.”

“I'm on welfare and people think I’m lazy.”

My mom told me that everyone has something  
something that someone can say something about.

True revolutionary art explains how theory and practice become one  
in the daily life of a new woman. Sharon's life flows in the wholeness of  
a woman's world. Her life is in touch with her woman soul and that soul  
speaks to the great social questions of our age.

“There was a cute little old lady that lived in the house  
behind us and even though Jan offered her a can of  
beer one night when we were having a party, she  
became our grandma. She was all alone and her fami-  
ly didn’t come to see her very often. She was very  
lonesome and so we adopted her.”

The new woman heroine is not of the male tradition — heroic in size  
or strength or ability. She is a fairly good ball player, with many bad  
days, very shy, has much rotten luck, doesn’t have much self-  
confidence, but does have much love, courage, and compassion.

Unlike male heroes of this century, the century of the ugly, Sharon  
hates ugly sights and outright questions why things are the way they  
are. She is active, not detached or cynical. She questions the ugly reality  
of her father’s insanity and knows from the depth of her woman soul this  
is not the way things must be. But the way things are under the Great  
Male Systems of Capitalism, Imperialism, Sexism, and Racism, sym-  
bolically presented as psychology.  
“Dad was not very rational and my mom was really  
worried that the shock treatments wouldn't help him.  
We went to talk to the psychiatrist and I began to lose  
faith in psychology. The psychiatrist didn’t ask  
anything about my dad’s background or anything  
about him personally. It seemed like they didn't con-  
sider my dad a person but just a case to be ex-  
perimented on without any understanding or care  
about the human being. I couldn’t understand how  
shock treatments alone could straighten out a con-  
fused mind that had taken years and deep-seated  
roots to finally bring to the breaking point. This wasn’t  
anything like studied in high school, but the world  
isn't anything like they teach you either. They tell you  
things that end up to be empty dreams and at first you  
think it just must be you and finally you realize that it  
happens to others too.

Sharon was woman faith in the world despite much evil and rotten  
luck. This is why the novel breaks new artistic grounds. Sharon is a real  
heroine and not an anti-hero.

“Nothing in this world makes any sense. Why do I  
keep seeing all these things happening around me? I  
wish I could yell at the top of my lungs STOP! STOP!  
Stop letting me see all these things. My mom told me I  
was soft and that I had to get some guts. She said you  
have to be strong in this world because this world is  
rotten. I fought all my life against believing that.”

She is a heroine because she acts as if there is truth, honesty, and  
love in this world. And in this very act of faith, the higher wholeness and  
beauty, which is our woman’s heritage, become fact. We are our own  
heroines.

Yesterday's Lessons can be purchased through the Women’s Press  
Collective, 5251 Broadway, Oakland, California 94618 for $2.50.

A. A. VILLAGE STRIPPER:  
1930 SO. BROADWAY  

DENVER, COLORADO 80210  

[303] 744-9911  

SAY BIG MAMA RAG  
FOR 10% OFF  

A Non-Interview  

With Gloria Steinem  

Chocolate Waters  

Gloria Steinem, a founder and  
editor of Ms. magazine, was in  
town early in November to do  
some campaigning for Congresswoman Pat Schroeder, and  
Big Mama was determined to  

get an interview. Now that’s  
determination.  
One group referred us to  

another and then to another and  
finally to Pat Schroeder's very  
headquarters and that was a  
dead end. You could almost hear  
the vibes in the background and I  
can’t help but wonder if the con-  
versation didn't go something  
like this:

Woman on phone (aside): It’s  
Big Mama Rag.

Important staff member  
(aside): ‘Big Mama Wha-a-a?

Woman on phone (aside): You  
know, that women’s newspaper  
that’s run by a bunch of weirdos.  
They want to interview Gloria.

Staff member (aside): Tell  
them to go away.

Woman on phone (sweetly):  
Go away.

Perhaps my paranoia is run-  
ning excessively rampant. At  
any rate, it wasn’t until a new  
friend, Margaret Sloan, con-  
tacted G.S. personally that we  
were able to arrange an inter-  
view. We didn't know when it  
would be, however. G.S. would  
call us.

Trying to prepare for the event,  
I ran around frantically gather-  
ing up past issues of Ms. —  
which I'd long since stopped  
reading. I had one evening. G.S.  
called that night and the inter-  
view was set up for 8 in the mor-  
ning at the Brown Palace Hotel.  
Christ, I thought, I can’t even  
wipe my ass at 8 o'clock in the  
morning. The Brown Palace, I  
thought. Maybe we could just go  
next door to Walgreens and have  
a glass of orange juice.

Naturally with my unfailing  
sense of downtown direction I  
thought May D&F was the  
Brown Palace and ended up  
walking five blocks out of the  
way — arriving late and panting  
in the lobby.

There was this very attractive  
woman being followed around  
by some man who was mutter-  
ing something about how  
wonderful “women’s lib” was  
and how he'd always wanted to  
meet it (I mean her).

That must be Gloria, I said to  
myself.

The other BMA staffers had  
arrived as well and we all con-  
verged at a small booth in the  
coffee shop. I sat next to Gloria.  
Very self-conscious — swinging  
one leg out into a safe space in  
the aisle so she wouldn't think  
I was trying to get too close to her  
and all those implications.

My “barrage” of questions  
was seemingly ready.

The indictment of Ms. must  
be responded to!

Ms. magazine must be ex-  
posed for the anti-revolutionary  
pulp that it is!

Down with  
feminism!

Down with equality!

Up with Truth, Justice, and the  
American way of Dyke  
Separatism!

I jutted out my jaw aggressive-  
ly, a serious frown on my face,  
my pen poised. “And how do you  

radical chic

I thought I saw her lower lip  
tremble slightly.

“Do you do? .. .?” I ended  
lamely, becoming increasingly  
entranced with the color of her  
hair.

Geez, she’s pretty, I thought.

“G-G-G-Gloria,” I stuttered,  
“my what a WONderful  

magazine you have!”

I can’t even remember if I ask-  
ed her any questions.

Except one: —

“Can I have your autograph  
please?...”

Ed note: Upon returning to the  
office empty-headed, Chocolate  
was soundly beaten about the  
face and ears by five angry BMA  
staff members. Her cohorts were  
let off a bit more easily.  
Applications for the next inter-  
view with Gloria Steinem are  
now being taken. No dykes need  

apply.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 6  

Photo by  

KOA Public Affairs  

Linda Fowler  

KOA-TV and radio has hired  
its first public affairs producer, a  
woman.

Allison Carr began the job  
November 4, having been  
previously involved in similar  
work with three educational  
stations in the Midwest. Prior to  
moving to Denver last summer  
she was an intern for Channel  
11, an educational television  
station in Chicago.

In her new job with KOA, Ms.  
Carr is responsible for the  
production of all public service  
programming. This includes the  
special “Area 4", as well as six  
radio shows for KOA radio.

Defining her role as  
“organizer, trouble shooter, and  
mother,” Ms. Carr explained  
that she has ultimate respon-  
sibility for all aspects of public  
service programming and “Area  
4". This includes organizing  
talent, the engineering, the  
script, public relations, employ-  
ing talent, and acting as a buffer  
between the station and the  
community.

Mixed Reception

Ms. Carr’s reception at KOA  
has been mixed; in some  
respects “it's been pretty rou-  
gh,” she stated. “There is a cer-  
tain level of harassment. But it is  
very subtle and I don’t believe it  
is consciously done. It's ap-  
parent in attitude. I've also  
received a lot of cooperation,  
particularly from the crews.”

Ms. Carr feels the un-  
conscious harassment comes  
in when people get scared. She  
is operating in fields which have  
previously been all-male areas  
at KOA. “Sometimes this scares  
them; they don't  
cooperate,” she said. “I try not to  
scare people.”

Her relationship with KOA  
crews seems to be going well,  
though. One thing Ms. Carr is  
trying to do for the crews is to im-  
prove communication among  
the members: something she  
has found to be frequently lack-  
ing. Ms. Carr also feels there is  
little discrimination toward her  
from the crew. She stated, “If  
you know your business, you're  
okay. That's what they care  
about.”

Perhaps the major barrier to  
be overcome is the attitude  
generally held by stations  
toward public service program-  
ming. Ms. Carr feels that  
stations have too often taken the  
attitude that this programming is  
something that has to be done  
just for fulfillment of re-  
quirements. The interest is lagg-  
ing.

With a heavy emphasis on  
entertainment, “the media is  
drastically misused,” she said.  
“It does not have to be just enter-  
tainment. It can be entertaining  
and informative at the same  
time.” It is in this direction that  
Ms. Carr hopes to guide public  
affairs programming at KOA.

Changing ‘Area 4"

Since bookings for “Area 4”  
are set until December, her first  
move will be in the area of show  
design. By expanding the  
amount of time allotted for each  
group or person, Ms. Carr hopes  
to offer more depth of informa-  
tion.

She also wants to change  
“Area 4” from an unfocused  
collection of information to a  
series which will focus on topics  
that have not been previously  
dealt with in PA programming.  
Lesbianism, hypnotism, and  
yoga are some of the topics she  
is considering. Periodical one-  
subject shows might include  
women in prison, analyzed from  
many points of view with  
segments depicting the prison  
hierarchy, prisoners and their  
feelings, ex-prisoners and their  
feelings, guards, families, and  
prison culture.

Of course, this can happen  
only if stations can be convinced  
there is a “market” for it. But  
with offerings such as these,  
public affairs programming  
could become the most useful  
and provocative aspect of televi-  
sion, replacing mind rot with  
valuable educational material  
and cultural analysis.

831-7015  
605 E. 7th AVE.  

VISIT US SOON