“Reality” is simply a more or less constant scanning pattern — the

scanning pattern we accept as “reality” has been imposed by the
controlling power on this planet, a power primarily oriented towards
total control.

— William Burroughs, Nova Express.

Sister and the Lesbian Tide, responding to the charges of censorship,
have pointed out that “objectivity” is a male myth (see
“L.A. splits’, p.1).

In the course of developing our own feminist reality, we are obliged to
adopt some politics and to reject others — often to oppose others as not
affirming our struggle. Some aspects of this process have been
discussed in ‘Struggle’, a forum which has appeared in Big Mama
since October.

The Big Mama Rag collective sees the position adopted by Sister and
the Tide as a positive step in the direction of defining our own reality.
We support the Tide’s editorial analysis of censorship, and both papers’
application of that analysis.

Bringing it All On Home

One of the responsibilities of a radical feminist is to follow through on
the political stances with which she identifies. In discussing the issues
raised by the Lesbian Tide editorial, we realized that we have never
actively linked our advertising policy with our editorial position.

A discrepancy which became immediately obvious was that, in this
issue, we had planned to run both Theresa Schook’s article on the anthology
The Ripening Fig, and an advertisement for the book. The content of The
Ripening Fig is elitist, and oppressive to fat women (see ‘The Fig Is Less
Than Ripe’, p.4). Clearly, to print an advertisement for it would be
inconsistent with our commitment to an actively radical politics.

As a result of the dialogue inspired by our sister newspapers, we have
sent the publishers their ad and their money back. We have also
extended our policy to accommodate the exercise of political dis-
crimination, or censorship (thus far practiced only editorially), in all
areas of the paper's content.

The collective is depressed. One major reason for this is the
disintegration of our planned Lily Tomlin benefit, on which we had
counted to take care of our most pressing financial obligations. The
paper is struggling to survive, and this has demoralized us all.

A further anxiety is the fact that Big Mama’s funding, from the United
Methodist Voluntary Service, runs out at the end of this month, and
after that there may well be very little money for salaries. We have
applied for renewed funding, but we can’t count on it coming through. If
it doesn’t, next year will see us devoting time and energy, either to
survival-money jobs, or else to extensive fund-raising efforts. Either
way, it will mean time and energy lost to the paper itself.

No doubt the coming of winter has something to do with it as well.

Obviously, our most crucial need in terms of dealing with immediate
pressures, is money. If you have any, for heaven's sake send it to us
right away. If you don't, there are other ways you can help. One is to get
involved in the paper — come by and learn the mysteries of production,
reporting and news photography.

Another is to come to critique meetings — now the second Monday of
each month, 7:30 at the office — or write us a letter, let us know you're
there and give us some feedback.

If you read the classifieds, you'll often find we have specific needs you
might be able to meet: for equipment, or input for articles. One thing we
really do need, for instance, is a place large enough to hold a really big
benefit dance. If you know of any leads, please call us and turn us onto
it.

We are paying commissions to women who sell ad space, and we
need new subscribers and distribution points. If you think your cousin
may want to subscribe, ask her (never forgetting our subscription
special, good through this month), or give her one for the festive season.
If you think your neighborhood grocer might want to sell the paper, ask
her and let us know.

Leave Big Mama in your dentist's waiting room, in the bathroom at
Howard Johnson’s. Tell our advertisers Big Mama sent you. Help us
make it through the winter.

© ‘TIS THE SEASON
TO BE MERRY

Big Mama Rag wishes all her
readers a fruitful Solstice season,
and a year of growth and ani

Big Mama Rag

Vol. 3-A, No. 12

‘Fig’ Is Less Than Ripe

Theresa Schook

Martha and Lucy Van Felix-
Wilde are Porpoise Press. Under
the name of their corporation,
they have written and published
a book entitled The Ripening Fig:
Tales of Emerging Woman-
hood. They were in Denver the
first week in November to
promote their book at various
feminist organizations in town.
They gave a reading, sponsored
by the Lesbian Task Force of
NOW, in the Park Hill
Cooperative Unitarian Church
on November 3. After reading
two stories from their book, they
answered questions from the
four members of the task force
and one other person who
attended the session.

Lucy and Martha

enraged the collective members
so much that letters of protest
were written to the Van Felix-
Wildes, and the book was taken
off the shelves. A copy remains
in the Bookcenter library, but all
others have been returned to
Porpoise Press. Martha and Lucy
are crushed by the criticisms of
their book. They took the oppor-
tunity, in the question and
answer period, to attempt re-
buttal to attacks on their book.
Objections

The Bookcenter’s main objec-
tion against the book, according
to Kay Young, a member of the
Bookcenter collective, was that
they felt that lesbian feminism
was distorted in the book.

Photo by Norma Verdiner

Published in the Ripening Fig

All Together Now

They prefaced their reading
with a short welcome in unison:
“We come to you in love...” 
ending with a quote from
Epictetus (included in the book):
“No great thing is created
suddenly, any more than a
bunch of grapes or a fig. If you
tell me that you desire a fig, I
answer you that there must be
time. Let it first blossom, then
bear fruit, then ripen.” Lucy read
the first selection, the story
called ‘Sylvia’, looking up from
the book occasionally to glance
at Martha. Martha took the book
from her lover to read the story
called ‘Sunshower’ and
Margarita.”

There has been quite a furor
raised over Ripening Fig in
“Woman to Woman,” the
Feminist Bookstore. The book

— The characters were all alike
from one story to the next, which
led to a stereotyping of les-
bians — tall, slender, white, and
blonde with short cropped hair.
— The women in the stories
were treated as sex objects by
the writers, with their value
totally dependent upon their
physical appearance. Within the
framework of their objectifying
concept of physical beauty, fat
was treated as a moral fault. “A
fat woman... looking like a blow
fish strangling on someone's
deck” “A fat slob... had always
repulsed her” (Sylvia). “A big fat
woman... ashamed of her
breasts that hung down to her
waist” (Leah).

— The characters were elitist.
They had no time for women
who disagreed with them or
women whose level of con-
sciousness was lower than
theirs. They were con-
temptuous of women who did
not fit their ideal.

— Monogamy was portrayed as
being the only way to conduct a
lesbian relationship. The omis-
sion of alternative lifestyles was
felt to be a serious error in a work
purporting to be lesbian feminist
philosophy.

— The only solution to life in a
patriarchal society presented
was that of escape. Separatism
was seen as an end rather than a
means to an end. Utopia was a
group of lesbian couples forming
their own colony in the Arizona
desert.

The decision to not carry the
book boils down to two basics
into which all objections can be
categorized. 1) The bookstore
has limited funds, which makes
a decision concerning what
books to carry imperative. 2)
Books are chosen on the basis of
how well they fit with the
expressed political ideology of
the Bookstore collective.

True Love and Fat

Martha and Lucy are tall,
slender women with short hair
— rather like their heroines.
They feel they have, in their
relationship, found true love.
They say that they have seen too
many people hurt in non-mono-
gamous relationships to believe
anything else works. Hetero-
sexuality, they say, is oppres-
sive (Martha was married and
now has a 6-year-old daughter,
Kate, whom they are raising.)
They are both very much into
health foods and body con-
sciousness. Porpoise Press is
going to publish a cookbook of
their recipes soon.

To the charges of being pre-
judiced against fat people, they
say they both have had the ex-
perience of obesity. To them,
obesity is 10 lbs. of excess
weight. To all charges, they say
that the characters and
situations were all people they
knew or had heard of. They knew
only obnoxious fat people, so
their fat people were obnoxious.
Their book is real life, the real
people in real situations, people
they are or have met.

Martha and Lucy are elitist.
They feel they are better people
because they eat a balanced
diet, because they have found
true love. They really need no
one else outside of each other.

Stilted

The main problem with Ripen-
ing Fig is that, as a piece of
writing, it is poorly done. The

More on Page 13

Sparks

York, Lesbian Feminist Libera-
tion, Gay Activist’s Alliance and
Gay Men and Women’s Alli-
ance for Responsibility in Media.

So far protests of the film have
concentrated on the advertising
sponsors — American Home
Products, Playtex, Plough Inc.,
Kayser-Roth Corp. (recently
bought by Gulf & Western) and
particularly the Miller Brewing
Co.

In Nashville, Tennessee,
housewives, church members
and local lawyers filed into the
Miller branch office October 24
and stayed until the office was
forced to shut down. In New
York, Lesbian Feminist Libera-
tion and the Gay Media Coali-
tion protested in front of Miller’s
5th Avenue branch on October
23, leafleting and carrying
posters reading “Miller Brews
Rape” and “Miller Poisons
Minds.” A sit-in by a delegation
of the groups was flanked by
Rockefeller Center security
guards.

In San Diego the Gay Nurses
Association sat in at the NBC

More on Page 1.