bmr:

where we're at

Trying to avoid the spirit of Christmas has not been easy.  
The celebration of U.S. capitalism seems to haunt us at every  
turn. By spending the 24th and 25th in the BMR basement doing  
production, we intend to celebrate getting the paper out by  
relaxing at "the baths" on the 26th. (That is, if we can dig  
ourselves out of the blizzard!)

Liz is sorely missed as a collective member by us other 4.  
With fewer of us here, we need more input from you "out there."  
Where are all those informative, scintillating (!) letters?

By the way, for more information on the incident at the  
Michigan Women's Music Festival where a woman was forcibly  
taken off the land, see the December 1982 issue of the Lesbian  
Insider/Insighter/Inciter (P.O. Box 7038, Powderhorn Station,  
Minneapolis, MN 55407). We would really like some feedback  

of our coverage of that incident, and on anything else we  
cover that you feel at all inclined to comment on.

Speaking of feedback, we are having a community meeting on  
Jan. 15 at R.I.P. (Radical Information Project) Bookstore,  
2412 E. Colfax from 11am to 1pm, childcare provided. Come and  
talk with us about BMR and its/our politics. A major thing  
for us this year has been “how do we understand and work with  
other movements?" The two big ones for us have been the anti-  
psychiatric movement - as feminists, developing working poli-  
tics around the issues of professionalism, being locked up,  
being drugged. And, National Liberation Movements - developing  
working politics around how imperialism works, how white peo-  
ple support it, and how the oppression of women ties into this  
system.

How have we/should we make changes in our political work?  
We hope many women will come. We are going to try for comm-  
unity meetings every 6 months and organize and use them as  
critiques. So, specific reaction and feedback to individual  
articles is encouraged. And, we will talk about future theme  
issue possibilities, i.e., Zionism and anti-Semitism, health...

In this issue, we have an article on native peoples' land  
rights struggles in Australia. This connects with native  
peoples' struggles to regain their land and sovereignty here  
in the U.S. of A., also. In BMR, we want to be making these  
connections with women and oppressed peoples both here at  
home and around the world. Imperialism reaches everywhere.

In our writings, we often use cumbersome phrases like Imper-  
ialism/White Supremacy/Patriarchy. This is the only way we  
know of at this point to adequately name the enemy. Leaving  
out any of those three would only be a partial naming. It  
sure would be nice to have an easy, short word to encompass  
what we mean, as we really try to avoid rhetoric in our writ-  
ings. On the other hand, rhetoric is only rhetoric because  
the ruling class discourages (of course) accurate naming of  
itself. They use the word "democracy" when it is really im-  

Collage was done by Lori Bradford & Deb Luger  
COVERS artists and journals used in this month's cover  

collage include Y. Wanrow, C. Winters and  
Akwesasne Notes.

COLLECTIVES susanna smith, Bobbe Ross, Deb Luger,  

Lori Bradford,  

supporters: Kim Womantree, Liz Lewis,  

Claire Ellington  

contributors: Joan Pettijohn, Natalie  

Phillips, Kathy Riley, Candy McCullough, Sue  
Goding, Linda Lane, Eden Stone  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly  
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding  

month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope  

with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-  
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-  
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, January, 1983  

imperialism. They say "reverse discrimination" when it's really  
white supremacy. They talk about “woman's natural place" and  
never acknowledge the patriarchy. As our politics develop and  
grow, we need to develop new, easily understood words and ex-  
planations to convey those politics in terms with which lots  
of people can understand and identify.

We need a woman (or women) to translate from Spanish into  
English for us. We get some publications in Spanish, which  
none of us read, and have the opportunity of exchanging with  
a women's newspaper from Peru. Let us know if you are willing  
and able to translate. (We do live in occupied Mexico, and  
it's indicative of white supremacy that most of us whites only  
know English.)

Due to a recent confrontation over whether men should be  
allowed into the office of BMR, we hereby (re)state our pol-  
icy. BMR has been and remains a woman-only space, and we have  
the expectation that both women and men, whether gay, straight,  
or bisexual, will respect that. Men do come into the office  
occasionally, to deliver something or to pick someone up, but  
we expect their stay to be limited to carrying out a particu-  
lar errand. We want all women to be able to come and go safe-  
ly, and be able to share information with supportive men in  
the community.

In the Oct. Where We're At, we started to talk about guide-  
lines for women writing articles for us, but somehow the spec-  
ifics got left out. So, it's time again to stress the impor-  
tance of short, concise articles. Our suggested guidelines  
for length are set up so we can cover many topics and authors  
in each issue and also for general readability for all of us.  
For news articles (local, national and international), we  
suggest no more than 3, 8½ x 11, double spaced typed pages.  

(That's about 5 written pages for most of us.) For theory  
articles, no more than 10, 8½ x 11, double spaced typed  
pages (or about 15 handwritten pages). We encourage finished  
copy but will help with editing if necessary.

Production weekend for the February issue will be on Jan.  
29th and 30th. Copy deadline is Jan. 16.

See you at the community meeting.

oops

The review of Coming Out  
Colored, by Maya Chumu, re-  

In our Dec., '82 issue, we  
printed two poems by Mary  
Moran which we forgot to cre-  
dit as being reprinted from  
also published in Maenad, Sinister Wisdom (P.O. Box 660,  
Summer, '82 (P.O. Box 738, Amherst, MA 01004).  
Gloucester, MA 01930). “  

viewed by Juana Marie Paz,  
in our Oct., '82 issue, was  

THANKS to Vickie for the "electric" warmth!

inside BMR :

Where We're At...........6.. 2 Women in Cages........ Peed  

Local Rita Silk Nauni  
Bookcenter Changes..... 455 Fulani Sunni-Ali  

National Sylvia Baraldini  
Native Women......10,11,12 Juanita Thomas  

International Book Review.... 5  
Aboriginal Struggles.. 8&9 America Held Hostage....... 5  
Fire Brigade Action.. 14&15 Calendar....... 6  
Sex oOur Issues........ 14 More on Anu. > 16  
German Prisoner......... 15 Classies and Ads...... 18  

rates are $7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,  

$14 (in U.S. funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown  
wrapper, and $21 to all institutions. BMR is free to all  
women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions.  
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian  
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol.1,  
#1 Oct. '72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60.  
BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box  

7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone no. is (303) 322-2010.