Putting Feminism Into Focus

Del Martin On Violence Against Women

Founder of the Daughters of Bilitis, an international Lesbian organization started in 1955, Del Martin has long been known as an activist involved with feminist issues. Since 1975, she has worked as a coordinator for the National Organization for Women's National Task Force on Battered Women and Household Violence. Currently self-employed as a freelance writer, Martin is the author of Battered Wives (Glide Publications, 1976), and along with Phyllis Lyon, she co-authored Lesbian Woman (Glide Publications).

The following address was presented as part of a panel discussion at the First National Conference on Violence Against Women.

Transcribed and edited by Constance Perenyi

I've long had a fantasy that we would move all the women who live in unratified states - move them out until the ERA was ratified. And now I know where to move them - to Washington D.C. For two years we have tried to get domestic violence bills passed in the House and Senate. We've done that organizing. We have done our lobbying. But they do not pay attention. What is more important is building up a defense plan. What is more important is drawing on radical thinking.

And I am disturbed by legislators who come to our conferences and say their thing and then leave, and do not listen to what is going on here. (Editor's note: this is in reference to a "campaign appearance" by Rep. Tim Wirth that disrupted the panel discussion at which Del Martin gave this address.)

Perspective

Writing my book Battered Wives helped me put the women's movement into focus, into a perspective of the whole. And I found that every issue we have ever addressed in the women's movement applies to battered women. That what we are dealing with is woman hatred, that the patriarchal, social and economic system depends on the control and subservience of women. And that the ultimate means of this control, when all else fails, is the use of physical force. To be born female is to be subjected to continuing acts of violence, physical and psychological against one's being. In today's so-called "enlightened" society, a girl-baby is not apt to be drowned at birth, nor are young females' feet bound; but she will be nonetheless punished for disappointing her father who must have sons to prove his manhood, to carry on his name, and to give him immortality. Wife-beating dates back to the beginnings of monogamous marriages. In earlier, primitive societies, women were highly esteemed among the clan. But with the advent of the monogamous marriage, the mother right was replaced by the father right, and wives were held in tight control in order to protect the husband's honor and his identity as father. A woman was obligated to marry and to obey her husband or suffer the consequences.

Christianity embraced the hierarchical family structure and made marriage sacred and gave the husband permission to castigate his wife and beat her. According to early English Common Law, the very being, the legal existence of the woman is suspended during marriage, or at least is incorporated into and dominated by that of the husband. In marriage, the woman loses her personhood. She is identified in terms of her husband. Legally he is head of household, responsible for supporting the family. She is subordinate and responsible for housework and childcare. With few exceptions, she takes her husband's name, his domicile, and becomes his legal dependent. Her labor is a duty to be performed without value or compensation. In many states, the husband has exclusive authority over what we call community property, including all the wife's earnings and can dissipate the family assets without the wife's prior knowledge or consent.

Jean Baker Miller in her book, Towards A New Psychology of Women says that the dominant groups usually define acceptable roles for subordinates, which typically involves providing functions that no dominant group would want to perform. Functions that a dominant group prefers to perform are carefully guarded and closed to subordinates on the basis that the subordinate is unable to perform them because of innate defects or deficiencies of mind or body, and therefore is incapable of change or development.

She also points out that if subordinates adopt the characteristics assigned to them, that they are considered well-adjusted. This is a means by which development of a group legitimizes an unequal relationship, incorporates it into the cultural values, moralities, and social structures, and thereby obscures the true nature of the relationship - that is, the existence of inequality.

In patriarchal society, men assume roles of dominance and assign women roles of subservience. To be masculine is to be strong, active, rational, aggressive and authoritarian. To be feminine is to be submissive, passive, dependent, weak, and masochistic. And normal adult behavior, sex unspecified, is equated with male characteristics. Men thus experience no dichotomy between adulthood and manhood because society says the two are identical. But the woman who tries to be a healthy adult does so at the expense of being feminine. The woman who adjusts to her so-called normal role does so at the expense of being an adult. Society then has constructed a no-win situation for women. Femininity is held out as the carrot for women, but to be feminine is to play victim.

Media

I want to talk about media, media in the way of advertising of products, and what effect it has on women as victims. There's the billboard for the Rolling Stones album "Black and Blue" showing a bound woman with the caption, "I'm black and blue from the Rolling Stones and I love it." There's the advertisement for a pants company in Los Angeles called "Cheek," and they show a man spanking a woman's cheeks. When the advertising agency was confronted by some outraged women, they were told, "We wanted to come up with something men could really identify with. We really wanted to give it to them." And then there's the billboard in the national campaign of the Bowling Association that says in big huge letters, "BEAT YOUR WIFE" and in small letters, "go bowling tonight." When the executives of the Association were confronted, they said, "We meant beat in the competitive sense. We meant take your wife out and show her who is boss."

Images in the media and pornography teach us that women are victims in the same existential sense that grass is green, that women like to be victims, that women expect to be victimized, women are easy targets for brutal behavior, that victimized women are attractive and sexually appealing, that victimized women are entertaining and amusing to contemplate, that the normal male is sexually aggressive and brutal. And moreover the frequency with which the media portrays women as victims, and especially their routine association with humor trivializes the entirely serious phenomenon of violent crimes against women.

The violence against abortion clinics, the bombings, burnings, raids, and vandalizing which occurred while patients were being treated and the death threats against employees and warnings that their children would be kidnapped or murdered should not have surprised us. Those who claim to be pro-life are also for the death penalty and gun control. The right-to-life catchphrase is a cover-up for patriarchal forces who would deny women control of their own bodies, their own lives. Again, violence is the ultimate weapon against uppity women.

And of course, the victims were to blame. If these women did not advocate reproductive freedom for women, they would not have provoked attack. In patriarchal society, all violent crimes are regarded as victim precipitated. A woman is raped because of the clothes she wears, because she travels the streets alone, because she is, or is not a virgin, because she is weak and vulnerable. A wife is battered by her husband because she did not obey him, because she could not read his mind and failed to fulfill his every whim or desire, because she asked for it, because she got pregnant, because she talked to another man. A girl-child is a victim of incest because of her seductive behavior, because of her desire for parental attention and affection. Women are killed because they dared to fight back, because they were unfaithful to their husbands, because they were lesbians, because they were too beautiful. Men, on the other hand, who are the perpetrators of violence are commonly excused for their violent acts. The man's family was under stress, he lost his job, drank too much, his mother had an extramarital affair. No matter how horrible his crime, the man is somehow vindicated by such rationalizations.

Our society has set up women as victims. To try to break out of that victimization is to be further victimized. The never-married woman who is looked at with pity and scorn as a reject. The woman who strives for economic independence and tries to further her education is subject to sexual harassment by her supervisors on the job or her professors. And the lesbian who dares to build a personal life irrespective of men is a pariah. By her very being she rejects women's assigned roles, she dares to be independent. By society's terms that means she is branded as illegal, immoral and sick. In patriarchal society, which depends on the control and subservience of women, being a lesbian is a capital offense. Society has many ways of forcing lesbians into conformity. They are beaten and raped - “all a lesbian ever needed was a good man." Lesbians are also threatened with murder, subjected to shock treatment, driven to suicide, disowned by their families, fired from their jobs, blackmailed, purged from government services, deprived of their children.

Fair Game

Since the advent of Anita Bryant's religious crusade against lesbians and gay men, there has been a marked increase of violence by youth gangs and by police who regard them as fair game. Sexual Trauma Services in San Francisco reports an increase of rapes against open lesbians and women who are considered suspect. Cases of police harassment and brutality in and around lesbian bars have been reported in various parts of the country. And recently, at a hearing before the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights in Houston, representatives of the Gay Political Caucus entered into the public record documentation of over one hundred individual cases to show that Houston police officers have used perjured testimony, physical and verbal abuse, selective enforcement of the law, and an alleged cover-up of a murder all to conspire against homosexuals.

The worst part of being a lesbian is to have to keep it secret, being privy to the daily knowledge that what you are is so awful that it cannot be revealed. The years, sometimes decades of soul-searching, untold agonies of self-doubt, guilt, painful inner conflict and isolation can be personally devastating. To remain silent is tantamount to being party to the annihilation of women's selves. To accept herself for who she is, a person of worth and dignity is a lesbian's greatest challenge. And the worst crime of violence to me

MORE ON PAGE 25

First National Conference

On Violence Against Women

were sessions on: “Violence Against Native American Women," and "Violence Against Women: Rape, Incest, Battering Among the Puerto Rican Experience." And in response to the requests for a workshop on "Minority Women: Voices to be Heard,” one was scheduled on the last day of the conference.

Constance Perenyi and Vicki Piotter

The First National Conference on Violence Against Women was held October 2 through 5 in Denver to address acts of violence committed against women as a single social phenomenon. Co-sponsored by Safe House and the Center for Community Services at Metropolitan State College, the conference was geared to professional women in the social services, most of whom work routinely with women who are victims of violence. But for many of the women in attendance, this conference was the first time they had explored violence against women in a larger political context.

The first full day of the conference began with a "Theory and Overview" panel discussion with Florynce Kennedy, Del Martin, and Cathleen Schurr. (See excerpts from Del Martin's address above, and from Cathleen Schurr's and Florynce Kennedy's on pages 20 and 21.) On the second day, the theme was “Theory Into Practice," and it was kicked off by Sandra Butler, author of Conspiracy of Silence, The Trauma of Incest. And on the last day, Robin Morgan addressed the theme of "Organize and Act” (see pages 20-21 for excerpts from her speech).

But, despite this rather meager "outreach," the conference was attended by primarily white women in the professional social service status. The reasons for this were: the location, the scheduling, and the cost of the conference. First of all, The Executive Tower Inn was chosen as the site, and although it is in central Denver, it is still a plush hotel that caters to corporate type business meetings and wealthy guests. The conference was set up during the week, and that eliminated the presence of women who work and could not be sent as part of their jobs (like women in the social services.) And finally, the cost was prohibitive - $120 - and although there was a system of bartering and scholarships available, many women complained that the information about those options had not been made accessible in time to make previous arrangements.

By the end of the conference, organizers were beginning to plan a Second National Conference to be held sometime next year. It is to be hoped that the second time around, the conference will be open to more women, and not necessarily professional women in the social services. There was a good deal of information and energy shared at the First Conference, and it is essential that feminists from all quarters of the community have input as well as the benefit of this sort of sharing.

Each day, the opening talk was followed by afternoon sessions of workshops, with topics ranging from "Humor Power: Secret Weapon in the War Against Women," to "Alternative Perspectives on the Theory of Family Violence: Research on the Communication Styles of Men and Women." While the particular thrust of these workshops was to women in the social services, a