International Women’s Day

Lesbian/Feminists Demand Rights

Eileen Bresnahan

On Saturday, February 14, 1976, approximately 50 persons attended a meeting in Denver aimed at forming a Regional Fight Back Organization (RFBO). The RFBO is to represent six states, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, Utah, Nebraska, and Kansas within the National Fight Back Organization (NFBO).

The idea for the RFBO was conceived in December, 1975, when, according to RFBO press releases, 1500 people met in Chicago and formed the NFBO. The purpose of the NFBO is to build a “massive, nation-wide movement to get rid of all oppression, exploitation, discrimination and to oppose the threat of imperialist war.” The Soviet Union, as well as the US, was defined as an imperialist power.

The RFBO meeting began with speakers from the United Farm Workers, Colorado Workers Unity (CWU), and other labor groups. Their themes centered around the need for workers to organize to fight back against bosses and the capitalist system.

Following these speeches, the conference broke up into five workshops: Oppression of National Minorities, Women in the Fight Back, Work in the Trade Unions, Unemployment Work, and Youth and the Fight Back.

Women

The “Women in the Fight Back” workshop was attended by approximately 15 persons, the majority of whom were women. It was co-led by Nell Maier of the October League (OL), who is also president of the Denver Coalition of Labor Union Women (CLUW) and a member of Colorado Workers Unity (CWU), and by a woman identified only as Marybelle of CWU.

— photo by Kate Sharp

The purpose of the workshop was ostensibly to approve or disapprove a “Resolution on Women and the Fight Back.” Maier, however, was so intent on cataloging the oppressions visited on women by capitalism that no more than half the resolution was discussed.

The reading of the resolution went along fairly smoothly at first, with small changes being made such as changing male chauvinism to male supremacy and inserting recognition of the unique oppression of single women. However, when a line proclaiming, “We do not accept the feminist view that women’s problems are caused by men” was arrived at, the discussion became somewhat heated.

A small contingent of feminists (representing Woman to Woman Center and Big Mama fag) in the workshop condemned the statement as a misrepresentation of feminist theory, so gross that it could result only from total ignorance or deliberate malice. A long, frustrating argument ensued, with the feminists explaining that the difference between men and patriarchy could be paralleled to the difference between those who work for capitalist businesses and capitalism. The root enemy is capitalism/patriarchy, but men may also become the enemy insofar as they uphold and benefit from that system. An analogy was drawn to the foreman, himself a member of the working class, who aligns himself with the bosses when a decision is made to strike. He is not a member of the ruling class and never will be in the same way that most men will never be real patriarchs, but he is serving their interests. And for this service, he reaps some benefits, as men do from their role in the oppression of women. Both have identified with the enemy — both have become enemies of the oppressed.

It eventually became apparent that most minds had long since been made up. Maier continued to insist that the analysis the feminists presented was not true feminist theory. However, the workshop voted to change the words “feminist view” to read “the view of some feminists” and to bring the matter up for consideration before the general body. When the final decision came, the revised version was rejected in a “democratic” vote of a body packed with October League members and supporters.

Exclusion Explosion

The real explosion of the day, however, ignited not around a Fight Back statement, but around a resolution that the Fight Back support an OL-planned International Women’s Day March.

Marybelle of CWU presented the resolution to the Women in the Fight Back workshop, asking for support. The resolution stated that the march had been organized by something called the “International Women's Day Coalition” (IWDC). The slogans for the march were to be “Down With Imperialism,” “Support the Struggles of Third World Peoples,” and “Full Equality For Women.”

A feminist present, stressing that she supported the chosen slogans, asked if she might carry a banner also indicating that she is a lesbian. Marybelle replied that all slogans had to be approved by the IWDC, and that it was already decided that no references to lesbianism would be allowed. When pressed to explain why this decision had been made, Marybelle stated that lesbianism is “bourgeois decadent” because lesbians “reject men.”

Much shouting, confusion, and some discussion ensued. An unidentified woman, who was attending independently, stated that she is celibate though she considers herself heterosexual. Was she not also rejecting men?

“No,” came the reply, “because lesbians attack the nuclear family” and “children are the wealth of the proletariat.”

“But,” the unidentified woman continued, “I have no intention of marrying or of having children. What's the difference?”

“The difference,” replied Marybelle, “is that you don’t reject men.”

By this point, everyone was more than a little confused by the IWDC (read “October League”) position on lesbianism.

Carol House Roderick and another woman member of OL — photo by Kate Sharp

and IWDC, neither of whom had originally been in the workshop, at this juncture inserted themselves into the argument. 

Bourgeois Decadent: When a woman asked why no feminists had been invited to participate in the IWDC, Roderick replied that “they” (read “October League,” again) had decided to actively exclude feminist groups.

“Why?” a woman asked.

“Because feminism is bourgeois decadent,” the unidentified October Leaguer replied, “and does not support working-class demands.”

“What happens if we show up with signs indicating that we, as lesbians, support the demands of the march?”

More on Page 14

Women’s Liberation Coalition Sponsors I.W.D. Panel Discussion

Woodwoman

On Saturday, March 6, the Women’s Liberation Coalition of the University of Colorado at Boulder facilitated a panel discussion to kick off a weekend of events marking International Women’s Day.

A broad spectrum of views was represented on the panel, as speakers strove to define the issues facing the women’s movement today and to visualize future directions.

As chairwoman Anne Markusen announced that “serious discussion” was about to begin, a disturbance in the audience heralded a presentation by the Boulder Socialist/Feminist Guerilla Theater. In an entertaining and well-acted series of skits, women depicted typical chauvinist oppression as experienced by women on the job, in the home, around childcare, and within unions — both from men and through male-identified women. They concluded by liberating the paper hats used to symbolize male domination, and then tearing them up.

The first panel speaker was Linda Harford of the National Organization for Women, who in a well-prepared but somewhat dry speech outlined the Majority Caucus position. She saw the efforts and publicity focused around the Equal Rights Amendment as important consciousness-raisers, but appealed to those involved not to become single-issue oriented. The way for the women’s movement to go now, she said, is to organize its constituency.

Motherpower

Mary K. Hildebrand saw the movement as having come to an impasse: having defined our problems in small groups, having come to grips with our personal oppression, we are now at a loss as to how to translate the insights thus gained into political action. She saw the main issue facing women today as that of how to organize to get power.

This speaker raised an interesting concept in positing the relationship between mother and child as a power base for women. Admitting that she had not yet thought this concept through, she was careful to explain that she was not advocating the power of mothers over children. Rather, she was interested in the possibility of channeling the power that subsists in the relationship between mother and child for political ends.

A start could be made, she suggested, by organizing around such priorities as demanding that the mother/child bond be recognized as inviolable, and insisting on welfare as a right rather than as something to be begged for.

Pointing out that most acknowledged childcare “experts” are men, whose basis is “objective” and theoretical rather than experiential, Ms. Hildebrand suggested that women should start “talking radically” to them.

Matriarchy

Morgan Starchild, representing a “radical feminist lesbian” position, spoke of the movement as scattered, as “moving in neutral.” The main issue facing it, she said, is that of survival, and in an attempt to address that issue, Ms. Starchild was involved in a conference last summer where plans were discussed for the establishment of an ongoing women’s community.

The failure of these plans has led her to conclude that, politics being “too alien” to women, political diversity will tend to undercut any efforts women might make to unify. Her solution is to encourage women to come together in some area other than the political.

Pinpointing Christianity as “women’s chief oppressor in this culture,” she suggested that the strongest base for women’s unity would be a return to matriarchal culture. Shared celebrations would do far more to bond women than any conference.

Christina Lucero, of a Chicano group in Greeley, introduced herself as a “student and teacher of Marxist/Leninist thought.” As such, she presented a somewhat predictable analysis of women’s oppression as an aspect of the larger phenomenon of class oppression. Women, she concluded, must unite with the working class, while bringing attention to their own particular oppression within the struggle for total change.

Cindy Wilson represented the February 1st Movement (a national black anti-imperialist organization). While stating that the first class oppression is that of women by men, she nonetheless defined the main contradiction in this society as ruling class oppression of the working class. In this context, she deplored the actions of “petit-bourgeois women professors,” whom she sees as “pimping the women's movement.”

The role of women in the February 1st Movement, she said, was to “stand side by side with our men,” since the primary oppression to be fighting is class oppression (although racial and sexual oppression often surface along with class issues).

Dual Struggle

Jeannie Winer, of the Boulder Socialist/Feminist Union (the same group as had presented the guerilla theater earlier), introduced her group’s analysis by describing women as oppressed as a class (as workers), and as a caste, this last definition cutting across ethnic and class lines. She was adamant that there could be no one enemy, and therefore no one solution: Capitalism and patriarchy are equally obnoxious and oppressive, and must therefore be struggled against simultaneously.

The speaker then turned over the rest of her speaking time to other members of her group, who presented short speeches on selected aspects of women’s oppression.

Cheryl, speaking on housework, described housewives as a surplus labor pool, and suggested that the government should pay women for housework. Carla, talking about women’s bodies, cited sexual assaults as the best example that the personal is political, and contended that, in the process of taking full control over their bodies, women will overthrow the sexist system.

Louise, speaking on madness, described traditional psychiatric attitudes which oppress and mystify women; and Debbie, on professionalism, described the co-optation of women workers as they learn to identify more closely with their male colleagues than with their female clients.

Suzie, speaking about lesbianism, described it as implying “wanton disrespect for social conventions” and thus as threatening both patriarchy and capitalism. The issue of lesbianism, she said, must be confronted and discussed on a theoretical level. Since lesbian oppression arises directly out of sexism, all feminist organizations should address themselves to it as an issue.

Glenda, talking about mothers and children, made the point that government sterilization policies constitute a telling statement on who is valuable to this society and who is not.

Jeannie Winer, summing up the group's position, declared that it would not support any revolution which did not hold fully equality for women as a priority.

More on Page 14