struggle

Nothing To Lose But Our Illusions ...

Kim Womantree

In the American pornographic tradition, bisexuality is seen as a hip way to cover all bases, relate to everyone. Liberals will drone, “sexual anyway,” at the drop of a threat of lesbian unity. The bisexual woman is seen as male-centered, turning to women for variety and perhaps to turn on a man. The bi woman is supposed to be a carefree butterfly, living only for pleasure. She flits from flower to flower (who cares whether they have pistils or stamens), sucks up whatever sweetness she can, and moves on.

Bitter reality differs. I am a radical feminist, a lesbian for five years and now bisexual, but not carefree. I am writing this article to sort out for myself the issues of power and privilege bisexual feminists face. I will go deep into problems bisexual feminists have with the women's movement, not because I am trying to guilt-trip anyone or because I want feminists to feel sorry for us, but because I have a unique perspective on the lesbian/straight split of the women's movement, and I think to understand bisexual problems could lead to compassion, tolerance and an eventual healing of this split. I don't think it is important that every feminist try being bisexual. I don't think that bisexuals are necessarily better feminists. The idea that any sexual preference can of itself lead to being a stronger liberationist has led to too many problems already.

Common Patterns in Bisexual Lives

1. We are drawn sexually to both certain women and certain men. This attraction is physical, gut-level, and irrational in that it is not influenced by reason. Feminist politics, previous orgasms, and previous rejections may affect us acting on desire, but they don't change the physical reaction to being around someone we want.

2. We are different from each other in how we are with our lovers. We could be more physically drawn to one sex, and have a strong emotional need for the other sex. We could be monogamous or non-. We often retreat from everyone, console ourselves with our cats, develop masturbation into a fine art, read, drink, chew our fingernails, or write articles for BMR.

3. A common pattern I'm seeing in lesbians who are now coming out as bisexuals is a history of a rejection by a woman lover, or by the women's community for political reasons. We have a history of identifying with straight women, wanting to work politically with them, and being frustrated because most radical feminist groups are almost all lesbians. The few straight women in them either come out or drop out.

Page 12 - Big Mama Rag, April, 1981

Whatever our individual reasons, we are disenchanted with lesbian feminism, and alienated from the women's community.

4. Other things bisexual/former dykes have in common: we're very aware of our newfound heterosexual privilege. We try not to use it. (Not being blatant with our male lovers in public) We feel guilty and defensive about being with men. We have a desperate need to feel a part of the radical women's community; we need feminist support, to stay sane and to grow politically. At the same time we feel alienated from this community, uncomfortable and out of place at lesbian events, angry at jokes that belittle men, male children and straight women, afraid of being found out. Some of us don't go to any event that has lesbian in the title out of a desire to respect lesbian separatism. We go to events that say All women welcome.

YARECTON 4 REVOLUTION, OR

~Kim Womantree/Big Mama Rag

5. We struggle with our male lovers around sexism. We do cop some privilege by being with men but we pay a high price. We have to deal with the fact that we might get pregnant. The need for birth control, with all of its health hazards and hassles, comes as a rude shock after years of lesbian lovemaking. We have to deal with our male lovers' secret homophobia. They often feel pride at having lured us from our decadent ways, and don't want to hear good things about the women we loved and love.

Almost all men are threatened by strong, radical feminists. At the same time they are attracted by and fascinated with radical women.

As one straight friend said, "I can literally not count the men I've met lately who I've scared away."

In time this leads to being a strong but cynical woman who needs male approval on some level but feels contempt for men. And who isn't getting her emotional needs met.

6. We can't talk about our problems with men to our lesbian friends. We cannot trust them not to get smug, even though we know and they know that lesbians also have power struggles, oppress each other, use and abuse each other. But something in the face, eyes or voice betrays smugness if we try to talk about our struggles with sexism with men. Some will come right out and say it, "What did you expect, being with a man? Why don't you just give up and find a good woman?"

7. Other reasons we can't trust our lesbian friends; there's constant gossip and jokes about when Jane Doe, the het, is going to COME OUT, i.e. be a real feminist, one of the club.

They belittle our sexual preferences. "How can you stand that THING in you?” They make us feel unwanted: “What are you doing here?" (at an all-women's party) "Does your old man know that you're here?" "As long as you're relating to a man, I can't relate to you." "How's old whatisface?” I said that to a friend who was strung out on this man. "I'm so glad you're not with that MAN anymore." (Hooray, the little lost lamb has come back to the fold. Since I had been rejected and was hurting like hell at the time, it was not the most sensitive of remarks.)

8. We get our political and personal support from each other, that is bisexual and straight women. We laugh, cry, share rage, feel less isolated. Perhaps this is the way it should be.

So why bother staying bisexual? A fair question.

9. Because we want to. Life is pretty damn grim and we have to compete for everything we need. If we do grab some sweetness here and there to stay sane, who the hell has the right to judge us? Also, we want men in our life. Not as bosses, dictators, oppressors but as friends, allies, and lovers because in our own vision of a revolutionary future we can't see only half a human race.

Why Lesbians Don't Trust Bisexuals

The remarks I quoted were not from hardcore separatist lesbians. In fact, most of them would probably say they wanted to work more with straight women. I sense in lesbians an unconscious fear that we will betray them, leave the movement, live in some man's shadow, blissfully ignorant of our own and others' oppression. There are some reasons for this fear—some are good reasons and some are off the wall, stemming from dyke chauvinism.

struggle

The Politics

The good reasons:

A. Bisexuals can cop a little male privilege and heterosexual privilege if they try. Lesbians will never be socially acceptable.

B. Bisexual women have burned many lesbians personally over the years—running off to a man whenever they started being scared of their ‘outlaw status, and needing reassurance that she was still attractive to men.

C. Bisexuality, if society in general accepted it in the liberal sense, i.e. "Everyone's bisexual anyway," could really undermine lesbian unity, strength and pride. And it would undermine women's independence from men; because society is so heterosexual that it will be assumed that the bisexual is out there mainly for men.

D. Off the wall reasons stemming from dyke chauvinism.

ENERGY STEALING - MYTH OR MAGIC?

There is this idea, common in the women's community, that those who relate sexually to men steal energy from those that don't. It's really a simple process. When we (men-lovers) are at a women's conference or concert, we are slowly, secretly absorbing the positive charge of the women's auras around us (more difficult, of course, should she be wearing heavy denim or leather clothing—butches take note) and we beam it back in a steady stream to our distant boyfriend who greedily sucks it up, thereby getting his revenge for being barred from an all-women's event.

So much for energy stealing. But there are two beliefs that are real energy stealers—the biggest frauds of the women's liberation movement:

Homophobia and Dyke Chauvinism: Two Sides of the Same Coin

The coin is male privilege, and it's a fake—silver-plated, but a plain copper cent in the middle, because that is all the male privilege any woman will ever get to keep. A heterosexual can lose it when she is divorced, when a man leaves her, when she gets too uppity, when she is old and "unattractive" according to society. The lesbian loses it when she steps out of her women's bar or concert, and when she stops pretending she has it at all. To the man on the street, we're just another piece of ass; to the boss, another pair of hands; to ruling-class men, another womb to control.

We get this worthless coin when we are coupled with, or imitating, men. We clutch it because of the benefits we get from it.

For the heterosexual woman, these benefits are: She gets to feel "safe" from other men. The physical power of the man she's with is supposed to protect her from rape and sexual harassment. As his sidekick, she also gets some of his power over others, prestige and money; how much she gets depends on his class privilege. Now we all know it doesn't always work this way; she can still get raped, harassed—and cheated. But that's the way it's supposed to be—the myth that keeps women hanging on.

Because she's with a man, she also gets heterosexual privilege. This means she gets to feel accepted by society, attractive, okay and normal. When she kisses him on the street, people think it's cute; she can gossip about him with co-workers, family and friends, and, again, feel socially acceptable, attractive, and normal. Unlike a lesbian, she will not get into a fistfight or have water thrown on her for showing affection to her lover; she will not lose her kids, her family, or her job because of her sexual preference.

She fears losing this privilege and the little bit of power she has to manipulate men by flirting or withholding sexual favors. This fear of losing privilege is called homophobia. If she lets homophobia rule her, it will keep her from listening to (that glazed look I was talking about), hearing about, or associating with lesbians because she might catch the social disease of queerness and so lose the little security she has.

It's a tribute to women's courage that so many of us took the risk and became lesbians. However, once we became lesbians, we found out we could still get fake male privilege in another form. Our heterosexual privilege is gone, though, as soon as we publicly come out as lesbians.

~Broadsheet

Lesbians can cop some male privilege in the following ways:

Dress like a man. Talk about women like a man. Come on to women sexually like a man. Cover up your feelings like a man. Fight over a petty insult like a man. Feel superior to other women if you work in a "man's job." Feel superior to women who are dependent on men—financially, emotionally. Get into sex roles. Have a steady lover to feel secure and then one or two on the side. Sound familiar? Feel superior to men as lovers because you know you can have an orgasm and give your lover one...sometimes. Ring a bell? Most of all, feel superior to, different from, most women. Like a man.

We have all known women who have done some of these things. We have all done them ourselves, me included. Feminism forced lesbians to drop the facade of sex roles, and take a hard look at what we were doing to each other. We had to change, a painful process we are all still going through. Some lesbians saw this male-imitation thing clearly, and took off the other way, getting into matriarchy, dropping "men" out of "womyn" and “wimmin", celebrating femaleness as the new standard. Separatism became a goal in itself instead of a political tactic, and expanded into separatism from male children and women who related to men. The culture (music, writing, theatre) which is coming out of this woman-identification is beautiful and powerful and I need it badly. But we can be blinded by its richness. We can be blind to the fact that we are still reacting to, away from, men, that our very lives are dependent on decisions men in power make, and that, even being aware of and dropping all the former fantasies of male power and privilege, we are still imitating men in one important respect. We still feel superior to "ordinary women," who are not like us.

Dyke Chauvinism.

I do not intend here to downgrade the courage of lesbians in living as sexual outlaws, in a world that despises them. I know that lesbians have paid an emotional price, and may have sacrificed friendships, family, and loved ones to be where they are. I was lucky in that my support group has stayed with me through all my changes. So lesbian feminists have a lot to be proud of. But nothing to be smug about.

Lesbians still hurt each other and not only in personal relationships, but through racism and class privilege. If there's one thing I've learned it's that rejection hurts, pain is pain, whether from a man or a woman. If it's from a man, then, well, what were you doing with him in the first place, and, if it's from a woman, she's a sister and she's not supposed to do that to you.

More on page 19
Big Mama Rag, April, 1981 - Page 13