Much of the news Big Mama Rag is receiving and reporting has to do  
with splits of one kind or another in the women’s movement. While it is  
true that various government bodies are capitalizing on our internal  
friction, it is important to remember that our arguments do not originate  
with them. When the weakness is there, our enemies will do all they  
can to aggravate the situation: but the weakness has to be there first,  
and it begins with us.  

A good example of a split gone haywire is the current  
Redstockings/Gloria Steinem controversy (see July Big Mama). The  
basic issue here seems to be the conflict between reformism and  
radicalism, between liberal and revolutionary consciousness. This is a  
question that the movement as a whole needs to discuss and resolve; it  
has emerged before and it will emerge again. But the whole thing has  

erupted in a mess of paranoia and accusations, providing a perfect  
environment for those who would harm us to step in and further widen  
the gap between feminists. There is an urgent need for the movement to  
abandon its tendency to finger-pointing and to adopt instead a spirit of  
questioning. Differences in themselves are not necessarily negative. It  
is how we are expressing our differences that endangers our survival.  

It is a frightening fact that we, as feminists, stand in danger of serious  
harassment by the armed guardians of the patriarchy. However, to  
blame our internal frictions on the government amounts to a copout.  
True, we need to remain clear that it is they who constitute the enemy,  
and not other women — but we should also remain aware of our own  
potential for self-destruction. Not to confront criticism, and not to  
engage in a process of constructive self-criticism is a dangerous  
blindness, and it might undo us yet.  

Dealing With Splits  

How can we begin to heal the rifts, and how ensure that no more  
develop? The key must surely be an openness to other lines of thought  
than our own. Rigidity comes from defensiveness, and defensiveness is  
a political mistake we can’t afford to make. We, as women, coming from  
many different backgrounds, have access to a rich variety of political  
sources. We should be utilizing our differences rather than arguing  
about them. It is natural for a movement to stiffen its defenses against  
outside harassment and co-optation, but we should beware of closing  
each other out in the same process.  

To make a true revolution, the means must be appropriate to the ends...  
Thus, a healthy society should be open to questioning its own premises,  
and in order to achieve a healthy society we need always to be  
questioning ours. The constructive power of criticism and self-criticism  
is a power for change and growth. To deny ourselves that process is to  
choose conflict, stagnation and death.  

It would be misleading to say that Big Mama Rag has gone national.  
The bald truth of the matter is that the paper has been actively  
covering national news for some time now. So that, by dropping the  
word “Western” from our cover and becoming simply “A Women’s  
Journal”, we don't see ourselves as shifting our focus. Rather we are  
recognizing a gradual development come to fruition. It has been said  
that local events reflect the national scene in microcosm. With this in  
mind, we have recommitted ourselves to extensive investigative  
coverage of local and regional news. By acknowledging national news  
as an equal priority, far from turning our attention from home, we aim to  
bring a broader perspective to all areas of our news coverage.  

For the rest, the collective continues to change and grow. One of our  
members recently returned from a visit to Sagaris, where she gained  
valuable insights into the current national scene, as well as organizing  

several media workshops. Big Mama was well received by women  
there, and the collective has benefitted from their feedback.  

Two of us are planning to take in the National Radical Feminist  
Conference in Pennsylvania later this month, and are scheduling extra  
time to do some investigation and data-gathering in that area of the  
country while we're about it. Big Mama will also be represented at a  
feminist media conference planned by Sister, a Los Angeles  
newspaper, in October in L.A. (more about this in future issues).  

We want to maintain close contact with our readers: we hold this as a  
priority. Write and let us know what you want to see in the paper. Give  
us some feedback about what you've already seen. Big Mama Rag  
keeps growing out of us all.  

“If we can’t love each other, if we can't learn to grow together, then  
we will have only a rebellion against the male death culture — a  
rebellion which may be successful. But I think we are capable of  
revolution. To love without role, without power plays, is revolution. I  
believe these are our goals.”  

— Rita Mae Brown  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 7  

European Feminists Host  

Tribunal on Crimes Against Women  
To Be Held in November  

Carol Lease  

In August, 1974, women at an  
international feminist camp on a  
small island in Denmark began  
thinking about having an Inter-  
national Tribunal on Crimes  
Against Women. Then at a  
workshop of an international  
feminist conference that was  
held in Frankfurt, Germany the  
following November, feminists  
began to seriously consider to  
have the Tribunal take place  
sometime in 1975, since this  
year has been designated as  
International Women’s Year by  
the United Nations.  

The first planning meeting for  
the Tribunal met in Paris last  
March. Energy was high and the  
tribunal was a reality. Women  

from Norway, Denmark,  
England, France, Belgium,  
Switzerland, and the United  

States had already formed ac-  

tively functioning Tribunal  
groups in their countries.  
Women from Italy, Portugal,  
Spain, Puerto Rico, Mexico,  
Holland, Germany, Saudi  
Arabia, Canada, Brazil, and  

Ireland were among women  
from other countries who  
attended, ready to start national  
tribunals on crimes against  
women in their countries.  

European Location  
The Tribunal will be held in the  
first two weeks of November in  
Lisbon, Brussels, or Amsterdam.  
The final decision will be made  
at an organizational meeting to  
be held in Paris in August.  
Women from these three cities  
have offered to host the Tribunal  
but have found that it is not an  
easy job. The Tribunal will need  
the use of simultaneous transla-  
tion equipment, translators,  
cheap or free accommodation  
facilities for 200 - 250 women, a  
large hall with smaller rooms for  

workshops, and various office  
equipment.  

The purposes of the Tribunal  
include reaching as many  
women as possible and being, in  
effect, a world-wide con-  
sciousness raiser. Tribunal  
organizers hope that the ex-  
posure of crimes against women  
will both increase the con-  
sciousness of feminists who are  
already aware of women’s op-  
pression but not too knowledgeable  
about specific oppression of  
women in other parts of the  
world, and strengthen the  
consciousness of women in  
countries where there is no  
feminist movement and where  
the consciousness of women’s  
oppression is still low.  

International Solidarity  

The organizers believe that  
“international feminism is more  
powerful,” and that the Tribunal  
will help make the struggle of  
feminists a more international  
one so that women from all over  
the world can help each other in  
times of need. They see the  
Tribunal not only as a  
consciousness-raiser but as a  
beginning and a basis for actions  
to eradicate crimes against  
women in all countries.  

A tentative format for the  
Tribunal, worked out at the  
March meeting, includes a com-  
bination of personal testimony  
and short reports from women  
who were/are victims of crimes;  
spontaneous testimony from  
audience members; movies and  
other audio-visual presentations,  
such as videotapes from  
victims who could not attend the  
International Tribunal;  
workshops on analyzing why the  
crimes exist and persist; and  
solution workshops to talk about  
ways to eradicate the crimes.  

In every country a national  
Tribunal either has been or will  
be created by feminists who will  
gather testimony from women,  
decide what specific crimes their  
country will present to the  
International tribunal in  
November, help the women who  
want to attend the international  
tribunal to attend, and possibly  

sponsor national tribunals on  
crimes against women.  

Specific Crimes  
A partial list of the crimes that  
will be presented during the 5  
day Tribunal is:  
Sexual crimes: rape, molesta-  
tion of female children, incest  
involving unwilling females,  

selling of girls and women into  
prostitution, prostitution due to  
lack of alternatives to make  
money, persecution of lesbians,  
extreme forms of sexual double  
standards (e.g.,  

clitoridectomies, infibulation, the  
use of young women to make por-  
nography, the brutalization of  
women to make pornography.  

Reproduction and medical  
crimes: brainwashing of  
females to become mothers,  
forced motherhood by making  
contraception or abortion illegal,  
inaccessible, dangerous methods  
of birth control, forced sterilization  
(particularly of Third World women),  
unnecessary surgery on women  
such as mastectomies and  
hysterectomies, the brutaliza-  
tion of the childbirth process, the  
brainwashing of women done by  
the psychiatric profession, the  
seduction and rape of women  
patients;  

Family and law: unpaid work  
of housewives, assigning the  
mother to be the major responsi-  
ble parent, wife beating, the  
legality of rape in marriage,  
purdah, selling of girls and  
women into marriage,  
polygamy, the ease with which  
men can divorce in some  
cultures while it is virtually  
impossible for women to initiate  
divorce, child brides of older  
men, the oppression faced by  
lesbian mothers, the horrendous  
consequences of child-brides;  

Work and politics: economic  
crimes against women, i.e.  
lower pay, poor job oppor-  
tunities, sexist welfare systems,  
the over-representation of  
women in poverty, male-  
oriented job structures, lack of  
political power for women, the  
torture of women political  
prisoners, the victimization of  
women in patriarchal wars,  
such as Vietnam.  

Tribunal organizers are trying  
to involve more third world  
countries in the International  
Tribunal since they were not  
represented at the planning  
conferences. Crimes in many  
third world countries are extreme  
and consciousness about them  
tends to be low. They ask that  
anyone who has ideas, specific  
information, or addresses on  
how to involve third world  
countries in the Tribunal write to  
them (names and addresses are  
at the end of this article).  

U.S. Organizes  
Regional Tribunals  
While there will be represen-  
tatives from the United States at  
the International Tribunal on  
Crimes Against Women, some  
U.S. feminists have already  

begun organizing regional  
tribunals to be held immediately  
before the international one in  
Europe throughout the United  
States.  

Women in Los Angeles and  
New York City have begun plan-  
ning west and east coast  
tribunals to help raise the con-  
sciousness of women in their  
areas and neighborhoods about  
crimes against women. Many  
women who will be unable to  
attend the International Tribunal  
will have the opportunity to  

speak about their victimization.  
Women working on the west  
coast tribunal can be reached  
through the Women’s Center,  
2112 Channing Way, Berkeley,  
CA 94704. East Coast women  
can be reached through Judy  
Friedlander, 214 W. 91st St.,  
N.Y., N.Y, 10024.  

Anyone who wants further  
information, has suggestions, or  
comments should write to  
Coordinating Committee, Inter-  
national Tribunal on Crimes  
Against Women (TCAW) c/o  
Maureen Giroux, Rm. 606, 33  
Ave. des Champs Elysees, Paris  
8, FRANCE or to the U.S.  
representative on the inter-  
national committee, Diana  
Russell, Mills College, Oakland,  
CA 94613. For further informa-  
tion on the U.S. tribunal (in  
general) write ITCAW, Women’s  
Center, 2112 Channing Way,  
Berkeley, CA 94704.  

WOMEN’S  
JOURNAL  

$6.00  

$10.00  

Sample or back copy 50  
BULK RATES AVAILABLE  

Individual Subs  

Institutions  

1724 GAYLORD ST.  
DENVER, CO. 80206