letters home to mama

2 OEE ET ETO AS EO A A A A A A AH A > a a ae,

Bookstore Needs  
Support  

The Woman To Woman Bookstore is ex-  
periencing serious financial difficult-  
ies. This is in part due to the season,  
and we are not yet considering the  
possibility of having to close. How-  
ever, we do need the support of our  
community, and we're not getting it  
from two groups of women. These groups  
are women who have written us bad  
checks and women who have overdue books  
from our library. The problem with the  
bad checks is obvious. The problem  
caused by the overdue books is that  
they are not available to the rest of  
the community; and since we cannot  

reprinted from PORTCULLIS  

afford to replace them our library is  
becoming more and more inadequate to  
serve the community. Out of approx-  
imately 700 volumes, 180 (or 25% of the  
library) are out and overdue. The  
amount of time books are overdue ranges  
from one to nine months.  

We have tried to contact these wom-  
en by phone and/or by mail but receiv-  
ed no response. So now we're trying a  
direct public appeal. Please help us  
out: return your overdue books and  
replace your bad checks.  

Woman To Woman Collective  

NO BOSSES Doing Well  

Dear Kathy:  

Thanks a lot for your review of No  
Bosses Here and printing an excerpt of  
the book. I especially like your last  
paragraph where you talk about the  
limitations of collectives that we dis-  
cuss in the book. We never realized  
how well the book would do, we've sold  
over 3,000 copies and are in our sec-  
ond printing. But more than that feed-  
back and reviews have been excellent.  

As a matter of fact we're probably the  
worst critics of the book. But then we  
usually are. We should probably read  

Inside BMR  

Virago Community Meeting  
Local NOW...  
Letters...  
Women Fight in Eritrea....  
Lesbian Loses Custody.....  
Where We're At........  

Editorial...  
COLLECTIVE  
Culture: Dona Calacone  

Photography:  
Finances:  
Office:  
Local News:  
Advertising: Sue Goding  
National/International:  
Production Coordination:  
Member-at-Large: Lynn  

CONTRIBUTORS  

Lori Bradshaw, Andrea Chesman, Marina Franchild, Andrea Gabrie! Kathy  
Jan, Bev Renick, Kathy Riley, Sammi,  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by Big  
Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.  
submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Co.  
Deadline for the material is the fif-  
teenth of each month.  
Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope  
No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material.  
We reserve the right to edit all material for length.  
Rates are $6 per year for individual subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Can-  
ada, and $12 to institutions. BMR is free to women in prison and in mental  
institutions.  
This publication is on file at the New Alexandria Library  
for Lesbian Women in Chicago and is also available on microfilm through  

The staff of BMR no longer keeps regular office hours. If  
you must reach us by phone, leave a message at Woman To Woman Center (320-  
5972) Monday through Saturday 10 am to 8 pm.  

(We no longer accept poetry submissions.)  

Advertising information is available from Sue (333-7554),  

Karen Martin, Deb Taylor  

Mary Wadding, Vicki Piotter, Corinne Coston  
Clair Kaplan, Dona Calacone, Bobbe Ross, Pandoura  
Sue Goding, Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross  

Clair Kaplan, Judy Barlow  
Susanna Smith, Corinne Coston  

our own sections on positive feedback.  
We also feel very good about the pos-  
itive comments the book has received  
from the women's movement. As a soc-  
ialist-feminist mixed collective this  
is important to us.  

One question. Currently only Woman  
To Woman Bookstore in Denver carries  
our books (in Colorado). Do you have  
any other suggestions for potential  
bookstores in Colorado? Again, thanks  
a lot.  

Carry on your good work,  
Vocations for Social Change  

Just What Can Feminists Afford...  
To Be A Sister-Peru.......  
Nat'l. Lesbian Feminist Organization..  
Culture.....  

Janet Sergi, Constance Perenyi  
Manuscripts and artwork may be  
sent to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO 80206. (Note: At this time we no  

longer accept poetry submissions.)  

Subscription  

Advertising information is  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 4  

Linda Rechter Community Meeting  

After Linda Rechter's death, women of the community held a meeting to discuss  
what our role is in a community, when one of us is in emotional stress.  
Women who had known Linda felt guilt at not being able/willing to cope with  
her emotional needs. A tape recorder was brought in minutes after the  
meeting had begun and therefore the tape that Carol heard, three months later,  
was not reflective of the whole meeting.  

JUST WHO IS CRAZY HERE?  
--A Memorial Article for Linda Rechter  

by Carol Stern  

Thank the Goddess for my poetry.  
Thank the Goddess for my own blood mother  
Thank the Goddess for the love I feel for the Goddess herself.  

Without these, I would also die as you did...  
(Now that you have left me here on Earth once again alone)  

And even so, I may choose one day to go as you did.  

But if I do, may my faith allow me to do it in peaceful  
and clear conviction...  

Not in the violent way you seem to have chosen.  

I had been out of the country...moving around too often to have an address  
where I could be contacted. When I got back, I found out that Linda had  
killed herself three months earlier. Needing to find out more surrounding  
her death, I acquired the tape that was recorded at the discussion following  
her death. (Everything in quotation marks in this article is taken directly  
from the tape.) The shock at hearing the tape only added to the shock I felt  
at losing my best friend. An incredible amount of time was taken up talking  
away (or attempting to talk away) feelings such as “guilt” or "despair" (in-  
dicating, of course, that these are "politically incorrect" feelings to  
have). Political differences, of course, also had to make their rounds, even  
on this occasion. While many women must have come there to grieve the loss  
of a sister, it just never seemed to get around to that. How frustrating it  
must have been for those who honestly came to pay tribute to and express deep  
sadness for Linda. I, myself, cannot allow for this intolerable invalidation  
of a sister, whether some choose to label her "mad" or not.  

At the end of the tape, three women finally spoke out on the frustrations  
that they were feeling.  

WOMAN 1: "I've noticed that you've wanted to talk a couple of times."  
"I'm just getting pissed. I'll live with it."  

WOMAN 1: "Why don't you share it?"  
"I don't know how."  
WOMAN 1: "Why don't you start with what you're pissed with."  

"I'm pissed with the same thing that Linda faced in this room. I have things  
to say, but I'm not sure of myself, and I'm sure I'm not attractive and I'm  
sure that I'm not communist, and I'm getting pissed at the idea that it's be-  
cause of that that I'm not good enough."  

WOMAN 2: “When I go into the women's community, too, I often feel a kind  
of relentless individuality. A relentless almost narcissism on the part of  
some of the women I meet. And I'm too fragile for that, and I go around in  
black a lot of the time and feel sad for the women's community. Because it  
keeps letting me down. And then I think, 'No, let me assume a personal re-  
sponsible position here. I keep getting let down, because I let myself get  
let down'...and right now I'm in a very confused place where I feel really  
frail and really sad a lot of the time because when I do reach out, I some-  
times get very scared. And go around feeling really fragile a lot of the  
time, like I need something...something...but I'm not quite sure what it is,  
and I'm not quite sure I really want to take the risk of reaching out and ask-  
ing for it..."  

WOMAN 3: “But where are you going to reach? I want to know where are  
you going to reach for it. Where? Where? I don't even see...I've never  
been here before. I go to W.A.P.A. I've never been in the feminist stuff.  

I don't like it...at all. I don't like all of the “These people do this, you  
people do this'. I'm feeling very uneasy...very, very alienated, very in-  
secure...I'm just sitting here wondering, ‘What the hell am I doing here...  
do these people have anything for me?' And I'm not liking it. I mean, God,  
if I'd been Linda, I think I'd have killed myself too."  

"What do you mean..." MORE ON PAGE 11  

April 2nd: The original movie version  
of A STAR IS BORN. 8:00 pm $1  

April 8th: SPECIAL SHOW: SHARI ME  
from Chicago. MUSICAL ENTERTAINMENT  
$2.00 at the door 10pm  

April 9th: Theater, Poetry and Art  
Show. $1.50 9pm  

April 16th: Music with Amy Wagner,  
Nancy Hutchison and Mary Centa $1.50  
9pm  

HAPPY HOUR: 6 to 8 pm weekdays with  
MIDNIGHT SPECIAL 12pm to 1am Fridays  
and Saturdays.  

SPAGHETTI NIGHT: Every Wednesday, all  
you can eat for $1.50. Check out the  
Pool Tournaments.  

NEW HOURS: Tues-Fri: 5pm to 2am  
Saturday: 4pm to 2am  
Sunday: 4pm to midnight  
38th & CHESTNUT DENVER  

GROUP MEETINGS WELCOME