IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

trial of Yvonne Wanrow cancelled

"From the very beginning I | trial of Yvonne Wanrow, scheduled to begin April 30th, will not happen, the result of the plea of guilty on Yvonne Wanrow was first convicted said I am not guilty of a crime (which she had been doing all along), 25 years. I still say it today. Evers now, or ever again. She was to have charges of second degree assault and manslaughter. In 1973 by an all-white jury in Spokane, Washington. She was not surprised by the guilty verdict-- her us 45 open to this sort of prosecution. If it doesn't happen to you, it could happen to your sister, your child, or someone close to you. I don't want to see that happen. resist."

first degree assault and felony murder for defending herself and children against a known child rapist.

In what can only be seen as a victory for Yvonne, her lawyers plea-bargained, with a five-year suspended sentence, one year to be served helping her Colville Indian community.

The trial was held in an area known for its persecution of its Native American population; the fact that she was a woman with a gun directly challenged society's tolerance for male violence against women and its lack of support for women who have faced More on page 18

-Yvonne Wanrow, Feb 1979

As Big Mama Rag was set to go to press this month, we learned that the

CHRONOLOGY OF KEY EVENTS

August 12, 1972: William Wesler, a drunken child rapist, enters Yvonne Wanrow's babysitter's house at 5:00 a.m. Yvonne shoots and kills him and injures his drinking companion.

May 13, 1973: On Mother's Day, Yvonne Wanrow is convicted by an all-white jury of murder and first degree assault.

January 1977: Washington State Supreme Court reverses Yvonne's conviction because a) the tape recording of her phone call to the police was illegally played to the court and b) the jury was not instructed to consider Yvonne's actions from the perspective of a woman under attack. (Several women have since been acquitted using this precedent in their defense, while Yvonne is still being prosecuted.) Spokane prosecutor, Donald Brockett, has the option to drop the charges or retry Yvonne; he presses for retrial. This is delayed by Yvonne's next appeal.

March 13, 1978: Washington State Supreme Court hears Yvonne Wanrow's appeal on the constitutionality of the felony-murder statute used to charge her. This law, declared unconstitutional in most states, says she can be found guilty of murder without any proof of her intent to kill.

December 29, 1978: Washington State Supreme Court rules against Yvonne's appeal and upholds the constitutionality of the felony-murder statute. Court later refuses to reconsider this decision.

March 2, 1979: Yvonne pleads guilty to lesser charges. Prosecutor Brockett still has the option to drop the charges or he chooses to retry her. Does not face trial.

Nestles Strikes Again

The Nestles Company, still selling their baby food formulas which have been documented as causing the deaths of many infants in Third World countries, has devised another product to foist on the Third World. The product, Nestoban, allegedly prevents diarrhea, sells for $2.20 a can, lasting a two-month infant eight days. Ironically, this Nestles' product prevents the very diarrhea its special food formulas cause. How clever of Nestles to create its own market.

-Off Our Backs

Uranium Babies

More than one hundred Indian babies born in recent years on the Laguna Pueblo near Grants, New Mexico have suffered some form of birth defects. The reservation is near one of the world's oldest and largest open pit uranium mines. The Jackpile Uranium Mine and the nearby Bluewater processing mill, operated by the Anaconda Mining Company, a subsidiary of Atlantic Richfield, employ about 450 Laguna Indians- 3/4 of the tribe's workforce.

-NASC Newsletter

Practical Woman

A Canadian firm has been ordered to pay Jane Gawne $800 in lost wages as a result of their refusal to hire her as a chainperson for survey work. The company said hiring a woman creates problems; first, the cost to the company of obtaining an extra room for out of town trips and second, that hiring a woman might upset the wives of other crew members. When job interviewer Richard Chapman told Ms. Gawne that it was too impractical for him to hire her and that he had tried a woman before "and it had not worked out", she complained to the Human Rights Board, which handed down the judgement in her behalf.

-Kinesis

Dad-Beats

A study by the Rand Corporation in California shows that only 7% of divorced men pay alimony and only 19% pay any child support after three years. Furthermore, alimony is awarded in only 14% of all divorces; child support in 44%. It was also found that women and children who are owed support payments were living on an average of $218 a month while ex-husbands lived on $880 a month.

-Majority Report

Stop and Go Bra

A stop and go bra has been invented by a Scottish scientist, with flashing red or green lights that indicate, by the color of the moment, where the woman is in relation to her cycle of ovulation, thus, by implication, whether she is likely to get pregnant if she has intercourse during that time. The birth control garment, as it is being called, is currently being tested at the Tenovous Cancer Research Center in London.

-San Francisco Chronicle

-photo by Karen Black

Bouncing Women’s Sports

A coalition of 300 independent colleges has raised $100,000 and hired a Washington consulting firm to organize a lobbying campaign aimed at exempting athletics from Title IX, the federal law barring sex discrimination in schools. Their ultimate goal is to exempt all sports from Title IX coverage, but at the very least they want, what they call, revenue-producing sports exempted from equal opportunity laws.

-New Women's Times

“John” Found Guilty

A New York judge recently found a man guilty of rape when he refused to pay a prostitute. The man had agreed to pay $20, but instead pulled out a revolver and forced the woman to work for free. The prostitute's newspaper said that the court would probably not have ruled in favor of the victim had the rapist merely refused to pay, instead of using a gun.

-Coyote Howls

GI Janes

Women pilots who ferried military planes during World War II, often under dangerous conditions, have just now won their fight to be recognized as service veterans. Air Force Secretary John Stetson announced that 1,097 Women's Air Forces Service Pilots who flew planes for the Army Air Corps will now be considered to have seen active military service. This now entitles them to benefits administered by the Veterans Administration.

-New Women's Times

Selective Breeding

The nation's first test tube clinic, scheduled to open in January in Norfolk, Virginia has a waiting list of over 500 women. To be considered for admission to the non-profit clinic a woman must be married, have blocked fallopian tubes, a healthy husband and a healthy uterus, according to Dr. Patrick Steptoe, one of the clinic's founders.

~-Hersay