Editors’ G

Poet, fiction writer and feminist theorist, Robin  
Morgan was one of the keynote speakers at the  
National Conference on Violence Against Women,  
sponsored by Safe House for Battered Women and  
Metro State College, Oct 2-5, in Denver. Morgan's  
speech stressed the interconnectedness of different  
forms of violence against us: battering, child  
abuse, rape, pornography, mutilation and medical  
mis-practice. It's not easy to edit her talks:  
as with her poetry, the temptation to add one more,  
"Oh, by the way, did you know?" is always present.  
Following one attempt to do so, Morgan is the  
author of Monster, Lady of the Beasts, Going Too  
Far: The Personal Chronicle of a Feminist and  
Powerful, a children's novella,  
which will be published soon.

Floryncee Kennedy is described in the conference  
literature as "well-known for her colorful Lang-  
uage"—a phrase once reserved for Southern male  
politicians. That could mean it's all too easy  
to focus on her language at the expense of the  
very sensible content behind it. In any case,  
whether you view her as an underrated theorist or  
a spectacle in getting people off their ass,  
she'll tell you she's no Mary Poppins. A lawyer  
and founder of the Feminist Party, Kennedy is  
coordinator of the Coalition Against Race  
Sexism and director of the Media Workshop of  
Consumer Information Services. She was once a  
dog sitter, an elevator operator and a maid.

Robin Morgan...

Love Surgery

“Anyone here heard of love surgery?  
Well, moving right along in the cate-  
gory of 'If-the-shoe-doesn't-fit-then-  
you-change-the-foot' category: Rather  
than change male attitudes toward women,  

a California gynecologist—male—  
has come up with a wonderful solution.  
Noting that 70 to 80 percent of Ameri-  
can women are pre-orgasmic, as we would  
call them, or as they would call them,  
frigid; because American men seem to  
refuse to understand the basic clitoral  
anatomy, this particular doctor has de-  
cided that rather than going to the  
trouble of teaching men how to be half-  
way decent, courteous lovers—which  
might begin with even locating the  
clitoris—that what you do is you  
simply move the clitoris. I'm quite  
serious. Since most men are, according  
to his research into sexual practices,  
interested in penile insertion into  
the vagina, then what you do is simply  
move the clitoris down nearer to the  
vagina. Then there might actually be  
some clitoral stimulation. Now this  
goes so much into the atrocity area,  
beyond even plastic surgery, enforced  
beauty standards, silicone breast  
transplants.

Incest and Abuse

"I think one of the ways that we've  
raised consciousness in the past—at  
least with rape and with battery too—  
is with language. A current obsession  
of mine is doing this with ‘incest!  

We know the very high rate statistically  
of child abuse in this country. But  

what this is usually referred to as is  
‘incest,’ which linguistically implies  
collaboration, incitation, and almost  
even mutuality. I mean, because a  
brother and sister, or two sisters or two  
brothers playing around at age three  
together could come under the same head-  
ing. But actually what we are talking  
about, however, is a situation in which  
in 90 percent of the cases in this coun-  
try, it is male-on-female abuse and  
rape."

Flo Kennedy ...

"We want to stop these men from kick-  
ing our ass. . .And I heard—was it you?  
—that you're too small to bash somebody's  
knees. You can break a man's knees with  
a skillet as easy as you can break the  
breast of a chicken for that chicken  
Kiev or whatever it is that requires you  
to break the chicken's breastbone. It  
ain't that hard; it really ain't that  
hard. So the reason you aren't strong is  
that you're too scared."

“We ought to stop pushing marriage in  
the first place; and we ought not to put  
up with media making marriage seem like  
the ultimate goal for every young, normal  
person... . But it really isn't so much  
marriage as living together. Now some  
people say, I'd never get married; I'd  
just live with somebody. Now, to me,  
that is the ultimate in asshole-ery. If  
you're gonna live with someone, you may  
just as well get married; then if the fool  
dies, you can at least collect social  
security maybe."

"We are living such lies in this  
country, and allowing lies to be put out  
in our name, that we purchase the products  
that make the multimillion-dollar propa-  
gandizing possible."

"I am really tired of people who are  
ignorant. I'm sick of people saying, I  
don't know enough about it. ‘Learn about  
it; for heaven's sake, and cut this  

bullshit."

"You are funding violence every time  
you pay a federal tax; and you are funding  
the perpetration of an atmosphere in  
which violence will obtain every time you  
purchase a heavily advertised product."

“We have never in this movement, which  
can certainly use a dose of Epsom salts  
or Ex-Lax, had a decent boycott."

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.10

Dowry Murder

"I guess when something happens like  
the realization of the dowry murders  
in India, when suddenly 10,000 women  
hit the streets in New Delhi over them;  
the dowry murders are...when a man's  
family feels that the bride did not  
come with sufficient dowry, and the  
bride's family doesn't want to pay more—  
what is a fairly standard tradition is  
that gasoline is poured over her and  
she is set afire. The breaking of news  
items like that, like love surgery,  
is always what, I think, creates that  
moment in feminist consciousness when  
you really feel, once again, that you  
are quite mad."

Pope in Iowa

"The backlash, I think, is the po-  
litical context in which we're talking.  
The rise of the right wing in this  
country is fairly obvious now. It is  
very moneyed, it is very smooth, it is  
well organized. . . I don’t know if  
you've noticed, by the way, that the  
papal visit seems to be going to the  
oddest places. I mean, why Iowa? .  
Well, Iowa has a number of very impor-  
tant races here, and it's almost a  
single issue campaign; and it's a pro-  
choice issue that we're going to the  
line with. So when the bishops' confer-  
ence declares its congressional targets,  
and then the pope happens to be going  
to those states where the races are  
very tight, I think it's worth noticing."

Church Non-violence

"I don't know if you were as touched  
as I was, but I was very happy and im-  
pressed to learn in a speech he (the  
Pope) gave yesterday...that violence  
is not the church's way. . .Now you  
know, the nine million women who were  
burned at the stake for being witches  
would be glad to know that...the  
ghosts of the church massacres could  
populate an entire planet."

"My mother and father instructed us to  
leave any classroom where any teacher  
threatened to hit us. Now I've known  
people from all classes who would say that  
their parents would give them additional  
punishment if they were punished in school  
on the assumption that the teacher was  
right and they did something wrong. So  
the first thing I would say that you  
might do, just within your own home, is  
take a position against striking your  
own kid. You don't know maybe how dif-  
ficult it is to be non-violent until you  
try it yourself. And maybe if you become  
non-violent, you'll be less tolerant  
of violence directed to you."

"The Procter and Gamble ad budget  
for 1975 was $360 million. That's al-  
most $750,000 per state. Now the follow-  
ing year, they escalated 85 million  
dollars to $445 million. In the next  
two years they escalated more...And  
what did you get for that money? A  
Trident missile submarine. And you don't  
even get to ride in it. In the case of  
Procter and Gamble and General Foods,  
you are funding your own brainwashing.  
‘Can this marriage be saved?'—all  
crotch oriented, all the biggest crock  
of shit in the world every afternoon.

And don't brag about not watching it,  
because whether you watch it or not,  
you're paying for it...And believe me,  
enough people are watching it so that  
the values are being set."

“Bringing a consumer action against  
the advertisers would put you in  
a position to go to them and say, ‘We want  
the equivalent of Crest toothpaste's  
last year's account, or one percent of  
the money you spent in 1975, for this  
issue. Now one percent of $445 million  
would be $4 million, $450,000 dollars.  
Now you could set up quite a few safe-  
houses."