mr: where we're at

Once again we're taking you "behind the pages" of BMR. We're having community meetings every six months now. Our
It was a "bad" production last month, which to us means the next one will be in January. We'll let you know more de-
tails soon. It's a great time to meet and critique BMR. 
So we had some serious talk with ourselves about improv- 
ing the situation. A bit more self-discipline in general is 
needed, for sure.

And, let's be firmer with deadlines, (not only with women 
writing in, but with ourselves. Surely we can write Where 
We're At, Hot Briefs, Resources, etc. before production 
weekend begins?). Our deadline is generally 2 weeks before 
production weekend. This allows us (barely) enough time to 
read, discuss and decide what to print and time to commun- 
icate with authors for editing and other changes that may 
be needed. We encourage finished copy, but will help with 
editing if necessary. Our deadline will be announced in 
“Where We're At" each month - the deadline for the Dec. 
issue is Nov. 14.

oops
Last month BMR reprinted an article (from No More 
Cages) by Fulani-Ali (page 17). At the end was a note 
referring to the struggle of Yaasmyn Fula, but con- 
tained incorrect information. The following letters 
were written by Yaasmyn Fula to No More Cages and 
to the Children's Defense Fund.

Dear Sisters,

In reading a recent issue of your periodical I observed 
an ad soliciting money on behalf of myself and several 
women. My name is Yaasmyn Fula, I am presently incar- 
cerated at MCC for refusing to testify before the RICO 
federal grand jury investigating the BRINKS robbery.

I have enclosed a copy of a letter I wrote to the group 
who has been soliciting money in my name. I have no idea 
who these people are and I have never been consulted 
regarding monies collected for me. I ask only that you 
not print any further requests by them that misrepre- 
sent me by asking for money. Thank you. I enjoy your 
publication and the exchanges it offers we inmates.

It's time again to stress the importance of short, con- 
cise articles. Our suggested guidelines for length are set 
up so we can cover many topics and authors in each issue 
and also for general readability for us all. We love hear- 
ing from you and in fact we were just talking about how ex- 
cited we are with the diversity of articles we've been re- 
ceiving. So please keep those cards and letters (and arti- 
cles, graphics, photographs - black and white, suggested 
headlines and space heaters to ward off that winter chill) 
coming in. And thank you, thank you Sue "Elf" Goding for 
those smooth new table tops and mailings.

During the past month we've had some heart-wrenching 
talks about being locked up. Thinking of Carmen at the 
Michigan Women's Music Festival (See Oct. ‘82 issue), the 
Oct. 20th Freedom Fighters going to trial and the Grand 
Jury resistors on trial and in prison set the scene. Incar- 
ceration seems real close sometimes. Be it our political 
thoughts and/or actions (you know you can be called in for 
grand jury proceedings for even an association of a friend 
of a friend of an acquaintance), our lesbian lifestyles 
(it's still illegal in most states), our ethnicity and/or 
class (all different peoples of color and Jews and the 
poor have been prime targets for incarceration, today and 
historically). The state is real powerful that way. And 
what does it mean when in “our own" communities and fami- 
lies the police and/or psychiatric institutions get called 
in to deal with battering relationships, and personal and 
social difficulties in living in this society - "mental 
illness"? We need to find better solutions.

These questions are ongoing and continually discussed 
within the collective, our communities and hopefully in 
our community meetings. As we stated in the June ‘82 issue

Yours truly,

Yaasmyn Fula

Children's Fund 
NCBL Legal Defense Fund 
P.O. BOX 04252 

Detroit, Michigan 48204 

To Whom It May Concern 
I don't know who your group represents as no one has 
ever consulted with me to solicit money on my behalf. 
Irregardless of whoever you are I demand you disconti- 
nue misrepresenting me in your ads for "financial & 
moral support." You have neither consulted with me, 
my attorney, or my legal support network all of whom 
have been perfectly capable of providing the financial 
& moral support I have needed. I am outraged, not be- 
cause I have never received a dime from your endeavors,

MORE ON PAGE 18

inside BMR:

3 cover: Photo from the Schomburg Collection, New 
York Public Library, reprinted from 
The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter.

= Where We're At...........6- 2 Culture 
collective: Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross, Deb Luger, Local Book Reviews....... Oe ps 
Lori Bradford, Liz Lewis Midwateryask <2. Sh + (ona PMO ROSS Hala mika. « ovis  LOpdaay, 
HOE SB ELIS kibeeerp wistl satiate: « 4855) SDEEESYS., cpugielatere 0 cae opti 14815 
Support: theresa moore, Claire Ellington, Heer : ” Calendar: te - = eas soe ie 

4 A Lesb. Incest, Surv.......6& More On... 2s 2c we cues 
Kim Womantree, Wendy Highb' Jacky F 

: 7 oe i, Bexnang SHOCK SEORe-- 4+ 1s wets te pitey 2 eCLASSLEOS, LeAS .... seek -18&19 

Women Against Imp...... «gD EMRESOUYCES y sisteisie se ae ee aS: 20 

contributors: rita Nathanson, Wendy Studinski, 

Natalie Phillips, Clara Kaplan, Kathy Riley, 
Lee Eddy, Eden Stone, Candy McCullough, Sue 
Goding, Joan Pettijohn: 

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly 
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts 
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., 
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen- 
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding 

month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope 

with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un- 
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater- 
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription 

rates are $7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., 

$14 (in U.S. funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown 
wrapper, and $21 to all institutions. BMR is free to all 
women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions. 
BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian 
Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol. 11, 
#1 Oct. '72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $60. 
BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 

7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone no. is (303) 322-2010.

‘Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, November, 1982