local

Cudahy Co.

In late August, the Cudahy company gave notice to its employees that it was being sold and all the workers were being laid off. It also told the employees that the new company would hire them back in their same jobs—for about half the wages they had been earning.

Many of the employees had been there years, some as long as 35. With the new owner, wages would be reduced from an average of over $10 per hour to about $5 per hour.

What makes the situation especially unjust, the Cudahy

Lays Off Entire Shop To Bust Union

Company is being sold to Bar-S, a subsidiary of the same company that owns Cudahy. This was done to break the union and contract. Bar-S is saying it is not obligated to any union contract. The union, United Food Workers, is fighting back through the courts, pointing out that Cudahy and Bar-S are the same company—only the name has been changed.

This is at least the second time this year that an entire shop has been laid off to bust the union and lower wages. In May, the janitors at the Federal Building were laid off when the government decided it was paying too much to have the offices cleaned. The workers had been making an average of a little over $5 per hour. A new janitorial company was contracted for the job who hired workers at minimum wage. The former employees were refused jobs, even those willing to take the cut in pay. All the workers were of course minority and women before and after the changeover.

The Cudahy workers have refused to work for the reduced wages. They have been picketing in the plant and stores that carry Cudahy/Bar-S products with some success.

In an effort to divide the workers through racism, the company has been hiring Asian scabs to replace the predominantly Hispanic workers. No one with a Spanish surname is being hired.

Cudahy/Bar-S products include meat products—bacon, lard, ham, etc. The workers are asking that people read the label when buying meat for the Cudahy or Bar-S label and boycott these products.

Criticisms centered specifically around a particular place (column 1, para. 2) where feminists' struggle to keep a conference schedule from conflicting with a Jewish holiday is used as an example of "feminists who include ethnic, patriarchal, cultural rituals in order to be perceived as liberal and non-racist, and to appease their own internalized guilt." 

We agree with the criticism—anti-Semitism is reflected in this example. It validates Jewish women's struggle to raise the consciousness of the women's community around cultural differences and the struggle to gain respect for their culture. When we recognize that it would be unlikely for a planning committee to ever schedule an action on Christmas or Thanksgiving, or any of the holidays of the dominant white culture, it is clear that it was only through the insistence of the Jewish women that the planning committee was made aware of their anti-Semitic behavior.

We apologize for our lack of awareness, for letting this go by unnoticed. We appreciate the criticism and recognize the need for us to educate ourselves further around our own anti-Semitic behavior.

More generally, we hear people saying that the politics of lesbian-separatism (e.g., defining men as the enemy) expressed throughout the article as a whole are oppressive.

Mary Daly is quoted: "It is axiomatic for Amazons that all external/internalized influences, such as myths, names, ideologies, social structures, which cut off the flow of self's original movement should be pared away." As if to say, "Come on everyone, snap your fingers and let go of all that crap that isn't useful—that isn't the real (pure, 'original') you." 

Much of the patriarchy (racism, for instance) is ingrained in us and exists to be dealt with in ourselves and in each other. And we need to accept each other's process to understand who we are and make choices about who we want to be. We perceive that for Jewish women this would mean that reclaiming their historic culture is necessary in order for them to have real choices.

But the reality is that from the beginning, we (the collective) had problems with aspects of this article, and other aspects we liked. For instance, we found it valuable that Evelyn and Paula had specific suggestions for white women and women of color for what they can do to work on racism in the community. 

As has been mentioned a lot recently, we seem to be in constant struggle over how and how much to present articles which we don't totally agree with (setting up boundaries). Being a "State of the Movement" theme issue, our boundaries were certainly a bit broader than usual—wanting to present some diversity in factions of the movement.

We have a theme issue coming up on racism, and one on religion. We expect to be dealing with these issues in more depth, and encourage women to submit articles.

For

As

That