Iran: Women Struggle Under New Regime

Open Letter From Dezful Prison

In recent months, two Iranian women were arrested, charged, convicted
and sentenced to terms of life imprisonment. Their crimes - that they
are women who have dared to defy the system of privilege. To this date,
their male companions remain uncharged.

The following is a translation of an open letter in which these women
recount their experiences with the system of "justice" in the newly

created Islamic Republic of Iran.

LIFE TERM IMPRISONMENT WILL NOT
SILENCE OUR VOICES

Ninety days after our illegal arrest
by Mr. Satarian, Islamic Revolutionary
Prosecutor, we, two female members of
the Socialist Workers' Party have been
convicted by the absentee court in the
city of Ahvaz (Iran).

In this court, even its creation
questionable, we have not been permit-
ted to read our charges or to defend
ourselves. Nor have we been given the
most elementary rights of having or
seeing a lawyer prior to our trial.
This court, which we don't even know
who's running, has, behind closed
doors, decided the destiny of the two
of us who have been arrested for our
beliefs. After all the struggles and
deaths of martyrs against the unjust
courts of the despised Pahlavi regime,
this atrocity, which cannot be de-
scribed in words, will always be part
of the history of brutality of the
Iranian ruling class against its op-
pressed people.

The oppressive, destructive, and
inhuman measures of the Ahvaz court
do not end in three months of painful
jail terms. The armed court military
blindfolded us and took us to an
unknown destination, which we later
learned was Dezful Prison. In the
course of transfer, anytime we asked
about our destination, we received
silence or simple "I don't knows" for
the answer. Anytime that we reminded
them that our great revolution objects
to these types of atrocities, we were
answered, “We will do more than this
to you."

In the middle of the night somewhere
in the middle of the desert, the arm-
ed military forced us to get out of
the car and told us not to resist.
Then they blindfolded us again and
said, “It only takes two bullets. When
you hear the sound of the gun, you
will know that you are dead." In this
manner we received psychological tor-
ture.

In Dezful Prison, we found ourselves
in single cells, each a small room
approximately four yards by three
yards. They then began to threaten
and harass us and give us bodily tor-
ture. They would tell us, “We have
brought you here to murder you."

In response to our objections re-
garding our situation and lack of safe-
ty and to our request to see the pri-
son warden, we were answered, “Nobody
is in charge of this prison.” The
officials even refused to call a
physician to attend to the injuries
done to us.

It is interesting that two days
later we learned about our charges
and our conviction from the mass media.
Accordingly, the Islamic Revolutionary
Court of Ahvaz has convicted us be-
cause of the following charges.

1. "Anti-Islamic activities" Soc-
ialists do not participate in anti-
religious activity. Contrary to the
ruling group's propaganda, we do not
think that in Iran Marxists and Mos-
lems are fighting each other. We
believe that the masses of people are
struggling against capitalists and
landlords. Socialists, as they have
indicated in the Socialist Workers'
Party statement, want religious free-
dom. We believe that our suffering
brothers and sisters, Moslems as well
as Christians, Jews and others, will
receive the same benefits from such
a struggle. The continuation of the
struggle of the Iranian masses is for
a better life, and the agitation and
conspiracy of the capitalists and
landlords against the majority of
these masses is a vivid example of this
matter. The attack of international
imperialism on the Iranian revolution
is another example of this reality.

2. "Accusing the government of
oppression and the destruction of dem-
ocracy" What is more important than
this is that six months after our
victorious uprising against the mon-
archy, imperialism, SAVAK, and
Pahlavi's terror, we see clearly that
attacks on all newspapers, publica-
tions, various organizations, and the
reorganization of the political pri-
son system by the government are the
examples of oppression and suppression
and not of freedom.

3. "Membership in the executive
committee of a legal party such as the
Socialist Workers’ Party of Ahvaz" Our
question is, under what law is member-
ship in the executive committee of
a legal party such as the Socialist
Workers' Party considered a crime?

4. "Inciting insurrection against
the central government" The methods of
the socialist struggle are peaceful
methods and are organized around an
identifiable revolutionary and active
program. The patient suggestions of the
party for the constitution and our
cooperative methods of instruction

Leaflet By Iranian Women

The history of the struggle of the
Iranian people is the history of men's
and women's struggle for justice in
which, hand in hand, they have strug-
gled against reactionaries and oppres-
sors. In the recent struggle, free
Iranian women have shown that they can
fight with their courageous brothers
against the corrupt regime of the im-
perialist puppet, Pahlavi, and work
toward democratic freedom.

We believe that without the active
participation of women (which comprise
half of our society) in the class
struggle, victory over internal react-
ionaries and imperialists will not be
achieved, and freedom for the whole
society will not be possible. Organi-
zing women to participate in these
struggles is a necessary and an una-
voidable matter. This responsibility
is upon our shoulders and upon other
responsible forces. Effort should
be toward organizing oppressed women
of our society toward collective at-

The first attack by the central government
after the revolution was against women.

can be considered examples of the true
nature of the Socialist Workers’
Party, and no evidence either in
Ahvaz or anywhere else in Iran can be
materialized against this truth.

The reasons for our imprisonment
are very simple and clear: the parti-
cipation of women, fifty percent of
the population, in the overthrow of
the Shah and their essential role in
the total process of the revolution. This
victory has provided the possibilities
for a free and prosperous society
with social justice and peace. The
laborers and the oppressed, by their
courageous participation, showed that
they can direct their own society.
And we are convicted because we still
believe in the achievement of such a
goal. We have been convicted because
we are women, and as it has been
shown, the first attack by the central
government after the revolution was
against women. Once again, women are
supposed to be pushed back to the
corner of their houses. They ought to
become the tools of reproduction and
become intellectual and psychological
slaves. However, women, by their
overwhelming participation in demon-
strations, have indicated that they
are not willing to withdraw from the
political scene. The policies of the
central government are against women's
rights in the family, society and
work. Our conviction at this time by
the ruling group is an attempt to
create fear among freedom-loving sis-
ters and women in Iran.

If the intention of our arrest, im-
prisonment, and conviction to a life
sentence is the use of tactics of
fear, intimidation, and their destruc-
tive power; and if they hope to pre-
vent us from telling the truth and
force us out of social and political
life; we should say that they were
not successful. The cries for free-
dom of women and the courageous
Iranian people cannot be stifled
forever.

Moreover, no unfounded and unde-
fined accusation or indictment is
capable of obscuring our true faces
forever. Our records against the
Pahlavi regime are available. We are
proud of these struggles. We will
not end our attempt at achieving a
society that establishes nurseries
instead of prisons. The right for
freedom of thought, assembly and
political parties is the fundamental
result of our revolution which was
paid for with our blood.

We are demanding an open court,
not a court with closed doors. We
are demanding a trial with our pre-
sence as well as the presence of
the public.

We are requesting all freedom-lov-
ing people and organizations to
help free us and other political
prisoners. We are asking for help
from all the defenders of the Iran-
ian revolution across the world.

Mahsa Hashami
Fatemeh Falahe
August 30, 1979

Printed in Jonbesh (a newspaper),
Tehran, Iran, September 24, 1979, p.3

tempts to destroy every aspect of
oppression and injustice. "The Asso-
ciation for Freedom of Women", with
the above understanding, has been
organized on the basis of equality
between men and women in every aspect
of life such as economic, social and
cultural. In this respect, with total
independence from other groups, it is
its goal to cooperate with progres-
sive groups and organizations (forces
that are working toward securing and
supporting the rights of the oppres-
sed and are active without any rela-
tion to international powers).

The following are the objectives
which the association pursues:

1. To struggle toward the destruc-
tion of cultural and economic founda-
tions of national reactionary forces
and imperialism which can be considered
the first step toward achieving
real freedom for women.

2. To develop a revolutionary

culture among all oppressed women by

the introduction of educational, cul-
tural and supportive services for use
at all levels.

3. To defend all women's associa-
tions and syndicates and to partici-
pate in the process of political
decision making to achieve women's
rights.

4. To participate actively in all
mass struggles and demonstrations
(political and professional) of oppres-
sed people toward achieving democra-
tic rights of all women. Some of these
rights include:

A. To secure equal pay for equal
work.

B. To obliterate existing unjust
laws in marriage, divorce, inheritance
etc.

C. To establish free child-care
centers and feeding centers for
children near places of work.

D. To establish free educational
and vocational centers for women.

E. To secure full payment for
salaries and fringe benefits to work-
ing women during the two months pre-
ceding and following childbirth.

F. To limit working hours to eight
hours a day and 40 hours a week.

G. To struggle against the econo-
mic and social roots of cultural
demise such as prostitution.

H. To work toward developing an
equal environment for both sexes in
social services such as the military.

I. To establish a cooperative,
social welfare bank for all women.

J. To establish social insurance
for all working or unemployed women.

During the present times and under
the present conditions, destructive
fascist forces are in the process of
growth. To achieve these rights
demands greater participation of all
free women. On this road, we are to-
gether, and our destination is inter-
twined. Therefore, we are asking all
women and everyone else who believes
in the above goals to join us in their
achievement.

The remaining paragraph contains the
time and place of the meeting.

MORE ON PAGE 21

Palestine: Fights Two Fronts

Schofield Coryell

"I have always had to fight for my
rights on two fronts. As a Palestin-
ian, I fight for the recovery of our
homeland that was taken from us by
force and violence by the Israeli

armed forces; as a woman, I fight

for equality as a human being against
the feudal customs of Arab society
where women are treated as inferior
and subordinate."

With these words, Raymonda Hawa-Tawil,
a Palestinian journalist in her mid-
thirties, summed up the essence of her
lifetime battle for national self-de-
termination and women's rights. "These
two fights," she added, "are not
contradictory, but complementary. They
both go in the same direction --
liberation of human beings from
oppression."

Hawa-Tawil made these statements
during an interview with Liberation
News Service in Paris. She had come
for the publication of her autobio-
graphical narrative about repression

and resistance in Israel and in the
territories occupied by the Israeli
armed forces ever since the Six Day
War. She now lives in the West Bank,
and has been arrested and imprisoned
several times by the occupation author-
ities for her activities in the fight
for self-determination.

The occupation authorities took
this action against Hawa-Tawil because
of her work as a committed journalist
and militant activist in the Pales-
tinian resistance movement. "My crime?
I took part in the movement against
the occupation and I kept the press
inside Israel and in the rest of the
world informed about the conditions
in the occupied territories -- the
oppression of the people and their
opposition."

The government's charges against
Raymonda Hawa-Tawil:

"Between 1969 and 1974, Raymonda
Tawil organized protest demonstrations
by the Women's Organization of Nablus,
a subversive association that has
been carrying out extremist activity
including incitement to riot and sit-
in strikes...

"In June 1969, she transmitted to
the Palestine People’s Front informa-
tion on what was happening in the
courts...

"In December 1969, she published
a statement about the torture inflicted
on prison inmates....”

And so forth. Her house arrest ended
in December 1976, but the following
year she was arrested again and sent
to prison for the same types of offen-
ses. She was released as a result of
protests in Europe on her behalf. She
has no intention of ceasing her fight
against the occupation.

Hawa-Tawil's book is her life story,
as well as the story of the Palestin-
ians' expulsion from their homeland.
Her book, titled My Home, My Prison,
will soon be published in English by
Holt and Rinehart, New York.

From Liberation News Service