20

@S

rice  
Qty  

Ja. on SY  

Straps From Mama's Table  

Chocolate Waters and  
Katie (Blaze) O'Brien  

(Editors' Note: Comedienne Katie  
O'Brien and performance poet, Choco-  
late Waters, went on tour from April  
2 to May 15th, last month. In a per-  
iod of six weeks they performed shows  
in 16 different cities from Idaho to  
Washington to Oregon to California,  
Arizona and Texas, travelling nearly  
5,000 miles. Last month's column was  
the first part of their road notes  
and observations about the different  
women's communities they visited and  
performed for. This column is the  
second installment.)  

Show business is now in our blood.  
We will go anywhere for a free meal  
and clean sheets and a little applause  
-- but even we have our limits. The  
Vanport Hotel Pub in Vancouver, Bri-  
tish Columbia, for example. Arriving  
in Canada, pleased that we are going  
international, we drive around the  
city for an hour searching for the  
Vanport Hotel, which is listed in the  
Gay Yellow Pages with the notation  
GF (meaning gay female to them and  
dykes to us). The hotel itself is a  
two-story building looking for all the  
world like an abandoned storefront in  
a ghost town. We decide to try our  
luck anyhow (after all, we're dykes -  
we know about facades). Entering a  
room lit by one nude light bulb, our  
olfactory glands are assaulted by the  
pungent smell of alcohol and urine.  
Two old men are draped over the dila-  
pidated couch and on the floor; the  
eyeball of one seems to be dangerously  
loose. Being quick on our feet - and  
no fools - we immediately bolt for the  
door screaming...  

The nightlife in Vancouver consists  
of several male gay bars and a few  
private clubs that might consider ad-  
mitting "lady guests". At Faces we are  
told that women cannot be admitted if  
wearing bluejeans, but we go anyway -  
figuring that we will slug it out at  
the door. There we find congenial fag-  
gots with their own bluejeans held  
together by safety pins; there are  
lots of ferns, no women and we have  
missed the woman blues singer by 10  
minutes. Oh well, tomorrow we will at-  
least get a scenic drive back to Wash-  
ington state. Doing 50 mph in the pour-  
ing rain on the Canadian highway -  
plop, plop, fizz, fizz - could it be  
a flat? On closer inspection it's not  
a flat - we only have three wheels  
(thank God it's someone else's car -  
Pam Keeley of Rachele Yaseen fame).  
As we wait for a tow truck in the  
pouring rain, a low-flying airplane  
wobbles precariously over our heads.  
On the other side of the freeway is a  
recently derailed train. We decide we  

are really in the Bermuda Triangle and  
wait patiently to be delivered. Voila,  
a Royal Canadian Mounted Policeman,  
looking for all the world like an ex-  
marine, comes to our rescue. For 15  
minutes he regales us with horror  
stories about the ineffectiveness of  
Triple A (which Pam has), doesn't ever  
offer us a seat in his cruiser as a  
respite from the cold, drizzling rain,  
and then politely calls us a cab -  
which never comes. We hitch a ride  
with a reluctant tow truck driver and  
six hours, four drinks later and $147  
poorer, we are back on the road again.  

Our next show is scheduled for Port-  
land on Friday the 13th. We stay at  
the home of Lois Lane, girl reporter  
for local NBC affiliate by day and  
lesbian by night. "Do you think we'll  
have any trouble making our guaran-  
tee?" we ask her. "Not if enough peo-  
ple show up," she responds. Producers  
in some cities do not seem to be tak-  
ing us seriously.  

Our spirits are somewhat dampened by  
the time we get to the MCC church  
where we are to perform, but think  
the space is quite fitting for a cou-  
ple of pagan dykes on Good Friday. We  
are greeted there by a large ray of  
irreverent sunshine named Carol Tut-  
tle, who is doing the lights for us.  
We immediately recognize trashy kind-  
red spirits in Carol and friend Jean-  
o Wyman and decide that our revolution  
must require at least 50% Women of  
Humor. Thus inspired, we put on a  
great show for about 60 Portland wo-  
men and find them a delightful and  
enthusiastic audience.  

Later we accompany Carol and Jean-o  
to a party where a woman near the beer  
keg is boasting that her "old lady"  
can beat up anyone else's "old lady".  
The house here is furnished in Early  
American Stark - no rugs on the floors,  
no pictures on the wall and in the  
bathroom you must comb your hair by  
the reflection in the toilet bowl.  

On Sat. we get a royal send-off by  
Jean-o and Carol who not only laud us  
with affirmations of what outstanding  
performers we are, but also give us a  
lid (of mayonnaise) and fix us a wond-  
erful breakfast. "Help yourself to  
some vegetarian bacon," offers Carol.  
"That pig ate only vegetables." (We  
know you aren't interested in our  
menu, but when you get a meal like  
this on the road it's worth writing  
about!)  

We were originally going to perform  
in Eugene, OR Saturday night, but a  
local political women's dance troupe  

called Wallflower later scheduled a per-  
formance then. At the last minute we  
rescheduled our show for Sun. after-  
noon in order to be able to play Eu-  
gene at all. The Wallflower women are  
superb performers and their dance  
group operates as a collective. Carol  

Tuttle, who knows a woman in Wall-  
flower named Krissy, calls her to ask  
if Blaze and I might be allowed five  
minutes on their Sat program to show  
a little of what we do and ensure that  
Eugene women will come out to see us.  

She tells Krissy that we are extreme-  

ly good and asks the five minutes as  

a favor. Krissy says we are to show  

up at 3:30 and they'll consider it.  
Although we are reluctant to leave  
Portland, we speed off to Eugene. When  
we get there we are told to come over  
at 5:30. At 5:30 we are told to come  
back at 6:30. At 6:30 we are told that  
they don't have enough time to consi-  
der letting us do the five minutes.  

We assure Krissy that we are indeed  
bonafide lesbian performers and that  
none of our material is classist, sex-  
ist or racist. "Well," she informs us,  
"We have to hear what you're going to  
do. Then we'd need to discuss it  
among ourselves and process it collec-  
tively and we just don't have time to  
do that now....Sorry." We are so stun-  
ned that we accept this verdict with  
nary a Jesus Fucking Christ and do  
not even confront them with how disa-  
ppointed, manipulated and angered we  
are by the entire incident.  

We have gotten earlier reports that  
the women's community in Eugene is “a  
bit strange." There seems to be a lot  
of ex-Californians here and many of  
the women are into process as a way  
of life, natural foods and downward  

mobility. Almost everyone has changed  
her given names to something more  
exotic although we did meet a Maryanne  
and a Margaret. Smoking and chocolate  
chip cookies are absolutely verboten.  
We did not meet or even see any women  
of color.  

There is an extremely successful  
multi-thousand dollar industry here  
called Starflower, which distributes  
organic foods nationwide and consists  
of a 35-member all-women collective.  
They have an enormous office adjacent  
to an even more enormous warehouse and  
four semis at their disposal. Quite  
an impressive operation!  

We stay with Enid and Wanda (who  
have just changed their names from  
Wanda and Enid) who are fine musicians  
and open our show at Mother Kali's  
with some of their original music.  
The following is a dialogue of theirs  
which typifies some aspects of Eugene's  
community:  

Hi Moonshadow  

I'm not Moonshadow anymore. I just  
changed my name to Flying Ashtray.  
Hey, you were supposed to meet me  

at Mother Kali's at 4 o'clock.  

Oh wow, I spaced it out.  

You mean you forgot?  

No, I didn't forget. I just spaced  
it out.  

(Next month Part Three: Florence,  

Santa Rosa, Sacramento, the Bay area  
and onward.)