8

Big Mama Rag Vol.7 No.3

How Therapy Is Damaging, Continued From Page 7

Lesbianism and/or feminism is treated as if it is an illness. Here are two
examples from the book Women and Madness:

"One woman told her mother about lesbian play with a girl friend,
when they were both ten years old. Her mother took her to a psychi-
atrist who administered shock therapy as a form of treatment." (5)

From an interview:

"Donna: ‘Why don't you fix yourself up?' he always said. 'You look
like a hobo - I'd almost think you were afraid of men!' Not a word
about how right we were to be afraid. Not a word about athletics,
lesbianism, politics or my eternal soul. Just ‘Dress up for Daddy'
as proof of my mental health." (6)

It is important here to mention it is not only lesbians and feminists who
suffer from the treatments of the psychiatric establishment. It is anyone
who doesn't fit the white, middle class, male, heterosexual standards of this
culture.

Mental Patients Liberation View

“There are two ways to analyze the psychiatric ‘treatment’ and institution-
alization of women: from a feminist perspective or from a mental patients
liberation perspective." (7) The feminist perspective says that the psychiatric
establishment oppresses women due to sex/gender, because it tries to fit wo-
men into the feminine role. A mental patients' liberation view realizes that
a woman is oppressed because she is a mental patient. After going through a lot
of therapy or being institutionalized and being convinced she needed it be-
cause “she is sick,” a woman has many emotional and psychic scars. Women who
have been labeled "crazy" are not treated well by therapists and by most other
people. I am talking about when a woman has been in therapy due to heavy emo-
tional distress, not when people enter therapy to facilitate growth and
awareness.

When a woman has been considered "mad" even after therapy is over, people

invalidate her opinions in the same way they were often invalidated when she
was in therapy - by the assumption "how could she know, she's crazy." This
even happens in the feminist communities. It is a heavy stigma.

Frequently the woman buys into this view of herself and she sees herself as
the “crazy lady." She learns not to trust herself, because her feelings and
perceptions have always gotten her into "trouble."

Sometimes she uses people's view of her. She has been told she is not re-
sponsible or in control of what she's doing; she's crazy. This can be taken
to provide license to do anything she wants. After all, "she can't help it."
Obviously she will have to suffer the consequences of her actions.

When something goes wrong in her life or when she's feeling overwhelmed,

a woman who has been to a lot of therapists is likely to go back into therapy
to fix "what is wrong with her." This is a destructive view for a woman to
have of herself.

The New Age

A lot of healing tools considered “New Age" and/or humanistic are dangerous.
The fault doesn't lie in the techniques (using diet, massage, meditation to
heal oneself) but is with the ideologies behind the technique and the way
people use them. Now instead of going to a psychiatrist, you can go to a heal-
er, diet consultant, body therapist or guru. What remains the same is that
they are often set up as experts which maintains the power dynamic of the
“therapeutic” relationship.

People who have figured out that traditional Western medicine and psycho-
logy are not health promoting turn to these "alternative" therapies. Their
idea is that this is counter-cultural and therefore will respect the human be-
ing. Some joke that it is. The people of the New Age are the children of the
middle and upper classes of the rejected culture. Often instead of questioning
basic assumptions and values of that culture, i.e., those that are sexist,
classist, racist and/or heterosexist, they just change the form in which the
value is expressed. A possible reason for this is that these therapies empha-
size people looking inside themselves - and often forget to mention to also
look outside themselves to balance it out. There needs to be more political
analysis involved with the New Age movement and the alternatives that are be-
ing created. Creating alternatives is important. However, that alone does not
change the social structure, especially when the people involved claim to
have "transcended politics."

Sexism and ideas that are oppressive to all are abundant in theories used
by holistic healers, such as macrobiotics and polarity therapy. Both these
therapies define what is male and female by polar role definitions. Even
though it is stated in these theories that every person has both male and fe-
male, yang and yin, incorporated in their beings, it is always stated that
women "naturally" have more male energy. And what's more, because of this

a woman and a man need each other to make a whole. At a lecture I went to sev-
eral years ago, the man speaking stressed this point. He mentioned that many
homosexuals had been cured (become heterosexual) by eating a macrobiotic diet.
Apparently in macrobiotics and Chinese medicine theory, sex role stereotypes
and heterosexuality are considered part of the natural order of the universe.

The way this conclusion was reached may have been due to how Chinese medi-
cine theory, which macrobiotics is part of, was developed. The conclusions
made in Chinese Medicine developed over a long period of time by observing
many people of that culture. No one mentions that in Ancient China, a patriar-
chal society, women were trained to be more yielding and weak (more yin) and
men were trained to be more dominating and strong (more yang). (This is sim-
ilar to the U.S., another patriarchal culture). So when these men and women
were observed, these qualities were found; that doesn't mean they are natural
or inborn. They could easily be a product of socialization.

When a woman questions the validity of the "naturalness" of women being more
yin and men being more yang and says it sounds sexist, it is likely that the
macrobiotic healer will tell her that she doesn't understand and agree because
she is too yang for a woman. This clearly attributes the problem to something
wrong in the woman and not with the theory.

Lesbians are also told they are too yang (masculine). I went to a macrobiotic
diet consultant. He told me that I was too yang and implied that this was not
healthy. He didn't mention what I was too yang for. He didn't mention that women
needed to be "feminine" to fit his standard of health. As far as I'm concerned,
his standard is oppressive to women.

Some women who went to a World Symposium on Humanity “organized by the 3-H-0,
an eastern spiritual group" (8), came to similar conclusions about the New Age.
After attending the conference and trying to bring up feminist ideas there,
they concluded:

"It is obvious to us that the New Age movement is hostile to women.
It is also obvious that it is a powerful movement with money, access
to sophisticated electronic media, and visions of world-wide influence.

These groups ARE NOT HARMLESS. They attract thousands of followers
by preaching a cleansing of personal lifestyles, greater personal au-
tonomy from technological stimulus, and increased ecological sensiti-
vity. At the same time they set up authoritarian structures, reject
new ideas and denounce homosexuality." (9)

The New Age generally appeals to people on an emotional and spiritual level.
Some of their values are to be passive and surrender to what's happening. That
may be a good approach for men at this time, but for women it means staying
in the same role they have been in for years. We are told to be mindless -
especially if what we are thinking about is how oppression operates in society.

Often I hear the statements, "You are responsible for creating your own rea-
lity," and "You can change your reality by changing your beliefs." While these
ideas may be true to an extent, they are often misused. So if a woman is raped,
or battered by her New Age husband, she is told that on some level she needed
it for her growth and development and attracted the experience to her. When a
woman client feels powerless with a male therapist or healer she is told it is
because she gave her power away and if she was really centered she would never
do that. Who would go to a therapist if she were really centered and strong in
herself?

Being damaged by a body/mind therapist doesn't feel any better than being
damaged by a Freudian psychiatrist. In many ways it's worse, because it's less
expected. Believe me, I know.

When I was eighteen, I was told by a traditional shrink that he could tell
that I had a sexual identity problem (read that: I might be lesbian), because
I wore men's pants and a woman's shirt. I was told to decide which sex I was
and dress accordingly. I was so depressed at the time, I didn't have the energy
to fight with him - even though I knew he was being sexist and ridiculous. It
didn't feel any better when a year later, a psychotherapist who was trying to
learn body reading told me the same thing. This time his evidence was that I
had a top/bottom split. This time I was furious by the interpretation and told
him so. I was told to release my anger by hitting pillows. This man also told
me that I was a lesbian because I couldn't be a man. Being aware enough to know
that what he was saying was oppressive - I confronted him for being hetero-
sexist. He claimed that his statement wasn't meant seriously, that he only
said it to get me in touch with my anger. I never did believe that.

So there I was with a therapist who was telling me on one hand to get in
touch with my feelings and on the other hand implying that my feelings weren't
valid and healthy because they didn't fit his framework of what a healthy woman
is. What made it worse was that he claimed not to make judgments. By that
point my political consciousness was growing and I knew he was making judg-
ments, even if he didn't.