6

== steer  
Colorado Feminist Credit Union Gets Off The Ground  

Woodwoman  

The Colorado Feminist Federal Credit Union (CFFCU) opened its doors for business on Thursday, August 5. Calling itself "the common woman's alternative," the credit union aims to make women's money available to other women in the form of loans they are often unable to get elsewhere.  

It will also enable women with extra money to make it available to their sisters, rather than turning it over to male-controlled institutions for their own self-serving interests.  

The CFFCU differs from any other credit union in that it is dedicated to implementing a high political awareness of the contradictions within capitalism while functioning as a financial institution.  

Credit Union Background  

Credit unions are non-profit institutions which exist to enable groups of people to pool their savings and make loans to each other, thus avoiding high finance interest rates. By federal law, such groups of people must have a “common bond,” such as that they all work for the same employer, or all live in the same neighborhood. This bond ensures that credit union members have a personal stake in each other's financial welfare, and facilitates mutual trust.  

Credit unions differ from banks in several respects: the most obvious is that banks strive to make profit, whereas credit unions turn all profit back to their members. Further, the more stock one holds in a bank, the more voting power one has. Each credit union member has an equal vote, regardless of how much money she has saved or borrowed.  

Banks also invest their funds, often in war machinery and other anti-people enterprises, whereas credit unions are strictly limited in where they may invest.  

Feminist Credit Unions Emerge  

Three years ago, women in Detroit, Michigan, persuaded the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) that feminism constitutes a valid common bond, and the first feminist credit union was born. There are now 13 other feminist credit unions in this country, and one in Canada.  

The CFFCU began in the fall of 1975, when feminists from Denver and Colorado Springs obtained seed money in the form of a $5,000 grant from the Aton Foundation, and began to work toward establishing a credit union for Colorado feminists.  

By early this year a Board of Directors had been established, a federal charter applied for from the NCUA, and an office rented at 1458 Pennsylvania, near downtown Denver.  

Several feminist groups joined the field of membership (credit union members must belong to one of these groups in order to establish their common bond of feminism). The field of membership so far includes the Denver, Boulder, Fort Collins, El Paso County and Jefferson County chapters of N.O.W.; the Women's Health Service of Colorado Springs; the Colorado Women's Political Caucus; and the Governor's Commission on the Status of Women.  

Prospective credit union members can join whichever of these organizations they prefer at the CFFCU office when they open their share accounts (a credit union term meaning "savings account").  

Each group has a membership fee, the lowest being $1. The credit union itself charges a $5 entry fee, and each member must have a minimum share account of $5. So every credit union member, whether saver or borrower, must pay a minimum of $11 in order to join (unless she is already a member of one of the membership groups).  

In cases of extreme financial need, arrangements can be made to deposit the $5 share account in installments.  

Credit Unions in the U.S.  

The first credit union in the United States was formed in 1909, but the institution only began to achieve wide popularity in this country in the early 1920s, after World War I. Credit had customarily been extended to merchants, but as the automobile and refrigeration industries grew, it became necessary to extend credit to individual purchasers. The average citizen couldn't afford to pay cash for a car or a large appliance, and the producing industries would have been unable to continue growing if credit had not expanded their markets.  

Economic power has come to abide in credit - those who have it have immensely more power to act in a financial context than those who don't.  

Women have been denied access to this power. Even though recent legislation forbids discrimination against women in banking, surveys show that such discrimination is still widely practiced.  

Often women who have been enormously responsible and reliable with money have been denied credit, only to see their husbands benefit from their credit histories.  

Many financial institutions refuse to acknowledge alimony and child support payments in assessing a woman's income when she applies for a loan. A significant number still insist on a male cosigner.  

One of the major advantages feminist credit unions offer women is that they recognize women as financially viable in their own right. A feminist credit union will often lend a woman money when every other institution has turned her down because she doesn't have a man backing her. Through a feminist credit union a woman can establish credit in her own name.  

CFFCU Vision  
The CFFCU plans to go beyond simply acting as a saving and borrowing institution. It will provide budget counseling to its members, and hold educational workshops to teach women how to find their way in the economic system. Nonetheless, there are many contradictions inherent in the concept of a feminist credit union. Credit unions proliferated in this country in response to the needs of big business, as a boost to capitalism. What makes the CFFCU unique is that it recognizes these contradictions and works toward resolving them. The group has produced a Statement of Principles and Goals, which will be reassessed annually. Principle Eight of the Statement reads:  
There are contradictions involved in operating a feminist credit union in a capitalist society.  
We believe that contradictions indicate stress points in capitalism around which we can organize and educate ourselves and others. These contradictions include:  
a) Dividends (individual return on investment vs. feminist goal of weakening capitalism);  
b) Loan criteria and interest rates (survival of the credit union vs. needs of the members);  
c) Credit (created needs vs. real needs);  
d) CFFCU checking account in a male-run bank (dependence on male institutions vs. female self-sufficiency);  
e) Membership size (reaching more people vs. political purity);  
f) Structure of decision-making (by a few vs. by those affected);  
g) Employees (practice of exploitation vs. goal of liberation);  
h) Success/failure (thinking the system works vs. cynicism about women).  

Dealing With Contradictions  

The Board of Directors of the CFFCU applied for their federal charter at the end of last year.  

For reasons of its own, the NCUA held up issuing the charter until June.  

In those six months, the women organizing the credit union had time to consider these contradictions and to work on ways of challenging them.  

In order to attract savers, credit unions declare dividends (interest on savings), the money for which comes from interest paid on loans: in other words, the savings of those who already have money beyond their immediate needs are swelled at the expense of those who have no money and are forced to borrow.  

The most visible departure the CFFCU has made from customary credit union policy has been in this area. Holding as a priority the more equitable redistribution of money amongst women of different classes, the CFFCU has determined not to declare any dividends during its first year of operation.  

After that, dividends will be low, perhaps 2 or 3%. Any money left over after overheads have been paid will be given back to borrowers in the form of an interest refund.  

Ideally, the organizers hope eventually to declare no dividends and to charge 3% interest on loans.  

Because federal regulations insist that dividends be paid before any refund of interest, there will also be no refunds for at least a year.  

The Board of Directors is hamstrung elsewhere by federal regulations. NCUA rules make it illegal to declare sliding scale interest rates according to women's individual incomes, as the CFFCU had at first envisioned. Thus all borrowers must pay the same rate - 12% annually or 1% monthly on the unpaid balance.  

The CFFCU hopes to get around this to some extent by charging different rates of interest on different types of loans: for instance, lower rates might be charged on emergency loans than on others.  

Loan Priorities  
The credit union has also formulated a loan policy which recognizes certain priorities in granting loans. These are physical health crises; mental health crises such as divorce, jail, or custody battles; feminist businesses; educational loans for women in their last year of study, who have definite work ideas; transitional needs, including bill consolidation loans; auto loans when a car is needed to get to work or school; and women's businesses.  

In the case of insufficient money to fund all approved loan applications, money will be loaned in this order.  

The difference between feminist and women's businesses, as defined in the loan policy, is that a feminist business "must be controlled by women to meet women’s needs in the community, and facilitate social change. A written statement of goals and a structure of accountability to the feminist community and a financial statement will be asked for."  

One of the criteria establishing ability to repay is that the borrower should have a good credit record dating back two years. No credit record will be accepted as good, however, to counteract past discrimination which may have denied women access to credit.  

The Credit Committee will also take into consideration cases where the CFFCU is a "lender of last resort" - that is, where the borrower will have nowhere else to go for a loan if the credit union rejects her application.  

Special consideration will be given to women working actively in the feminist movement. Such women, like all borrowers, will have to satisfy the Credit Committee of their ability to repay, although they may be shown greater leniency on job and residence stability requirements. They may also be given more time to repay their loans, but they will still be subject to the priorities listed above.  

An active feminist is defined as one “who spends at least 40 hours a month involved in projects which are oriented toward the collective empowerment of women.”  

Another form of special consideration is the CFFCU's commitment to provide free child care so that committee members who have children will be able to attend credit union meetings.  

Structure  

Every credit union must have three controlling bodies: a central Board of Directors; a credit committee, which approves loan applications; and a supervisory committee, to oversee the workings of the credit union and ensure that the members' interests are protected.  

The CFFCU organizers envisioned a collective comprising all three committees, which would set policy by collective process. NCUA rules, however, provide that the Board of Directors must be the only decision-making body. So although the Board functions as a collective, the Credit Committee must abide by its decisions and neither it nor the Supervisory Committee may participate in policy-making.  

In order to ensure that the credit union's staff members are not subject to hierarchical power within the group, every staff member is also a member of the Board of Directors.  

Staff members are still exploited, however, in that all but one don't, as yet, receive any pay for their work. The one salary paid amounts to $300 a month for full-time work.  

Definitions of Success  

The CFFCU has put some energy into defining “success” - a difficult task given that an institution operating within the capitalist structure must be hard put to define its own success from an anti-capitalist position.  

Even the proposed educational workshops, in this context, appear contradictory. Women will be taught to "make it" within a system opposed to feminism.  

Although the Statement of Principles and Goals states this fact as a recognized limitation, it doesn't go  

More on Page 14