bmr: where we're at

Well readers, what was supposed to be a one month focus on  
"Organized Religion and Spirituality" will instead cover a  
two month span, this issue being devoted to "Spirituality"  
and next month to "Organized Religion". We found ourselves  
with about 40 pages of copy and yet were confronted with the  
reality that both the BMR collective and supporters are small  
and our energy low. So, we made a compromise and find our-  
selves with a 24 pager this month with a natural division  
page wise (the total page number must be divisible by four,  
so you either add or subtract 4 pages at a time) by splitting  
what was one theme, into two. We had a hard time coming to  
this decision because we had been interested in presenting a  
better balance of copy in one issue. We hope that with the  
closing of the theme next month we will indeed have presented  
a more balanced view of Religion/Spirituality in our lives.

Last year in our May 1981 issue--Part One of our theme on  
Women and Health, BMR was hit with not only the politics of  
psychiatric assault, but further how the issues of psychia-  
tric assault tie into the concerns/issues of women in prison.

We gathered information on tactics and abuses that happen to  
women on the inside in both prisons and psychiatric institu-  
tions--like dehumanizing behavior modification programs and  
forced drugging with heavy psychiatric drugs.

So it turns out, that 12 months later in our May 1982 issue  
the theme will be Prisons and Psychiatric Institutions: In-  
side and Getting Out. We wanted to include both prisons and  
psychiatric institutions in this theme in an effort to ex-  
plore the potential alliance between the anti-prison and  
anti-psychiatric movements and feminism. We believe that in-  
mates in the U.S. and elsewhere can be seen as political pri-  
soners; prisons and psychiatric institutions a "tool" of the  
"state", one of the strong arms of repression.

Through analysis, articles, national news stories, book re-  
views and personal writings from the lives of women inside  
and getting out, we hope to have copy that explores the  
role of police (reality police included) --police repression  
in the communities of all people of color and the repression  
foisted by the Immigration and Naturalization Service--La  
Migra. Police action then backed up by the criminal injustice  
system and their prisons and psychiatric institutions.

We would like to explore how the state views their rights  
and power to lock people up--who gets locked up and why--the  
state's increasing demand for more lock up facilities...

How BMR and the feminist presses can balance the coverage of  
the few commonly called "political prisoners” versus the  
masses of prisoners and psychiatric inmates whom we also see  
as political prisoners. At the same time we must continue our  
reporting on the conditions of the Puerto Rican and the Revo-  
lutionary Armed Task Force POWs, and others who will inevita-  
bly follow. We must hear how life really is on the inside--  
the complete joke of "prison or psychiatric rehabilitation”.

This month's cover includes works by:

cover:

Tanya Temkin, Suzanne Jackson, Laurie White, Froggi Lupton,  

Marika Tell and one reproduced from Matrix, artist unknown.  
The collage was put together by Liz Lewis.

collective:

Sue Goding, Bobbe Ross, Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford

Supporters: Alberta Gallardo, Judy Barlow  

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Kim Womantree, Wendy Highby.

contributors: Candy McCullough, Vickie Barriga,  

Priscilla Canney, Eden Stone, Clara Kaplan, Kathy Riley.

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by  
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  

and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and the 19th of the preceding  
month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with  
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited  
material. We reserve the right to edit all material for  
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are  
$6/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $12 outside  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, March 1982

Included in this analysis must be an understanding of the  
issues of special concern to women such as: child bearing,  
rearing and custody, sexual harassment and assault, surveil-  
lance by male guards. And then the shock of getting out--no  
job, and a societal stereotype that's likely to keep you  
unemployed--continued harassment by the cops just to get the  
list started. Now this long overview of how we view the scope  
of the theme "Prisons and Psychiatric Institutions: Inside  
and Getting Out" does not mean we will actually have the  
copy but please know that it is important for our readers  
who are also writers and graphic artists to help us out in  
really covering this issue well. Copy deadline is April 19th.

We will be having a community meeting Saturday, March 13th  
from 11 am to 1 pm in the basement of Woman to Woman Feminist  
Bookcenter at 2023 East Colfax. At our last community meet-  
ing the collective set a deadline for March to stop and re-  
evaluate our ability to keep the paper going with a small  
collective and group of supporters. We are still in struggle  
over this issue although our collective commitment to BMR  
is strong. We feel like we have been getting some impor-  
tant feedback from our authors and readers...that we are  
learning things--that our politics are developing in a direc-  
tion that we are satisfied with. We hope the community women  
will come and let us know if they are feeling like our poli-  
tics are working for them too.

We also want to make sure women in the community know that  
although we need collective members (which is a lot of work)  
that BMR is full of short-time commitment type jobs, that  
really mean a lot towards keeping the paper going such as:  
typing or proofreading, shopping for BMR supplies, or filing  
graphics in our graphics box, or getting out some of our  
back issues that are just sitting around the office, or  
helping us get our standing street boxes fixed...etc. We also  
gather once a month to mail out the paper. We need food dur-  
ing production which is one weekend a month!

BMR will have a booth at the Peoples Fair in May here in  
Denver. We need women to come together on a short term pro-  
ject to get T-shirts and/or underwear silkscreened for the  
fair, we could also use some money donations for this project  
and as always for the paper too. In Struggle the Rag

RATES AS OF APRIL 1

$7 Individual sub $1.25 Sample or back issue  
$14 Overseas and plain includes mailing  
All monies in US currency  
$21 University and  
Institutional CLASSIFIEDS-2.00 first 10 words  
+75 Individual copy at 15 cents per word thereafter  

Bookstores and  
display boxes  

DISPLAY ADS--write for ad  
sheet to BMR  

inside BMR:

Where We're At  
Crit. / Self-Collective, ed. 545.55  
Workfare  
Soup Kitchen Rally  
Voting-Rights News  

Spirituality  
National Women's  
B.L.A. Communique  
Calendars  
Classifieds and Ads  
RESOURCES  

THANKS FOR THE FOOD CANDY!!!!

BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prisons or  
psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexan-  
dria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA. and is avail-  
able on microfilm (Oct, 1972, Vol. 1 through May 1980) di-  
rectly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is indexed by the Al-  
ternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218.  
Our phone number is (303) 322-2010, we have a phone message  
machine.