4

Rape

A Violent Act
Of Oppression

We object to a rapist speaking here today. As women of Big Mama
Rag and members of the Sexual Assault Information Exchange we did
not “invite” any rapist to speak. It is an insult to women to have a rapist
speak to a group that is struggling to eradicate rape in our city.

Metropolitan Denver groups that are concerned with rape have
addressed themselves to some aspects of the crime. They study the
rapist or women who are raped or tell women not to walk alone at night.
They advocate whistles, tear gas, locked doors and inform women what
their chances are of surviving rape if they resist.

There has been no discussion or analysis of rape within these groups.
Discussing rape is not talking about why men rape women, or why rape
is such a frequently reported crime in this area. Discussing rape is
talking about what rape means and what it represents!

All crime is a socially defined and encouraged activity that actually
reinforces a social system by keeping those with power strong and
those without power weak. The crime of rape is no different. It is not an
isolated act. It is an overt act of hatred of women that is allowed and
encouraged in our society. Rape is a violent act against women by men.

Until political and social analyses of rape are developed, until rape
programs deal with the mental and psychological rape that all women
must live with from birth to death, rape action groups will remain
essentially powerless. They will continue to be funded to set up hotlines
to talk to women after they are raped or show women how to try to avoid
being raped. These are all good, necessary programs but they are not
enough. They do not consider why women must put up with rape in this
society.

Groups represented here should be organizing speakouts on rape for
women who have been raped; supporting women who have been raped
and are fighting cases in court such as Joann Little in North Carolina,
who desperately needs money to have an adequate defense; be present
and supportive of women at rape trials; sponsor free self-defense
classes in inner city, low-income neighborhoods; advocate that schools
incorporate self-defense for young women as required courses from
first grade.

To tolerate the presence of a rapist at a group such as this is a direct
insult to women in the entire Denver community. It reinforces the fear
and intimidation that women live under every day. It condones and
reinforces sexual violence and the male dominance that validates it. As
women identified women, we as members of this information exchange
are opposed to the presence of a rapist. We refuse to allow this man to
speak here in our presence. His mere presence here rather than that of
a woman who has been raped is further proof that everything that men
do is more significant than anything that women do, including rape.

We ask that this group begin immediately to develop a social and
political analysis of rape and its implications in our society. We ask that
this organization begin dealing with rape not only as a crime but as a
tool of political oppression.

Carol Leese

Big Mama has changed a lot in a year. Her problems of last June are
not her struggles of this June. BMR has evolved into a true newspaper,
reporting on and representing the interests of many women and at the
same time trying to create a real “alternative” both in its structure and
its content.

At a weekend “in-city” retreat, new and old staff members got
together and talked about the purposes, structure, finances, jobs, and
the issue of power in the paper. Long hours of discussion showed the
concern and care many women shared for the paper and helped us
make some decisions that we hope will make the future functioning of
BMR successful and stimulating for feminists and feminism.

The purposes of the paper have been defined in a broad context as the
communication of news, ideas, to other women, and in a specific
context as providing a way for women to get involved in a real way of
working to change and enrich their lives. The old structure of the paper
placed too much responsibility (and therefore too much power) on the
shoulders of the few. Although there was a structure that was
supposed to put power in the hands of the entire staff of the paper,
general meetings were poorly attended and decisions were made by the
same people who had to do the work anyway.

Therefore a structure has been instituted that abolishes irresponsibility
and abuse of informal, influential power. Those who are responsible for the paper will be the decision-makers. Now this
responsibility does not rest on two but on the entire core group.

So, the new structure of BMR focuses on a “core group” of women
whose priority is the paper. The core is open to any woman who is
willing to commit herself to the work responsibility/attendance
meeting responsibility of the core.

The women who compose the core will in themselves be capable of
putting out the paper, but will probably never have to do so since there
are many women who either cannot or will not become involved in the
paper to the degree of the core group involvement and do a lot of
important, necessary things for BMR. These women are in the
“friends” part of the paper — which is essential to the functioning of
BMR and will be explained in greater detail later.

The core group is currently meeting twice a week and will eventually
meet once a week. The meetings are mandatory and vital to keep up
with the business and decisions that need to be made on the paper.
There will still be an open meeting for anyone to attend on the first
Monday of the month (the same night as the old general meetings) at
which time ‘friends’ can voice any disagreement with core group
decisions and anyone can declare their intention to become involved in
the core group.

The paid positions in the paper have been re-defined. The woman
who staffs the office, answers mail, the phone, and takes care of some
communication within the paper as well as being in charge of the
production of the paper (due to the fact that she will be in the office) will
be the only full-time paid staff member.

More on Page 15

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 5

Japanese Feminist
Organizes Press

When Takagi Sawako,
distributor for the Femintern
Press of Japan, was in the
United States in 1973, she
visited numerous feminist
organizations and found that
while American feminists were
interested in Japan and other
Asian countries, they put
questions to her about the
women of these countries that
she was unable to answer. Why,
for instance, do most Japanese
women still use omiai, arranged
marriage, to find husbands?
Because American feminists did
not have basic information about
the Asian countries, answering
even simple questions entailed
explaining vast amounts of
cultural background. She also found many
feminists so wrapped up in their
own struggles that they had no
more than a superficial interest
in the lives of Asian women.
Her 1973 visit made Sawako
decide to set up a center to
collect and provide basic
information and analysis for
English readers, feeling as she
does, that she not only wants to
answer the questions of
American and European
feminists, but that they have an
obligation to understand the
situation of Asian women.
“American and European
feminists, by being uninformed
about their sisters in other
countries, contribute unwittingly
to their exploitation. For
example, take the situation of a
large number of women in South
Korea. (The same applies, in
slightly varied form, in Thailand,
Indonesia, Taiwan etc.) They are
exploited in various ways
through foreign domination —
economically, sexually, and
politically. Economically as the
cheapest labor ($30 a month for
factory workers and secretaries),
sexually through government-
supported prostitution (kisaeng),
politically through being
imprisoned and sexually
tortured for the least attempt to
organize an effective feminist or
other kind of activist group.
“Scarcity of jobs forces large
numbers of women to become
kisaeng, and prostitution is one
of South Korea's main
industries. It is government
supported because it is one of
the country’s main sources of
revenue, earning large sums of
money ($300,000,000 a year)
mostly from Japanese “salary-
men” who come to South Korea
in organized kisaeng-party tour
groups. (But before blaming
Japanese male tourists only,
remember that women in other
under-developed countries
serve the same function for
American, Canadian, European,
and other “salary-men”).
Prostitution in South Korea has
even had to play the role of
replacing the income lost as a
result of the end of the Vietnam
War as far as American and
South Korean servicemen are
concerned. During the war, the
American government bought
the services of Korean soldiers,
providing Korea with a lucrative
source of income.

“Attempts to form effective
women’s movements to
overcome these various forms of
exploitation are immediately
suppressed by the Park government, which is supported by
American and Japanese
economic power. These women
are imprisoned and sexually
tortured.”

Takagi Sawako believes that
American, European and
Japanese feminists cannot
ignore feminists in other Asian
countries to attempt rebellion
alone in their even more
repressive situations.
“Feminism,” she says, “must
become an International
struggle.”

English-language publications
currently available from
Femintern Press, Box 5426,
Tokyo International, Phone 359-
0043 or 369-4101.

150,000 People Sterilized
Annually

Elissa Krauss

On April 18, 1974, HEW, after
extensive litigation and negotia-
tion, put into effect Federal
Regulations which provide
minimum protection for in-
formed consent to sterilization
by competent adults (21 and
over) being treated under
Medicaid and federally funded
family planning programs. (Ap-
proximately 150,000 persons
are sterilized each year under
these programs.) A recent sur-
vey by the American Civil Liber-
ties Union (ACLU) of
departments of obstetrics and
gynecology at teaching hospitals
across the country indicates that
there is gross non-compliance
with these regulations.

The regulations define in-
formed consent to sterilization
as: a full understanding of the
procedure to be performed,
attendant risks and benefits, and
its irreversibility as well as an
understanding of all other
methods of controlling concep-
tion. Programs and projects are
required to provide documenta-
tion via adequate consent forms
that knowledgeable and volun-
tary consent has been obtained.
Further, they are required to
provide oral and written protec-
tive warning to all welfare
recipients that no benefits will
be withdrawn if a patient
decides not to be sterilized.
Finally, hospitals are required to
impose at least a three-day
waiting period between the time
the consent is obtained and the
time a sterilization operation is
performed.

In November, 1974, ACLU
sent a questionnaire to the
heads of OB/GYN departments
at 154 teaching hospitals to
ascertain compliance by these
institutions with the federal
regulations on informed con-
sent. Of the 49 hospitals respon-
ding to the questionnaire, 48
provide “non-therapeutic”
sterilization. Of the 18 hospitals
enclosing standard consent
forms in use, only three forms
were in compliance. Only 14
who responded stated that they
include the required protective
warning to welfare recipients in
their consent documents, and
only six hospitals had a policy
imposing a three-day waiting
period.

HEW is empowered to seek
court orders against hospitals
which fail to comply with federal
regulations. As ultimate sanc-
tion, federal funding can be
withdrawn. Clearly it is not
moving. Health activists might
inquire about policies and con-
sent forms at their local
hospitals. If they're not in com-
pliance, one action could be to
draw up a consent form meeting
these regulations, even expan-
ding upon them, and demand its
use by the hospital.

— HealthRight

Trial Set
For Little

The Joan Little trial has been
set for July 14 in Raleigh, North
Carolina. The 21-year-old black
woman is charged with killing a
white Beaufort county jailer.
Little says that the man
attempted to rape her; she
defended herself with the ice
pick he threatened her with.

A special two-week term in
the Wake County Superior Court
has been set aside for the trial.
The trial had been moved from
Beaufort county after defense
attorneys argued that pretrial
publicity and racial prejudice
made a fair trial impossible in
eastern North Carolina.

Prosecutors asked the North
Carolina Supreme Court to strike
down the order for relocating the
trial, but the high court upheld
Judge McKinnon’s order.

Little remains free on bond
totaling $115,000.