6  
“It’s A Lie, Pass It By”  

Women Out Smashing Windows  

“Windows!" is a feature film from  
United Artists which opened in New  
York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Tor-  
onto on January 18th. It was met by  
demonstrations organized by the Coa-  
lition Against Violence Against  
Women, the National Association of  
Lesbian and Gay Filmmakers, the Na-  
tional Gay Task Force and other fem-  
inist, lesbian and gay organizations.  

understand why such a good-looking  
"dish" as Andrea would be interested  
in such a deadpan face as Emily).  
Since reviews have been so bad, this  
has led some people to ask, "Why  
not let the film flop on its own?" or  
"Doesn't all the publicity of a boy-  
cott in a sense promote the film?"  

In a statement passed out in front  
of the Baronet Theatre, the protest-  

Outside the Baronet Theater in  
Manhattan, an estimated 300-350  
people chanted such slogans as "It's  
a lie, pass it by!" "Don't go in,  
come out!" and "2, 4, 6, 8, Windows!  
is woman hate!"  

Protesters charged that Windows!  
combines numerous anti-woman, anti-  
lesbian stereotypes, grossly misrep-  
resents rape and lesbianism, and  
absolves men of their responsibility  
for violence against women. The co-  
alition was formed in response to  
this film, hopes that the boycott  
of Windows! will spark a wider pro-  
test against prevailing negative im-  
ages of lesbians and gay men in Hol-  
lywood films.  

In this film, Emily (Talia Shire)  
is a newly divorced career woman liv-  
ing on her own for the first time.  
From across New York's East River  
and through her windows, she is watched  
and pursued by Andrea (Elizabeth  
Ashley), a lesbian poet who eventual-  
ly pays a taxi driver to rape Emily  
at knife point so she will be turned  
off to men. Critics charge that this  
not only absolves men of the respon-  
sibility of violence against women,  
but perpetuates the myth that a wo-  
man who tries to make it on her own,  
without the protection of a man,  
somehow invites violence. In reality  
they point out, rape is a crime com-  
mitted by men against women and has  
reached epidemic proportions.  

Reviews of Windows! in local and  
national media consistently point  
out the lack of artistic merit (how-  
ever, one New York critic, in typical  
sexist response, wrote he couldn't  

Prisoners Protest Sex Rule  

probably going to be watched more close-  
ly, and they may feel harassed."  

Prisoners in the Oregon Women's  
Correctional Center are protest-  
ing one of its rules which for-  
bids sexual activity:  

Gayle Smith, an inmate, is  
quoted in the Oregon Statesman-  
Journal: "There's just a very  
few lesbians in here, but they  
act like all of us are lesbians.  
Two people can't even be in the  
same bedroom together. You can't  
even visit your friend's room."  

Inmate Theresa King added:  
"They really magnify a lot of  
little stuff. If somebody's hav-  
ing a problem, I've learned the  
best thing to do is to go over  
and give them a hug, give them  
some support. But here, you can't  
even touch somebody, let alone  
hold their hand or put your arm  
around them. That's homosexual  
activity.”  

Superintendent Lee Gierloff  
said, "I've seen a lot of touch-  
ing, a lot of hugging, and the  
staff does not deal with it as  
sexual activity. It depends on  
who's doing the touching and  
who is doing the hugging.”  

She added: "There are some who  
have been known to engage in ho-  
mosexual activity. They're pro-  

violence against women. Advertising  

ers answered these questions with:  

"We think that most viewers will  
dismiss this film as an insult to their  
intelligence. But we have to respond,  
nonetheless, if only in memory of the  

pain and discrimination so many of  
us have suffered because of twisted  
images of what it means to be a homo-  
sexual perpetuated in films like  
Windows!"  

At a January 22nd news conference,  
the coalition called on United Art-  
ists to stop distributing the film  
and demanded the termination of the  
ad campaign which portrays an image  
which exploits and sensationalizes  

for Windows! depicts a woman holding  
a knife to the throat of another  
woman with the caption "Somebody  
loves Emily...too much."  

A look at the portrayal of lesbians  
in American film (of which there have  
been about 30 in the past 60 years)  
shows Hollywood perpetuating images  
of psychotics, violent, suicidal,  
religious fanatics who are closeted  
lesbian spinsters, vampires, or  
"turning straight" in the end. Win-  
dows! shows that films like these  
continue to be made, while screen-  
plays with positive portrayals of  
lesbians are not produced because  
they are considered "too risque."  

Demonstrations are planned to con-  
tinue at theatres where the film is  
being shown. The coalition hopes  
these protests will prevent Windows!  
from opening in other cities.  

(Information from LNS and the Gay Com-  
munity News).  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 2  

Zap Action Zaps Feminists  

Three Seattle women were arrested  
the last week of January for defac-  
ing a sexist billboard. During late  
evening hours, they threw paint at a  
billboard using a picture of a scant-  
ily-clad woman, smiling and kicking a  
leg, to sell entertainment at Har-  
rah's Club in Reno, Nevada. As they  
were leaving, the three women attract-  
ed the attention of Seattle Police  
Officer Arthur Kennedy who arrested  
them and then called three other of-  
ficers to escort them to jail. Trial  
date for two of the women on charges  
of property destruction has been set  
for March 11th.  

In their dealings with the police,  
the women were insulted and verbally  
harassed in what seemed like an effort  
to provoke them. They were told that  
their behavior would be "expected of  
nine-year-old kids" and that the wo-  
man on the billboard looked "kind of  
cute up there." One woman was releas-  
ed at the station, but the other two  
were held until the following after-  
noon when they were released on per-  
sonal recognizance.  

The women released the following  
statement: "As lesbians and femin-  
ists, we feel deeply offended each  
time we see women's bodies used to  
sell products and entertainment. We  
are extremely angered when our bodies  
become the product and entertainment.  
This is the case with the billboard that  
was defaced—singers advertised  
(Neil Sedaka, Debby Reynolds, etc.)  
were secondary to women's legs and  
breasts. This is one more blatant  
example of men using women's bodies  
for their own pleasure and profit."  

Supporters of the women offered  

the following advice to others who  
plan to fight back against sexist  
advertisements: "Valuable ex-  
perience was gained through this ac-  
tion. The action should be done as  
planned with a time limit. Water sol-  
uble paint should be used, so it  
will come off skin and spread better.  
Cars should be parked away from the  
site of action. Additional paint  
should not be left in the car. (This  
can be used as evidence). Never run  
or do anything that would attract  
attention. Do not assume, if the cops  
approach you, that they know what  
they are doing."  

The women are asking for support  
and solidarity by packing the Seattle  
courtroom, or writing to Judge S.  
Schaefer and Prosecutor Mary Brennan,  
expressing your position and demanding  
that the charges be dropped. Write  
them at 610 3rd Ave., Seattle, Wash.,  
98104.  

The case of the Seattle women is  
reminiscent of "The Bluebird 5" case  
in Denver in 1977. Five women were  
arrested October 31, 1977 near the  
Bluebird Theatre, which regularly  
shows porn films. The theatre had  
been spray painted and plastered with  
leaflets (very similar to the one  
the Seattle women are using to let  
people know that violence against  
women is an important issue, and is  
reprinted below.)  

The Bluebirds pled not guilty to  
the charges of property destruction,  
and planned a defense on the politic-  
al points raised in the leaflet.  

Six days before they were to go on  
trial the charges were dropped,  
thanks to solid feminist support.  

Women need to continue the struggle against the huge profiteering  
made off our bodies. In a group, we have the power to combat violent  
attacks that are physical, psychological, and economic.  

RAPE IS ON THE INCREASE: yet media and judges say that rape is not a  
serious crime. The majority of rapes occur in the home. Only women  

are always subject to being terrorized by physical threats in their  
own homes and cars. The position of women is to live in constant fear;  
never to leave windows or doors unlocked, to be aware that walking  
alone on a street at night means that you are "asking for" verbal  
harassment and possibly rape. The threat of physical violence is pre-  
sent for women every day. But rape is war: WOMEN FIGHT BACK.  

WOMEN ARE PRESCRIBED 70% OF ALL TRANQUILIZERS. What is it that women  
have to be tranquilized from knowing? Psychologists label angry or  
assertive women as "sick or crazy." The same qualities in a man are  
a sign of mental health. WOMEN, CONTROL YOUR OWN MINDS.  

Women are also the victims of unnecessary surgery (hysterectomies,  
mastectomies) and cancer-causing birth control pills. Forced child-  

bearing (no abortions for poor women) and forced sterilization (main-  
ly used against poor and minority women) again point out the attacks  
on women's bodies. Medical and mental abuse separates women from pos-  
itive feelings about their own bodies.  

It is almost impossible to think of women apart from our sexuality  
because our sexuality is an advertising gimmick. Every ad or commer-  
cial that sells their product along with a half-dressed woman uses  
women. Sex is seen as a commodity to be bought (as in prostitution  
or legal marriage) or taken (as in rape). WOMEN, CONTROL YOUR OWN  
BODIES.  

75% OF WOMEN WORK IN LOW PAY CLERICAL OR SERVICE JOBS with little  
chance for promotion and few health or retirement benefits. Most poor  
women have two jobs, one at low wages and another for free (housework  
and childrearing). A woman's chances of getting a decent well-paying  
job are further blocked by business and government refusal to provide  
daycare. WOMEN, ORGANIZE AGAINST ECONOMIC EXPLOITATION.  

Mary Daly calls nuclear power "the rape of the atom." It is also the  
rape of the earth, of all life that dwells within and upon her. This  
violence comes from the same source as the violence against women  
that is happening day and night. WE ARE GROWING MORE FIRMLY COMMITTED  

to DEFEND OUR SISTERS AND OURSELVES AGAINST ANY FORM OF RAPE THAT MEN  
INVENT.  

Images of physical and sexual violence against women are presented to  
us every day by the mass media—billboards, magazines and newspapers,  
films, record album covers, book jackets and advertising slogans. The  
portrayal of women as sexual objects and willing victims is directly  
related to the steady increase in the number of violent crimes com-  
mitted against women. WOMEN, STOP VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.  

-Women Behind Bars