national

Buy American Means Racist Violence

Merle Woo  
Speech from the San Francisco Lesbian and Gay Freedom Day  
Celebration - June 26, 1983  

We are here today to proclaim that we are proud to be gay,  
demanding equality and visibility; committed to gay libera-  
tion.  

Why do we have to be freed?  

Because our very being threatens the foundations of  
Capitalist society:  

Challenging the dictum that the nuclear family is the  
only way to live;  

Opposing the institution of marriage;  

The decree that women and children are property;  

That men are superior;  

Criticizing a society that would make a distorted  
stereotype of manhood - straight, white and  
militaristic  

John Wayne Mickey Spillane  
We are out for one day a year. Are we out for good?  
Is our commitment to the depth and breadth of not only  

Our gayness but to our humanity?  

Many gay people are also women, people of color and workers.  

And we are all victims of sexism:  
A “wimpy gay man" is no different than an Asian male who  
is "effeminate". My forefathers - Chinese and  
Korean immigrants - were only good enough to do  
"women's work": laundry, cooking, cleaning.  

Racism, sexism, heterosexism, economics all connect.  

While MX missiles are being deployed and US intervention  
increases in Central America, the war on all of us continues  
at home.  

Violence against workers, undocumented workers,  

working conditions killing us;  

Police Brutality;  

Sterilization of women of color, abortions being  
outlawed -  

Rita Silk-Nauni and Chol Soo Lee prisoners of this war.  

Buy American means racist violence - war.  
In Detroit, because of a failed auto industry, two white  
auto workers murdered Chinese American Vincent Chin.  

We are blamed and ostracized for dying of AIDS, anorexia,  
Alzheimer's, toxic-shock syndrome, sickle-cell anemia  
while the US government and the AMA profits.  

Why is there no cure in this wealthiest of countries?  

We have to be multi-issue and get active in the  
Labor, Third World, Women's, Elderly, Disabled Movements.  
We have to get their support for us too!  

I'm waging a Free Speech battle against the University of  
California.  

Fired as a lecturer because I protested the decimation of  
Asian American Studies.  

Gone is student democracy  
and community-related courses;  
the goal of a Third World College,  
and my classes teaching the ‘connections of race, sex,  
sexuality and class -  

Gone is the one person who stood up proudly as a lesbian  
Asian American socialist feminist teacher.  

- Guardian  

If we believe that Ethnic Studies  
Women Studies  
Gay Studies  
are not acceptable academic subjects because  
we are genetically and morally inferior -  
Then, we have assimilated, allowing censorship.  

To UC, Affirmative Action is reverse discrimination;  

UC supports the ‘Lawrence, Livermore, Los Alamos labs;  
Puts out $2 million to stop unions from organizing on  
campus; has investments in white South Africa.  

I think of UC as a worthy opponent and fine choice for a  
fight -  
It is not natural and eternal, nor is the US Government.  

I am a long-distance fighter, having the support of a  
determined and committed Defense Committee:  

whites, people of color;  

straights and gays;  

students, workers, unionists and radicals.  

There is joy in fighting back and only in being a rebel  
against the Capitalist system -  
can I develop to my fullest potential.  

While I file grievances for my rights, I am also working  

toward creating an international socialist society -  
where we will produce for ‘need and not profit,  
creating an environment that is safe for all -  

Where we can be out and proud of who we are,  
creating new and equal relationships  
where people are not property or owned through our labor.  

We are fighting for our lives and the future of humanity.  

Let us revolt together, now.  
Big Mama, Rag, October, 1983 - Page 11.