A Question of Economics, Special Needs

15

Women Face Housing Problems

by Bonnie Shapiro

(Editors' Note: The following
article is an edited version of

an article appearing in Shelterforce,
a national newspaper dealing with
housing issues. Bonnie Shapiro is
housing coordinator for Northern

New Jersey NOW and a board member

of New Jersey Tenants’ Organization.)

Women's issues in housing are so
great and so small, so intrinsic a
part of our daily routine, that they
often go unthought of, even by women.
Yet, many unattached women are find-
ing it difficult to find decent, af-
fordable housing and those that do are
often subjected to psychological
pressure, even abuse. Problems range
from outright sex discrimination to
special needs such as nursing homes
and shelters for victims of domestic
violence.

Although discrimination against
women in housing based on sex is il-
legal, enforcement is another story.
Only seven sex discrimination cases
and four consent decrees have been
issued in the entire country. This
small number of cases is surely not
for lack of discrimination.

Women suffer in housing because of
their economic relationship to the
larger society. The current rule of
thumb is that 25% of income should go
for housing. Many women earn salaries
so low that they cannot "afford" decent
housing. Landlords and mortgagers
reject many women on financial grounds
even though these women have always
been able to make “ends meet" in the
worst economic situations.

Many landlords do not want child-
ren. This discrimination against
children most adversely affects
women. In Bergen County, New Jersey,
for example, there are over 9000 fe-
male heads of households accounting
for 24% of that county's housing
needs. These head of household
mothers face combined problems from
low income, children and “type" of
income. Alimony and welfare payments
are often rejected as bona fide
sources of income. Welfare as income
creates its own special problems.
There has long been "moral" discrim-
ination against the welfare mother,
who is supposedly lazy and immoral,
having children for profit. New
Jersey currently has two bills in the
Assembly making it illegal to dis-
count these sources of income. So
far, they have not been able to get
much support.

Government has certainly not in-
tervened to help the low income or
welfare mother. On the contrary,
moral prejudice has always been one
justification not to build public
housing. And the federally funded
rent supplement program, called
Section 8, has been slashed as part
of the federal budget cuts.

For women who have found apart-
ments, their problems are hardly
over. Female tenants are doubly de-
prived. Like all tenants, they are
propertyless in a class society; as
women, they face extra harassment at
home and injustice in the courts.
Lawyers tell of court cases in which
lawyers for the apartment owners turn
to male strangers in the courtroom
and accuse them of having keys to the
female defendant's apartment. This,

it seems easy enough for these men
to get authentic-looking identifica-
tion. Perhaps if a woman could get
her apartment maintained on a regu-
lar basis, by familiar workers, she
would not so readily open the door
to strange "personnel".

There are specialized problems in
housing for special groups of women.
Women's shelters face exclusionary
zoning problems.

Older women are the "survivors"

of course, establishes the female as

a woman of "easy virtue" and probable
liar. Many judges show their "con-
cern" for female defendants by patern-
alistically talking them out of stay-
ing in their apartments; "You don't
really want to live there, dear, do
you?" they suggest.

Harassment at home by building
owners and their agents ranges from
actual sexual assault, to propositions,
to allowing or disallowing male vis-
itors (or suspected lesbian visitors)
to controlling overnight guests. One
woman was evicted (illegally) for
having a male exchange student stay
with her and her daughter for three
days and nights. This woman felt
ashamed and degraded, and sought to
"prove" that she was "respectable."
Some owners try to forbid women from
living with people to whom they are
not married. Many women, believing
that the owner has the power of evic-
tion (even if the owner legally does
not), live in fear of the watchful
eyes of maintenance workers and
others, afraid to stand up for their
rights lest there be some sort of
retaliation. And indeed, many owners
of buildings, especially in rundown
areas, call authorities and malign
women who receive AFDC grants in re-
taliation for complaints about poor
conditions. Women alone often find
that they cannot get any maintenance
service. They are ignored when they
request repairs, ridiculed as com-
plainers, or put in the position of
having to pay "cute" sexual games
with servicemen in order to get ser-
vice.

Another problem disturbing to fe-
male tenants is that of the key re-
quirement. Many leases require that
a tenant hand over a key to the owner
or managing agent. Maintenance per-
sonnel get the key, too. And friends
of the maintenance personnel? In
some developments, maintenance men
use their keys to walk in on women
at home during the day, or get in
before the woman comes home. It is
a fact that 25% of rapes occur in
the home. While maintenance men are
obviously not committing all these
rapes, there is more thought being
given as to whether the owner is re-
sponsible for the safety of the ten-
ant. In California and New Jersey,
suits are in progress against
apartment owners for rapes occurring
on their premises. In New Jersey,

a bill has been introduced to make
it illegal for an owner to require
a key to an apartment.

There are reports of higher rape
statistics in low income areas. In
some of these areas, the direct
cause is women opening their doors
to men pretending to be supers or
building inspectors. Albert De Salvo
(The Boston Strangler) used that ploy
and so did a recent imitator in East
Orange, New Jersey. Identification
has not seemed to be the answer;

in this country, often left desti-
tute after the death of a spouse.

For these women, there is little
choice in housing. Many women do not
think of where they will live when
they grow old; the horrible fact is
that the average nursing home patient
is a 79-year-old woman, below poverty
level, not necessarily in need of any
nursing care, but in need of protec-
tion from the violence of her old
neighborhood.

Meanwhile, many older women who
need the care cannot get into the
"home". They have to wait for some-
one else to die! Rent subsidies
are not so easy to get either; in
many urban areas 35% or more of pov-
erty level women over 65 are on wait-
ing lists for senior citizen housing.

Some subsidies are available for
housing in the private sector, but
an apartment owner does not have to
accept a tenant who is on rent
subsidy.

In the face of all these problems,
there lurks a deeper dilemma, one
that many feminists do not want to
face. Regardless of all the problems
in securing housing, or the difficul-
ties of trying to live harassment-
free, American women, whether they
work outside the home or not, have
been taught to identify with their
homes. The American woman is still
encouraged to find her creative out-
let in her living space. The home,
or apartment, is a reflection of our-
selves, and numerous commercials
exhort us to see ourselves in our
china, furniture, floors, and crystal.
Much of the beating and battering of
women is blamed on the wife's "bad
housekeeping" or pressure to move up

to a nice (richer) house. The ques-
tion, "When are you buying a house?"
has become second only to "When are
you having a baby?" The pressure is
on the apartment wife, for she has
failed to capture the American dream.
She is in additional conflict because
she is trying to create her own en-
vironment in an apartment she does
not own. Her lease dictates the
color of her walls and what to put
on these walls. Older women cling

to their homes in the midst of chaos
and deteriorating neighborhoods. But
elderly women who are forced to move
from their homes often can't make it
anywhere else--they lose their roots
and identity.

Definitely we must start address-
ing the problems of day-to-day hard-
ship affecting so many women right
now seeking "homes" to identify
with. We must begin to view the
need for adequate housing as a gen-
uine feminist issue, even as we are
seeing economics as a feminist issue.

(Excerpted from the Summer, 1979
issue of Shelterforce. For more in-
formation, write to 380 Main St.,
East Orange, NJ 07018).

‘Nuisance’

St. Louis tenants organize
against anti-child leases

For years landlords have claimed
that pets are unhealthy, a nuisance
to other tenants, and are destructive
to a landlord's property. In St.
Louis, Missouri, the owners of two
apartment complexes recently decided
that small, human creatures commonly
referred to as children should be
placed in the same category as dogs,
cats, birds and gorillas.

When lease renewal time came
around this year, tenants were
shocked to learn that a new clause
prohibiting children was added to
every lease. There was no grand-
father clause, nor were there to be
any exceptions for hardship cases.
From the landlords' point of view,
the families with children had two
choices available to them. They
could place their children up for
adoption or they could move out. How-
ever, the tenants added a third choice
--They decided to stay and fight the
landlords' arbitrary decision.

At the present time, there are no
laws in Missouri which ban discrimin-
ation against children in housing.
With the help of Freedom of Choice,

a local group of housing activists,
the tenants in both complexes organ-
ized to fight their landlords.

In one complex, the tenants gave
their landlord (a bank) such bad
publicity that all the new leases
were withdrawn and the families with
children were allowed to stay. In
the other complex the landlord answer-
ed the tenants' demands by locking
out tenants and placing their furni-
ture out on the street, all with
three days notice. The tenants are
now taking their landlord to court in

an attempt to have discrimination
against children ruled unconstitutional.

In both cases, tenants joined to-
gether and fought back hard. In the
first case, bad publicity and a rent
strike hurt the landlords so much
that they backed down. In the second
case, direct action was helpful, but
the landlord was determined to fight
any challenges of his power. These
tenants are being forced to go to the
courts to assert their legal rights.
If they win, their victory will mean
an end to discrimination against child-
ren in housing in Missouri.

(Reprinted from the Summer, 1979,
issue of Shelterforce)

Photo by Christina Thomson/
The Decade of Women