4

groups-projects

The NORTHERN WOMAN JOURNAL has de-
cided to take time out from publish-
ing to reevaluate its work. The
journal editors state: "We find our-
selves too bogged down in just get-
ting the paper out on time and do
not have enough time for proper ed-
iting and creative writing which is
both thought-provoking and progres-
sive...we see ourselves as a small
group of radical feminists in the
middle of northwestern Ontario won-
dering what the hell has happened to
the revolution." They are seeking
feedback and encouraging information
about the collective process. Write
to them at NORTHERN WOMAN JOURNAL,
316 Bay Street, Thunder Bay, Ontario
P7B 1S1 Canada.

Donna Mahon has organized a peti-
tion to Governor Thornburgh to pro-
test oppressive conditions in the
MUNCY STATE PRISON. Her actions were
prompted by the seriously inadequate
medical conditions at the prison.
The list of grievances includes: in-
adequate food services; inadequate
care for pregnant women; inadequate
counseling; sex discrimination;
Clinton-- Muncy's restrictive hous-
ing unit; and the arbitrary use of
rules. To support this struggle you
can write a letter to Governor Thorn-
burgh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Office of the Governor, Harrisburg,
PA 17120 and to Donna Mahon, #5940,
Muncy, PA 17756.

The WOMEN'S RESOURCE CENTER at the
University of Montana has compiled
a comprehensive resource file on
various aspects of violence towards
women. The file includes articles,
brochures, bibliographies, publish-
ed and unpublished papers, journals,
newsletters, current reports and
poetry. Materials represent the is-
sues in theory, scope and action.
Topics include: institutional vio-
lence (prison, mental hospital, ob-
stetrics and gynecology); porno-
graphy; family violence (child abuse
and battering, incest and marital
rape); sexual harassment in the
workplace; and rape. The Women's Re-
source Center would appreciate your
contributions. Please indicate copy-
right rules if appropriate. They
are developing a filing and public
access system. Send materials to:
Women's Resource Center, University
Center, University of Montana, Miss-
oula, MT 59812.

Women: Has your physician made sex-
ual advances to you? Has he offered
or carried on a sexual relationship
with you? Has he otherwise sexually
exploited your medical relationship
with him in the course of his care
or treatment? COALITION FOR MEDICAL
EQUALITY is a group of women who
want to establish contact with other
women who have been sexually ap-
proached or used by a physician. They
want to support each other, explore
legal rights, prevent misuse of other
women, and learn more about respon-
sible health care for women. They
want to hear from you. Your phone
call or letter will be answered
right away and will remain strictly
confidential. We can help each other.
Write: Coalition for Medical Equal-
ity, PO Box 2713, Olympia, WA 98507.
Phone (206) 866-9489 Tuesdays, Wed-
nesdays and Thursdays, 3-8 p.m.

If you live in the San Francisco
Bay Area and want to volunteer some
of your time, NEWSFRONT INTERNATION-
AL would like to hear from you. The
news magazine needs women to work on
their planned international women's
quarterly. They also need people to
help with NEWSFRONT who are know-
ledgeable about specific geographic
areas, such as Black Africa, Asia
and Europe and are interested in cov-
ering them through the foreign press.
If you translate from French, Itali-
an, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Japan-
ese, or any Scandinavian language and
if you are interested in editing,
typesetting, layout and production,
call NEWSFRONT at (415) 654-6725 and
ask for Ines or Linda. Please give
them a call, they would like to hear
from you.

resources

conferences

The National Women's Studies Asso-
ciation will hold its third annual
convention-- WOMEN RESPOND TO RACISM-
at the University of Connecticut,
Storrs, May 31- June 4, 1981. Contact
NWSA Convention Coordinators, Women's
Studies, U-181A, University of Conn-
ecticut, Storrs, CT 06268. Phone
(203) 486-4310.

A comprehensive conference on
WOMEN AND TECHNOLOGY will meet at
San Diego State University from
March 6 to 8, 1981, a weekend which
includes International Women's Day.
The conference is being sponsored by
the Women's Studies Department of
SDSU, the Coalition of Labor Union
Women, the Society of Women Engin-
eers, and the Center for Women's
Studies and Services in San Diego.
Midge Costanza will deliver the key-
note address, "Strategies for Tommor-
row." There will be more than a doz-
en individual speaker presentations
and more than 20 workshops. The con-
ference will present a diversity of
subjects and viewpoints as it con-
siders the impact of technology on
women in the past, present and fut-
ure. Free childcare, special ser-
vices for the handicapped, and reduc-
ed rates for seniors, students and
low-income participants will be
available. For registration material
and more info, write Conference on
Technology and Women, SDSU, San
Diego, CA 92182. Phone (714) 265-6339.

There is a forthcoming conference
on writing and politics-- LEFT WRITE:
A UNITY CONFERENCE OF WRITERS ON THE
LEFT. The conference is being struc-
tured around the needs of various
communities-- Black, Hispanic, Asian,
Native American, Lesbian, Gay, and
Feminist. The two-day conference is
planned for February 21 and 22 in
San Francisco at the Noe Valley Min-
istry. Writers and community leaders
are being invited to participate in
panel discussions and workshops. For
more info contact: Writing and Poli-
tics Conference/Small Press Traffic
Bookstore, 3841-B 24th St., San Fran-
cisco, CA 94114.

SEX IN THE 80'S is a conference
sponsored by the Workgroup for Sex-
uality Beyond Sex Roles and the
Seattle Institute for Sex Therapy,
Education and Research (Sister). It
will be held in Seattle, Washington
February 20-22nd. For more informa-
tion, write: Sister, 100 N.E. 56th,
Seattle, WA 98105.

publications

The Indian feminist magazine
MANUSHI is in deep financial trouble
as Indira Gandhi's government is re-
fusing to sell them paper, forcing
them to buy it at exorbitant "free
market" prices. They need many new
subscriptions and financial contri-
butions to continue their much need-
ed work making known the activities
and ideas of women in India. Please
write Manushi, A-5 Nizamuddin East,
New Delhi, 110013, India.

LATIN AMERICAN LESBIAN ANTHOLOGY--
"We would like to inform our sisters
of the creation of a Latin American
lesbian collective for the purpose
of publishing an anthology dealing
with our issues and concerns. We in-
vite you to submit articles, short
stories, poems or songs in either
Spanish or English." The deadline
for submitting material is April 30,
1981. For more information please
contact Juanita or Digna at (212)
473-6864. Materials can be sent to
LALA c/o Digna Landrove, 170 Ave C,
Apt. 4H, NYC 10009.

WOMEN AT FARAH: AN UNFINISHED
STORY by Laurie Coyle, Gail Hershat-
ter and Emily Honig is available
from Reforma for $3.25. This story
of the 1972-74 strike at Farah Manu-
facturing Company in El Paso, Texas
explores the effect of the strike on
the women who initiated and sustain-
ed it. It weaves together more than
70 hours of interviews and back-
ground into a very strong study.
Order from Reforma-- El Paso Chap-
ter, PO Box 2064, El Paso, TX 79951.

Big Mama Rag Vol.9 No.2

films

The WOMEN AND WORK FILM, the story
of Australian working women, is
ready to go into production provided
they can raise the necessary financ-
es. Pre-production work on the film
(two years research and script de-
velopment) is now complete. The
film needs individual donations if
it is to tell the story of rebel-
lions against those oppressive
patriarchal practices that have man-
ipulated Aboriginal women, white
women and migrant women throughout
Australian history. A $5 donation
can buy the "Victory" poster (shown
below) designed by Frances Budden
of Matilda Graphics. All proceeds
from the poster have been kindly
donated by Frances and Matilda to
the film. The film, which should
find its way to the US in the early
80's, will be available to the
women's liberation movement, the
trade union movement, educational
institutions and the media. To
order the poster write: Matilda
Graphics, 21 Shepard St., Chippen-
dale, Australia. Send donations to
Flashback Films for the Women and
Work Film, PO Box K563, Haymarket,
Sydney 2000 Australia.

GROW VITAMINS

THE WILLMAR 8 is a film that tells
the inspiring story of eight women--
bank workers in the small town of
Willmar, Minnesota-- who suddenly
found themselves in the forefront
of the fight for working women's
rights. Like millions of other women
throughout the country, they had been
forced into low-wage, dead-end jobs.
When a young male trainee was hired
at twice their starting salary and
the women were required to "train
him in," they complained to the
bank president who told them, "We
are not all equal, you know." This
comment led the previously apolit-
ical women to form a union and start
the first bank strike in the history
of Minnesota. After two years, the
strike was eventually broken. The
film shows that through their strug-
gle, the Willmar 8 won a sense of
dignity and self-worth that had been
denied them on the job. The Willmar
8, directed by Lee Grant, is avail-
able from California Newsreel, 630
Natoma St., San Francisco, CA 94103.
(415) 621-6196. The film is 55 min-
utes and rents for $75. Those not
able to pay the fee may request a
discount.

YOUR KITCHEN DOOR

Redwood Records has just published
a book called MAKING A SHOW OF IT,
A Guide To Concert Production, by
Ginny Berson. The book is geared to
producers, promoters, community or-
ganizers and musicians. The book is
available in women's bookstores or
by mail from Redwood Records, PO Box
996, Ukiah, CA 95482. Price is $4.95
plus 85¢ postage. California resi-
dents add 6%.

The FEMINIST WRITER'S GUILD has
launched a nationwide petition drive
in protest of the new, more restric-
tive eligibility requirements for
the National Endowment for the Arts
Creative Writing Fellowships. In-
stead of broadening the NEA's cultural
base to reflect the literary life
of America in the 1980's, these new
standards institutionalize discrim-
ination against all women writers
and are particularly unfair to fem-
inist, lesbian, third world, and
working-class writers whose work re-
flects their experience. The Femin-
ist Writers Guild is circulating
petitions throughout the literary
community. For copies of the peti-
tion, please write to: Feminist
Writers Guild, Box 184, Village Sta-
tion, NYC, NY 10014. Enclose a self-
addressed stamped envelope.

FILM FUND.

The WOMEN'S WRITER'S CENTER, INC.
is a one-year program in writing
workshops and tutorials, in feminist
literary history, criticism and es-
thetics, and in independent study
projects. Devoted to the education
and support of women writers, the
Center welcomes students with both
traditional and nontraditional edu-
cation, background and training. For
information write: The Women's Writ-
ers' Center, Inc., Cazenovia Col-
lege, Box AY, Cazenovia, NY 13035.

FEMINIST FREE UNIVERSITY is seek-
ing women to teach for its 1981
Spring Session. The Feminist Free
University is a liberation school
taught for and by women. The classes,
workshops and groups offered during
the Spring Sessions will provide op-
portunities for women with specific
interests, experience and knowledge
to teach other women practical
skills, feminist studies, or person-
al growth and development. Interest-
ed women who would like to teach a
class, workshop or group may call
(San Diego) 233-8984 or write to
908 "F" Street, San Diego, CA 92101.