- Hot Briefs

Prison for ‘Ladies’

The Inmate Recreation Committee of the Bedford Hills Correctional Facility for Women reports that, despite considerable funds having been allocated to the facility by Albany for the women's recreation, specifically for gym equipment and for movies, there has been no new equipment purchased for years and the movies they get are old. Superintendent Curry will not allow some of the equipment the women requested because “it's not lady-like for women to participate in certain sports involving this equipment."

“Honor” Crime

An Iranian woman was hanged by her brother last month to uphold her family’s honor, following reports that she was made pregnant by Staff Sgt. Michael Moeller, one of the American hostages being held in Iran. So how did the US media report this story? Not that another woman was killed in a woman-hating ritual, but that reports of Sgt. Moeller's alleged involvement with an Iranian woman produced another “traumatic effect" on his family, including his wife and two children, under the banner headline: Pregnancy News Spurs ‘Trauma.'

Housework Kills

The results of an autopsy of Marion Jones may well prove a claim made by the San Jose, California, woman last year that her housework was killing her. Jones, the wife of an asbestos worker, died in February of a cancer she had claimed was caused by breathing asbestos fibers while handling and washing her husband's work clothes. The woman had been diagnosed as suffering from a deadly form of cancer which is caused by asbestos. Last year she filed a $12 million lawsuit against 19 companies which manufacture the substance. Her suit claims the companies "carelessly and recklessly” produced asbestos, with the knowledge that their product "could and would cause severe injuries" to humans. Now an autopsy reveals that Jones did indeed die of asbestos in her lungs.

Spirited Workers

In Malaysia, women factory workers, many in the electronics factories of multinationals such as RCA and Texas Instruments, have been able to shut down factories for days at a time through spontaneous outbreaks of possession by "spirits." During periods of intense pressure for high production, a "demon" appears to one woman, who becomes "hysterical." The hysteria quickly sweeps the factory and often spreads to other plants.

Can’t Take It Away

The West German Trade Union Confederation (DGB) informed all of its members that they would not be allowed to participate in any festivities or events on this year’s International Women's Day. March 8 has been celebrated by women around the world ever since 1910. The reason? This day is "too much of a party holiday" and goes against the principles of a united union confederation. However, many women refused to accept the DGB order and went ahead to make March 8 a special day.

Disarming Rapists

In Hong Kong, four women's organizations have jointly organized a War on Rape, which has received extensive media coverage by Hong Kong newspapers. The campaign calls for reforms of existing laws on rape, organized counseling facilities for rape victims, and providing resource materials on rape. Meanwhile, in India, numerous demonstrations have been organized to protest rape and the harassment of women. Much controversy has been generated by these demonstrations and activists have been subject to verbal and physical abuse.

Where We're At

Big Mama Rag has a new addition to the office—an Artwaxer that has helped ease the pain of production. It waxes copy quickly, evenly, and cleanly, something we never dreamed possible for our layout and paste-up weekends.

We are glad that summer is really almost here; the warmer weather has also given production weekends a boost as it was proving difficult to line up copy with gloves on. Don't look for us to ask for a donation of a space heater till sometime in the Fall; however, we'll gladly take one now so we can be prepared.

With summer around the corner, it's time again for the Capitol Hill People's Fair at East High. Big Mama Rag and Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter will be sharing a booth; look for us May 10th and 11th on the Esplanade by 17th street. Stopping by the booth will be a good chance to get that set of back issues you've been meaning to send for. If you miss us at the People's Fair, please come to the BMR community meeting Sunday, May 25 at Woman to Woman at 7 P.M. We've published a number of issues since our last community meeting and want to get feedback on what kind of job you think we've been doing.

Bring energy, ideas, suggestions, criticisms, and, if you have extra money burning a hole in your pocket, bring that too. We'll pass the BMR hat to help you get it out of your system.

The June issue of the paper will be on the subject of class; we really want it to be a good issue and we need your input to help make it happen. We are soliciting articles for the "Voices From Our Lives" feature; we want you to write down your personal experiences that have been affected by your own class values as well as others and society's values. We also want articles addressing the questions: is the women's movement a white, middle-class movement, and, since the elimination of class divisions is necessary for the liberation of all women, does this mean the women's movement is a communist movement? Also, how does classism express itself in the women's community; how does it divide us, around what issues; what role do professional women play in the movement; how do we as feminists address the survival issues of all women? Deadline for articles is May 15th.

Raid On Zanzibar

Zanzibar, a lesbian feminist bar in Rome, was recently raided by Italian plainclothes cops, followed by several in uniform with guns in hand. Supposedly looking for heroin, cocaine, and other drugs, the bar was searched and a policewoman arrived to body search some 65 women, one by one in the bathroom. This took five hours and nothing was found. As the police were taking the owners of the bar, Tiziana and Nicola, off to the women's prison, dozens of women who had been forced to wait outside tried to show their support. Obviously irritated by the women, the police became violent, punched Nicola, and three more women were grabbed and arrested. The police pointed their guns at the women to keep them back. It was immediately decided to have a meeting in the Zanzibar, keep the bar open, and start a campaign against what is a deliberate attempt to criminalize the women's movement and close down the only women's bar in Italy.

Soviet Sisters Revisited

Last month Hot Briefs reported that three Soviet women had been detained for publishing an “underground" feminist journal in the USSR. Many Soviet “experts” doubted its existence since "feminism isn't an issue there, Soviet women already have equality." However, a copy of Woman and Russia appeared in France where it is being translated in its entirety. Some quotes: “Today's woman finds herself in an intolerable situation." "We, the female half of humanity, have lost the experience of the past, and are unable to create a new one." "Feminism is progressive and the Women's Movement is an essential element in the world democratic movement.”

Author Recognized

Little known midwestern writer Meridel Le Sueur has been awarded a senior fellowship in literature by the National Endowment for the Arts. Le Sueur, who is 79 years old, was until recently a victim of a blacklist for her political activities in the 1930s. Le Sueur penned several works in the thirties including a feminist novel about Depression era women titled, The Girl.

Oral Sex Out

The current issue of High Performance, a performance art quarterly, hit the stands three weeks late because its printer refused to print a photograph depicting two women in the act of oral sex. The photo, taken by lesbian artist Tee Corine, was intended as illustration for a cover story about the Lesbian Art Project's theatre piece, "An Oral Herstory of Lesbianism." The editor of High Performance said it was clear to her the printer refused to print the photo solely because of the lesbian theme; he said "it offended his plant workers and would offend his customers" although he realized it was not intended to be titillating or pornographic. Editor Burnham pointed out that the printer has never objected to printing anything for High Performance before, including "plenty of genitals" and graphic, candid rape scenes depicted in past issues. One obvious question: what is an oral herstory of lesbianism doing in a magazine depicting graphic rape scenes?

Artistic Expression

A library photo collection featuring shots of women who were apparently raped and murdered and left lying in their own blood, was torn up last month by a woman who had herself been raped. The woman said the photos were part of a collection in the library of the University of California at Santa Cruz, titled "The Incredible Stack O'Wheat Murders." The set, she said, had been received by the library as part of a promotion of the work of photographer William Reynolds. The former rape victim invited a reporter from a local newspaper to attend the tearing-up of the photos. If it was “artistic expression" to take them, she said, their destruction was also an "artistic expression” and should be documented.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 4

Help Her Chances

A custody fight is like giving birth a second time knowing you have an 85% chance of having a stillborn. This is the feeling expressed by Donna Zelle, a lesbian mother still fighting for her two youngest children in Illinois. Donna won the first round in court, but her ex-husband got a stay on the court order giving Donna custody. Donna still needs financial and emotional support to continue her fight. Donations are tax-deductible and can be sent to LMNDF, PO Box 21567, Seattle, WA 98111. Be sure to clearly earmark the donations for Donna Zelle.

‘Family’ Fight

A family is parents, or a parent and child, not lesbians, not even unmarried heterosexual couples. Such was the conclusion of the Oklahoma Conference on the Family. Many people present at the conference expressed grave concern that the stance of the conference did not meet the needs of Oklahoma families not fitting the traditional molds; their concerns were voted down by a strong contingent of "right-to-life" groups. Other highlights from the conference: “There is no word sweeter than ‘mother’ and the nurturing of children is the most important career" and "Divorces are too easy to get."

Anita Stashes Cash

In filings recently released by the IRS, Anita Bryant collected over $2 million from the public in 1978 for the operation of her two anti-gay organizations, Protect America's Children and Anita Bryant Ministries. Anita Bryant Ministries, launched in 1977 to establish counseling centers for homosexuals who have drifted away from her fundamentalist Christianity, raised almost $1 million in contributions, yet tax files show only $150 of that amount went to “counseling,” $400,000 went to more fundraising, and the other half million plus went into the bank. The first organization, Protect America's Children, had as its aim an explicitly political function, and is a tax-exempt group. The IRS, while refusing comment on Bryant's continued tax-exempt and tax-deductible status, said an audit may be in the offing.

Blame the Victim Game

The US Department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW) has decided that men's college dormitories and women's should keep different hours for the protection of the women.

The HEW decision, in what may be a new ruling on protective custody, came in response to complaints at the University of Arizona that women's dormitories are not open to visitors for as many hours as men's dorms. According to HEW spokesman C. Marck Hall, that's all right because "the women's hours are necessary for security reasons, because women are more vulnerable to physical abuse and harm than men."

Sporting Equality

Nearly eight years after Congress passed Title IX, HEW has settled on a definition of anti-discrimination in inter-collegiate sports programs. The recent issuing of HEW's Title IX "policy interpretation" clears the way for long-awaited enforcement action to end unfair treatment of women in those programs. Women's reaction to the policy has been positive on the whole, while some representatives of men's athletic programs have voiced harsh criticism of the proportional scholarship requirement. For a copy of the policy, write Public Affairs, Office for Civil Rights, HEW, Room 5146, 330 Independence Ave. S.W., Washington, DC 20201.