The Briggs Initiative

Much More Than an Attack on Gay Rights

Sharon Sapphora

Sharon Sapphora is a freelance Les-
bian writer, who presently resides in
San Francisco.

Over the last few months I have
watched a wave of attacks against
third world people, poor women, and
lesbians and gay men. At first, Anita
Bryant's "Save Our Children" campaign
seemed at best a sick joke put on by
religious fanatics, people similar to
those I grew up with in the South. It
didn't shock me any more than the
"Stop the ERA - Keep Our Women" signs
posted in the local laundromat of a
small cowboy town in Colorado where
I lived last year. One of the reasons
I decided to move to San Francisco was
to get away from that kind of mental-
ity.

Now, after several months of living
in the "queer capital of the world,"
where everyone is happy and gay, I
realize there is little difference
here except the illusion of safety in
numbers. You feel like you are a ma-
jority here. Everywhere you go there
are lesbians and gay men.

Politically, the climate here is
like any other part of the country.
The same attack started by Anita is
continued here by Senator John Briggs,
only done in a more sophisticated and
dangerous way. He has combined Pro-
testant preacher revival tactics with
political maneuvers designed to legally
take away the civil rights of les-
bians and gay men. Briggs has succeed-
ed in getting enough signatures to put
a state initiative on the November
ballot. If passed, the statute will
require that school boards fire or
refuse to hire any teacher, aide, ad-
ministrator, counselor, even the jan-
itor, who has engaged in homosexual
activity as defined by the California
penal code: "Any public homosexual
conduct advocating, soliciting, im-
posing, encouraging, or promoting
private or public homosexual activity."
This means any school employee, gay
or straight, could face suspension or
dismissal for being lesbian or homo-
sexual, or for even supporting the
rights of gays in or out of the class-
room. This gives the school board the
power to get rid of any progressive
teacher who is “rumored” to be queer.
The Briggs Initiative has brought
the lesbian and gay male communities
closer together in order to fight for
the rights of gay school workers and
gay students in the public school
system. However, the division that
occurred over how to fight this battle

“My mother feels much safer now that we've kicked out those gay teachers.”

has weakened the coalition. One of the
first rallies I went to was presented
by BACABI (Bay Area Coalition Against
the Briggs Initiative). The first
thing I noticed was that two thirds
of the audience was male, as were
most of the speakers. One speaker was
a member of the Libertarian Party. He
insulted the third world people there
by asking that the issues of gay
rights remain separated from other
causes, meaning that white male homo-
sexuals should not involve themselves
with the struggle of other oppressed
groups in the third world community.
At that point, most of the women in
the audience got up to leave, until a
black lesbian was given equal speaking
time.

After this, I met Lesbian School-
workers, a group of lesbians who be-
lieve the only way to defeat Briggs
is to understand the connections be-
tween this initiative and other right
wing attacks; then, with this under-
standing, to join forces with women,
third world people, and all groups
who suffer from the injustices of our
social, economic, and political sys-
tem. These women spend hours giving
lectures in and out of school in an
attempt to educate the public about
lesbianism, especially as it is con-
nected to the educational system. As
they work with the third world com-
munities against other oppressions
such as the Bakke case, abortion cut-
backs, the death penalty, and forced
sterilization, a broad coalition is
being formed. But Briggs is no fool
when he says that if he can win against
gays in San Francisco, he can win
across the nation. And he will win.
We cannot defeat Briggs by trying to

persuade the people of this country
to give us our civil rights by voting
the right way on initiatives and the
like. The freedom fighters would nev-
er have succeeded at all in their
fight for civil rights if it had come
to a vote in this country. People
would not even vote in the Bill of
Rights if they had a choice.

All this has opened my eyes to the
rising tide of economic crises deep-
ening in this country. It is not an
accident that Anita advertised for the
Florida Orange Corporation. They would
like us to believe they are not be-
hind her queer-baiting. But in the
movie "A Day Without Sunshine" the
Florida Orange Corporation is shown
as a huge multi-million dollar con-
troller of world trade at the expense
of enslaved migrant workers. This is
the kind of power backing which Anita
and Briggs represent. The attacks on

Gayla Review

gays and poor women and third world
people are no accident. Neither is
the means to keep these groups separ-
ated from each other. During times of
rising inflation, unemployment, and
high taxes, people grow restless. Such
dissatisfaction is used by the right
wing as a stage to pit the working
class against the minorities. If peo-
ple are out to "kill a nigger for a
job" or "gas queers to save our child-
ren" then they won't notice the fas-
cists taking over until, as in Nazi
Germany, it is too late. The Nazis
did not have a majority of the popu-
lace's backing when they took over
Germany; only 37% of the population
supported them. At that time many
Germans thought of the Nazi party as
part of a minority radical element
not to be taken seriously. When I read
an article written by the editor of a
paper called The Torch in 1977 entitled
"Gas Gays," I thought it was a
joke. Who could believe anyone was so
off the wall as to print, "The White
People's Committee to Restore God's
Laws is not embarrassed to admit that
we endorse and seek the execution of
all homosexuals."

It is no joke. It is a fact that at
least 250,000 male homosexuals and
lesbians were the first among those
to be sent to Nazi concentration camps.
They were forced to wear the inverted
pink triangle and were subjected to
starvation, torture, and then gassed
right along with the Jewish people.

Why are gays the first to be at-
tacked? Because homosexuality is an
easy emotional troublemaker among the
working class. Then, how is the op-
pression of women and other minorities
tied in? Because for imperialism to
keep control it must enforce the role
of white male supremacy within the
working class by keeping the role of
women chained to the nuclear family.
The abortion cutbacks just passed in-
to law serve to force poor women to
have more unwanted children, which
keeps them dependent on the welfare
system and on men. The affirmative
action setbacks (Bakke) keep working
class women out of educational opp-
ortunities that would give them
higher-paying jobs and more econo-
mical power over their lives. Carter's
new welfare package is a bomb that
will force working class women who

Big Mama: Rag Vol. 6 No. 9

are pregnant to work at very low
wages without supplying child care.
The recent attacks on lesbian mothers’
rights to raise their children, and
the rights of lesbians and gay males
to teach in public schools further
strengthen the traditional nuclear
family structure, and thus, white
male supremacy.

It is easy to see why the gay male
community does not wish to involve
itself with the issues of anyone's
rights except their own. They are
part of the white male ruling class
that has given them their privileges.
They do not wish to risk any more
than it will take to keep these
rights. For this reason, the media
has always focused on the middle
class male homosexual, who has it
made in places like San Francisco.

He has remained in some ways an op-
pressor, and is not as threatening to
the patriarchy as the lesbian of the
women's movement.

- Arbeiterkamp/ LNS

We have proven that women can live
outside central male dominance and
that the nuclear family is not nec-
essary for our survival. Lesbian
mothers have successfully challenged
the myth that raising children is in-
separable from male provision. We
cross over every other oppressed
group, forming the possible basis of
a powerful coalition of all oppressed
people. The government must "save
their children," meaning the white
nuclear family.

Meanwhile, the Senate
has passed a bill to the House that
if passed will virtually take away
all of the rights of the First Amend-
ment. Under this bill, anyone who
prints or sends information by mail
about abortion that might persuade
someone to have an abortion can be
sentenced to up to five years in pri-
son. (That means you may not be able
to read BMR in the near future.) It
also makes it illegal to boycott or
to demonstrate against any business
that might cause them to lose "any-
thing of value . . . including rights,
privileges, interests, and claims."
This could outlaw strikes, pickets,
and close down places like self-help
clinics because it damages doctors'
businesses. The final step towards a
police state is provided for by out-
lawing any demonstration that might
“get out of hand" and be called a
"riot," which is defined as a public
disturbance involving ten or more
people and "violent or tumultuous con-
duct on the part of the participants."
Even strong chanting or raised fists
is said by public officials to create
a danger of “imminently” injuring
people or property. Anyone inciting,
organizing, speaking, or giving dir-
ections to such a demonstration can

MORE ON PAGE 11