international

Palestinian Women

Women Against the Occupation, a large group of Jewish Feminists, lesbian and heterosexual, living in Israel who oppose the Israeli government's policies.

prison

For 44 months now the Palestinian political women prisoners have been striking. The women prisoners, 26 of them, broke out with the strike on the 10th of May 1983, with their only demand being not to force them to cook for the prison's guards.

Following is the course of events which brought to the break out of the strike; About a year ago the prison's administration decided, unlike previous norms and against the Geneva convention, to make the cooking for the guards compulsory to the women prisoners in Neveh-Tirtsa prison. (It should be noted that this is not to be a paid job like all the other jobs which are done by the women prisoners.)

As a result, the Palestinian women prisoners have come to a decision that they should refuse to do this work due to its political connotations: one more attempt to humiliate the women prisoners and turn them into the slaves of the oppressive establishment.

On the 10th of May this year they have taken the decision not to cook for the guards neither with payment nor without.

As a result of this strike commander Ms. Epstein who was in charge of Neveh Tirtsa prison at the time, decided to take strong punishing actions in order to break the strike and to force the women prisoners to go on serving the guards.

The following are the actions which were gradually taken:

1. The women prisoners were prevented from ALL the other jobs they used to do: in the electrical appliances workshop, sewing workshop, and in the prison's fields.

2. The women prisoners are kept in their cells 23 hours a day, and can only leave their cells for one hour a day. This one-hour walk is done for each cell separately to prevent any contact between the different cells.

3. Instead of the relative visits that used to be once a fortnight according to the women's prison's rules, they are allowed a visit now only once in two months.

4. The women prisoners are prevented from receiving books and newspapers, and the reading materials they previously received have been taken away.

5. The women prisoners are prevented from the little permissions they had before the strike broke out: their jeans were taken away, and so were hair pins, personal sewing kits, and sewing and embroidery works which they made in their free time.

6. They no longer get their tea-time (10:00 am) food like in the past.

The attempts made to break the women prisoners' struggle have come as far as applying pressure and harassment on their lawyer Mr. Walid Fahoum. Thus Mr. Fahoum was approached by commander Ms. Epstein to persuade him to apply pressure from his end on the women prisoners to end the strike. Faced with his refusal Mr. Fahoum was blamed by commander Epstein of harming the women prisoners and to strengthen her views she arranged a meeting for him with the only women prisoners who refused to join the strike. As the strike went on the meetings of the women prisoners and their lawyer, Mr. Fahoum, have taken a new shape: the meetings took place in a visits hall while a two meters long table is placed between the woman prisoner and Mr. Fahoum, in order to make the conversation very loud; on top of that, a woman guard was always present in the room, (to care for the "safety" of both the woman prisoner and the lawyer, as was explained to Mr. Fahoum.)

But this was not the end of the harassment: in any conversation with any of the women prisoners, led by a lawyer under the previously described conditions, the present woman guard used to intervene, disturbing the flow of the meeting, trying to persuade Mr. Fahoum that the information given to him by the women prisoners is a lie and untrue.

On the second of August 1983, Mr. Fahoum intended to meet life prisoner Teresa Halasieh. Teresa, who participated in the hijacking attempt of the Sabena aircraft in Lod airport in 1972, was shot and wounded in the eye and the arm. For six years now Teresa suffers from boils which appear in different parts of her body, high temperatures, and from general weakness. All the medical treatment she got did not help, and as a result of her bad physical condition she is subjected to low moods, and even depression. On that date (2-8-83) before Mr. Fahoum managed to exchange a few words with her, he was ordered to leave the prison premises immediately. When he demanded explanation from commander Ms. Shoham (the new prison commander), Mr. Fahoum was blamed of organizing “aggressive demonstrations" (namely the demonstrations).

The relationships between the political and main population prisoners which were generally good relationships, in spite of repetitive attempts made by the women guards to foment a quarrel by the two groups. This attempt was not fruitful and due to a demand made by the main population women prisoners, the prison administration re-permitted the watching of TV, obviously to the main population which was organized by "Women Against Occupation” which took place on the 5th of August). Mr. Fahoum was also blamed of encouraging the women prisoners to behave aggressively. On the 5th of August when Mr. Fahoum returned to meet the women prisoners yet again, he was told, again by commander Shoham that he cannot carry out his meeting since there are too many visitors in! (it should be noted that that day was not a visiting day in the women prison, not mentioning that as noted above these Palestinian women prisoners are only allowed relative visits once every two months!)

Another fashion of applying pressure on the striking Palestinian women prisoners was to turn the main population women prisoners (most of them Jewish) in Neveh-Tirtsa prison against the political women prisoners. Thus, when the strike broke out ALL the women prisoners were forbidden to watch TV. The purpose of this collective punishment was clear: to undermine the relationships between the political and main population women prisoners only. From the information received from the women prisoners' lawyer, it is known to us that the women prisoners are determined to continue the struggle until the prison administration will accept their only demand: not to make the cooking for the prison's guards compulsory. The Palestinian women prisoners carry out their struggle under very difficult conditions, under hard punishment actions, which get worse as time goes on and under increasing attempts from the women guards and the prison administration to get them to surrender. But in spite of the hardships and the bad conditions under which they are, the Palestinian political women prisoners say time and again that they don't intend to waver from their demand. The meaning of this demand is a resistance to the Israeli establishment's attempt to humiliate them both as women and as freedom fighters.  
MORE ON PAGE 17