|

National Lesbian Feminist Organization Forms

The following is an interview with
Canok Lease, one of six Denver women
who were the Midwest delegates to the
Ad Hoc Committee organizing the Nation-
al Lesbian Feminist Organization (NLFO).
The Committee met in Los Angeles, March
1979.

A group of California women were in-
spired by the Lesbian presence at the
National Women's Conference in Houston
to call for the formation of a national
Lesbian organization. At the committee
meeting in March, there were 143 dele-
gates from around the country. Of
these, 100 had formally applied to re-
gional coordinators to be delegates.
Another 25 came as observers and were
later seated as delegates. There were
3 delegates at-large and a delegation
of 15 Chicana Lesbians came from San
Francisco.

Janet Sergi

BMR: What was accomplished by the Ad
Hoc Committee?

Carol: A temporary national steering
committee was formed. It is composed
of 16 women, 12 of whom are permanent.
There is a requirement for half of the
women to be women of color and to keep
regional representation equal. (There
are 5 national regions.) The majority
of the women of color present were from
California, so 4 positions on the steer-
ing committee were temporarily filled
by Anglo women, who will find women of
color in their regions to fill these
positions. I am responsible to fill
one steering committee position for the
Midwest region.

BMR: What is the temporary structure
of the NLFO?

Carol: The national steering committee
is temporary. Its purpose is to fac-
ilitate the organization of the group
until the national ratification conven-
tion which will be held in the spring
of 1979 in St. Paul, Minnesota. Every
state is to have a state convention to
be held no sooner than 3 months and no
later than 9 months from now. State
conventions will pass resolutions on
political issues. Women in each state
who want to become members are respon-
sible for setting up the state conven-
tions. To check if organizing is al-
ready going on in your state or if you
want to become a member, write to Pam
Minich, NLFO, 4021 Mandell #G, Houston,
Texas 77006.

Local groups can organize for prep-
aration of state and national conven-
tions. Dues are one dollar a year per
thousand dollars of income. Fifty per
cent of the dues go to the national
group, thirty per cent will go to fin-
ance the upcoming national convention,
and twenty per cent will go to the lo-
cal chapters. At the national conven-
tion a new structure can be implemented.

BMR: What is the purpose of a national
lesbian group?

Carol: Here is the statement of pur-
pose of NLFO.

Be it resolved that we declare that
the purpose of this organization is to
act on a feminist platform which deals
with the oppression of lesbians in all
its manifestations.

Be it further resolved that we see
these manifestations as including, but
not limited to, discrimination based on
sexual preference, sex, race, class,
age and physical disability.

Recognizing that lesbians are op-
pressed and invisible in this society
where woman-hating is the norm,

Recognizing that there is a need to
achieve equal rights and legal protec-
tion for all lesbians,

Recognizing that there is a need
to educate lesbians and the general
public as to the social, political,
economic and racial oppression of les-
bians,

Recognizing the need for developing
lesbian culture,

Recognizing that all women have
many aspects of their lives, situations
and struggles and that women have mul-
tiple facets to their identities,

We therefore unite as the National
Lesbian Feminist Organization.

BMR: What types of conflicts arose?
Carol: There was a conflict over who
should become members. The categories
were: 1. all born women (definition:
being born female and not changing to
the female sex later in life) 2. les-
bians only 3. all lesbians and/or wo-
men-identified women (definition: wo-
men whose primary focus is other women).
We decided on the third category. There
was no fear that straight women would
take over the group; the major concern
was for closet lesbians to be able to
join under the women-identified categ-
ory. The decision can be changed at
the ratifying convention. (Two dele-
gates walked out of the conference be-
cause straight women could join.)

BMR: Was there a conflict over race?
Carol: The women of color resolution
came in the discussion of reapportion-
ment. The delegates thought that all
five national regions should be equally
represented instead of giving the east
and west coasts more votes. The women
of color present wanted their own del-
egation of 15 and asked that 50% of all
lesbians on state and national policy-
making bodies be women of color. These
were both agreed upon. An amendment
was proposed that this policy was un-
workable because lesbian women of color
are not presently that active in the
lesbian movement. They tend to be work-
ing class and closeted due to justified
fears of losing their jobs and children
in this economy. The amendment was
withdrawn. The women of color felt it
was up to Anglo delegates to implement
the 50% quota in their own communities.

The following is the final amendment
on racism and classism:

Be it resolved that this organization
is committed to fighting against racism
and classism and therefore women of
color will be involved on all levels of
planning and decision making.

The planners of the next conference
are mandated to reach out to all under-
represented groups and show evidence of
success or attempt before the body of
the next conference.

Women of color should comprise 50% of
all regional and national boards.

Sufficient monies gathered by the
national organization shall go to ex-
pedite the above goals.

MORE ON PAGE 14

Linda Rechter

"It's frustrating!"

From page 2

As all too often happens in discussions, the mood of the group seemed bent
on a certain attitude that influenced that of the others.

Many did not speak
at all, and most of the few people who were brave enough to speak out on
their own fears or frustrations were apologetic as they did so.

Over too quickly, the subject;
things began to get too close. Why is it that personally relating to Linda's
pain is too threatening for most of us?

We talk about relief for suffering, yet turn away from it when it is right
before us.

I know that if I get depressed (or act crazy, or get angry, etc.)
I am afraid that if I show that to people, they are not going to like me or see
me for who I am.

When I see how Linda was viewed, and anytime that I witness
the aloofness and the condescension that others are treated with who are foolish
enough not to conceal these emotions, this fear becomes even more real.
The tragedy is that we all know these feelings and we all have suppressed them
or been ashamed of them or felt helpless victims to them.

Whenever this hap-
pens, we destroy ourselves, we destroy the unity and full power of our move-
ment, and we destroy each other, without even realizing it.
The real trouble is that women love gross insensitivity. I would find her to live with someone who, as she says,
is "too fucked up for anyone to live with."
Maybe then, she would be able to see the real beauty and
value of the people we label as "mad."

It is no secret, in fact, that the world's fine people often commit
suicide and/or go “mad."

It is simply the fact that the world creates so
little space for the gentler and more perceptive people. Narrowness closes in
on us from every side...we seek refuge among our own...in Linda's case, Lesb-
ian-Feminists...and if that seems to fail us too, we feel totally helpless and
become desperate.
“Fucked up" (and who isn't?).

I am not glorifying Linda.
It's just that the idea that “she was too fucked up to live with," the desire to "pass her off..." the perpetuation of this
closing-out pattern has got to be stopped, at least within our community.

The lives we close out are too valuable...the price we pay is too high.
Somehow the world has twisted itself up, with your death.
An unmendable warp has developed there, somewhere in my vision.
That someone such as you could have died like you did...
That something like this could have happened...
And still we do not face the disease that is killing us all.
That this has happened with you,
That when it seems to let us down, we are that much more desperate.

There is no reason why Linda should not have had truly good friends. She
loved to have fun, and she was fun to be with; she had a delightful sense of
play and humor. She also felt a deep need for Feminist Revolution. I, myself,
considered Linda's friendship a real godsend. It's been a long time since
I'd been able to find a relationship like it. She was easy to get along with,
and always ready to give truly positive energy. At times she was like a play-
mate, and at other times serious and meaningful conversations came easily and
freely. She was simply a damn good friend to have.

It seemed that she was always searching for outlets for her revolutionary
feminist politics. This, I feel, was extremely frustrating to her; that the
groups she sought to link up with for this outlet always demanded that she be-
have entirely contrary to her nature. I know that she expressed a lot of ang-
er at the women at the bookstore because of this. Perhaps she felt that some-
thing was wrong with her, because politically and emotionally she felt linked
with the feminist movement, while in reality, she never really felt that she
fit in.
Linda loved life and suffered to death because it would not meet
her needs.
You, on the other hand, hate life and beat it to death,
because it will not meet your needs.

"With Linda, nobody didn't know that she was depressed. Nobody didn't know
that she was suicidal. It wasn't a question of picking up on these clues, be-
cause they were out there. But it was just that nobody, I don't think, really
quite knew what to do. That there was no resource that you could plug into...
that there was no network where when people just got burned out and couldn't
stand her another minute (cause that's the way anybody who's dealt with a
suicidal person knows it gets...that you just don't want to see them again),
that there was nobody to pass her off to." (Italics mine--Carol)

"She was in the process of finding a place to live when she killed herself,
with a group of women..."

"But then, she was too fucked up to live with anybody."

"I don't know. I haven't known Linda that long. I only knew her a month
and a half. The past month, I was seeing her a couple of times a week...she
was staying over at my house...we were conversing and talking. I have con-
tempt for people who say that about her being out of it...about her being spaced all the time. We had some very good conversations, and..."

"But were you going to live with her?"

"But were you going to live with her?" (Would you live with one?) These
words and the tone of voice that she spoke with them keep bouncing back and
forth in my mind. If I were to put the speaker of these words on trial for
and countless times has happened with others,
And again and again and again it will happen until we learn.
I, myself, can't bear the pain of such costly illustrations.

"I think the important thing to realize is that there are women in the com-
munity--it could be you, it could be me, it could be anybody in this room--that
at some time or other--maybe right now--needs help.”

"I've tried twice in my life to commit suicide. What feels most important
to me is that we make it feel okay to ask each other for help. That's what's
important to me. If I'm in need and I feel that I can call you or say I need a
hug right now, or I need to be touched, or I need a hello, I think that creat-
ing that kind of atmosphere is what's most important.”

"What feels most important to me is that we make it feel okay to ask each
other for help." And how is it that we have so far failed to create such an
atmosphere? To me, it is an absolute necessity that we take care of each other
as we struggle, each in her own way, against this monster that we live in the
midst of. And what kind of revolution are we able to create if we allow our-
selves to let slide the basic needs of the people near us? Personally, I have
little faith in such a "revolution." Unfortunately, little more was said about
what we must do in order to create such an atmosphere, or to understand why we
have failed to create it. I would like to see, in response to this article,
and in response to Linda's death, extensive and productive discussions in order
to begin to create this atmosphere that we are so desperately lacking.

A lot of things were left unsaid at that meeting. I am told that there were
a lot of people there, and judging from the small number of different voices
heard on the tape, there must have been many there who never said anything. I
would like to hear from those people...the people who never spoke as well as
the people who spoke little and felt that they were not heard. I would like to
hear what they needed to see happen at the meeting, whether they knew Linda or
not. I would also appreciate hearing from the people who knew Linda, and were
genuinely fond of her--not from a sense of obligation, but who truly appreciated
her for herself...her simplicity, her sensitivity, her humor, her sensibility.
Perhaps we can get together again and discuss those things that need to be
said...a small group...at my house. Perhaps we can get together and express
our grief and sadness in a long overdue memorial for a sister. I also would
like people to contact me who are interested in discussing how we can go about
creating the type of atmosphere within our community in which we all can feel
comfortable in asking for help; in which we all can feel appreciated.

Please. No more lonely women. No more tragedies. The lives we lose are much
too valuable.

Linda, I miss you.
Address Letters to:

Who will I dance with now?
Canok Stern, & CMR.