IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

MSINVONNF

=
G
O
{e)
me}
o
e
2
°
1)
-
OF
>
n
®
ec
3
°
1)
°
~
°
£

oe

Morgan: We’re the
Women That Men

Warned Us About

Chocolate Waters

“We all know the male mass media stereotype of the Women’s
Movement: ‘If you've seen one Women’s Libber, you've seen ‘em
all—they each have two heads, a pair of horns, and are fire-
spouting, man-hating, neurotic, crazy, frigid, castrating-bitch,
aggressive, broom-riding witches.’ So I want to start out by saying
that this shocking stereotype is absolutely true,” said Robin
Morgan to a group of about 100 people gathered in University of

Colorado's Mackey Auditorium, April 8.

Morgan, Feminist author,
editor, and speaker went on to
cover a number of topics perti-
nent to women—including
gynocracies, women’s revolu-
tion, rape, pornography, and the
Church. She began by explain-
ing that we women are really a
colonized people who have been
alienated from our basic
land—our bodies. “We have
been used for childrearing and
sex and have been made to feel
unclean, but the time is here for
us to take back our own land.
Yes, we are the women men
have warned us about!”

She continued by talking
about the Women’s Movement
itself and observed three basic
areas which have emerged. The
first one being the Civil Rights
area where groups (such as
NOW) tend to work within the
capitalistic and patriarchal
system. “Although these groups
often settle for legislative
reform, their work is still in-
tensely valuable,” said Morgan.

The second area is what she
called the Women’s Liberation
part of the movement, where the
refugees from the Left (or the
“boys’ movement”) gathered
together. Said Morgan of the
woman who had been working
in the Left, “wiping the tear gas
from her eyes, she would then
go home and make supper.” She
added, “If people wonder why
the Left is dead, it’s because
most of the women (who were
doing the shitwork) have left.”

Radical Feminism

The third and perhaps most
important is the Radical
Feminist part of the movement
where women are not interested
solely in reform. Affirmed
Morgan, “I do not want to be
equal with what it is men are in
this society.” She went on to ex-
plain that Radical Feminists are
interested in working towards a
world run by and on the power
and love of women. In clarifica-
tion of power (a tricky concept),

she added, “not in the male

sense of power over someone,
but in the context of a ‘power
plant producing energy.’ The
power plant itself radiates life-
giving energy, but does not con-
trol life.”

In such a society there would
probably be few of the ills which
characterize the patriarchal
world of today. One of these ills
is rape. Speaking out against
rape, Morgan defined the crime
as “any pressure on a woman to
have intercourse against her
will. According to that definition,
the bedrooms of happily-married
couples are often scenes of rape
and every man could be defined
as a rapist.”

She also stressed the need for
rape crisis centers run by
women and further pointed out
that in New York City last year
only 4% of all rapes were
reported and for the 18,000
cases that did get to court there
was only one conviction.
Statistically, white women are
raped most often by white men

* and Black women by Black men

(contradicting the myths). “But
interestingly enough,” she add-
ed, “70% of all rapists are
men.”

Verbal Visual Rape

Concerning verbal and visual
rape—pornography, Morgan
called it “one of those areas
where mama was right.” Sex is
used pornographically in a
destructive, sadistic, conquering
manner—just one more way of
putting women down. She com-
mented about “judges reading a
lot of dirty books with one hand,”
but went on to say that women
are finding some of their own
ways to deal with pornography.
In Knoxville, Tenn., for example,
women took pictures of men as
they emerged from dirty book
stores and plastered these pic-
tures up all over town.

As Morgan came to the end of
her talk, she explained that a
woman had requested a reading
of “Monster,” the title poem from
her first published book of
poetry. Although she doesn't
usually read her poems during
speaking engagements, Robin
closed the evening with a most
powerful and moving reading.
Seconds of silence followed by
tears and thunderous applause
affirmed that the audience in-
deed shared the pain of Robin
Morgan's experience as a
woman as well as her hope of a
new and promising world for us
all.

- An Interview
With Robin Morgan

Maureen Mrizek

Chocolate and I traveled to
Boulder to interview Robin
Morgan on the afternoon of April
8. We found her conducting a
discussion in the upstairs of the
SMC building. She sat patiently
answering questions and
illuminating Feminist concepts
with an unending supply of facts
and analysis.

After the discussion we walk-
ed down to the Women’s Center
for the interview. I may add that
the Women’s Center was bright-
ly festooned with pictures of
women supporting some of the
most recent male national
liberation struggles, and there
were posters advertising the
Women’s Center presentation of
“Lucia” (a movie about a woman’s
role in a man’s revolution). Lucia
seemed to be the hottest thing to
hit town since the Betty Crocker
Bake-offs.

Back to the interview—we
didn’t really push a lot of things
into the interview because Robin
had been talking politics all
afternoon and her voice seemed
to be fading away. But we talked
about a few important topics. We
wanted to know her view of the
differences that exist in the
Women's Movement. She said
that she felt there could be “a
tremendous strength in diver-
sity”—that we have a “12,000
year old battle to fight and there
will, most likely, be more than
one way to fight it.” She said she
felt that diversity is a “natural
outcome of our growth as a
movement,” and that “it matters
less where a woman is coming
from than where she’s going to.”
She suggested that we should
ask ourselves “What is our com-
mitment to a worldwide
Women’s Revolution?” She felt
that instead of developing in
terms of “vanguardism” and the
“correct line” we should con-
centrate more on “respect for
the individual and where she
feels most comfortable.” She
suggested that some of our
divisions “are the product of
moral laziness. They are an ex-
cuse for not confronting men,
the real oppressors.”

We talked about the
differences that women face in
working together politically,
which I, for lack of a better term,
labeled the “Consciousness
Chasm,” the differences in
women’s Feminist con-
sciousness. She said that
women with a more advanced
Feminist consciousness
“should not lose sight of where
they themselves have been,”
that “all of us at some time in our
lives have thought ‘I’m not op-
pressed’ and believed it.” She
suggested that we view
ourselves as “facilitators un-
covering the layers of defenses
women have built up for survival
in a man’s world.” She said

More on Page 3

Political, Spiritual
Feminism Flourish
In New Mexico

Linda Fowler

“The Women’s Movement in Santa Fe is really together,” a friend
told me. It seemed like a good idea to check it out.

Going into my second day in Santa Fe, I could feel the birth pangs my
sisters were suffering. They had been able to establish the Women’s
Health Services (in spite of hassles from the state over abortion
counseling), the Santa Fe Women’s Commune which the
women published on their own press, and a women’s center, “The
Gathering” (I Ching), established on little more than energy. With this
last development, social stigmas arose because the center is located
on the edge of the barrio and had been founded by a predominantly
Lesbian group.

In an effort to dissolve the stigma and establish a unified sisterhood
in Santa Fe and statewide, these activist sisters sought to join with the
New Mexico Women’s Political Caucus during the planning session
for the state convention scheduled to be held in Santa Fe. As so often
happens, the situation came down to the issue of Lesbianism; in this
case, simply the right to use the word and call oneself what one really
is. The meeting of the by-laws committee was packed. Those who felt
“Lesbian” is not a dirty word won out. The by-laws were rewritten,
and many of the women who had opposed this change—some of
whom were in a position to be politically helpful to Feminism—walked
out of the meeting and withdrew from the caucus. Result? Same old
story: a lingering atmosphere of debate and division within the
Women's Movement. And in this case, giving up on the sisterhood.
The activist women, feeling oppressed by their own sisters, have lean-
ed heavily on Marxism and are seeking to merge with other oppressed
groups in Santa Fe. They have abandoned the women’s magazine, and
will instead begin publishing a general community newspaper, hoping
to be joined by other oppressed people as the paper develops. Theirs
has become a class struggle. Their predicament underlines a dilemma
common to many women's efforts in the embryonic stage: until suf-
ficient grassroots support can be established, women are forced to
deal with the system on its own terms through coalition and com-
promise.

ly Magazin

Factionalism Blurs Vision

Is this the road the Women’s Movement is going down? Fac-
tionalism, with the resulting blurring of vision and scattering of
energies? Here are women who feel they are better off compromising
their Feminism because they cannot come together with their sisters,
and cannot, on the other hand, cease functioning. Channeling their
women’s energies (these women alone created the new community
newspaper) into a coalition with other oppressed groups, they can no
longer look to their own oppression as their fundamental cause. And
once again women’s position becomes secondary.

What happens in this situation to a woman who wants to be active
but not just in another splintered political group? As a woman named
Columbine told me, “I want to live in Santa Fe. I want to work in the
Women’s Movement. But I want to work with other women; not with
men. And I can’t put out a paper alone. I feel torn.” She talked of an ap-
proach other than political—another level deeper in. And we went to
Albuquerque, to the Labe’ Collective.

Labe’ Collective

The Labe Collective had been formed by a group of ten Lesbian
women, many of whom are craftswomen, activists, and spiritualists.
They seem devoted to living together collectively and harmoniously,
i.e. a musician, an artist, a silversmith, a creator of leather clothing, all
living together in one house and apparently flourishing; to individual
development—they have an awareness of the need for each woman to
have time alone, to be in her own space; to stress individual as well as
group activism; and to the channeling of energies not into changing
the existing structure but into the development of a woman's culture.

This development requires a fundamental spiritual base, not a
political one. Although politics can get you what you want, politics can

not tell you what you want. In order to know what you want you must

know who you are. Knowing this is the basis for a women’s culture.
Being it is the culture. You are it.

In an atmosphere that is non-competitive, that is supportive of self-
knowledge, self-ability, and personal development, in a living collec-
tive composed entirely of women with a minimum of outside male in-
fluence, craftswomen, writers, artists—all conscious women—come
to discover those things which are basically, commonly woman and to
express those characteristics through their creations. Here are the
beginnings of a Feminist culture.

Why within Labe? Because Labe is generative. Generative because
being Lesbian, separation from male influence is much easier. And
this separation may be necessary if any women’s culture is to be
found. Generative because spiritualism (the looking inward to know
the self) and closeness become elemental.

The elemental, the spiritual may prove a better base for achieving
Feminist goals than a political one. While political focus is external in
nature, spiritualism looks inside and tells us what women are, who
women are, who we ourselves are. It can unite us through the
knowledge and understanding of what is basically woman, and can
perhaps give us the rudiments of a matriarchal religion. Lesbians may
be the ones who can lay down a framework, rather than the hand. (See
letter p.9 from Labe Collective.)

BIG MAMA LOVES YOU — SEND US YOUR PICTURE. WE
WOULD LIKE TO SEE WHO READS 8/7. WE'RE SERIOUS!