| Del Martin  
From Page 11  

(note: after the NOW National Confer-  
ence at which Arlie Scott was purged  
from the organization after failing to  
be re-elected, both Del Martin and  
Phyllis Lyons withdrew from NOW mem-  
bership.)  

BMR: ALL these things are connected.  
Like that meeting the abortion rights  
leaders called with the right-to-life  
groups "to work out a solution to the  
abortion 'problem.'" It outraged a lot  
of women but then I heard some women  
say it was a good step towards under-  
standing each other. That meeting  
angered me. I don't know, for me it's  
a very confusing time.  

DM: It is a very confusing time. That  
whole political move to the right is  
very dangerous and upsetting. And then  

Women’s Prison  
From Page 1  

McGoff’s racist prison policies are  
abominable. Griffin ran CWCI for 2  
years with much less violence, under  
looser controls.  

Bobbi said what they need is for  
women to get the word out about what  
is happening to them and to give them  
support to fight the restrictions.  

Letters of support can be sent to  
Bobbi LeBlanc, CWCI, Box 500, Canon  
City, CO 81212.  

Also write to Mark McGoff, Box 500,  
Canon City, CO 81212 and tell him  
what you think of him and his restric-  
tions.  

Write to Governor Lamm, 136 State  
Capitol, Denver, CO. Demand that  
McGoff be removed as superintendent,  
that racist exploitation of the inmates  

be stopped. Those of us who are on the other side  
at the forefront have so many inner  

Martinique Women struggles.  

From Page 6 BMR: It's like things I took for  

granted among women, I can't take for  
granted anymore.  

DM: You can never take anything for  
granted. Another thing you have to un-  
derstand is that as more women come  
into the movement, they are going to  
be starting from zero in taking that  
first step. They are going to have to  

bring any feminist dimension to their  
demands. Their orientation is primar-  
ily reformist and they are most active  
in electoral campaigns.  

Q: You, militants of the GRS, parti-  
cipate in the Support Committee for  
Battenre (CPSFA). Where does  

this organization stand now, a year  
and a half after its formation?  

Clara: The Committee was created  
July 3, 1978, in response to the  
assault on two women workers by their  
respective employers -- one lost a  
week's work because of her injuries;  
the other, after having been humiliated  
and beaten, was later fired.  

The CPSFA assumed the task of infor-  
ming these women of their rights, or-  
ganizing others subjected to similar  
attacks, and providing a forum where  
women could discuss these problems  
and formulate their demands.  

The Committee analyzes the oppress-  
ion of women as the inevitable conse-  
quence of a capitalist system which  
exploits them as workers; a colonial  
society which perpetuates the model  
of woman-as-object, acculturated to  
her negated identity as a black woman;  
and a phallocentric society which rela-  
gates women to a status of inferior-  
ity.  

We provide support for women fired  
for refusing to work under illegal  
conditions; we seek out the testimony  
of rape victims and aid them through-  
out the prosecution. We intervene in  
any case of oppression which a woman  
dares to reveal. For us, the work of  
the Committee is crucial to the long-  
term development of an autonomous wo-  
men's movement in Martinique.  

BMR: How do you work with that? That  
has been a real problem for women  
working together.  

DM: Well, you just have to accept  
that and you have to give them a  
chance to learn and grow and you have  
to assume that they will be far more  
conservative and will try to hold you  
back. That's just a given. Accept that  
given.  

It sounds to me like you are trying  
to sell feminism. When you are at  
that point, it may not sink in. Years  
later, something will happen in their  
lives, and they will say, "That's what  
she was talking about." It can be a  
delayed reaction; also, you really have  
to have some time to think it through.  
You don't just suddenly get all this  
information and then there's an immed-  
iate transformation, although that has  
happened too. We were writing feminist  
stuff in The Ladder years ago, without  
knowing anything about feminism, using  
all the wrong words. We were using  
"girl," but what we were saying was  
really feminist. And what is called  
consciousness raising today, we were  
doing under a different name - pulling  
groups together. The vocabulary  
changes, but the process is the same.  

Feminism  
The Lives!  

Demands of Women  

demand control of our reproductive process  
demand free, adequate health care  
demand free, 24 hour day care  
demand the right to the use of self-defense  
demand equality in the job market  
demand the right to guaranteed jobs or income  
demand free and relevant education  
demand an end to sexism in the cultural media  
demand an end to the oppression of lesbians  
demand an end to privilege based on race  
and class  
demand the end of defining people in terms of  
their relationships to others  
demand the right of self-determination for  
all people  
demand the right to use any means necessary  

to eliminate male supremacy  

The Demands of Women is now available as a poster.  
- See Classified Ad, page 19.  

Glad To Be Gay?  
From Page 9  

Violence and how it affects gay men.  
Little comment was written other than  
to point out had a man sex-murdered  
33 young women, the use of the word  
"straight" would not have been used  
to describe his character.  

How do gay men feel about Gacy?  
Does it frighten them? Do they claim  
him, disown him? Are they concerned  
only to the extent that the press is  
using it to give gays a bad name?  

The issue of male violence within  
the gay community is one that needs  
to be dealt with, and not brushed a-  
side as "inaccurate" or "isolated."  

I know of too many deaths, one a per-  
sonal friend who was murdered by his  
"butch" lover, and know of too many  
beatings for it not to be an issue.  

Another oversight by gay men in an-  
alyzing oppression is in the recent  
upsurge of "Queer Killings" by heter-  
osexual men. There is no doubt in my  
mind that the men who are being kil-  
led and assaulted on the streets by  
other men are "effeminate." Lesbian  
feminists know that the "fag-killers"  
are not out hunting down "urban ani-  
mals," but instead are killing, what  

to them, are just another version of  
women. It cannot be explained only in  
terms of the rise of the right wing  
against gay civil rights, as the gay  
press has done, but must be explained  
in terms of which men are being at-  
tacked, why they have been singled  
out, and how the gay tendency to im-  
itate heterosexual role definitions  
does nothing to change the objective  
reality that in society men hold pow-  
er over women, and keep it that way.  

Lesbian feminists object to not only  
the lack of analysis around sexual  
politics, but the tendencies within  
the gay community which mimic the  
very power structure that has done  
so much harm to women. It does strike  
horror in the hearts of lesbians when  
we are to be aligned with men who  
choose to imitate submissiveness as  
the role of women, or leathermen who  
pronounce male power by their costumes  
which conjure up sadistic images.  
These masquerades are insults and re-  
peat the message that gay men do not  
strive to be different than the dom-  
inant society; a difference that is  
essential to the lives of their les-  
bian sisters.  

Another trend in the gay movement  
that has caused lesbians to question  
alliances with gay men is the fact  
that a number of men have come out in  
favor of abolishing the laws on the  
consent age for sexual acts. One man  
theorized that John Gacy, conscious of  
his sexual desire for young men, but  
aware of society's taboos against  
man/boy sexuality, acted out the role  
of rape presented to men and then mur-  
dered and buried his victims to bury  
his sins. Thus, he reasoned, if we  
were to eliminate the laws against  
sex with young people, John Gacy's  
tragedy, and others like it, could be  
eliminated.  

The issue of man/boy sex has already  
created havoc with "gay unity." David  
Thorstad, who founded the North Amer-  
ican Man/Boy Love Association, had  
been chosen to speak for the March on  
Albany for Lesbian and Gay Rights last  
April. The group, Lesbian Feminist Lib-  
eration, brought a motion to the coali-  
tion for Lesbian and Gay Rights (CLRG)  
to remove him as a speaker, or, if he  

was not removed, that the CLRG would  
remove their endorsement of the march  
and Lesbian Feminist Liberation would  
withdraw from the coalition. Their  
motion carried; however, the March on  
Albany Committee refused to remove him,  
and the Coalition's support was with-  
drawn. Gay response was to charge the  
lesbians with being divisive.  

Lesbian feminists cannot help but be-  
lieve that gay men's attraction to  
boys is nothing more than the attrac-  
tion of men to the power imbalance that  
such a relationship provides, and that  
the emphasis on youth is on the submis-  
siveness of their position in society,  
just as women's position. Also, the re-  
peated reference to "beautiful boys,"  
"young flesh," etc., brings to mind all  
the horrors of sexual objectification  
that is in no way liberating, espec-  
ially for the group being objectified.  
(A recent ad in the Gay Community News  
read: "A spring auction for gay youth-  
see your future competition or lov-  
er.")  

Lesbian feminists have also been dis-  
turbed over the co-optation of the  
issue of custody rights of lesbian  
mothers into the issue of "gay-parent-  
ing." The threat of lesbians losing  
their children because of courts deem-  
ing them "unfit" is a real issue. The  
few gay men who want custody of their  
children (for many it's a way to "get  
back" at their former wives - an act of  
misogyny) do not question how patriar-  
chy tries to keep women in line by the  
manipulation of their children.  

There are many manifestations in  
the gay movement that lesbian femin-  
ists can only conclude to be danger-  
ous, that do, in fact, speak to very  
different goals. Ian Young, speaking  
as a gay movement activist in the  
Body Politic, a Canadian gay public-  
ation, points out the conflicts quite  
well:  

"Let us work with feminists on com-  
mon causes by all means. But let us  
also insist that no one, not the  
state, not the church, and not the  
feminist movement, dictate to us how  
we should have sex or with whom. If  
they cannot or will not stop their  
attacks on us - on our erotic litera-  
ture, (which they call ‘pornography’)  
on man/boy relationships, on outdoor  
sex, on anonymous sex, on male trans-  
vestism, on lesbian and gay S&M - then  
our movement must in its own interest  
recognize them as enemies, and treat  
them accordingly."  

While many gay men might be concerned  
with how to go about having sex  
in the parks or in the baths without  
getting busted by the police, the  
concern I am faced with, that I am  
forced to come back to time and time  
and time again, as a woman and as a  
lesbian, is the best way to deal with  
the problem of men raping women in  
laundry rooms, in parks, in houses,  
or wherever a woman happens to be.  
Until gay men say as a movement that  
they do not want to be like their  
straight male counterparts, until  
they stop celebrating oppressive  
maleness, any unity with lesbians  
will be a false unity.  

I will support any man's right to  
love another man - in that sense I  
have a gay identity. But when I see  
gay men make a mockery of the changes  
that lesbians are trying to create  
for all women, then I am not gay, but  
very, very angry.  

Sanderson Farms  
From Page 15  

with them. Talk to people you know  
and get them to write. The strikers  
need to hear that you support them.  
Write:  

Chemical Workers Local 882  

226-D Ellisville Blvd.  

Laurel, Mississippi 39440  

(601) 649-8836  
- Send money, as long as you are writ-  
ing anyway. Strike pay for some strik-  
ers has been cut to $15 per week.  
Give a little, the union needs it.  
- Boycott Sanderson Farms products:  
chickens with Miss Goldy, Southern  
Beauty, and Southern Pride labels.  
- Send a message about how you feel to  
Joe Sanderson, c/o Sanderson Farms,  
Industrial Park, Laurel, MI 39440 and  
to Mayor W.L. Patrick Jr., City Hall,  
Laurel, MI 39440.  

(Reprinted with minor changes from  
Of Our Backs)  

Health Clinic  
From Page 1  

women individually, they offer cours-  
es through the Denver Free University,  
on self-health care.  

DWHCC bases its fees on women's in-  
come. This is a return to a sliding  
scale policy. For a while they were  
charging a flat fee for services.  

Their waiting room has newspapers  
and books about women's health. There  
are also pamphlets and leaflets that  
women can take home. On sale there  
they have books, including Our Bodies/  
Ourselves and DWHCC t-shirts. The  
fees are clearly posted on the wall,  
for their services.  

The Denver Women's Health Care Clin-  
ic is located at 1929 High St. In add-  
ition to being open in the day they  
have later hours on Mondays. They  
have a 24-hour answering machine that  
gives their hours. If anyone has  
questions the machine will take her  
name and number and the clinic will  
return the call. Phone 320-1020.