WOMEN OF CHINA, continued from page 10

TURNING OVER

In order to build a great Socialist Society, it is of the utmost im-
portance to arouse the broad masses of women to join in productive
activity. Men and women must receive equal pay for equal work in
productivity. Genuine equality between the sexes can only be real-
ized in the process of the Socialist transformation of society as a
whole.

--Mao Tse-Tung 1955 (Sidel:19)

Any all-out attempt to free women could only result in the
upheaval of the whole social pyramid and a tremendous change in the
correlation of forces struggling for power.

(Belden: 37)

One of the principal tasks of the Revolution in China is the emanci-
pation of over two hundred million women from the bondage of semi-
feudal and medieval social ideas and customs. As long as this great
human mass is not liberated, a real revolutionary change, not
only in the institutions of the country, but in the general life and
thought of the people, will not be affected.

--Soong Ching-ling, 1927 speech (Bunch-Weeks:1)

The pain, anguish and despair of the Chinese women's bitter past have
been transmitted into new feelings of hope, pride and joy. This incredible
metamorphosis has significance for all the world. "The revolt of woman has
shaken China to its very depths..." (Belden:42) The women of China rep-
resented one of the greatest masses of disinherited human beings the world
has ever seen.

These women, the most oppressed of the oppressed, joined the revolt a-
gainst the old regime in the nineteenth century. Since then they have made
progress during three periods in the history of China: “immediately after
the revolution, in the Great Leap Forward at the end of the 1950s, and in
the Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s." This process of turning over
(liberation) has been unsteady; between each of the explosions of progress
there have been some setbacks--two steps forward and one back.

As women were agitating for new rights and roles, China was embroiled in
political upheaval over the direction and future of its whole society. Wom-
en became involved in the general movement against imperialism and capital-
ism. Women's goals for emancipation coincided with those of the Chinese Com-
munist Party (CCP) for liberation of the masses. Thus, women's liberation
and the CCP each benefited from the support of the other. The participation
of women became a major factor in the success of the CCP, and the organiz-
ation of the women's movement had top priority in the CCP.

China Reconstructs/LNS

In the 1940s the CCP organized women's associations in each village. A
cadre (political worker) called women together and told them that they had a
right to equality with men. Initially, women were afraid to demand adequate
food, clothing and treatment. But the cadre encouraged them to meet and
share the stories of their lives; these sessions were called "Speak Bitter-
ness" meetings.

Encouraging the women to recall and recount the horrors

under which they had been living sparked their anger, which soon
sprang to the surface, impelling them to renounce their former role.
From accounts of the "Speak Bitterness" meetings, it is clear that
the effect was electric not only upon the person telling her story
but upon those who listened as well. Identifying with the victim,
the listeners would realize what conditions they themselves had been
living under, and their anger and sorrow came to the fore. (Sidel:18)

Thus, speaking out in a group about personal oppression and receiving en-
couragement from other women awakened Chinese women to the possibility of
revolutionizing their roles.

Next, each woman reasoned with her husband. If he did not change his
ways, they locked him up for several days. Then he was hauled out for a pub-
lic meeting attended by all the women of the village. After allowing the hus-
band to tell his side of the story, the wife was encouraged to speak. Often
this was the first time in her life that she had spoken publicly. Then the
husband was given a chance to confess and promise to treat his wife fairly
in the future. If he refused, the women beat him until he gave a public
promise to act with equality toward his wife. They then released him with
warning; if he broke his promise he would receive a more severe beating.

In 1942 the CCP issued an order abolishing foot-binding. However, the
order--which carried fines--was not effective. Gradually, through education,
the abominable practice has been abandoned.

Photograph by Deb Taylor of a poster.

The 1950 Marriage Law abolished the patriarchal family organization and
the Confucian ideology regarding women.

Article 1: The arbitrary and compulsory feudal marriage system which is
based on the superiority of man over woman is hereby abolished.
The new Democratic marriage system, which is based on free choice of
partners, on monogamy, on equal rights for both sexes, and on the
protection of the lawful interests of women and children shall be
put into effect.

Article 7: Husband and wife are companions living together and shall en-
joy equal status in the home.

Polygamy, concubinage, child betrothal, infanticide, dowry, marriage by
purchase and interference with the remarriage of widows are prohibited.

Women and men have equal rights to pursue careers, manage and inherit property
and to use their own family names. Free divorce by mutual consent is avail-
able; the husband alone cannot apply for divorce during the wife's pregnancy
nor within one year of the birth of a child.

After the promulgation of the Marriage Law, special emphasis was put on
raising the literacy of women. Another major battle was to eradicate pros-
titution and venereal disease.

But the key factor in the “turning over" of women's position lies in work.
"Women now receive equal pay for equal work (although hard manual labor still
merits more work points than lighter manual labor), and are, therefore, not
dependent upon their families or their husbands as they once were." (Sidel:23)
In 1971, 90 percent of the women were working; traditionally male professions
are now open to women. They constitute nearly 50 percent of all doctors, and
make up a majority of those in the fields of obstetrics/gynecology, pedi-
atrics, psychology and internal medicine. Women are employed as scientists,
aviators, welders, electrical workers, oil well operators, militia servers,
etc.

Population policies have had a significant impact on the status of Chinese
women. Article 53 of the Constitution states: "The State advocates and en-
courages family planning." This policy supports late marriage (26-30 years),
fewer children (1 or 2), child spacing and better children (more healthy and
better educated). In a society where women were once defined by marriage and
childbearing, these changes reflect a deep transformation in the social
structure. (Gimenez)

The combined goals of full employment for women and better children are
augmented by positive pre-and post-natal policies. Employment does not dis-
courage childbearing/rearing; neither mother nor child is penalized. Regular
and frequent medical examinations are provided during pregnancy. Women in-
volved in heavy work are entitled to switch to lighter work in the fifth or
eighth month of pregnancy with no reduction in pay. During the last trimes-
ter, work hours are reduced without loss of pay. Fifty-six days of paid
leave may be taken before and after delivery; this is extended to seventy
days for a difficult delivery. If more time is needed, regular sick leave
may be taken. Breastfeeding presents few problems because most women live
near their workplace, or the workplace has a nursery in it. In addition,
the mother is given two half-hour nursing breaks each day which are counted
as part of her eight work hours. By utilizing her lunch hour she can see her
baby every two hours during the workday. (Gimenez)

Contraception and abortion are free. Abortions are available on the re-
quest of the woman alone. Excellent medical care for infants and young chil-
dren is provided. Child care facilities are available; about half of the
children use these facilities, and the other half stay at home with grand-
parents. The concept of multiple parenting--nurturing by parents, child
care workers and grandparents--reduces the responsibility and stress the
mother would experience if she alone were trying to provide for all the
child's needs. A variety of other communal facilities, such as those dealing
with food preparation and laundry, further lighten the load.

Women have acquired a great deal of political power at the local level.
Local directors of programs, administrators of villages, social services,
committees, organizations and the corresponding cadres are predominantly fe-
male. (Sidel)

What have the women of China achieved? Their progress has been hailed by
feminists everywhere as "a major miracle...the greatest single emancipation
of women in history." (Deckard:253) This monumental "turning over" process
has included significant changes in the quality of their lives--in their
legal, social, political, economic, emotional and physical power: "Solidar-
ity, mastery, control of one's destiny--a far cry from the traditional female
servility." (Cohen:401) The progress of Chinese women in their struggle for
liberation should provide inspiration for feminists around the world!

Continued on the next page.