letters home to mama

Thanks!

The Bluebird 5 defendants would like
to make public to the feminist commun-
ity of Denver a statement of apprecia-
tion.

The Defense Committee was immediate-
ly there when we needed you and you
stayed and worked throughout the whole
time. Your energy, political conscious-
ness, your plans and the results of all
those things combined were concrete and
reassuring. As defendants we watched
and worked with you in benefits, press
conferences, writing leaflets, doing
legal research and fund-raising. We
saw a true feminist spirit emerge as
lesbians and heterosexual women worked
together. The combined talents of all
of you helped us as defendants struggle
through the times that we might have
otherwise felt alone.

Our five lawyers: Jeanne, Ruth,
Patti, Phil, and Sandy, helped us un-
derstand our legal situation with humor,
honesty and a willingness to let us

fully participate in deciding how we
were going to handle our time in court.
They emphasized to us the need for
unity. When the time came that our
unity was tested they respected our
ability to make that decision and were
with us all the way. We know that it
will gratify them to know we will not
hesitate to use them again...if we have
to! We thank them for understanding
our financial situation and not making
their needs outrageous.

To the Velvet Hammer, Linda Ryan,
and Linda Foley; we want to thank you
for your offer to help us with bail by
a willingness to put up your property,
if necessary, and for letting our
benefit happen at the bar, and for
your emotional support.

_Jadnside BMR

International Women's Day....... Rice eaiere ]
Virago Grant Ae

Letters.

National/ International

Where We're At............

UCR NEWS :c'6 sxre,e G5 8a ais

Hot Briefs 

Beyond Boycott.... 7

National Lesbian Organ

Health News

Scraps from Mama's Table..........0.00 09
pil be AA SY ARDS MR aD Re pen Jee 8
COLLECTIVE

Culture: Mary Wadding, Dona Calacone

Photography/ Graphics: Karen Martin
Finances: Mary Wadding, Vicki Piotter

Office: Clair Kaplan, Dona Calacone, Bobbe Ross

Local News: Kath Riley, Sue Goding, Bobbe
Advertising: Kathy Riley, Sue Goding

National/ International: Clair Kaplan, Judy Barlow
Production Coordination: Susanna Smith, Corinne Coston

Member-at-Large: Kathy (KT) Pantzer

CONTRIBUTORS

Lori Bradford, Tea Schook, Chocolate Waters, Carol Lease, Sabo Tage, Lynn

Anderson, Bev Renick, Jan, Mel Mars, Deb

Woods, Pandoura Carpenter, Janet, Kay, and Susan

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by Big

Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.

Manuscripts and art work may
be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, Colorado 80206. (Note: At this time
we no longer accept poetry submissions.) Deadline for the receipt of
material is the fifteenth of each month. Please enclose a stamped, self-
addressed envelope with all manuscripts, for unsolicited material. We reserve the
right to edit all material.

Subscription rates are $6 per year for individual subscriptions in the
U.S., $10 in Canada and overseas, and $12.00 to institutions. BMR is
free to women in prison and in mental institutions. This publication
is also available at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago
and is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. The stage
of BMR no longer keeps regular office hours. If you must reach us by
phone, leave a message at Woman to Woman
available from Kathy (571-5134 days) or (Feminist Center (320-5972)
Monday through Saturday 10 am to 6 pm. Advertising information is
837-8405 eves).

I recently attended the Leaping
Lesbian Follies, a talent show for the
community sponsored by Virago Produc-
tions. I assumed it would be a women
only event (since it was advertised
"all women welcome"), and I was really
upset when I noticed a man watching the
skit put on by the Colorado Springs
Health Collective (in which they appear-
ed on stage nude).

I do not feel that everything that
Virago does should be for women only,
but I think that the concept of women's
space is a valid one, and that some
things (like a Leaping Lesbian Follies)
should be restricted to women, should
not be shared with men.

Virago (according to a former col-
lective member) "...started with the
idea of providing entertainment for
women only." However, they haven't had
a women only concert since Teresa Trull
was here in June of last year. I won-
der if this relates to the fact that
since last summer they have been trying
to get funds from the federal govern-
ment.

And they've been successful. They
now have a CETA grant giving them
$41,096 for an eleven month period.

Before the idea of government
funding was introduced to the collec-
tive, Virago planned women only con-
certs; in fact, turned down the chance
to produce a concert with Kristin Lems
and Jeanne Mackey because Kristin in-
sisted that it be an open one. At that
time, they were not interested in the
legal ramifications of women only con-
certs. Since they have been funded by
the federal government, they have taken
a new look at the situation -- twice last week I was told (by Vir-
ago members) that it is against the
law to prevent men from attending their
concerts, that they will advertise “all
women welcome" but if men show up it
would be illegal not to grant them ad-
mission.

What does that mean? It seems that
for $41,096, feminist concepts about
women's space, about women and the sys-
tem can be altered. I believe that any
project that accepts money from a cor-
rupt, oppressive system tends to lose
its original fine principles. I be-
lieve that when feminists take money
from the government, and say they are
ripping off the government, they have
made a mistake -- they have been bought
out. I have been in bookstores oper-
ating on the same CETA funds Virago is
getting, and found no radical feminist
material, no radical lesbian material --
nothing that would truly offend the
funding agency. And I have a feeling
that's what's happening to Virago -- the money becomes so important that
the original politics of the collective
can and will be corrupted.

Since Virago Productions has accep-
ted this money, the least they can do
is give the community an accounting of
what they are getting and what it's to
be used for. I have heard that it might
be pooled to put on entertainment and
to distribute throughout the collective.
I have also heard that it will be div-
ided among five women as follows: Pro-
gram Director - $821/month; Secretary-
Bookkeeper - $628/month; Sound, Light,
Audio Technician - $785/month; Community
Liaison (2) - $751/month.

Virago plans a community meeting
late in March. I hope women in the
community will attend and ask what hap-
pened to the concept of women only con-
certs, why the collective needs money
from the government, and what they plan
to do with it.

Gertrude A. Sauter

Sexist Judge
Censured

Dear Big Mama Rag,

Josie Heath, Chair of the Colorado
Commission on Women, announced today
that the commission will file a com-
plaint with the Judicial Qualifications
Commission requesting immediate review
of remarks made by District Judge Dean
C. Mabrey, Las Animas County. The
complaint will be made on the grounds
of "...conduct prejudicial to the ad-
ministration of justice, so as to bring
the judicial office into disrepute."

Judge Mabrey commented from the
bench, while dismissing a second de-
gree sexual assault case: "...while
there may have been a slight confron-
tation of some kind and perhaps a
feeling out by the defendant, this is
more like an attempted seduction than
it is a sexual assault, all be it a
little bit rough, but that's the way
things are sometimes. At least that's
the way I remember it."

The Commission on Women believes
that these statements reflect the need
for women in Colorado to monitor the
attitudes of the judges in our state.
Once again, sexual assault has been
confused with sexual desire. Physical
confrontations of this kind are more
an exercise of power over a woman than
an expression of passion. When vio-
lence against one woman is judged
acceptable, the safety of all women
is uncertain.

For information on how you can
become involved in the monitoring
process, call the Commission on Women
office in Denver at 839-2821 or con-
tact Commissioner Josie Heath at
988-6160, ext. 263

SUNDAYS: ENTERTAINMENT!
Big Bash on St. Patrick's Day!

MIDNIGHT SPECIAL -- 12 pm to 7 pm
Fridays and Saturdays

NEW SOUND SYSTEM
HAPPY HOUR -- 6 to 8 pm weekdays

SPAGHETTI NIGHT: Every Wednesday,
all you can eat for $1.50. Check out
the pool tournaments.

NEW HOURS:
Tuesday - Friday: 5 pm to 2 am
Saturday: 4 pm to 2 am
Sunday: 4 pm to midnight