Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 6

Gathering Held At Mt Taylor/Dalton Pass

Susanna Smith

The Mt. Taylor/Dalton Pass gather-
ing, April 26-28, 1980, was held to
protest the continued expansion of
uranium mining on Native American
land, especially in that area of
northwest New Mexico. It was a spirit-
ual, as well as political, gathering,
drawing together Indian, Chicano and
Anglo peoples opposed to the destruc-
tion of land and lifestyles for the
profits of energy companies.

The gathering was also a commemora-
tion of the Pueblo Revolt of 1680,
the only time (so far) the Pueblos
organized a united front to oust an
oppressive government (at that time
Spanish).

After a short orientation in Santa
Fe, NM the night before, people ar-
rived at Dalton Pass. Women set up a
space at one end of the site, and
childcare was provided.

Things slowly got started - first
was traditional music, then state-
ments from members of the Morgan-Pesh-
lakai family, owners of the land on
which the gathering was held and
active in opposition to uranium
mining. They, as did all the Dine
(Navajo) speakers, spoke in Diné
and were translated into English. A
recurrent theme of the speakers was
respect for the earth and all living
things. The basis of life is the
earth - all things are done in order
to sustain life.

Several workshops were run simul-
taneously. I attended "Impact of
Energy Development - Water and Land."
The main speakers there were 2 white
men, one a lawyer who is an Indian
rights specialist, and the other, a
geologist.

The geologist explained that
Conoco Oil Company is drilling a
uranium mine in Crownpoint, NM, into
the same underground layer the wells
are sunk from which the whole Dalton
Pass area gets its water. Since
underground water seeps into mines,
they will be pumping water out, which
will eventually lower the water table
and dry up the wells. If the water
table is lowered in one area, it
affects the water table in neighboring
areas.

Conoco can't legally “impair” the
water, but they are drilling the
shaft anyway, without a water right.
The people of Crownpoint have a
"senior right" to the water and could
sue Conoco, according to the lawyer.

Mobile Oil, at a nearby site, ex-
tracts uranium from underground by
using a technique called “insite leach-
ing." Chemicals are pumped into ore
deposits to dissolve uranium and
other ores so they can be extracted
in liquid form. This poisons the
water. They're required to restore
the water to its original quality,
which the geologist said could be
done, but is "economically unfeasi-
ble."

Other effects of mining were dis-
cussed at the workshop - radon gas
releases, more effects on the water
table and quality of the water; more
effects of these things on animals
and humans.

Saturday evening was entertainment
- including Native American music,
Chicano music and one women's group.
Songs were both political and not,
sung in Diné, Spanish and English.

A delegation from Japan involved in
anti-nuclear activities, which inclu-
ded a women's group, was present at
the gathering. They offered support
for the struggle and stated, “Nuclear
power can be stopped by women's power."

There was a workshop called, "Vio-
lation of Human and Treaty Rights -
Relocation," from which I received
information from Carol Stern. There
is a so-called “tribal dispute" be-
tween the Hopis and the Navajos over
joint use area in northeastern
Arizona - the Big Mountain area. The
federal government is attempting
to divide up the land between the
Hopis and Navajos and relocate some
6,000 Diné and 500 Moqui (Hopi) who
now live "on the wrong side of the
fence."

The government wants to be able
to mine the mineral deposits located
in that area. Many of the Indian
people are refusing to leave the
land they have always lived on, which
to them is sacred. What follows is
a transcript of a translation of
a Diné woman's, Katherine Smith,
talk about her fight against relo-
cation and her view of the situation.

"We need to educate the men," said
Serrano. "Because they sure can’t do
everything alone. They need us but
they haven't let us develop and get
the skills we need. We have to be
real careful, though, because men
aren't the main problem; they're
oppressed by the same system. We need
to educate them and work together
as a family of workers-- women and
men."

The women from Texas Farmworkers
will host the next conference. Mean-
while, women at the Phoenix conferen-
ce said they will work to create
statewide grassroots organizations of
women.

"We want to include all working wo-
men in our organization, because one
of the problems of the farmworker
movement has been that we've been iso-
lated from other workers and other
types of women," said Serrano. The
organizers have hopes of building a
national movement of grassroots women
with strong farmworker involvement.

A special focus of continued organ-
izing will be the border areas. Women
from Mexico noted that the border
states have many of the same runaway
plants and agribusiness. They also
experience the same low wages and
lack of unionization.

Organizers of the conference expre-
ssed optimism about the progress of
the movement of farmworker and grass-
roots women. “Each year in Phoenix
we now celebrate International
Women's Day," said Serrano, "and
each year it's getting bigger and
stronger."

(Reprinted from Liberation News)

From the beginning of this ga-
thering, we have heard the prayers
and the songs. I've come to learn
that my clan...was named after the
Whirling Mountain, which is just
north of here.

Several years ago we learned
from the government that we were li-
ving on the land of the Hopi, but,
as far as we know, they've always
lived up on the mesas. We didn't
know that we were living on Hopi
lands. When we heard this, we didn’t
realize that we were sitting on a lot
of money. Three years ago, my sister,
Pauline, resisted the fencing (being
put up between the now divided Hopi /
Navajo joint use area) by confrontation and she stopped the fencing crew
when she hit them with sticks and
drove them off her land.

Since then, we have come to learn
many things in Big Mountain. We learned that there was a lot of corruption
in our tribal government and that
the federal government was ripping
us off. And then last year the feder-
al government came in with their
fencing crew again...and we had told
them three years ago that we didn't want any fencing, and they were coming on
our lands again. Something had to be
done, so I went out. They were fen-
cing right across the wash from our
house. I walked all the way across
and I loaded my gun and I shot at the
fencing crew so they would stop. Sure
enough they stopped and they left.
Then policemen came - Indian police-
men... They said they were going to
arrest me because I was shooting at
the fencing crew and I noticed they
were also Indians... I told them they
could not arrest me because they are
my sons and my blood... only a white
man could arrest me, or an FBI man.
I told them I wouldn't go with them
and some white man came and took me
away.

They took me to Chamblin (?)
police department on the Navajo reservation. I spent one night in there with all
the drunks and the next morning... I
was released. I started walking back
to Big Mountain and I was just out
of town when I was picked up by the
police again.

I ended up in jail again on the
Hopi reservation... I spent another
night there and the Hopis were talk-
ing about me all night, asking each
other what they should do with me.
The next day they just released me
and said I had to go to trial.

When I went to trial, they told me
I had broken the laws of the white
man and I told them that I had my
own laws. We, the Dine people, have
our sacred laws. They were given to
us in the beginning and I didn’t
recognize their laws and I told them
that’s why I wasn't afraid of them.
That's why I would shoot at them
again.

We are still suffering because our
livestock have been reduced and we
don't have much food anymore. We used
to have enough sheep to get us by
year-round, but today many of us
herd only 13 sheep (the number allow-
ed by federal law) and some of us
don’t have cows anymore. The United
States government is doing all this to
us because they want to get to all the
coal that we're living on. We don't
want this coal to be taken out from
our mother the earth. It is part of
her womb.