women in cages

Imagine

Anna Lamb

The California Institution for Women (C.I.W.) in Frontera has a "security policy" for pregnant mothers: it is to chain them

prison

to their hospital beds during labor, during the baby's birth, and after the birth, until the prisoner's release from Riverside General Hospital. A prison guard watches over the mother in labor 24 hours a day, letting her out of sight only to go to the bathroom, carrying the I.V. pole with her. This "security policy" is said to ensure the prisoner doesn't flee the scene.

Pregnant prisoners are strapped into the bed at the ankles or wrists, with only a few inches allowed for movement. The woman is most commonly bound at the ankle, which prevents her from freely moving about, or even turning over properly in her sleep, sometimes for days on end. This humiliating experience endangers the mother's ability to labor properly and the child's right to a free and healthy birth. It also interferes with the natural bonding experience between mother and child, so important in the baby's first few days on earth. It is harder to estimate the impact on the baby in the process of birth, but it is surely as questionable legally as it is morally. A baby born in chains is born an unconvicted criminal. This mark on the baby leaves a scar on the mother as well. Imagine birthing a child in chains, in continual labor pains, under guard, unable to freely move, call for help, or receive the care and concern we usually associate with motherhood. What possible justification can the state have for such interference with life and liberty!

In a recent case of one mother who was threatening a breech birth, a Caesarean section had to be performed. After the operation, the chaining policy was continued, even though she was in too much pain to even walk, let alone run, enduring the strain of an escape attempt. She had to urinate through a tube, attached to her body, since she couldn't even stand up or walk to the bathroom.

It is a mystery why pregnant mothers are considered such security risks by the state, as to force prisoners' babies to be literally born in chains. It is the ultimate sign of the legal slavery status of prisoners, made legal by the 13th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which states that slavery will be abolished, "except as punishment for crime." If we were to hear about this happening in another country, we would feel outraged, consider it barbaric, and protest its cruelty to women and newborn babies.

Does C.I.W./C.D.C. fear the mothers will suddenly ditch their babies to turn a trick, or write a bad check, or rob a bank, or kidnap a cop? The one time in a woman's life when she is least likely to stop doing what she is doing is while laboring with a baby. It's hard to imagine quite what goes through the mind of a punishment-oriented State, except that someone, somewhere is very concerned to keep tight control over laboring mothers—the people who perform the world's greatest service to humanity. As we approach 1984, we remember there is a name for that "someone, somewhere"—and that name is "Big Brother."

This control extends to the mother-child relationship throughout the prisoner's hospital stay. It is common practice for mothers to be deprived of the pleasure of their children's company, except during feeding hours, 6 times a day. (This policy is normally enforced, whereas the "security policy" is inconsistently and arbitrarily enforced.) In general, imprisoned mothers don't realize they can insist and win the right to keep their baby with them throughout their stay in the hospital, as one mother recently did, encountering no resistance from staff upon her refusal to release the baby from her arms. Mothers are never informed of this right, only of the policy that denies them the right. The right to keep her baby with her at all times (and not just 6 times a day) would seem to stem from the mother's right to choose—whether and how and when to breastfeed her baby. Once again, the government's interference in this nurturing process seems unusual

Page 4 - Big Mama Rag, March, 1984

and unnecessary and unfeeling and unconstitutional, at best.

If male prisoners birthed and breastfed babies, would state guards be as likely to chain and dog them during labor, and then regulate their feeding habits during recovery? What would happen if mothers suddenly refused to be chained during labor? Would they find out it's only common practice, but not an enforceable policy or actual law, as with the feeding policy? Would women prisoners find themselves gaining more freedom in childbirth, if they asserted their right to that freedom, and the right of their child to that freedom?

Another common policy is to rush the pregnant mother in and out of the hospital as quickly as possible. Women with normal births stay only as long as it takes to accomplish the act of birth, with as short a recovery time as possible allowed. Some women stay only 1 day. The new 1-day policy is for the purpose of saving the state money. There is increasingly less concern with the needs of the mother and child. Considering the million dollars a day

Birthing Your Child In Chains

Laurie White/BMR

that goes into destructive bombs, would the taxpayers of this country really begrudge the mother another day to recover from her productive work, if they knew the truth of how the state spends their money?

Mothers having Caesarean sections are allowed a 5-day hospital stay. At the end of the 5 days, stitches are removed and mothers are returned to C.I.W. with no further care as a rule. The reason for stitches being removed so surprisingly quickly is to prevent the necessity of a return hospital visit, thereby saving the state money. New mothers, still sore and healing, walk on eggs for weeks after returning to prison, so as not to strain themselves and pop the wounds open again.

This is a much pushier approach than with free-world Caesarean mothers, who are normally hospitalized for two weeks, sent home for two weeks, then asked to return to the hospital to remove the stitches, giving the mother enough time to heal.

The chaining practice at C.I.W. was commonly used at Sybil Brand Institute/L.A. County Jail, until

MORE ON PAGE 17