Editorials, Letters

letters home to mama

Dear Sisters,

I enjoy BMR. It's kind of nice to feel part of something warm and unified and moving and whole. Some people call it Feminism.

In Sisterhood,  
Jeremy  
Aurora, Co.

To our sisters in Denver,

A group of ten women here in Albuquerque have come together to form the Labe Collective. We are concerned primarily with the Lesbian community and have begun to try to create an alternative to the bar. We have already had various activities and will continue to do so until we have raised enough money to put a down payment on a building located centrally in the City.

One of the ideas that has been discussed is a Summer Solstice Celebration to be held on property located on the edge of the Santa Fe National Forest approximately 90 miles northwest of Albuquerque. Preparations are already being made; we want your help; we would like to have you join us in getting it together, i.e., planning and conducting workshops, etc. We think it will be fruitful to provide a variety of entertainment, booths, workshops and daycare, not systemized but structured enough so that it would be a creative learning experience, not just a tribal stomp run through a haze of alcohol and dope. We invite the women of Colorado to participate in any way they so desire through the above mentioned concepts.

We will be facing some problems and need many ideas to deal with them. Some of these problems are: cooking facilities, water facilities, sanitary facilities, daycare, information services. We would like to deal with these problems in the safest and most ecologically sound manner. We would like to provide a large main shelter in case of rain and a large communal cooking area. We feel the best way to deal with the sanitary question is to bury evacuation and deposit paper in a fire. We would like to set up an area and have personnel for daycare so that women with young children can enjoy the festival without the constant demands of their children.

Some of the activities we would like to provide are booths so that women with arts and crafts may have an opportunity to sell their wares, food booths for women with special interests in cooking, one-day workshops including Yoga, breathing, coming, sun-bathing, cloud watching, massage, mandala-making, silent hikes, Sufi dancing, an all-inclusive Essence of Women trip. Other workshops may include self-help, women and the law, occult studies, etc.

Any suggestions, help, participation, energy, love are welcome.

This festival will be free. The booths will cost approximately $2.00 a day to rent. We ask that sisters bring their own food, water and sleeping bags for 2 days of celebration.

In sisterhood,  
representing Labe,  
Kris  

620 Free(wo)man N.W.  
Albuquerque, N.M. 87107  

Dear Sisters:

As a Lesbian peer counsellor and a resource person for matters Feminist in New Jersey and Lesbian Nation-wide, I was glad to receive the April 1974 issue of Mama Rag and especially the listing of the Colorado contacts. I see that Love/Abbott AND Martin/Lyon both spoke in your area—wow! They haven't even done so in New York!

Denver/Boulder had a DOB for a short while, but there seemed to be multiple hassles, and they dissolved a long time ago. I have no idea whether any of the women on your publication were ever connected with DOB.

I was interested in the page concerned with individual women’s stories of their personal developments, and was amazed at one woman's change from Feminism into the Left. Most of the women I knew did this in reverse, which would be my own position. But I guess we each have a different drummer to follow.

As a Lesbian I am totally committed to the female cause—although I have more disagreements than agreements with the more conservative portion of the movement, principally NOW. Yet we do work with them in New Jersey. I cannot see my lot with the Left at all, since I consider them not only sexist, but anti-gay basically.

Glad things are going great guns in Colorado. At least you got rid of the pesky sodomy laws—something we haven't done yet here.

In sisterhood,  
Julie Lee  

Lesbian Counsellor  
Daughters of Bilitis  
in New Jersey  

Dear Big Mama Rag,

I'd like to share with Big Mama Rag readers my response to the NOW panel on Lesbianism and my changing perspective.

NOW was criticized for not inviting a Dyke Separatist to participate on the panel. The person responsible for organizing the panel had had previous experience with Dyke Separatists. Her experience was that wherever Dyke Separatists are included on panels the atmosphere fills with animosity and hatred, and that energies converge on the issue of separatism to the total exclusion of other Lesbian perspectives. She felt that since this was the first panel on Lesbianism at NOW, she preferred there be a broader based discussion this time and that issues of Dyke Separatism be discussed at another time.

Secondly, this panel was essentially an exchange by the Gay Coalition of Denver and NOW. April 16th two NOW women presented a panel at the Coalition general meeting. Lesbian panel members did not presume to represent all aspects of Lesbian perspectives.

Thirdly, I want to point out a double-standard I see inherent in this Dyke Separatist criticism of NOW. I hear the Separatists saying to NOW women: “You should have invited us. You should want us although we want nothing to do with you. You are all wrong and we are all right.”

If you want to speak to a NOW general meeting, Separatists, why don’t you go to the NOW board and tell them what you want? NOW women aren't mind-readers. I don’t understand why it’s important to you to zap a NOW meeting since you detest NOW women and don't want to work with them anyway.

During the evening the zappers criticized me for wearing earrings, for my clothing choice, for my choice of words, for my political priority — working on a state anti-discrimination bill. Sounds to me like they're on the same old trip — intolerance of diversity and imposition of their values on me — just like out there in the macrocosm — whites imposing their values on blacks, Chicanas, Indians, etc.; straights on gays, men on women.

As I see it, it’s very important to you Separatists that I be just like you. It’s very important to me that all of us cultivate a climate in which we feel free to express our uniqueness rather than demand conformity of one another.

I am reminded of the medical model with which psychiatrists relate to people. This is a belief system which focuses on illness: what's wrong with you or me. Inherent in this perspective is the assumption that only certain people have the knowledge of what's wrong, and can, therefore, make the diagnosis — tell us what our wants and needs should be.

In the field of mental health, psychiatrists, of course, hold this power position. So that a depressed housewife is sick — she needs to become a better wife, mother, or whatever. A Lesbian is a Lesbian because she got screwed up in her sexual preference — she had bad experiences with men and all she really needs is a good fuck (by a man of course and of course this “good” fuck will change her sexual orientation).

The only difference in this particular situation is that it’s the Separatists who have taken the power position, the assumption of the “correct” value system, and have applied it to me, other Lesbians and NOW women. We “deviate” from the Separatists’ model code of good behavior. The terms used are different but the essence is the same. Because I wear clogs, corduroy jeans, a turtleneck top and earrings, I’m a classist. Somehow I don’t quite see the connection between what I choose to wear and how my choice discriminates against Separatists. I haven't determined for them what they should wear.

My choice of words somehow comes out of the Separatists’ version of the sickness model as being a reflection of my intellectualism. I feel like I'm back in the McCarthy era with that accusation.

In contrast to the medical or sickness model, the model I feel comfortable with is the growth or existential model, in which the focus is on being. This model recognizes and values inner experience and returns the locus of evaluation within the individual from the traditional external sources: God, men, and what will the neighbors think.

Growth is inherent within the

More on Page 10

FEMINIST AWARDS OF THE MONTH!

The staff of Big Mama Rag would like to extend our appreciation and 1,000 thank yous to Elissa Meyer and Linda Lane, who resigned this month as co-editors. Where would we have been without you folks? Although Elissa and Linda will be functioning in other capacities on the paper, we wanted everyone to know how much they’ve helped the paper to grow and how much we will miss them as editors.

Where We're At

by Jackie Bryson

During the past four months, the staff of Big Mama Rag has been struggling with its own internal problems, while attempting to slay society's dragon of sexism. We want to share with our readers the process and outcome of our struggles.

In January, the old staff of BMR (approximately eight women) called together women of Denver who were interested in working with the paper. More than 40 women responded. We were delighted with the response, and, quite frankly, overwhelmed with some of the logistics and complexity of feelings that developed with an organization of this size. We tried to adjust our structure to accommodate. We became more hierarchical — with an editorial board, three part-time, paid staff members, and many talented and enthusiastic women who wanted to help. We tried assigning tasks to new people and dispersing responsibilities. Personal contact facilitated the growth of trust and understanding among some women, but frustrations and misunderstandings developed among others on the staff. Some new people felt left out of decision-making; staff members felt overburdened trying to work out feelings and publish a monthly newspaper at the same time. Charges of elitism, Lesbian-overkill, and editorial authoritarianism were made both face-to-face and behind people's backs. We made some mistakes. Some were mended. Some were not. We were getting uptight, so we decided to slow down and take a look at our process.

At a general meeting early in May, we all decided that we needed time to get to know each other, to share ideas and questions, to develop the kind of trust that is essential in working on a women’s paper. We have been taking time to do this, and that is why this issue of BMR is a bit late. We also decided to hold some informal “educational consciousness-raising” sessions (Radical Feminist Theory, Feminist Poetry, Feminist Journalism, and Feminist Photography). We have been discussing our personal and political ideas in these small groups in order to re-define the needs and structure of BMR.

To some extent this has worked. For the women who have stayed with the paper, there is much optimism and a re-commitment to the goal of the paper — to represent a radical feminist point of view in covering local news and feature stories, as well as to continue to develop our theories and practice of a female culture. We have found it necessary again to re-structure our group. Presently, there are 15-20 women who have a firm commitment to the paper, and with a group of this size, we have been able to return to our original structure as a collective. Meetings are held twice a month and business and editorial decisions are made by a consensus of women present at those meetings. Any women participating in decision-making or any solely “creative” aspect of the paper (photograph, graphics, writing) is expected to do some share of the footwork involved in keeping the paper operating.

There are other internal decisions we have arrived at which are perhaps too petty and/or too boring to go into here. Mainly we want to let you know that BIG MAMA LIVES! We are alive, healthy, and functioning. We continue to get responses from our readers, but we want (and need) very much to hear more — letters, manuscripts, graphics, photos, etc. In addition, our monthly business meetings will be held on the first Sunday of the month at 10:30 a.m. in the BVA office (1724 Gaylord) and are open to any woman who wants to come.