Page 4

Preserving a healthy sense of who we are and what being a woman means in this society calls for a legal perspective that is feminist. As the case of Inez Garcia illustrates, there are differences in the way men and women view the law—and the law, because it can support or destroy us, is one concept that women should understand.

Under the terms of the law as now written, Inez Garcia is guilty. The law does not see rape as an offense which justifies self-defense even to the extent of killing one’s oppressor. All laws reflect our values and feelings; what society feels is important. The society is male, those who write the laws are male; therefore, the laws themselves are male biased.

If women were writing the laws, they would know internally the significance of rape and the response that action justifies. Rape violates the essence of women. As such, it is the ultimate threat to our identity and self-worth. Under the laws of a matriarchy, rape would be a primary transgression. Implied and stated by law would be a respect for women’s autonomy and their inherent right to control their bodies, their property.

The issue of property has been raised before in the feminist analysis of rape. Over and over again the system has viewed women as property—men’s property. Any attempt by women to defend their bodies is struck down by the courts even though the crime of rape has been shown not to be an act of passion, but one of violence and transgression. This attitude reveals how the system persists in viewing women: they are for the use of men. There is either a conscious or covert conspiracy on the part of men to keep women from being human beings with equal dignity. The law as it stands supports the male violators because the essence of the law is dedicated to supporting the patriarchy. Perhaps this explains why rape is the fastest growing crime of violence in the country.

The traditional assumption that the courts can be an objective and impartial forum is a fallacy. If the convictions of Inez Garcia and other victimized women are allowed to stand, they will reinforce the demeaning stature to which women have been reduced; everyone’s property but our own. The law will not be a precedent for the enlightenment and education of the country—it will become license for men to use women as they see fit.

The laws on rape must be rewritten by women.

Discrimination against women, however and whenever it occurs, no matter how subtle it may be, must be recognized, confronted, and eliminated. The present existence of law and legislative reform will never eliminate sexist politics, policies, and practices. We will have to do it ourselves.

Sex discrimination is elusive. It is often so interwoven into the very fabric of life that its opposition seems ludicrous or a “waste of time.” Its opposition won't be easy. It can only be made easier by the support of others... by people who refuse to see women as “inferior” and helpless and powerless.

The fact that women have to pay more often to use public facilities than men is being challenged by the Women's Coalition to End Pay Toilets. This practice, the coalition says, is in violation of the Public Accommodations Act that ensures all people equal protection under the law. The coalition may take the practice into the civil courts, and they deserve the support of all women.

All women suffer in some way from inadequate, sexist, racist health care. And if a woman is poor, it is very likely that her health problems will be greater and her opportunities to receive good care will be less.

This country spends billions of dollars a year on health care but has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the world. Prenatal care is almost non-existent in most counties and cities in this country.

Preventive medicine is largely ignored in the medical system of this country. Symptoms are treated while the rest of the body and the mind are ignored. Germs, microbes, and viruses cause disease in the minds of the healers. The social context is largely ignored. Most large hospitals have impressive research programs and focus on profit-making before patient care.

The treatment and cure of cervical cancer has been known for 15 years, but women continue to die from it. A simple test can detect this form of cancer, but the medical establishment has a hard time recognizing its responsibility toward providing health care and health education inexpensively for all women.

Women as nurses and other medical care workers compose 75% of all health workers in the country and are restricted to the most menial and lowest paying jobs in the system. Only 7% of all physicians in the US are women. Exclusive policies of medical schools and sexist education in general keep women and minorities a small proportion of all doctors in this country. There are fewer doctors per person than 50 years ago due to “professional birth control” practiced by the medical profession since the days of the Depression.

BIG MAMA RAG DAY

Come to the second annual Big Mama Rag Day! This day is devoted to all women in Denver who want to get involved with the paper.

Denver Free University 1122 E. 17th Ave. [17th & Park]

November 24 1 P.M.

SisterHood Express

Sisterhood Express is the future feminist newspaper of Tucson, Arizona. At this time we do not have the people energy or the financial resources to become a full-fledged publication on our own. By joining forces with Big Mama Rag and becoming an insert in this paper, we hope to become a reality while we are gathering the strength and skills to fly on our own. Here is our statement of purpose as formulated in July, 1974.

STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

Sisterhood Express is a group of Tucson women coming together from varied places with much experience and many skills to share equality in providing a common forum for the voice of the Tucson Woman.

The goals of the newspaper are:

1. To publish news of the women’s movement from local, national, and international perspectives.

2. To provide an outlet for expression of creative skills of local women in literary and graphic arts.

3. To identify and document incidents of sexism, ageism, and racism in our community.

4. To provide commentary on news and issues from a feminist viewpoint.

ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

At this time, SisterHood Express (SHE) has no formalized organizational structure. Because we are firmly committed to developing a non-hierarchical organization (we view hierarchical organizations as one of the vehicles of oppression in our society), we have been reluctant to structurally define ourselves at all.

This does not mean that we are not organized. Right now SHE is a loosely structured collective. Task-oriented committees are formed and terminate as specific tasks emerge and are accomplished. As we grow and develop, the committees will stabilize and become our structure. As we see it now, each committee will have a coordinator. When we incorporate, the Committee Coordinators will become our Board. Coordinators will serve for a specified time only, so that everyone will have a share in the “leadership” of SHE and share in the responsibility.

We welcome all input about the pros and cons of non-hierarchical organizations. We are particularly interested in hearing about any of your experiences or efforts in this direction.

BMR, SHE RELATIONSHIP

According to our present thinking, BMR and SHE will be structurally and editorially independent and autonomous. BMR will act as a support system for the birth and development of SHE. In return, BMR will benefit from the increased distribution and the infusion of energy from SHE.

We at SisterHood Express are very excited about the liaison with BMR. It is especially interesting from a political viewpoint, since it represents one feminist newspaper giving birth to another. This would seem to present an innovative alternative to the standard competitively oppressive process of creating such an organization.

PROSPECTIVE SHE CONTENT

The SisterHood Express insert will cover a broad range of material of interest to the women of Tucson and the southwest. We want to keep our format very flexible so that we can experiment with different ways of utilizing the space. We may want to present a combination of news, features, and poetry one month. Another month we may wish to utilize the space all for one thing, such as an investigative report or graphics and photographs.

Our main criteria is that material be of interest and value to women in particular. News and features about Tucson Women and services for Tucson Women will be given priority. We are interested in educating, entertaining, developing consciousness, and providing alternative self-images for women.

With these goals in mind, here is a list of some of the material being gathered for publication in SisterHood Express: features on feminist activities and organizations in Tucson such as the Lesbian Alcoholic Anonymous Group, The Rape Crisis Center, Alternatives For Women; an article on mother-lesbian daughter relationships; a mental health column called “How’s Your Head?”, discussing such topics as “What is Mental Health?”, “The Effects of Oppression on the Mental Health of Women”, “Feminist Counseling”, and “How To Choose A Therapist”; news and features of women in sports; coverage of special events, such as the WITCHES (Women in Tucson Celebrating Halloween) Retreat.

MEMBERSHIP IN SISTERHOOD EXPRESS

SHE welcomes all material submitted by Tucson Women. Send your material to: SisterHood Express, P.O. Box 27727, Tucson, AZ 85726. We would also like to hear opinions from all BMR readers on this idea and the items we eventually publish.

Tucson Women who are interested in being a part of the SHE organization are welcome at our weekly meetings. These are held on Saturday afternoons, at 2:00 p.m. at the Tucson Women’s Center, 912 East Sixth Street, Tucson, AZ. After attending three (3) meetings, a woman can become a voting member.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 5

Letters Home...

From Page 2

Responses to Class Analysis Dear People,

I would like to answer the “Analysis Part 2” in the October BMR in which it is stated “for middle class women their work is not a material necessity but an attempt to achieve fulfillment or escape boredom under the illusion that somehow their jobs are beneficial to the world.”

I am concerned that the “Analysis” and the article “A Working Class Perspective” tries to hang a middle class woman with some of the very same things that men try to hang on middle class women. I would suggest your reading Survival in the Sexual Jungle by Andrew Dee Brin, Ph.D.

Middle class women who work outside the home more often than not are working—not for the trivial things (and who decides what is trivial?) but many times work so that the family can survive—and not in the lap of luxury either!

We are all guilty of classist remarks and thoughts. It will be nice when we can all be rid of these barriers and accept all people for what they are. Why do we need to put anyone down? We have all been programmed in our thinking and need to become more aware; but being full of rage and uncontrollable anger does not help anyone, and anyone who says he or she is not prejudiced about something or someone is not being honest. But being willing and able to change old ideas when we are presented with new thoughts is what we all need to strive for.

In Personhood,

Virginia Bonham Woodard NOW Media Task Force Metro Denver and Clara Brown Chapters

Dear Big Mama,

Can’t tell you how exciting it has been for me to read the last two issues of Big Mama Rag. I’ve been out of town for two months, and I have returned to find what I consider to be some of the finest articles ever.

Particularly, articles like “A Working Class Perspective” (October) and the article on the Feminist School (September) reflect the depth of thought and the diversity of opinion that goes into the writing of Big Mama Rag. I have always felt that one of the strengths of the Women’s Movement lies in the fact that controversy is not suppressed. But rather sensitive consideration and basic respect is given to women from a wide range of life experiences and with differing personal views of Feminism.

After reading those articles, I was once again assured that Big Mama Rag remains a very effective tool for communication among women. I'd be very interested to see continued exploration of vital issues with the same integrity and introspection. Write on!

In solidarity and love, Elissa Meyer

PRAISES PRISON ISSUE

Dear Sisters at Big Mama Rag,

I was very impressed with Vol. 3, No. 3 of your magazine both in content and layout. Keep up the good work, hard though I know it is...

Yours in Struggle,

Ellen Marie Bissert

More on Page 17