Greenspan  
From Page 9  

so — just as your father didn’t pay  
enough attention to you.” And soon.  
From then on, it’s downhill all the  
way for her. She’s lost the battle, as  
usual. She really does hate the  
doctor at this point, so he must be  
right that she’s really angry with him  
and it all has to do with her father.  
And he could see her anger even  
before she could! Wow is he smart!  
Maybe he even intentionally pro-  
voked her anger so that she could  
gain some insight into her problem  
with her father. Wow! Is he skilled!  

At this point, the name of her  
game is “Identification with the  
Oppressor.” She succumbs, once  
again, to his power over her. She  
mystifies herself and her own know-  
ledge of herself by giving her power  
over to him. She has, in short,  
learned the basic lesson of tradi-  
tional therapy: “Never trust your-  
self. Trust him.” And she hasn’t come  
one jot closer to dealing with the  
problem of her boss. Fifty dollars  
later the doctor smugly notes in his  
chart the patient's transference  
resistance.  

Ok, this is a caricature, but it’s  
close enough to what goes on day in  
and day out in traditional therapy.  
The point is not that there is no such  
thing as transference. Certainly  
carryovers from the past haunt us  
every day, and that means doctors as  
well as patients. But the point is that  
within the context of this power  
relationship, such transference  
interpretations are weapons used in  
the oppression of the patient. They  
also serve to delegitimize the  
patient's most immediate and very  
real concern — her per-  
sonal/political struggles at work.  

Ok. Next we have the liberal  
feminist therapist. She goes after  
the feelings in a different way. She  
allows the client space to explore her  
own feelings rather than interpret-  
ing these feelings for the client. She  
may suggest some Gestalt role-play  
with the client playing herself and  
her boss. Or she may get out the  
tennis racket and the pillow and en-  
courage the client to tell her boss  
how she feels. “See that pillow —  
it’s your boss. Now let him have it!”  
etc.  

If it works, the client is enabled to  
get in touch with her feelings and to ex-  
press herself, feeling better about herself. In  
short, she’s learned the basic lesson  
of liberal feminist therapy: “If you get  
in touch with your feelings, you'll  
like yourself more and everything  
will therefore go better.” So now the  
client can buckle under and go to  
work like a good girl, this time with  
greater self-esteem.  

Now obviously, this client is a hell  

12 W. 25th Street  
Baltimore, Maryland  
21218  

Graphics by Peg Averill, Carol Clement,  
Casey Czarnik, Alexa Freeman, and  
Jacqui Linard.  

A 1976 women’s calendar with 13 original  
color paintings on heavy white paper.  
Spiral bound in the middle with squares  
marking off the days of the year. $2.50  

THE DAY BEFORE  

A third edition of the graphic datebook  
of our matriarchal past with ten new  
color drawings by Casey Czarnik and a  
new introduction and ten new quotes  
selected by Coletta Reid. The datebook  
contains 53 washes and ink sketches of  
ancient female symbols and artifacts and  
a quote for each week to help you dis-  
cover the beauty of female culture  
throughout the year. $3.50  

Include 15% extra  
for postage & handling.  

of a lot better off with the feminist  
therapist than she is with the doctor.  
As far as I’m concerned, anyone who  
helps a woman dare to express  
anger in this society is doing that  
woman a radical service. But the  
problem is that the pillow is not in  
fact the client's boss and having dis-  
charged her anger at the pillow, the  
danger is that, without any further  
intervention, the client is likely to  
think of her anger as irrational — fun  
to release but it doesn't belong in the  
workplace. The danger is that her  
anger will be pacified. So the  
problem is that the liberal feminist  
therapist doesn’t go far enough.  

Now since it's obvious where my  
allegiances lie, I’m going to paint the  
socialist feminist therapist with a  
little more sympathy. When it gets  
down to practice, it’s not that the  
revolutionary therapist ignores  
transference or ignores feelings. It’s  
just that she doesn’t ignore what  
both the doctor and liberal do — the  
concrete reality of the client's op-  
pression and exploitation at the  
hands of a paternalist and sexist  
boss.  

It may very well be the case that  
the client's anger at her father is an  
unconscious red light that flashes  
whenever she sees her boss. But it's  
also true that, in many significant  
ways, her boss is like her father.  
They are both patriarchs. They both  
treat her like a little girl. They both  
command her services and demand  
her obedience, etc. And again, it may  

be that this client sets herself up for  
confrontations with her boss in part  
because of her desire to smash her  
father.  

But it is also true that she has good  
reason to want to smash her boss.  
And there is no reason to suppose  
that the latter is any less important  
than the former — no reason, that is,  
except the bourgeois ideology of the  
primacy of intrapsychic feelings and  
of individual solutions.  

So the socialist feminist therapist  
may, at different times, address her-  
self to the transference issues as the  
doctor does, but not to cloud the  
material reality of the client's life and  
not in the context of a power  

struggle. She may also do gestalt  
work and help the client realize her  
anger, but not without placing that  
anger in a political context.  

She does this by talking with the  
client about the client's work and  
validating her legitimate anger at her  

her successes and failures in the  
struggles. By exploring different  
strategies of revolt e.g. pointing out  
to the client that the kind of indivi-  
dual clashes with the boss that the  
client easily gets into, place her in a  
vulnerable position to be fired, but  
perhaps there are other women at  
work who share her grievances.  
With collective power behind her,  
the client would be less vulnerable to  
being fired and more likely to  
succeed at getting the boss to meet  
her demands.  

So the socialist feminist therapist  

asks questions about all this and ex-  
plores it with the same interest and  
conviction that the doctor explores  
transference and the liberal feminist  
explores feelings. Furthermore, I  
want to say helping a woman to have  
the strength to participate in or to  
organize a strike against a boss is a  
way of helping her to express anger.  
Going on strike directly instead of  
psychosomatically is a way of ex-  
pressing anger as much as role-play-  
ing or punching pillows.  

It may be a way of expressing  
anger which is ultimately more help-  
ful to her personal and political  
growth than discharging her  
feelings onto a pillow. The thera-  
peutic effects of political action are  
ruled out in traditional therapy and  
by and large in liberal feminist  
therapy.  

To those who see what I am sug-  
gesting more as political organizing  
than as therapy, I would repeat the  
words which have been the unique  
contribution of the women’s move-  
ment, i.e. the personal is political; its  
converse is also true: the political is  
personal. To make a hard and fast  
distinction between the personal  
and the political, between therapy  
and organizing, is to forget this  
primary feminist insight.  

Moreover, political education is  
really no more the case in the  

socialist feminist approach to  
therapy than in the other ap-  
proaches. All three models are  

political in nature. Every therapist  
offers a political world-view to her  
clients. Her very choice of words, her  
choice of what to go after in therapy,  
what to stress and what to ignore,  
these are all political acts. The tradi-  
tional and liberal feminist thera-  
pists in different ways, covertly  
present to clients a political model of  
the individual solution. The tradi-  
tional goal is “insight.” The liberal  
feminist goal is getting in touch with  
or discharging feelings. Both of  
these are versions of “If you get your  

head together everything will be al-  
right.”  

So the difference is simply that the  
socialist feminist therapist makes  
her politics a self-conscious aspect  
of the therapeutic process while the  
traditional and liberal feminist  
therapists’ politics are couched in  
psychological ideology.  

I want to summarize now: What  
are central distinctions I'm making  
between liberal and socialist/  
feminist therapy? The first  
is in terms of models of health.  

The traditional model of health, as  
we have seen, is the oppressed and  
mystified woman. The liberal femin-  
ist model of health is the excep-  
tional, bourgeois, male-identified  
woman. I think both need to be sup-  
planted in the socialist/feminist ap-  
proach by a model of the struggling,  
revolutionary woman.  

I am not saying that we can ever  
hope to make conscious revolution-  
aries out of all the women we see in  
therapy. I am pointing, rather, to a  
framework of understanding and  
operation. For example, I see a  
woman in therapy who was initially  
rabidly anti-feminist. She is now one  
of the primary movers in a class-  
action suit being filed against a  
Boston publishing firm in which she  
is a worker. She is also less depres-  
sed and more self-assured than she  
has ever been before.  

There is a definite relation be-  
tween these two things: her political  
activism and her increasing sense of  
self-esteem. Now she is by no means  
a revolutionary; she’s not even sure  
she’s a feminist! But she is strug-  
gling, she is growing both politically  
and personally and there is a rela-  
tion between these two struggles.  

So when I talk about the model of  
the struggling, revolutionary  
woman, I am talking about a woman  
like her, although by all criteria she  
would be presently classified as  
liberal in her political orientation.  

I am also talking about the limita-  
tions of therapy. I believe that  
capitalism takes its inevitable toll on  
women's lives. Until the entire  
society is restructured around the  
needs of people and not profit, I'm  
afraid that therapy can be of only  
limited use to many women except  
insofar as it offers bandages for open  
wounds. I am not minimizing the im-  
portance of this.  

The second important distinction  
has to do with the therapeutic  

model. The traditional model is still  
humanist (and I see the humanist  
understanding of the therapeutic  
relationship). It still relies on the  
notions of professionalism that I  
have talked about.  

This is a remnant of the patriar-  
chal model in feminist clothing.  
Again, a new model is needed in the  
socialist feminist approach, a model  
in which the therapist and client are  
seen as equals in struggle, insofar as  
this is possible in capitalist society.  

The politics of an egalitarian  
therapeutic relationship are com-  
plicated under capitalism. Ob-  
viously, where one person pays  
another in return for her skill as a  
helper, there is a fundamental  
material inequality in the relation-  
ship which will never be completely  
overcome. In this society, money  
means power and one person is here  
giving it up to the second person.  

This need not be the case, for in-  
stance, in a socialist society in which  
health care was free for all people  
and salaries for health care workers  
were paid by the state. Nor would it  
be the case in a feminist society  
where genuine communities of  
women existed for mutual support  
so that women could turn more to  
each other for help rather than feel  
they have to turn to a stranger.  

But obviously, we do not live in  
such societies now and we have to  
confront the contradictions of doing  
radical therapy in a capitalist cul-  
ture. These contradictions include  
the fact that, no matter how radical  
we are in our practices, we are still,  
relative to others in this society, part  
of a professional elite. And, as I’ve  
tried to show, it is impossible to have  
a totally egalitarian relationship in  
this context.  

There is a second major source of  
inequality as well which has to do  
with transference. If I were to rede-  
fine transference from a radical poli-  
tical perspective, I would say that  
transference has to do with the ways  
in which the hierarchical social rela-  
tions learned in the nuclear family  
are bound to be recapitulated in  
therapy. It is hard to imagine a client  
in this society who would not feel, at  
least at the onset of therapy, very  
much one-down to the therapist. I  
feel this quite acutely in my own  
therapy. There is no simple way to  
will away this power differential by  
rhetorically demanding that it  
vanish. But there are ways to en-  
hance or reduce the problem.  

One way to reduce is to defuse the  
power differential of the one-to-one  
therapy situation by working with  
modified CR groups in which the  
therapist takes the role of guide and  
participant. One might well ask  
whether individual therapy is all  
justifiable, given its patriarchal his-  
tory. Isn’t it bound to perpetuate  
the hierarchy we wish to dissolve?  

As I've said, I don’t think this hier-  
archy can ever be totally dissolved  
under capitalism. We don’t even  
have the language in which to think  
of a non-hierarchical therapy situa-  
tion. Psychiatrist, psychologist,  
counselor, social worker, therapist.  
None of these words is right. Patient,  
client, counselee. None of those  
words is right. So by what terms  
can we even refer to the revolu-  
tionary model of therapy?  

I have begun to think of the re-  
volutionary model in terms of the  
“new matriarch and her new  
daughter.” I don’t like either of these  
terms and I would certainly be at  
least as uncomfortable calling my  
clients daughters as I am calling  
them clients. So obviously feminists  
in addition to everything else have to  
reinvent the language. But I want to  
conclude my remarks on revolu-  
tionary feminist therapy using these  
terms, because they do have some  
meaning for me.  

By way of background on the  
model, I refer you to Phyllis Chester's  
book Women and Madness, for her  
remarks on how the mother in our  
culture serves as a major police  
agent for her daughter, actively  
working to betray her daughter into  
slavery by teaching her how to be  
feminine and by turning against her  
or withdrawing love if the daughter  
shows any signs of independence or  
rebellion against her feminine role.  

Because of their own oppression,  
says Chesler, our mothers generally  
did not know how to foster genuine  
autonomy in their daughters, usually  
valued their sons more highly and  
spent much of their energies pre-  
paring daughters for the day they  
would be “given away” (as the ex-  
pression goes) by their fathers.  

Within this context, the socialist  
feminist therapist as new matriarch  
becomes, for a time, the mother we  
all never had, in a re-socialization  
process, this time not training us to  
bow our heads and bind our feet but  
to fight for ourselves and for each  
other.  

Why matriarch? Why not call the  
therapist a sister? Haven't we had  
enough of mothers? Isn't a matriarch  
want to minimize the therapist's  
power? Yes we do, but to repeat my  
self, I don’t think in this society we  
can ever totally succeed. So first I  
use the word matriarch because I  
want to acknowledge that from the  
client's point of view, the therapist is  
going to be, to some extent, a power-  
ful figure, invested with a certain  
kind of extra dimensionality. Larger  
than life, so to speak, like Momma.  

But more importantly, I use the  
word matriarch because it loosely  
refers to a period in history when  
society was woman-centered and  
when women had power of a very  
different sort than exists in patriar-  
chal culture. Symbolically speaking,  
life-giving power, rather than the  
patriarchal death trip. So I want to  
preserve this sense of power in the  
use of the word matriarch.  

In a sense, the new matriarch can  
be seen as a descendant of our  
woman-healing ancestors —  
nurses, midwives, witches — our  
ancestors whose functions and skills  
within the women’s community  
were delegitimized and expro-  
priated by the patriarchal white male  
medical professionals. So the new  
matriarch is a model of a therapist  
that is closer to the image of the  
woman healer than it is to the image  
of the male doctor.  

I want to stress that the new  
mother is not the old mother who  
was ever a parent, never a person to  
her daughter. The new matriarch  
does not represent that kind of  
parental tyranny. She is someone  
who can share with the new  
daughter her own experiences in her  
struggle to liberate herself and the  
insights and skills she has gained  
from this struggle. She talks as a  
loving companion to the new  
daughter, not as the tyrannical  
understanding