Dear Readers of Big Mama Rag,

Big Mama Rag needs your support. Since November 1973, BMR has been publishing
feminist news and analysis and has been an outlet for the ideas and theories which
have emerged from the women's liberation movement. During these years it has
frequently been a financial struggle to keep the paper alive in her commitment
to feminism through a monthly publication which will inspire, initiate and focus
dialogue and growth among women.

As we enter the uncertainty of the '80s, facing growing threats from the organ-
ized right-wing factions, we also face an enemy just as devastating—double digit
inflation. Big Mama Rag has not raised her yearly subscription rate of $6.00 in
over 5 years, yet during that time, our mailing and printing costs have doubled
and the cost of supplies nearly tripled, and we have been notified that printing
costs will again increase in the next two months. All the while, we have been strug-
gling with mostly dated and faulty equipment.

Big Mama Rag remains committed to keeping the paper available by maintaining the
subscription rate at $6.00 and providing free subscriptions to women locked up in
institutions. In fairness to our readership we also intend to keep our advertising
policy of refusing ad money from businesses with questionable services and products,
which realistically would provide a needed source of income. Instead, it is import-
ant that we provide ad space and give breaks to those who have good things to offer
the feminist community, but are also in a money bind. Also, in the last year, BMR
has felt it necessary to expand from her usual 12-16 pages to 20-28 pages per issue
because the news and information is there and needs to get printed. We don't want
to have to cut back on important articles that can't be read elsewhere because the
checkbook says, "Not one more page."

After witnessing the recent folding of other feminist news journals, BMR feels, now
more than ever, the importance of continued publication. We can't do it alone. We
need all the financial support from you, our readers, who understand the paper's value
to the cause of revolutionary feminism. We are asking you to become sustainers of Big
Mama Rag by making a monthly contribution in the amount you determine. We need fin-
ancial support on a regular basis so we can return, on a regular basis, even more
thorough coverage and analysis of issues important to all of us.

The money you contribute will go directly to the sustenance of the paper, not as
salaries to the women who work on the average of 25 hours per week in the process
of putting out the paper. Work on BMR will never be used as a source of personal in-
come for collective members or contributors; that money comes from work away from
the paper.

We can only speculate on the changes the '80s will bring, but one thing is certain—
Big Mama Rag will respond, as an independent feminist news journal, to the challenges
of another decade of struggle. How well BMR does the job depends on your support.

THIS DONATION BEGINS MY MONTHLY SUSTAINER TO BIG MAMA RAG IN THE AMOUNT OF
I AM UNABLE TO MAKE A MONTHLY COMMITMENT, BUT HERE IS A DONATION OF

Bulk Rate

Big Mama Rag
1724 Gaylord Street
Denver, Colorado 80206

Name
Address
Zip

$12. Institution
$10 Overseas

$50 Lifetime Sub
$10 Sustainer
$6 Individual Sub

Big Mama Rag
1724 Gaylord St.
Denver, CO 80206

Meclin Stone

New York, NY

U.S. Postage
PAID

Denver, CO
Permit No. 1512

5-8

10013