1 Editorials, Letters

Big Mama Rag Vol. 2 No. 8 ~

LETTERS

From Page 9

individual — she is self-actualizing until or unless the process is interfered with, denied or devalued. This is a particular problem with women in America, according to Anne Schaef, feminist therapist. She believes that we as women in this culture have been trained to feel innately inferior and to invalidate our own perceptions. From there, I think, we go on the trip of invalidating other women.

The Separatists spoke of the necessity for women to be able to defend themselves against male physical attacks. I agree — I recognize my need to be able to defend myself from assault, whether my defense be either a verbal interruption of a would-be rapist’s program or a form of physical self-defense — judo, karate, etc.

Throughout the past year that I've been with the Gay Coalition of Denver, I’ve been criticized by various lesbians for working with gay men. Again, people telling me to deny my positive experiences, deny my perspective. (Tsk, tsk, Marge, you must really be more careful about the company you keep. After all, you are a lesbian and we all know that lesbians hate men. You're going to ruin our reputations if you don't stop this nonsense.)

I have felt tremendous support from the people in the Coalition. In that atmosphere I have felt comfortable to be open and have grown. As Anne Schaef says, “Any way to get somewhere else is to be where you are.” My awareness has been of gay-straight issues and in that perspective I have worked.

Now I feel ready to move on — I want to work with women in an autonomous women's organization. My decision is not in response, however, to the rejection and animosity I have felt from Dyke Separatists. One doesn't grow in an atmosphere of fear and contempt.

My perspective is changing. The gay-straight issue is no longer primary with me. I've explored it and now feel the need to explore sexism within myself and our culture.

Marge Johnson

Support Our Advertisers
They Help Support Us

Bread Box — B.L.T. — stoneware, cotton and epoxy by Peg Goldberg from the Catalog of the Exhibition, 22nd Denver Metropolitan,

Local Talent - Review
From Page 6

eatery a decade ago. “Stop Action,” Susan Rehschuh’s creation, emanated a turmoil of sexual waves, a wildly moving black and white lithograph.

There were a number of bad entries in the show but overall I thought the women represented did well; they had good technique and imagery and proved that women can compete with men, and in some instances do much better. I was hoping to see more women represented, but the Art Museum is hardly a forum for non-sexism. The women showing at Soup's On made it. They beat the system and proved that women can show and sell by themselves, and that's the best thing to come out of Denver's art community in a long time—women collectively pooling their resources to produce an alternative and making it work in a male dominated field, it takes energy and woman power is what we've got plenty of.

THE WOMEN’S INSTITUTE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO, BOULDER, IS SPONSORING A SEMINAR ON EDUCATION JULY 29 THRU AUGUST 10. THEY ARE IN NEED OF WOMEN PERFORMERS WHO COULD DONATE THEIR TIME AND TALENT. ANY WOMEN INTERESTED SHOULD CONTACT CHRIS, 843 17TH ST., BOULDER.

Gwe FROM VANTAGE.

for ONCE in my life

A LESBIAN Novel. BY DENVER AUTHORS, Tris Poitras

START

Look For TAT THE BOOKSTORE IN Mid-Wy /

tranoyss new hairitage
11097 E EVANS,

CALL FOR APPOINTMENT

Robin Morgan Interview
From Page 3 ~

“She (the woman) is in control of the birth of her consciousness; we are the midwives.” Compassion and humility were two characteristics she suggested that women should try to develop in working with one another. She also stressed that women who have knowledge and skills should not use them as power over other women, but should share those skills with their sisters.

Colorado Women Where Are You? — We have gotten many responses about Sigma Rag from across the country, but very little response from local women—the women for whom this paper is published. This is very discouraging. If you like us, hate us, or are just plain indifferent, we would like to know about it. We need to find out if we're reaching any of you out there!

The Oil Crisis?

Maureen Mrizek

We're in the midst of an oil crisis, the cause may or may not be over demand and limited supply. We may never know, but one thing we can be sure of is that the oil industry itself will continue to prosper and grow. The oil crisis may continue indefinitely for a decade or more or we may find a way to end it.

One idea for ending the crisis is to nationalize the oil industry. To accomplish this feat would require something close to a nuclear war because of the amount of economic and political power the industry wields in relation to the government.

Another idea is to nationalize the oil industry and give the oil tycoons the political recognition they deserve in terms of the real economic and political power they have. In other words, merge the government and the corporate state. The way to accomplish this merger would be in the form of a monarchy. Originally monarchs came into being because people needed to be protected; a king would form a band of warriors and promise to defend a tribe or nation of people. The people in return would swear allegiance to the monarch and would trust in the king’s discretion as their ruler and governmental head. Our civilization (?) has now changed to the point that people do not need monarchs to defend them, but they are dependent on a highly developed technological economy which has at its base the need for oil...

The idea of a monarch has not been without its place in American history. There were many people who supported the idea of making Washington king after America had won her independence from England. The office of the president has many of the vestiges of ancient royalty and the American people have always (WELL, ALMOST ALWAYS) encouraged and enjoyed a type of royal pageantry for its leaders. A very likely candidate for king in 1976 would be John D. Rockefeller (of Standard Oil). Rockefeller wouldn't be losing that much and America wouldn't be losing a president; she would be gaining a king.

At last the issues of democracy and economics could be clarified. People would no longer have to labor under the idea that they are working for themselves, that if they could only pull themselves up by their own bootstraps or G-Strings (whichever fits) they could be successful. Economic feudalism would be the name of the game, and now people would know what to call it. People would be working in royal factories for the king or some other nobleman. Actually, people’s existences wouldn't change a lot. The Constitution and the Bill of Rights might be abolished, but it’s unpatriotic to exercise those rights anyway, so people wouldn't notice that. You might see the Royal Seal on gas station signs in place of Standard Oil or Exxon or some other brand name. An incredible moral burden would be lifted from the shoulders of citizens who had been chasing the elusive concept of democracy in a capitalistic economy. Sociologists, psychologists, and psychiatrists wouldn't have to be sneaky about socializing people; they could just tell them to get back to their class or class-caste, or off with their heads.

So you see a monarchy would actually clear up a lot of confusion and clarify our society for us. The next time you sit shivering in the dark—think in terms of a Royal Standard Oil and ask not what Standard Oil can do for you but ask what it can do for the Kingdom.

Monday

Thursday

>women's

Dr. Wolf Analyzes Roles

From Page 4
Wolf, do you think there are things happening now that might actually be detrimental to the Women's Movement? Wolf: With any sort of mass movement processes of routinization set in and people begin to take it over. There are definite advantages to be gotten from a movement. It is made into everyday kind of stuff. It’s a conservative kind of force, and I hope this doesn’t happen to the Women’s Movement. Then, too, some of us who have been active are pulling out because we have our own personal lives to get together. You're doing things out here, you're saying things, then you're going home and picking up the dishes. You've got to do something about that. It’s dishonest! It's a continual struggle and I think it will be a struggle until I die.

BMR, In what directions do you see the Women's Movement growing?

Wolf: I think we're going to have more and more Women’s Centers. I think more women are going to get into public life, which is terribly important in a structural way. We're going to clean up the language; you know people say you're a “sissy” and monstrous things like that. And this is terribly important; we think the way we have words for. Women’s Centers are vital; libraries are vital. Women’s history has to be written just as Black history had to be written. We've started already. Women’s sociology that reflects women. We need women’s coalitions if we're going to hang on to what we've got and go forward.

BMR: Do you think women are now beginning to identify with other women?

Wolf: I think one of the most important things to come out of the Women’s Movement is the right of choice. This requires that women be supportive of one another. This support is something that we're not going to get from men. I think that in some ways segregation is essential for any oppressed group because you've got to get it together and you've got to have some kind of support.

RIP BOOKSTORE
737 E. 17th Ave.

LARCH HOPMENS SECTION

ALSO BOOKS ON GAY LIBERATION, CHA, CUBA, VIETNAM, MARXISM, ANARCHISM, IMPERIALISM,

ALL Books 20% OFF AT ALL TIMES

42-6

- Saturday / 12°F