letters

Ex-Collective Member Responds

An open letter to BMR,

This letter is in response to the "Dissolution in the Women's Movement" article that was printed in the last issue of BMR. I am an ex-collective member and continuing friend of BMR. I was also at the community meeting where Sandia offered to "take over and do an issue on dissolution in the women's movement." Further discussion left me, and I believe other women at the meeting, with a clear sense that Sandia was going to get non-collective women together to do an issue.

Doing an issue involves finances, advertising, settling the advertising accounts, and continually attempting to find more ads for each month's issue, reading approximately 70 progressive papers and other sources of news each month, then writing or getting other women to write national/international news and hot briefs, researching local news stories and getting all other articles written by production deadline. And then comes what I would estimate to be about 60 woman hours of production—proofreading, typing, layout, headlines, etc. Not to mention trips to and from the printer, local distribution, mailing, and shopping.

Whew, and don't think that's a conclusive list; I've probably left many hours of work out. This work is done by a collective of anywhere from 3-6 women. During my three years of association with BMR, out of perhaps 20 collective members, I wracked my brains and came up with 2 women who were not working full time. (One woman was on unemployment and another was between jobs for a several month period living off her savings so that she could devote full time work to BMR.)

The article expresses dismay, stating that the political scene in Denver has been recently dominated by lesbians in their early 30's who don't know what they're doing politically and don't have to worry about money. The article discredits itself on that point. I, for one, have never met a woman on BMR who didn't have to worry about money.

I agree that BMR is hurt by its lack of journalistic quality and poor distribution. The problems are time and energy, however. Skilled journalists have been on the paper, ready to lead the rest of the collective down the path of righteousness (i.e. good journalistic style, editing, layout, proofreading, etc.), but I don't feel the problem has been a lack of skills to achieve what is required. 

The paper like BMR should be both a journalistic endeavor and a community effort, but rather a lack of enough people doing the work.

MORE ON PAGE 22

COLLECTIVE

Taking Ourselves Seriously

Dear Big Mama Rag,

This letter is in response to the articles written in the June issue on the dissolution or direction of the feminist movement. The one primary problem of our movement is that we do not take ourselves seriously. We talk a lot about “revolution” or “radical change” or age but we do not really believe that any of these are possible. We certainly do not analyze our actions and theories with that as the final focus and test.

For example, we argue whether BMR should be politically pure and "radical" or whether it should have a broader audience as though these were mutually exclusive concepts. Two hundred women in Denver will never make a revolution or basic social change. If we are serious we know that numbers of women must accept radical ideas to make those ideas effective.

Good communication among the "politically developed women" may be fun but it is a dead end.

On the other hand, watered down politics and changing topics and content to appeal to a broader spectrum is an equally dead end because it leaves those new readers still unexposed to radical concepts, unchanged and unwilling to make serious change.

If we are serious let us respect the power of our ideas and the intelligence of our sisters and act out of the conviction that women of many backgrounds and various levels of political development will be fascinated by radical content if properly presented.

MORE ON PAGE 22

Insanity and Ecstasy

Sisters,

As a newcomer to the Lesbian feminist movement, I am filled with intellectual curiosity and an overwhelming amount of past misdirected energy. Reading the latest issue of Big Mama Rag it became clear to me why my sisters are not experiencing this same zeal and commitment. I enjoyed all of the articles around "Dissolution in the Movement" immensely because it helped me to feel that there were complicated, intricate and obvious reasons for the lack of commitment the women's movement is now experiencing.

As a lesbian separatist, with a lesbian vision I have many times thought about the boundaries that I have set up for myself. It's not easy being a woman in this world, or a lesbian, but to be a radical lesbian who digests and analyzes the world through a political consciousness is to walk a thin line between insanity and ecstasy.

MORE ON PAGE 22

Fran Day, Constance Perenyi, Susan Goding, Lisa Gould, Judy Barlow and Vicki Piotter

CONTRIBUTORS —

Lynn Anderson, Corinne Coston, Pat Greer, Deb Taylor, Chocolate Waters, Mel, Terra, Crystal Arp, Lynn Davis, Kim Womantree, Sable Walls, Jennifer E. Derrancis, Bradford, Pat Delaney, Lisa Miehle, and others.

INSIDE BMR

Local News Letters

Kirsten, Diane Scheeler, Carol Smith, Dona Calacone, Lori Kate Sharp, Carol Arber, Kathy Riley, Phyllis Kadison, Black, and Ruth, Diane Talmadge, Susanna Smith

Cover by Constance Perenyi

Red Stockings International Year of Child. Voices

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts and artwork may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St., Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for materials will be announced each month in Where We're At. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6 per year for individual subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada; and $12 to institutions. BMR is free to women in prison and in mental institutions. This publication is on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago and will soon be available on microfilm through Bell and Howell. We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218.

Advertising information is available from Sue at 333-7656.

Unjustified Criticism

Dear Big Mama Rag and the Denver Womyn's Community,

As a former member of Virago, I am concerned that misinformation about and unjustified criticisms of the collective continue to be repeated almost a year after our dissolution. There are many justified criticisms of Virago, and several of us have expressed willingness to discuss these, in person or in print. I personally am still willing to engage in dialogue on the subject.

There are two major criticisms that I feel are unjustified. The first is that we didn't do anything (i.e. produce events) after we received our grant; the second is that we didn't work (didn't earn our money). In response to the first criticism, I would like to repeat—this information has appeared in BMR several times—that the purpose of our grant was to bring womyn's culture to other segments of the Denver community, not to bring it to the womyn's community. We did this with concerts in prisons, nursing homes, and detention centers. Naturally these events were not publicized. This is what we were paid to do and this is what we did.

In response to the second criticism, that we didn't earn the money we were being paid, I ask by whose standards? It is categorically untrue that one woman, or any womyn, did not work at all. Some womyn did not work for short periods of time due to a variety of personal circumstances. We felt that supporting each other through times of stress was politically and personally sound. It is possibly true that none of us worked 40 hour weeks. This is because we did not feel the necessity.

MORE ON PAGE 22

Overthrowing Patriarchy

Dear Big Mama Rag people,

Congratulations on a fine job! I am enjoying your latest issue on dissolution as it is something I have puzzled over quite a lot lately. I look forward to receiving BMR every month for a number of reasons, primarily because it helps raise my consciousness on issues of struggle, I can learn of news nationwide regarding women, and I also can find out about happenings in the Front Range. I have received BMR usually around the middle of the month; however, some of the events have already occurred. I know the mail to Estes Park is slow (although it is not pony express). When do you mail it out by bulk rate?

I've also learned a great deal from your article on Rape and Patriarchy. I work as a volunteer with

MORE ON PAGE 22

2023 E. COLFAX Denver, CO 80206

feminist center

Traveling through? Stop by!

We need staffers:

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 8

Furious, Prodded, Provoked

Dear BMR,

I was furious for days after I read the panel discussion ("Dissolution in the Women's Movement") in the June issue of BMR.

I had expected a good analysis of the issue—why so many feminist groups have folded, and ways of surviving a hostile political climate and our own internal conflicts. I didn't expect condescending remarks and a blanket reduction of the problems of groups like BMR and Woman to Woman Bookstore to the fact that the women in them don't get paid.

As a woman who has always done unpaid political work—I don't point to that as some kind of virtue. I don't think making money is "immoral." The question is always—whose money is available, for what purpose and to whose benefit? No doubt BMR or the bookstore could be run as a very efficient small business, paying one or two women and providing good articles or books. But something would be lost; it would no longer be a collectively-run, community bookstore or newspaper. It would be "Mary and Sue's bookstore or newspaper." In my opinion, working for free is not a matter of being too “pure” to touch money. It's a matter of knowing what you want and the best way of getting—or preserving it—within the imperfect set of choices we have. All this is not meant to put down small businesses and co-ops. We need more of them to work in or go to—for carpentry, food, printing, all sorts of skills and services. But at the same time, they are not "the political solution," just part of the struggle...

Before this letter gets too preachy, I'd like to pass out some praise: let's hear it for BMR for the biggest and one of the best issues ever, despite all the dissolution around us. I especially liked the demands on the front cover. I kept looking for some kind of credit line until I realized they're our demands, the ones we all know when we stop and think of how comprehensive our movement is. I also like Janet Sergi's outlook for the eighties. Her story and Sue Goding's had a lot of insights about energy issues and the job market—the many ways they affect our lives. Finally, after my thoughts had been prodded and provoked to exhaustion, I loved reading Blaze's and Chocolate's account of their tour to the West Coast. I mean, there's nowhere to run. So we might as well try to get along with each other in Denver.

Kathy Riley

Mon-Th 10am-8pm Fri-Sun 10am-7pm