hot briefs

Computerized Breasts

Scientists at Waseda University in Japan have designed a new method of breast cancer detection. The device has 25 fingers, each equipped with a gauge, which is, in turn, hooked to a computer.

As the fingers examine a breast, they give the computer information so it can draw a picture of any lumps in the breast.

Indian Sit-In

On Monday, July 20, a group of Indian women, mostly elders, began an occupation of the offices of the Department of Indian Affairs in Vancouver, British Columbia, demanding to meet with the Minister of the Department, Monroe. The women of the occupation have received support from Native organizations across Canada, as well as from Australia and Denmark.

Men Beware

In Rochester, NY, after the rapes of 7 elderly women, two poster campaigns were initiated—the first, a composite portrait of the suspected rapist and the second a fake proclamation by a fake Department of Rape Prevention of a 10 pm curfew for all men. Police were reported "frantic" about the second poster.

Seduction Costs Dr.

In San Diego, a woman successfully sued her male psychiatrist. The psychiatrist had seduced and continued to have sex with her for two and a half years telling her "to trust in him because he was the only one who knew what was best." She was awarded $4.6 million from the courts.

Branding Women

Women's anti-nuclear affinity groups blocked 14 busloads of utility workers from entering the Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant in San Luis Obispo, California, for several hours. The women were eventually arrested and on each woman's left arm a one-inch high number was printed in indelible ink so that the cops could identify anyone who tried to rejoin the blockade after being released. "Just like Auschwitz," said one woman.

Organized Drugging

Based on statistics gathered in 24 cities between May 1976 and April 1977, the National Institute of Drug Abuse estimated that there were 5,800 drug-related deaths in hospital emergency rooms from psychiatric drugs. The statistics do not include deaths from drugs occurring in places other than emergency rooms. The major killers were Valium (900), Seconal (800), Nembutal (600), Liminal and Tuinal (500 each) and Elavil (700). During the same period there were 1,700 emergency room deaths related to the use of heroin/morphine.

Block That Door

Over 100 militant demonstrators blocked the elevators at the state office building in Chicago, IL. The women were demanding answers to why a northwest side Public Aid Officer had been moved to a location that is isolated and inaccessible to public transportation. They wanted to know why $500,000 is being used to renovate the new office when there were no competitive bids. As Anne Boone, a participant said, "Why do they try to take our few dollars and give them to the already rich?"

Angry Women

In Brixton, London, angry women occupied a local cafe after a woman was sexually assaulted by the manager there. They slapped up posters on the outside asking people to boycott the cafe, then walked in as a group, trapping the staff inside and giving the manager "one of the worst days of his life—which is only fair considering that is what he gave her."

Equal Pay Won

In San Jose, CA, women won the country's first strike over the issue of comparable worth, earning the same wages as men do in jobs of comparable skill or education. The workers, including women librarians, clerks, and park aides, won wage increases amounting to 154% over two years after 10 days on the picket line.

Purina Boycott

When representatives of the United Farm Workers union attempted to talk to strike breakers in the fields on Aug. 6th, more than 40 unionists were arrested. The UFW is currently involved in 3 strikes—against Bertuccio, SteakMate, and Sam Andrews, all large growers who have refused to bargain with them. The UFW has called for a boycott of Ralston Purina, which owns SteakMate, to support the strike. Some 300,000 seasonal farmworkers harvest U.S. food crops. Still, the average family income in 1977 was $5,971 for a family of 5.4 members.

Poster No-No

A judge in Vancouver B.C. upheld the city bylaw passed in Vancouver declaring that anyone found postering would be subject to $2,000 or 2 months in jail, when he found the defendant guilty of affixing a poster to a pole and handed down a one-year suspended sentence. Women's groups, theater groups, political organizations, and others all depend on postering to get out announcements cheaply. After the decision, the "poster people" held a demonstration at city hall and stated, "We have postered before the trial, during the trial, and we'll continue to poster."

Whose The Criminal?

Last year, thousands of women and almost 200 children were locked up at the Federal Prison in San Diego. Although they're illegal aliens, they are not in prison for unlawful entry into this country, but merely for having witnessed an alleged crime—their own smuggling into the U.S. Because they are often the only person who can provide the prosecution with testimony to convict accused smugglers and because they would presumably feel if released they are kept in prison months, while the alleged smuggler is often able to post bond and get out. "I wonder what would happen," asked Baca of the Committee on Chicano Rights, "if Mexico, for whatever reason, started locking up American kids. There's no doubt that racism makes it possible for something like this to happen."

Fights Against KKK

In Cincinnati, Anna Small, 42, is charged in the shooting death of a Ku Klux Klansman, Clyde Hensen, 27. Small, one of a few blacks in her neighborhood, had been harassed by her neighbor Hensen for 10 years, including when nails were put in her tires and cars driven over her lawn and gasoline poured around her house. Police refused to arrest Hensen even after they found an empty gas can on his porch. The day after the gas incident, Hensen and 5 or 6 friends were playing football against her house and using abusive language. Hensen entered Small's house after she had asked them to leave. He continued his abuse and threats. Small warned him with her gun and shot him as he advanced toward her. Small's defense committee can be reached at: P.O. Box 29334, Cincinnati, OH 45229.

WW ill

The Pentagon is asking hospitals across the country for a commitment to provide care for at least 50,000 injured military personnel in the event of war. One of the basic assumptions for the request is that this future war will not include a strategic nuclear exchange that would destroy major metropolitan centers and the hospitals located there, a Pentagon spokesman said. He said it is an attempt to be ready for a potential large-scale conventional war, or a confrontation with tactical nuclear weapons in "Europe or the Middle East or both." So plan your vacations now.

Credits

Sources for this month's hot briefs: News and Letters, Off Our Backs, On the Edge, Workers World, Hersay, Matrix, Rouge, The Progressive, Science for the People, Bread and Roses, Kinesis, Big Mama Rag, October, 1981 - Page 7