Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 8

On The Mutilation Of 30 Million Women

Following a report on the UN conference on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women, that took place in Khartoum, Sudan, in February, 1979—considered a turning point in the battle against the genital mutilation of women. A resolution was passed condemning clitoridectomy and urging campaigns for its abolition in all the countries of Africa and the Middle East where it is now performed. Within the conference there was a battle between those who wanted the practice stopped altogether and those who wanted to "clean it up," and bring it into the hospitals to be done in sterile conditions and under a local anesthetic. This is already beginning to happen in some cities, and could lead to clitoridectomy becoming even more firmly entrenched, as hospitals would have a vested interest in keeping it going. Fortunately, those who absolutely opposed the operation won at Khartoum.

The article is reprinted from Broadsheet, New Zealand's feminist magazine.

In the vast Friendship Hall built at great cost on the banks of the Nile some years ago, a meeting was taking place discreetly on a subject entitled "Traditional customs affecting women's health." WHO had assembled a number of subjects under this heading—nutritional taboos during pregnancy and lactation, early marriage, and the excision and infibulation of female genital organs prevalent in most African countries and, to a lesser degree, the Middle East. The last topic, quite obviously, overshadowed all the others both by the description of the operations and the horror they revealed.

Excision and infibulation methods vary slightly depending on the culture, ethnic group, and the period in history, with the variations mostly affecting the rites leading up to and following the operation itself.

These practices can be grouped into three categories:

—The "mildest" form consists of slicing off the tip of the clitoris with a sharp instrument, usually a razor blade. This practice, which is recommended by a number of Islamic authorities under the name "Sunna circumcision," is by far the least widespread. It was hardly discussed at the Khartoum meeting, except as a "fallback solution."

If, said the delegates in substance, people insist on retaining such prepubertal rites, then perhaps they should be persuaded to give up other kinds of excision and change to this "mild" form, which does not appear to hold major problems for the woman's future.

—The form of sexual mutilation most widespread among African peoples, including Copts and animists, consists of excising the whole of the clitoris (clitoridectomy) as well as the inner lips. Local "variants" have obviously sprung up. Some ethnic groups, for instance, cauterize the clitoris with fire. The organs to be destroyed are rubbed with a special kind of nettle; the next morning, the woman performing the operation cauterizes the already swollen clitoris with a burning brand. It is more usual to excise the organs with the help of various sharp instruments, which of course cause heavy hemorrhages. To stop the flow of blood the wound is covered with compounds of various herbs or plasters made up with milk, honey, sugar, and even animal droppings.

Franzesca Hosken (US), WHO's temporary delegate who has been collecting data on the subject for an impressive number of years, says: "This form is practiced in over 26 African countries extending from the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea right across to the Atlantic coast (Senegal and Mauritania), and from Egypt in the north to Tanzania in the south, including most of Nigeria. I consider some 30 million women and young girls are operated on in this way."

According to the writer Awa Thiam of Senegal, the practice is also to be found in the two Yemens, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Jordan, Syria, and Southern Algeria.

—The most harrowing descriptions provided at the Khartoum meeting were of the third and most radical form of mutilation—infibulation. The Sudanese call it "Pharaonic circumcision" and the Egyptians "Sudanese circumcision." It involves removal of the clitoris and the inner lips and then sewing up the labia majora, whose inner surfaces have previously been scraped so as to ensure they stick together when they heal. The practice is standard in the whole of the Horn of Africa—Somalia, Djibouti, in most of Ethiopia (Ogaden and Eritrea), Sudan, Upper Egypt, northern Kenya, Nigeria, and in many areas of Mali.

Edna Adan Ismail (Somalia), WHO's temporary delegate who has long served in the health ministry at Mogadishu, gave the conference a rundown on the technique of infibulation. The girl is placed on the floor or on a low stool and a strong woman sitting behind her pins her arms down. Two women hold each of the little girl's legs to immobilize them. The woman performing the operation (often the village "matron") then approaches with her instrument (usually a razor blade or a knife specially kept for the purpose) and slices off the clitoris and the labia minora and scrapes the skin off the inner surface of the labia majora. Then the stitching begins. The labia majora are pulled together and "stapled" with the thorns of the dwarf acacia which grows freely in the desert (the thorns measure about 10 cms.—4 in.). A string is then passed around the thorns closing the wound like a corset. A tiny opening is left at the lower end for the evacuation of urine and menstrual blood. To prevent the wound from closing completely, the matron places a matchstick or tiny bamboo wedge in it. Next she covers it with a mixture of gum arabic and sugar which forms a hermetic seal. The girl's legs are next bound together right down to the ankles to prevent her moving them and interfering with the healing process. By this time the little girl is too exhausted to cry.

She is then placed on a mat and the women wait for her to urinate, which would show the opening had not been closed. The first passage of urine causes intense burning.

At the end of a week, the thorns are drawn out and the girl is given a stick to help her hobble around in her hut, as her legs are still bound. The scar is inspected and if the operation has not been successful, it is repeated.

A few years later comes the time for marriage and motherhood. Jacques Lantier has described in detail the Somali rituals involved here in his book "La Cite Magique," published by Les Editions Fayard, Paris, in 1972. "The wife goes to her husband's home where he takes off her clothes and whips her till she bleeds with a leather-thonged lash known as the courbash... He may not deflower his wife with his penis. For this he uses a double-bladed dagger that he plunges into the vagina which is ripped open and bleeds profusely... Then he penetrates the woman.

"Tradition requires the man to have repeated and lengthy intercourse with his wife during the first week, the object of these 'labors' being to keep a passage open and prevent the wound from scarring over. During all this time the woman lies stretched out and stirs as little as possible to keep the mouth of the wound open.

"On the morning after the first night, the husband wears the bloody dagger on his shoulder and calls on neighbors to receive their expressions of admiration. Once these formalities are over he goes back home immediately to resume his labors.

"The woman becomes pregnant quickly. When the time for delivery arrives, she sits on a stool and the midwife opens the vulva with a kitchen knife... With every outward push of the fetus, the midwife cuts her open a little more. When the fetus has been expelled, water which is nearly boiling is poured on the organs causing enormous blistering. Then the process of scraping the tissue off the inside of the labia, fixing them together with acacia thorns, binding the legs together and all over again..."

According to the Khartoum Conference delegates, it is not rare for a woman to be sewn up and opened ten or twelve times until the operation becomes impossible because of the state of the organs.

The complications arising from such a practice are evidently innumerable. As Lantier describes it, "a clumsy or awkward cut or exploration pierces the bladder or the rectum." Dr. Ahmed Shandall, professor of Khartoum University, who did not take part in the WHO symposium, has described these complications in a very important work based on five years of treating 4,000 women at the Khartoum hospital.

It is not unusual for babies to die as a result of shock caused by hemorrhages and violent infections (such as tetanus). As for the extreme pain and the psychological trauma they cause, they are obviously the rule. Cases of urine retention are very frequent, especially when the woman performing the operation is particularly "conscientious" or is bothered by her patient's movements and slices through the meatus and even a part of the vagina. Dr. Shandall gives the case of a woman whose urinary tract had been enlarged to such a point that for more than a year it was mistakenly "utilized" by her husband. The delegates at the conference also told of cases of the anal opening being used for this purpose when infibulation makes standard heterosexual relations difficult.

And that's not all either. The long-term complications are even more important. In the first place, chronic infections of the genital region lead to an exceptionally high incidence of sterility, which in Africa is more of a social and economic disaster for the woman and her family than a personal tragedy. Cysts and stones often develop over the scars, on the vulva, and in the vagina, and they can grow as big as grapefruits. Painful menstrual spasms become very frequent, especially when the blood cannot be evacuated properly.

There are also the obstetrical complications, which injure two persons—the mother and the child. Scars on the vulva generally become hard, tear off easily, which means having to make very wide openings, generally on both sides of the perineum (episiotomies) with the help of a sharp instrument. This in turn leads to infections when the operations are conducted by people who are not too skilled, as is generally the case in the bush. There is also a very high incidence of vesicular-vaginal and recto-vaginal fistulas, caused largely by repeated childbirths.

Frigidity—a subject scarcely touched upon by the Khartoum congress participants, except the Egyptians—is almost always the lot of these mutilated women. Eighty percent of the infibulated women examined by Professor Shandall had never experienced any sexual pleasure. Eighty of the women did not even know until then that women could experience pleasure from sexual contact.

Before considering what could be done about genital mutilation, the delegates asked themselves how such mutilating rites became so firmly rooted in such a large number of cultures so different from one another in terms of geography, religion, and ethnic affiliation?

Islam has wrongly been blamed for it, and for far too long. Excision has been, and still is practiced by a large number of non-Muslims, beginning with Christians. The Skoptsy, a Russian sect that only Stalinism succeeded in suppressing, is said to have got its male devotees to practice self-castration. Its women were forced to undergo excision of their sexual organs and mastectomies. The authority for the practices came from Matthew XIX, 12: For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

Closer home, excisions have been practiced in psychiatric hospitals in Great Britain and France, traces of which can be found in a report. "Aware of the need to combat the awful vice of masturbation among young girls, Broca made the humane suggestion to tuck the clitoris away behind the sewn-up labia majora instead of resorting to clitoridotomy. The young girl would be given back the use of her clitoris with a second operation freeing her on the eve of her wedding."

We are not told whether this "humanitarian" plan had been often effective. All this shows, however, is that the idea is not "typically."

MORE ON PAGE 17