Interview with Jane Alpert...

From Page 8

housewives as providing feudal labor in worldwide society.  
This is something that has already come out of the feminist  
movement, and that a lot of work is being done on. We don't  
have all the answers, but we are working on them.  

As for this criticism coming from the left, that is pretty  
ironic, given the total failure of socialist so-called  
revolutions to create free equal societies. It’s absurd to let  
Marxism put feminists on the defensive by being presented  
as the only possible prescription for eliminating poverty,  
hunger, inequality.  

K&S: What are your thoughts about feminist goals and  
priorities?  

JA: I think the first goal for a feminist has to be a personal  
one: the discovery of her own creativity and the unlocking of  
her own potential. The goal that follows immediately from  
that is to do everything in her power to help and encourage  
other women in the very risky and dangerous struggle to  
make the best kind of life we can for ourselves.  

Going beyond that, a vital issue is our physical survival —  
surviving our victimization by the medical system, for exam-  
ple. The growth of the self-help movement has been for me  
a very exciting thing to watch; and it’s something I would  
like to learn more about. In a bigger sense, it's fantastic to  
see the growth of feminist culture in the last five years.  
Schools, clinics, music groups, presses, feminist art, are  
burgeoning all over in a way that's great to see after having  
been so remote from it.  

K&S: What do you think is the role of lesbianism in the  
women’s movement?  

JA: In the broadest sense I see lesbianism as coming to  
love what we have in common with other women.  
Lesbianism forces us to confront our own body-loathing —  
the hatred for our own bodies that we are brought up with,  
the fear that we have of other women’s bodies. The gut  
meaning lesbianism has for us all is such a positive and im-  
portant thing.  

K&S: There are groups of women in the movement who  
have chosen to separate themselves not only from men, but  
also from women — including feminists — who themselves  
continue to relate to men. What is your attitude toward les-  
bian separatism as a tactic?  

JA: I see that as a self-defeating idea. All women relate to  
men, whether we like it or not. They're our employers, our  
neighbors, our law-enforcement officers, etc. Having a  
purist position doesn’t change the facts. We have to figure  
out how to deal with reality, whether we call ourselves  
woman-identified or not.  

K&S: The essence of the dyke-separatist position is that  

ERA Report  

ERA ratification has become  
an especially important issue for  
women because of recent court  
trends in deciding sex dis-  
crimination cases. This is the  
conclusion which has been  
reached by a recent ERA Project  
investigation.  

The ERA Project surveyed  
cases of sex discrimination in  
school athletics, pregnancy  
leave and disability, Jaycees  
membership, Social Security  
benefits, property tax exemp-  
tion, and jury duty.  

Only four of the nine U.S.  
Supreme Court Justices (Bren-  
nan, Douglas, White, and  
Marshall) have been willing to  
define sex discrimination as in-  
herently “suspect,” in the  
language of constitutional law,  
and one of these Justices has  
retreated from this position in an  
April, 1974 opinion.  

Three other Justices (Powell,  
Burger, and Blackmun) have  
dodged the constitutional issue  
of how best to evaluate sex  
classifications in view of the  
pending ERA ratification process  
in the states.  

The significance of the split in  
the Supreme Court is this: until  
ERA ratification, the Court may  
uphold laws discriminating  
against women, so long as a  
reasonable relationship can be  
shown between that law and a  
valid state objective.  

Cases involving employment  
discrimination may fare better  
with the courts through this in-  
terim period, because they are  
usually brought under the  
specific portion of the civil rights  
legislation which prohibits sex  
discrimination (Title VII of the  
1964 Civil Rights Act). But all  
non-employment cases, plus all  
cases involving minors, will risk  
adverse treatment by the courts  
so long as the ERA remains un-  
ratified.  

Five more states must ratify  
the ERA before it can become  
part of the U.S. Constitution.  
Letters and contributions to the  
all-important “swing states”  
can influence the outcome.  
Direct your energies and funds  
toward Nevada, Missouri, North  
Carolina, North Dakota,  
Oklahoma, Illinois, and South  
Carolina.  

(Sister, L.A.)  

bicycles  

Sales — Info — Repairs  
319 East 17th Avenue  
Denver  
573-1177  

“We cater to women’s needs”  
No Rip-Off!!  

Confusion...

From Page 1  

around an issue such as this,  
which would be relevant to a  
broad base of women. Eventual-  
ly, a woman’s congress could  
call for a general strike of  
women in this country, both as  
workers in the labor force and as  
workers in the home. The Cove-  
nant would then negotiate with  
the power structures for the  
elimination of the causes of this  
destruction of the environment  
(restriction of use of jet engines,  
development of a “people-  
oriented” technology, for ex-  
ample). Such an action would  
serve as an example of the  
benefit which women could bring  
to people, and demonstrate  
that women are capable of using  
power to improve people's lives.  

The Political Is Personal  

There is one fast aspect of  
political organizing which  
should be discussed, namely, its  
personal aspect. The WOMEN’S  
MOVEMENT WAS THE FIRST  
TO ANNOUNCE THAT “the per-  
sonal is political.” From that  
rather ambiguous position,  
women were able to validate  
their own experiences as com-  
mon to a group — to women. For  
many, it was the first recognition  
by women that they were a peo-  
ple. The converse of that posi-  
tion, that the political is per-  
sonal, has been more difficult to  
articulate. Janet Sergi, in explor-  
ing the psychology that has led  
to this condition, concludes that  
without a solid political base  
from which women can, as in-  
dividuals, make the work which  
they do meaningful, and extend  
their own personal community  
to the world community, women  
will remain politically weak and  
spiritually bankrupt.  

Many women have perceived  
that traditional leftist  
“revolutionary” groups are in-  
ternally corrupt in their struc-  
tures and methods, and many  
women have opted not to par-  
ticipate in that type of “revolu-  
tion.” It is possible, however,  
that women could create a  
revolutionary organization  
which would be qualitatively  

different from the usual political  

women who relate to men — and even lesbians who relate  
to women who live with men — are diffusing their energies  
on behalf of the enemy; that it is only genuinely  
revolutionary to put all one’s energies into women-  
identified women.  

JA: Well, I believe that one essential of feminism is the  
connection of all women to all other women. We share a  
core of common consciousness. If we lose sight of that we  
would just be selling out our feminism. We would be locking  
ourselves into the same kind of destructive isolation that  
many of us were into in the left: the idea that there is a  
“them” and “us.” To see the “them-and-us” analysis  
applied to other feminists is heartbreaking. I don’t think this  
kind of separatism has anything to do with lesbianism, or  
the positive value that lesbianism has potentially in the life  
of every woman.  

K&S: What are your thoughts and feelings about going to  
prison? What is your inner preparedness like?  

JA: I have been thinking about prison for a long time.  
Prison has been part of my dreams; it has a kind of concrete  
reality for me. There wasn’t a point in the last five years  
where in some part of my brain I wasn’t ready to be picked  
up and to go to jail and spend time there. I have read  
everything I could get my hands on about women’s prisons.  
I've thought about how I will use my skills in prison to help  
other women, I've thought about the extent to which I would  
feel lonely and isolated.  

I feel very mentally prepared for prison — but, it also  
scares me. I mean, prepared as I am, it is still impossible not  
to fear the kind of experience it is going to be. I'm sure that  
it's going to be life-changing, that in many ways it will be  
shattering; as going underground has been. I am fearful  
mostly in the sense that it is an unknown — no matter how  
concretely I try to imagine it. I am lucky in that I have con-  
fidence in my own strength and the solidity of my core to  
feel that I am not going to be broken by the experience.  

K&S: Is there anything that women can do for you? Is  
there anything that you need from feminists?  

JA: Just knowing that the women’s movement supports  
me — just knowing that the Women’s Movement exists — is  
such a miracle, such a source of strength for me. I'm not go-  
ing to be facing anything qualitatively different from what  
we all face every day. And knowing that is the best thing I  
can get from feminists.  

On January 13th, Jane Alpert was sentenced to a  
twenty-seven month term in prison. Her address, for those  
who wish to write her, is: State Correctional Institute of  
Muncy, Box 180, Muncy, PA 17756.  

Women withdrew from the  
Left because of its lack of respect  
for life-forces, the inadequacy of  
its political analysis, and its un-  
willingness to relate to the  
spiritual/personal aspect of  
human existence. The Left is  
male-identified. The unique  
qualities which women-  
identified women could bring to  
the political area could operate  
to expand and converge the con-  
cepts of the non-spiritual  
political party or the apolitical  
spiritual commune. Women as a  
group could meet the challenge  
of bringing about revolutionary  
changes, while preserving the  
female value system. A feminist  
who was active politically while  
maintaining her own center in  
relation to the world, would  
manifest the ideas of a woman-  
state in her internal life, in com-  
munity, and in her work.  

Women have not had material  
power in this world since the  
overthrow of the matriarchies,  
way back somewhere in our  
collective past. It is the respon-  
sibility of women to restore the  
balance to the earth to provide  
people with material control  
over their lives that will free  
them for spiritual development.  

Conclusion  

The women’s movement is in  
a crisis of confusion, relevance,  
and perhaps, survival. Economic  
pressures, historical lessons,  
and the dangerous reformist  
drift of the current movement in-  
dicate that there is an urgency to  
resolve this confusion now. For  
radical feminists to actually  
emerge as a real force in history,  
we must settle in for the long  
haul, and develop a united, prin-  
cipled feminist political  
organization which will create  
concrete goals, strategies, and  
networks of communication that  
will form the guts of a feminist  
revolution. A National Feminist  
Congress could converge the  
political and spiritual aspects of  
a woman-identified identity.  
This is not to say that a political  
organization would be all things  
to all people. That would be an  
empty promise. But it is to say  
that such a woman-identified  
organization could bring political  
unity where there is confusion. It  
could give hope to our rather  
ominous future. It could restore  
power to those who brought  
forth life in the beginning.  

CIA...

From Page 4  

and countless others have  
attended three day “cursillo”  
training sessions or the 20-day  
“curso” intensive training  
sessions. According to one OEF  
report, over 13,000 Latin  
American women leaders are  
reached through its policy of  
follow through with seminar and  
workshop alumnae.  
The Asian Connections  

Following the charges made  
by Ann Roberts concerning the  
OEF involvement with the CIA,  
executive director of the League  
of Women Voters Caroline  
Wood, confirmed that the OEF  
gets money from the State  
Department, AID and the Asia  
Foundation; that the League is  
aware that the Asia Foundation  
has been used as a conduit for  
CIA money in the past; and that  
biographical material collected  
on women overseas is sent to  
the State Department. And she  
agreed that the information may  
in fact end up in the hands of the  
CIA.  

But, said Wood, the OEF does  
not “knowingly provide” the CIA  
with information.  

- Counter-Spy/LNS