racism

compiled by Lori Bradford

This booklist is intended only as a
beginning look at the "complete list"
of readings that are available on wo-
men/people in other cultures, on issues
of racism, anti-Semitism, and classism
in the United States and internationally,
and on the impact of these issues
within our own movement...feminism.

book list

We hope you will put this list to
good use, to read about yourself--about
others, in affirmation. Many of the
authors listed here have written many
more than the books attributed to them
here, if you find an author you really
like then pursue them--don't let this
list limit your sources for information.
I know as this list goes to press there
are many omissions, particularly the
lack of any listing of children's and
young adult books (of which there are
many excellent titles; we can run a list
directed at a younger age group in the
near future), and a greater listing of
fiction works and good histories of
different people of color. Please
consider writing us your responses to
these books as you read, BMR is always
looking for book reviews. In the
meantime, good reading!
The books appear in no special order.

All The Women Are White, All the Blacks
Are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave, edi-
ted by Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell
Scott and Barbara Smith. From the Femi-
nist Press, $7.95 paper, $14.95 cloth.
This is a new book not yet on the
streets, but be ready for it Jan. 29,
1982. This collection includes notes on
studying slavery, representative issues
in the social sciences, black women's
health, the politics of black women's
studies, racism in the women's movement,
black feminism, and lots more.

Common Differences: Conflicts In Black
and White Feminist Perspectives by
Gloria I. Joseph and Jill Lewis. From
Anchor Press, $8.95 paperback. Gloria,
a black woman and Jill, a white woman,
explore in turn "the differences between
Black and White women's perspectives,
attitudes and concerns on key issues."
An excellent book.

Native American Testimony/An Anthology
of Indian and White relations: First En-
counter to Dispossession, edited by
Peter Nabokov, prefaced by Vine Deloria
Jr. From Harper Colophon Books, $4.95
paper. An excellent anthology reflecting
many Native American voices.

With These Hands/Women Working On The
Land edited and with an introduction
by Joan M. Jensen. From the Feminist
Press, $3.50 paper. Beginning with the
Native Americans who were working the
land when the first Europeans arrived
in North America, this unique collec-
tion traces to the present day the his-
tory of farm women of all races in the
United States.

Page 22 - Big Mama Rag, December, 1981

The Cancer Journals by Audre Lorde.
From Spinsters Ink, $4.00. This auto-
biographical work deals with her
struggles with breast cancer from a
Black lesbian feminist perspective.

The Jewish Woman/New Perspectives edi-
ted by Elizabeth Koltun. From Schocken
Books, $6.95 paper. A presentation of
discussion in "all the important as-
pects of a woman's life within Judaism
and the Jewish community...indispens-
able in the re-evaluation of the role
of the modern Jewish woman.

Open To The Sun/A Bilingual Anthology
Of Latin American Women Poets edited
by Nora Jaquez Wieser. From Perival
Press, $8.50 paper. From 1910 to today
their one continuous theme is revolt:
and though sometimes forced to camou-
flage their meaning with symbols, they
do not separate their protest and cri-
tique of an oppressive society from
their own specific oppression as women.

The History of Anti-Semitism/From the
Time of Christ to the Court Jews by
Leon Poliskov. From Schocken Books,
$5.95 paper. An extensive analysis of
the relationship between anti-Semitism
and the Jews.

The Hidden Face of Eve/Women In the
Arab World by Nawal El Saadawi. A per-
sonal and disturbing account of the
lives of women in an Islamic world.

A most excellent book.

From Zed Press, $6.95 paper.

Slave of Slaves: The Challenge of Latin
American Women anthologized by Latin
American Women. From Zed Press, $8.50
paper. The building of a feminist move-
ment in Latin America in the face of
harsh economic and political conditions.

Camp Notes and Other Poems by Mitsuye
Yamada. From Shameless Hussy Press,
$1.95 paper. This collection of poetry
includes poems written during the WWII
years in a concentration camp in Idaho.
Mitsuye is a second generation Japan-
ese American.

From Somewhere In The World/Assata Sha-
kur Speaks--Message to the New Afrikan
Nation. From the New Afrikan Women's
Organization, $2.00--pamphlet. For addi-
tional copies or more info write: New
Afrikan Women's Organization, P.O. Box
1184, Manhattanville Station, New York
NY 10027.

Freedom With Reservation/The Menominee
Struggle to Save Their Land and Their
People--coordinating editor Deborah
Shames. This book sells for $2.25 and
all proceeds from this book will be re-
turned to the Menominee people. Write
the National Committee to Save The Me-
nominee People and Forests, Inc., Rm.
301, Box 1816 Jefferson Place NW,
Wash, D.C. 20036.

Black Foremothers/Three Lives by Doro-
thy Sterling. From Feminist Press,
$3.50 paper. The carefully researched
biographies of Ellen Craft--runaway
Georgia slave, Ida B. Wells--journalist
in the crusade against lynching, and
Mary Church Terrell--a leader in the
movement for suffrage/civil rights
reflect and connect the struggles of
the years 1826-1954.

Portraits of Chinese Women In Revolu-
tion by Agnes Smedley, edited and in-
troduced by Jan MacKinnon and Steve
MacKinnon. From the Feminist Press,
$3.95. From her reporting of the war
years in China, 1928-1941, the editors
selected 18 pieces that portray the
personal and political struggles of wo-
men in revolution: crippled by foot-
binding, forced into marriage, killed
by overwork, or charged with lesbian-
ism because of their solidarity.

The Woman Warrior/Memoirs of a Girlhood
Among Ghosts by Maxine Hong Kingston.
From Vintage Books, $2.95. An account
of growing up female and Chinese Ameri-
can in California.

Cogewea/The Half Blood by Mourning Dove-
Hum-Ishu-Ma. From Bison Books, $6.25.
First novel by a Native American woman
(1925) tells of a half-blood girl
caught between the worlds of Anglo
ranchers and full-blood reservation
Indians.

The Ways of My Grandmothers by Beverly
Hungry Wolf. From Morrow Quill Publica-
tions, $5.95. A record of the ancient
ways of the women of Beverly's tribe,
the Blood People of the Blackfoot Na-
tion.

I Am The Fire Of Time edited by Jane P.
Katz. From Dutton Paperbacks, $6.95.

A collection of many voices of Native
American women.