The “Little Suicides”

Is It Personal Preference Or Integrity

By Kathy Riley

Dependencies, or "habits" as they are lightly called, can be easily ignored if they aren't obviously destructive: the "little suicides," as my friend Georgia calls them, get lost between the smiles.

My favorite little suicide used to be cigarettes, until I stopped smoking them eight months ago. It was a small self-destructive habit for two reasons: by watching me smoke at one time, you wouldn't have seen me die from emphysema 20 years from now, and two: cigarettes are not treated by the general population like a major suicide at all. Fair warning--a change is coming.

It was important to me in quitting smoking to remember the power of images--like in magazines or on billboards everywhere, where smokers and drinkers are forever young, rich, sexy and adventurous. One real danger in overcoming our addictions, I think, is to focus on how weak and stupid we are for not having been able to do it earlier. Powerful forces are at work, trying to keep us dependent on buying drugs of all kinds. All drug dependencies have multi-million dollar advertising budgets behind them.

Nicole Hollander-I'm In Training To Be Tall And Blonde, St. Martin Press

cide: no one screams, whispers or calls an ambulance when you light up. (Imagine: what if people did do that?)

I'm writing about this issue, this dependency, because it's clearly political as well; it deals with power, the power smokers give to the tobacco industry and take away from ourselves (our health) by smoking. One could build such a good case for how all good feminists should, therefore, quit smoking. But it doesn't work that way, or at least, it didn't work that way for me.

If we've ever suffered from an addiction, we know that addictions do not follow the more orderly flows of consciousness raising: problem perceived, feelings experienced, fears aired, possibilities examined, new choice made. Addictions are, by their nature, defiant of logic and set up to perpetuate themselves. All of which explains how, while we are addicted, many of us could see an entire film on smoking-related diseases, leave the theater in silence, drive to a restaurant, and laughing, have a cigarette lit by the time the waitress brought the coffee.

Although I was long aware of the political/health implications of smoking, I was not successful in quitting until, finally, smoking became more of a humiliating than a pleasurable experience: I felt guilty all of the time; all of a sudden it was harder to smoke in public places; it seemed I was often stepping outdoors on freezing winter nights during intermission. Non-smokers, especially my friends, became more vocal about how they hated it and correspondingly supportive during my frequent vows to quit. Friends, who were ex-smokers and thus expert in self-humiliations, knew that good support involved dropping the right hints instead of the right arguments: "It was so nice after I quit,” Alice said encouragingly. "Then people couldn't smell me coming."

So, the point of all this is to offer encouragement to all of you who've ever wanted to loudly complain about smoking, be haughty, ban it entirely from meetings or make exquisitely pained expressions in front of smokers. Do it.

In writing this, however, I've realized that as an ex-smoker anxious to prove myself nicotine-free, I've yet to be really confrontive with smokers: "No, I don't mind--really. Go right ahead; it doesn't bother me."

or at least, a powerful cultural attraction (i.e. cocaine). It's important to fight these images every day, whatever way, at least in our heads. (Take the billboard man who stands in front of his backpack at the foot of the mountain lighting up; what should he really be saying?)

At the same time, we need new images.

In popular culture, women are either victims, cops or consumers. As feminists with access to women's culture, we have so many other possibilities: We do not have to be drugged to be artists. There are more ways a woman can be than Bonnie Raitt or Janis Joplin were able to dream.

Everyone, it seems, has their own suicide. But as a community, can we work on the "little" ones, like cigarettes, junk food, compulsive eating--which will kill us tomorrow--before we've seriously dealt with the major ones, like alcoholism, which kills much more quickly. An estimated one out of three lesbians has a drinking problem. And the number is even higher if you count "co-alcoholics," a category which has included myself. I just heard of the word recently, in a fine health pamphlet called “Lesbian Health Matters" by the Santa Cruz Women's Health Collective. But as a concept, co-alcoholism has been around a long time. Co-alcoholics--usually lovers or friends of the alcoholic--are the people who provide drinks, who are often driving to the emergency room, calling bosses with hangover excuses, or any other behavior designed to protect a drunk from the harsh knocks of life as an alcoholic: knocks she must feel if she is ever to make any real changes in her life.

Since I've known the women of LUNA (Lesbians United Against Alcoholism) in Denver, it infuriates me, it surprises me, that anyone would drink with or offer a drink to anyone she knows is alcoholic. Yet a year ago, I was doing just that--out of sisterly sympathy, I thought; but really, when I thought about it, out of my own fear of making either of my alcoholic friends angry with me, angry enough to leave me. (In this situation, co-alcoholics should remember that we are going to lose them anyway if they continue to drink.) Co-alcoholism is a dependency in itself, because the co-alcoholic gets much of her sense of self-worth out of being needed, which if we've had a traditional upbringing, is what we've been taught to do anyway. For those of us who have been co-alcoholics, it's important to deal with.

One of the few dependencies that is generally considered funny or at least acceptable is a dependency on eating meat. Despite promising political growth in other areas, I've remained a liberal in this one: I've developed preferences for fresh vegetables, but will be among the first to dive for a chicken casserole at a potluck. My friend Bobbe is a confirmed carnivore and often asks me suspiciously when I'm going to ‘turn vegetarian’ on her. Others of her friends have already made it clear they don't want any dead animals brought into their homes for dinner. There are political implications to eating or not eating meat, which I think I first really learned when I read Diet For A Small Planet. Still, it seems more common for people to quit eating meat out of empathy for animals or for health reasons--now that yoga teachers aren't the only ones talking about how bad it is for you.

I think the stumbling block for many of us in making vegetarianism a truly political issue--as opposed to keeping it in the category of private taste, upbringing or whim--is the belief that our not eating meat will not keep anybody from starving. As the author of Diet For A Small Planet wrote, when we were told as kids to clean up our plate because of all the starving children in India, we knew that the only one who really cared was the family dog.

A small article in the Denver Post this month quoted a UN nutrition expert who said that 500 million people in the world today suffer from severe malnutrition; this could be corrected if 10 to 15 percent of the grains used to feed livestock in developed countries could instead be used to feed people directly. The problem is not food supply, but distribution. But given this country's economic dependency on the livestock industry, it's easy to perpetuate our personal dependencies. And we know that until the livestock industry feels the same pressure lettuce growers felt in the late 60's, our decisions to eat or not eat meat will remain largely issues of "personal" preference or integrity. That's important, but not enough.

-New Women's Survival Catalog

The Game Of Self Image

Susan Goding

While growing up, we all got the message that girls should be thin and beautiful. If we were thin and beautiful we could "catch us a man." My experience, instead, was that men would catch me...whether I liked it or not. I was “attractive."

I never consciously made any connection between being fat and being vulnerable. Rather eating became a physical outlet for my almost constant fear and anxiety. I started gaining weight at around the age of six.

Violence was an integral part of life in my neighborhood, in our homes and in the streets. Disagreements were settled with fists. Being fat and knowing how to use my weight, I felt I could handle any situation. If I had been skinny maybe I could have gotten away by being wiry and fast, but being fat I was a brick wall.

As a fat kid, I was unattractive and believed boys and men bothered me less because of it. Knowing how to use my weight, I felt indestructible.

Compulsive eating was almost a perfect cycle. I ate to reduce the anxiety about being powerless against men. As I got fat some of that anxiety was alleviated. However, compulsive eating became an ingrained habit; I eat to reduce anxiety, to avoid chores, when depressed, etc.

As I grew into an adult, I began to realize that even as a fat woman I am no match in a fight with almost any man.

As a feminist, I am struggling to change society and its acceptance of women as men's toys. Men may always be stronger than women in one-on-one fights but after the revolution, with all women, the laws and courts behind us, no man will be able to cause trouble but once.

Believing that by being fat and unattractive I was able to insulate myself from the world was an illusion. But the illusion helped me keep my sanity; it helped me feel I had control over my life's situation.

I don't believe, anymore, that fatness has any substantially beneficial effect on my life, as a woman or as a lesbian. So now I have to learn to change my reaction to anxiety about this society. In this case, the only answer seems to be to change this society.