%

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 4

Rape And Patriarchy...continued from pg 7

The significant factor in this view of rape is that it is forced, against the
female's will.

"Rape is not a special, isolated act. It is not one aberration, a deviation
from the norm of sexual and social behavior in this country. Rape is simply at
the end of the continuum of male-aggressive, female-passive patterns, and an
arbitrary line has been drawn to mark it off from the rest of such relation-
ships."

The basic elements of rape - power and dominance - are involved in most
heterosexual relationships in this society. Heterosexual love often finds ero-
tic expression through male dominance and female submission. “Erotic pleasure
cannot be separated from culture, and in our culture male eroticism is wedded
to power." This accounts for male, and thus, police/doctor/judge identifica-
tion with the offender instead of the victim of this crime. Rape sustains the
possessory, protectorate and supremacist role of man in a patriarchal society;
man has an investment in rape as a tool of psychological terrorism for keep-
ing woman in her place.

...That is how they reproduce
themselves—
making women frightened. That is their
birthing process. Delivered by all
mankind,
Doctored by fear. Nursed by women's
fear of men.

-Lou McDonald

This psychological terrorism is accomplished not only by physical assault,
but through constant "little rapes" - the whistles and comments on the street,
harassments by the boss, jokes by comedians, verbal assaults at any time and
place - that man uses to objectify and degrade woman: Woman is subjected to
this kind of violation daily; it can gradually erode her self-respect and pri-
vacy until she begins to internalize this view of herself. These continual en-
croachments, subtle and blatant, function as reminders of the possibility of
rape, as the penultimate act that always carries with it the threat of death.

The traditional, patriarchal view of rape is as the theft of another man's
property. Raped women, as property, have been defiled, soiled, ruined. Thus,
men in war and other male games, use rape of the male enemy's women to aggran-
dize their own manhood and concurrently reduce that of the enemy. The rage one
man may harbor against another who is threatening his position in the male
hierarchy is deflected upon a female scapegoat. White men have used this pro-
perty view of rape to further their racist goals both by their assaults on
black women and by their use of the judicial system to falsely incriminate
black men of raping white women. The chattel view of rape also explains why a
man cannot be convicted of raping his own wife; since his wife is already
his property, he owns access to her body.

Rape is an integral part of the entire social matrix which denigrates being
female. “As long as our society is divided between males as wielders of power
and females as a largely powerless caste, rape will continue to be a preroga-
tive of the ruling class."

The Victim

"Any discussion of rape must begin with the object of the attack - the vic-
tim. Yet, until very recently rape victims were the least studied and under-

stood, invariably given the lowest priority in the few research projects under-

taken on rape."

"My mother wouldn't have talked about it, even if she had lived. But anybody

who thinks rape is a sex thing should have seen her. She was almost unrecogni-
zable, beaten and bruised over her entire body. She was raped and strangled in
her own home during the daytime." -daughter of 80-year-old victim

Who is the rape victim? She is Everywoman. Females of every age, every race,
every class and every description are raped daily. Old, young, black, white,
rich, poor, slender, obese, illiterate, well-educated, lesbian, straight, pro-
stitute, housewife, attractive, plain, invalid, healthy - all females are po-
tential victims. These females are raped at any time of the day or night, in
their homes, at work, at the laundromat, library, in their cars, in urban,
suburban and rural areas. Yet the patriarchal myth would have us believe that
only young, attractive females are raped at night in dark alleys. This view
promotes a second myth that the victim “asked for it" by being provocative
and by being out alone late at night.

"She was asking for it" leads to “she deserved it". In other words, she
either stepped outside the male-defined code of behavior for women, or she

limited herself too narrowly within it and did not defend herself. "So appar-

ently women are damned both ways - they seem to be looking for it or they look
too good for it, they are touchable or they are untouchable. Either way, they

are eligible for rape."

A patriarchal system begins early in preparing a girl child for a life of
subjugation. The socialization process is thorough in teaching the young fe-
male to be passive, submissive, dependent. In addition, she learns to be com-
passionate, patient, understanding, especially of male behavior. All of these
socially endorsed traits make her more subject to rape. When she responds to
a rape situation with these acculturated patterns, she is castigated and said
to have "precipitated" the assault. This interpretation of her behavior is
part of the patriarchal process whereby “rapists receive, if not total abso-
lution, at least partial forgiveness". Women often respond to rape with feel-
ings of shame, embarrassment and guilt, having to some extent, internalized
the patriarchal view that rape is a female-precipitated act.

The socialization process teaches the young female to be the perfect victim
of sexual aggression - to be ‘feminine.’ To be feminine in this culture "is to
defer to masculine strength; is to lack muscular development or any interest
in defending oneself; is to let doors be opened, to have one's arm held when
crossing the street. To be feminine is to wear shoes which make it difficult
to run; skirts which inhibit one's stride; underclothes which inhibit the
circulation." It is significant that those very behaviors which are thought
to be attractive are those which make it difficult for a woman to defend her-
self against aggression.

When a woman is attacked by a potential rapist, she is not only hampered by
her acculturated lack of physical strength and her restrictive garments and
shoes, but also by her diminished sense of her own reality and worth.

Rape is a traumatic experience; most victims suffer damaging psychological
effects from the dehumanizing experience. Some women fall into deep despair;
others suppress their feelings and become alienated and/or more submissive/
dependent. The disbelief, shock, shame and embarrassment of those closed to
them often further complicates the experience. In addition, many rapes are
accompanied by some form of physical violence - hitting, kicking, choking -
and/or by a weapon such as a gun, knife, screwdriver or bottle. Of the 619
rapes in Denver in 1978, weapons were used in 218; bodily force was used in
the remainder. The male view that a woman is raped and that is the end of it
is false; in addition to the physical and emotional suffering, the victim of-
ten has to move to escape the memories and/or repeated assaults by the rapist
and she may lose her husband/lover and even her job.

The longest-lasting effect of rape is nearly always the psychological damage;
terror of physical brutality, generalized fear and guilt and depression
are common.

The Rapist

"Those men were the most normal men. there (San Luis Obispo Prison). They
had a lot of hang-ups but they were the same hang-ups as men walking the
Street." - Alan Taykon, parole officer.

"He said what attracted him to me was the fact that I had my own mind, that
I wasn't submissive, but at the same time all he wanted to do was to crush
it out of me.” -rape victim, raped by her husband

Who is the rapist? He is Everyman. Studies show that the rapist is indist-
inguishable from ordinary men; with the exception of about 3%, rapists seem
to be sexually and psychologically normal. Rape is committed “by males of

MY HUMAN RIGHTS
TO SAY NO! As John,

every age, race, social and economic status, intelligence and educational le-
vel and physical and personality characteristics." In addition, rapists come in
every relationship to the victim: father, husband, boss, friend, acquaintance,
colleague, stranger, date, fiancé, brother, uncle.

Many myths about the rapist exist. The most common one is that he is a
psychopath; this myth is perpetuated by the fact that these rapists (3%) are
the ones that get media coverage.

A second myth purports that rape is a natural behavior, an inevitable product
of the male's strong sex drive. But in truth, rape is not universal to the
human species. Margaret Mead describes a society where the people do not "...
have any conception of the male nature that might make rape understandable to
them". In addition, the fact that most rapes are premeditated discredits the
image of the poor man who is suddenly overcome by sexual needs society does
not allow him to satisfy.

CONTINUED ON PAGE 13