Lesbian alcoholism support group forms

Linda Lane

"There were times in my ten year
drinking history when I would wake up
and find myself in a strange place
with a woman who was a complete stran-
ger, making me think I had been kid-
napped by a tribe of wild Amazons.
Then I would remember, it was merely
a fantasy of the night before. My eyes
would be swollen, my head throbbing.
‘Oh shit I did it again. What did I
say? Where the fuck am I? Christ I
need a drink.’ Another time I was
drinking and driving, hit broadside by
a truck, a thousand pieces of glass
flew at me, and my chest was slammed
so hard into the steering wheel that
I couldn't breathe and knew I was dead,
"Shit I need a drink.' Or the time I
was busted by two cops who must have
been eight feet tall and weighed 500
pounds each and I was going to take
them both on. Handcuffed, pushed
around, 'in the car girly', taken to
jail. There I was, finally in the
movies, shown to the assistant DA,
my lawyer, and some giggling prisoners.
Sweating and shaking, I watched not a
tough, stick dyke, but a small, sick-
ly, staggering, red-eyed woman who
was falling apart, scared, pale, and
drunk. ‘Oh, shit that's not me: -That's
a cheap B movie that goes on the Late
Show.' I've got to do something. Those
years are lost to the abuses, humilia-
tions, the fights for a drink or be-
cause I was drunk. I was always sick,
I can't remember how long, carrying a
low-grade infection, and my insides
burned for years, with jaundice yel-
lowing my eyes."

The above is a small part of my his-
tory as a lesbian alcoholic. Some
stories are much more bloody and self-
destructive, some die silently among
us without any help.

There is little recognition of the
problem of alcoholism in the lesbian
community. The lesbian alcoholic is
often ignored, humored, laughed at,
alienated and sometimes beaten. She

is not trusted politically, because
drinking gets in the way. She is ir-
responsible and not held accountable
for her actions when she is drunk.

The lesbian alcoholic is your friend,
your lover, yourself, the woman across
the bar that you don't know who could
kill you in her car. Could fuck you
over for a bottle, could hit you, or
disrupt your political project more
effectively than any “government
agent". (In whose interest is it to
keep us drunk?) We are there in your
homes, parties, bars and women's
gatherings.

A study done in Los Angeles has
shown that one in three lesbians
has a serious drinking and drug abuse
problem. That is frightening. The
Denver community is most likely no
different from L.A.

The lesbian alcoholic is caught in
a double bind: she is a woman and
queer. Only recently have traditional
alcoholic treatment facilities begun
to recognize the rise of alcoholism
among women. Most treatments in the
past have been created by men for men
and only recently begun to address
the needs of Native Americans, Blacks,
Chicanos, third world people and
women.

Often, when a lesbian seeks treat-
ment in traditional facilities, she
must keep her lesbianism a secret. If
she doesn't, she is often ostracized,
ignored or her lesbianism is seen as
the root of her problem. A lesbian
cannot get well under those condi-
tions. She needs support, a community,
adequate health care and some alcohol-
free space.

LUNA is a newly formed support group
for lesbian alcoholics, drinking or
recovering, and for their friends,
lovers, or significant others. The
primary focus of LUNA is to support
the lesbian alcoholic in her search
for sobriety and to support friends
and lovers in dealing with alcohol-
ism. LUNA was formed by two lesbian
alcoholics who are trying to stay

Women Installers v. Pa Bell

Susanna Smith

Five women formerly employed as in-
staller-repairers by Mountain Bell
Telephone brought suit against that
corporation on charges of sex discri-
mination in seniority, promotion and
transfer. They went to trial in the
beginning of August before Judge Fine-
silver of the Denver U.S. District
Court. He ruled against the women and
in favor of Mountain Bell, saying that
since the seniority system has been
shown to be a bona fide system (in a
past court case) there was no evidence
of discrimination in transfer or pro-
motion as it was done by seniority.
The women had charged that they would
not be on the bottom rung of the sen-

iority ladder if Mountain Bell's pre-

vious employment practices had been
non-discriminatory. (Women were not
hired into craft positions before
1973.)

The suit against Mountain Bell or-
iginally started in June, 1975 as a
class action suit charging Mountain
Bell with unlawful sex discrimination
practices and policies on behalf of

all women who are employed, were em-
ployed, might have been employed or
might become employed by Mountain Bell
in craft positions. Last year, Sept.
77, Judge Finesilver restricted the
case to charges of discrimination in
the promotion and transfer of the
original plaintiffs in the case.

The five women involved in the suit
were hired as installer-repairers in
the summer of 1974. One week after
1974 ended, they were all given
typing tests, taken “out of the field”
and put to work as clerks and opera-
tors at a $25 per week cut in pay. In
March, they were all laid off. The
plaintiffs felt that Mountain Bell
had merely been using them to fill
their 1974 Equal Employment Opportun-
ity Commission (EEOC) requirement and
was not making a sincere effort to
train and promote women in craft posi-
tions.

Mountain Bell stated that the rea-
sons for the demotions were that a
drop in growth and business forced
employee cutbacks. During the trial,
Barry Roseman, attorney for the plain-
tiffs, showed that the business fore-
casts for Mountain Bell were the same
before the women were hired as when
they were demoted or laid off. Of
those persons downgraded in January,
1975, 60% were women, though women
only made up 23% of the total work-
force of Mountain Bell, mostly in
clerical or operator jobs. Of those
laid off, 50% were women. In another
job category, ‘communications-service,
no one was demoted and some were even
promoted during this time period. This
was a protected job title, and 90% of
those in this job title were men.

During testimony at the trial,
Mountain Bell employees stated that
there were force adjustments: in depar-

MORE ON PAGE 13

sober and are finding it difficult,
given the inadequate and oppressive
alternatives.

We also envision ourselves as an
information source to the women's
community and as providing education
to the traditional treatment centers.
LUNA is for women who need support
for sobriety and for those who want
to educate themselves and help create
an alcohol-free space. The group is
also trying to develop an analysis of
the oppression of alcoholism. Differ-
ent women in the group are interested
in working on a variety of projects
concerning the lesbian alcoholic. The
primary function is that of a support
group for ourselves.

We are not an AA group nor are we
a substitute for AA or any other
treatment for the lesbian alcoholic.
We are vital and alive and developing
ways for ourselves in dealing with
our disease. Anything a woman does to
stay sober is valid.

We need you. Your support and parti-
cipation in our struggle, our fight
to overcome alcoholism is essential.
LUNA meets at 8:00pm on Tuesdays at
1178 Vine (up the back stairs). It is
frightening coming to the realization
of alcoholism. You need not be alone,
we are here, we need you. You don't
have to bear your struggles alone
anymore.

L.U.N.A.

“How can I tell if __
holic?"

"My lover just drinks beer and she
tells me she's not an alcoholic. I
guess she must be right."

"I'm not an alcoholic, I've never
even been picked up for drunken
driving."

There seem to be a whole variety of
questions as to what exactly consti-
tutes alcoholism, what one character-
istic determines if a woman is or is
not. "Is it a ‘preference’ or are you
"born with it?'"

Rather than trying to talk about
"answers", which not too many people
have anyway, it's probably just as
productive to think in terms of possi-
bilities. Is it possible for you to
have a problem with alcohol use? Is
that something you've ever considered?

__ is an alco-

Is it something you've considered so
often you'd rather forget about it
altogether?

Is it possible that you know someone,
a friend or lover, who seems really down
about her drinking? Or too hung over
to have much time for anything else?
Or who drinks and keeps on drinking
after most other women at a gathering
have stopped?

Trite, but very often true, there's
also the woman who drinks by herself.
She comes home, spends two or three
hours getting "high" and then is "com-
fortably" out of things until the next
day, when she'll very likely go
through the same cycle all over again.

Is it anybody else's business that
you or someone you know drinks too
much? Does anybody care if a woman
drinks too much?

For a long time it appeared that no
one did care. For many of us there
was no alcoholic recovery group in
which we could feel comfortable. For
many of us, counselors’ attitudes of
"cure the lesbianism and the alcohol-
ism will take care of itself" became
intolerable. Many of our friends were
insensitive/uninformed about what it
was that alcoholism could do to the
life of a woman.

This summer, a group of lesbians in
the metro area have gotten together to
form L.U.N.A., a lesbian alcoholic
group for drinking alcoholics, sober
alcoholics, friends and lovers of al-
coholics and lesbians who just want to
understand more about what alcoholism
is.

Our group meets weekly (Tuesday
evenings) in the home of one of our
members and we talk... and talk ...
and talk...

Hopefully, out of much support and
mutual sharing, we are together build-
ing a union through which we can meet
the needs of each of the women in the
group, whatever those needs may be.

Our needs, in fact, are variable and
yet many common themes seem to reap-
pear. We've talked about isolation,
feelings of incompetency, anger/rage,
relationships, fear, getting sober
tomorrow, staying sober this week, de-
veloping ways (mental and physical) to
deal with anxiety. We have many issues
yet to cover, but we see the primary
commitment of our group as that of
providing support for any and all les-
bians who want to confront their own
or someone else's alcoholism.

We don't have a "cure" (yet)
we're willing to talk about it.......

(You can contact us at: Woman to
Woman Bookstore, 320-5972, or at
399-3971 or 831-8650.)

Pa Bell, et al, policy decisions

Kim Womantree

It is still easier and cheaper for the big companies like Mountain Bell to
maintain separate female and male labor markets, than to open all jobs to any-
one who qualifies. The white working class men who comprise most of the con-
struction craft tend to identify with the privileged white upper class people
(mainly men) who make the policy decisions. You can still go to union meetings
and hear people complaining and moaning at “reverse discrimination", blaming
their problems in getting transfers and promotions on the women and minorities
who are supposedly threatening their jobs. Meanwhile, the company is still
working everyone on forced overtime because that's cheaper than hiring more
people. However, the five women who filed suit in May, 1975 persuaded the union
to see their own self-interest in the case, and the union at one time requested
to be co-plaintiff in the installers case - an idea which was overruled by
Judge Finesilver in January 1976. So there is a possibility of exposing the
Bakke, seniority, “reverse discrimination” bullshit as the big lie it is by
talking with those who feel victimized by it and by identifying a common enemy.
Meanwhile, there are only 4% women, and about the same percentage of Blacks and
Chicano men in these high-paying, more satisfying craft jobs. And the Mountain
Bell system is doing better every year in terms of its profits. Deregulation
of phone service (other companies can now sell you a phone all your very own
instead of the past practice of customers leasing one from the phone company)
is now in effect. That also means Bell system is gearing up its laboratories at

Western Electric to flood the market with even more hideousnesses to sit on

your table - and incidentally - make bigger profits than before. Haven't you
noticed Bell system repair people and especially service representatives get-
ting more aggressive lately? The pressure is on. But Papa Bell isn't worried -
not too much - yet. It'll take a few years, and more rumbles from underneath
like the women installers suit before he starts to feel shaky on his pile of
money. And every little bit helps.