voices from our lives  
“I Learned Seven Ways To Rob A ‘7-11...”

Marianne Hricko Stewart

On the bus he said, "I'll bet you're  
a psychologist. You have that kind of  
smile." In the taxi, she said, "You're  
really a movie star in L.A., huh?" On  
the plane, he asked, "You a model?  

You remind me of paintings by that  
artist who painted those children with  
sad eyes." She said, "But we can't  
give you a school grant 'til we find  
out how you lived on nothing in 1979.  
Were you a kept woman?" He said, "You  
don't remember when your baby said her  
first word or when she first walked?"  
And soon my daughter will ask, “Mama,  
will I ever see my brother and  
sister?"  

And to all I will try not to say,  
"No. I was in prison for eighteen  
months."  

People say life gets easier once  
you pass thirty. I can't remember one  
day in my life when it wasn't screwed  
up-- with hectic confusion, strange  
people doing stranger things, shattered  
dreams until shell-shock was  
normal-- but somehow, after I hit  

thirty, it finally bottomed-out; bottom  
of the barrel stability. That is,  
until I went to prison.  

And what a learning experience. From  
the time of the witch-hunt trial, from  
the judge’s denial of my stay, and  
handcuffing me in court, and my sitting  
in a "holding tank" for 15 hours,  
from noon to 3 A.M., I learned. Without  
any food, pregnant, hypoglycemic,  
wondering how my 3 and 4 year old  
children were, feeling as though I  
had just died and was looking back  
upon my life, I realized what a brutally  
enlightening experience it was  
going to be.  

The degradation of imprisonment, at  
least in Orange County, starts with  
male court officers “patting you down"  
while you request a female officer.  
They ignore the request, and so does  
your public defender (who's just gotten  
you 1 to 10 years), and they go on  
groping, enjoying themselves. It's  
like the judge has, with a few words,  
made you an animal, or sub-human, and  
every primitive, hostile feeling can  
now be taken out on you-- "Free-for-  
All" time-- Caging-Time.  

Then you proceed to the “holding  
tank,” a place usually crowded and  
containing one open toilet in full  
sight of not only prisoners but male  
and female guards walking by. Also in  
view of janitors, plumbers, electrici-  
ans, attorneys, etc., walking by.  

After fainting and getting dizzy for  
three days, (and after asking to see  

a doctor at least four times a day) I  
was finally taken to the prison “in-  
firmary." It consisted of a locked  
dorm, and housed only 12 women-- a  
segregation unit of protective cust-  
ody and work furlough. If we wanted  
anything (like emergency medical ass-  
istance), we would pound on the door  
for 10 minutes. This gave me a defin-  
ite premonition of what being pregnant  
in prison was going to be like. Exact-  
ly how much the police, judges, pro-  
secutors and society in general cared  
about the unborn-- inside “criminals"  
was evident. And I hadn't even left  
the county jail.  

The sweltering bus to the men's,  
women's and children's prisons on the  
5th day reinforced this belief. It was  
92 outside and hotter on the crowded  
bus. A few times I felt morning sick-  
ness rising although I hadn't been  
able to eat county jail food since  
the first day when I tasted it. Just  
when I thought I was going to faint,  

a breeze would come through the driv-  

-Judith Ogus/Plexus  

er's window, revivingly.  

The California Institute for Women  
is in the middle of cow pastures. In  
spring and summer it has more flies in  
the "Receiving" building where 200  
women are housed than probably Bombay  
or Calcutta. Flies crawl on food be-  
fore you even pick it up in the cafet-  
eria; after that, it is your private  
war. Added to this attraction, the  
cook complains if you ask for a piece  
of veal which is not blue-green and  
cold. (He takes yours and puts it  
back on the grill for someone else.)  
There is no pregnancy diet here, ex-  
cept an extra cup of milk. If you're  
allergic to milk, that's your problem,  
just like everything else. Also, you'd  
better get used to the taste of the  
water (the taste is undrinkable), be-  
cause there's only the sink water to  
drink from 10 P.M. when they lock you  
in and count your body and let you out  
at 6 A.M. Unless prone to morning sick-  
ness, you can get used to it easily  
if you think of all the chemicals that  
went into it to make it safe-- and  
you're desperate.  

You are treated like a child, at  
best. At worst, you are considered to  
be in a pound and treated accordingly.  
Most of the time, however, you are in  
that gray world of being a machine.  
You are being processed; you are being  
"programmed." You do not matter-- ex-  
cept for "body counts" coming out  
right. Whatever you say is irrelevant  
unless to answer a cop's question,  

15  

“...I learned women could be placed  
in mental hospitals if they  
were termed ‘troublemakers’ and ‘radicals’  

by prison officials.”  

preferably in one syllable. Whatever  
you need-- writing paper, blankets,  
toilet paper, sanitary napkins, a  
doctor-- is an irritation to the po-  
lice, and may take all afternoon or  
evening to get. (Doctors take longer).  
Whatever questions you have that can  
be answered in 5 minutes on the phone  
will take three weeks to answer be-  
cause you are not allowed use of  
phones (except for a collect call  
twice a week.) And all calls are mon-  
itored-- even attorney phone calls;  
this would seem to be unconstitutional,  
but nothing is done. Federal judges  
don't care anymore about prisoners than  
state and local judges do. Most were  
prosecutors; a little insight into the  
criminal justice system.  

Male guards pull open your door when  
you are dressing, sitting on the toi-  
let, in nightclothes, etc., under the  
pretense of "searching out homosexual  
activity," or “searching for drugs."  
Drugs are hardly ever found, but voy-  
eurism is one of the fringe benefits  
of being a pig. Since over 80% of the  
women are bisexual or gay, they have  
long known better meeting places. Sol-  
itary confinement is the prison's  
answer to what to do with those  
“apprehended in compromising situa-  
tions"; no amount of solitary confine-  
ment is going to change one's sexual  
preference, but this is how the prison  
soothes society's wish for surface  
appearances. Condemn the condemned.  

One is always guilty until "proven"  
guilty.  

Whenever you have a visit, you are  
strip-searched coming and going. If  
you must go to the bathroom during a  
visit, you are patted down or strip-  
searched upon entering the bathroom,  
and if the guard feels like it,  
watched continually. Even pregnant  
women are treated in this manner.  

Pregnant women are also forced to  
work in hot, dangerous places like  
the kitchens, “cafeteria” (mess hall),  
and "industry." If they refuse, they  
are placed in solitary confinement  
or in segregated housing. All women  
prisoners are forced into slave labor;  
the alternative is solitary confine-  
ment and a lengthened parole date.  
Slave labor is alive and tucked away  
in the 13th Amendment where few know  
it exists-- just as few know over  
4.5 million men, women and children in  
America are exploited under the big  
business of contemporary slavery.  
Texas is one of the biggest money  
makers, but all states and prison  
officials find this business lucra-  
tive. Best of all, these slaves never  
cost anything. So what difference if  
they die? You see, we are all politic-  
al prisoners; we are all prisoners of  
war.  

And by passing more laws against the  
poor and against social programs,  
there will be an unending supply of  
slaves. Prison officials find the re-  
cidivism rate to be up to the stand-  
ards they'd hoped for.  

Who is the criminal in slave states?  
Who is the victim?  

Unique perspectives at the bottom  
raise interesting questions in a  
"land of the free." Like how can it  
be "free" and an example to the world  
when there are so many imprisoned?  
When there are so many concentration  

camps for minorities and the poor?  
And how can it be a "democracy" when  
there are a whole lot more poor than  
wealthy, and all the laws are for the  
wealthy? How can America permit slave-  
ry to flourish within?  

Also, it is estimated that there is  
a 5% error rate in findings of guilt.  
That means 25,000 people are in pris-  
on in America, subjected to much  
worse than I've spoken of, who were  
falsely accused and convicted.  

How can anyone who calls themselves  
Christian, or Jew, or anyone with a  
belief in God, go on turning their  
eyes away from the destruction of  
their brothers and sisters-- guilty  
or not? No god could have meant for  
all these people to be kept in slave-  
ry; some caged 16 hours a day; many  
caged 24 hours a day; humiliated, de-  
graded, embittered, soul-degenerat-  
ing, and subject to the worst disease  
America has ever known: the “criminal  
justice system."  

Yes, prison was a learning exper-  
ience. I learned seven ways to rob a  
7-11, a dozen ways to burglarize,  
eighteen ways to hold up a savings  
and loan. I learned women could be  
placed in mental hospitals for puni-  
tive purposes if they were termed  
"trouble-makers" and "radicals" by  
prison officials. I learned good  
mothers could have their children  
taken away from them without ever be-  
ing present or represented in court,  
even though this is "illegal." But,  
then, judges don't do “illegal”  
things-- they “error” (like in a  
game), or make “mistakes in judge-  
ment." The one word which best de-  
scribes what prison taught me is re-  
fined animosity. Another is more care-  
ful planning. And one learns to appre-  
ciate the fine art of physical and  
emotional violence. One of the most  
negative emotions is patient-vindic-  
tiveness. But everyone learns to sur-  
vive because survival is a form of  
resistance.  

Many prisoners leave wondering how  
they made it out without killing any-  
one. They have memories and dreams  
years later about the claustrophobic  
cement and steel, the forced drug-  
gings, the screams of other prisoners  
when someone hung herself or set her-  
self on fire or decided to cut her  
jugular vein-- and if they're lucky,  
they're not back inside having these  
dreams.  

Well, for certain, we know that  
society is bringing down its own  
"Sevenfold." Not guards (Nazi-like  
as they are), not administrators  
(caught up in the greed of life-  
trade), not judges or prosecutors  
(wallowing in their own power, arro-  
gance and sadism). Society is going  
to reap the whirlwind. It's up to  
each person reading this to make a  
commitment. Nothing will change-- not  
politicians, nor juries, nor prison  
systems-- by wishing it away. As  
part of society, each individual must  
be an activist in destroying the  
prison system before it destroys each  
individual.  

And remember-- the next time you,  
your family and friends are vandal-  
ized, robbed, burglarized, or worse:  
this is your learning experience,  
and you were innocent-- or were you?  

-The Political Economy of Population Control in Latin America