national

National Conference

Conference Overview.

Lori Bradford

May 28-30, over 800 people gathered for the National Conference Against Repression here in Denver, Co., occupied Mexico. The sense of history-in-the-making and excitement shared by conference participants reflects on the importance of the building of political unity between New Afrikan, Puerto Rican and Chicano; Mexicano revolutionary movements; along with the active participation of white North Amerikan anti-Imperialists--in solidarity with, and under the leadership of Third World women and men. In coming together, this conference celebrates the struggle and growth towards political unity and a shared strategy. Unity that must represent the struggle to continue to organize strategies and tactics that will defeat the U.S. Imperialist state, a state rapidly advancing in fascism. Because the Imperialist state is in crisis the state strategy is to mobilize the masses in support of fascism, and eliminate the direct political threat represented by National Liberation Movements and the strategy for building people's war. Total fascism allows for no political dissent.

Just as people's war is being waged against Imperialism outside "U.S. borders" in such countries as Ireland, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and evidenced in the struggle of all South Afrikans against apartheid, that struggle is here, in the U.S. now, because of the colonization of people within state defined borders.

The relationship of an oppressed people to the Imperialist state defines the terms of struggle. When the essence of the relationship is identified as colonialism...then the solution is independence. The liberating strategy for all colonized nations must be anti-Imperialism. The relationship of colonialism between the Chicano/Mexicano, Puerto Rican and New Afrikan peoples within U.S. dominion in part determines the reality of peoples war in Amerika. However, it is not only government terrorism that defines the present reality of war in Amerika, war against Black, Puerto Rican, Chicano/Mexicano, and Native American Liberation Movements. The reality of people's war is also determined by the organized resistance of all oppressed and anti-Imperialist peoples, a shared strategy to end colonialism and defeat U.S. Imperialism worldwide. U.S. power and wealth is built upon the forced occupation and rule of all land and peoples of the "U.S.", much land stolen from Native Americans and Third World Peoples.

The demands for: Independence and Socialism in Puerto Rico; a re-unified and Socialist Mexico (Occupied territory now known as: Texas, Nuevo Mexico, California, Arizona, and parts of Utah, Colorado, and Nevada); Self-Determination for the Republic of New Afrika (Occupied territory now known as: Mississippi, Georgia, North and South Carolina and Alabama)--and for war in Amerika, people's war, served as the basis for political issues and struggle for us at the conference. (Unified in the demand for self-determination for all colonized peoples and independence of their nations through the overthrow of Imperialism.)

To quote from: From Somewhere in the World/Assata Shakur Speaks--Message to the New Afrikan Nation,

Sisters and Brothers, our backs are up against the wall and we have to come out fighting. We have got to come out fighting with knowledge, with a plan, with a strategy for winning. We can't fight like we fought in the past. We can't rely on one or two tactics. We have got to use every tactic imaginable. We can't afford to let our enemy set up the rules of the game...more than any time of our being captives in America, we need an army. We need an army to defend ourselves and we need an army to fight for our liberation...We need a nation. Sisters and brothers, nobody on the face of this earth has more of a need of a right to a nation than we do. We aren't citizens of America, we are victims of America.

In building support for the armed clandestine movements/and armed struggle, the revolutionary movement at large, must be committed to the strategy of non-collaboration with the state. A stand of non-collaboration in the face of grand juries wherever convened. Non-collaboration is necessary to protect and build on armed clandestine movements--people's war and to declare the illegitimacy of the state. These state tactics which criminalize and often incarcerate the political activist, must be met, not only with non-collaboration, but also a strong network of organized support for all Prisoners of Freedom Fighters, political prisoners, for all grand jury resisters.

The focus of the conference was then further connected as solidarity statements were heard from the people's movements in Iran, Palestine, the Dominican Republic and the Congo. Solidarity statements at the conference for the anti-Springbok five, five anti-apartheid demonstrators arrested Sept. 1981 at Kennedy Airport, recognized that the struggle to end U.S. Imperialism and the struggle for Afrikan liberation is a single, shared fight. The control of Afrikan land is central to the struggle in South Africa today, central to the struggle of the Azanian people to defeat white supremacy/colonialism in South Africa. In Schenectady, NY, the Black Liberation Army bombed and destroyed the Eastern Rugby office, leaving a communique which said, “Don't play sports on African Peoples' graves." This militant solidarity gives greater power to the demand for "Victory for African Liberation Worldwide," to the struggle to retake land and lives in the United States.

Women's Workshop

Lori Bradford

There were three speeches at the Repression on Women workshop--Priscilla Falcon who works with El Comite Contra La Repression, Josefina Rodriquez from the National Committee to Free The Puerto Rican Prisoners Of War, and Chinganji Akinyela a member of the Black Human Rights Coalition. The workshop was structured to present an understanding of the role of women in their movements, and also to struggle to place the role and struggle of women in the context of their nation struggle for liberation.

Through the leadership of Black, Chicano/Mexicano and Puerto Rican women and men, in workshops and speeches, the tactics of a racist, classist, imperialist government were exposed in both the past and present history of the United States. The conference presented workshops on: grand juries, repressive legislation, police repression, prisoners, repression on labor, prisoners of war, paramilitary white supremacist organizations, U.S. terror internationally, repression on women and repression on youth. All these brought into clearer focus necessary strategies for resistance and for political and social change - the move towards socialism.

The fact of these different movements' combined efforts, in organizing in solidarity with this conference demonstrates the practical work and cooperation necessary, to forge real unity between different National Liberation Movements and to show strength and unity - an organized plan for resistance - against oppression.

What follows is an account of the Repression on Women workshop - and then some personal responses by individual women to both that workshop and the conference in general.

Marty Mathers

Priscilla Falcon gave a history of the women from the Mexican Valley starting with the pre-Columbian period. The peoples of the Mexican Valley exerted a great cultural influence over a wide area extending even into Guatemala. One such group was the Aztecs. Their deities included both gods and goddesses. The women of the heavens were in direct contact with earth as they ruled the elements, like Chalchihuitlicue, the rain goddess. Some even say that Chicomecoatl the corn mother was first mother to all peoples of the Mexico Valley.

A Call To Resist Imperialism And Fascism

She protected women who died in childbirth. In Mexico City there is a shrine to all women who have died in childbirth. They are honored as are warriors who have died in battle.

With the Spanish invasion, women lost much of their status. Nevertheless, they played an extensive role in the struggle to free Mexico from Spain. One example was Dona Maria Josepha Ortiz who was caught trying to incite insurrection. She was very blunt with her captors saying to the soldiers around her, "do you know why I was captured?" She ignored their unresponsiveness and said "Because I have a country I honor. And to remove the whip which has tormented our backs and the backs of our children." The captain of the guard threatened to kill her for exciting the soldiers and she replied, "It would be an honor to shed my blood in defense of my ideals." There were many more women Priscilla named in the struggle against Spain.

The 1900's began with a radical note with the formation of the Mexican Liberal Party by the anarchist Enrique and Ricardo Flores Magon. Part of the Party's program was the development of women. Estella Ramirez, a socialist labor union organizer, had read Magon's tract on women and became a supporter of the Party. She formed a mutual aid society which with dozens of others like it helped to ease the problems of survival facing most Chicana/Mexicanas.

In the 1940's more job opportunities opened up but the Chicano/Mexicano population was under siege by the police and armed forces during the Zoot Suit wars.

Cecilia Romero is one of these women, her four daughters and two sons were inspired by her early participation in the Chicano movement. Her youngest son is Ricardo Romero, who because of his refusal to cooperate with the Grand Jury investigation of the Puerto Rican Independence struggle, was jailed for two years. Today he is the head of the Chicano/Mexicano commission of the Movimiento Liberación Nacional (MLN).

Priscilla ended her presentation by saying she had tried to present a short historical analysis of women's role in the Chicano/Mexicano struggle from two perspectives, that of the traditional context and that of the historical context. She continued to say, “The right to self-defense is the means of self-determination.”

In the 1830's the U.S. was a rising industrial nation looking for "cheap land" to expand into. The northern part of Mexico - California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas and parts of Colorado were seen as prime targets especially considering the sparseness of the Mexican population. The population nevertheless resisted the colonization, and in the 1950's as today when the job market slacked off, the INS (Immigration and Naturalization Service) began their intimidations as a smoke screen for an ailing economy. Women still organized, but too often, as happened in one garment strike, the women leaders of the strike were deported to Mexico.

The 1960's was a decade of radicalism from the massive grassroots organizing around the Vietnam War to the reawakening of the Chicano movement. The concept La Familia was very strong in the struggle. Whenever men emerged into the spotlight there were women to inspire them. Maria Teresa Focky Mountain News that Chicana/Mexicanas see themselves together with their men in the struggle to defeat U.S. imperialism. It will not be a short struggle but one they have to prepare their children to take up. Thanks to their parents they still have a close-knit family which has enabled them to survive and they will continue to survive until they see the socialist re-unification of Mexico.

Josefina Rodriquez was the next speaker. She began by saying that women make up half of society and that women are not liberated. Many women see their husbands as the source of the problem but need to look further. The government is the one who decides the rights of the people. "Revolutionary women realize that the struggle for equal rights has no meaning unless it's linked to the liberation of our nations." She said imperialism is the enemy of all women. Women's role must be complementary and not competitive with men.

Wherever there is repression, revolutionary women have resisted. She pointed out examples such as the women in Zimbabwe and Vietnam. She spoke of the many women who through the 400 years of Black struggle have been leaders of the movement, of Puerto Rican and Cuban women, too. She continued saying the women must create a vanguard movement capable of mobilizing solidarity with progressive white workers who have not been bought out by the state. The vanguard must also deal with the problem of oppressed nationalities and develop a strategic unity with these forces for in the decade of the 80's the very survival of their people will depend on this unity. “Companera," Josefina said, "History charges you with tremendous responsibility. Your support, the support of people everywhere is of utmost importance in our (words missing from tape) to conquer national liberation. It is important...that in the decade of the 80's, colonization be put to rest. You have a tremendous role to play, accept the challenge."

Chinganji Akinyela was the last to speak. She began by saying “Free the land!" She then read a quote from a women's organizing pamphlet. "We are mothers, sisters, warriors, queens, teachers, healers, builders and protectors. We are New African women determined and committed to total independence of all African people everywhere."

From African women's first contact with slavery to abortion propaganda and forced sterilization, they have tried to control their destiny. Under slavery they were continually under the threat of rape and having their children sold out of their arms. Harriet Tubman was the most vivid example of resistance not only freeing herself but returning.

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Mama Rag August, 1982 - Page 11