11

But I’m Fighting— | Won’t Let Them Win.”

I'd say the majority of women at the
P.O. are looking at it with some sort
of permanency instead of looking out
as to how to get on to something bet-
ter, but wanting to make things bet-
ter at work so the stay will be a
little easier. Ellen, don't you ever
feel at work like you are in a battle
zone?

Ellen: Oh yeah. And sometimes when I
see a real casualty, like someone who
gets fired who shouldn't have been
fired, then I really feel like, "oh
shit, let me out of here, I don't
want to play this game anymore, I
want to go home and not worry about
this." It really is a battle zone and
it doesn't have to be that way. It
doesn't have to be as bad as it is.
It could actually be a pleasant place
to work—the work itself isn't that
bad, the day in/day out physical la-
bor is not that bad—it's the manager—

says "I can't do it, but I'll support
you." That's very important. The

need for childcare probably never
dawned on him, he may have been aware
of it, but it was never a nitty grit-
ty issue for the union.

BMR: But when the stewards would han-
dle all these sick leave and AWOL
(absent without leave) grievances
from women...

Ellen: But it wasn't from the view-
point that the babysitter wasn't a-
vailable. Even myself—I remember
when I'd call in sick or late to work,
it wasn't that I was having babysit-
ter problems, it was like..."oh,
you're right, my outside life is in-
terfering with work." The attitude I
took was "Oh I'm sorry I let that
happen. I won't do it again." Well,
that's bullshit. I finally realized,
that's bullshit, and I'm not going

Photo from a women's caucus meeting. Ellen is shown far right.

to apologize for it. It's a fact of
my life, and a fact of life for so
many women there. Really, if you
think about it, it's only up until
five years ago that women have come
into the postal workforce. So it's
going to take a while. For a woman
to realize what the problems are,
working ten hours a day, overtime
all the time, for a woman to finally
say, “hey, wait a minute, this isn't
necessary, we've got to do something
about it..."

That's the reason I got the wo-
men's caucus off the ground—to give
women the feeling that there is some-
thing there, a responsive organiza-
tion that can do some things to
change this feeling of powerlessness.
Maybe someone wouldn't ever want
to come to meetings and get involved,
but at least psychologically they
know something is there that count-
ers that feeling of helplessness and
frustration. If it's effective, the
response from women will be there.
Right now, childcare is my gut level
thing with the caucus—that's some-
thing that can be done, it's not im-
possible and it's so necessary.

BMR: Do you ever see childcare as
something people would strike for?

Ellen: Not yet, but yeah, that may
have to come. As far as the power
structure of the membership goes,
most of the power lies with men who
have been there a long time. I have
a feeling like if today a referendum
vote was sent out to incorporate the
women's caucus officially into the
union, that the vote would come back
no. That's my feeling. I may be dead
wrong. But a lot of men are threat-
ened by the women's caucus and a lot
of men belong to the union. And the
working women right now are just be-
ginning to recognize their power,
let alone use it. And if we ever
did... we've got a lot of shit to
get through because of that struggle.
I really have great admiration for
a lot of the women down there, and
that struggle they go through. That
is what makes it worthwhile—the
people.

Like your committee's report on sex-
ual harassment was excellent, but

Women will say to me, “I don’t have any kids.
Childcare might be a good idea,
but it's not that important.”
You can't say to them, “Well, fuck you.”

it's not going to change anything
overnight, but at least it's there.
Women can read it and say, "Wow. Hey
Ah, the other night someone came up
and did this to me." It's a slow
process of kind of changing a con-

sciousness, say around sexual harass-

ment, and getting someone to the
point where they are going to do
something about it. But making that
transition from just accepting it to
the point of fighting it—hey, that's beautiful. And from there on
it's easy, as long as there is a
place for them to get active.

My biggest fear is that we are go-
ing to get all caught up in the
women's caucus and not accomplish
anything, like the flower is there,
but no roots—that only enforces
the frustration and I don't want to
see that happen.

BMR: I just wonder how much we can
chip away at the majority of men who
don't want women there at all.

Ellen: A lot of them haven't thought
about it like that.

BMR: Well they think about it in
that they are irritated.

Ellen: They are irritated, but they
haven't thought it through.

BMR: One guy comes up and says to
me, "Why should I support childcare,
my wife does her job and takes care
of the kids?"

Ellen: I've run up against that too.
So I say, “If something happened to
your wife, what would you do?" You
can't take it as a large philosoph-
ical issue, it's a very basic, per-
sonal need. When you can bring it
down to where the person can see
themselves in that situation, it's
not as difficult.

A lot of men don't know, don't
even understand, what it's like to
be sitting with two kids an hour
before reporting time with no baby-
sitter. That's something where you
have to talk the language. It's not
their reality.

BMR: Do you ever hear that from
women, too?

Ellen: Yeah, a lot of women will say
to me, “Hey, I don't have any kids—
childcare might be a good idea, but
it's not that important, so I'm not
going to get involved." You can't
say, "Well, fuck you." You have to
say, “Hey, you are a working woman,
aren't you? As a working woman you
are involved, whether you know it
or not. And the women's caucus is
basically working women—women work-
ing together on the problems that
affect us." We have to work togeth-
er; the powers that be are not con-
cerned with what we are concerned
with, so we have to do it ourselves.

BMR: One thing that would worry me
about the women's caucus is if the
only direction it took was like that
meeting we had with Pat Schroeder

(a Congresswoman from Denver)—like
just getting pats on the back from
legislators who don't pat you on the
back when it comes to certain legis-
lation we might need.

I want to see childcare at the post office.

I know the union realistically has
to deal a certain amount with poli-
ticians and legislators, but people
at work are real mistrustful of that.

Ellen: Yeah, so am I. I was glad to
have met Pat Schroeder. At first I
thought like, “Oh, wow, Schroeder
wants to meet with the women's cauc-
us." Then I thought, “Wait a min-
ute, why am I saying, ‘oh wow'?”

She is a woman who is into a situa-
tion that a lot of women aren't, so
she's got a perspective from that
angle and that's interesting to know.
She has gotten into the power struc-
ture and said, "You are going to
have to change. I'll accommodate you,
somewhat," and certainly she does.
You asked me about women supervisors
or women postmasters—they all get
in there and say, "I'll change, I'll
adapt. Thanks for letting me be
here."

BMR: Since you've become a steward
and restored some people's hope for
unionism by showing a strong, effec-
tive leadership, have you gotten
that at all—that pressure to com-
promise and quiet down?

Ellen: No, and that's one of the
things I like about being a steward.
I do what I do out of my convictions.
A good steward commands respect, not
demands respect like supervisors do
or some officials from the union do.
How effective I can be comes from
how respected I am by my co-workers.

One of the major problems with
union leadership is that they are
fighting for things they are out of
touch with. What's difficult is
when you get that foot off your neck
to be able to remember, still, what
it feels like so you can get it off
other people's. There you are and
it's real easy to say, “Well, bye.
What's your problem? Why are you be-
ing so miserable? I don't have any
problems. I'm fine." That's why I want to stay
a steward. If I can handle all the
problems that people have coming
through grievances, and if I can
contribute to setting up a childcare
center and getting that done, I'll
feel good. Get that done... and so
many other things... god... you know—
I find myself reading women’s publi-
cations, which I had never done be-
fore, and they connect all these
larger issues. All of a sudden it
dawned on me that they all lead back
to the same thing—all these isolat-
ed incidents aren't so isolated.
Sometimes just thinking about it is
so overwhelming—society's got to
change. And I really understand why
people are alienated—they just
don't want to worry about it anymore,
just worry about the mortgage pay-
ment or the rent.

I find that in myself, too. Like
when I took the wallpaper off my
wall, “Hey, I don't want to think
about anything but my wall." Because
it's there, it's defined, and only
so big and I can deal with it. I
can get a square foot done in an
hour, you know. But then I realize,
hey, I don't have time to be alien-
ated.

———
Preliminary information released by the Coalition of Labor Union Women
Center for Education and Research indicates that women union members are
a far cry from achieving an equal place in the leadership of their union
organizations. The information is part of

preliminary information com-
piled in a groundbreaking study begun last fall by the Coalition of Labor
Union Women (CLUW).

The study, "The Empowerment of Union Women," is an 18-month
national monitoring and resource project addressing the limited roles of women in
American unions. The study will document findings
and develop a series
of policy recommendations for unions and union members. In addition, it
will publish a "first-of-its-kind" resource and training manual
for all women union members.

Final results and policy recommendations will be forthcoming
sometime at the end of this year. For more information, contact
Elyse Glassberg,
CLUW, 15 Union Square, New York, NY 10003.