Just What Can Feminists Afford?

Marina Franchild

BMR feels that this article raises important issues that need to be opened
for discussion. We are printing it as a struggle column although it is con-
siderably longer than our usual struggle columns. We hope that printing this
will encourage more discussion around these important issues. Letters to
Marina Franchild can be sent to her through BMR, 1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO.
80206. We will forward personal letters to her, unopened, if you indicate
on the outside of the envelope. Other letters that are sent to us for Marina
Franchild without being so marked, and letters sent to BMR concerning these
issues will be opened by the BMR staff, considered for publication unless we
are asked not to publish, and be sent to Marina as well, unless we are asked
not to send them. We hope to hear from you.

Introduction

In order for patriarchal society to become catalyzed into a feminist one, 
nothing short of a comprehensive political transformation of the established
order will be adequate. Therefore, the principal consideration of the Women's
Liberation Movement must remain a commitment to self-determination, both as a
goal and as a process; a radical perspective must not be abandoned to a re-
formist perspective - the latter doing little to substantially rearrange the
status quo.

Our experiences have taught us that there are no easy answers to the ques-
tions that arise whenever feminists attempt to find methods which will enable
women to achieve and maintain this autonomy. It is generally accepted, how-
ever, that any solution would have to provide for the development and mobil-
ization of women into a force which will be greater than that thrust upon us
by our oppressors who resist political change.

Those in power rely upon our political inertia as one major stabilizing
factor that permits them to control our lives. Therefore, if we are to accom-
plish a wrenching rearrangement of political power we initially must: (1) de-
velop a significant amount of unity amongst ourselves - otherwise we will re-
main defeated; (2) learn to recognize the oppressor in all his manifestations,
otherwise we will continue to be infiltrated; and (3) strive to avoid collab-
oration with him that we anticipate will lead to the dilution and absorption
of our values and struggles into his structure - otherwise we will be co-opt-
ed. (We have a responsibility to become politically educated so that we can
astutely make these evaluations.)

These are the necessary preconditions for self-determination. Without them
we are lost.

To briefly elaborate on pre-condition (1): In our early stages of revolu-
tionary development we must be concerned with the shaping of attitudes and
actions that deal with the differences within our constituency - all women.
Although feminists must continue to struggle under the common banner of sis-
terhood - deriving strength from our acknowledged commonality - we are not
all the same; pretending that we are does not make it so. On the contrary,
this blindness to fact impedes our progress by intensifying frustrations al-
ready felt by women who can in no way forget that they are the "have-nots",
while other women are the relative “haves”.

We desperately need, within our movement, a reorientation of political val-
ues that seeks to conform to our revolutionary vision before the revolution:

We must all work - especially privileged women - to ensure the elimination of
class and race hierarchy (as established by the patriarchy) from within our
movement. Our revolutionary struggle will not survive the disunity caused
by hypocrisy. Moreover, we will be unbelievable to non-movement women.

To briefly elaborate on pre-condition (2): The oppressor will appear in his
conservative, liberal - even "feminist" disguises. (e.g. men's liberation).
However, we must understand that all males at all times have one common inter-
est - to maintain the subjugation of “their” women for the endlessly varied
uses they have for our productivity.

To briefly elaborate on pre-condition (3): Those in power have confidence
that we will continue to solicit their approval, and thus acquiesce to their
authority. Therefore, if we are to be politically successful, we have to
function independently of establishment sanction while formulating methods of
self-determination.

Unfortunately, trends which overlook these preconditions are abundant and in-
creasing within our movement. This has led to too many instances of self-
aggrandizement and opportunism, which contribute to a loss of radical perspec-
tive.

Last January, four lesbian feminists - June Arnold, Parke Bowman, Charlotte
Bunch and Bertha Harris, agreed to do an interview with Lois Gould which led
to the self-glorifying article appearing in the New York Times, January 2,
1977, entitled "Creating a Women's World." Not only did these women expose
certain aspects of the Women's Liberation Movement (WLM) and women's vulner-
abilities to establishment scrutiny, they flagrantly misrepresented other
aspects. In addition, they played themselves off against what they considered
the "extremist" element within the WLM while pandering to establishment val-
ues. Their article, as a breach of principle, is particularly aggravating to
one of the fundamental concerns of lesbian separatists - which is to eliminate
media co-optation from the WLM, thus preventing our movement from becoming
marketable within the patriarchy.

Throughout this “second wave" of feminism, many feminists have concerned
themselves with the issues of establishment co-optation and opportunism with-
in the WLM.

In their 1973 essay entitled "Academic Feminists and the Women's Movement",
Ann Leffler, Dair L. Gillespie and Elinor Lerner Ratner describe the power
which is accorded to those feminists with "advantageous institutional connec-
tions". They state that these women acquire a disproportionate amount of
power in the WLM because women who are in positions of power - both profes-
sionally and economically - are able to obtain resources unavailable to non-
professional, less privileged women active in the grassroots women's struggle.
At the same time, they continue, these women escape accountability - "formally
they are responsible only to their colleagues.”

Furthermore, Leffler, Gillespie and Ratner assert that these resources allow
such women to manipulate communication channels between the WLM and the pub-
lic, and "exert undue influence on both ideological and structural concerns”
within the WLM. They call such women "an elite".

This phenomenon is described as follows:

-- BUR

Without the existence of a movement which potentially taps massive dis-
content, the establishment would have no use for female academics. They
depend on the movement's existence, but cool it down and get rewarded for
doing so. They peddle conservative platitudes as movement analyses. They
use the movement's momentum to advance their own goals. There is a word
for such behavior: opportunism. (p. 21.)

-- With their media contacts and their credentials of expertise, aca-
demic feminists have a better crack at the target population than the
"civilian" movement does. So, they can legitimize their pre-eminence to
the movement, by claiming special privileged communication with the
masses...They get away with this claim precisely because it's false. The
communication flows only one way: They address the People, but the People
have neither organizations, nor media, for formal means to reply. (p. 8)

Although Leffler, Gillespie and Ratner's essay focuses on academic women,
they do not limit their analysis to that group:

+++ our description of academic feminists applies to other groups with
advantageous institutional connections - e.g., media women, entertainers,
non-academic professionals, Democratic and Republican party regulars,
union leaders, etc. It applies, though less strongly, to women with left
connections - e.g., Socialist Workers Party and New American Movement mem-
bers. In all these cases, the women involved mainly remain subordinate and
responsible to male hegemony. But once they enter the women's movement,
their institutional or social connections give them greater access to pol-
itically useful resources than non-affiliated movement women have. For our
argument, that's all that matters. (pp. 4-5)

I agree with these women's analysis (see their complete essay for comprehen-
sive understanding) and feel that certain aspects generally do describe dy-
namics existing between Daughters Inc. and the WLM, Daughters and non-movement
women, which must be looked at. (I, of course, recognize that there are differ-
ing degrees of individual responsibility amongst those four women.)

It is both recognized and appreciated that Daughters Inc. has published many
books by women who could not, or would not have wanted to be published by es-
tablishment houses. Also, it is a valuable contribution that Daughters only pub-
lishes women. Moreover, Daughters has brought to women the reality of some wo-
men's lives that would otherwise not be available. For example, Nancy Lee
Hall's A True Story of a Drunken Mother, May Hobb's Born to Struggle, Linda
Marie's I Must Not Rock, etc.

Although these, and other, contributions of Daughters Inc. must be acknowledged,
I must take issue with those views expressed to the Times. I feel that it
is my feminist duty to hold the feminists who expressed these views accountable
to the WLM. In the past, the outcries against co-option and opportunism have
been essentially ignored by privileged women who participated in these proc-
esses. Current protests from radical women, such as myself, must receive
their due, respectful consideration. Therefore, I expect my grievances to be
taken seriously; I expect rectification.

My Political Intention

The bulk of my article is directed to these four women specifically; however,
the political issues raised are by no means exclusive to these women. There-
fore, I not only expect a political response from these women, I am also hoping
that my article will catalyze further discussion of these pressing issues with-
in the WLM so that political resolution eventually may be achieved.

A direct consequence of my covering these issues in relative depth, while
tending to the demands of survival is that I have not been able to get this out
to the movement prior to this time. Insofar as political situations require
prompt responses I apologize to all concerned for my lateness. Nevertheless, I
feel these issues are as relevant today as they were last January.

This portion of my article is directed specifically to: JUNE ARNOLD, PARKE
(PATTY) BOWMAN, CHARLOTTE BUNCH, AND BERTHA HARRIS. Again, it concerns itself,
as stated, with issues that affect the entire movement.

For the reasons given in my Introduction I find you politically irresponsible
in granting Lois Gould an interview which you knew was intended for New York
Times publication.

Furthermore, none of you presently embrace lesbian separatist politics. It is
not clear whether three of you have ever considered yourselves lesbian separa-
tists; and Charlotte Bunch is described by Lois Gould as having been to “ex-
treme separatism and back". It is therefore inexcusable that you made defin-
itions and judgments about lesbian separatism to a partially male audience, to
heterosexual women who are politically naive, to a heterosexually defined
interviewer somewhat antagonistic to the WLM - again, in the establishment media.

This action is seen as not only undermining to movement autonomy but politi-
cally disloyal as well. No matter what political disagreements you may have
with any feminists, it is not sound for you to expose these differences to a
public audience. Intra-movement controversies must be dealt with internally
through movement channels should they exist, and if not, they must be created.
However, you did not only reveal these disagreements, you discredited us and
politically disowned us. It is reprehensible that you referred to lesbian sep-
aratists as "extremists at large in the feminist press, and elsewhere”.

Lois Gould's attitude and your unexpected flippancy further aggravate this
situation. I who somewhat know you as political individuals (your histories in
the movement) cannot tell, from this article, when you are being politically
serious or when you are being jive. I have spoken with other lesbian separa-
tists about this and we feel that you did not consistently present your genuine
political beliefs to the Times; but rather, presented a palatable version - some
of the time - for reasons of personal security and respectability.

If this is what you have done, there is no excuse for obtaining your respec-
tability at the expense of other women - particularly lesbians and lesbian sep-
aratists. I expect you to rectify this situation. How did you address the pro-
blem that some women readers would not know where either you or the WLM are at
politically, and would therefore see the Times article as an accurate repre-
sentation - word-for-word - of your politics; by inference, WLM politics? It is
not even clear how many of you actually are connected with Daughters Inc. Ac-
cording to the Times all of you are associated with Daughters. Is this true?
In what capacities?

If your politics genuinely are as presented, then you have taken on establi-
shment conservatism as your politics, while at the same time, falsely main-
taining vestiges of radicalism.

I am assuming that the Times article, as printed, contains enough distor-
tions and deletions to alter the meaning of your words. I am also assuming
that none of you had editorial power over the finished product, and that Lois
Gould had minimum editorial power, if any. However, because June Arnold had
publicly expressed the opinion that any time women use the male publishing
process we will be used and ripped off; it is reasonable to assume that the
male press - especially the New York Times - would follow suit. You should
have anticipated corruption of your words and safeguarded against it.
You are therefore held accountable for the entire contents of "Creating A Wo-
men's World" - paraphrases as well as quotes.

continued on next page