Lost Lesbians of Literature

Natalie Clifford Barney and Renée Vivien, French Poets.

Having spent a year at La Sorbonne, gotten my B.A. in French Literature and gone  
on to one year of graduate study, I thought that I knew a good deal about French  
poetry. Imagine my surprise when while doing research in an extraordinary book,  

I discovered two lesbian poets whose work impressed me deeply. I had studied all  
these years and had never heard of these women.

My information comes from a remarkable book: Sex Variant Women in Literature  
A Historical And Quantitative Survey, by Jeannette H. Foster, PH.D. Vantage Press,  
New York, 1956.* (all references except where otherwise noted will be from this book).  
This volume can be consulted at the University of Denver Library. Dr. Foster  
covers the entire literary field (up to 1956). Her section on German Literature is  
particularly good, but as a French student I will concentrate on my two pet  
discoveries.

All of the following analysis is based more or less on Dr. Foster's study, as  
neither of these poets is available here in either French or English. With one  
exception: Dr. Foster gives no translations, so the interlinear transliterations  
are my own. For them I beg indulgence, for I'm no poet.

Strangely enough, The Songs of Bilitis, a rather anemic imitation of Ancient  
Greek styles, has been and is popular among lesbians, while Natalie Barney and Renée  
Vivien remain unknown and unpublished. Yet both women were contemporaries of Louys  
(the man who wrote The Songs). At first they even gave him manuscripts to criticize  
seeing in him ** ‘the champion of the young girls of the future'.... They found him  
more inclined to admire "jeux latins et voluptés grecques" [Latin games and Greek  
pleasures] than the ‘exagérées préoccupations' of "damnées Enneés" (damned women, a  
common French term for lesbians). *Zbid, p.154.

The lesser, from a literary viewpoint, was Natalie Clifford Barney,  

an American ...who was able to live independently in Paris and maintain  
her own yacht... she had by the late nineties made contact with Pierre  
Louys.... In the garden of her luxurious Paris residence she built a  
Temple of Friendship, and welcomed there many of the literary personalities  
of the day.* Ibid, pp.154-155.

The only two volumes available are Aventures de L'Esprit, [Adventures of the  
mind] a sort of record of her relationships with the literary notables of her time,  
and Actes et Entractes [Acts and Intermissions]: four poetic dramas and some poems.

One of these, "Couple," is a descriptive and sensuous picture of two lovers:

"Se tenant par la taille-- ainsi que deux bouleaux —  
(their arms around each other's waists--like two birch-trees)  
Reliés par leurs branches--  
(Entwining their branches--)  
Elles vont, ondulant leurs têtes et leurs hanches...  
(they pass, swaying their hips and their heads...)  
Elles sont dans la nuit ainsi qu'au seuil d'un temple,  
(they enter the night like the threshold of a mysterious temple...)  
Si quelque homme, épian ce couple insidieux,  
(if some man, seeing this disturbing pair,)  
De son mépris le couvre...  
(let him cover them with his contempt...)  
Qu'il sache que tout don de beauté plaît aux dieux:  
(let him know that all gifts of beauty are pleasing to the Gods;)  
Que les lois ordinaires  
(that such ordinary standards)  
Ne peuvent s'appliquer à ces noces lunaires...  
(could never apply to these lunar embraces...)  

Elles ont, d'un élan plus divin qu'animal  
(with a passion more divine than animal, they have)  
Dans les vastes silences  
(in the deep freedom of secrecy)  
Joint avec des baisers leurs ressemblances,  
(Joined with their kisses their similarity,)  
Toutes leurs ressemblances.  
(their complete similarity.)  
Et par delà la terre, au-delà du bien et du mal,  
(and beyond the world, beyond good, and beyond bad,)  
Elles vont, diaphanes  
(They pass, transparent)  
ET troublantes, et ceux qui les jugent profanes  
(and those who think ill of them)  
Sont eux-mêmes profanes. * Ibid, [Barney, N. C., Actes et Entractes. Paris  
(are themselves ill) Senset, 909] p.157. 

"Of greater literary importance is Renée Vivien [Pauline Tarn, whose poetry has  
been pronounced most perfect in form of any French verse written in the first  
quarter of the century, and this quality is the more remarkable in that her native  
language was not French but English. As she died at thirty-two, its quantity also  
deserves mention, for her collected poems run to five hundred pages; besides...  
two volumes of ‘prose-poems' which a decade later would have been called free verse,  
a prose satire, and an autobiographical novel." Ibid., p.158.

"Vivien was more openly lesbian than any woman so far encountered in Dr.  
Foster's book, but the few selections and biographical notes found in anthologies  
are careful to conceal this fact,... so she will be discussed here at some  
length." Ibid., p. 159.

I must refer you to Dr. Foster's competent study for this excellent discussion.  

4 continued on page 6