hot briefs

PATCO Still Strong

Despite all the hoopla about Raygun's support for Solidarity in Poland, a look at his treatment of striking air traffic controllers gives a reality check. Since Aug. 3rd the government has redoubled its efforts to bust PATCO. The Justice Dept. went after the union in every federal court in the country and as a result, 70 members have been charged with a felony for striking.

In addition, honorably discharged veterans are being denied return to the military, HUD has issued a memo saying that any forbearance agreement on any mortgages will not be continued for air traffic controllers. Women controllers have been approached by the FBI and told, "If you don't return to work, we will say you were an unfit mother and you can't keep your children."

Rape-Programmer

The parents of Stephanie Riethmiller paid nationally known "cult deprogrammer" Ted Patrick $8,000 to help them kidnap and deprogram their daughter because of her relationship with her woman roommate. The deprogramming involved handcuffing and repeatedly raping her for 6 days before the police found them. Stephanie is suing her parents, Ted Patrick and 3 others, all involved in torturing her, for 2.75 million.

El Pueblo Unido...

The American Civil Liberties Union has filed a lawsuit on behalf of La Raza Unita Party in Los Angeles, CA. Documents obtained from police show it had infiltrated the party from 1972-79, and spied on the United Farm Workers union, The National Lawyers Guild, the Peoples' College of Law (a non-profit university attended primarily by black, third world and working class students) and the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Educational Fund. Spying took place despite the adoption of guidelines in 1976 “insuring" that the LAPD was investigating only criminal activity. "Signing a petition," said one party member, "is not sabotage, and trying to get a third political party on the ballot is not terrorism."

Losing Patients

Dr. Henry Lyons, a psychiatrist who counsels students at the University of Florida, says premarital sex is a sign of mental illness and usually leads to suicide, drug and alcohol abuse, or promiscuity. Fortunately, he says, only a tiny percentage of his patients have engaged in this practice, and the number is dwindling.

Long Overdue

Working women in Canada have won a major victory as a result of the long postal worker strike there this summer. As part of the new contract won, women have the right for 17 weeks paid maternity leave at 93% of their salary. After years of denial, childbearing responsibilities are finally being recognized as more than hers alone, in Canada at least.

Unsung Heroines

Anna Walentynowicz, the woman credited with starting the Polish Solidarity Movement, was probably one of the first of close to 10,000 Solidarity members arrested in Poland in the middle of Dec. Walentynowicz was fired from her job as a crane operator in 1980 for advocating that unions be independent of state and communist party affiliation. It is estimated that one third of Solidarity leaders are women.

Jamas Sera Vencido

Villa Sin Miedo (Town Without Fear), one of hundreds of squatter communities in Puerto Rico, has been repeatedly attacked by the police since its founding. The cops first cut the electricity and tried to cut off the water supply. In Nov. police opened fire on the farm, wounding one man in the leg. Two women who tried to talk the police into leaving were dragged by the hair, then interrogated and beaten for four hours. Eight land takeovers took place in the NE last year, Villa Sin Miedo is the only one on public land to survive, and continues to house 250 families. "Our homes, children and future are here," said one resident, "We are not going to let anyone throw us out at the whim of some rich person."

* worth was won by women at

Macy's Faces Facts

Another victory for women on the issue of comparable pay was won at Macy's "Shop on Union Square" in San Francisco. The union contended that the women have substantially the same job duties, skills, knowledge and responsibilities as employees of Macy's "Tiger Shop", "Lifestyle", and "Men's Suits" departments. The total award exceeded $300,000 plus interest.

End Of An ERA?

After many years of work and effort by hundreds of thousands of women, the Government has told women what it thinks of the ERA, also known as the Equal Rights Amendment. A Federal Judge ruled this month that the extension on the deadline for passage of the ERA was illegal. This ruling has quashed all possibility for the amendment. NOW is appealing the ruling.

Burning For Profit

2,500 people rallied in front of City Hall in Hoboken, N.J. to protest the criminal arson that has taken 13 lives, mostly black and Latino children. The arson began after the passage of the Vacancy Decontrol Law, which gives real estate large tax breaks to build condominiums. The people are charging that the landlords are burning the buildings for profit.

Another Victory, Another Fight Ahead

Feminists have rallied in defense of an Australian woman who was given a life sentence after she murdered her husband. The woman killed her husband after 27 years of brutality to her and her 5 daughters, who he also sexually assaulted. Feminists are urging reform in the laws about murder and are hoping for a victory like this year's. After a long public campaign by feminists, another woman and her son were released. They had been sentenced to life in 1975 for the killing of the woman’s husband after a lifetime of brutality.

Big

-Bulldozer

Women For A Day

The Congresswomen's Caucus has added 46 men to its membership list. The group reported it changed its women-only policy as a way of gaining more revenue and more political clout. They're probably right about both counts, but in whose interest are they planning on serving?

Credits

Resources for this month's Hot Briefs include: The Progressive, The Guardian, Worker's Viewpoint, Broadsheet, People's World, Hersay, Amazon, Northwest Passage, Speculum Speaks, The New Indicator, Matrix, Worker's World, Westword, Kinesis, and The Cincinnati Enquirer. They were compiled by Susan Goding.

Mama Rag, January, 1982 - Page 5