State Conference Lacks Politics

Tea Schook

June 3, 4, and 5, over 3000 women  
and a handful of men attended the  
Colorado Women's Conference held in  
Boulder at the University of Colorado.  
Participants came from all over the  
state of Colorado to formulate a Plan  
of Action from Colorado and to vote  
for delegates to send to the National  
Women's Year Conference being held  
later this year in Houston.

The conference was an outgrowth of  
the International Women's Year activ-  
ities of 1972. "International Women's  
Year" spawned "International Women's  
Decade," which inspired women's con-  
ferences in every state; all are fed-  
erally funded and governmentally con-  
trolled.

The control by the government was  
felt in all aspects of the conference.  
All voting, procedures for nominating  
delegates, and attempts to modify the  
"Plan of Action" were forced into the  
rigid structure of Robert's Rules of  
Order. Due to the fact that the con-  
ference was funded by congressional  
law, the basic structure could not be  
changed. Use of Robert's Rules cre-  
ated a rather curious hierarchy where-  
in those women who understood parlia-  
mentary procedure had a much greater  
chance to push their amendments. In  
the context of the conference, the  
women who were more likely to be fam-  
iliar with that format were white,  
middle-class women; thus, the confer-  
ence was purposely classist.

The Black Caucus, for example, did  
not have any of their candidates for  
Houston delegates nominated because  
the "Rule" for nominations had not  
been made very clear. The women of  
the caucus worked hard to compile the  
paperwork that had been required for  
nominating; however, it had not been  
made clear to them that nominations  
had to be made from the floor also.

As a result, their candidates were not  
nominated.

Governmental control shaped the con-  
ference in many other ways. Much pos-  
sible action was severely limited—  
once again, Robert's Rules was a  
strong tool for limitation. Through  
Robert's Rules, debate over any con-  

troversial topics (i.e., lesbianism  
and the replacement of the plenary  
session chair) could be effectively  
quashed before discussion began.

At Saturday morning's plenary ses-  
sion, one woman moved to replace the  
plenary session chair of the confer-  
ence. Her reasons for so doing were  
that the chair had been selected by  
the executive committee rather than  
having been elected by the conference  
body. It became obvious that those  
in power knew that such a replacement  
move was afoot and were prepared.  
Immediately, another woman moved to  
close debate on the question in order  
to "get the work of the conference  
done." The original motion could not  
be voted upon until it was determined  
whether or not discussion would be al-  
lowed. Discussion was curtailed, and  
the motion to replace the chair was  
defeated because the woman was not al-  
lowed to explain her point.

The National Recommendations, which  

inadequate Representation  
Incarcerates Two

By Kathy Riley

The Colorado women's community is  
being asked to organize support for  
two women unjustly convicted of mur-  
der in the deaths of their children.

The request came in the form of a  
four-page letter to Big Mama Rag from  
James Manier, an inmate in the Colo-  
rado State Penitentiary at Canon City.  
Manier is a law librarian and "jail-  
house lawyer" who counsels women pris-  
oners one day a week at the prison.

Through his counseling, Manier met  
Sun Ae Ellis, a Korean woman serving  
a 12 to 20 year sentence for second  
degree murder in the death of her step  
son, and Sandra Charlesworth, who is  
serving a nearly identical sentence on  
the same charge resulting from the  
death of her 22-month-old child.

Both women were convicted separate-  
ly after very inadequate representa-  
tion by public defenders. Manier is  
asking women to set up a defense fund  
and to contact one or more feminist  
attorneys willing to take on the cases.

Most of Manier’s letter deals with  
Ellis' conviction, and we are print-  
ing an edited version of the letter:

"Sun Ellis is a Korean citizen who  
understands very little of the English  
language. Prior to her arrest on the  
charge she is presently serving time  
for, she had been in this country for  
one month. She met a G.I. in Korea  
and became pregnant by this man. He  
left her, promising to return for her  
and the baby. She waited 14 months  
for him, but he never returned. In  
1974 she met another G.I.; they were  
married in May, 1975 in Korea and she  
came to the United States (Colorado  
Springs) with her husband and 3 child-  
ren on March 25, 1976. After coming to  
the U.S. she was abused, neglected and  
ignored by her husband on many occa-  
sions. She had no other place to go  
and nobody to turn to for help.

"On April 14, 1976, she was charged  
with the beating death of her stepson,  
convicted by a Colorado Springs Dist-  
rict Court and sentenced to the above-  

mentioned term of imprisonment. I have  
talked with this lady to great length  
and it is my sincere opinion that she  
did not commit this crime—and even if  
she did do it, she did not do it inten-  
tionally, nor could it be proven be-  
yond a reasonable doubt that she com-  
mitted the crime at all. The husband  
himself had every opportunity to com-  
mit the crime, and it seems to me that  
he certainly had the temperament for  
such a crime. Her husband testified  
against her at her trial, and accord-  
ing to the number of times he visited  
her at the county jail prior to trial,  
it seems to me that he convinced her  

to "take the rap" and nothing would  
happen to her.

"He lied to her when he told her  
that he “was forced by law to testify  
against her at trial." He now has  
their children and has moved to Okla-  
homa. He tells her that he is going  
to stick by her, but he has told the  
prison authorities that he intends to  
divorce her. She was defended by the  
Public Defender; I'm sure you are aware  
of the type of "defense" you get from  
the office of the Public Defender. I  
doubt very much that she understood  
one tenth of the trial proceedings.

"The second factor involved with  
the case of Sun Ellis is this: The  
Public Defender is filing an appeal in  
the State Supreme Court, but I don't  
think they know very much about the  
case, since Ms. Ellis tells me that  
her lawyers never talked to her about  
the things I talked to her about and  
she never told them any of the things  
she's told me concerning her case.

"A point in question is the fact  
that the District Attorney suggested to  
the jury that Sun Ellis was learned in  
the martial arts simply because she is  
an Oriental. Nothing was ever men-  

tioned in court of her husband's train-  

ing in those arts as a member of the  
Armed Forces. I am certain that with  

any form of adequate defense, Ms. Ellis  

had been drawn by the National Commis-  
sion on the Observance of Internation-  
al Women's Year, were the basis for  

all conferences throughout the country  

Photo by Cheryl Peake  
These “guidelines“ showed the govern-  
ment's true concerns for women by de-  
manding nothing. Lesbianism as an  
issue was glaring in its absence from  
the government program. The National  
Recommendations were merely one more  
mark of the government's attempt to  
weaken any accomplishments that might  
have possibly occurred at the confer-  
ence—one more swipe at women's con-  
cerns, making them innocuous.

The conference was structured in  
ways which can only be called tradi-  
tional, if not non-feminist. Radical  
women who attended were forced to fit  
into the forms provided by the confer-  
ence rules in order to make any gains  
in the radicalization of the Plan of  
Action. The rules served to subdivide  
participants into several factions  
through a “caucus” format. The more  
radical elements, Chicanas, Native  
Americans, rural women, Oriental Amer-  
icans, Blacks, etc., overcame this  
artificial division and joined forces  
on many issues.

The caucus format lent itself to a  
“playing at politics" phenomenon.  
Playing at politics includes tactics  
like stalling, packing voting sessions  
with your particular interest group,  
and "spontaneous" demonstrations. All  
of the above happened in Boulder.

Rumors were abounding that Right-to-  
Lifers and Anti-ERA forces were going  
to overrun the conference to send  

their delegates with their particular  
reactionary program to Houston. React-  
ing to this, feminist and other rad-  
ical women in the area summoned their  
friends to vote for more radical del-  
egates and make a platform that was  
more equitable.

As the voting continued through Sun-  
day, it quickly became obvious where  
particular factions were concentrating  
their forces. In the back of Macky  
auditorium sat the anti-abortion,  
anti-ERA men and women. Upfront and  
flanking both sides of the room were  
the radicals and lesbians. The more  
liberal women placed themselves in  
the middle section.

Since all four microphones were  
placed toward the front in the aisles,  
quite a few of the more radical demands  
were heard than were the views of the  
people in the rear. A strategy em-  
ployed by that block was to prolong  

discussion in the hopes that the Plan  
of Action would not be ratified due to  
a lack of time. This tactic became  

more obvious as Sunday afternoon wore  

on.  
One woman, at the last moment, made  

a motion to strike the entire abortion  
platform which had as its basis the  
idea that abortion is a woman's right.  
She then stated that she wanted to go  
on record as having held up the rati-  
fication of the Plan of Action, be-  
cause she did not believe in abortion  
and that the conference was composed  
of mere interest groups and did not  
represent the women of Colorado. Her  

motion was quickly voted down, and  
she ran screaming from the auditorium.

Ratification of the Plan of Action  
was the most important issue of the  
day. Had the Plan of Action not been  
ratified by 5 pm Sunday, delegates  
from Colorado would have gone to Hous-  
ton with no position for Colorado, lea-  
ving decisions as to which issues were  
important up to the delegates elected.  
Of course, not all delegates elected  
have liberal-to-radical views, so this  
could have had dire implications.

The Plan of Action itself was divided  
into seven categories: Arts and Hum-  
anities, Basic Needs, Education, Pol-  
itics Law and Civil Rights, Relation-  
ships, Work Income and Homemaking, and  
International Interdependence. Amend-  
ments were made during the voting ses-  
sions to specific points under each  
category. Voting on the Basic Needs  
provisions lasted all morning Sunday,  
while the sections for Work Income and  
Homemaking and International Interde-  
pendence were passed with no amend-  
ments.

The greatest hostility was shown dur-  
ing the voting in the sections on Pol-  
itics Law and Civil Rights and Rela-  

More on Page 11

Photo by Deb and Cheryl.

Other offensive shirts are still  

phone number 893-0307.