. For this  
process did, with Tori  
ual International Confer-  

‘and Psychiatric Oppression, and the  

Peoples’  

-conference Against Repression here in  

Denver, it has been pretty disjointed. Since this turned out  
to Women in Cages, Part II, at least we had a lot of articles  
in early and typed already. So, that helped, as did the fact  

that there have been some new faces around  
the office this month -- women helping with the typing and  
proofing.  

We had a booth at the Peoples' Fair, and  
made some good contacts, which always feels good. And, we  
made a bit of money selling papers, and our silkscreened  
T-shirts and athletic shorts.  

The supporters group has been busy concocting fundraising  
ideas. They are planning to do a benefit for BMR -- a brunch  
on Sunday, July 18. The details are not yet pinned down, but  
we do know that it will be a great meal, and we hope that  
lots of people will come. Watch for details next month!  

We want to thank everyone who contributed to these issues  
on Women in Cages. There was a lot that we read through, ex-  

cellent articles in other journals, several which we are  
reprinting in BMR, and many others. There are a number of  
papers and newsletters being put out which print articles  
around the oppression of prison and psychiatric inmates.  

Here are the names and addresses of some of them.  

Madness Network News  
P.O. Box 684  
San Francisco,  
CA 94101  

No More Cages  
(Women's Prison Newsletter)  
P.O. Box 90  
Brooklyn, NY 11215  

Alliance for the Liberation  
of Mental Patients Newsletter  
1427 Walnut St.  
Philadelphia, PA 19102  

Phoenix Rising  
Box 7251, Station A  
Toronto M5W 1X9  
Canada  

Write for  
Elemental  
(Union for Psychiatric Change)  
P.O. Box 153  
Waverly, N.S.W.  
Australia  

Red Dragon  
NWPO  
Box 20613 Broadway Sta.  
Seattle, WA 98102  

Matrix  
(feminist/lesbian magazine)  
P.O. Box 7221  
Olympia, WA 98507  

Through the Looking Glass  
(a women and youth prison  
newsletter)  
P.O. Box 2228  
Seattle, WA 98122  

Every time we do a theme, our biggest accomplishment is  
just to begin to discover the complexity of the issues --  

The relationship of the feminist movement to the psychiatric  

Cover. graphic reprinted from Madness Network News,  
artist unknown.  

collective:  
Sue Goding, Bobbe Ross, Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford  

Supporters:  
Aiverta Gallardo, Judy Barlow,  
Eden Stone,  
Wendy Highby  

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Kim Womantree.  
Gloria Tucci, Cathy Burns,  
contributors:  
Young, Andrea Gabriel,  
Kathy Lopata, Dee Dee NiHera, Cate Gilles, Carol Burns,  
Kathy Riley, Patty Abreiz, T. J. Feureborn, Vickie Barriga,  
Laurel Carlsen, Clara Kaplan,  
Linda Lane & Linda Lane  

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by  
Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 19th of the preceding  
month. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with  
all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolic-  
ited material. We reserve the right to edit all material for  
length with the input of the author. Subscription rates are  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, June, 1982  

the liberation movement and anti-prison movement  
has for a long time been vague at best and badly co-opted  
at worst. As the article from All She Wrote (reprinted on  
page 10) so clearly points up, the early women's movement  
gave priority to concern over the conditions of imprisoned  
women. But as factions of the women's movement have become  
liberalized, geared toward reforms, interest has turned more  
to the victims of crimes, and pulled away from the analysis  
that the prison and psychiatric systems are tools of the  
state to keep poor and Third World people on the bottom of  
the economic ladder, and keep women from having power over  
our lives and bodies. The whole system of psychiatry is bas-  
ed on the assumption that there is such a thing as “mental  
illness” -- i.e. that certain responses to the world (like  
rage and despair) are inappropriate and will be "cured"  
(stifled) by professional "therapy" and drugs. The concept  

of feminist therapy buys into the idea that the solution lies  
in change on an individual level outside the context of so-  
cietal problems. Individual solutions are not really solut-  
ions, but are just stopgaps. Significant change will only  
come about when connections are recognized between different  
struggles. It gets back to the understanding that no one will  
be liberated until everyone is.  

As feminists, we must choose ways to work which take the  
large picture into account. As the state's control over pro-  
jects like battered women's shelters and rape crisis centers  
increases (through funding and management), the police, the  
prison system, psychiatrists and the psychiatric system are  
set up as the legitimate friends of the victims of "crime".  
The enemy then becomes the "criminals" or "patients". And an  
understanding of their actions as responses to an oppressive  
situation is lost.  

We need to struggle towards more radical ways of working.  
Ways that are effective in bringing about far-sighted change  
rather than solving a problem for one person by stepping on  
another. Ways that allow for the people who are most directly  
affected to have power and self-determination, rather than  
creating a hierarchy of power where those with money and  
education (professionals and the institutions of the state  
-- prisons and psychiatric institutions) hold power over the  
lives and choices of others. Creative ways of working that  
attempt to construct alternatives that will move us closer  
to our ultimate goal of liberation for all oppressed people.  
This has to be tackled on many fronts at once and in many  
ways. We would like to hear about specific ways that women  
are working. We need to share ideas, and regularly re-evaluate  
our work and its effectiveness toward revolutionary goals.  

We welcome feedback on this and any issue. We have always  
held critiques once a month during one of our regular meeting  
times. The critiques are generally not terribly stimulating,  
and not real well attended. Recently, we have been trying  

MORE ON PAGE 21  

inside BMR:  

Where We're At...........  
Culture (Interview) ....4,5,6  
Women In Cages  
Psychiatric Oppression...7  
Hawaiian Prisoners...10,11  
Prisoner Support........11  
Psychiatric Abuse.12,13,14  

America Held Hostage.......  
Calendar. ... 68.4  

Classies & Ads......  
Resources..........-  

$7/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $14 (in U.S.  
funds) outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $21  
to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated  
in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at  
the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA  
and is available on microfilm (Vol. 1#1 Oct. 1972 through  
July 1979) directly from Big Mama Rag for $60. BMR is index-  
ed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore,  
MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010