Library Lacks Lesbo Lit

Linda

While looking for lesbian literature
in the Denver Public Library, I could
not help comparing it to a similar
situation I encountered as an adoles-
cent, frantically searching through
Dr. Spock, trying to find a few kind
words about masturbation.

Like the library's treatment of les-
bianism, Dr. Spock dealt with every
subject under the sun nobly. But
when it came down to an ultimate ta-
boo, it was obvious that the matter
was hidden within the pages only be-
cause something had to be said about
it. Masturbation was the only subject
in the book that didn't really explain
anything, but was handled with great
care and discretion--I knew it had to
be bad.

The library was recently pressured
into taking a daring step away from
this negative impression by stocking
two copies of local poet Chocolate
Water's lusty book of lesbian poetry,
To the Man From the Denver Post. It
took almost 8 months for Chocolate
Waters to convince the library to ac-
cept her book. The deciding committee
didn't feel that the book was really
poetry, or that there is much demand
for poetry in general anyway. One
librarian felt that the numerous re-
quests for the book were made by Choc-
olate's friends. One copy of the po-
etry has been inconveniently camouflaged
in the Western History section
which, according to a library official,
is reserved for "special" books and
books by local authors; the other copy
is located in the pamphlet file, which
is behind the desk upon request only.

Thus this "special" subject which
can otherwise be found on the shelves
side by side with sexual deviancy and
psychological disorders (one book even
has a section entitled homosexuality
and schizophrenia) has risen to a more
timely image--which at best could be
termed constrained.

Not all lesbian books are tainted
so. There are some novels in the gen-
eral fiction area, such as Bertha
Harris's Cherubino, Nightwood by
Djuna Barnes, and the classic Well of
Loneliness--lesbian love stories that
all happen to end on the same note of
utter despair and insanity.

The feminist books also lose their
point, being sandwiched between eti-
quette and folklore. If I had been a
woman newly trying to come out, I
would definitely have been scared off.
A public library has the tremendous
responsibility of not only providing
quality reading material to all inter-
est groups in an unbiased manner, but
also of being up to date on their sub-
ject matter. With all the recent pos-
itive literature and studies on homo-
sexuality, it can no longer be termed
sickness in 1977; the pregnancy books
are also discouraging, giving an over-
all impression that women can't really
handle it.

An institution which is as important
as the library is in influencing the
minds of so many people cannot con-
tinue to give these distorted impres-
sions of such important subjects: these
attitudes are not only harmful to pe-
ople on a gut level--they are passé.

The new influx of novels by and
about lesbians has gone almost unno-
ticed by the library; some beautiful
and important books are not being made
available to the public.

In trying to find out why this is so
I asked library officials what they
based the selection of their books on.

"Excellence in writing,” I was told,
"is the primary factor. It doesn't
matter if it is about lesbians or not
it has to have more than political
content. Quality is the main consid-
eration.” I couldn't help cringing
over the thought of their Playboy
magazines, with their strange mixture
of quality and perversion; but then I
suppose they have to cater somewhat
to public demand.

A more legitimate excuse was that
many of the new lesbian novels are not
reviewed in the Library Journal, where
many book selections are made, or are
not even in print. All they really
have in the way of pro-lesbian fiction
are two bibliographies of lesbian lit-
erature in the pamphlet, kept safe
behind the desk.

Apparently some individual library
officials are making attempts to stock
more lesbian novels, but cannot pass
them through the committee which makes
the final decision.

The library is slow to change, but I
do believe they will come around in
time. According to Harry Mooney Jr.,
a head library official, a book about
two young black women called Auby
will be placed in the young adult sec-
tion. Whether it is pro-lesbian I
don't know, but Mr. Mooney did state
that he “expects there will be trouble
over the book.

It seems that the library has been
under pressure from groups such as the
John Birch Society in the past. One
group called the National Separation of
Church and State tried to induce them
to display their “hate” literature--
the library did not concede to the
pressure.

Mr. Mooney did offer to talk to Mrs.
Jo Shephard, head of cataloguing,
about the possibility of changing the
dubious location of the homosexuality
literature when she gets out of the
hospital in the next two months. The
library is under the authority of the
American Library Association, but ap-
parently an individual branch could
make this change. Mrs. Shephard will
hopefully take this step towards
abolishing the homophobic attitude of
the library.

"We consider the library to be quite
liberal," I was told. "We have no
problem with censorship."

A petition is now being circulated
at the Woman to Woman Bookstore on
2320 East Colfax demanding that the
library stock certain lesbian novels.
Anyone interested in helping is en-
couraged to sign.

LESBIAN CONTACTS

THE LEAGUE:
BOX 2143D
DARIEN, CONNECTICUT
06820

for Gay Women:
GATA’S GUIDE, 1977

Annual discreet pocket size international bar/club
guide and complete directory. This fourth edition
contains over 3000 listings. Includes resources, services,
retreats, restaurants and much much more. $4.00
only from: Gata’s Guide, 115 New Montgomery
Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94105. (discreet mail
order only — two weeks delivery on all orders),
Also in Boulder at: Southern Women’s Resource
Center and at 1743 Walnut and in Denver at
WOMAN TO WOMAN.

Scraps From Chocolate's Table

Chocolate Waters

Miss Citrus Is No "Fruit"--Anita Bryant, former beauty pageant winner and
singer who has advertised orange juice for the Florida Citrus Commission,
is now fighting against gay rights in Miami. Bryant helped organize a group
called "Save Our Children, Inc." and claims the local gay community is “try-
ing to recruit our children to homosexuality." She is especially concerned
that since Miami's ordinance to ban discrimination against gays in housing
and employment has recently been passed, male homosexual teachers will now
be coming to school in drag. Would anyone care to form an alternative group called "Save Anita Bryant, Inc.?” No, I
didn't think so.

Is That By Me Again--In an article concerning how much money is allocated
to men involved in college athletics as compared to how much is allocated to
women, the Idaho State Journal has made the following enlightened observa-
tion: "In 1972 women received about one per cent of the total intercolleg-
iate budget. Surprisingly enough, this has doubled and is now two per cent.
Still, large discrepancies exist...” The Idaho State anal
is "fondly" referred to by certain local residents as the "Idaho State
Urinal."

Something You Do in the Dark--This dubious honor, presented in the
“Advocate Awards for 1976," was awarded jointly to Rod McKuen, Marlon Brando,
Elton John, and Janis Ian for publicly making it known that they have oc-
casionally "gotten it on" with members of the same sex. The award was sim-
ultaneously given to Shirley Maclaine who once said in an Advocate interview
that she would do it, but she only had time for “one good fuck a week." (The
Advocate, 1/12/77)

All the Best--This “accolade” was given to Juliet Beir by a fel-
low emigrant (male we presume) after both of them had walked and crawled
across Death Valley in 1849. The incident is taken from Women in the West
(Dorothy Gray, Les Femmes Press), a book which was recently reviewed in the
San Francisco Chronicle by JoEllen Hall. Absurdly enough, the reviewer,
supposedly honoring the book, makes the same statement that “Any reader would
* be proud to be called the ‘best man in the party'." Oh brother! Oops, I
meant Oh Sister! (Thanks to Elsa Gidlow who sent in this article from the
San Francisco Sunday Examiner 11/14/76.)

Will the Chocolate Waters Please Sit Down or Go to Another Bar?--Last
month at the Three Sisters a friend came over to inform me that I was being
introduced in another corner of the bar. I thought this rather curious
since I didn't happen to be in that particular corner at the time. Never-
theless, I moseyed over to hear what this other C.W. had to say for herself
and it seemed to me that everything sounded pretty accurate so I didn't in-
terrupt. (I only wish she hadn't made that crack about Pat Wagner being a
much better poet.) Anyone else wishing to claim my identity should let me
know immediately so that I might forward all the unpaid bills I've accumu-
lated this month.

P.S.--The official student newspaper of Idaho State University in Pocatello
is called--are you ready for this?--the Spectrum. I wonder if they knew
what they were getting themselves into. (Sorry about that!)

Alicia’s
Mexican Restaurant

278 So. Downing 777-9904
“Good Home Made Food”

ENTERTAINMENT
DANCING
POOL
CONVERSATION

2638 W. 23rd Ave.

the alternative women's bar