Chicana Lesbian Fights for

Freedom

BMR Interviews Cecilia Gonzales in State Hospital

Deborah Taylor

Cecilia Gonzales, a 20-year-old Chi-
cana lesbian, is back in the State Hosp-
ital in Pueblo, Colorado. She was ex--
tradited from California where she had
lived after escaping from the hospital
a year ago.

Cecilia had been originally sent to
the mental hospital in 1974. She and
her lover had been involved in a shoot-
ing incident, and she decided to take
the rap for her lover because she felt
that she was better able to cope with
imprisonment and would get a lighter
sentence because she was only 17.

She pled temporary insanity to avoid
a trial and jail. After a month's ob-
servation in Denver General Hospital,
Cecilia was sentenced to an indefinite
stay in Pueblo State Hospital.

The "treatment" in the hospital was
intolerable. She was often drugged, re-
stricted to the ward, or put in isola-
tion. For two years she tried to be re-
leased from the hospital legally. The
amount of red tape and bureaucracy
seemed impenetrable. Many staff mem-
bers agreed that she did not belong in
the hospital and was well enough to
leave. In fact, they had begun the legal
process by which she could be released.
Unfortunately, no one explained this pro-
cess to Cecilia. Finally, she escaped.

Two months after she escaped, she
was caught in San Francisco. She was
released on bail while she fought ex-
tradition.

During this time, Cecilia proved she
could survive on her own. In San Fran-
cisco, she got a job, lived in an apart-
ment with her lover, and made a strong
circle of friends in the feminist com-
munity. She was even chosen to receive
a $1400 federal grant to go to mechanics
school. Hundreds of people signed peti-
tions and wrote letters to support her
struggle to stay in San Francisco.

However, Cecilia was brought back to
Colorado a month ago. Now she is trying
to get released from the hospital again.

Feminist lawyers are petitioning for
a release hearing (sanity hearing) as
soon as possible, but this may take six
months or more.

Also, Cecilia is facing felony charg-
es for having escaped from a State Hosp-
ital. A conviction could result in a
sentence of up to five years.

Cecilia is discouraged about being
back in the hospital again and she needs
your support. Letters, posters, books,
and anything else would be appreciated.
Write her at Ward 67, Pueblo State Hosp-
ital, 1600 W. 24th St., Pueblo, CO 81003.

State Conference In June

A defense committee is beginning to
form in her behalf. The lawyers are
charging no fee, but we need to raise
about $1000 to pay for psychiatrists to
testify at sanity hearings in her be-
half, and to pay the other costs.
Please send whatever you can to: Cecilia
Gonzales Defense Fund, c/o Deborah
Taylor, 1458 Gaylord St., Denver, CO
80206. Also, if you can give any time,
please call (303) 399-2002. People can
also visit Cecilia at the hospital.
Phone or write for more information.
Visitors help give Cecilia the strength
to continue to fight for her freedom.

Photo by Deb

Two BMR members visited Cecilia
Gonzales in Pueblo State Hospital on
April 28th. Following are some of the
comments she made on hospital life and
her legal situation. The conversation
is paraphrased as we did not use a tape-
recorder. Cecilia's nickname is Sis.

We talked with Sis in a visitors room
with her lover Cheryl who came with us
from Colorado Springs where she lives.
The room was empty and we talked freely,
with occasional interruptions by staff
who came in to get their coats on their
way out.

Cecilia was dressed in a corduroy
vest, black shirt, and pants - definitely
a dyke image. She was not drugged.
Rather, she was very articulate and aware
of her situation.

We gave her copies of Big Mama Rag
and some women's records. She showed
us a wallet she had made that day in
occupational therapy which had "Sis" on
one side and "Dyke" on the other.

Interview

BMR: What is hospital life like for
women?

Sis: You have to be a “good girl." They
lock up women for using language that
isn't considered appropriate - like fuck
you. If people can't handle “fuck you",
I don't know why they're working here.

One woman didn't want others to see
her in the bathtub because she was se-
ven months pregnant, so she took a bath
in her clothes. They grabbed her and
put her in seclusion. Seclusion is pun-
ishment; no one is helped when they lock
you up and put you in seclusion. Sup-
posedly a person is out of control, but
they aren't really.

I helped a woman change her mind a-
bout getting more shock treatment. All
they do is burn your brain out. I hav-
en't had any, but I've seen people af-
terwards and they don't move for a long
time.

BMR: Have they ever put you in seclu-
sion?

Sis: I haven't been in seclusion since
I've been back; I won't give them the
satisfaction. The last time I was here
a guy hit me and I hit him back. I'm
not going to let anyone hit me; I don't
care who he is. They grabbed me and
nearly choked me and handcuffed my hands
behind my back and tied me up in se-
clusion for a day and a half.

There is an Indian here who is real-
ly into his culture. They get down on
him about his culture and tell him "This
is a White Man's hospital and here you
have to act like a White Man." One time
he wasn't doing anything violent and
they asked him to sit, and he didn't.
The PT (psychiatric technician - like
an orderly) called the security police
and they dragged him down and put him
in seclusion and practically choked him
to death.

BMR: What kind of psychiatric care are
you getting?

Sis: I've only seen a shrink once and
that was in a big staff meeting where
eight staff fired questions at me -
like; “Have you ever hated animals?
Count back from 100 by 7's, and Does a
rolling stone gather moss?" I didn't
know that one.
They write notes on you every day.

I've seen some of them. Today's was
“No problem with authority." They con-
sidered me anti-social. But if I'm
into something, I'll do it. They push
you into things you don't like all the
time.

BMR: How do they deal with your being a
lesbian?

Sis: They haven't hassled me since
I've been back about my appearance or
for being a dyke. It's different from
before I escaped. I gave them (the
staff) a copy of a NAPA newspaper (Net-
work Against Psychiatric Assault), and
that changed them.

BMR: We heard that friends of yours
just sent $100 that they raised from a
benefit in San Francisco. This money
will go towards paying a psychologist
to do an evaluation of you to be used
in court.

Sis: The psychologist on my ward will
testify that I should be released,
but most of the doctors here just do
what the administrators tell them to
do.

The security police pressed charges
against me; the staff didn't care.

Photo by Deb
Lots of people split all the time.

I've escaped before. One time I got
caught in Denver and they didn't press
charges. The last time I escaped they
didn't even look for me. I'm the first
person I know to get charged with es-
cape.

More on Page 14

Women’s Conference Is Not Aimed at Feminists

Deborah Taylor

The Colorado Women's Conference for
International Women's Decade will be
held at the University of Colorado
in Boulder the weekend of June 3, 4, 5,
1977. Admission is free and all women
(and men) are invited to participate.

3000 Coloradan women are expected
to attend the conference (CWC). It
is lavishly funded by the govern-
ment and the total cost will be
about $50,000. The federal govern-
ment has contributed $29,000, the
state of Colorado $8,000, and foun-
dations and big companies like IBM
$15,000.

The women who organized this con-
ference are middle-class, college
educated professionals. Most are
new to the women's movement. A few
went to the International Women's
Year Conference in Mexico City in
1975 and then became interested in
having a state conference.

Every state in the country will
have a similar conference funded by
the government this year. Congress
appropriated five million dollars
for these conferences (in a bill
sponsored by Pat Schroeder, D. Rep-
resentative from Colorado). These
conferences are part of International
Women's Decade which began with
International Women's Year in 1975
and will end in 1985. Like the con-
ference in Mexico City, each confer-
ence is supposed to be an historical
event in which women come together
to discuss what they need.

Outreach has been a major part of
pre-conference planning. The $8000
state government grant is for finan-
cial aid for low-income women.

There will be at least 200 workshops
on topics ranging from "Midwifery" to
"Prostitution" to "Affirmation of New Life-
styles" to "What If You Are Raped?".
The key speakers will be Dottie Lamm,
the Governor's wife, Pat Schroeder,
U.S. Representative, and Elise
Boulding, Sociology professor.
There will be movies like "Antonia",
"Billie Jean King" and “Anything You Want to
Be".

This conference is trying to reach
women who have not been active in
the women's movement; older liberals,
Chicanas, and rural women from all over Colorado.

This is not a feminist conference,
however; the brochure stresses it is a
"women's" conference. Radical feminists
were not asked to speak; instead the
speakers represent the Establish-
ment. Feminists who participate through
workshops, leafletting, and selling
literature and talking with individual
women, will try and move the conference
to the left.

The CWC will reinforce people who believe
in the system by demonstrating that
"See, the government does care about
women."

International Women's Decade (IWD) is
being sponsored by the same people who
gave us International Women's Year: the
State Department. State Department
agencies channel money for IWD. These
highly publicized events make the U.S.
appear progressive. "Woman" rhetoric
can serve as a cover for U.S. development
policies in underdeveloped countries,
particularly population control.

By creating a parallel “legitimate”
women’s movement, the government can
delegitimize the existing Women's Liber-
ation Movement. The government has used
this parallel organization strategy for
a long time in foreign countries.

The conferences of IWD are touted as
democratic, grassroots forums where wo-
men can bring up any issues. In fact,
however, conferences are so pre-planned
and tightly organized that this open
forum idea is a farce. Certain topics
cannot be mentioned such as U.S. foreign
policy, unemployment, and religion.

The manual sent to state conference
planners this year says that “Decision:
on program content - what is to be said
and who is to say it - should be made
by people who understand what the Con-
ference is working to accomplish...
Before distribution of your state pro-
gram, therefore, it must be approved
by the Executive Committee of Interna-
tional Women's Year Commission. Women
who wish to be heard should probably
be selected through advance interviews
in order to assure that the women are
presenting genuine problems and are not
so emotionally involved in their prob-
lems that they cannot distinguish
between fact and opinion."

The government wants its money's
worth.

The goals of the conference are to
describe the problems of women, to
educate people, and to offer policies
for the government to follow. Task
forces have been meeting for months
discussing different problems of women
and possible solutions. They have come
up with Plans of Action which are print-
ed at length in the brochure of the
conference. These Plans of Action will
be voted on by people at the conference.

Since men are invited to the confer-
ence, they will also be voting on
these Plans of Action.

After the Plans of Action are rati-
fied by vote at the conference, they
will be printed up and given to every
legislator in Colorado. Twenty Coloradans
will be attending the conference.

More on Page 1