```
10

TREN THE CRT

Ob’servations By Obie

A column

Overcoming my feminist objections to Ebbets Field by such
rationalizations as Sabbath was made for (wo)man and not vice versa,
etc. I ventured downtown last week to hear Janis Ian, one of my favorite
musician/vocalists. Arriving approximately a half hour in advance of
the TEN-THIRTY show, question number one is why the hell did we have
to wait till 1 a.m. to hear her?

It was downhill from there on. A man onstage paraded in a t-shirt
which read “No Head, No Backstage Pass.” Then we were asked to
endure almost an hour of Tim Moore, a mediocre imitation hard-rock
group whose big number was “I Want to Possess You.” Having seen
Janis Ian before, even all this would have been worth it had she been up
to par. Alas poor Janis was tired; she explained rather irritably to the
audience that she was still on New York time. Well, we were on Denver
time on a work night!

Denver is a transient city it is true, and maybe that’s the reason we
were treated with not only the same jokes as last year but more than
half the same songs! And why only 45 minutes of entertainment from
the main biller? But the biggest question is why did the other media in
town give such rave reviews? Why did the audience from the first show
practically swoon from adoration? Did Janis perhaps give her all
because she knew the first show was being reviewed?

Janis Ian is still a fine musician. She still has that wistful yearning
quality that makes her voice unique. I will still buy her albums but I know
at least three people who will never again pay to be insulted by Ms. Ian
in person.

“Voices” by Susan Griffin is a play about five women of varying ages
approaching adolescence; five women who are beginning to listen to
long-ignored voices within themselves. There is Maya, an ex-
revolutionary divorcee whose anger makes itself felt and heard in hard,
cold, articulate terms; then there is Kate, the actress who never married
and cannot bear the thought that one day she will stop speaking. Next
we enter Erin, one half of an ill-adjusted set of twins whose life unfolds as a
series of “what ifs”; Rosalinde, an ebullient, sincere but shallow
creature who jumps from cause to commune with frequency and
urgency in Life’s smorgasbord; there is also gentle Grace, middle-aged
mother of four whose dreams have been locked away in a drawer with
her high school diary and teenage poetry.

Setting up a backdrop pointing out these differences, Griffin then
proceeds, in unequaled prose, to take the audience through labyrinths
of emotions, common experience, laughter and shock to line up the
similarities of female existence. The voices speak of women who have
placed all their marbles in men in three-piece suits, all their stock in
causes, the American Family, and lovers of either sex; the voices speak
hauntingly of fleeing self. Interestingly enough, each one reaches a
point in time when she has “no place to go.”

They each then fall in love. Maybe if our defenses weren't so
that discovery feminists could be better.

Installers Fund Benefit
is Night Of Premieres

Kate Sharp

There was an air of anticipatory excitement on the eve
of June 8th as people gathered
at “The Money Grubbers Ball,” a
benefit concert for the Women
Installers Legal Defense Fund.
The evening was to be the
“debut” of several musicians
making their premier
appearance before a Denver
feminist audience. Many of us
were quite curious; none of us
were disappointed.

Appearing first on stage was a
woman, bringing with her an
accent so delightfully thick as to
seem almost melodic, hair
somewhat remindful of a lion's
mane, and the name
Woodwoman. Wood (as she is
also called) immediately gives
one the impression that she is
very comfortable and pleased
with both her position on stage
and her audience. She treats her
audience as though it were not
an “audience” at all but rather,
her good friends gathered
together in her living room. And
from the very first note she
delivers a consistently rich and
strong and compelling vocal
impact. She has a most unusual
vocal quality that is hauntingly
unpredictable in nature and she
possesses an incredible range
that she seemingly effortlessly
slips and slides around in.
Woodwoman is a songwriter.
Her lyrics portray sensitivity and
wit, and they are a true indica-
tion of this musician’s amazing
versatility. She is equally at
home with all the styles she
performs whether they be blues
or love songs (which she calls
her “mushy ones”) or that
uniquely difficult style known as
the talking blues. I cannot more
emphatically rejoice that ver-
satility, sensitivity and wit are
the components of Wood’s
musicianship. The only place
she lacks is in her instrumental
delivery. Her guitar expertise
does not as yet equal the quality
of her vocal performance. But
she is a musician that I am sure
Denver women will hear from
more and more as time goes by.
And to that I say, Thank
Goddess!

Second on stage was a woman
making her first
performance ever. She was a woman named
Suzanne Pierson who was ap-
parently humbled and awed by
the experience because the
song all but totally escaped her. She explained
the reason for her ner-
vousness, jokingly reconciled to
begin another song, and was
met with overwhelming good
natured applause and laughter.
Her audience gave her a con-
fidence that did not dwindle
the rest of the performance but
increased to a delightfully
animated crescendo. She dug
her audience digging her. She
sang to them with an exquisitely
pleasing strength and power of
voice and showed them that she
undeniably and unfailingly
knows her way around her
guitar. Suzanne (sometimes
known as Soupy) is also a
songwriter. Her lyrics are full of
some very pleasing dream-like
and ethereal images and moods.
They act as subtle reminders of
childhood, or travel, or being in
love. They are very sensitive
pieces of music. Her only failing,
I believe, is a lack of versatility
(although she did eventually
prove an accomplishment with
that genre known as “the
humorous song”). Both her
vocal style and songwriting style
could benefit from the adage
that “Variety is the spice of life.”
But she is comfortable, compell-
ing, and accomplished at what
she does. She is undeniably one
of Denver’s more worthwhile
musicians.

Two goods make a great.
Wood and Suzanne did a short
set together. They explained that
they had only practiced together
for a few hours that very after-
noon and proceeded to go into a
most delightful string of well-
polished, difficultly ac-
complished, extremely pleasing
close harmonies. They will un-
doubtedly keep up the habit
because they complement each
other so well. Suzanne's guitar
expertise adds fullness to
Wood's already compelling
vocals. Wood's voice inspires
Suzanne's to soar to some
places it just doesn’t reach
alone. A sort of “sisterhood of
song” grows out of their singing
together.

Energy was high and the vibes
were good. The time was ripe for
some rock ‘n roll, and that’s what
we got. Asterik was next on
stage and although they had a
few of the earmarks of inex-
perience, that criticism was
pretty well forgotten as soon as
the first feet began hitting the
dance floor. Asterik is quite an
adequate band to dance to.
They've got a fairly rapid and
smooth succession from one
song to the next which is an
essential characteristic for any
dance band to have. Their vocal
and instrumental deliveries are
quite well coordinated for a band
so young. It usually takes a rock
‘n roll band a while to figure out
that too much volume on the
instruments obliterates the
vocals. Asterik has no such
problem. But I think perhaps the
strongest point in Asterik’s favor
is the competence of their
drummer. Already she excels at
what she does and her drum
solos are pure delight. She can
only improve with experience,
and for that reason alone Asterik
is worth keeping tabs on. I think
my only major criticism of the
group is that they presently
perform few originals. But they
are writing some of their own
material and that’s encouraging.
Their choice of “old stand-bys”
is somewhat repetitious of other
local women’s bands but they
also have a repertoire of delight-
fully seldom heard and com-
petently delivered “standards”
that other Denver boogie bands
don't perform. Like wine,
cheese, and money in the bank,
musicians improve with age.
Asterik's performances will cer-
tainly be getting better and
better. And considering the
degree of competence, vitality,
and worthy musicianship they
already possess, this fact can
serve as a genuine piece of
optimism for Denver women.

It was a night of premieres. It
was a night filled with the
excitement of discovery and the
excitement of the prospect of
brighter days ahead. Goddess
only knows why Denver inspires
so much consistently fine
musicianship. Inexplicable
phenomena usually
attributed to the altitude. But I prefer to
refrain from any theories and
just sit back and let the music
soak in. Hopefully we all can do
just that, time and time and time
again.

The characters, Janet — from
Whileaway, the woman world
where large asses are beautiful
— and Jeannie — who works in
a dime store and dreams of
unrequited love — are antipodal
stereotypes illuminating the
very real character of Joanna —
the author, herself. Joanna
describes herself as a ‘tall,
blonde, blue-eyed Lesbian”
(ole, the capital L). Definitely a
woman-identified woman. She
asks, “Does it count if it’s your
best friend? Does it count if it’s
her mind you love through her
body? Does it count if you love
men’s bodies but hate men’s
minds? Does it count if you still
love yourself?”

In a style reminiscent of Millet
and Vonnegut, the book is a little
spacey and may be a bit hard to
follow for those uninitiated to
either feminism or science fic-
tion. But for those of us who love
them both, The Female Man is a
warm experience that will make
you laugh and cry and hoot with
joy. I particularly enjoyed the
cocktail party with Aphrodissa,
Ludicrissa, Wailissa, and
Saccharissa (who spoke with a
drawl). I also loved Jael, the
beautiful older woman with
silver hair and stainless steel
teeth who made millions as an
assassin (of men, of course).

Don't miss The Female Man;
it's sheer entertainment. You
may get hooked on science
fiction, and maybe you'll get an
invitation like the one I recently
received to “Join the Science
Fiction/Fantasy Fan Club and
chase skirts.”

Joanna Russ, where are you?

Editor's note: in Boulder, by all
accounts. Joanna Russ, we have
learned is soon to take up a
teaching position here. We ex-
pect to publish an interview.
```