Jessie Annis, an organizer of the anti-  
lynching movement, wrote, "When from  
their own investigations of lynchings  
allegedly committed to protect South-  
ern womanhood, they found that they  
were used as a shield behind which  
their own men committed cowardly acts  
of violence against a helpless people,  
they took the only action they could."  
All this is not to say that blacks  
are never rapists, or that a signifi-  
cant number of rape charges brought  
by white women against black men are  
fabrications. There definitely exist  
among black men those who view women  
as property, and attacks on white wo-  
men as violations of white men's  
possessions. The ruling class en-  
courages men of color and working-  
class men to accept the doctrine of  
male supremacy, in many of the same  
ways, and for many of the same rea-  
sons that it encourages belief in ra-  
cial supremacy. While it is in some  
ways understandable that some of these  
men will accept these bribes, it is  
in no way defensible. These men cer-  

tainly make themselves the enemies of  
women.  

_Diana Press Responds To Ruth  

The women of Diana Press extend a  
warm greeting to all the women who  
read our books, as well as to those  
who have only read about us.  

We've been getting a lot of bad  
publicity lately in the women's press  
in the form of unresearched (or half-  
researched, or "researched" without  
understanding) accusations and un-  
founded rumors. One of the items  
that has gotten a great deal of cov-  
erage is Ruth Geller's letter, with  
its accusations of unfair treatment  
from Diana Press. We have hesitated  
to answer her for two reasons. We  
wanted to avoid the personal issues  
such an answer entails, and our pre-  
vious experience with the press has  
made us wary of attempting to get  
our position fully or fairly repre-  
sented. But we've decided now to  
face the issues head on, since our  
failure to provide a statement is  
being used as proof of guilt. Also,  
in order to ensure that our full  
statement appear somewhere for the  
record, we are asking that it be  
printed in full in Albatross. Other  
publications can receive a full re-  
print copy by contacting this maga-  
zine (Albatross). We are also send-  
ing our statement to Lesbian Connec-  
tion, although we understand that  
they reserve the right to edit all  
material.  

As a general policy we believe that  
author-publisher relationships should  
be confidential, since much that is  
personal occurs in such relationships.  
But in the case of Ruth Geller, we've  
been given no choice. So here's the  
story.  

Before Ruth Geller submitted her  
manuscript to us, she sent it to  
practically every publisher in the  
country. They rejected it. Diana  

Press, on the other hand, believed  
that the novel was well-written and  
had historical value in terms of the  
evolution of the women's movement.  
For those reasons, we agreed to take  
it on, and we meant to publish it  
despite that.  

As feminists we are quite sensitive  
to the suggestion that women often  
bring false rape accusations for ul-  
terior motives. We have seen this  
assumption used against us time and  
again. So if we accept every rape  
charge brought against a black man  
as true (and we believe that most  
are), this is still only a tiny per-  
centage of all rapes. Susan Brown-  
miller estimates that perhaps only  
one rape in twenty is reported. We  
rarely call the cops over the teacher  
who gets “too friendly", the priest  
who wants to give us more than coun-  
seling, the doctor who "oversteps the  
bounds", or the boss who expects more  
for a wage than a day's work. And  
who are all of these men likely to  
be? They are almost certainly white  
and middle to upper class. They are  
the “unreported” when we talk about  
rape - they have escaped our statis-  
tics but they must not escape our no-  
tice.  

Which brings us to the question:  
should rapes by black men be reported  
to the police? This is perhaps the  
most difficult problem of all. While  
we might feel naturally inclined to  
report the crimes against us by rul-  
ing-class men, we know that our  
chances of conviction are incredibly  
low and that considerable violence  
will certainly be done to our psyches  
and our reputations before we are  
through with the American criminal  
justice system. If we are raped by  
a black man, we know that our chances  
for getting a conviction are higher,  
but the reasons why they are higher  
should not make us feel too comfort-  
able about taking this course. Yet,  
in the end, what else can we do?  

Numerous alternatives have been  
suggested by feminist groups. Some  
of these alternatives include:  

attempting to intimidate the rapist  
through verbal or physical con-  
frontations with him at his home or  
workplace;  

Her accusation that we broke the  
contract is true, but it was not an  
action we took lightly or because  
Ruth was too much trouble. At the  
time, there was nothing else we could  
do. The contract specified a publi-  
cation date of December 31, 1977.  

The book was destroyed by vandalism  
on October 25, 1977. We could not  
meet the terms of the contract, and,  
since we had already invested a great  
deal of time and money and energy in  
her book, our inability to fulfill  
those terms meant that we took a con-  
siderable loss. Ruth's contract was  
only one of three that could not be  
fulfilled. That was the reality of  
the situation, a reality that Ruth  
refused to understand. But then,  

why should she understand that real-  
ity when she failed, consistently,  
throughout our relationship, to un-  
derstand that she was not our only  
author and that her wishes were not  
our only responsibility?  

Our earliest problems with Ruth  
stemmed from her lack of knowledge  
about publishing and her lack of  
willingness to learn. She incorrect-  
ly assumed that she had control no  
other publisher would allow over  
every phase of our operation regard-  
ing her book. She refused to believe  
our explanations of standard methods  
of book production and placed herself  
in an adversary position that no a-  
mount of special treatment changed.  

One example of Ruth's major argu-  
ments with us occurred when she re-  
ceived her copy of our spring 1977  
catalog, which contained a descrip-  
tion of her book. She was enraged  
because we mistakenly listed the  
author as "Ruth Geller" instead of  
"R.S. Geller". She was also upset  
because the catalog described the  
novel as “the unfolding of one woman's  
sense of oppression", whereas, Ruth  
said, it was actually the story of  
two women. Of course, Ruth did call  
the book Seed of A Woman, not Seed of  
Two Women... Finally, she was dis-  
tressed because the photo in the cata-  
log showed a black woman in the crowd.  

leafletting the city with warn-  
ings which include the rapist's  
picture;  
and, most drastically of all, en-  

couraging women to kill their rap-  

ist, or, alternately, setting up  

"hit squads" of women to castrate  

or kill the rapist.  
While we support the first two alter-  
natives mentioned above, we wonder a-  
bout their overall applicability to  
the problem. Not many women are pre-  
pared emotionally or physically for  
this kind of direct confrontation  
and, therefore, the number of rapists  
on whom this pressure may be brought  
to bear will be minute. As to the  
last two alternatives, while we be-  
lieve that the women's movement must  
wholeheartedly and vigorously support  
any woman who chooses the course of  
killing her rapist, we do not believe  
it to be good sense for us to encour-  
age any woman to take this course of  
action. The women's movement is ne-  
ither organized sufficiently nor rich  
enough to be able to guarantee each  
of these women the kind of campaign  
that was organized around the case  
of Inex Garcia or that of Joan Little.  
(Indeed, the women's movement, per se,  
can't honestly claim much of the cred-  
it for the defense of Little.)  
So, realistically, any woman who  
takes this course of action must be  
prepared for the possibility that  
she will have to face the conse-  
quences alone; to encourage someone  
to take this line of action strikes  
us as irresponsible. As for the  
"hit squad" idea - the dangers as-  
sociated with this kind of vigilant-  
ism are well known. It would be very  
easy for the system to turn such ac-  
tions against us through grand ju-  
ries, wholesale arrests, and massive  
backlash. Suicide is rarely good  
politics.  

So, in the long run, and keeping in  
mind that we exist under patriarchy,  
we feel that the only viable alter-  

Geller  

As Ruth said, there were no black wo-  
men in her book. To be perfectly ac-  
curate, we did not have this argument  
with Ruth herself, but with her at-  

torney, who called long-distance, at  
our expense, to relay Ruth's com-  
plaints - for two hours.  

This is just one example of the kind  
of harassment and expense that Ruth  

subjected us to. Another publisher  
might have dropped her contract im-  
mediately. But we kept on going, ac-  
cepting the many collect calls, put-  
ting more labor and money into her  
book, because we believed it was worth  
publishing. We had it almost to pub-  
lication when we were vandalized. We  
are a little tired of talking about  
the vandalism, and maybe some of you  
are a little tired of hearing about  
it, but the fact is that we are still,  
after a year, struggling to make up  
for that financial and emotional dis-  
aster.  

So we were vandalized. And there  
we were, cleaning up the mess, wonder-  
ing whether we'd survive, fearing we  
wouldn't, when a burglary sergeant at  
the Oakland police department informed  
us that Ruth had called them and asked  
if we really had been vandalized. She  
didn't call us until she'd checked  
with them. In her public statement,  
she said she called the police because  
she assumed our phones had been de-  
stroyed.  

I FIND THE DEFENDANT  
NOT GUILTY OF RAPE  
SENTENCE. THE PLAINTIFF  

TO 4 YEARS TO LIFE  
INCONVENIENCING  

native for the majority of women is  
to report the crime to the police.  
Rape is not a merely slightly kinky  
sexual interlude, it is a crime of  
crushing physical and psychological  
violence. It is far too dangerous  
to all women for any man, no matter  
what the extenuating circumstances,  
to be allowed to escape unscathed,  
at least if we have anything to say  
about it. The inequities in the le-  
gal system must be recognized and  
opposed. We know, often firsthand,  
about the courts, the prisons, the  
police - about their favoritism, and  
their dangers. But we cannot be ex-  
pected to accept violence and possib-  
ly death to save rapists from these  
things. We must not, however, pick  
and choose what rapes will be report-  
ed - we must report every one, no  
matter how privileged or unprivileged  
the perpetrator may be.  

We realize that only with the death  
of the patriarchal capitalistic sys-  
tem will come the end to rape, but  
that day has not yet come. As it is  
often true in this society, none of  
the alternatives are happy ones.  

One of the areas where the vandalism  
hit hardest was in the pasteup room.  
The typesetting and pasteup for three  
books that were to be published were  
destroyed. We had to drop all three  
and postpone several more. Those that  
were merely postponed had not yet made  
it to the pasteup stage, and we still  
had the typesetting - a major and time-  
consuming part of the production pro-  
cess. Although contract-breaking is  
not an uncommon practice in publishing,  
it is not something we, as a feminist  
publisher, commonly do. We feel that  
we have obligations to our authors  
that other publishers do not have (we  
also do not abandon a book after the  
first few months on the market if it  
doesn't sell well - another common  
publishing practice. We do everything  
we can to keep it in print and do sell  
it, because we do not accept books we  
don't believe in). But following the  
vandalism there was no way we could  
fulfill our contractual obligations,  
no way we could commit ourselves to a  
new publication date. We had to con-  
centrate on survival, and, we hoped,  
our eventual recovery. MORE ON PAGE 10