bmr:

We are all about to enjoy our long awaited vacation from  
BMR, our next issue will be mailed early in October. Al-  
though we won't be having our weekly Sunday night meetings  
or doing production in August, we all check into the of-  
fice for other jobs we have to do to keep Mama alive.  

Susanna is keeping track of money coming in and going  
out and also keeping up with subscriptions and all that  
that entails. Deb is doing ads and Bobbe is doing book-  
stores. Balancing books, sending out notices for money,  
answering the mail--is the hardest part of the project.  

This issue is a 20 pager. We wanted to have more pages  
but the reality of our money is that we can't. Printing  

this issue will be around $400, we are 4 months behind in  
rent ($260 plus late fees) and owe 3 months phone bills.  
Last month we were late in mailing as we had to scrounge up  
the money. This issue is late also, we are still hunt-  
ing up the money for printing and mailing.  

Naturally we are asking for more money--but we also feel  
all our readers have a right to know our financial status.  
Local women have been very supportive and some women out-  
side the Denver area have been sending us money monthly. The  
money we have received has been so welcome but as important,  
the support is like a kiss on the lips--it makes us feel  
good. Our supporters have been generous with their time,  
energy, labor, money and food. To write Thanks doesn't say  
it all but it is so good to know that politically we have  
support and emotionally, we have fine friends.  

For the future...we would like to highlight on our covers  
those women among our readers who have photos that they  
have taken--photos of women active, women quiet, women  
alone, many women, women at work, women creating as well  
as scenery and design, we are open to all. Naturally we  
also want graphics; pen and ink, bold, detailed, whatever  
you think is representative of your work. Photos should be  
black and white also, they reproduce best. No money but  
your name in BIG letters.  

We have two articles on racism in the women's movement.  
That's not surprising, it exists so blatantly and we all  
perpetuate it. Individually we may make some progress about  
recognizing how racist we are and try to think and behave  
so that we are not oppressive to people of color but the  
sad fact is that racism doesn't end because individually we  
may have learned some things about racism.  

Patriarchy/Imperialism has used racism to separate people  
and all the systems and institutions of our country perpet-  
uate it. Racism to us means many things: people of color  
are continually harassed by the pigs who disrupt their  
communities as well as on individuals, people are kept out  
of the labor force or are slotted into the lowest paid jobs,  

cover: “Dyke Twins," Photograph by Susanna Smith  

collective:  

Deb Luger, Lori Bradford, Susanna Smith, Bobbe Ross  

supporters:  

Liz Lewis, Sue Goding, Linda Lane, Claire Ellington, Joan  
Pettijohn, Kay Young, Candy McCullough  

contributors: Patricia Silva, Louise Knapp,  
Rozz Lieght, Lisa Miller, Michele Quackenbush,  
Beth Williams  

Big Mama Rag 44 a feminist periodical published monthly  
by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts  
and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St.,  
Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will gen-  
erally fall between the 15th and 18th of the preceding  
month. Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope  
with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for un-  
solicited material. We reserve the right to edit all mater-  
ial for length with the input of the author. Subscription  

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag August/September, 1983  

rates are $9/year,  
$15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 overseas,  
$22 U.S. institutions, $24 Mexico, Canada and $26 overseas.  
Free to all U.S. women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric  
institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library  

for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and 46 available on micro-  
film (Vol.1, #1 Oct.'72 through July '79) directly from BMR  
for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O.  
Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is 303-322-2015,  

where we're at  

deprived of medical care, tracked and forced out of schools,  
the men are used as cannon fodder for U.S. wars, the women  
forcibly sterilized, great numbers of men and women thrown  
into jails or psychiatric institutions and are invisible  

to the general society. The total intent is to kill off the  
people. The only way to kill racism is to kill our system  
and its institutions, to this end we work.  

So as we fight racism in ourselves, we have to teach our  
children and as each white woman comes into the move-  
ment, she has to learn also and we keep on learning. As  
long as our political/economic system rules we know racism  
will not go away. All the above is not to soft pedal  
or excuse racism in ourselves, and we will continue to  

write and reprint women's struggles.  

We recognize that anti-Semitism is more open today, that  
the KKK and neo-Nazis have joined forces and are encour-  
aged to be more outspoken against Jewish and Black people,  
and it is easy to condemn those groups and their actions.  
But we have been silent on our political stand on Israel  
and Zionism, and we have received much criticism. We have  
felt that the Left has had the questions and answers down  
pat and although they are our natural allies on most issues  
we felt we just couldn't accept their stand, as feminists  
we have to do our own reading, talking and analyzing. Every  
issue is emotional and that emotion has to be recognized  
and addressed in our analysis.  

So we have been talking and reading and plan to have our  
results in the November issue.  

We have heard and read what Jewish women have said, that  
to criticize Zionism and Israel is anti-Semitic, and other  
Jewish women and the Left have said that Zionism is racist.  
We have been asked if we felt Israel has a right to exist?  
Do Jews have a right to the land that was Palestine? Be-  
cause Israel exists, the Palestinian people have been dis-  
placed, killed and scattered; and yet Israel exists because  
of the history of persecution and genocide against the Jew-  
ish people. Regardless of what the Israeli and Palestinian  
leaders do--the people of both cultures are being pulled  
apart.  

Our deciding our political stand is not going to change  
the world situation and we know when we print our politics  
that it will not be the definitive answer for us or anyone,  
but it is our beginning on the issue.  

We hope you will all check your sub label on this issue  
and if it reads 9-83 (Sept.) or any month before that, it's  
time to re-subscribe.  

Have a good August-September, see you in October, here!  

inside BMR:  

Local  
Where: We're At........0-5 ee Interview with Grand  
et terete. ons moses Sipeeciseas Jury Resister...... 10,11  
Movement Voices  
Craft women...... soe ee ee Identity as Jewish  
Struggle/Racism Mother... .-+eee+s++s+-13  
In the Lesbian Community.5 Women in Cages :  
On Women's Paper.......- 12 Psychiatric Atrocity.14,15  
Hot Brbei se. 5 anon e aiiverwiatecete’s 6,7  
ES LARE IONS Calendar/More-On.........17  
BL Salad Ovinceuis « axel = 8,9  
EVOVANG ssc «2180s reg Ee PIAS 16 Classifieds & Ads.....18,19  

RESOURCES). cic = «cic sie sie ee  

(11 issues) for individuals in the U.S.,  

Ae