12

Women

Assata Shakur/Joanne Chesimard

We sit in the bull pen. We are all
black. All. Restless. And we are all
freezing. When we ask, the matron
tells us that the heating system cannot
be adjusted. All of us, with the
exception of a woman, tall and gaunt,
who looks naked and ravished, have
refused the bologna sandwiches. The
rest of us sit drinking bitter, syrupy
tea. The tall, fortyish woman,
with sloping shoulders, moves her head
back and forth to the beat of a private
tune while she takes small, ten-
tative bites out of a bologna sandwich.
Someone asks her what she's in for.
Matter of factly, she says, "They say
I killed some nigga. But how could I
have when I'm buried down in South
Carolina?" Everybody's face gets busy
exchanging looks. A short, stout young
woman wearing men's pants and men's
shoes says, “Buried in South Carolina?"
"Yeah," says the tall woman. "South
Carolina, that's where I’m buried. You
don't know that? You don't know shit,
do you? This ain't me. This ain't me."
She kept repeating, "This ain't me"
until she had eaten all the bologna
sandwiches. Then she brushed off the
crumbs and withdrew, head moving again
back into that world where only she
could hear her private tune.

Lucille comes to my tier to ask me
how much time a "C" felony conviction
carries. I know, but I cannot say the
words. I tell her I will look it up
and bring the sentence charts for her
to see. I know that she has just been
convicted of manslaughter in the second
degree. I also know that she can
be sentenced up to fifteen years. I
knew from what she had told me before
that the District Attorney was willing
to plea bargain: Five years probation
in exchange for a guilty plea to a
lesser charge.

Her lawyer felt that she had a case:
specifically, medical records which
would prove that she had suffered re-
peated physical injuries as the result
of beatings by the deceased and, as a
result of those beatings, on the night
of her arrest her arm was mutilated
(she must still wear a brace on it)
and one of her ears was partially
severed in addition to other substan-
tial injuries. Her lawyer felt that
her testimony, when she took the stand
in her own defense, would establish
the fact that not only had she been
repeatedly beaten by the deceased, but
that on the night in question he told
her he would kill her, viciously beat
her and mauled her with a knife. But
there is no self-defense in the state
of New York.

The District Attorney made a big
deal of the fact that she drank. And
the jury, affected by T.V. racism,
jaw and chatter, petrified by crime
and unimpressed with Lucille as a
“responsible citizen," convicted her.
And I was the one who had to tell her
that she was facing fifteen years in
prison while both silently wondered
what would happen to the four teenage
children that she had raised almost
single-handedly.

Lucille has short time, and it is
the day before she is to be released,
that she does not want to go around.
She comes to the Bing (Administrative
Segregation) because she has received
an infraction for fighting. Sitting in
front of her cage and talking to her I
realize that the fight was a desperate,
last ditch effort in hope that the
prison would take away her "good days."
She is in her late thirties. Her hands
are swollen. Enormous. There are huge,
open sores on her legs. She has about
ten teeth left and her entire body is
scarred and ashen. She has been on
drugs about twenty years. Her veins
have collapsed. She has fibrosis,
epilepsy, and edema.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6, No. 7

In Prison: how we are

She has not seen her three children in
about eight years. She is ashamed to
contact home because she robbed and
abused her mother so many times.

When we talk it is around the Christmas
holidays and she tells me about her bad
luck. She tells me that she has spent
the last four Christmases in jail and
tells me how happy she is to be going
home. But I know that she has nowhere
to go and that the only "friends" she
has in the world are here in jail. She
tells me that the only regret she has
about leaving is that she won't be
singing in the choir at Christmas. As I
talk to her I wonder if she will be
back. I tell her goodbye and wish her
luck. Six days later, through the
prison grapevine, I hear that she is
back for the Christmas show.

Dust in Time

of Houston Rape Crisis Coalition

We are at sick call. We are waiting
on wooden benches in a beige and
orange room to see the doctor. Two
young women who look only mildly bat-
tered by life sit wearing pastel
dresses and pointy-toed state shoes.
(Wearing "state" is often a sign that
the wearer probably cannot afford to
buy sneakers in commissary.) The two
are talking about how well they were
doing on the street. Eavesdropping, I
find out that they both have fine
“old men" that love the mess out of
them. I find out that their men dress
fly and wear some bad clothes and so
do they. One has 40 pairs of shoes
while the other has 100 skirts. One
has 2 suede and 5 leather coats. The
other has 7 suedes and 3 leathers.

One has 3 mink coats, a silver fox
and a leopard. The other has 2 minks,
a fox jacket, a floor length fox and
a chinchilla. One has 4 diamond rings
and the other has 5. One lives in a
duplex with a sunken tub and a sunken
living room with a waterfall. The
other describes a mansion with a re-
volving living room. I'm relieved
when my name is called. I had been
sitting there feeling very, very sad.

There are no criminals here at
Riker's Island Correctional Institu-
tion for Women, (New York) only vic-
tims. Most of the women (over 95%)
are black and Puerto Rican. Many were
abused children. Most have been abused
by men and all have been abused by
“the system."

There are no big-time gangsters here,
no premeditated mass murderers, no
godmothers. There are no big-time
dope dealers, no kidnappers, no
Watergate women. There are virtually
no women here charged with white col-
lar crimes like embezzling or fraud.
Most of the women have drug-related
cases. Many are charged as accessories
to crimes committed by men. The major
crimes that women here are charged
with are prostitution, pickpocketing,
shoplifting, robbery, and drugs. Women
who have prostitution cases or who are
doing "fine" time make up a substantial
part of the short-term population. The
women see stealing or hustling as
necessary for the survival of themselves
or their children because jobs are
scarce and welfare is impossible to
live on. One thing is clear: American
capitalism is in no way threatened by
the women in prison on Riker's Island.

One gets the impression, when first
coming to Riker's Island, that the
architects conceived of it as a pri-
son modeled after a juvenile center.
In the areas where visitors usually
pass, there is plenty of glass and
plenty of plants and flowers. The
cell blocks consist of two long cor-
ridors with cells on each side con-
nected by a watch room where the
guards are stationed, called a bubble.
Each corridor has a day room with a
TV, tables, multi-colored chairs,
a stove that doesn't work and a re-
frigerator. There's a utility room
with a sink and a washer and dryer
that do not work.

Instead of bars, the cells have doors
which are painted bright, optimistic
colors with slim glass observation
panels. The doors are controlled
electronically by the guards in the
bubble. The cells are called rooms by
everybody. They are furnished with a
cot, a closet, a desk, a chair, a
plastic upholstered headboard that
opens for storage, a small bookcase,
a mirror, a sink, and a toilet. The
prison distributes brightly colored
bedspreads and throw rugs for a homey
effect. There is a school area, a gym,
a carpeted auditorium, two inmate
cafeterias, and outside recreation
areas that are used during the summer
months only.

The guards have successfully con-
vinced most of the women that Riker's
Island is a country club. They say
that it is a playhouse compared to
some other prisons (especially male):
a statement whose partial veracity is
not predicated upon the humanity of
correction officials at Riker's Is-
land, but rather, by contrast to the
unbelievably barbaric conditions of
other prisons. Many women are con-
vinced that they are, somehow, "get-
ting over." Some go so far as to rea-
son that because they are not doing
hard time, they are not really in
prison.

This image is further reinforced by
the pseudo-motherly attitude of many
of the guards; a deception which all
too often successfully reverts women
to children. The guards call the wo-
men inmates by their first names. The
women address the guards either as
Officer, Miss, or by nicknames,
(Teddy Bear, Spanky, Aunt Louise,
Squeeze, Sarge, Black Beauty, Nutty,
Mahogany, etc.). Frequently, when a
woman returns to Riker's she will
make rounds, gleefully embracing her
favorite guard: the prodigal daughter
returns.

If two women are having a debate
about any given topic, the argument
will often be resolved by "asking the
officer." The guards are forever tell-
ing the women to “grow up," to "act
like ladies,” to “behave" and to be
“good girls." If an inmate is break-
ing some minor rule like coming to
say “hi" to her friend on another
floor or locking in a few minutes
late, a guard will say, jokingly,
"don't let me have to come down there
and beat your butt." It is not un-
usual to hear a guard tell a woman,
“what you need is a good spanking."
The tone is often motherly, "didn't
I tell you, young lady, to ..... or,
"you know better than that"; or,
“that's a good girl." And the women
respond accordingly. Some guards and
inmates "play" together. One officer's
favorite "game" is taking off her belt
and chasing her "girls" down the hall
with it, smacking them on the butt.

But beneath the motherly veneer, the
reality of guard life is ever present.

Most of the guards are black, usually
from working-class, upward-bound,
civil service-oriented backgrounds.
They identify with the middle class,
have middle-class values, and are ex-
tremely materialistic. They are not
the most intelligent women in the
world and many are extremely limited.
Most are aware that there is no just-
ice in the American judicial system
and that blacks and Puerto Ricans are
discriminated against in every facet
of American life. But, at the same
time, they are convinced that the sys-
tem is somehow "lenient." To them, the
women in prison are "losers" who don't
have enough sense to stay out of jail.
Most believe in the bootstrap theory—
anybody can "make it" if they try hard
enough. They congratulate themselves
on their great accomplishments. In
contrast to themselves, they see the
inmate as ignorant, uncultured, self-
destructive, weak-minded, and stupid.
They ignore the fact that their dub-
ious accomplishments are not based on
superior intelligence or effort, but
only on chance and a civil service
list.

Many guards hate and feel trapped in
their jobs. The guard is exposed to a
certain amount of abuse from co-workers,
from the brass as well as from
inmates, ass-kissing, robotizing, and
mandatory overtime. (It is common prac-
tice for guards to work a double shift
at least once a week.) But no matter
how much they hate the military struc-
ture, the infighting, the ugliness of
their tasks, they are very aware of
how close they are to the welfare
lines. If they were not working as
guards, most would be underpaid or
unemployed. Many would miss the feel-
ing of superiority and power as much
as they would miss the money, espec-
ially the cruel, sadistic ones.

The guards are usually defensive.