ot briefs

Women Protest

Throughout Latin America, last Nov. 25 was marked by demonstrations as part of the international day of protest against violence against women. In Lima, Peru, hundreds of women from feminist organizations, unions and political parties, and poor women from the slums demonstrated.

To show the relationship between violence against women and repression by the state, the feminist group ALIMUPER has publicized the rape of peasant women by soldiers, and an incident in Lima in which two women who were merely discussing feminism in a cafe were arrested by the secret police and threatened with rape, robbery, imprisonment and torture for two hours before being released.

Small Acquitted

Anna Small, a Black woman charged in January 1980 with voluntary manslaughter after she shot Clyde Henson, Jr., an alleged member of the Ku Klux Klan, was acquitted of all charges in June 1981.

Small, who lives in Cincinnati, is the only Black person on her block, and had been a victim of various forms of harassment by Henson and members of his family for over 10 years. At one point Henson threatened to kill her, then smashed in her door. Small warned him to leave, but he forced the door in and she shot him.

In the face of continuing harassment, Anna is receiving special police protection.

Lesbians Arrested

Two Italian women, Maria Santa Uzzo, 43, and Rozanna Mazza, 23, were arrested in Agrigento, Sicily. They were sitting on a bench and kissing when a policeman arrived. He asked them to leave, which they wouldn't do, and he then arrested them for insulting a public official.

The charges were offense against the public morality and resisting a civil servant in the course of his duties.

Marianna and Rosa were sent to prison, but after enormous protests from all over Italy, they were provisionally released.

Klan Attacks Paper

Twice in the month of February, members of the Ku Klux Klan have shot at the offices of the Jackson Advocate, a Black-owned, progressive newspaper in Jackson, Miss., and threatened the life of its publisher, Charles Tisdale.

The 45-year-old, widely read newspaper has been an outspoken supporter of civil rights.

Clinics Harassed

Clinic harassment has become a common anti-abortionist strategy for curtailing abortion services. In early October, a Staten Island abortion clinic was forced out of business because of anti-abortion picketing and harassment.

In Dayton, Ohio, a Washington Township trustee, a realtor, and two owners of the proposed site for a women's health center report having had their lives threatened by anonymous anti-abortion callers, who also threatened to burn down the proposed location.

Marriage Pressure

It used to be that schools discreetly expelled female students who got married or pregnant. Now, at least some school districts are going in for shotgun marriages. Officials of the high school in Whitehall, Pa., have expelled a 16-year-old student for her refusal to marry the man she lives with.

Cindy Yetter, an A student, says, "We talked about it but it's just too soon to jump into anything like marriage." School officials, she charged, "said repeatedly that if we got married it would all work out." She stated, "It isn't up to them to decide what is moral and what is not."

“Paralyzer” Not One

Gary Harris, marketing director for the Phoenix-based company which makes "Paralyzer" tear-gas spray, justified the spray's ineffectiveness by stating that "the recent failed assassination attempts on Reagan and Pope John Paul II show that nothing is 100 percent foolproof."

The wrapper of the Paralyzer states that it is "a precision instrument that will instantly stop even a 300 lb. man up to 20 min., including individuals under the influence of alcohol and narcotics."

On a field test, none of the 20 women were able to stop her attacker despite having the spray can ready and in many cases shooting the simulated attackers directly in the face.

Spaghetti Sauce

Members of the "movement" in Switzerland, whose slogan is "Make cucumber salad out of the state," made spaghetti sauce out of a CBS 60 Minutes film crew last fall.

The film crew went to one of the Swiss youth centres and began filming the scene outside. They had hoped to get interviews with some of the people inside but just as they stopped filming they were grabbed by a dozen or so youths and tied up.

While some threw bucketfuls of red, white and black paint over the crew, others poured bottles of ketchup over their heads and others took the film from the cameras and burned it on the street. Someone slashed the tires of their van.

After about five minutes the men were cut free and the equipment taken from them was returned.

No Citizenship

South Africa's plan to disenfranchise its black population by setting up phony "independent" homelands moved a step ahead when Ciskei was established Dec. 4.

Like the three other homelands that have been set up in the last five years, Ciskei's independence is not recognized by any country or international organization.

As the homeland policy was explained by a former South African information minister, "If our policy is taken to its full conclusion, there will not be one black man with South African citizenship."

Housewives’ Bane

A study published in Medical Self Care magazine found that housewives are twice as likely as women working outside the home to die from cancer of the breast, ovary, colon, uterus or stomach. The study blames the higher death rate on cancer-causing chemicals in cleansers, as well as indoor pollution and low-level radiation from microwave ovens and television sets.

Stress and depression add to the likelihood of getting sick from housework.

Kan KKK

Sources for this month's Hot Briefs include Her Say, The Guardian, Gay Community News, Sister Lode, Off Our Backs, New Movement in Solidarity with Puerto Rican Independence Newsletter, People's World, Rocky Mountain News, Big Apple Dyke News, Open Road, the Waste Paper, the Progressive, Spare Rib, News & Letters, Workers' Viewpoint, Mother Jones and Aegis.

Compiled by Susanna Smith.

WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN “TOTALITARIAN AND AUTHORITARIAN?”

Dan Wasserman, Washington Star

WELL, A TOTALITARIAN AND AUTHORITARIAN LEAVES MANY OF THESE GOVERNMENT ARRESTS, GOVERNMENT TORTURES AND MURDERS ON THE OTHER HAND... PRIVATE SECTOR

-Rag, March, 1982 - Page 7