“The idea that unlimited opportunity exists under capitalism is  
absurd. The most that society offers us now is the ability to  
accumulate material wealth at the expense of others.”  

—Alexa Freeman and Jackie Macmillan,  
“Prime Time: Art and Politics” in Quest v.1 no.1.  

The recent purchase by the Feminist Economic Network of the  
Women’s City Club building in Detroit has focused much  
attention on the issues of feminist economics.  

FEN purports to have accepted economic leadership of the  
women’s movement. In order to exercise valid and effective  
leadership, it is necessary to sustain support from the  
constituency one assumes to lead. It was clear as early as  
November 1975, at FEN’s inception, that its founders did not  
enjoy the support of the women who participated in that  
conference (see Big Mama, Jan. 1976), #4 of whom chose to  
form another network rather than subscribe to FEN’s bylaws.  

Since then, several member organizations have withdrawn  
from FEN, leaving it with only three members. Of the 13  
feminist federal credit unions in the U.S., only one belongs to  
FEN and even that one is considering withdrawal (see Big  
Mama, May).  

Furthermore, the Women’s City Club is being staffed mainly  
by women from the Oakland Feminist Women's Health Center,  
2400 miles away. That there is not enough local support to  
maintain the project casts even more doubt on FEN’s claim to  
leadership.  

Another central principle of leadership is that of account-  
ability. If FEN represents feminists in any sense, then  
feminists have a right to demand that FEN be answerable to us.  
The network is operating in an especially sensitive area,  
working with and assuming responsibility for money, the very  
substance of capitalist power. We would expect that the women  
controlling it would take exceptional care to be fully accountable  
to those whose resources they are committing to a project  
fraught with contradictions.  

Privacy and Accountability  

A FEN board member expressed concern that so many women  
were aware of the details of the loan which enabled them to buy  
the building. She cited the credit union’s responsibility to  
protect the confidentiality of its transactions. We endorse a  
woman’s right to privacy in all her transactions; in this case,  
however, the loan was made in the name of all feminists and  
was supposed to represent an investment in women’s future.  
To attempt to conceal such a transaction is, we feel, a distortion  
of the principle of confidentiality.  

The structure of FEN is such that its board is self-selected,  
rather than being chosen by its membership. This means that  
the women whom FEN claims to represent have no control over  
the network's activities, but are forced to rely on the  
self-proclaimed integrity and good intentions of the board  
members. Because no structure exists to challenge the board’s  
decisions, it now falls to concerned feminists to take issue with  
FEN’s direction, politics, and actions.  

We question the political value of a club which provides only  
services to relatively privileged women. The only survival-  
oriented facility in the building is the Downtown Detroit  
Feminist Women’s Health Center. The Detroit Feminist  
Federal Credit Union once had its offices there, but they have  
since moved out, following hostilities between themselves and  
FEN. (see last month’s Big Mama).  

We are not saying that it is politically incorrect to provide  
recreation and services to middle-class women. We do feel,  
however, that when women’s money is used in the name of the  
movement, it should be used to benefit all women. The  
Feminist Women’s City Club, by its very nature, excludes  
women who don’t have the money or leisure to take advantage  
of its facilities.  

There are many other projects in which money could have been  
invested, which would serve a much broader spectrum of  
women in more crucial ways: a hospital, for example, or a food  
co-op or daycare center. Even FEN’s original plan to establish a  

More on page 18  

@  

A most exciting thing happened to Big Mama the other day—a  
friend donated a sum of money to go toward the purchase of a  
typesetting machine. We still need to make up the difference  
between the donation and the down payment, but things are  
truly encouraging for us.  

Of course, having this money come into our possession was a  
tremendous uplift for collective members. In keeping with our  
high spirits, Big Mama will be on vacation during the month of  
June. This means that there will be no July issue published. The  
idea is that an extra-large June issue will make up for the lack.  

Speaking of lack, Katherine Davenport has left the collective.  
We are open to another collective member to assist in general  
paper functions without, at first, taking on any specific duties.  
One of our problems in the past has been in deciding what  
qualities we really wanted in a collective member. We have now  
rectified this situation and have a list of three general criteria.  
They are: 1) The prospective member must have been involved  
in another feminist project before joining us. 2) She must agree  
with the basic politics of the newspaper, and 3) She must be  
willing to make a serious commitment to Big Mama.  

A note concerning a recent policy decision: news is our  
priority, as we are a newspaper. Because of this, we will no  
longer carry poetry as a regular feature. We have been unable  
to carry poetry for the past few issues because news has taken  
up all our available space. Chocolate Waters seemed to be the  
only person concerned about the missing poetry. We will still  

attempt to print a poetry page when we have the space, but  
don’t hold your breath, Choc.  

We now look forward to a much-needed vacation. Farewell!  
until August.  

Schlafley’s Home State  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 4 No. 6  

Groups Gather for Illinois ERA Rally  

Lee A. McDavid  

On Sunday, May 16, approximately  
10,000 women, children, and men from all over  
the country gathered in  
Springfield, Illinois for a Na-  
tional ERA Rally. Illinois is  
one of the key states which has  
not passed the ERA and  
demonstrators hoped to con-  
vince the Illinois legislature to  
pass the national amendment;  
the state amendment was  
already part of Illinois’ new  
state constitution.  
The rally, organized by NOW  
and supported by many of the  
ERA Coalition organizations,  
attracted people from Cali-  
fornia to Pennsylvania, inclu-  
ding about ten women from  
Colorado, and showed repre-  
sentation from among union  
women, students, profes-  
sionals, black women, Indian  
women, lesbians, socialists,  
nuns, and politicians.  

Leaflets  
The Saturday before the  
rally, pro-ERA people leaf-  
leted Illinois in order to  
educate voters about the ERA.  
Saturday evening the Colo-  
rado representatives attended  
a potluck in Peoria, Illinois  
and heard Betty Friedan speak  
about 45 minutes on the ERA  
and other women’s issues.  
Friedan, originally from  
Peoria, spoke of the necessity  
to pass the ERA because it  
represented basic “American  
values” and warned against  
“lies” which anti-ERA people  
were spreading in order to get  
the ERA “Schlaflied” in Illi-  
nois. (As a side note, Phyllis  
Schlafley sits on the Commis-  
sion on the Status of Women  
in Illinois.)  
Later Friedan branched off  
into a discussion of “radicals”  
in the movement; defined only  
as those supposedly demand-  
ing unrealistic things of  
feminism.  
On Sunday, the well-organized Illinois group was ready  
for the thousands of people  
who poured into Springfield  
and gave people directions  
and detailed information on  
where to find the rally points.  
At about noon the rally started  
and 10,000 people, including  
500 from the east coast  
Freedom train who arrived  
late, many union workers, as  
well as members from So-  
cialist Workers Party  

Stretched  

the length and  
breadth of the street chanting,  
“What do you want? ERA!  
When do you want it? Now!”  
Few anti-ERA people showed  
up for the gathering except for  
one woman carrying a port-  
able sound system (she quickly  
disappeared); one man who  
said he hoped the black clouds  
that day would rain us out  
(which they didn’t); a sign  
declaring the ERA “a plot by  
the ruling class”; and a plane  
financed by the Illinois Stop  
ERA Committee carrying a  
streamer behind it which said,  
“Illinois Women Oppose  

ERA—Libbers Go Home.”  
Capitol Gathering  
At the state capitol, where  

the demonstrators gathered  
after the march, Mary Jean  
Collins-Robinson, a member of  
Chicago NOW, introduced a  
continual stream of guests,  
speakers, letters and tele-  
grams of support. One letter  
of support was received from  
“the President and Mrs.  
Ford.” Speakers included  
women from labor unions,  
politicians, a nun, political  

activists, and many others.  
The speakers overlapped in  
content very little and pro-  
vided over two hours of  
interesting speeches covering  
everything from the ERA’s  
religious implications for  
Catholic women to the neces-  
sity for full employment and  
change in the American econ-  
omic structure.  

The last speaker was Betty  
Friedan who followed the  
same outline as she had in  
Peoria the night before.  
About halfway through her  
speech a group of women  
carrying a large lavender sign  
saying “Lesbians support the  
ERA” placed themselves di-  
rectly in front of Friedan who  
seemed to finish her speech  

sooner than usual, but did not  
make any mention of their  
presence.  
Tenuous Position  

The status of the ERA in  
Illinois is very tenuous and  
very political. Cecil Partee,  
president of the Illinois senate  
and Democratic candidate for  
attorney general, declared her  
support for the ERA, as did  
the governor of Illinois, Daniel  
Walker, and previously de-  
clared supporter Richard  
Daley, mayor of Chicago. But  
Partee, as well as many other  
senators supporting the ERA  
in Illinois, are not running for  
re-election to the senate next  
year and, therefore, a serious  
problem has arisen. Some  

pro-ERA senators are accused  
of ignoring their duties until  
their term is over and not  
lobbying for the ERA thus  
causing the possibility of the  
ERA being voted on by a new  
senate which very well may be  
more conservative. Governor  
Walker is accused of sup-  
porting anything and every-  
thing indiscriminately with  
little actual commitment.  
And Richard Daley is well  
known for playing one game in  
the public view and another  
behind closed doors. The  
pro-ERA people feel that if  
these three powerful men  
really supported the ERA it  
would have passed long ago.  
The Colorado representatives  
from Ft. Collins left Illinois  
feeling that the ERA had a  
50-50 chance of passage.  
Though some women at the  
rally felt as though the ERA  
was the only relevant feminist  
issue, the majority seemed to  
feel ERA was one issue among  
many. Much time was spent  
in the rally speeches discussing  
the necessity for a total  
change in the system, which  
was heartening.  

Feds Not Funding Day Care Standards  

Hundreds of federally sup-  
ported daycare centers around  
the country are now in danger  
of closing following the Sen-  
ate’s failure by three votes to  
override President Ford’s veto  
of the $125 million bill on day  
care.  

This action denied daycare  
centers $125 million in addi-  
tional funds to enable them to  
meet federal standards, which  
include long-unenforced staf-  
fing and safety measures.  

The bill would have delayed  
until July 1 the implemen-  
tation of those standards,  
which are now in effect  
because of the veto.  

States found in violation of  
the standards would lose  
federal funds retroactive to  
February, and in some cases  
to last October, thereby for-  
cing many centers to close.  
Illinois, which would be hard-  
est hit, would have to close  
centers for more than 35,000  
or 40,000 children being  
served, according to state  
welfare officials.  

The effects of hundreds of  
daycare centers closing would  
be “disastrous,” said Velma  
Denlinger of Workers and  
Parents United for Daycare,  
an organization in New York.  
“Private daycare costs are  
now up to $35 a week per  
child,” she added, “and there  
is just no way a low-income  

person can make it. It actually  
comes down to forcing people  
to quit their jobs and go on  
welfare.”