NOW’s National Conference  
Will Discuss Key Issues  

Sandy Stevens  

The National Organization of Women  
(NOW) will hold its National Confer-  
ence April 22-24 in Detroit, Michigan.  
This year's conference will open with  
a rally and march in support of rati-  
fication of the Equal Rights Amend-  
ment. Planners of the ERA rally are  
counting on representatives from each  
of the 50 states marching shoulder to  
shoulder to visibly demonstrate the  
unity and strength of NOW's commit-  
ment to 1977 ratification.  

The increasing attacks on women's  
rights by reactionary forces have  
prompted discussion within NOW on how  
to meet these attacks and defend the  
rights women have gained. A number  
of resolutions have been submitted for  
discussion at the conference. Briefly  
they deal with the following:  

1. That NOW call for more aggres-  
sive steps in the advertising, pre-  
scribing, and acceptance of psycho-  
tropic drugs by women;  

2. That religious institutions  
“undertake reparations programs" in  
view of the wrongs they have done  
victims of the patriarchy;  

3. That NOW take action to eradi-  
cate the use of images of violence  
against women in advertising in the  
recording industry;  

4. That business and school desegre-  
gation being key social issues; NOW  
actively participate in efforts to  
support school desegregation and Black  
rights;  

5. That NOW call for a visible cam-  
paign that includes rallies, picket  
lines, educational conferences, and  
other events against attacks on wo-  
men's rights. That NOW must make its  
priority the defense of the rights of  
our Black, Chicana, Puerto Rican,  
Asian, Native American and working  
sisters;  

6. That economic issues in our Se-  
cond Decade lead to strategies for:  

organizing into collective bargaining  
units, preserving the concept of equal  
pay for comparable work, guaranteed  
minimum income, a national network of  
child care centers, full employment,  
and redistribution of economic re-  
sources;  

7. That welfare reform include, as  
a minimum, comprehensive coverage  
without irrelevant eligibility criter-  
ia, uniform federal administration,  
protection of privacy, flexibility in  
establishing standards for eligibility  
and definitions of lifestyles and  
elimination of sex discriminatory con-  
cepts;  

8. That use of the expression "working  
woman" be replaced by term(s) ac-  
knowledging unpaid homemakers for  
their contribution to the economy.  

The 1977 National Conference has  
also planned more than 100 workshops  
covering a broad range of topics.  

ERA Strategy Abortion  

Battered Women Child Care  

Women in Poverty Lesbian Rights  

Displaced Homemakers  

How to Attract New Members  
How to Run a Meeting  
And many, many more... All women  

are welcome. For more information  
about the conference and upcoming  
local NOW activities call:  

East Denver Chapter, Fran at 755-  
8790. Their next meeting is April 4th  

Central Denver Chapter, Donna at  
837-9289. Their next meeting is  
Sunday 12.  

CGH Won’t Birth Babies  

Phyllis Kadison  

Colorado General, the state welfare  
hospital, has once again cut back on  
women's health services. Since the  

new year began, the family planning  
clinic has been eliminated and other  
gynecological services greatly re-  
duced.  

Now, according to an anonymous Denver  
General doctor, Colorado General will  
not be accepting pregnant women as  
patients in their obstetrics clinic  
until August. It is believed that  
they will accept only those pregnant  
women who are considered to be “high  
risk" patients. This would suit their  
needs as a teaching hospital. So from  
now through August, birthing is more  
or less "banned" at Colorado General.  

The women of Denver and outlying  
areas do need hospitals that will give  
good continuous prenatal care and will  
birth babies. According to a Denver  
General ob-gyn doctor, the private  
hospitals are refusing to accept the  
overflow of patients (mostly Medicaid  
and poor) that would normally go to  
Colorado General.  

What is now happening is that women  
who are turning to both Colorado  
General and Denver General for care,  
are being turned over to the neighbor-  
hood health clinics for care. The  
reason for this is that the neighbor-  
hood clinics receive federal funds, and  
neither the state nor city wants to  
pick up the “tab" for providing obste-  
trical services.  

The doctors at the clinics feel they  
are understaffed and overworked to  
begin with, and don't know how they'll  
handle all these extra patients and  
provide good care. Perhaps soon our  
state and city hospitals may just tell  
us "sorry no babies for this fiscal  
year, we're just plain out of funds."  

We need to have gynecological and  
obstetrical care provided to us by our  
hospitals in Denver and we need to de-  
mand it. For information on an action  
involving these cutbacks call 399-7809  
or 388-9085.  

Two months ago we heard that federal  
women prisoners in Wyoming were being  
sent to Nebraska to serve their time  
because the state of Wyoming does not have  
a prison for women. This is just one of  
many examples of stories that deserve  
coverage and analysis, but that we have  
been unable to report on, being unable  
to get additional information here in Denver.  

Big Mama Rag is asking women to send in  
articles and news items from their  
communities, cities and states of  
interest and importance to women. Help  
get the word out about women in your area!!  

struggle  

a continuing forum  

Yin McDuff, Deanne Pernell, and Karen Saunders  

This is an open letter to the anti-rape movement. The members of the  
Santa Cruz Women Against Rape are writing this letter because we are  
concerned about the direction the anti-rape movement is taking. While we  
have many concerns, some of which are expressed in this letter, we would  
primarily like to address the issue of the relationship of the anti-rape  
movement to the criminal justice system. The reasons we are interested in  
this issue have a lot to do with how we see ourselves as a Women Against  
Rape group.  

We are a political group that focuses on the issue of rape and violence  
against women, and that is working towards the long-range goal of a radical  
transformation of the very basis of our society. We do not believe that rape  
in the present capitalist, racist, and sexist structures of our society  
can be solved through the criminal justice system. The fight against rape  
must be waged simultaneously with the fight against other forms of oppression.  

When the organized movement against rape first started about five years  
ago, most of the anti-rape groups were collectives of feminists, who  
came together because of their anger at the way the police and the courts  
treated rape victims. These groups (and ours was among them) were primarily  
political. We were critics of the police, the courts, and the hospitals,  
the institutions that traditionally dealt with rape victims. Their awful  
treatment of women became a topic in the media, largely due to the efforts  
of the women's movement against rape.  

In a snowballing fashion, many other anti-rape groups formed. Many of these  
groups, however, did not consider themselves political, nor even feminist.  
They considered themselves service groups, who wanted "to help rape victims."  
They felt that the criminal justice system and the anti-rape movement had a  
common cause, “to get rapists off the street." Therefore, these groups tended to  
encourage or cajole women to report rapes to the police.  

The more explicitly political groups were frustrated, both by the ineffectiveness  
and unresponsiveness of the criminal justice system, and because of the  
increasing rape rate. While many remained critical of the criminal justice  
system in theory, most groups felt it was important to work on building or  
improving relationships with the police and other criminal justice agencies.  
They hoped that this would lead to increased prosecution and conviction of rapists.  

In attempts by anti-rape groups to build good relations with the criminal justice  
system, criticism of these agencies has been withheld, or dealt with through  
police channels instead of by applying outside pressure (e.g., through the media,  
demonstrations, etc.). This tendency to work with the criminal justice system  
is reinforced by the fact that many groups are supported through government  
funds. Because of this, there is an inevitable push--if not outright con-  
tractual obligation--to persuade women to report rapes to the police.  

Because there aren’t many other alternatives, we support the right of individual  
rape victims to go through the criminal justice system. We don't feel that  
they should be forced or pushed into anything, whether reporting or not reporting  
a rape to the police. But as anti-rape groups, we have the responsibility  
to expose the function, and challenge the process, of the criminal justice system.  
Attempts at "good relations" with the criminal justice system have served to co-  
opt our movement, and have led to the belief (or hope) that the criminal jus-  
tice system can solve the problem of rape. Yet, the sexist and racist nature of  
the criminal justice system only makes the problem worse.  

It is true that the conviction rate for rapists is very low. This is largely  
due to sexism and the sexist myths about rape in our culture. We abhor the  
reasons for this low conviction rate but that doesn't mean we should work for a  
high conviction rate. Those convicted of rape are most likely to be Third World  
and/or poor White men, as is true of convictions for nearly all other crimes.  

In order for a DA to "win" a rape case, he (or rarely, she) must use sexist,  
racist, and classist stereotypes and assumptions, thereby supporting the worst  
aspects of the system. If the goal of this process is fighting and ending rape,  
it is bad and self-defeating to use racist and classist means to get to that end.  
The process is crucial to the true success of the end.  

The answer is not just to get rapists “off the street.” Prisons themselves are  
incapable of changing rapists. Prison culture is much like that of the outside  
world, with all of the pressures intensified. Male sex roles, violence, and  
power relations which lead to rape in the first place, are strongly reinforced  
within prison. Rapists in prison don't stop raping--they simply enforce their  
power over men weaker than themselves. Prisons don't deal with the roots of the  
problem; they only add to the causes. Men getting out of prison have not learned  
new ways of relating to women and haven't developed an analysis of why they rape  
or how to change. It is likely that they will rape again.  

Those anti-rape groups who spend time working for reform legislation encounter  
many of the same problems and obstacles. Sexist attitudes (and actions) cannot  
be legislated away. Legislation does not exist in isolation; even “good" anti-  
rape legislation (and it isn’t clear what that would be) will be ineffective in  
a sexist society that encourages violence against women, and in a criminal  
justice system that persecutes Third World and poor White men.  

The time and energy that is now used both to try to develop a good working re-  
lationship with the criminal justice system agencies, and on reform legislation,  
could be much better spent. The anti-rape movement should work on community  
education, and on developing practical alternatives that deal with both the symp-  
toms and the roots of sexism and violence. We want our focus to be the creation  
of various community-based and supported alternatives, because we think that the  
responsibility for dealing with rape should be in the hands of all community  
people. Some of the ideas and alternatives we're working on now include:  

1. We encourage people to get together to discuss ways to watch out for each  
other. This includes block watching to make neighborhoods safe, organizing  
at workplaces to get support to deal with hassles from bosses and fellow work-  
ers, and organizing at schools to get self-defense classes, etc.  

2. We try to create the consciousness in people that they should respond to  
a scream or a call for help, and that they should go to a woman's aid if it  
looks like she's being hassled.  

3. We print the descriptions of men who rape, hassle, and assault women so  
that rape will become a public issue, so that these men will lose their  
anonymity, and so women can be warned of some particular men.  

4. Confrontations of rapists, etc. by women (or women and men). The message  
we want to present to men is that we know who they are and what they did, that  
they are responsible for their actions, and that they have the responsibility  
to change. We try to offer follow-up re-education by anti-sexist men. Although  
we think that each individual confrontation is important, we hope that each one  
will lead to broader community awareness and action.