national

Necessary Bread Disarmament Statement

There is this lifeboat theory. It's a line some folks are putting out about how we're all gonna get saved. Except we know they believe there's only a small survival group of people worth saving, and there's a whole lot of people they ain't gonna miss. This is not a pleasure cruise. Not a fantasy. We are talking about the threat of a nuclear war that some people think is "survivable."

We are a group of feminist lesbians whose various identities mean that we shouldn't get along. But we do. We are Northern Black and Southern White. Anglo, Jewish, daughters of engineers and domestic workers. We are first and tenth generation Americans, Cuban immigrants, transplanted Chicanas. Some of us were raised right; some of us just grew up. But none of us, none of us, were meant to survive.

We see our working together as a radical step, a departure from "politics as usual." We oppose a "peace without justice" movement, whether it be in the name of disarmament, feminism, Third World liberation, lesbian and gay rights, or the organized Left. Nobody's freedom can be bartered out of these or any other movements. It is more than enough that we are already expendable to the powers that be in this country.

In Washington, D.C., with a population 80% Black, post-nuclear holocaust plans insure the survival of the white, male elite (or so they think). In New York City -- a city with an immense Third World population, the city with the largest Jewish population in the world, a city with people of many different ethnic backgrounds -- where are the old people, the poor, the disabled, women without men or means, women with children, people incarcerated in institutions to go to be saved? Which subway line are we to take to freedom?

The mass anti-war, anti-nuclear, anti-militarism movement developing in this country and around the world is indeed amazing. But if the usual white, middle class, male, and heterosexual perspectives are allowed to determine the direction of the movement, we will all lose.

day 522

set the stage for the Simpson-immigrants and refugees in an effort to keep Amerika white.

The success of the Vietnam anti-war movement was in its size. Its failure was in its inability to do more than scratch the political surface. People of color in the U.S. were forced to choose between race struggles and the white-on-white peace movement: ironic, given that it was poor and Third World people -- Vietnamese and American -- who were being killed in the largest numbers.

Militarism is a Third World issue. It is Third World countries and nations, not the USSR, that are the battlegrounds for global warfare today. But the U.S. government uses the threat of Russian communism to justify its continued intervention in the Third World.

And those of us who are Third World lesbians choose to do our political work in the name of lesbianism to counteract those of our people who tell us that we divide the race. We are of our people and will always be of our people. What breaks up our families is the gay sister or brother kicked out from it. What divides the race is racism. And it is nuclear warfare that is the ultimate form of genocide.

We have all heard people discount the anti-nuclear weapons and disarmament movements as "white, middle class" issues, not “bread and butter" issues, not about "our survival." We don't agree with this analysis, but at times some of us have felt this way. Like every woman, we live in danger. We know -- especially those of us who are women of color -- that the police can kick our asses on the street and our lives would be over as quickly as if a bomb had gone off. We know of the daily threat of violence from men -- for some of us, the particular threat from white men.

We know too that these threats, these acts of violence are meant to divide us, to make us see each other as the enemy. We refuse to accede to such pressure, regardless of its source.

In the face of the nuclear power arrayed against us, the various governmental interests and power-plays, the fact of militarism as someone's profitable business, we feel in some ways that we can do little to affect the process. It hasn't been proven that raising our voices stops anything. And yet, the contradiction is that it is us, and the many, many like us -- poor, Jew, female, old, dyke, disabled, colored, and tired, those of us struggling to put bread on our own and other people's tables -- who cannot be ignored. For it has been proven that the movement can't stop a thing without us.

We demand a very great deal more -- but for starters, we will take a belief in the future that is every bit as necessary as bread on the table.

Necessary Bread Affinity Group

for all of us, the rage of heterosexual men. We know the fear of violence, not just from the Klan and the American Nazi Party, but from the less readily visible, the more “respectable,” those who share the anti-Semitism and racism and queer-loathing of these groups, and could find in us "appropriate" targets for hatreds supported by every establishment institution in this society.

Barbara T. Kerr  
Cherrie Moraga  
Carroll Oliver  

Dorothy Allison  
Elly Bulkin  
Cheryl Clarke  

Tania Abdulahad  
Sonia Alvarez  
Gloria Anzaldua  
Becky Birtha  
Leslie Cagan  
Fay Chiang  

MORE ON PAGE 17  
Page 8 ~ Big Mama Rag, July, 1982  

Those who are already U.S. citizens can expect less freedom of information as the Reagan administration and the Supreme Court work together to close law enforcement records and "dissident" files to the public.

Meanwhile, the Justice Department is preparing to prosecute those young men who have refused to register for the draft. Although over 14 million have not registered, U.S. attorneys have been instructed to prosecute a select group of 225 resistors -- hand-picked by the Justice Department.