13

Rape And Patriarchy...continued from pg 8

The third myth is that of the rapist as the unfortunate victim of society, one who has been oppressed and cheated out of his due fulfillment in life. In light of his earlier defeats, it is no surprise (so the myth goes) that he strikes out against women to regain his manhood.

Rape apologists constantly search for the victim in the criminal as well as the criminal in the victim. However, rapists are not psychopaths, sociopaths or driven by uncontrollable sexual urges. They are neither permanently insane nor temporarily insane with sexual frustrations. They are “normal” red-blooded American males doing what the patriarchal system teaches them to do. In the spectrum of learned male behavior, rape is the "perfect" combination of power and sex.

"Recognizing that rapists are in no significant sense different from other men does not make the act less horrible. Rather, it brings into question the society in which ordinary men can be rapists." And that society must be one in which masculinity is inextricably tied into dominance, power, violence, and sadism. That society must condone a view of women disqualified as whole human beings, against whom it is permissible to perpetrate atrocities. That society must be one in which “women are systematically defined as inferior, where women are systematically despised."

Patriarchs - television dictators, newspaper moguls, movie monarchs, artists, writers, psychologists, psychiatrists, politicians, religious potentates, prophets, philosophers, sociologists -- have been the engineers of this misogynous culture. Their women-hating dogma reproduces, inculcates, perpetuates itself insidiously, diabolically.

Rape is part of the male ritual, like chugging beer or playing football. Hegemonic rites such as group rape (humorously referred to as gangbangs by males), war rapes (both as “spoils” of war and mass rape as a military strategy), stag party rapes, rape as a tool of organized crime and even armchair rape are all a part of the male bonding process which is essential to a patriarchal system. In each of these atrocities, it is the male/male interaction that renders the assaults fascinating to the assaulants.

The majority of rapists do not believe that they have done anything wrong. They will go to “incredible lengths to see their behavior as 'normal' and 'acceptable'" often interpreting their own conduct as seduction or love-making.

The concept of rape (as women define it) is meaningless to the patriarchy, which views women as a lower order of creation, as a piece of ass, a cunt, a lay, a chick, a box, a whore; as put on earth as chattel for the use, misuse, and sexual gratification of males.

The Police

"I know how serious this is, Little Lady. This is as serious as if I forced you with a gun into my car and I took you out in the woods and I forced you to have sexual intercourse with me." -police officer to rape victim

"If a woman has a knife at her throat, she might as well relax and enjoy it." — high ranking police officer, Ann Arbor.

What happens when a rape victim reports the assault to the police? First of all "the vast majority of rape victims never report the crime to any social authority." The minority (about 10%) that do report it to the police often regret having done so. Many express feelings similar to those of the woman who said, “If I'm ever raped again...I wouldn't report it to the police because of all the degradation..."

When a girl or woman reports the rape to the police, she needs sensitive and effective help. In order to provide this help the police officers should have a high level of human understanding and intensive preparation. Few officers possess the necessary maturity, awareness and training; as males and part of the patriarchal conglomerate, they readily further the traumatization process of the victim.

"Victims report being leered at, humiliated, and harassed by the policemen they called for help...‘Are you a virgin?' ‘Did you like it?’ ‘Did you climax?'" Minority and Third World women and girls are especially oppressed by the police. Many report being ignored, propositioned, verbally and physically manhandled and/or raped by police officers.

Police often refuse to accept the rape as "founded" unless the victim has severe injuries. Lesbians, hippies, prostitutes, divorced women, working-class women (any woman who is not middle/upper class, white, feminine) also meet with police incredulity and hostility. Women who are calm and lucid (often in shock) are faced with disbelief, too. Police have been described by rape victims as: indifferent, paternalistic, hostile, incompetent, condescending, voyeuristic, sexist, racist, full of contempt, rude, arrogant.

Even if the police “believe" the victim, they often make only minimal efforts to catch the rapist. If the rapist is white and middle/upper class, very little or no effort is made. If he is black or working class and the woman is white, the police are more likely to pursue the matter.

Many police reforms have been suggested; some of these are: having policewomen assigned to rape cases, having one officer do all the questioning, interviews that focus on the suspect instead of the victim, providing training for police officers in how to be humane, sensitive and effective, giving victims full information about police procedures and standardizing procedures.

However “until police come to view attacks on women and children as seriously as they view attacks on men and property - and until women are seen as equal human beings - real reform will remain an illusion and forcible rape will continue its devastating acceleration."

The Medical Complex

"The rapist must have enjoyed you - you have such a nice tight vagina.” -private physician to a rape victim

"The rape of women by men is not nearly as devastating an experience as the rape of men by men, because raping a woman is just an extension of the normal sex act," -doctor in a metropolitan hospital

Like the misogynist police departments, most of the medical and mental health complex are part of the patriarchal system and, as such, further the corrosive process that a rape victim experiences.

Many hospitals will not handle rape cases for a variety of reasons: Catholic hospitals often turn away rape victims because they do not want to deal with the contraception issue. Many private hospitals want to avoid the legal entanglements of the doctors having to present evidence in court.

The few hospitals that will accept rape victims are often so "busy" that “a wait of five to six hours is not uncommon ... a victim might have to sit alone in a general waiting area and to be further humiliated by stares and comments from passing personnel, and then crudely summoned with a call of ‘Where's the rape?'" A rape patient sometimes has to wait while the doctors argue over who will examine her.

Rape victims’ descriptions of their treatment by the medical complex includes: snickers, lewd comments, apathy, ignorance, hostility, racism, insensitivity and condescension.

In spite of the foregoing, most feminists encourage rape victims to get medical attention for the prevention of pregnancy and venereal diseases, for the treatment of physical injuries and for the gathering of physical evidence for the legal authorities in case the woman decides to report the rape.

Psychological counseling is often as debasing as its medical counterpart. "Many therapies incorporate a malevolent antifeminism or sexism." The therapist frequently communicates, subtly or blatantly, the old patriarchal myths: "You wanted it", “You asked for it", "You deserved it".

Drastic, widespread reform of the medical complex is essential. The Miami/Dade County Rape Task Force drafted the following "Bill of Rights" for rape victims:

- You are entitled to good quality medical care by doctors, nurses and counselors.

- You are entitled to full information about your present condition, the treatment you receive, the reaction your body may have to medications, hospital charges and your own record.

- You have the right to be treated without discrimination and to dignified care.

- You have the right to privacy and confidentiality, for yourself and your personal records.

- You have the right to refuse (choose) treatment, to be told of the medical consequences of your action and to leave the hospital when you choose.

- You have the right to refuse (choose) to have this event reported to the police.

- You have the right to complain about your personal or medical treatment.

- You have the right to continuity of care, including responses to your future related needs.

I am POWERLESS!

CONTINUED NEXT MONTH