Damesha Blackearth on Dessie Woods and Colonial Violence

Woods Will

Dessie

Susanna Smith

Dessie Woods is a 34-year-old
African (black) woman who is cur-
rently serving a 22-year prison
sentence for killing a white man
who tried to rape her and a friend.
She has been the victim of forced
druggings, beatings, and an attempted
hanging in the more than 3 years
she has already served in the
Georgia Women's Institute of Corr-
ections. Despite her brutal treat-
ment, Dessie remains strong in the
knowledge that what she did was
right.

On November 29, 1979, Damesha
Blackearth, Chairwoman of the Nat-
ional Committee to Defend Dessie
Woods, spoke in Denver. Damesha is
also a representative of the African
People's Socialist Party and has
recently returned from a European
tour. She is touring the U.S. to
build support for Dessie Woods and
to intensify the harassment campaign
of Carter and the Democratic Party.
Her talk was accompanied by a slide
show, "Death Penalty, U.S.A.: We Charge
Genocide," and a statement by Clare
Strawn, a member of the African
People's Solidarity Committee in
San Francisco.

The slide show gave the history
of African people from the time they
were brought from Africa to be slaves
in America, to their present colon-
ialist status in the U.S. It showed
strong women and men fighting back
throughout that history.

The slide show portrayed how col-
onialism of Africans includes geno-
cide, one form of which is the death
penalty. Fifty-eight percent of the people
on death row are black people. The
death penalty is legal lynching.

Clare Strawn, a former activist in
Denver's lesbian feminist community,
spoke about the role of North Ameri-
can (white) people in the struggles
for national liberation of third
world peoples. She is a member of
the African People's Solidarity
Committee (APSC), a white group
which organizes other North Americans
in support of third world struggles
for liberation, specifically, the
national liberation of African people
in the U.S. The APSC takes its
leadership from the African People's
Socialist Party (APSP), an African
organization which is working for
the liberation of all African people.

As white people, the APSC takes
its leadership from African people,
thereby stating that black people
have the right to determine their own
direction/strategy, and also challeng-
ing the notion that imperialism has
instilled in us that the world re-
volves around our perceptions as
white people.

I recorded Damesha Blackearth's
talk. It was very informal—she had
no prepared speech—just took quest-
ions from the audience. She is a
highly articulate and forceful woman—
inspiring and dynamic. The
following transcript is slightly
edited from the tape, and is a
poor rendering because reading it
one misses her dynamism.

What exactly happened with Dessie
Woods?

In the summer of '75, Dessie Woods
and a sister named Cheryl Todd were on
their way down to Reidsville (Ga.)
prison to visit Cheryl Todd's brother
who was not getting proper medical
attention and he was complaining des-
perately of an illness. On the way
down to the prison, Cheryl Todd, who
was under treatment for high blood
pressure, fainted right as the women
reached the prison. A state trooper
came over, accused the two women immed-
iately of public drunkenness, beat the
women, and jailed them for two days
until money was wired to them for
their release. Upon the sisters get-
ting out of prison, they wanted to get
out of southern Georgia as quickly as
possible, which meant the two sisters
hitchhiked.

They got a ride with a white man who
was posing as a detective. He had a CB
radio and a long antenna. At this time
CB radios were not that popular. And
he told the women he was a detective
and he would take them back to Atlanta.

The two women got in the car under the
assumption that he was a detective and
he was extremely nice to the two women
and they began to tell Ronnie Horne of
their story and how they had just been
beaten and jailed.

After a while they learned Ronnie
Horne's real intent when he wired to
his friend on the CB radio and agreed
to meet him at a nearby restaurant.
When they got to the restaurant, the
two men began to argue over which one
would take which of the women. Dessie
Woods and Cheryl Todd refused to be
separated and told Horne that they
would find other means of getting home.
It was at that point that Ronnie Horne
threatened the women and told them
that if they did not get back in the
car that he would arrest them and that
they would never get out of prison
that time.

The two women got back in the car
and Ronnie Horne assured them that he
would really take them to Atlanta that
time. This is when he drove into a
deserted area and he told Cheryl Todd
and Dessie Woods that he was gonna
rape both of them. Cheryl Todd,
who had been raped at a younger age,
could not bear the threat and jumped
out of the car and ran screaming hys-
terically into the woods. It was at
that time Ronnie Horne pulled his gun
in an attempt to shoot Cheryl Todd.
Dessie Woods made the snap decision to
fight for her very life which ended up
in her shooting Ronnie Horne twice in
the head and leaving him in a perma-
nent state of erection called rigor
mortis.

What has happened with Cheryl Todd?

What we term as ideological imperial-
ism, the October League, which is bas-
ically a white-run organization, which
also has some black people in this
formation; they took Cheryl Todd and
explained to her that if she separated
the two cases, that Dessie Woods was
the real culprit, and that's who the
prison system really wanted and if she
separated the two cases she would get
a lighter sentence. So Cheryl Todd,
afraid and not wanting to be railroad-
ed back to prison, agreed to separate
the cases. Because Cheryl Todd never
displayed any resistance, therefore the
state did not see her as a direct
threat.

Once the cases were separated, Cheryl
Todd got five years, four years to be
served on probation, so actually Cheryl
Todd ended up doing, I think, like two
months in prison.

What is Cheryl Todd doing now?

She's out under the condition that
she does not make any public statement
around the case of Dessie Woods and the
last I heard she had got banged up in
a car accident so she's really not do-
ing anything.

What is the situation with Dessie
Woods now?

Dessie Woods was just denied parole
in November. She's in segregation and
she's on a hunger strike. What happened
was two white women, who were getting
ready to be released and who Dessie
Woods thinks were bribed to attack her,
Dessie Woods ended up whipping both of
the white women which resulted in her
being put in segregation and the women
being released from prison to a half-
way house.

And so Dessie Woods is in segregation
indefinitely. We have had communication
with her very recently and we have gone
down there and demanded to see her.
Last time we saw her she made the state-
ment that she understood that the only
correct way to get out of prison was
to fight like hell and so Dessie Woods
is still very strong, strong, strong
and continues to fight back.

What is happening with the case of
Dessie Woods?

Just recently, the National Committee
to Defend Dessie Woods was able to
secure another lawyer. The name of this
lawyer is Dennis Cunningham and he's a
well-known lawyer in terms of political
cases. The most recent thing that Cun-
ningham is doing is filing an appeal
for the habeas corpus appeal. In June
the habeas corpus appeal was denied.
He's planning on appealing that den-
ial and fighting the case from that
end.

But the national committee has al-
ways elaborated on the fact that we
don't expect Dessie to be freed through
the court system. We understand that
never once in the history of so-called
American justice has the court system
ever admitted to any guilt. We under-
stand that these are the same court
systems that upheld the Jim Crow law,
the same court system that said black
people were property, and that black
people could be murdered at will. We
understand that these are the same
court systems that sentenced Assata
Shakur, Sundiata Acoli, to prison.

So we don't expect them to admit to
any guilt willingly. We think that
the masses of righteous thinking people
and the masses of black people, in an
organized fashion, applying necessary
pressure on the U.S. so that they un-
derstand that anywhere they go in this
country they're going to be confronted
with, “How can you talk about human
rights when Dessie is in prison?"

We understand that every time Carter
rears his head and human rights comes
out of his mouth, we need to be pre-
pared to confront him, "Well, what
about Dessie Woods?" and it's going
to be pressure like that that is going
to force the state into freeing Dessie
Woods. So the freedom of Dessie Woods
actually lies in the hands of right-
eous thinking people. It's up to us
to do what we want to do.

How are the cases of Joann Little
and Dessie Woods different?

The cases are similar in terms of
the resistance. But the Dessie Woods
case is different. Particularly, the
cases are different in the way the
cases are being struggled around.
Joann Little's case basically accepted
the whole court system and says, "You
all made an error here" and pleaded
with that system to free Joann Little.

We say it wasn't an error and that
the whole court system is illegitimate.
They had no right to try Dessie Woods.
They have no right to try black people
in this country. And so we are demand-
ing, we're not asking for the freedom
of Dessie Woods, we're demanding the
freedom of Dessie Woods. We're strug-
gling around the Dessie Woods case in
the context that we understand will
liberate all black people - to forward
the black liberation movement in this
country. The Dessie Woods case is not
simply a free another political prisoner
issue. We understand that we will be
fighting to free political prisoners
all our lives unless we develop a
strategy to liberate black people from
U.S. domestic colonialism, and that's
why the Dessie Woods case is different
from Joann Little's case and that's
why the Dessie Woods case has strong
implications as it relates to the
black liberation struggle in this
country.

Free Dessie Woods will be the theme
of International Women's Day in many
cities throughout Europe and the U.S.
This idea started with women in
Copenhagen and has spread rapidly
to other cities.

For information on this and other
facts about Dessie Woods contact:
Dessie Woods Support Committee
1332 S Van Ness
San Francisco, CA 94110

National Committee to Defend
Dessie Woods

120 NW 9th St.

Gainesville, FL 32601

Write to Dessie Woods, A-78927,
GWIC, Hardwick, GA 31034 to show
your support.

Big Mama Rag, Vol. 8, No. 1.

Would you talk about your trip in
Europe?

Basically, the trip in Europe devel-
oped a lot of unity, a lot of unity
among a lot of African forces in Eur-
ope and also unity among European
forces in Europe. One of the things
that I found in terms of the general
tour was that the so-called left Eur-
opean movements in Europe that are
supposed to be progressive are very simi-
lar to the North American movement in
this country in terms of white people
always putting out conditions of how
they will support Dessie Woods and
what conditions Dessie Woods will be
supported around. And that's why it's
important that black people, and also
North American and European people
understand, that black people are our
own liberators and we're going to
struggle and that the politics around
the Dessie Woods case has been defined.

We don't put forth as a prerequisite
unity with our strategy, but we do say
that this is the strategy that black
people have adopted. We do character-
ize the different types of support. We
see liberal support and actual solidar-
ity with the pro-independence movement
in this country.

And I found that a lot, mainly the
feminists, were involved in self-
interest - how will it forward our
movement - what is Dessie Woods going
to do in return for us. And putting
out that they are the ones that will
actually free Dessie Woods. Actually
nothing could be further from the
truth because black people along with
our allies will free Dessie Woods.

And it is definitely the case that
Dessie Woods is under the leadership
of black people.

And so I found those tendencies and
those struggles that I get into in the
U.S. with the North American left move-
ment were the same struggles that I got
into throughout Europe with the Euro-
pean left movement. I found that Afri-
can people, same as in the U.S., basi-
cally united with the strategy because
of concrete conditions and because of
the living hell that we suffer day to
day. It was no problem understanding
how the death penalty is genocide.
African people had no problem under-
standing police terror in our community.
They had no problem understanding how
injustice like that could be committed
on Dessie Woods - and Dessie Woods still
be in prison after three years of
forced druggings, brutal beatings,
attempted hanging.

The European tour, as I saw it, was
no different from a tour in the U.S.,
the only difference was that the U.S.
does not have direct control over
Europeans so they're more in a posi-
tion to apply a serious kind of pres-
sure on the U.S. government and to
expose the whole human rights hypo-
critical international campaign that
James Earl Carter runs around the globe
talking about. Now throughout Europe
anytime Carter shows his face, I can
guarantee that there will be European
people and African people saying,
"What about Dessie Woods in the U.S.?"
And that's a serious victory....one,
it's a serious victory because people
in Europe understand and know about
the contradictions that black people
are facing, so we're no longer isolated.

We're no longer in a bind where they
can keep the struggles of black people
local and national struggles. They
have become international whether the
U.S. government wants to acknowledge
that or not. It's real. We had demon-
strations at U.S. embassies throughout
Europe.

When I was going into London,
I was stopped by a British official
and harassed and interrogated for over
three hours. Some of the questions
that they asked were “Who are you?"
and I told them, "It's necessary at
certain times to travel under my
stage name" and also, "What are you?"
and they wanted certain kinds of
answers and I attempted to give the
answers that I knew they were looking
for.

I probably need to mention that
prior to me going through immigration,