POLITICS POLITICS OF HEALTH

Big Mama Rag Vol.4 No.7

Realizing Our Sexual Potential

Deborah Taylor

The Kinsey Report, Masters and Johnson, and a new study in 1972 all report that 15% of women never experience orgasm, and that 70% of single and 47% of married women do not have orgasms consistently in their sexual relationships. The corresponding figures for men are much smaller; only about 8% of men are impotent.

The differences between men and women reflect the effect of our sexist culture on women; as an oppressed class we are taught to hate our bodies and to direct our sexuality towards meeting men's needs rather than our own. We are afraid of loving ourselves too much and of giving ourselves pleasure. We are mystified about our sexuality, but we can counteract these myths with correct information, and learn to love and reclaim our bodies.

Women have a much greater sexual capacity than men, but this capacity has been subjugated and stifled by a sexist society (Mary Jane Sherfey, The Nature and Evolution of Female Sexuality, 1972). We have multi-orgasmic potential; women have been known to have as many as several hundred orgasms in four-hour periods of study. We are rarely physically satiated when we have sex, although we may be emotionally satisfied and exhausted. Men are limited physiologically in ways women are not; for example, the amount of blood congestion in their pelvic areas is smaller. Men satiate themselves quickly and are rarely multi-orgasmic.

Inevitably, when men brought women under their control over a period of 8,000 years, they subjugated our sexuality as well. Today men define how women can express their sexual drive with laws and cultural taboos. Patriarchal heterosexuality, prolonged adolescent abstinence, and monogamy are not suited to female sexuality, and consequently women are usually not aware of their sexual potential.

People in power create cultural values and myths and laws to assure that their needs are met. Sexist values and myths are integral to the ideology of our country. Some examples are: It is okay for men to be selfish in bed. Women do not have sexual needs of their own; their bodies belong to men and their only need is to please those men. Men know how to "do it"; women learn all they need to know about sex from their men who "give" them orgasms. Only married sex is legitimate. Women are objects of consumption and men buyers; if you are ravishing, you deserve to be ravished (or raped). If a man has an erection, women are responsible. Rape is just normal male sexuality. Etc., ad nauseum.

We often believe these myths and accept these sexist values because they are so pervasive, and because there is a societal taboo on discussion about sexual experience. Anything sexual is surrounded with mystery, guilt, fear, and anxiety (including miscarriage, abortions, etc.). Most women remain ignorant and ashamed about their bodies and sexuality all their lives. Robin Morgan writes in Sisterhood is Powerful, 1975,

"Our bodies have literally been taken from us, mined for their natural resources (sex and children) and deliberately mystified...Androcentric medicine in the service of the patriarchal colonizer had researched more efficient means of mining our natural resources with...little concern for the true health, comfort, nurturance, or even survival...of those resources. This should hardly surprise us; our ignorance about our own primary terrain - our bodies - is in the self-interest of the patriarchy.”

In order to reclaim ourselves we must learn to know and love our bodies. Most of us are barely moving and breathing; we can change this with yoga, self-defense, sports, and good sex. We can go to self-health workshops and learn to use a speculum and see our genitals for the first time.

We can challenge our hatred and distrust of our bodies when we can see ourselves as beautiful, well-constructed, strong sexual beings.

Masturbation can be an important sexually liberating experience for women because when we masturbate, we love ourselves directly rather than vicariously through a partner. We take our sexual power into our own hands, literally. Studies show that women reach orgasm more dependably, rapidly, and intensely through masturbation than any other sexual activity. (The next most effective method is manipulation by a partner and intercourse.)

Only 63% of American women masturbate compared to 92% of American men. The percentage of women has been rising, but half the women who masturbate feel guilty about it. Patriarchal religious doctrine and cultural ideology say that we are not supposed to masturbate. Masturbation reputedly causes warts and hair to grow on your hands, sterility, blindness, psychosis, etc., ad nauseum.

The myth that if women masturbate they won't have sexual energy for their partners is unfounded. In fact, studies show that there is no relation between the frequency of sex with a partner and masturbation. The more orgasms you have by any means, the more sexually responsive you are likely to become. Masturbation teaches us what we like and makes us feel good about ourselves physically. It enables us to relate to others from a position of abundance rather than neediness. Setting sexual nourishment is like eating; sometimes we're hungry when our friend isn't around. We might prefer to eat with her, but we wouldn't consider starving just so we could eat together.

The different ages at which women and men reach their sexual peaks is due to social roles as well as physiology. Heterosexual women often become most responsive in their late thirties and early forties. This phenomenon is due to the fact that they are no longer overburdened and tired with child-rearing. They are less afraid of getting pregnant and have mastered birth control. They know their bodies better after years of experience, and their husbands/lovers are slower in getting an erection so they allow more foreplay.

Men reach their peak at a much earlier age (19) because they have more cultural approval and encouragement to master their sexuality and develop their bodies. Their sexual needs are recognized and respected and they practice masturbating for hours, play sports and take pride in their bodies. Human sexuality is learned, not instinctive. It takes self-love and practice to learn how to have orgasms. Women are taught to hate themselves and to not practice, to be passive and depend on their partners.

Sex can be a power game; we talk of being "screwed" or "fucked over" when we lose in a power struggle. It is humiliating and frustrating to know we are going to lose. We can become discouraged and feel helpless, and in frustration, we turn off our feelings until we experience no sexual feelings at all. This numbness can end, however. If a woman has a clitoris she can have orgasms. If we practice loving ourselves, we can gradually discover that we do have sexual feelings and coax them to the surface again.

The focus of our physical self-hatred has been the features of our bodies which distinguish us from our oppressors: large breasts, body fat, and different genitals. All women have these characteristics; all women are oppressed. For example, we are taught our genitals are dirty and disgusting—a "dark hole of Calcutta." As a child, I was given a separate washcloth for that "unmentionable" other place, whereas my brothers boasted about their penises as symbols of power.

In fact, our vaginas are cleaner than the insides of our mouths. Our vulvas are extraordinary and each one is different. They vary in color, shape, pattern, and sensitivity: brown, pink, purple, heart-shaped, oval, triangular, wrinkled, smooth, long, dangly, tight, etc. Every woman is different in terms of the number and type of nerve endings in different areas of her genitals. The clitoris,

More on page 14

is intercourse.)

The different ages at which women and men reach their sexual peaks is due to social roles as well as physiology. Heterosexual women often become most responsive in their late thirties and early forties. This phenomenon is due to the fact that they are no longer overburdened and tired with child-rearing. They are less afraid of getting pregnant and have mastered birth control. They know their bodies better after years of experience, and their husbands/lovers are slower in getting an erection so they allow more foreplay.

(4, Denver Witch Wins Lawsuit Against Brown Palace Hotel

Kate Sharp

In May, 1976 BMR published the story of Kathy Estes' discrimination suit against the Brown Palace Hotel. Estes is a self-proclaimed witch and claimed she had been discharged from her position as cashier at the Brown Palace because of her creed, witchcraft. The case, which was heard by Judge Penfield Tate on March 26, was decided upon in Estes' favor on July 15th.

Tate ruled that Kathy Estes was “illegally discharged" by the hotel and cited laws prohibiting dismissal of “any qualified person because of creed.”

In his decision, Tate ordered that the Brown Palace immediately "cease and desist from any and all discriminatory and unfair employment practices," that Estes “be offered reinstatement in the same or similar job...from which she was illegally discharged" and that such reinstatement “must include all seniority, rights, benefits, and privileges that would have been accrued had she been continually employed.”

Tate further ordered that Estes be awarded a cash settlement in the amount equivalent to the salary she would have accrued had she been continually employed, less any money earned by other employment since the time and any applicable deductions required by law.

The three major issues arising from the dispute were: 1. Whether Estes was discharged and had not, in fact, quit; 2. Whether she was discharged because of her creed; and 3. Whether witchcraft is a creed under Colorado law and also the creed of Kathy Estes. Tate answered each issue in the affirmative.

The Brown Palace has 30 days to appeal the decision.