Wages for Housework: Not Now, Not Here

Kim Womantree

The Wages for Housework movement has grown by leaps and bounds since 1972. In the United States it is small, but in England, Italy, Canada and elsewhere, hundreds and now thousands of women march behind Wages for Housework banners. The movement is based on a simple fact: women do a lot of work—cleaning, cooking, childcare, sewing, love-making, keeping a home together—that would be paid except for the fact that they do it in a private home. The term "double shift" refers to the hours a woman works at her paying job and then when she comes home—up to 20 hours a day. This work holds capitalist society together, because someone has to keep those workers coming to work.

The theory behind the demand, Wages for Housework, is that if women got paid a living wage for their work, we would be freer, have more choices and more power over our lives and that housework would stop being drudgery and become a job worthy of respect and dignity. The point is also made that the jobs women now have would also go up in status and pay because there would no longer be a vast pool of women waiting for jobs—they could choose to be housewives instead and employers would have to make their jobs more alluring.

The theory is sound. Wages for Housework is a radical demand in two senses—that it gets to the root of the problem and that it can't be accomplished under the present economic system. Some of the practice behind the demand is also sound. The strength in raising the demand is that it exposes women's slave labor, which has been carefully kept invisible, and says that this labor is of immense value to society, that society could not run without housewives. So it also exposes a power base for women.

In India

It is also a very effective way to organize women. In Italy where most women are full-time housewives, there could be no feminist movement without housewives. And this is a great thing, that in Italy, thousands of women come out from their isolated kitchens to speak out, to march on the streets, and to organize for free abortion on demand, better health care, and Wages for Housework.

In Italy and England, Wages for Housework people in 1973 fought against cutbacks in the Family Allowance Plan. This is a stipend paid to women with children every week. In England, the women won. Also in England, WFH has been active in the Claimants' Union—equivalent to our Welfare Rights Organizations here. So Wages for Housework is a real force in these countries and has already accomplished much.

I believe that Wages for Housework is not a worthwhile demand for women here in the United States to fight for, right now, for several reasons, some general and some because of conditions of this particular country.

First of all, I repeat, it is a radical demand. Wages for Housework, if fully realized, calls for an end to the capitalist system, since there is no way capitalism can support the removal of all that free labor. This is apparent when you realize that we are talking about a living wage—$250 or more a week is the value of the 60-100 hour work-week women put in. Now there is no way that our businessmen are going to take their billions away from guns and nuclear toys to give to women and children. No way without a total revolution. No way, without a complete change of power. No way, without armed struggle.

But many organizers of Wages for Housework still talk as if it can be accomplished by merely expanding the welfare system or demanding that bosses pay workers twice as much to cover the work done at home.

Expanding the welfare system would expand an oppressive bureaucracy. Women on AFDC get barely enough to survive and all kinds of humiliation. But even if they got more, and other women got it too, they would still be dependent on the State for a living. And what the State giveth, the State can taketh away.

Obviously, nothing would be "given." Women would have to fight for what they got. But with the world economy getting worse, people will have to be fighting a hell of a lot harder than they are now to get ANYTHING, even token gains, much less a living wage for half the population.

Doubling the wage earner's pay would in many cases make a husband a boss instead of a slave owner. Women workers' pay would double, but again I ask if this is realistic in the recession we are in.

Last, the movement for Wages for Housework can go left or right. If it goes to the left, it can be focused towards getting collective, community-controlled childcare, free laundries and dining halls, communal living (and cleaning) arrangements. If it goes to the right, women will be back where they started from in isolated houses, doing isolated work, being competitive, and raising nuclear families. A woman, just returned from Barcelona says that in Spain it is going in this direction.

I believe in the United States, the potential is for the movement to go to the right, if it goes at all. It may never get off the ground here because 1) we don't have the base that Italy does—that is, only 30 to 40% of women here are full-time housewives, 2) the radical feminist movement in this country is much more sectarian and much more isolated from housewives than in Italy or England, and 3) we have a strong right-wing feminist movement here whose credo is to get power by getting more money and moving up in the system. Italy and England do not. This “right" tendency, encouraged by the government, has given us the Feminist Economic Network, Ms. Magazine, the Managerial Woman, the Women's Bank—all aimed at giving a few privileged women an illusion of progress while leaving most women untouched. I believe this right-wing feminist movement could strongly influence Wages for Housework into believing its goals could be accomplished "within the system," without revolution. Women's magazines like Ladies Home Journal, Family Circle etc., aimed at housewives, are publishing more and more articles whose theme is "I'm just a housewife, and I love it; why don't these damn libbers stop putting me down?" These articles do not mention Wages for Housework. 4) Finally, because the USA is an imperialist country, we get cheap labor and raw materials from poor countries and our standard of living is very high. People are more content and fearful of jeopardizing their "security"—and reluctant to join radical movements.

All of these factors that would push Wages for Housework toward the right could change. As the recession gets worse, people will be more antsy and willing to risk as they have less to lose. Feminists could get more involved with women who don't call themselves feminists.

What do we do in the meantime? All the work we are doing now on sexuality, health care, anti-rape, pro-abortion, anti-discrimination, and what have you.

We also keep slowly building collective childcare and living as an alternative to the nuclear family. This should be coupled with outreach so that these ‘alternative lifestyles’ don't become the property of a privileged group. We don't wait for the male left to make socialism so our needs can be met “after the revolution." Without a strong and independent women's movement there will be no revolution. But neither do we try and tailor a radical demand to fit things as they are. Fighting for Wages for Housework under capitalism is a dead-end street.

AFTERWORD: I am not a housewife myself. I wash no one's socks but my own. Therefore my viewpoint is limited. I would like to hear from housewives and mothers in this community. I am also interested in canvassing neighborhoods, supermarkets and laundromats in August to get women's opinions on housework and other feminist issues. Anyone who would like to help, call me at 477-0103.

the Working

ion Group
ALL work a }

. Women

and the w f
ing -The power of women and the version of the community, by Me Rosa Vella Costa and Se F - #3 Women In Struggle, - Houseworkers Handbook

Le<t and Right Exroxs, by LUG

ewelr Poster ‘eltner fa. Cue :

ecor *

rams yUNIT-AOR/ 3 Serames Vibrators — : Ng Bumpers

The most complete feminist gift store in the world. FEMINIST HORIZONS is located at 105861 West Pico Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90064. (213) 836-7822 Browse from 11 a.m. until 5 p.m., Monday through Saturday. For our mail order catalog of one-of-a-kind items, send 25¢. You'll be glad you did!

FEMINIST ATTORNEY

RUTH A. BUECHLER

Legal Services in the areas of: Bankruptcy, Domestic Relations, Lesbian and Women's Rights, and General Legal Services.

Reduced fees available for people with low income.