10

Big Mama Rag Vol. 6 No. 7

The Pent Up Players Perform in Boulder

Dona Calacone

On June 25, the Pent-Up Players, consisting of seven women from the Colorado Women's Correctional Institute at Canon City, presented their play, Those in Darkness, at the Stage Door Theatre in Boulder.

Those in Darkness is their second play depicting the reality of prison life for women inmates. Their first play, Day after Day, was enthusiastically received when it was presented in Denver last year. Those in Darkness is a collage of scenes which metaphorically display the boredom, anxiety, and confusion which years of incarceration can bring about. It is divided into seven sections, each illustrating a different aspect of prison life. Each section contains several short vignettes, interspersed with song and poetry, ranging from the women's own writings to works by a variety of authors: Kafka, Joseph Bush, Andrea Shepard, Arthur Kopit, and Lewis Carroll, to name some.

The quality of the acting was high; the scene changes were smooth and the lighting was well done. Generally, the material used was well selected and imaginatively dramatized. However, it would have been nice to have seen more material which was written by the women themselves.

The most significant aspect of the play was the fact that these women were not merely actresses portraying prisoners, but were the prisoners themselves. The audience was made startlingly aware of this early in the play with the cast line-up. All seven women stood in a line facing the audience and each one, in turn, mechanically recited her name, identification number, the crime for which she was convicted, and the length of her sentence.

This was the first performance of Those in Darkness. The women hope to present it many more times but the decision to do so has not yet been made by the prison warden. The play was directed by Juliet Wittman with

“I wanted help so bad, but I could never get it.”

The following are quotes from women inmates of the Colorado Women's Correctional Institute at Canon City. They are excerpts from the panel discussions held after the plays Those in Darkness, presented recently in Boulder, and Day after Day, presented in Denver last year.

Dona Calacone

Entering Prison

“I was great when I first got there, but I had spent three months in the county jail and I was alone for three months. I mean there was nobody down there. The women's cell in the county jail is in the basement and I saw a matron three times a day when she brought my food and that was it, and half the time they forgot that. I had to bang on the pipes to get them to come down. The last two-and-one-half weeks there was one other girl brought back for reconsideration. When I was put into population at the prison, I felt like I had gotten out of prison for a while because I wasn't locked in a little room, you know. To me it was more free."

"When I walked into CWCI (Colorado Women's Correctional Institution) in 1973, I was scared half to death because I had watched the movies, 'Women in Chains', and I wasn’t actually scared of them jumping on me, they were probably scared of me jumping on them....but if you're talking about women harassing you or in a gay situation, no; there was no problem whatsoever. Nobody's going to attempt to touch you or harm you in any way unless you put yourself in that situation. But if that’s the way you want to be treated, then that's how you'll be treated. Otherwise, no problem."

Crimes and Sentences

"87% of our population at this time are in for either some type of forgery or sale of narcotics. 1976 seemed to be a popular year for forging checks and credit cards. In my case, at the time I was broke; flat broke. I had a husband I was putting through college and three children. He would not get up and go out to work; he would not take care of the kids when he was out of classes. I had to pay $180/month for childcare. I just got scared because I was getting threatening calls from loan companies, threatening to repossess everything down to my kids. And I wasn't thinking.”

"Believe it or not, I committed my crime because somebody ripped me off for my checks. I was fixing to go back to school—to college—and somebody ripped me off for two checks. I had my kids and I was trying to buy a house at the same time. I told the police about it. They said, 'Come on, Denise, you're known for crimes.' So I took a lie detector test and they found out that I did not do it even though you can pass a lie detector test just by poking yourself a few times and saying 'Ouch!' and you'll be alright. I went to loan companies but by me being an ex-con, I could get no help. So the only thing I could do to save my home was to go out and commit a crime...that's the only alternative I could think of. 'You've got to feed your kids somehow.'"

"I was a drug addict and one night we got bored with the everyday thing and there was nothing else to do so we started a dare game, and my dare was to go down and do this thing. So I went down and touched the wall and I was getting ready to go in and I decided, 'No, man, this ain't for me. This is not the way.' So I turned around and was walking back and people walked out and saw my knife, saw my mask, and had me arrested for attempted armed robbery. And it's just that that's the way things go. And I never did it. I was twenty-two when I committed my crime. I've only been in since February of this year but I've been paying for this crime since April 15, 1976."

"I went to Morrison when I was 15. I think I've had one free year since then. Between the parole board and the court dates and the bonds and sitting in jail, ever since 1970, I think I've had one free year."

"My mother was an alcoholic. I left home at eleven 'cause I couldn't stand her screaming at me...The way I survived is: I took a string and a hook and I caught worms at night and I went out and I fished, just to have something to eat. I got tired of fish assistance from Lisa Lloyd and was produced through a grant from the Colorado Humanities Program.

At the panel discussion which followed the play, Juliet Wittman said that the women inmates greatly depend on support from outside the prison. She said that the women's recreational programs, like the drama project, aren't funded by the institution or the Department of Corrections, but by grants from the outside. Without people on the outside initiating and working on these projects, recreational programs for women inmates would not exist at all. Wittman said that initiating the project and securing the grant was a long, difficult process. Even when a few such projects are begun, the institution often schedules them to occur at the same time, thus keeping the activities open to the women limited.

The drama project is especially valuable because it educates people on the outside. Wittman says, “There's a tremendous desire on the part of those people inside to contact (the outside)...Sometimes a simple thing like someone letting you use their home can mean so much to somebody, and there are people outside willing to do it but the connections aren't being made. There're so many things which could be done if public interest were aroused at all: some kind of bus service to get visitors back and forth, some kind of support service in terms of jobs, if you could somehow get the goodwill to the place.”

* * * * *

On Sunday, June 25, at 11:30 p.m., Denise Taylor, one of the Pent-Up Players, was arrested upon her return to Fort Logan Community Center (the halfway house at which she is now residing) for violating parole. Denise forgot to make a required telephone call at 9 p.m. to the halfway house. However, she is known to have spent the evening with the other cast members under the supervision of two guards from CWCI.

photo by Deb Taylor

Participants in the panel discussion following the presentation of Those in Darkness: Four members of the Pent-Up Players (l. to r.): Ginger Meyers, Marsha Keuten, Sherran Reynolds, and Denise Taylor; Judith Aplon, from the Colorado Humanities Program; Juliet Wittman, director.

and I wanted something to go with the fish, so I went into a store and I stole a whole bag of potatoes. It seemed like that was the easiest way to get some food without asking anybody for help. I didn't want to go to a halfway house or a juvenile center, so I had to survive on my own. I got a little job and I still went to school, but it was still not enough and I got into bigger crimes, from petty theft all the way to armed robbery."

Sentences

"A lot of your sentence has to do with the judge, too. The particular judge I went before has a daughter and a son. One of them, I don't remember which one, O.D.'d on heroin. I went before him. It wasn't a rumor, my lawyer told me...he's very hard."

"I resent the fact that the guys who busted me were bigger crooks than I ever was..."

Vocational Training

"We have a yard and maintenance crews; laundry, sewing room, kitchen, janitorial and school and we have maybe one inmate in the hospital. Otherwise, there's not that much for you to do."

"What the institution actually needs is for somebody to come and train you for some kind of job skills or get you prepared."

“One of our instructors does have a business class where she teaches basic office practice, typing, PBX operation. They're just starting a data processing class now. Once you have finished with your high school and possibly have finished the business class and are classified low enough that you can leave the institution, you can attend night classes in the Springs at the college."

"Right now we're trying very hard for them to open some trade school for women...I had been in the electrical trade in the streets and when I went in, I told them that I wanted to go to electrical school...Due to the fact that I was a woman, I couldn't go: because you had to go with the men. Then they sent an instructor over for maybe six to eight weeks...the man in charge of rehab said we were drinking too much coffee, even though I was carrying a B+ average.”

"I wanted help so bad, but I could never get it. I have talents where I can build shelves to waterbeds. I can show you oil paintings of people that I have painted, designs. I can also show you people who write poetry, who could publish a book but there's no way that you can get any help in here."

Getting Out

"I meet the parole board in October but I don't have any parole plans. I don't have a place to live and I don't have a job and I'm not sure right now how I'm going to accomplish that."

MORE ON PAGE 18