22

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7. No. 7

Straps From Macia’s Table POOF 56 FSS SFOS SSS SESS ESOS ESS SOLOS SO PESOS POSES SEE OSOSSSOSOSSOSS SO SOOSOOSSSSOOOOOCS

Chocolate Waters and Katie "Blaze” O'Brien

(Editor's Note: Comedienne Katie O'Brien and performance poet, Chocolate Waters, went on tour from April 2 to May 15. In a period of six weeks they performed shows in 16 different cities from Idaho to Washington to Oregon to California, Arizona, and Texas, traveling nearly 5000 miles. This column is the fourth and final installment of their road notes and observations about the different women's communities they visited and performed for.)

Discouraged by our lousy experience with Olivia, hassles with our San Francisco producer, and by the fact that we're barely making enough money to cover our asses, we promptly retaliate by coming down with the Russian Flu. We're ready to dump Blaze's VW into the Pacific and take our chances with the nearest DC-10, but fortunately we are saved by two of San Francisco's most delightful inhabitants, DeVaughn and Zanne (pronounced Zana). DeVaughn is a multi-talented artist, cocktail waitress supremo, and all-round bon vivant.

Zanne, an erotic poet who doubles as a stunning brunette, is also a dancer who works religiously with the anti-nuclear power movement. Regaled with wine, seafood, DeVaughn's exceptional guitar, and Zanne's exotic dancing, we decide that perhaps we can go on with the show after all. So we do, performing at Oakland's fine women's bookstore, ICI, and then at the homey Bacchanal, the women's bar in East Albany.

By now, however, we've learned to assume nothing and to expect less. There are women (wonderful, warm, kind women) who just do not take us or producing seriously. "Lights, oh you need lights?...Well, we have sound, but it's not too good..." Since the Bacchanal is a bar, it has its own special circumstances which differ from playing a bookstore or women's center. Taking a deep breath (you never know how “laid back” anyone is going to be), Blaze calls with questions about money, sound, and who will collect from the customers. Do we have to provide our own paid person to do it or will they? What a pleasant surprise: Could this really be efficiency on the other end? Ollie, the bartender who is an institution at the Bach, will collect the money and help with the technical considerations. She, and her own particular brand of warmth and humor, is to us what the Rye Fleurus must have been to Gertrude Stein. When an occasional woman groans (as opposed to those who really are broke or unemployed), "Don't you have a sliding scale?" Ollie's reply is right-on, "Did they have a sliding scale at that prick movie you went to see last week? These women are here to show their asses for you and it will cost you three bucks to see it!"

The audience at the Bach is receptive and Chocolate, bolstered by 100+ fever and several glasses of wine, sleazed with ease with her best yet rendition of “I Wanna Come."

After the show, we visit with new friends and Ollie entertains us with stories about her relatives:

Uncle George: "Maaaaa, Maaaaa, Maaaaa.”

Ollie's grandmother: "That's what they sound like when they're squeezed out of a condom."

We loved her and Blaze was quite simply ready to adore her.

Our next gig is a two-night engagement in Santa Cruz where we stay with our producer, poet Ellen Linscott, and her boyfriend, Steve, who's a roadie for Moby Grape. They are both exceptionally fine people who go out of their way to make us feel at home and comfortable. Chocolate immediately falls in love with Ellen and Santa Cruz and decides maybe being on the road isn't so bad after all.

We do our shows at Shellie's Too, which is a lovely place and so spacious there's even room to play pool at the pool table. The owner of Shellie's is a rather dour middle-aged woman who, at one point, asks Chocolate, "Aren't you afraid people will think you're colored?" Although Chocolate is very much taken aback by this racist remark, she replies evenly, "I would consider it a compliment and I believe the word is Black."

At Shellie's we also meet up with a confused 20-year-old woman who is guilt-ridden about being a dyke because of her religious beliefs, and is at such an impressionable age that she could go in almost any direction—religion, sex, or volleyball. Although Katie later dryly observes that she gets all the panting Catholics and Chocolate gets all the panting, we deal with the young woman as kindly and helpfully as possible; Katie is especially understanding, drawing from her own background as an ex-nun. We leave the woman with the assurance that at least she isn't going to do herself in that night, and promise to correspond.

In Santa Monica, we are graciously received by Womansplace and our producer, Gail Suber. The show goes well and one woman suggests we change the name of our act to Blazing Chocolate(!). Later we have coffee with several women from the area, among them Jeanne Cordova and Sharon McDonald of Lesbian Tide fame. Jeanne confesses to being a closet Denverite (a lover of mountain and other natural formations), and Sharon makes mincemeat of the myth that "femmes" (her word, not ours!) are akin to the "little woman" role. Both women are charming and dynamite tour guides in the gasless LA area.

While in the vicinity, we decide to look up Lily Tomlin, which actually consists of us riding around Beverly Hills yelling, “Lily, Lily, where are you? Why don't you come out and play with us?" Receiving no answer to our queries, we opt for a drink at the ostentatious Beverly Hills Hotel. Intrepidly driving through the accessway, nonchalantly waving to all the Lincoln Continentals from the floor of our VW, we suddenly realize there is no way for us to back out. Katie fearlessly pulls up to the front entrance of this monstrous pink and green obscene establishment and accosts one of the valets. Rolling her window down coolly, she tilts her head to one side, looks down her nose appropriately, and says quite drippingly, "Do you have the time?" "Honey," responds the valet, "We've all got the time." So much for cool. Not to be intimidated, however, we find ourselves a parking place that is actually small enough for a mere Volkswagen. Blaze spots a young man nearby and asks, "Is this dump open to the public?" Looking at us with considerable amusement, he replies with an easy, "Sure." We still aren't. Ascending the sidewalk to the hotel, Katie approaches a cab driver with the greeting "Hi. We're tourists—obviously. Where's a good place to get a drink inside?" He recommends the Zebra Club, yes Z as in zebra, and so we set out to find it. The maitre'd, dressed in a cute little black tux and tie, looks askance at us and our blue jeans. "I'm sorry,” he tells us, “There isn't any room." "Thanks," Chocolate says, "We'll make some," and we slip past him into the bar. Two drinks apiece and 12 dollars less, we realize that we're much more entertaining than the "beautiful people” at the Beverly Hills and on our budget what we've just spent is grossly ridiculous. In the lobby, Katie suddenly pulls out a pair of soiled swim shorts from her bag and begins to wave them in the air singing, "Who wants to buy these beautiful blood stains?" to the tune of Jerry and the Pacemakers' old standby, “Who wants to buy this diamond ring?” Then for good measure, she rubs them on every Lincoln Continental we pass and we leisurely make our exit from the corner of Sunset and Hollywood.

Back on the road, we arrive in San Diego only one hour before showtime. Although the women here are some of the friendliest we've encountered, Blaze is suffering from a renewed attack of the flu and exhaustion. To make matters worse, the car absolutely refuses to take us to the Las Hermanas Coffeehouse where we are to perform and we envision another automobile mechanic getting rich quickly. Nevertheless, our performance is as consistently professional as possible and Katie, posing as Dolly Partinski and Julia Grownup, has the audience rolling in the aisles as usual.

Staying only overnight in San Diego, we thank our hostess, poet Shelley Savren, and the VW miraculously starts up with no trouble at all. Considerably relieved by this unprecedented turn of events, we're off for the wilds of Phoenix, Arizona.

There we are greeted by our producer, Moonyean, who owns a delightfully orderly and well-kept bookstore called A Womansplace, and by her lover Gren "Froggie" Le Bleu (formerly Jeri from Denver). They are temporarily harboring an 18-year-old woman named Barbara, a refugee from another "good Christian family," who has been driven out by exhortations that the practice of lesbianism entitles her to a one-way ticket to the Flaming Inferno. Even though Barbara has mostly rejected such primitive poppycock, the suspicion that it just might be true after all still lingers. "Is there life after childhood?" she asks us beseechingly.

Moonyean has done an excellent job with production and we perform at the Arizona State University for about 80 people. Because of university policy about such matters, there are boys in the audience, which always changes the atmosphere in less than desirable ways. Fortunately, most of them are so offended by us that they leave during the intermission. As Blaze often says at the end of her routine, "The difference between women's humor and the other kind is—who laughs."

Last stop: El Paso. Smells like home to Blaze, where she spent three years as an undergrad. But what a change. It's true that the home of Rose's Cantina still cannot boast a woman's bookstore, switchboard, or center but...remembering 1972 when there were only two known lesbians in the city, the current situation is wonderful. Our first introduction to the changing awareness of El Paso women is attendance at the final exam of the Women's Literature class. The class is taught by Lois Marchino who, unfortunately, was not a faculty member in the years Blaze needed her. There is a bountiful spread in one of the student's homes and the women read their own short stories, poetry, journal entries, etc. Ann's story about the minimization of her writing award by her father touches chords of recognition in all too many of us. And Kathy is nothing short of brilliant with her journal entries recalling early fumblings with boyfriend, Duke, to whom she feeds dog food, telling him that it's the hors d'oeuvres. You've been looking for the female counterpart to Holden Caulfield - she's it!

Our performance is hands down the best one yet. Best in terms of reception, space, enthusiasm, and our own energy. Maybe we've just got the routines down so well that we're finally 100% sure of what works. El Paso is the only city where our audience has a noticeable proportion of non-white women. Chocolate receives her largest response for contributions to reprint her books and Blaze is almost convinced that it might not be a bad place to live again. El Paso is also the only place since Boise where our performance ended with stomping and unabashed cheering for MORE MORE MORE. An encore? Oh dear, we hadn't planned one. The women were unqualifiedly beautiful and it was a grand note on which to end our tour. HOMEWARD BOUND! Denver, Pat Murphy, Ronnie Storey, and numerous other wonders are a mere 13 hours away. That funny, square state has been too far for too long.

Katie "Blaze" O'Brien and Chocolate Waters are available for performances at women's establishments, universities, conferences, race tracks, and brothels by calling Eggplant Press at 303-831-1442 or by writing to P.O. Box 18641, Denver, CO 80218. Make them an offer they can't refuse.