Culture ———— |  
with Spunk  

Norma Rae  

Creating a Woman’s Story  

Kathy Kahn  

If anyone ever doubted the acting abilities of Sally Field, let those doubts be put to rest. As Norma Rae, Sally Field is superb. Finally, a film and an actress have given us a true portrayal of the Southern working woman, a proud and strong picture of a weave room worker, down to the very bare bones of the truth.  

In the weave room, on the floor, sweating out a day's work, Sally Field understands everything about Norma Rae. High on beer in a bar and low down angry at the textile bosses, Field captures the whole range of a Southern woman's heart and soul and spunk and courage. The most moving scene in the film might be the moment Norma Rae tells her children what it means to be a “jailbird.” But it’s hard to say which moment of Norma Rae's life is most moving, because Sally Field has captured so many emotions so well.  

Norma Rae is the story of a thirty-one-year-old Southern textile worker who turns union organizer. But not until she has spent nearly half her life sweating blood in the weave room, gone through countless relationships with men, and borne two children. Norma Rae is the story of the spiritual and intellectual growth of a Southern sweatshop slave who decides to fight back against the textile bosses' injustices, and who sets a fire of union determination under her fellow textile workers.  

But not without a man. Norma Rae's husband, Sonny, is a beautifully simple Southern working man, thoughtfully portrayed by Beau Bridges.  

87. Are all members of the household involved in household tasks?  

8. Are boys and girls participating equally in physical and intellectual activities?  

9. Are both girls and boys developing independent lives, independently meeting challenges and finding their own solutions?  

0. Are there any stories about one-parent families?...families without children?...are day-care and childcare shown?  

*Adapted from Women on Words and Images, P.O. Box 2163, Princeton, N.J., 08540.  

Children’s Books  

Sonny, however, is not the man "inside my head." Norma's head is infatuated over the Union organizer (Ron Liebman), who is not only a man but an educated one at that.  

Only not so smart. Any union organizer who so blithely steps down from the North into the gossipy streets of a Southern textile mill town, without any previous contact with workers inside the mill would have to be stark raving insane. Liebman's caricature better fits a VISTA volunteer of the mid-sixties than today's union organizer. But unfortunately for unions and Southern women, there are some like Liebman's stereotype, who blow into town with books and books of knowledge and complain that the local hot dogs are not Nathan's and get their kicks out of intellectually seducing working women, then blow out of town to make it with the socially acceptable educated woman in the City before stepping down South again for the next exercise in preserving the Macho Maverick image. Liebman's union organizer was an unlikeable character and his pride in his family heritage of Jewish struggles rang hollow. Liebman's union organizer sold short our labor movement and our Jewish brothers.  

The writers of Norma Rae knew their material. This is most evident in Norma Rae's dialogue. Time and again throughout the film, totally realistic scenes flowed well and were packed with the truth about the lives of Southern textile workers. The viewer is given a cursory education in the drudgery and dangers of textile work, from hearing impairments to brown lung to speed uns.  

Regina, the adopted daughter of a single woman, adjusts to the addition of a man and then a baby to the family.  

The material was carefully edited and photographed and the effect was often so real you felt like you wanted to reach out and shake a union sister's hand.  

But the writer's material seemed limited, as if they had studied one isolated life experience of a textile worker. In fact, Norma Rae is based upon the real life of a textile weave room woman. As a depiction of her life experiences, the film might be totally true; as a general portrait of Southern textile union organizing, the film suffers a great deal. This occurs because the writers have emphasized the frustrated uncelebrated relationship between Norma Rae and the Union Organizer, leaving the sweat and blood and hard work of organizing as a backdrop to the Organizer's intellectual seduction of Norma Rae. Sadly, this also leaves the other mill workers in the background with little time and space to depict the struggles of their characters so that the minor roles become compacted melodramatic pieces. Had the emphasis of the film been reversed, the entire film could have been as effective as Field's acting.  

Norma Rae is another one of those films that is afraid to emphasize workers' struggles because "the audience needs to get a subtle message, not knocked over the head." The writers had a vital message, but they hid it behind the overlying theme of frustrated intellectual and physical desires of two people.  

Romanticism contributed to the film's problems and clashed with Field's up-to-date image of the Southern worker. Norma Rae got a bloodied nose once - that was real.  

Creating different experiences in sound proved to be the strong point of the evening. Mojo, Kay's partner, made an entrance from the rear of the auditorium, her flute answering stereophonically, finally joining Kay onstage. Improvisation made up the largest part of the program. All of their approaches to this kind of music were successful; two were outstanding. Kay asked the audience to suggest moods, and the response was as various as “pontificate” and “healing”--a calm interlude with the two flutes ending on a unison note. Another beautiful effect was the two flutes improvising over an open side force, or chance, such as throwing of dice, or, as in John Cage's “Music of Changes," which gets its pitch, duration and frequencies from the I-Ching. Gardner's music seems quite different, a flowering of the spirit, one that shares decisions and moods with her audience and produces an immediate, living experience. Before the evening was over, she had us literally dancing in the aisles.  

Ron Liebman never got his nose bloodied - that was romantic hogwash. The textile bosses and local Sheriff vented their anger at the union by batting eyelids and frowning a little. With a Norma Rae around, the bosses would have been doing more than seething under their white collars. For some reason, they were not violent - a real departure from reality.  

Norma Rae, the woman's story, is a beautiful film worth seeing if you can get by the Organizer’s sexism, the "his book larnin' and her horse sense make a dynamic duo” syndrome.  

Norma Rae is not a film about union organizing today as much as it is the story of Norma Rae the woman. The best part of the film is what finally happens between Norma Rae and the Organizer. Because if it had happened any other way, Norma Rae would have been a very unhappy woman.  

Norma Rae, the woman's story, is a beautiful film worth seeing.  

"Hi Dilly Women," a play based on Kathy Kahn's book (Hillbilly Women, Avon Paperbacks) is opening Off-Broadway on April 25th at the Long Wharf Theatre in New Haven. Anyone who attends a performance should contact Kathy with their comments about the play, since the producers have not bothered to send the author a copy of the script.  

You can write to Kathy at:  

600 Pennsylvania #109  

Denver, Colorado 80203  

Other women's papers are urged to reprint this request.  

Reversing Roles Gardner Flows, Flowers  

Gardner comes on strong, comes barefoot, and with the strength of a sturdy young oak tree, plants herself on stage, letting the music rise through her whole body, flowing out and flowering into the minds and hearts of a delighted audience. Outside it was snowing and slushy, but inside the packed auditorium people were warm and happy, complete with an atmosphere of welcome.  

The concert held at Gove Junior High School on March 31 was a benefit for the Colorado Women's Health Services Clinic. It opened rather downbeat with Maureen Mrizek on vocals, Christine Eber and Ruthis Clark at the piano. Maureen has an unusually good voice, but occasionally sang out of range. The results still seemed easy to get close to emotionally, identify with.  

The basic philosophic position of aleatoric is creation by some, out of chance, or as in John Cage's “Music of Changes," which gets its pitch, duration and frequencies from the I-Ching. Kay laughingly put it this way, "classic composers get uptight about improvisation, so they call it aleatoric, and go ahead and improvise.” White uses elements of aleatoric music such as prepared dime, wedged in-between the hes.