8

Three Feminists Discuss Motherhood

So You Want To Be A Mother...

Deb Taylor  
Kathy Riley  
Editor's note: This is an interview - 

with three feminists and politically active women who are also mothers. The two of us on BMR who did the interview are going to decide whether to become mothers.

ALL the mothers in this interview are raising their children without the help of a partner right now, and are living alone with their children.

Some of the mothers speak about the desirability of living collectively. We invite women who live in a collective with children to write in about their experiences for our next issue which will be about collectives.

All the names of the mothers and children are pseudonyms since the aim was to be as honest as possible without fear of repercussions from husbands/families.

*Sutra is a black lesbian, aged 29, with one adopted boy aged 9. She decided to adopt in 1975 and finally adopted Larry in 1976. She has had him a year and 8 months. Sutra is currently on welfare. Until 4 months ago, she worked as a counselor in New York before moving to Denver.

* Sarah is a white woman aged 43 who has had three natural children, who are now aged 21, 19, and 12. She is currently living with her 12-year-old son Saul. She has a PhD, has taught in college, and has been doing factory day labor for the past year. She has been heterosexual up to the present time.

* Trudy is a white woman aged 49. She has had 3 natural children and they are aged 22, 19, and 10. The two sons chose to live with their father when she left him. She maintained an ongoing relationship with them and when she moved to Denver 5 months ago, her 19-year-old son moved here with her from the East. She now lives with him and her 10-year-old daughter Josephine. She supports herself doing temporary office work.

Family

Deb: The idea of ‘family’ seems crucial to the decision to have children. I am interested in who makes up your family. I feel like I'm alone. As a lesbian, it's hard to create a sense of family in this society. I used to feel like I had a family in a collective I lived in. Since “coming out", I've been struggling with a “spinster mentality" - that I'll always be alone. That's what my role model of what an independent, strong woman is.

I think kids would help me feel I have a family, and my lover and I are talking about having a kid. I am scared about feminists who go floating through space free of commitment - just glad to be free of oppressive relationships.

Kathy: My family was close and we had a real sense of continuity - seeing each other every holiday and living in the same town. Now living alone in another city I miss that. Being a mother would mean seeing growth occur over a period of time with that sense of continuity. But I have also come to accept and welcome the fact that my family - meaning the people that I am closest to at any given period of time, may be different from year to year.

Sutra: Right now my family is Larry and myself; although I consider the woman I am involved with now to be part of my family kind of. Also some other women in the community who I've started to get close to.

My family - like my parents, brothers, and sisters, they don't have anything to do with my life anymore.

Trudy: My sons aren't really in my family. My son who is living with me now is 19, but politically he doesn't understand me because he hasn't understood about himself yet.

In the last six years, my family has included various women I have met - most of them feminists. My daughter knew who she could talk to about certain things and who would help her when she couldn't go to me and who would take care of her. I hope in the future in Denver to find women and children to do this with on an equal basis. I feel that almost any woman I meet is a potential family member.

Sarah: I feel that my 12-year-old son and I share the precariousness of our existence in a way that makes us an immediate family - even though he doesn't understand fully everything that I'm doing - he's trying to put up with it. (laughter)

My oldest son (21) is very much part of some kind of family. Our familiness is based on a shared political perspective more than on a kinship tie. My 19-year-old doesn't share that perspective and although he lives in Denver, we don't have that much to do with each other - a kind of polite respect for each other and an occasional sense of in-group solidarity.

My own parents, sisters, and brothers I come in contact with on a very warm, supportive basis from time to time, but I have consciously cut myself off from having the kind of close family support system I had earlier because I feel that it compromises me somewhat politically to have that. I would rather get my support from people who share totally my political involvement and outlook - not just out of family solidarity.

BMR: What if your child doesn't share your political ideas and values?

Sarah: I think that's the hardest part for him. (son Saul, aged 12). I think he does share ideas in the abstract already. He understands the validity of them, but he also understands it could mean some sacrifices. Like he's angry with me when he knows that I'm going to do something that might land me in jail, and he wouldn't be with me.

I don't feel too much contradiction in myself about that, but he feels angry that I would risk separating myself from him temporarily out of my political commitments. I feel that he will realize that temporary separations won't mean a negation of our closeness.

I have felt liberated more than I've felt sacrificial in taking on this new (political) commitment. I feel that even if I live so much less time, that my life will be so much more worthwhile. Living and dying isn't my main concern.

What bothers me about myself that aren't liberating are when I fall back into depression or cynicism about my own commitments, and wonder if we're really going to win. I would hope for him that he would never have to deal with those particular feelings. The difficulties or the kinds of material sacrifices or the possibility of dying - those kinds of things I don't feel guilty about laying on him. But I would feel guilty if he ended up being super cynical because of my having failed to live up to my life commitments.

Adopting  
BMR: Sutra, tell about your decision to adopt and what that has meant for you in terms of what you can or can't do.

Sutra: I had thought prior to making this decision - and even after I had made it - that I was going to be like a grandmother. I would be able to take a kid anywhere. And I was going to be different from all these other people... I was really off to show that you could take a kid anywhere - and that's a goddam lie.

I kept telling myself that I was ready for it, and I wasn't. And I still am not. To me, the 24-hour day-ness of the responsibility is the part that pulls on your body and your mind emotionally. Even if you go out and you've got a good sitter - you're still thinking, "Is this cool? Is that cool? Is something going to happen?"

Sutra: I often feel very choked when I decide I want to go somewhere at 10 o'clock at night and I can't get a sitter and Larry will not stay alone. Then I'm angry. Like last week he didn't want me to go down to the first floor to use the telephone and that pisses me off no end. I can't be controlled by some of his fears.

If I go down to 5 which is one floor below this one, for 20 minutes at 8 in the evening, he will even follow me down there! I can't even tell you what I go through mentally and physically. I feel just really choked.

I think Larry probably understands a lot less at 9 than I think he does. (He grew up in the South.) A lot of political stuff that I've been into since I've had him is totally foreign to him, and it takes a lot of explaining. And sometimes I do well, and often I don't do very well.

Lately it's been real bothersome to me because we haven't had a lot of time that's just together time - that's been quality time. A lot of it's been really tense - and I'm on his ass and he's bugging me. Structuring that time is real, real difficult. And I haven't been able to do it very well. That's something I need help with.

Time...

Trudy: I've been a mother for 22 years and I'm tired of it. I want to be with adults. I want to have free time without responsibility. I get so tired of knowing that I have to take care of someone, arrange a meal for someone - especially someone who doesn't eat very much or like food.

Sometimes I feel that I'm being choked to death and there's never going to be enough time just to go to the park and relax, to go to the art museum to do something for me. Because I have to juggle my time, the time I want to spend doing something for me never happens. Then I start feeling guilty, and all sorts of things happen in my head.

I plod through the day and night to do the things I must do. I set these standards for myself, and naturally I'm going to fall short of them. And so I go to bed at 1 or 2 in the morning feeling guilty that I didn’t have enough time for everything I had set out for that day, and then I wake up in the morning thinking, oh, I've got this left over from yesterday that I must crowd into this schedule.

The only good thing that's come out of that feeling is that I've dropped groups that I worked with, that politically I disagreed with. So I can work on the things that I think are important.

The whole thing of quality time with my child, I don't even know what those words mean. Because sometimes she's happy just having me around. And I don't like to be around just to make somebody happy. I had that in a marriage.

Sarah: I share some of those feelings but not nearly as strongly, because I think my child is a little older (12). He goes out with other people and has more independence and isn't quite as dependent on me. But also I have actively encouraged that independence from when he was pretty young.

Also I have hard-heartedly refused to play Scrabble and games with him that he likes to play with me, but that I don't like to play with him.

I have almost always refused to do it, and even if he feels hurt - I figure that I would resent it if I did it, and he can look for other people who do enjoy it.

There are other adults around who kind of enjoy doing that sort of thing with children, and he now actively pursues those kinds of adults. He has a whole list of adult friends, and that way I escape from some of those resentments.

I don't mind just spending time and being there for him because I feel that I just kind of like being at home and sharing that space. It isn't something that I’m just giving him.

There's a side of me that wants to escape from all the things that are going on and to feel that there's somebody home waiting for me - that there's somebody at home who cares how I'm feeling. In fact, I feel that Saul is often more emotionally supportive of me than I am with him.

Trudy: I guess I've never thought that my children were concerned with how I was feeling. I've always felt that it was a one-way process.

Sarah: When I was making a difficult decision about whether to stay with a lover or not, and I knew clearly that he (Saul) didn't want me to and I was feeling terribly guilty because I still kind of wanted to (I wasn't ready to do the rational thing), and he, sensing how I was feeling, comforted me and told me I had to do what I wanted to do and that I shouldn't do what he wanted me to do...

He seems to be very sensitive to those kinds of emotional crises that I get myself into. I think it's partly a product of that he knows he's going to suffer if I'm not emotionally content. (laughter.)

Sutra: He (Larry) may not be able to do anything about it, but he can share some of where I'm at.