MY HISTORY 800K5 LIs) TO MF

THEY TOLD ME I DIDN'T EXIST.
if ae Alta
CONT. FROM PG. 8 si i

The gala ball came round quite quickly -
So did Cinder dressed to the tickly

And riding in her pumpkinickly.

She spied the prince almost at once! 
He looked so sad, down in the dumpsel,
She ran and threw her arms around him,

"I love you and I need a hug!"

The prince drew back in much surprise.
He swished away his royal disguise.
"Don't fear," she cried, "You flaming faggot
I'm DustBin Hoffman dressed in drag!"
The prince was so glad he wept.
He hugged Cinder till she crept
(Then left the ball to get some sleep).
Of course they both were very happy
And went to live in A.C. Diesel-
gaily ever after.

Halloween Is For Clowns

By Meredith Britt Other people were going home from her two-week vacation.
In the refrigerator I found
"All who have been Halloween Clowns, take heart. 
There is still candy in the decent guy approaches, as the 
entrance of the stranger's house. The pumpkin grins. The 
porch light still burns." A couple understandably swooning 
over their new red 4 by 4. The message was unsigned.
Five o'clock - 15 the time to go home, but the job wasn't done.
I was still wondering why the dashboard was still in the back of the diner. 
I thought lying on my head on the floor of the driver's side 
of a Chevy pickup, my feet through the window of the open 
door. Bill leaned over to whisper obscenities in my ear, hitting 
his head on the steering wheel. 

I then took our customers to break the bad news. 
They took it well. I was left alone again in the quiet solitude 
of my botched up job. I had out my finger, the incision was 
about 4 millimeters in length, two-fifty-firsts of an inch wide, 
and I questioned the advisability of stitches. I went to wash 
my hands and think about things. It occurred to me that it 
had been a long time since I had really enjoyed kissing a woman, 
Sir o'clock and I'm asked if I would mind going to Littleton 
to get a truck. I didn't mind. By the time I got back downtown 
the shop was closed so I was forced to go home, "Yo, not yet."

Seven-fifteen, a downpour of rainwater all over Auraria, 
no windshield wipers, a premature dusk and I'm home. 
Checked the mail...no mail, looked to inspect the gash in 
my finger but couldn't find it. Fat Six sleeping in the chair 
still hadn't had her kittens. 

I called my friend, Beanie, to see if she was back from 
her trip. The phone kept ringing lifelessly until I hung up. 
The fifteenth day of seals.