10 EDITORIALS

“Photo by Babs Nash _

We Got Your Number...

In July, Big Mama Rag, who has been a member of the Denver
Sustaining Fund since that group's inception, approached the
fund with her first request ever for funding. Through the events

that followed, we found the DSF not to be radical (going to the 

roots) in its analysis of society, economics or its own functioning.
Rather, it is a reformist group whose interest is in wresting power
from that part of the system presently in control, in order to hold it
for another party of that same system, Patriarchy. The age-old
struggle of the sons against the fathers; both against the women.

As requests for funding by various groups were reviewed, it
became apparent that decision-making was based more on politics
than on need. Our politics did not fit the “radical” mold. Another
version of Animal Farm. The “radicals” have a stake, become the
reformists, become the capitalists. To wit: The “boys on the Left”
(a term borrowed from Robin Morgan) were more concerned with
whether BMR could show a profit (this information was not
sought from other groups applying) than with whether BMR would
continue to exist in this community, without DSF support. BMR
tried to point out that our purpose for existing is an evolutionary
Feminist revolution — not the amassing of money. We are
concerned with communication, not profits.

While some 50 women, representing individuals and women’s
groups with memberships of close to 1000, turned out to show the
need for and support of a women’s paper in Denver, some DSF
members questioned our base of support in the community! It's
apparent the DSF sought evidence of our support not from among
the people, not from among the women's community, but from
within its own narrow vision. Once again, the definition of reality
was that which is male-dominated and controlled.

Because the women of this community asserted themselves
and sought to influence the DSF, they were labeled Mau-Mau, both
by a member of the Tenant's Union and later by the Straight Creek
Journal. Interesting. That people supposedly dedicated to the
elimination of oppression—sexist, racist, or political—used a
term designating a Black uprising (one that should have a positive
connotation) as a put-down. It can be so only if one is in
allegiance with the system whose foundations are being
challenged.

Dealing with such bigotry is a waste of our time and a
dissipation of our energies. “We will not attempt reform of our
oppressors while women are in such need. All women. We are
telling you, yes, there are working women here, yes there are
Lesbians, yes, there are heterosexuals, yes, there are children,
yes, there are Blacks and Chicanas, yes, there are differences in
our oppression, but we are all oppressed first because we are
women, and we know it. Yes, we are looking to our own
oppression. And yes, we've got your number: a revolution which
ignores the needs of women will produce a society which ignores
the needs of women. The freedom of women is a world to be
fought for.

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3, No. 2

RAPE
Denver Doing Enough?

Rape will always exist in a patriarchal society. It keeps a woman
in her place, both physically and mentally, by making her afraid to
act as an individual. It reinforces marriage and encourages women
to seek men as protectors. Even when a rapist has been caught,
convicted, and sentenced, a woman is still not free to move in this
society. She is still seen as property.

Women are subject to the violent abuse of their bodies and are
denied humane treatment and the equal protection of the law
every day in this city. Although the incidence of rape has
drastically increased in recent years, causing some to refer to
Denver as the “rape capital of the world,” the conviction rate for
rape remains lower than for any other crime.

The rapist mentality permeates the police, the courts and the
medical profession by forcing the victim to prove that a crime has
even taken place! She must also fit the stereotypical female role
that is determined by this patriarchy in order for her to be worthy
of the “protection” of sexist laws. It is no wonder that women
often refuse to report this crime. The socialization of women
demands that women be dependent, passive, submissive -
characteristics that invite the hostility of the rapist - and then
women are criticized for not being independent, strong and active in
reporting and prosecuting their rapists. Another example of the
insensitive, schizophrenic male mentality that runs this city.

Rape hotlines in Denver provide support for a victim after she
has been attacked and discovers that her life has been drastically
altered by the experience. They offer preventive education,
lobbying, and speakers for citizens groups. But they are funded by
federal anti-crime money and basically present no threat to the
system that they actually claim to oppose.

Police Paternalism

The police department has proven that it cannot or will not act
to effectively limit this crime. This is understandable since the
police department is a male institution. Men basically view
society as being composed of the criminal and the citizen, the
good and the bad, the good will conform and the bad will not. A

More on Page 19

POLICY STATEMENT:

LNS

“She has taken a woman lover
whatever shall we do

she has taken a woman lover
how lucky it wasn’t you” 1

Gossip is one of our worst enemies. And hard to counter. But
“political criticism” — now that’s something concrete and direct
that we can handle. The episode we're referring to happened at the
July 10 meeting of the Denver Sustaining Fund (See p. ) when a
member of the Radical Information Project stated that RIP
believes that working-class women do not want to relate to BMR
because of the paper’s history of “Radical Lesbianism.”

Someone finally said it out loud. Lesbianism. BMR is pleased
to take the opportunity to confront controversy head-on and stop
gossip by telling the truth. We believe this is so important that we
have decided collectively that this article would be our “policy
statement” on the subject, endorsed by the women of Big Mama
Rag — united.

To clear the air. Many responsible positions on the BMR staff
are held by women who identify themselves as Lesbians; the
collective itself is made of women, less than 50% of whom are
Lesbians. This is not a confession; it is an affirmation. BMR has
dealt internally with this issue, and continues to do so, in an
atmosphere of respect and trust. BMR recognizes that Lesbians
are women who have affirmed a primary commitment to women,
and as such, deserve a place of respect among women. We also
recognize that at least 10% of women are Lesbians, and that our
newspaper should reflect that fact. It seems that the community's
own homophobia (fear of homosexuality) has allowed it to judge
BMR on the basis of one issue of our paper (May 74) in which we

More on Page 19

4

SUBSCRIBE
Ft

fe)

COLORADO'S
MONTHLY
WOMEN'S JOURNAL

NEWS—covering feminist activities
in the West.

THEORY—developing the ideas
and ideals of a new feminist
consciousness,
INTERVIEWS—focusing on local
feminists.

POETRY—exploring a female art
form.

HEALTH—discovering and
defending our bodies.

Individual Subs $5.00
Institutions $8.00
9 Institutions $3.00
Sample or back copy $0.40

BULK RATES AVAILABLE *

1724 GAYLORD ST.
DENVER, CO. 80206