SPSSCOSSSSSSCSCHSSOSOSOSOSOSSCSCCSCSSOSSOESESCSOOe

Women Reclaim the Night

Right to be on the streets and in your
own home WITHOUT fear of harassment
or rape?

Of women across the country and in
England who have marched together to
reclaim the night, the streets, for
themselves.

There will be a night march and rally spon-
sored by Women Against Violence
Against Women. Marchers will assemble
at East High. The march will go down
Colfax Ave. to the Civic Center for a
speakout and rally, and then return
to East High. Bring flashlights.

For more information, write to Women
Against Violence Against Women, P.O.
Box 18236, Denver, CO 80218, or call
388-8678.

PSPSPS PSPSOSPSSSOCSSSOSS SS SSSS OS SCOCSSSOSSSOSSOSOSD

Women, do you feel you have the

Denver women will now join hundreds

On Saturday, July 29, 1978, there

Issues of concern include rape, bat-

For more information, write to Women

Lesbian Gains Custody

Charlotte Peterson

Last month in a Denver court I was
awarded custody of my four children
in spite of the fact that I was a
self-avowed lesbian. One of the
things I resent the most is that the
very fact of my sexual preference
could be and was used as a weapon—
against me, against my lover Nora,
against my children, and against all
of us as a whole. In fact, my ex-
husband would only threaten a custody
battle whenever he became angry with
my lawyer or me.

All of the psychiatrists, psychol-
ogists, and the judge said that they
“found my four children to be happy,
well-adjusted, and mentally stable.
They testified that the children had
a distinct preference to remain with
me and Nora even though they love
their father too. Dr. Cohen, the
psychiatrist that testified for my
ex-husband, said that the children
should be placed with their father
‘and his wife-to-be because the homo-
‘sexual seed had been sown. We were
going against millions of years of
evolution, universal laws, and ana-
tomical differences. However, he ad-
‘mitted that he thought that homosexuals
were terrific people. He said that
he ‘liked homosexuals, and that they
are no different from heterosexuals
except for one thing. Some of his
best friends are homosexual. He was
asked at the deposition if in light
of this would he mind if one of his
own children were homosexual. He said
that it is more comfortable to be
“heterosexual in a heterosexual society.
I don't think that any of us
can deny that statement, but we can
ask why this is so. He testified at
the deposition that the children
should be awarded to their father so
they can live in a “normal” environ-
ment, but that I should be given ex-
tensive visitation rights. He later
changed this when he testified in
court and said that the children
should not be allowed to stay over-
night with me at all. Yet, he con-
sistently testified that Nora and I,
as well as the four children, are
mentally healthy, loving persons. The
only reason they should not be with
their mother is because of homosexuality.

The children testified before a
court reporter, individually, to the
judge in his chambers before court
convened. They stayed the rest of the
day with Nora's mother. I have two
sons, Chuck (14), Duane (12), and two
daughters, Michelle (10), and Sharon
(7). This battle lasted nearly two
years and the actual trial was three
full days. I testified first and we
immediately established that Nora and
I do live in a lesbian relationship
and that the children are aware of it.
My ex-husband's lawyer, Mr. Baum, re-
dundantly asked us where we slept, if
there was only one bed in that room,
and if the children were ever in the
room while we were in the bed toget-
her. The answer to all these ques-
tions was "yes." Then the judge asked
me, "What have you told your children
about lesbianism?" Leslie (my lawyer’s
law clerk) said to Nora, "That's the
‘question." I replied, "I have told
them that a lesbian is a woman who
loves and cares for and shares her
‘life with a woman."
Leslie said, "And that's the an-
swer.”

Dr. David Muller, a psychiatrist
here in Denver, testified on my be-
half. We had no guarantee that he
would decide that the children should
remain with me. We only asked him if
he were biased on the homosexual is-
sue. He truly wanted what was best for
the children. He interviewed all of us,
as did Dr. Cohen, but he visited
the home also. He said that he could
get a "feel" of how the children lived
in the home, and was impressed with
the way they could decorate their
rooms, and their freedom of expres-
sion. He felt it would be a traumatic
shock for them to be separated from
Nora and me. I recommend him highly.
If he thinks you shouldn't have your
children, it will not be because you
are gay.

Mary (my ex-husband's girlfriend)
testified that I had shoved her ag-
ainst the refrigerator and rubbed my
body against hers. Something like that.
She's 5'5" or more and the last per-
son that I would try to seduce. We
ignored it. She said that the children
went to their place dirty, smelled,
and in ragged and torn clothes. The
judge asked her who had dressed them
for their interviews with him and she
replied that she guessed their mother
did.

She complained about Duane's rela-
tionship with his friend, Mark, and
said that Michelle was "just too a-
head of herself." When asked why she
thought so, she answered that Michelle
had told her a gay joke. Mr. Bucholtz
asked me about it later when I was
back on the stand and I explained that
she learns those jokes at school. We
also discussed the sex education
classes that the Denver Public School
System offers.

Mr. Bucholtz asked Mary if Mark is
Black. She said that he is. He then
asked her, "Does your objection to
Duane's friendship with Mark have any-
thing to do with the fact that he is
Black?" She appeared very insulted
and raised her voice (not to mention
her eyebrows) and loudly proclaimed,
"OF COURSE NOT!"

Charles (my ex-husband) complained
about a live-in mother's helper I
once had. He didn't like it that she
had a little altar in her room and
she chanted and burned incense. After
he raved on for a while the judge
showed anger and said that the Sup-
reme Court has ruled such and such
and that it didn't matter what reli-
gion she was and he would hear no more
of it. She was Buddhist, but I found
Charles’ objections to the chanting
and incense amusing because he was
raised Roman Catholic.

The funniest thing was when he pre-
sented pictures that he had taken of
my house to show how dirty he thought
it was. I don't know when or how he
took the pictures. There was one of
the master bedroom with a pile of
clothes on the bed. He commented on
that, but then angrily said, "And I
have told Charlotte that I don't like
cats and there you can see a cat on
‘the bed." By the way, the clothes
were in the process of being folded.
That was very obvious in the photo-
graph. I did admit, however, that my
house does get messy.

Charles’ sister tried to testify
about my going to a gay bar here.

The judge ruled that it was irrelev-
ant because we had already acknowledged
that we are gay.

Nora testified beautifully. Baum
tried the one about unstable homosex-
ual relationships and asked Nora if
she had one-night stands. The judge
said that we all objected to the way
that was phrased and asked Nora if
in between her relationships was she
in a type of dating situation.

She answered yes and that her previ-
ous relationship had lasted seven
years, and that she considered our
relationship as permanent.
When I testified again Mr. Baum
asked me if it were true that I had
gone around and told the neighbors
about my lesbianism and that none of
their children were allowed over to
I denied it. He said, "I was told
by my neighbors that it was you who
told them." He turned red, glanced
at the judge and dropped it. By the
way, my children's friends' parents
have shown support for me.

Then around four o'clock we reach-
ed the end. The judge stated that
he had spent a couple of sleepless
nights on this case. We recessed.
When we returned to the courtroom
we were calm and afraid, sure and
unsure. I had repeatedly told my
lawyer, "If only he isn't biased. He
may hear only one word-- and the rest
will mean nothing." I asked him what
he thought the judge had decided. He
replied, "I think that we'll know
when the judge tells us." It seemed
as if the judge would never stop
talking or tell us just what we wanted.

MORE ON PAGE 18

When you brought me here to die,
I damned your soul
until I discovered that you had none.
As you ripped out my heart,
day after day,
I cursed you in my sleep
and cried without crying—
out—what I wished to.
And when my mother died &
you would not even
let me go to see her;
And when my lover wrote no more
but you would not let me call;
And when my child was hurt
and I could not comfort her;
I said to myself:
Bitch, you are stronger than they are.
You will survive.

Suzan Stuart
Break the Chains of
Legalized U.S. Slavery

Cops Lose!

PRESS RELEASE-- June 27, 1978

The New York City Police will be
making a lot more arrests of men who
beat their wives, as a result of an
out-of-court settlement reached yester-
day in a lawsuit filed against the po-
lice in 1976.

In a 1000 word consent judgment,
the police have obligated themselves to
arrest men who commit felonious assault
or any other felonies against their
wives, as long as there is reasonable
cause to believe that the husband com-
mitted the crime.

The agreement reverses the long-sta-
nding practice of the police to re-
fuse to arrest violent husbands just
because they were married to their vic-
tims. As part of the agreement, the
first of its kind in the nation, the
police policy of treating these as-
saults as not worthy of police inter-
vention will no longer be in effect,
and battered women will now be offi-
cially entitled to the same police pro-
tection as other victims of crimes.

The agreement is expected to be seen
as a precedent both by police depart-
ments elsewhere in the United States
and by battered women's groups contem-
plating similar lawsuits.

The suit was initiated against the
police and against employees in the
Family Court by 12 married women who
had been beaten by their husbands and
then were refused assistance by the
police or the Court or by both. In
addition to challenging police refusal
to arrest, the complaint charged that
employees of the New York City Depart-
ment of Probation and Family Court re-
fused to allow battered women to file
petitions in Family Court seeking pro-
tection from their violent husbands.

Under the agreement signed yester-
day, the police will send officers out
whenever a woman calls and says her
husband has assaulted or threatened
her. In addition to arresting in fel-
ony cases, if there is reason to be-
lieve that a lesser crime has been
committed, the officers must still ar-
rest unless they have proper "justi-
fication" not to arrest. They cannot
refuse to arrest just because the woman
has not been to Family Court first.
In addition, the officers cannot use
as an excuse the fact that they think
the husband and wife should “reconcile.”

The police also agreed to mandatory
arrests in all cases where the woman
has gone to Family Court and gotten an
Order of Protection and the husband
has then assaulted or threatened her
again.

The police further agreed that when
they come to the scene of a crime by a
husband against his wife, they will
remain there temporarily to protect her
and help her get medical help if
she needs it. If the husband has left
the premises, the police will follow
the same procedure for locating the
husband as would be followed in cases
of crimes outside the family.

The suit is still pending against
City Probation and Family Court employ-
ees who work in the Court. They are
charged with violating the requirements
of the Family Court Act which guarantees
to every woman a right to file a
petition seeking an Order of Protection
and to see a judge the same day to ask
for a temporary order to last until the
hearing date. The Order usually
prohibits the husband from further as-
saults and sometimes orders him to stay
away from his wife.

The suit contends that the police
send women to the Family Court, Family
Court sends them back to the police,
and “neither agency enforces the law."