Page 7

Feminist School Ideas Come Together

Jackie Bryson

In late July five women were invited to discuss the idea of a Feminist school for children—to share what they know about education and about Feminism and to try to develop some of the principles by which a Feminist school would operate. The following article was taken from that discussion.  
BONNIE TRUMBULE - Director of Sebastian House, an alternative learning resource for people 12-18; Associate Producer of Anatomy of Women TV series; Mother of two young people, a daughter age 11 and a son age 14; Community organizer in Philadelphia Education Project; Former member of WITCH (Women’s International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell).  
MARY BACKIEL - Spent two years teaching in the Open Living School in Evergreen, which is an alternative program within the Jefferson County Public School System; Formerly a member of the Denver Women’s Theater Group.  

YVONNE STITH - Teacher for two years at Lucy Stone Cooperative, an alternative Feminist-initiated day care project and is currently writing a book about that experience; Mother of two boys (ages 4 and 5); Original organizer of the Women’s Broadcasting Corporation; Has compiled a non-sexist educational program for preschoolers; Presently is employed by Mountain Bell as a telephone installer.  

LINDA FOWLER - Coordinator of Big Mama Rag; Linda has a daughter age 8, who has been enrolled for two years in Strawberry Fields, an alternative elementary school in Denver; Was ADC (Aid to Dependent Children) Representative to the Advisory Board of Gilpin County Dept. of Welfare; Linda is a mountain woman who resides part-time in her self-constructed cabin in the mountains above Idaho Springs.  
JACKIE BRYSON - Former public school and Catholic school teacher in New York City; has two children, a son, 5 and a daughter 3; was an active parent member of the Lucy Stone Coop for two years; Coordinator of Big Mama Rag and plans to attend DU Law School in September.  

Jackie: We were trying to define some ideas for discussion tonight... some goals for a Feminist school. Or why a Feminist school, anyway? One of the most glaring needs seems to be that in public or alternative schools, while sexism may be a concern, the varying levels of consciousness about sexism make it difficult to be clear about what you might want in an ideal school. Usually, there’s either constant confrontation—or a lack of it—that leads to frustration. Feminists seem to be reacting to rather than building something concrete.  
Bonnie: Even in a Feminist school, you'd still be confronting sexism. For example, there is a prospective teacher volunteering at Sebastian House. He is interested in alternative education and has something to offer. However, he constantly calls women “chicks” even though both Jerry (my husband) and I have talked to him about it. Feminist values are not a part of his life, no matter what we say. He won't be hired because I don’t want that kind of attitude expressed around the young girls at Sebastian House.  

Yvonne: Also, an example would be set for the boys at Sebastian House. It would more or less give them permission to be sexist. We need male teachers to be models for boys, too.  
Jackie: I would like a school for my children where we would be starting with high consciousness teachers, so we wouldn’t have to spend a lot of time educating teachers—raising their consciousness.  

Yvonne: There are a lot of Feminists working in different schools in Denver, and trying to raise consciousness where they are. But a different atmosphere would be created where Feminist goals were goals of the school itself rather than of one or two individuals working in the school.  

Linda: I want teachers who are not afraid of giving values to students. It’s nonsense to be afraid to do so for fear of “laying your trip” on a kid. If you don’t give children some concrete values to relate to, they'll just attach themselves to the general cultural values. Which is what we don’t want.  
Jackie: But how would a Feminist school be different from any other good school?  
Yvonne: Everything would be different. The social environment, the materials, books, posters, everything. There would be an emphasis on changing sex roles. Carpentry for girls, for example. Sewing for boys.  

Bonnie: No. It would be carpentry for people. Everyone would be invited.  

Mary: And you'd have women teaching carpentry. Being models for both girls and boys.  

Yvonne: What I’m talking about is that sometimes there is a need for separatism within a school—the boys from the girls. For example, I read an article about a Feminist in a day care center where the girls and boys were both encouraged to do carpentry. But somehow the girls seemed to lack confidence when working with the boys. So the teacher initiated separate carpentry for the girls until they were confident and capable of working with the boys. A teacher would have to be sensitive to where kids were at and how to try to change things.  

Mary: Yes. You would want to hire people with a consciousness that would allow them to do those things spontaneously.  

Bonnie: But when you come down to it, I don’t think that this kind of thing we’ve been describing really attacks the basic sexism that exists—that permeates the society.  
Jackie: I think we're still reacting to what’s around us—with no idea of where we'd go without something to react against. One of the ideas I’ve been thinking about lately, is that I would want a school which would encourage those parts of the personality which are “feminine.” The feminine principle—creative, close to the earth, cooperative, expressive of feelings, protective, non-destructive.  

Bonnie: I’d call that humanism.  

Linda: No. What we generally call “humanism” is really patriarchy. This culture has been created by men and I think we can speak in generalities about it. It is competitive, aggressive, ego-oriented. Women’s history has been so hidden from us that we confuse ourselves as women, with ourselves as members of the human race. When people speak of the human race, they usually are speaking of the history of patriarchy. We have to search back into our roots to find our real culture.  

Bonnie: I don’t like that. It seems to say that women are inferior. That they haven't been able to take control, therefore, they’re incompetent.  

Jackie: No. It says that women haven't had control of the violent forces of society. And they don't want that control. By saying that you want to bring out the masculine in women and the feminine in men, you bring up a very dangerous proposition. Women must protect and fertilize what woman is. Not deny or discount it.  
Yvonne: Maybe androgyny would be a good goal for a Feminist school.  

Bonnie: I don’t know. I get confused about which came first. I recognize a feminine principle. But did it come from women per se? Or was it a result of our oppressed condition? And the tasks assigned to us?  

Mary: I have thought about finding out what a women’s culture is. I have broad ideas of women’s qualities. We need to sort out why we are that way. More cooperative. More supportive. We have to be careful to understand all these things so as not to lay trips on boys or girls about what they should be.  
Bonnie: Really, it seems like we're talking about two different projects. One of them with kids—doing a school. The other is a project with the women involved in the school—to investigate those ideas.  

Mary: We need to take specific examples of what we mean. Analyze them. It must be an ongoing “discovery process—how that would relate to teaching. But teaching can be so exhausting. Can the two things go on at the same time? You'd have to start your planning early and at the same time have a group of people who would watch the process of how teaching may change—distilling the philosophy and disbursing it.  
Yvonne: As a teacher, I’ve seen kids on all sorts of power trips—size, age, sex, race. I’ve also felt that few parents really want you to impose your values or have any opinions at all. But I think that politics and a school are not inimical. You share what's important to you with your students—a book, an idea. And if Feminism is an integral part of your life, your teaching would reflect that.  

Jackie: I can think of a specific instance, Pre-schools more and more encourage kids to talk about their feelings. Mr. Rogers, on TV, for example. But that kind of talking seems to stop for boys at some age. It seems like it stops about the same time that sexual identity as a male begins. It would be a goal of a Feminist school for all kids, especially boys, to talk about their feelings.  

Bonnie: Yes. You'd create an atmosphere of concern where kids can express their feelings. And you'd have to have a lot of faith that that atmosphere will work. Kids can give an incredible amount of support to one another, but that kind of relationship must be fostered by the school.  
Yvonne: And remember boys need heroes, too. Can we find some? For example, Henry Blackwell, when he married Lucy Stone, insisted that she not take his name, and he continued to publish her Feminist works for many years after her death. Or Chief Joseph and other Indians who have had their roots closer to the earth.  

Mary: What about the question of male teachers? Where do you find men who believe in Feminism?  

Jackie: Right. In hiring a teacher, I would want Feminist principles to be as important to that teacher as they are to me. I’ve never met a man who felt that way—who would call themselves Feminists and be proud of it. Very few if any, men understand the cultural implications of Feminism.  

Linda: As I’ve been listening and discussing all this, I’ve come up with the conclusion that we may be talking about two different things and confusing them. There is such a thing as a non-sexist school and there is such a thing as a Feminist school. A Feminist school would explore the ideas of women, of women’s culture, women's values. It would consider the general culture to be a patriarchy, and start from that assumption.  
Bonnie: Then you'd be tipping the scale.  

Linda: Yes. I think of tipping the scale back into the balance that patriarchy upset.  

This article is also intended to be an organizing tool. Women interested in continuing this discussion or actually planning a Feminist school are urged to call the BMR office (322-2010). We'd be happy to coordinate.