reOn The ea

Don't Bogart The Airways Observations By Obie

Anne Celia

Let us assume for the moment
that those mythical characters
called “freaks” and “rednecks”
actually exist as distinct entities
somewhere in the material
world. Each group is hewing its
own survival out of the wilder-
ness of modern North America,
desperately trying to preserve its
own cultural heritage against
the pervasive influences of the
Melting Pot. Occasionally they
experience conflicts with one
another, for their worldviews are
so at odds. Let us assume that,
and perhaps we can watch them
fight it out and save ourselves a
lot of trouble (at the suggestion of
a sister in New Haven)

Anyone with a little AM-radio
background knows that Ladies
Love Outlaws like babies love
stray dogs. But to have gotten
the word that it’s mothers who
are to blame for those nasty
types who pick on and beat up on
and otherwise harm all those
peace-loving (male) hippies who
hang out in taverns throughout
North America, passively drink-
ing cosmic draughts of ale with
the local populace, in search of
greater understanding, the
greater Truth, the greater Reality
— to have learned that, you must
have access to a truly enlighten-
ed AM station. For instance the
one proudly boasted by Denver,
Colorado, in the dead center of
cowboy ‘n’ freak country (and
Guru Maharaj Ji country and
singles country and topless-
exotic bar country .. .). The
station will remain unnamed to
protect my innocence.

AC/DC

“So up against the wall, red-
neck mother,” wafted over the
airwaves (my airwaves) to me
(my sense of hearing). ’Twas that
old “hand that rocks the cradle”
mentality, translated into Hip

Culture terms. Hadn't we gotten
over all that yet? I impatiently
asked myself. I alternated
currents. On the AC side I
considered making a bomb
threat to the station if I ever
heard them play that song again,
reflexively dropping that plan of
action as I remembered the FBI,
the Grand Juries, Jane Alpert,
the Underground. That was five
years ago stuff, ‘60s stuff.
Nobody does that anymore. On
the DC side, I was sweating my
brains out with strategies to
nationalize the airwaves. A
sure-fire method of short-
circuiting: work inside the
system and burn right out
beating up against that im-
penetrable wall yourself. (This
is, of course, the moral of the
story: look who’s really up
against that wall.)

Dear Jerry Jeff Walker: you
are funny and funky. “Mr. Bo
Jangles” was fine, but where
have you gone wrong now?/
“Sangria Wine” was delightful
and syncopated, but what's all
this shit? What did your mother
do to make you hate women so?
Humor is fine, my dear,
however, this is not the slightest
bit funny and we demand equal
time. The tune ain't even good.
Even if you are just making fun of
Merle Haggard.
Ass-backwards
In Washington, D.C. a group

Listen to “Women Alive” on KCFR 90.1 FM Fridays at 7 p.m. and to “Women

and then they'll play an old blues
song — by a man — with the
memorable words, “Rock me
like my back ain’t got no bone.”
The impact is, to put it kindly,
diminished. Somebody's got the
agenda wrong. In this case there
wasn't even an agenda, how-
ever, they didn’t play anything to
counterpoint this ‘redneck
mother” tirade. Is it the cow-
boy/frontier mentality endemic

photo by Glenna Booth

Everywhere” on KFML 13.90 AM Sundays at 2 p.m.

known as Sophie's Parlor
presented “Womansound, 24
hours of feminist program-
ming,” in late August. Perish the
thought in Denver. They'll make
a tokenist effort to integrate
feminist or even just plain more
woman-hating music into their
general programming, but the
results tend to be ass-back-
wards. They may play Ellen Mc-
Ilwaine's fine clear voice pro-
claiming “It Wasn't God Who
Made Honky-Tonk Angels,” but
they'll play it first, then they'll
play the jukebox version,
“Honky-Tonk Angels.” They'll
play Bonnie Raitt’s “Love Me
Like a Man,”

“I don’t want some man to rock
me

like my back ain’t got no bone,

I want a man who will rock me
Like my backbone was his own,”

woman to
woman

feminist
center

Big Mama Rag
Off Our Backs
The Other Woman
Majority Report
Sister

Herself

Women: A Journal
Amazon Quarterly
Quest

The Second Wave
Women & Film
Country Woman

2023 E. Colfax, Denver
(303) 320-5972

to the American West? If so,
what's it got to do with these
freaks? Demarcation lines seem
to be getting in a muddle. The
other day, talking to a person I
consider a bona fide freak, I
heard him downrap the “red-
necks” in the local bar and then
briefly thereafter yell at me,
against my protests, “I am, too, a
male chauvinist, Anne!” (And
proud of it.)

Scientology and Feminism

The Jerry Jeff song continued.
In a sudden flash of conditioned
guilt, I remembered a situation
in Vancouver last year. As I
recall from second-hand ac-
counts, the Scientologists were
up in arms about books on the
shelves of the public library
criticizing the teachings of L.
Ron Hubbard. They were
demanding the books be remov-
ed, pending legal action by the

Church of Scientology. I
remembered my impatience
with their pedantic,

authoritarian silliness. And now
here I was, furious that my ears
were being subjected to a simple
silly little song that I found
grossly offensive but which
probably no one else was even
listening to. On the other hand I
felt justified. I mean, dianetics in
print is one thing; misogyny on
the radio is another. Nonetheless, my fantasized (and discard-
ed) bomb threats reeked of
censorship. Censorship, the
big bad axe of Big Brother
watching you. How terrible. How
grossly reactionary could a
harried feminist get? Yet a very
profound censorship already
existed in the media — which
songs were played, which
weren't. Which jokes were
made, which weren't. And a
long-growing repression in the
States was suddenly snow-
balling, and in the process was
encompassing the women's
movement — wiretaps, opened

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 11

a column

In the history of motion pictures there have been many cinematic
failures with accolades nonetheless for deserving actors. “Nashville” is
such a movie. Most of the performances in this piece of tripe are

faultless.

Nashville, home of the Grand Ole Opry, is where aspiring hopefuls
migrate to make it in the world of country western music either as
performers or professional groupies. The background in this movie is
the story of a Hal Philip Walker, man of the people, Presidential
candidate, whom you never see but always know he’s there — in the
background in his red, white and blue truck promising to clean up the
mess that has become America. His supporters’ efforts take a large
portion of the 21 hours trying to convince the biggest country stars to
donate their talents to the maverick’s political rally. This correlation
between country-western performers and politicians is a good one on
some levels — the power trips and egos involved bear many similarities.
But the underlying premise is that this particular segment of the
population should shoulder most or all of the blame for the country’s
present troubles. No matter what your feelings are regarding “kicker”
music, it is grossly unfair to lay this on one group.

The movie opens with about five different scenes going at once and
country star Haven Hamilton, in a brilliant low-key performance by
Henry Gibson, singing “We must be doing something right to last 200
years.” Any attempt at satire here is immediately lost. Altman robs us of
all our own imaginations in his heavy-handedness.

There are too many loose ends that need splicing. For example, how is
Lily Tomlin, married to Ned Beatty who is obviously meant to conjure up
images of your local redneck bigot, the lead singer in a group of black
gospel warblers? How is doted on, adored Barbara Jean (Ronee
Blakely), undisputed queen of country western with all the trappings
including a Southern Baptist tradition, married to a slick Madison
Avenue Jew? And Opal played by Geraldine Chaplin?

Does Altman believe we're that unsophisticated that we've never
heard of the BBC? Or its strict conservative British tradition? It is
inconceivable that they would have such a twit, a gossipy sparrow as a
foreign correspondent. And what of the filling in the final scene? No
rhyme and no reason. It’s as though someone, anyone, had to die so
why not the girl in the white dress singing to her mom and dad in Idaho!
And she was killed by a young man with Mother Problems.

The message is loud and clear. Altman does not like Southerners or
women. Women are relegated to one of two pigeonholes — saint or
slut. You can be a noble wife and mother like Lily Tomlin or a sugary
Barbara Jean who is compliant to all demands placed on her. Or you are
an insensitive nymph as played by Shelly Duvall or a no-talent who
trades in on her body as Gwen Welles did in a revolting strip tease.

This is a movie about what men value and Keith Carradine plays it to
the hilt singing “I’m Easy” and phoning his next as the last conquest
leaves his bed. Altman's approval of this behavior is very apparent.

Altman is a pig of the first water who does nothing to improve the
great white screen's view of women. And what's more he does it with a
complete lack of imagination.

mail, and prison terms for not
talking were becoming more and
more common, coming closer
and closer to home.

Soothes The Savage Breast?

By the time the refrain had
grilled into my auditory senses
sufficiently for me to forget all of
it but “Up against the wall, you
redneck mother” (how could
anyone forget that barely con-
tained, vicious violence?) the
next song was playing, a soulful
country tune that lifted up my
spirits and made me hum with
the good vibrations. What were
they doing to me? Where had
they put my furious female fury?
My self-righteous outrage?

The next song was indifferent, so I had the opportunity to reflect upon my paranoia. This is another of the Deadly Sins in the Counter-cultcha (while it is simultaneously a virtue in the women’s movement). Another dose of guilt, then: where had I gone wrong? Did I really believe that DJ played that song simply either to anger me or to get some freaks’ yayas out? On the other hand, how could I believe such a purveyor to the counterculture could be so insensitive to the feelings of women — my feelings?

No, I decided, I was missing the point. It was a funny song. I had no sense of humor. My mother warned me about this: “You have no sense of humor, Anne.” I was, in actuality, betraying my mother! The joke was on me, not on that drunken redneck’s poor mom, how could she know better, anyway? If only I could've laughed, eased myself away from all those terrifying censorship and paranoid tendencies, this horrible revelation might never have occurred to me. We could all live in peace. Maybe I should call up that disc jockey and thank him right now.

Vulnerable Males

Unfortunately or not, it just ain't that easy. The music continued without ads. (I told you this was an unusual AM station.) Now they were telling us the soul of woman was created below and was making these poor male suckers all dazed and confused. The vulnerable fellows, they were driven to write and play these songs. And it was all our fault, a recessive gene, perhaps, emerging only in females and passed down from generation to female generation. Matrilineal descent was causing the torment embodied in the voice of the nation — the AM tunes cauterizing the ears of a generation. (And incidentally bringing in lots of revenue!) No wonder they resorted to power trips, trying to get that chick under their thumb. No wonder they boasted so loudly of their exploits and burned out amps expressing their agony.

After work, I split the radio scene and headed home down 17th Street, trying to walk off my fury/confusion/guilt. The freaks are taking over the storefronts on this Denver street, making this high-crime district a viable, supposedly-untainted capital-making place. Here you have your free university, your best bookstores, your natural food store and restaurant, your co-op craft stores, etc. A new business had opened up. I did a double-take at the woodburned sign. Sure enough, it said, “The Bare Tit, a Coffeehouse.” More quickly this time, I flashed on smashing their windows, picketing, pasting up “misogynist” and “discriminatory to women” stickers. Then I began to wonder; maybe it’s a joke? Maybe I have no sense of humor.

I didn't wait around to find out.