hot briefs...

150 Year Sentence

Rita Silk-Nauni, a Native American
woman who was charged with first de-
gree murder in the shooting death
of one Oklahoma City Airport security
guard and the wounding of another
(see BMR June, 1980), was found
guilty of first degree manslaughter
and assault with a deadly weapon on
June 18. When the all-white, seven
woman, five-man jury was polled, it
was found that 11 of the 12 jurors
had been willing to convict Silk-
Nauni of first degree murder for
which the penalty would have been
death. As it is, Nauni has been sen-
tenced to 100 years in prison on the
manslaughter charge and 50 years in
prison on the assault charge.

The shooting for which Silk-Nauni
was convicted occurred when the two
security guards attempted to arrest
Silk-Nauni's ten-year-old son for
littering, a scuffle ensued, the
guards drew guns, and one of the guns
went off—accidentally says Silk-
Nauni, who contends that she was only
trying to protect her son. Neither
she nor her son has any prior police
record.

The Defense Committee contends that
Silk-Nauni has been railroaded, and
that she was not even allowed to have
her own attorney.

Attorney William Kunstler reported-
ly asked the courts for a continuance
until August, when he would be able
to take up Silk-Nauni's defense.

That request was denied, with the
state ruling that Silk-Nauni had the
right to counsel by law, but not nec-
essarily counsel of her choice.

Frances Wise of the Defense Com-
mittee told BMR that the conviction
will “definitely” be appealed.

Our Boys In Blue

A Federal judge in Los Angeles,
California, has ruled police may ask
female applicants detailed questions
about their sexual lives.

Judge Manuel Real reached that de-
cision after hearing a suit by Deb-
orah Thorne, a job applicant who
charged the El Segundo Police with
sex discrimination and invasion of
privacy, after failing to be hired
as an officer.

Thorne charged police asked her at
her job interview how many times she
had slept with a married man, how
many abortions she had had, and
whether her menstrual periods were
painful. After taking police tests,
Thorne claimed, she and another
woman were passed over for the job,
in favor of a man who had scored
lower on the tests.

No Accident

A Roanoke County (Virginia) Cir-
cuit Court jury has awarded $65,000
to a woman who was beaten by her
husband. Judge L.L. Koontz, who
heard the case, said he believed it
was the first Virginia case of civil
damages being awarded in a wife-
beating case. State law ordinarily
prohibits a person from suing a
spouse for damages, except in cases
involving traffic accidents.

Defending “Honor”

The father, mother, and brother of
a 15-year-old California woman were
charged with murder for pumping 15
bullets into the body of her 14-year-
old boyfriend, after they found him
hiding under her bed.

Police said the boy, Marvin Keola,
apparently climbed through Nurah Yah-
ya's bedroom window. Yahya's parents
heard noises, entered her room and
found Keola under the bed. The woman
fled and called the police.

The woman's mother, meanwhile, call-
ed police and said she had shot a
prowler in the leg, officers said.

"They were in love," said the boy's
father. "They talked on the phone
all hours of the night."

Investigators speculated that the
boy was killed because he had offen-
ded the strict moral code of the Mus-
lim religion.

where we’re at

Originally we had planned to have a general issue this month. However,
during the month of June, with Gay/Lesbian Pride Week and the parade, we
were inspired to include a feature on lesbians in the gay movement. Next
month the theme will be around the demand for control of our bodies.

We have received a donation for the entire cost of a telephone answering
machine. We haven't bought it yet, but by the time you get this we proba-
bly will. Call and leave us a message if you aren't into writing letters.

Speaking of letters, we have appreciated your criticisms and comments.
Keep those cards and letters coming. We are always interested in hearing
what is going on.

This month we mailed out a letter asking for sustainer (monthly) dona-
tions. You may have received one. If you didn't we still need money. Last
month's 28 page issue (Class) depleted our bank account. BMR averages
10 pages. Thank you to you all who started sustaining or gave us your
donation.

During the summer we are running a subscription special. The perfect
gift for friends. One sub is $6, the second is $5 and each additional
sub is $4. Get 3 for only $15.

We are looking for desks. If you have one to spare let us know, we will
pick it up. Right now, we have a long table that's only use seems to be
collecting stacks of paper. We need something with drawers.

Working on BMR, we occasionally receive stories that are so painful, so
angering. Locally there are 2 situations that demand immediate action. We
are torn about what to do. Just getting out the information in the form
of a newspaper takes all our time. Yet we often feel the need to do more.
By printing BMR we hope readers will be moved to organized action.

The women prisoners in Canon City need our support. They are organizing
protests within the prison, but being locked in an institution their
actions are limited. Protests from outside the prison are the only way to
get changes for them without terrible violence against the women.

Sally Hopkins has just fought a battle we all will benefit from. She
fought it without our support, bearing the emotional and financial cost
alone. It seems only fair that we now try to ease the burden by getting
her some money and support.

If anyone would like any information on any article give us a call. We'll
be glad to let you know if there is organizing going on and offer suggest-
ions if you need help. We are also interested in hearing about any organ-
izing and actions women are involved in. Give us a call at 322-2010.

Land of Opportunity

What kind of jobs are being found
for some of the women who recently
emigrated to the United States from
Cuba? According to a recent news
story, seven of the women were expect-
ed by their sponsor to dance nude in
a night club. The women, ranging in
age from 19 to 27, were also told
that they could make $25 a night as
prostitutes.

When all the women refused, they
were sent to work in a Florida orange
grove, where they were supposed to
make 65 cents for every box picked—
but none received any money.

"I imagine it's going on all over
the country," said Christa Matulevi-
cius, coordinator of Central Florida
Refugee Assistance, Inc., of the
exploitation. She placed the blame on
the International Rescue Committee,
one of the groups processing refugees
at Eglin, for not screening sponsors
"properly."

Welcome to the land of opportunity,
women.

Lesbians Overboard

Eight women are scheduled to be
discharged from the US Navy on char-
ges that they were engaging in homo-
sexual acts. The women, crew members
on the missile test ship USS Norton
Sound, were among an original group
of 24 women being investigated after
a female crew member told a superior
that some women aboard were lesbian.
The investigation of the other 16
women has been dropped.

Susan McGrievy, attorney for the
women, said that they will fight the
discharge, which the Navy says is
for "reasons of misconduct."

In a recent court decision in Wis-
consin the Army was ordered to rein-
state a lesbian because the Army was
unable to show the woman's homosex-
uality disqualified her for service.
The Navy claims that the decision
does not apply to it, however, be-
cause its regulations call for dis-
missal for homosexuality for morale
and security reasons, as well as for
job performance.

Dumb Move, Boys

A man with a history of "domestic
trouble," who was sentenced to prison
for shooting out the back windows of
a police car during one such "inci-
dent," but later pardoned by the
governor of Mississippi because he
was terminally ill, has shotgunned his
wife and 24-year-old son to death.

He then turned the gun on himself,
taking his own life.

Sheriff Howard Huggins, who had
known the man, Clarince Wheat, for
40 years, says releasing the convict
was "a dumb move."

"I remember, someone came by here
and asked if he should be let out,"
Huggins said. "My answer was no."

"I still say, if he had been up at
Parchman (prison) like he ought to
have been, two people would have been
living."

Wheat, who had served eight months
of a five-year term, was suffering
from diabetes, heart disease, and
terminal cancer.

"The department was very concerned
about getting him out of prison be-
cause of the costs he was running up,
what with the medical attention he
needed," said former governor Cliff
Finch, who pardoned Wheat. "They were
just trying to do what was right."

Rapists Executed

Three Chinese men who lured nearly
100 women into an apartment on prom-
ises of helping them find jobs and
then raped them were executed by fir-
ing squad in a government crackdown
against crime and corruption in high
places, the Quingnian Bao (Youth News-
paper) reported.

The three youths, members of a gang
of seven, were executed within min-
utes of sentencing. One of the youths
was identified as Li Heng, the son of
a leading local municipal Communist
Party member. A fourth gang member
was sentenced to death but reprieved
for two years when the sentence will
be reviewed, while three others re-
ceived prison sentences ranging from
five years to life imprisonment.

‘Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 6

Looking for Trouble?

According to an article in the
Rocky Mountain News, women in Grand
Junction, Colorado, are arming them-
selves in large numbers, due partly
to a series of rapes in the downtown
area. Local gun dealers are report-
ing a 200 percent increase in gun
sales and many of those sales are
small-caliber handguns to women.

In an unsigned letter received by
the Grand Junction Daily Sentinel
last week, a woman business manager
who makes night deposits told why she
carries a loaded gun with her at all
times:

"I want to remain anonymous because
the next time...a sickie is about to
attack someone, I want them to stop
and wonder if I couldn't be the one
who wrote this letter...because this
is my warning shot and if they ponder
too long or get too close, the last
sound they hear will be the safety
clicking off. And then they'll know."

The police response?...Josephine
Henson, a police-community relations
officer, says that if a woman shoots
an assailant and fails to incapacitate
him, it "angers him," and the woman
is in "real trouble." Also, she
reminds us that carrying a concealed
weapon is a misdemeanor which can mean
a jail sentence or a fine. A woman
who carries a gun to protect herself
from assault and rape is "just looking
for trouble," she concludes.

Women Shun “Circus”

Upset by rule changes that will allow
floats in the annual Gay Pride Par-
ade, San Diego, California, lesbians
have planned their own alternatives
to the event. Lesbian activists fear
the parade will become a "circus"
instead of a serious civil rights
march. In previous years, floats
were not permitted.

This year's alternative lesbian
events in San Diego, which include a
rally and candlelight march and a
picnic, are designed to focus atten-
tion on issues facing the lesbian com-
munity and celebrate a separate les-
bian identity.

‘Harvard Deep Throat

Linda Boreman Marchiano (Linda Love-
lace) and Women Against Pornography
have launched a nationwide boycott
and protest against the film, Deep
Throat.

"I was a prisoner prior to the film-
ing and during and after," said Mar-
chiano at a press conference. Held
captive against her will—“at gunpoint
in many cases"—by her then husband-
manager, Chuck Traynor, Marchiano said
that she “was beaten on a daily basis.
If I wasn't being physically abused, I
was being sexually abused and mentally
abused."

"I hate the thought of people making
money from the most degrading and ter-
rifying time of my life."

Informed estimates of Deep Throat's
grosses range up to $600 million, much
of it allegedly channeled into organ-
ized crime. Chuck Traynor, now mar-
ried to pornographic film star Marilyn
Chambers, received $1,200 for Marchi-
ano's appearance in the film. Mar-
chiano was not paid anything.

In a related incident, a showing of
the film at Harvard University, May
16, resulted in a confrontation be-
tween women demonstrators and male
students. By the end of the evening,
two male students from the Quincy
House Film Society had been arrested
on charges of "disseminating obscene
literature," allegedly as a result of
complaints made to the district
attorney's office by two female resi-
dents of Quincy House.

Members of the ad hoc committee
which sponsored the protests issued
a statement saying that they did not
"initiate or authorize" the alleged
complaints.