- hot briefs...

Girls Die First

In India there are now 20 million
fewer women than men; at the turn of
the century that figure was 3.4 mil-
lion. The rise in female death rates
has been most striking since 1951.
More and more women are dying of ov-
erwork, poverty and neglect, accord-
ing to an Oxfam report prepared by
Maitrayee Mukhopadhyay. Far more
girls under four than boys die of
the top twenty killer diseases,
though girls in this age group are
believed to be biologically stronger
than boys. "This leads one to the
conclusion that girls receive medic-
al attention only when it is too
late." Malnutrition is more wide-
spread among women, yet more men are
admitted to hospitals for nutritional
diseases.

Red Rose Boycott

Women in India are protesting vio-
lence against women in the media. In
Bombay, the Forum Against Rape is
calling for the boycott of the film
Red Rose, in which a popular movie
star portrays a charming rapist who
always wears a red rose. The rapist
is seen as a sympathetic, lonely fig-
ure and the women are seen as either
long-suffering or bad. Manushi, a
feminist newspaper in India, attri-
butes the murder of two girls aged
five and seven in Bangalore to the
fact that the two rapists had seen
Red Rose. The Forum Against Rape has
been distributing pamphlets outside
theatres to discourage people from
seeing the film.

That’s Incredible

Who did not have the right to vote
last November? In Texas, joining pri-
soners, ex-prisoners, undocumented
workers and paupers as persons legal-
ly denied the right to cast a ballot
are welfare recipients. A class-
action suit, filed last summer by
mostly prisoners and ex-prisoners
who acquired this knowledge of Texas
law while incarcerated, calls for an
end to such archaic and anti-poor
election laws. A group of Chicana
welfare mothers joined the suit as
plaintiffs. "Nobody talks about these
issues or cares about these people,"
explained one woman from this group.
“When I heard there was a suit try-
ing to change things I went and talk-
ed to a lot of my girlfriends and we
decided to become a part of the
suit." The Texas parole board, the
Governor and Secretary of State are
trying to get the suit dismissed.
(BMR has no news of any outcome of
the suit.)

onr:

Activist Murdered

Yolanda Ward, 23, a rising leader
in a number of progressive struggles
was killed execution style in Wash-
ington, D.C. in the early morning of
November 2nd. At the time of her
death Ward was actively organizing
on both a local and national level
against a controversial federal hous-
ing program. A member of the Rape
Crisis Center, she helped organize
the First National Conference of
Third World Women Against Violence
last August. Although two suspects
have been taken, the case remains
unsolved. At a press conference at
the Rape Crisis Center, a coalition
of activist groups called for an im-
mediate investigation into her death.

Landlord Liable

A woman who was raped in her apart-
ment in Freehold, New Jersey has ac-
cepted a settlement of $150,000 from
her landlord, after accusing him in
a suit of refusing to fix a lock on
the window used by her rapist. The
defendants in the suit were Alexand-
er Eichler, of the Bristol Realty
Company and Charles McCann, acting
superintendent of the apartment com-
plex where the woman was raped in
1978. The woman said she had asked
McCann twice to fix the lock before
she was raped. The rapist was arrest-
ed and confessed.

No Lie Detectors

California Governor Jerry Brown
signed into law a bill that bars
the police from requiring sexual as-
sault victims to take lie detector
tests. The new law becomes effective
January 1st. Many police departments
throughout the country require vic-
tims of rape to take lie detector
tests as a prerequisite to filing a
police report and pressing charges.

Marriage No Excuse

Four battered women suing the Oak-
land police department have won an
out-of-court settlement which pro-
hibits the police from considering
whether an attacker is married to,
or involved with the woman being
attacked, when deciding whether to
make an arrest. The suit, filed in
1976, was the first such action in
the US; a similar suit was filed in
New York last year. This decision
has important implications for a
woman's rights as "wife" in contrast
to the presupposed husband's “libert-
ies."

where we’re at

As the faithful who read this grossly underrated column may remember,
we had originally intended that our January issue deal with the topic

of "Process."

Alas, our own process wasn't up to it, so the issue on
“Process" has been postponed until March.

We will be writing to an

arbitrarily and totally unscientifically selected number of groups

requesting your collective wisdom on this subject.

If your project

does not get contacted, and you feel that you have something of value
to share on this subject, please forge ahead and send us an article.
If your project is among those contacted, remember that your mama is

counting on you.

The deadline for "Process" copy is February 1st.

Other

copy for the March issue may be submitted up ‘til the 15th.

The January issue will deal with the topic of "Women in Unions." All

you union women out there please take note.

Deadline is December 15th.

Many of you fine women have sent us the names of bookstores that are

interested in selling BMR.

Our offer of a free six-month sub, or a six-

month extension of an existing sub, still stands (a three dollar
value!!)--all for any woman who sends us the name of a bookstore that

subsequently orders Mama's rags.

As the snow falls outside and the frost builds up inside, Mama is
reminded to remind you all of our standing appeal for space heaters. If
everyone who reads this column sent Mama just one space heater, we'd all
be able to go into the lucrative space heater rental business or, at the

very least, stay warm.

Think about it--it's practically tax-deductible

(if you're prepared to wait another seven years).
Stay warm, stay happy, and have a nice holiday if you're into that
sort of thing, and if you're not, have a nice few extra days off work.

Mama.

Brazilian Women Unite

Brazilian feminists are uniting to
establish a center for the protec-
tion of women. The women met in the
wake of recent cases involving men
who shot their wives or lovers be-
cause, according to the men, the
women had been unfaithful to them.

In one such case last October, the
man was free on the grounds he had
acted "in defense of his honor." De-
ploring the public's acceptance of
violence against women, Maria Sil-
veira said at the women's assembly,
"We are all concerned about disarm-
ing the world powers, about nuclear
plants and the atom bomb, but we are
forgetting to disarm the fathers'
right inside their homes who are kil-
ling the mothers of their own child-
ren."

Routine Torture

"We want to be able to struggle
for social reforms in Iraq, to im-
prove the position of women in our
country," said Fatima, an Iraqi wo-
man on a recent delegation to Brit-
ain, "but with the repression and
terror our people are suffering at
present we can now only try to save
lives." Iraq has the highest rate
of political executions in the Middle
East and political prisoners are tor-
tured "as a matter of routine" (Am-
nesty International July 1980). Wo-
men suspected of disloyalty to the
ruling Baath Party are interrogated
in offices of the state-run Federa-
tion of Iraqi Women. Women political
prisoners have been tortured in front
of their children and had their
children tortured in front of them.
Photographs of women prisoners naked
and being sexually assaulted are
sent to their families--if the woman
is released she will be disowned or
even killed to preserve family honor,
Fatima said. "Let them know that
world opinion is disgusted by their
brutality."

Feminine Poverty

"The feminization of poverty has
become one of the most compelling
social facts of the decade," says a
report by the National Advisory Coun-
cil on Economic Opportunity. The pov-
erty population is shifting such that
almost one female-headed family in
three is poor; about one in 18 famil-
ies headed by men is poor. The report
attacked the view that growth in the
private sector of the economy was the
best way to tackle the problems of
poverty. It pointed out that the mon-
ey somehow never seems to "trickle
down" to the women, youths and minor-
ities that need it most. As a result,
the report predicted that by the year
2000 that “the poverty population
will be composed entirely of women
and their children."

No Thanks Giving

On Thanksgiving Day in Canada,
Indians marched to protest the steal-
ing of their children. The apprehen-
sion of Indian children is occurring
at eight times the Canadian national
rate: over 40% of the children in
care with the Ministry of Human Re-
sources are of Indian ancestry. Nat-
ive Indian people want to create and
build a system of child welfare bas-
ed on their own customs and tradi-
tions. One of the protest organizers
told Kinesis, a Canadian feminist
publication, that Thanksgiving Day
was chosen "for the sake of contrast-
ing the splitting up of Indian famil-
ies, while non-Indian families re-
unite and gather around a roasted
turkey."

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 11

TV Targeted

Under the guise of an anti-porno-
graphy campaign, new right activists
are using the threat of a consumer
boycott to dry up sponsor support
for TV programs they dislike for pol-
itical or “moral” reasons. Among the
programs that the National Federa-
tion for Decency have found "dis-
pleasing" are: "Off the Minnesota
Strip," a much-praised documentary
on how runaways are caught up in New
York's thriving prostitution and
child pornography rackets; Jane Fond-
a's film, "Coming Home"; "Gay Power
and Gay Politics," a CBS documentary;
and "Margaret Sanger: Portrait of a
Rebel," about the woman who founded
Planned Parenthood and crusaded a-
gainst laws that made it illegal to
distribute contraceptives in the US.

-Matrix

Tasteless Decision

The city council of Wellington,
New Zealand has upheld the decision
of a transportation manager to re-
fuse the Lesbian Centre's application
for advertising on the city's local
buses. The manager found the term
"lesbian" distasteful, and claimed
the ad would result in complaints
from the public.

Outside/Inside Support

The Federal Bureau of Prisons has
agreed to admit publications with
lesbian and gay content into federal
prisons. The decision is an out of
court settlement on a lawsuit filed
in 1977 by Lambda Legal Defense and
Education Fund on behalf of several
publications which had been excluded
from federal prisons. Off Our Backs,
Gay Community News, the Inside-Out-
side Collective and the National Gay
Task Force, and an openly gay inmate
were plaintiffs in the case. The
NGTF termed the settlement a success,
"especially for those incarcerated
lesbians and gay men who find them-
selves isolated and cut off from any
source of gay community support."

Sisterly Advice

Karen DeCrow, former president of
the National Organization for Women
and board member of the Gay Rights
National Lobby, has given Anita
Bryant some advice. Bryant was re-
cently fired from a $100,000 a year
job promoting orange juice "because
of her divorce and so forth." DeCrow
urged the former anti-gay singer to
sue the Florida Citrus Commission for
violation of the 1977 Florida Human
Rights Act, which prohibits job dis-
crimination on the basis of marital
status. Bryant, who opposed the act,
has not responded to the advice.

Church Chains

Police arrested 18 women in Belle-
vue, Washington in November for
chaining themselves to the iron
gates of the new $12 million Mormon
Temple to protest the church's op-
position to the Equal Rights Amend-
ment. The demonstration was timed
to block the beginning of a weeklong
dedication ceremony. Police Major
Jack Kellum, who used bolt cutters
to get them off the gates, said the
women were charged with trespassing
and would be held until they posted
bail. He said they vowed to return
to the temple as soon as they were
released. One of the protesters said
she was there because the Mormon
Church has used its enormous wealth
and enormous power to block ratifi-
cation of the ERA for economic,
rather than moral reasons.