11

Unified Feminism

Culture is, indeed, confusing. Culture tells us that we either aren't suf-
fering, or that this is the way we are supposed to feel; it tells us to try
and meet our needs with things that have nothing to do with altering the basic
conditions of our lives. When I saw "Star Wars," I was needing escape, and
there were no "feminist alternatives" available that I hadn't already made use
of—I was going to "borrow" from the dominant culture in needing a rest from
struggling around sexism, my job, etc. While I was dazzled by the color and
display of special effects, the message of the movie only reinforced the "bad
feelings" I was trying to forget for a while. There are a number of feminists
who are among the numbers returning to see "Star Wars" a second, or even third
time. Is it because we have internalized the values of our culture to such an
extent that we are unable to sort out what is “good” and what is "bad"? Or is
it that if we were to reject all that the dominant culture offers as far as
cultural activity on the basis of what it says about women and oppressed people,
the number of movies we could see, books we could read, etc., etc., could be
counted on one hand, because progressive subcultural activity isn't very vis-
ible? Do we “borrow" what we can from popular culture, and disregard and block
out the rest? Do we let the “rest" seep in, surprising us at times we least
suspect?

Identity

The rise of the women's liberation movement alerted society to a conflict
between itself and a particular group in its culture (women). In creating a
movement, we have recognized the need to analyze the character of societies
in light of all the different struggles women are waging and to try and decide
what it is that pushes this struggle forward or what holds it back. In this
context, culture is very important. Although there are exceptions, most of the
theory to emerge around “feminist revolution" has addressed values, and the
institutions and structures which are based on transmitting a certain set of
values contributing to the hierarchy between women and men; "feminist revolu-
tion" has not addressed the control of economic resources, which plays an
equally important role in the shaping of culture. It is my belief that the
slow development of a unified feminist analysis is directly connected to our
lack of an identity as women, and as the cultural influence of the dominant
culture is felt, the problem of our identity is more acute.

As women, we are digging for an identity out of a chaos of images; we are
trying to choose our own values, accepting or rejecting those which have been
assigned to us; we use culture to express our ideas and values, which is a
statement about our identity as women. In digging for an identity, we have
also presented a chaos of images about what that identity is. Individual women
choose the images that best fit in as much as they connect to the cultural
values with which we were raised. It has been said that the expression of wo-
men's identity, and thus, culture, is in the art of the everyday—that culture
reflects at every moment the material and spiritual reality of a social group-
ing. Women are not a social grouping.

In fighting for liberation we have to assert a separate and distinct identi-
ty from that of the power over us, in the framework of a movement. For the most
part, our identity as women has been something we've been born into, outside
our will. Our identity lies in the fact that as individuals (or as a group)
we are only similar to certain other individuals (or groups) if we are also
different than other individuals or groups. Identity is meaningless unless
it is compared to other groups. The problem for women in creating an identity
lies in the fact that women belong to all races, all classes, come from a var-
iety of ethnic, cultural and religious backgrounds and that many of us have been
totally assimilated into the dominant culture. Most women are isolated from
each other in individual homes with our sense of identity defined by our family
backgrounds. We do not have a geographical base to build on; we do not have
an economic base; we do not have a cultural base, etc., etc.

Our diversity as women, which I one day see as being a great strength, right
now operates as a weakness. Our variety of backgrounds complicates the effort
in determining the role of culture, (which is a way of collecting people togeth-
er, a weapon, really, in getting rid of domination) in the women's movement.
How do we bring diverse interests together, resolve contradictions and con-
flicts, and define our common objectives? It seems to me that saying, “our
diversity is our greatest strength," is a way of not really looking at the re-
ality of the situation and serves to sweep differences, conflicts and negative
feelings away. It's understandable that women don't want to challenge what
has been coined "sisterhood," since that's all we have and we are, as a move-
ment, and individual women, particularly vulnerable in a sexist society. But
"sisterhood" is a false identity.

I am not saying that the differences that exist between women are insurmount-
able and that what appears to be obstacles to us developing a group identity
cannot be dealt with. It will just be more difficult than any other “movement
for liberation" has had to face. One of the strategies that women have used
in helping to create an identity has been separatism. I believe in the use of
women separating from men as an effective strategy, not, however, as a desire-
able goal. By separatism, working with women politically in "all-women" situ-
ations, we can, and have, learned skills previously denied us or that we relied
on men to do; we can get a better perspective of ourselves in relation to the
dominant culture; we can view our relationships to other women as a primary
commitment; we can explore our differences, which are based on real life sit-
uations; we can explore issues of importance to all women, in all our various
identities (as Black women, working women, lesbians, mothers, movement workers,
etc., etc.) and can come up with a basis for unity, which is the formulation of
our identity as women. Unfortunately, this hasn't happened, or rather, it has
not happened on a large enough scale. It is something we “don’t seem to mind.”

Last month, a friend suggested we get together and go out dancing. That
wasn't my mood that night so we didn't connect. Instead, I went to a women's
coffee house to hear poetry and music, and was extremely uncomfortable with
the fact that the room consisted of only white women. I left at intermission
and went home, and didn't tell anyone why I left. I am trying to understand
where that unease came from. I know I was partially uncomfortable because the
possibility had been raised that my friend might come with me to the coffee
house. She is a woman I met at work and has not known me in the context of my
work in the women's movement, other than being aware that I'm a lesbian femin-
ist who works on a women's paper (which she has occasionally read). She is a
Chicana, and I realized I would have been embarrassed, for myself and my “com-
munity" had she decided to meet me there. It is not an embarrassment about my
“whiteness,” but about what was being culturally presented at the coffee house.
I realized that the only thing separating this presentation of "women's cul-
ture" from that of the dominant culture was that the only "conflict" or
reason for being in the same space was lesbianism. (My friend is a lesbian,

Analysis
so that wasn't the problem.) No other cultural values of the dominant culture
were being challenged, or acknowledged, other than the fact of challenging the
value that a woman without a man is incomplete. In fact, the cultural values
of the dominant culture were so evident in this grouping of all women, and
most of us “didn't seem to mind."

Many women are caught in the middle. We can say that “corporate” type women
have definitely chosen their identity with the dominant culture; women who are
in subcultures under attack by the dominant culture do not, although there
are exceptions, identify with the dominant culture. Then there are women in
the middle, who for a variety of reasons, are searching for an identity separ-
ate from the dominant culture, but which they are very much a part. These wo-
men in the middle (I include myself in this category) can do three things:
they can assert an identity separate from the dominant culture—rejecting
the values and systems which maintain racism, the exploitation of labor, sex-
ism, heterosexism, etc.; they can assert an identity very similar to the dom-
inant culture; or, they can not make up their minds, which is what most women
do.

Culture is not who we are, but what we choose to do with our backgrounds,
and how we choose to do it. Our focus should not be on apologizing for our back-
grounds. I could care less if a woman comes from extreme privilege; I care a-
bout how she chooses to deal with that privilege in the context of how she
works with the dominant culture; guilt about being white, or about being mid-
dle class is another way of not dealing with differences. The women's movement
consists of women from all three of the categories mentioned above: what has
been the start of a “women's culture" reflects these different identities. At
BMR, we exchange with a number of journals, newspapers, magazines, etc., all
published under the guise of "feminism": they are directed to women living in
the country; women working towards a matriarchal society; single mothers; wo-
men in business and corporate executives; lesbians living in communes or work-
ing in political groups with heterosexual men; women fighting it out in unions
or in the nuclear movement; socialist feminists; anarchist feminists; there
are a few examples of women of all races working in groups; women whose main
interests are in motorcycles, religion, farming, or technology. You name it,
and in the name of "feminism," it's been published, or sung, or performed,
or expressed in a variety of cultural ways. Not only are we confused by the
messages of the dominant culture, but by our own cultural expressions as well.

The dominant culture, a prop of patriarchy/capitalism, knows that it must
divide and keep divisions between different groups in order to survive; it
also tries to destroy the social structures, culture, and thus identity of
groupings in order to keep its domination permanent. Women are divided—when
we fight back, the strength of that fight to go forward lies in the organized
political expression of a culture, a way of doing and perceiving things, a
proof of identity. We have to push those values that make us different from
the dominant culture—the values of a "feminist" culture play a vital role
in organizing women into a movement, addressing issues that meet the needs of
women. The development of arts, music, literature, sexuality have to relay
the messages of how we are different. For example, our need for food, clothing
and shelter is certainly not different than other groups or individuals, but
the way we envision those needs being met is what makes us different and con-
tributes to our identity. Likewise, the need for “family," for protection,
support, love, etc., is not a conflicting need, but the way we envision the
function and structure of family is what makes us different and contributes
to the formulation of an identity. The basis for unity is possible, cutting
across all class, race, sex, educational lines. We just have to do the work to
get there. But first of all, we have to want to do the work, which means work-
ing on ourselves, as well as fighting every other kind of obstacle imaginable.

This last part of the discussion on women, identity and culture is directed
to all those women in the middle who have chosen to assert an identity sepa-
rate from the dominant culture, who choose to reject the values of racism,
sexism, capitalism, and who are trying to pull together a sense of self-respect
strengthened by the development of political awareness. This is also directed
to the woman who was on the other end of the phone a few days ago. What we
say we believe in, and what our actions say, do not always go hand in hand.
In our searching for an identity as women, we not only have challenged the
values of our oppressors (rhetorical word); but have cut the challenge to our-
selves in the areas of lifestyles, personal relationships, process, group in-
teractions, and "feminist ethics." Sometimes we succeed in the challenge and
sometimes we fail to weed out those values and beliefs that have saturated
us from the time we were born. We grow up learning so many things: that we
need someone to take care of us, that women “can't be trusted," that a woman
without a man (is not like a fish without a bicycle) but an oddity; that we
should be self-sacrificing; that love is possession; that we live in a free
country; that we shape our own destiny; that love between women is sick; that
white people are better than Black people; that it's our own fault if we are
poor; that men are better than women; that... that... that... And we learn
these things from women as well as men, and we are told them every day in the
day-to-day existence within our culture. In such adverse conditions, some of

MORE ON PAGE 20