Reflections On Organizing

The day of the community meeting we learned that the AFSC was having a meet-
ing that very night to plan a demonstration to oppose registration for the
draft. As if that was not coincidence enough, they were planning a demon-
stration for the very same day as ours, March 8th.

The AFSC is a pacifist organization. It counsels people on how to obtain
CO status. They believe that violence can be ended by boycotting it. (You
know, what if they gave a war and nobody came.) This kind of mentality has
kept women down for too long. They do not expend energy in opposing the vio-
lence that is being perpetrated against most of us: working people, poor
people, people of color and doubly if we are women. For most of us to boy-
cott violence we would have to quit our jobs, where unsafe working conditions
are forced on us in the name of profits, and lock ourselves in our homes, be-
cause the police and planned unemployment, racism and sexism make walking the
streets unsafe. Women are only safe at home--if we live alone or with other
women and have an impenetrable home.

Basically the AFSC told us they were planning a demonstration and we could
participate or not. At this point the four of us had a break down in unity.
Connie knew that the AFSC's politics were in opposition to her own and she
could not work with them. Vicki knew from previous experience that working in
a broad-based coalition such as the AFSC was organizing is not worth the
effort, as feminism is not a priority for consideration by too many of the
group that would be included in such a coalition. Connie and Vicki suggested
that we either ask the AFSC to join us, but that the demonstration be control-
led by feminists; or that we ask them to change the day of their demonstra-
tion. We also talked about changing the day of our demonstration if they did
not comply. Kathy had no problems with aligning with the AFSC. I felt that

the best solution at that point was to coalesce with the AFSC.

-Susanna Smith

This break-down in unity and our failure to discuss our principles put us
in a weak position and consequently allowed the group to take a weak and in
many ways supportive position with the AFSC, a group we should have dis-
credited by our political stand. We never discussed exactly which groups we
could align with, much less what to do with a situation like this. The AFSC
wanted leadership in the anti-draft movement in Denver. They got it simply
by planning a demonstration the same day as ours.

Had we the foresight to anticipate that a group would attempt to seize lead-
ership, we could have decided that despite our individual differences, collec-
tively we would take one stand. Or, more likely, we would have discovered
our differences and realized we differed on points so major that we shouldn't
be working together on this issue. For all the bad-mouthing conflict gets
(such as being called "divisiveness" by some who would rather hide differen-
ces than confront them) how much better it would have been to have resolved
our differences! It was demoralizing to discover 20 minutes before the com-
munity meeting that our group had fallen apart.

About 30 women came to the community meeting. Connie gave a history of the
resurgence of the push for the draft in Congress and Carter's announcement of
his registration of men and women.

Connie then told of the AFSC's meeting that night and their plan to hold a
demonstration on March 8th.

Strategies were discussed to deal with this situation. It was suggested
that we go ahead and hold our demonstration. There was discussion around who
we would want to align with and whether we would want to align with the AFSC.

Basically, we decided that we saw the anti-draft movement as a broad-based
movement and it was best for all groups opposing the draft to participate in
one demonstration. We decided to go to the next AFSC meeting, and began to
formulate our points of unity.

From that meeting on, we became seemingly more concerned with logistics than
with developing our politics. We decided that we wanted to push for getting
at least half of the groups to have women for their speakers and for more wo-
men's organizations to have speakers. We are responsible for the National
Organization for Women and the Women's Political Caucus being represented at
the demonstration. Both groups believe that if men are drafted women should
be, too, because women should have the right to defend this country as men
do!

In planning the entertainment we spent a lot of time in scheduling, contact-
ing other groups to provide the entertainment, and learning other people's
songs. At one time we discussed writing and performing guerrilla theater but
at the meeting to do this only 2 women showed up. Even at that, we should
have gone ahead and written it and then tried to find women to help perform
it--but we didn't. Consequently, at the beginning of the broad-based demon-
stration, when we had discussed having guerrilla theater on how the AFSC had
opportunistically taken the day for their demonstration, in an effort to con-
front them; instead we scheduled two white men, with a woman singing and
playing back-up, who said they had ended the Vietnam war by being Conscien-
tious Objectors.

On only one occasion did the entire group discuss what our political bias
was. At that time we briefly discussed why we opposed the draft as feminists.
We failed to discuss how this demonstration would fit into our overall femin-
ist strategy, and who we wanted to reach. We pushed for more women speakers,
whether they were feminist or not, instead of developing a plan to demonstrate
feminist politics and presence. In trying to get groups to provide women
entertainers, and in asking women from the women's community to provide enter-
tainment, we apparently hoped that others would express our politics for us,
rather than spending the time to develop ways to express them clearly and
articulately ourselves.

Given this same situation, we could have made our presence strong and clear.
We should have been more articulate about our politics. We probably had 2

hours of time at the rally to express ourselves.

From Page 1

As it was, we used 5 min-

utes, when Dottie Shank and Susanna Smith read the speech for Women Say No.
The rest of the time was used to sing Holly Near's politics or to read Pat

Parker's politics. 

We could have controlled the microphone.

We had talked of doing guerrilla theater, but did not make it a priority and it was not done.

By controlling it we could have

prevented the commercial announcements by the AFSC every fifteen minutes.
One reason we did not feel a strong need to do this may be that we never did
discuss to what degree we were aligning ourselves with the other groups. We

never discussed who we could or could not align with. We never discussed who
we were trying to educate by participating in this action: ourselves, the
other groups participating, or the people who came to the demonstration. It
was an important question because it relates to the content of the entertain-
ment, and to how we participated--providing the sound system without keeping
control of it, and rounding up the entertainment without keeping control of
its content.

We had a strong understanding of our opposition to the draft and the need to
fight the government. We had strong understanding of the need to act--but we did not have a strong understanding of our actions in the context of this demonstration.

We could have done our own press work.

We should have had a press confer-

ence, sent out public service announcements, and been more disciplined about
putting out the leaflets for the demonstration. We had the means to create a strong feminist presence, but we did not do a good job of it this time.

We aided anti-feminist groups--the AFSC was not the only one but it had control in that they decided who could come and speak at the demonstration--and they decided that anyone could, including that Women Say No could provide the entertainment.

Women Say No was formed at an open community meeting. At that meeting we had no basis except that we all opposed the draft. Each of us probably had different reasons for working within this group. One important benefit was in working with women we had never worked with before. And that we will learn from this when we work together in the future.

Anarchist convictions and courage remained unbent by any state. But caution, I am told, must be taken to not overadulate Emma. Hero worship will eventually disappoint you. Significantly modern day women, like Emma, more interested in the liberation than the rights of women, are beginning to make important contributions to anar-
chism, i.e., anarcha-feminism.

Peggy Kornegger's Anarchism: The Feminist Connection perhaps suggests the most significant of these writings thus far. I know it was the most important theoretically for me. Her contention is that the second wave of feminists have been unconscious anar-
chists in both theory and practice. She goes as far to claim that the personal/political and anti-authoritarian nature of the small group process in the women's movement has strikingly resembled the anarchist affinity groups during the Spanish civil war. But her criticisms are equally important. I think her statement on patriarchy expresses that. "When... fighting patriarchy, it isn't al-
ways clear to all of us that means fighting all hierarchy, all leader-
ship, all government, and the very idea of authority itself." It is why when women stopped short of being anarchist they became "trapped in ‘ye olde male up/down political rut.' Radical feminist theory can only hail feminism as the "Ultimate Revolution," she tells us, when it becomes conscious of its anarchist roots. Insulated with hope, poetry and the beauty of liberated simplicity, her work envisions "Making Utopia Real" through a long process of preparation as people take control over their lives through sabotage, resistance, self-management and the creation of personal/political organizations.

The historical precedent set by Lizzie Borden's Women and Anarchy con-
firms Peggy's description of women as "intuitive anarchists." A fascinating analogist work outlines anarchism's most influential precursors and think-
ers to the non-hierarchical and small group process created by the women's liberation movement. Ellen Ellenbogen's article, Feminism: The Anarchist Impulse, historically recalls the recent anarchist impulses of women, both consciously and unconsciously by 1969. A situationist analysis dis-
cusses the reinvention of everyday life in a comprehensive study of

FROM PAGE 16

Socialism, Anarchism and Feminism by
Carol Ehrlich. Still others demonstrate the anarchist-feminist connec-
tions adopted by the women's culture. Individual and collective growth
expressed through the joy of art and music, a culture itself which
creates qualitative emphasis upon social relations. Theories postulated
by anarchists for a social over a political revolution. It fulfills the
anarchist principle of means creates ends; the insistence upon living the
revolution now. Women have realized here, unlike Marxist, that in order
to regain their lost humanity one must act now to create a world worthy
of oneself.

Today anarchism has come to embrace numerous other dimensions for me. It
means a reendowment with nature, a regaining of relationship with the
earth, with face-to-face associations and hope in the step-to-step little
pockets of freedom that grow around me. As I look about at the anti-author-
itarian forms taking root in the anti-
nuclear and cooperative movements, I
am reminded that in this country the
small group process began with the
women's movement. It gives me more
reason for hope; a reason for con-
scious anarcha-feminism. Why anarchism

alone is inadequate. Personal and

political relationships with anarchist
men have taught me how easily the
practices of anarchism can be elimi-
nated. How inherent patriarchy still is.
It is why I ask for a total sexual-
social revolution. I ask for no more
than forms which paint a future which
creatively destruct every last vest-
ige of patriarchy, capital and the
state.

RESOURCES

Tyranny of Tyranny, Black Rose 1,
Cambridge, MA, 1974.

Anarchism: The Feminist Connection,
Peggy Kornegger, Come-unity Press,

13 E. 17th St., NYC, NY 10003, $1.50.
Women and Anarchy, Heresies, PO Box
766, Canal St. Station, NYC, NY 10013,
Vol. 1 No. 2.

Socialism, Anarchism and Feminism,
Carol Ehrlich, Research Group 1,

2743 Marylinda Ave., Baltimore, MD
21218, #26, 80¢.

Feminism: The Anarchist Impulse, Ellen
Ellenbogen, Open Road, P.O. Box 6135,
Station G, Vancouver BC, Canada

464 4G5 #4.