struggle

Anti-Semitic

Rose

For a long time, I've wanted to write  
about my being Jewish. I have a lot of  
thoughts and feelings in my mind, but to  
sit at the typewriter and actually focus  
them is very difficult. After reading  
the letter by Sandy Katz, Shelley Kush-  

jewish woman speaks  

ner, and Louise Brotsky in December, Big  
Mama Rag, I knew I'd have to get going  
and try to put my thoughts together. al-  
though I totally agree that Jewish peo-  
ple need to deal with their white supre-  
macy and the racism and militarism of  
Israel, I thought their letter was with-  
out any compassion for the struggles of  
Jewish people. They said in their letter  
that Jewish women are declaring ourselves  
"Third World" or at least "non-  
white". They claim, moreover, that the  
emerging Jewish identity comes from “a  
desire not to have to take full respon-  
sibility for fighting white supremacy in  
this society", and that this emerging  
Jewish identity is "dangerous". The  
three women even make the claim that the  
tradition of leftism in the Jewish com-  
munity has been diminishing.  

I don't think these three women, who  
are, by the way, Jewish, are being fair.  
I don't think many Jewish women consider  
themselves women of color, but rather  
want non-Jewish women to become aware of  
their anti-Semitism and the oppression  
that Jewish people face. Their letter  
implies that women who feel oppressed  
around anti-Semitism should keep their  
mouths shut, because talking about anti-  
Semitism is a counter-productive strug-  
gle. The more we all get used to talking  
about our struggles, the more women will  
see just what fascism in this country is  
all about. My mother's cousins and aunts  
and uncles were killed in the Nazi camps  
and my mother would have been killed too  
if she had stayed in Poland a few more  
years. The terror and pain I read in her  
eyes is my most vivid memory of her.  

I have a lot of conflicts about my Jew-  
ishness. I feel both love and anger to-  
ward the culture in which I grew up. I  
feel conflicts about the state of Israel.  
Though I don't support Israel and I am  
no Zionist, I have a strong feeling that  
the Jewish people need some place of re-  
fuge.  

The ruling class of the Amerikan em-  
pire, through their mass media, has fo-  
cused on the Jewish people as the per-  
secuted people. When we are told about  
the Holocaust, not a word is spoken a-  
bout the millions of mental patients,  
prisoners, old people, socialists and  
progressives, gypsies, artists, lesbians  
and gay men, and other “enemies of the  
Third Reich" in Germany and throughout  
Europe, whose bones are also buried in  
those Nazi death camps. I grew up total-  

Page 6 - Big Mama Rag, February, 1982  

Feminism Vs. Patriarchal Judaism:  

ly fearing German people. But now, as an  
Amerikan citizen, a Jew and an anti-fas-  
cist, a lesbian, an ex-mental patient  
and a witch, I feel curiosity and empa-  
thy for all those forgotten progressives  
and assorted "deviants" who were German  
citizens as Nazism took power. How dif-  
ferent is it really than being an Ameri-  
kan citizen today? The US is just as  
brutal and destructive as the Nazis were;  
it's just that the Amerikan empire is  
much better at lying. Amerika destroys  
the land and lives off Third World people  

aq oan) m3!  
/7pOERE POTRY PD POS  
pba wy upepa 8 WONG  
eae |e: OvIN PK PY st  
ree Ppa 3D BOD BD TR  

in the name of “progress and development”  
or “assisting developing nations". Tor-  
ture by any name is still torture, and  
fascism by any name is still fascism.  

I wonder a lot why most mainstream Jew-  
ish people don't see that they give sup-  
port to a racist and imperialist nation.  
I used to talk to my parents about how  
much I hate the US. They would listen  
and get angrier and angrier. Then they  
would say something like, "Amerika is  
good to the Jews. We are safe here." My  
grandmother used to hide in the fields  
in her village in Poland during the  
pogroms. The Catholic Church would get  
the Gentile people all worked up about  
how the Jews killed Christ and about  
how the Jews killed Christian babies to  
add the blood to their matzahs. Every  
now and then the Gentile men would  
stalk the Jewish villages looking for  
revenge. For the Russian cossacks, kill-  
ing Jews was just a way of letting off  
steam. Oh, I definitely don't feel  
white like Christians and ex-Christians  
are white, even though I understand  
that I have white skin privilege. I do  
not see myself as Third World. I know  
my life has been a lot more privileged  
than the lives of people of color. Yet  
I feel separated from white mainstream  
culture by its anti-Semitism.  

Of course the Amerikan media doesn't  
talk about how the US destroys Third  
World lands and persecutes the people.  
The Amerikan media is not interested in  

reporting how US industries leave other  
lands barren and poison the rivers and  
lakes or how the US backs dictatorships  
paid off to let US corporations exploit  
the people mercilessly. There have been  
so many holocausts in the history of  
Western Civilization, so many people  
persecuted who we rarely hear mentioned.  
The Armenian people were nearly destroyed  
by the Turks. The American Indians'  
homeland was stolen. After years of  
broken treaties and brutal slaughter  
waged against them by US military for-  
ces, most of the Indians who survive  
today live in poverty. They are forced  
by law to allow industrialists to rip  
off the resources of the land on their  
reservations, their sacred Mother Earth  
for pennies. After stealing the land  
from the American Indians, the US built  
its industrial base upon the slave la-  
bor of black people. The US has prospered  
by breaking the backs of Third World  
people, around the world and in  
this country.  

By focusing on the persecution of  
Jewish people to the exclusion of other  
oppressed people, the media creates and  
builds resentment toward Jewish people  
from other oppressed people. In the  
Midwestern city where I was raised, it  
was set up for Jews and Blacks to re-  
sent each other. Jewish merchants were  
barred from having stores in Gentile  
neighborhoods. So they set up business-  
es in black neighborhoods. The busi-  
nessmen were interested in profit, not  
in serving the Black community. Bad  
feelings grew between the two communi-  
ties. Over the years, several of my  
Dad's friends were killed by Black peo-  
ple in hold-ups. All to the advantage  
of the ruling class to keep people di-  
vided.  

Anti-Semitism is always sitting in  
the back pocket of the ruling class.  
Their convenient scapegoat is the image  
of the rich, pushy, get-ahead Jew. My  
family background is working class, but  
there are a lot of Jews in visibly afflu-  
ent professions, such as doctors, law-  
yers, and entertainers. Not too many  
Jews are actually in the ruling class.  
The Bohemian Grove gathering and the  
Trilateral Commission probably include  
only a very few Jews, like the Roth-  
childs and Henry Kissinger. However,  
Jews are always used as symbols of  
wealth and oppression. When times get  
really hard, anti-Semitism gets more  
and more intense. The ruling class uses  
Jews to take all the anger and abuse  
over the conditions that the ruling  
class creates.  

I recently read a short description  
of anti-Semitic violence throughout the  
history of Europe, written by Janet  
Schrim.  

"Many anti-Semitic attitudes and re-  
strictions were firmly in place by the  
year 500, the beginning of the Middle  
Ages. A period of heavy anti-Semitic  

struggle  

violence began in 1096 with the First  
Crusade undertaken to wrest the 'Holy  
Land' from the Moslems and Jews. From  
January to July of 1096 the ‘crusading’  
mobs of knights, nobles, monks, and  
peasants killed 10,000 Jews in France  
and Germany. This was from 1/3 to 1/4  
of the Jewish population of these coun-  
tries. There was a Second Crusade in  
the 1140s and a Third Crusade in the  
1190s. It became customary to start a  
Crusade by killing Jews and cancelling  
all debts to Jewish moneylenders. Some-  
thing they never taught me in Catholic  
grade school.  

“Other sorts of things sparked anti-  
Semitic prejudice to violence. From  
1347 to 1350, when the bubonic plague  
spread over Europe until one third of  
the population was dead, Christians  
seized on the obsession that Jews had  
intentionally spread the plague by poi-  
soning wells. Jews were tried on this  
charge even in towns where there was no  
plague. Poland reported killing 10,000  
Jews on this account. In Germany, in  
Erfurt, Mainz, and Breslau alone over  
10,000 Jews were killed. In 1389 in  
Prague, after an imagined insult to the  
Christian 'host', 3,000 Jews were kill-  
ed, their synagogue burned and the To-  
rah destroyed. The Jews were also fre-  
quently accused of ritual murder of  
Christians, particularly children.  
These particular examples are incidents  
for which there are hard statistics a-  
vailable. I know of no standard, agreed  
upon estimate of Jews slaughtered in  
Medieval Europe. There are books and  
books filled with the extreme anti-sem-  
itic atrocities of this period. For all  
we know it may be the case that one  
third of European Jewry was murdered in  
the Middle Ages. But numbers don't even  
begin to tell the whole story, a story  
full of legal restrictions, expulsion  
from countries, unjust imprisonments,  
manipulation by self-serving rulers,  
prejudicial taxation, confiscation of  
resources, forced baptisms, constant  
contempt and abuse from the majority of  
Christians.  

With the Renaissance, anti-Semitic  
violence abated greatly but anti-Semit-  
ism remained, always susceptible to be  
made more active whenever a scapegoat  
was wanted. After the French Revolution,  
Jews began to fare better. The anti-sem-  
itic writers popped up. Anti-Semitism  
has never died out. Nazi anti-Semitism  
was not an aberration in European his-  
tory. The one original part of Hitler's  
plan was the intent to eliminate the  
Jews as a people."  

I said I feel a lot of conflict over  
my being Jewish. I feel for the Pales-  
tinian people. I don't think peace is  
possible in Israel, because it is a  
holy land to Muslims, Christians and  
Jews. The leaders in Israel are becom-  
ing more and more militaristic and  
aggressive. The idea that the Bible gave  

the land of Israel to the Jewish people  
and therefore it is alright to take it  
from those who live on that land, is un-  
justifiable. And yet I wish there was  
some way, somehow to have a Jewish  
homeland.  

In Sunday school we read The Pathways  
Through The Bible. It explained the  
tales of the Old Testament. I remember  
the story that God told the Jewish peo-  
ple that the land of Canaan was over-  
flowing with milk and honey, and that  
He (the God) was giving it to them. He  
would go with them to battle to take  
Canaan. Yes, Canaan was overflowing  
with milk and honey and people. The  
peaceful, Goddess-worshipping pagans  
weren't ready to do battle. They were  
wiped out. Many of the stories talked a-  
bout how bad the idol worshippers were  
and how those who really loved God would  
destroy these evil idols. All that idol  
smashing that God was so proud of, was  
the destruction of religious images  
which threatened the power of these one  
male God conquerors. Taking a look at  

these things I had accepted so matter-  
of-factly when I lived at home, was a  
rude awakening for me. I realized that  
the origins of Judaism are very connec-  
ted to the origins of patriarchy. It al-  
so showed me that all patriarchal relig-  
ions are founded on cruelty and are a-  
busive to women. The problem about ex-  
pressing conflicts like these is that  
someone is probably going to accuse me  
of being anti-Semitic, but, let's face  
it, all of Western Civilization is built  
on war and conquest and brutality. I do  
not forget that the Catholic Church has  
killed far more people than the Nazis  
did. It's unfathomable to me how many  
people the Catholic Church tortured and  
killed in the name of its God.  

The community I grew up in was mostly  
all Jewish. There probably wasn't one  
Gentile family for blocks. I can appre-  

Double Edged Dilemma  

ciate my parents' fear of Gentile peo-  
ple. They were still trying to recover  
from the shock of learning about the  
death camps. My mother was the boss in  
my family, except that my grandma lived  
with us and has a very forceful way a-  
bout her. The two of them struggled a-  
lot while my Dad kept out of it. It was  
usually about Grandma making some com-  
ment about the house needing to be  
cleaned. Our house was actually too  
clean and my mother was always exhaust-  
ed. My older brother had much more pow-  
er around the house than my Dad. Mom  
and Grandma treated him like he was a  
king. He was horribly mean to me, but  
my younger brother and I were always  
close.  

In my parents’ circle of friends all  
of the women were powerful. I remember  
hearing in sixth grade that girls be-  
come mothers and teachers and nurses,  
while boys become doctors and firemen  
and lawyers. I just didn't believe  
that could happen. I think my cultural  
background gave me a lot of ways to see  
myself as a powerful person. The other  
aspect of Jewish culture that I love is  
some intangible that my Grandma symbol-  
izes to me.  

I was Grandma's "good girl", so  
naturally I observed all the Jewish  
holidays, fasted on Yom Kippur, ob-  
served the Passover, and kept kosher  
(more or less, less as the meat prices  
got higher). Grandma used to “bench  
lit", that is, light the Sabbath can-  
dles, every Friday night. She would  
wave her hands three times around the  
old candlesticks and sing the Sh'ma as  
if it were the most precious prayer in  
the world. The candlesticks are mine  
now. She gave them to me after my  
mother died. The only time I ever say  
the Sh'ma now is when I explain to  
someone what it means in English. This  
sacred chant, "Hear, O Israel, the  
Lord our God, the Lord is one. Praise  
be His name whose glorious kingdom is  
forever and ever," makes me feel ripped  
off and angry. When I think of the  
thousands of times I said it from the  
bottom of my heart...That strict idea  
of one male God infuriates me, one  
controlling God! I think we are all  
divine. In fact, the religion of Juda-  
ism makes me angry. The only Jewish  
religious service I've been to in years  
was my Mother's funeral. The sermon the  
rabbi gave was all about how she was  
such a God-fearing woman. I wanted to  
tell him to shut up. After he was  
through I asked him if I could go over  
to the coffin and kiss the roses on my  
mother's casket. (Jews keep the casket  
closed.) He said, "no," but I ignored  

him and went over to my mother's  
beautiful oak coffin to say farewell,  
before her earthly body was lowered  
into the ground. The rabbi came to the  

MORE ON PAGE 20  
Big Mama Rag, February, 1982 - Page 7