Co-opting Feminism

In a march that took place on International Women’s Day, the split
between feminism and the male left in Denver was once again
beautifully illustrated.

When feminists and gay people arrived to participate in the march,
they were told they could not do so while carrying their signs that
supported women and gay rights. According to the organizers of the
march, feminism and homosexuality are inconsistent with the interests
of working-class and minority women, primarily because of the threat
they pose to the nuclear family. (The organizers themselves are white
and middle-class.)

The organizers are absolutely right that feminism and homosexuality
are threatening to the nuclear family. They are wrong, however, in their
“line” that feminism and homosexuality are inconsistent with the
interests of working-class and minority women. All women are
oppressed because they are women. Minority women bear a double
oppression because of their heritage and their gender. Working-class
women must struggle to survive in a capitalist economy that often uses
organized labor to keep them down. All women face every minute, every
day of their lives, the woman-hatred that is patriarchy and their
oppressor: men.

The male-defined socialist line does not see the nuclear family as
oppressive to women. It thinks that capitalism created women’s
oppression and that socialism will destroy the reasons that women are
exploited. But women's oppression preceded capitalism by at least
2000 years and has outlived capitalism in socialist countries. This is so
because male supremacy is the oldest form of domination and resists
change. Proof of this is easily seen in the struggle the male left still has
with feminist revolutionary theory.

Women are primarily exploited by our position in the patriarchal
family structure. Capitalism just came along in the history of man and
took advantage of our positions as sources of cheap labor, as
consumers, and as reproducers. Capitalism distorted the means of
production (resources, labor) and the means of reproduction (women).
And it seems that male-defined socialism is doomed to imitate its
predecessor.

It's still a matter of the “fathers against the sons.” Radical feminists
will have to initiate and lead any true socialist revolution. Neither the
male left nor the women who are trapped in it can.

Elitism and the O.L.

One thing that the Women’s Day march did was to show the true
position of ‘revolutionary’ socialist verbiage and those who mouth it.
The rhetoric is hopelessly middle-class and patriarchal and therefore
counter-revolutionary (to use a term common to those who place
themselves in the vanguard).

The women’s groups that were contacted soon found out that their
input was to be token, at best, that the thrust of the march was basically
being defined by women who were well-schooled in male-defined
socialist politics, and that the issue of radical feminism was not even
going to be considered.

An interesting aspect of the whole fiasco is the tactics that the group
used to convince others of their “correctness.” Lesbian-baiting and
gay-baiting and now feminist-baiting are “correct” methods to —
convince people that heterosexual male politics will form the
revolution. The ‘coalition’ (which was in reality two or three male
socialist women, not the ten who were supposed to be it) openly and
enthusiastically manipulated minority and working-class women and
thereby capitalized on the homophobia rampant in this society. They
encouraged the oppression of all women by encouraging anti-feminist
and anti-gay attitudes.

The people involved in the organizing of the march, whether or not
they are members of the October League, are hopelessly middle-class.
There is no difference between their vision of change and that of a Pen-
tagon official's. They will continue to hold marches and rallies and talk
about the revolution and the high value of the nuclear family while at
the same time encouraging classist, sexist, and racist attitudes.

It is important to understand that the feminists and gay supporters at
the march who were told that they couldn’t march with signs
supporting women’s and gay rights identify themselves as anti-imperialist, anti-capitalist, anti-racist.
It is the male-defined socialists who cannot hear us.

Linda Fowler

As the “recession” goes on, our financial situation becomes in-
creasingly tighter. That may be hard to believe as we have been squeak-
ing in every column for months. But, Mama wouldn't lie to you, would
she? Of course not. It is true, true, true.

The BIGGEST headache right now is our looming debt: $1,100!!!
(Mostly for typesetting & printing.) We have to eliminate that debt if we
are to keep publishing. To that end, Raw Honey and The Three Sisters
are doing a benefit for us at the bar, 3358 Mariposa, on April 16 at 8:00
p.m. BMR gets the door and 35% of the bar. We know Wednesday is not
the best day of the week for partying, but that is when we have to do it.
So, take a deep breath and come anyway. We desperately need your
support. And remember, you'll recover.

Once we get on firmer financial ground, we can go back to our usual
24 pages. Lately, we have had to cut back to 16 pages due to costs. This
means there is a lot of good material we must leave out of the paper.
Bummer.

Advertising is one area in which we can increase our income. Clare
Strawn has been hired as ads manager (a part-time position) and is
making progress. She can use some help. If you sell an ad for BMR, we
will give you 20% commission. Contact Clare at the office about this.

Distribution is another area we are hitting hard. Circulation
manager is Chocolate (another part-time position). Contact her for
some leads on outlets if you can help out. Or get your own. We are still
offering a free subscription for each two outlets you get for us.

The BMR Library is starting to come together (see article, page 10).
Susan Hayes is working on this project and can use help and ideas. We
need to locate funds to develop it. You can contribute books at a dis-
count. Contact Roberta Karsh at the Footnote bookstore.

More on Page 7

In Europe

Big Mama Rag

Vol. 3-A No. 3

International Tribunal
On Crimes Against Women

To Be Held This Fall

An International Tribunal on
Crimes Against Women will be
held in the Fall of 1975, probably
in Europe. At the Tribunal,
women from all over the world
will give personal testimony on
crimes committed against them.
Following each testimony, a
report on the crime will be given,
discussing its prevalence, how it
is dealt with by legal and social
agencies, and the difficulties
women face in combating it. A
League of Women’s Rights, of
which this Tribunal is the first
action, “will continue to serve as
a source of information on
crimes against women and as a
pressure group for eradication of
these crimes.”

The idea for the Tribunal came
out of a workshop at the Inter-
national Feminist Conference
held in Frankfurt, Germany, in
November 1974. Diana Russell,
author of The Politics of Rape
and Sociology professor at Mills
College, was one of the few
women from America to attend
the Feminist Conference and
volunteered to organize the
American Committee to the
Tribunal. Although the Tribunal
will be held during International
Women’s Year, it is not spon-
sored by the U.N. In fact, it was
conceived in part to combat the
false impression that U.N. coun-
tries really want women to be
liberated and to stop the co-
optation of women’s issues:
documenting the legality of op-
pression exposes the hypocrisy
of these countries.

A list of crimes committed
against women around the
world is eye-opening in itself:

- infibulation (scraping of the
labia until they grow together to
promote chastity).

- clitoridectomy (for the same
purpose)

- selling of women

- forced prostitution

- forced sterilization

- forced motherhood through
outlaw of contraception and
abortion

- child brides (some of whom
have been hospitalized as a con-
sequence of intercourse).

- purdah

- rape (which is, of course, legal
within marriage in this and other
countries)

- economic and employment
inequalities

- double standards in divorce
laws (in some countries, allowing
polygamy for men but not
women in others)

The list goes on.

Public airing of the crimes
“has a tremendous potential as
a world-wide consciousness-
raiser,” Diana told a group of
women who met in Berkeley
February 1 as the first step in
organizing the American Com-
mittee. She communicated to
the group her excitement about
the Tribunal “as a possible way
to encourage the women’s
movement in countries that
don’t have it.” There is simply
the impact of the concept of
crimes against women. Another
effect of the Tribunal, Diana
pointed out, is that to have a
report in an international forum
on, for example, clitoridectomy
“will freak out the countries that
still practice it... will challenge
the sexism in those countries.”

A planning meeting will be
held in Europe in March to
screen the cases selected by the
national committees to make
sure that different types of
crimes will be presented, and to
make essential decisions about
the Tribunal: when and where it
will be held, whether men will be
admitted, and how to handle
press coverage and problems
presented by different
languages. Representatives of
the national committees will at-
tend the planning meeting,
which is also open to other in-
terested women.

The U.S. organization is
attempting to contact women’s
groups throughout the country
in an effort to secure
documented reports of more
cases, to raise funds for the
Tribunal, and to determine the
three or four most significant
crimes committed against
women in this country.

Women who are interested in
volunteering active assistance
may call Diana Russell in
Berkeley, California at (415)
843-0680.

— Chris/Plexus

Police

own arrests.”

Demonstrators came from
gay, straight, and mixed groups.
Sponsors included the San Fran-
cisco and Berkeley-Oakland
Women’s Union, the Daughters
of Bilitis, the San Francisco
Socialist Coalition, and Union
Women’s Alliance to Gain
Equality.

The protest was called, said
Skidmore, to tell other gay
women and men and the city
government “that we will not
tolerate the arbitrary harass-
ment from the cop on the beat or
the politician behind him. We
will continue to resist until this
harassment is ended.”

Feminists Call For Alternative
Conferences in Mexico City

Linda Fowler:

The International Women's
Year Conference is to be held in
Mexico City June 22 - July 4. The
official U.S. delegation will be
selected from recommendations
made by the Office of Inter-
national Conferences of the U.S.
State Department, according to
Murry E. Jackson, director of
that office. Final selection of
delegates of both sexes will be
made by William B. Buffam,
Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Af-
fairs.

Although one criterion for
selection will be active participa-
tion in women's affairs, equal
weight will be given to
“thorough knowledge of United
States policies on issues which
will be discussed at the con-
ference, an ability to present Un-
ited States positions, and an
ability to negotiate effectively in
an international forum.”

It is significant that the State
Department will select all
delegates, that these delegates
will defend United States policy,
and that the selection of these
delegates, which will include
men, will be made by men.
Women of the United States can
expect no authentic representa-
tion from such a contingent.

We are beginning now to form
an “unofficial” delegation of
women to go to Mexico City with
the intention of more adequately
representing American
women. We hope to set up alter-
native workshops with “unof-
ficial” delegates from other
countries to deal with issues
which women themselves con-
sider significant.

The Big Mama Rag office will
serve as a clearinghouse for in-
formation and as an
organizational center for the for-
mation of a delegation from this
area. We will attempt to coor-
dinate efforts with groups of
women with similar aims from
other parts of the country who
will be attending the conference.

Let's show the State Depart-
ment that it cannot co-opt
Feminism so easily. Contact the
BMR office for more informa-
tion: 322-2010.