$

culture

Lesbian Feminism

Editor's note: the following article was sent to Big Mama Rag by Andrena Zawinski on behalf of Women Against Sexist Violence in Pornography and Media. The group can be contacted through P.O. Box 7172, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.

Can a lesbian feminist be involved in sadomasochism? According to Samois, a Berkeley-based support group for lesbian feminists into S&M, the answer is: yes. According to them, S&M is "an eroticized exchange of power negotiated between two or more sexual partners." This handy rhetoric of sexual liberation coupled with the notion of consensuality is the latest tactic that pushes what amounts to no more than an overly simplistic, female-disguised concept of male sexuality that comes complete with catchphrases like, “listen to your body" or "pleasure and pain are closely related." For me, as for most feminist women, pleasure and pain are not indistinguishable. We know the difference between being raped and being loved. For me, as for most feminist women, our bodies tell us that pain hurts. And feminists recognize that violence masked as sex is violence nonetheless.

In attempting to answer the question, "Can a lesbian feminist be involved in sadomasochism?", images flood my mind - images of gruesome homicide photographs that detail accidental S&M deaths and murders; images of a burlesque queen as she draws reeling delight from the audience when a dagger-like stiletto heel pierced her vagina; images from the current trend of horror films that glorify violence against women; images of women bound, gagged, and brutalized and killed off in men's entertainment magazines; images that disturb my waking thoughts; images that disrupt my sleep. It is difficult to consider S&M as part of lesbian feminism in light of these images, even more difficult within the context of the basic tenets of feminism and lesbian feminism as life-affirming choices. In answer to the question, "Can a lesbian feminist be involved in S&M?", I propose that any lesbian or feminist considering, having, or having had involvement in S&M pose another question: why?

As lesbian feminists consider the question of sadomasochism, one thing becomes increasingly clear - S&M is the most counterrevolutionary proposition that has hit the women's movement brandishing the name of feminism. This becomes more and more evident as more and more arguments for S&M surface. Commonplace positions include the idea that S&M is innate, S&M is a logical and sexual reflection of culture, S&M is sophisticated and experimental sexuality, S&M is cathartic, consensual, and just plain fun. Additionally, lumped in with these ideas is the business that sadists and masochists are an oppressed sexual minority, oppressed by feminists!

In the S&M as innate proposition, advocates often refer to childhood experience as proof of "S&M tendencies." In defense of being born a sadist or a masochist, the childhood-experience-equals-inherency proponents additionally laden their argument with Freudian theory of fixation. This is something feminists have long fought against in defense of sexual preference as an issue of positive personal choice vs. sexual preference as a negative biological destiny. Childhood sexual experimentation between boys and girls, boys and boys, and girls and girls no more writes a script for adult sexual preference than other curious ventures children pursue. We are taught male and female roles. What we do with these lessons is a matter of the direction of whole lifetimes, not an isolated experience that points to a biological prescription for adult sexual activity that, in actuality, embraces social, psychological, and even political dimensions as well. The notion of sexual programming is a convenient one, but a dangerous one in light of issues like sexism and racism.

Well then, if S&M is not innate and proven out by a history of childhood experimentation, could it be true that it is a social phenomenon, one that is a natural expression for cultural creatures cast in a society riddled with both pleasure and pain? That we experience a wide spectrum of pleasure and pain in our lives is not at issue. What is at issue is the role feminists have been struggling to play in culture to free ourselves from restrictive role dichotomization, while some would have us embed ourselves in the extremes of gender role polarization - sadism and masochism. Yes, culture may indeed be full of pleasure and pain; but, as feminists, we are taking on the arduous task of reshaping culture without any real or immediate rewards. "Our struggle lies in trying to reduce violence within ourselves, not to let it infiltrate us, or set up barriers in our thoughts, our intuitions." (Crimes Against Women, testimony on violence against women, Italy, p.174.)

Despite what is a counterrevolutionary direction for feminists to take, many lesbian feminist S&M practitioners believe that S&M sex is an experimental sexuality that actually grew out of the women's movement in an attempt to redefine female sexuality. Bearing the brunt of a buckle from a paramour doesn't strike me as terribly catalytic.

In what has become the handbook on the subject (What Color is Your Handkerchief), a glance can tell what careful reading verifies -- the lesbian feminist concept of S&M is a renaming of male concepts of domination, a male perceived sexuality in which one person must be feminized and subjugated to the will of the other. S&M activities have many variations that can include everything from costuming to urinating and defecating to whipping and piercing. Specialty stores commercialize it with a booming business in straight jackets, piercing jewelry, bullwhips, and other bondage and discipline accoutrements. Recommended literature reveals the S&M concept as neither new nor experimental. Story of O, recommended as one of the best pieces written, is about a woman who is "fucked, sucked, raped, whipped, humiliated and tortured on a regular and continuing basis - she is programmed to be an erotic slave." (Woman Hating, Andrea Dworkin, p.56.) The Marquis de Sade, once proclaimed as a sexual revolutionary but now recognized as murderous and vile, is also recommended with a mild cautionary note tacked on that his activities may have lacked safety and mutuality. Experimental? Sophisticated? Hardly. The male posturing of power masqueraded as sex has filtered into an accepting female culture - unfortunately not so unusual or new a phenomenon either.

Along the same line, S&M is extolled as a higher form of sexuality for the daring and intellectually superior. I fail to see the evolutionary quality in brute force; I fail to see the difference between the sadist and the rapist. S&M supporters balk at this analogy because they say the difference between the two is that the sadist hurts the masochist as an expression of love while the rapist hurts the victim as an expression of hate. Further, they say that the sadist is actually manipulated by the masochist who sets controls on how much sadism she will tolerate. Why does this remind me of the dangerous cliché of "women who ask for it"? The message lesbian feminists involved in S&M give to our male-dominated culture becomes increasingly clear - that women want what women have always had, domination and degradation. Oh how far we have come to have bought the pornographic culture of men, to have provided it with feminist jargon, to have legitimized female slavery by perpetuating it among ourselves.

Yet, there still remains the question of fantasy and the acting out of fantasy as cathartic. We know that

Sapphistry: Striking Out At Feminism ‘Til It Hurts—

Sapphistry

Pat Califia

illustrated by Tee Corinne Najad Press, 1980 $6.95/paper

Constance Perenyi

Several years ago at a cresting point of the new wave of feminism, Big Mama Rag published an editorial on lesbian/feminism and sadomasochism. The introductory paragraph expressed the surprise - and horror - felt by the collective because the issue had even become an issue, and because sadomasochism was being linked to lesbian/feminism. Going on to refute this link, the writers stated that in no way is sadomasochistic behavior feminist, nor does it have a place in the women's movement. (See BMR, Vol. 4, #6-June, 1976).

Well, the issue is raging again, as I suspect it has been all along. But what has drawn the most attention recently are two publications that not only argue in favor of lesbian sadomasochism, but also explain the "how-to's." The first became the subject of ongoing controversy in feminist and gay publications over a year ago and that is What Color is Your Handkerchief - a tacky booklet that details technique and communication (i.e. if you see a woman with a red handkerchief in her right back pocket, she is telling you that she is a "top" or dominant partner, who is into fistfucking.) The Handkerchief Code is put out by the Samois Society, a group of women devoted to releasing lesbian sadomasochism from the chains of misunderstanding so that lesbians everywhere can truly liberate ourselves into thinking that if it feels bad, it's got to be good.

The second publication is a volume called Sapphistry: the Book of Lesbian Sexuality. Written by Pat Califia, a member of the Samois Society herself, Sapphistry could actually be subtitled: "The Book of Lesbian Sadomasochism." Although it covers many topics, and presents a lot of useful information about women's sexuality in general, the whole book is based on the same premises used to justify lesbian sadomasochism and to argue that it is liberating and ultimately (gasp!) feminist.

All of the arguments presented in the article by Women Against Sexist Violence above apply to Sapphistry as well; so rather than going into the problems point by point, I will try to get to the roots of Califia's faulty reasoning.

In her introduction, Califia tells us that her book is designed as a resource to be used by the lesbian community. She goes on to say she has tried not “to label any form of sexual activity as politically incorrect, aesthetically displeasing, or morally wrong." Further, she states that because lesbian sexuality has been put down, we have overreacted to our oppression by ignoring the sexual component of lesbianism. And she sees Sapphistry as “an attack on the repression and colonization of women's sexuality."

While much of what Califia says is true - that lesbianism has been distorted by the society at large and that many of us feel uncomfortable with our sexuality - she is missing the point in her argument. She states over and over again that we are conditioned to feel guilt - "It seems as if it doesn't matter what we feel bad about as long as we feel bad about something.” And the solution as she sees it, over and over, is "to go after what we enjoy and forget about what we've heard we should enjoy." In talking about technique, she asks, "Do you think it's too kinky, weird, or wrong? Remember that is the prevailing attitude towards lesbianism. If both of you can get pleasure out of doing something and don't intend to harm anyone in the process, how is it wrong or bad?"

As the article above explains, lesbians into sadomasochism turn words like “wrong or bad" around not to point at their own practices, but at the anger of feminists who speak out against sadomasochism. In one sweep, they group all their critics together and charge that feminists are inviting oppression, bringing it down on all of our heads even heavier than before. Talking about pornography and the feminist fight against it, Califia asks if "a group of feminists attempting to ban sadomasochistic pornography behaving any differently from a church group trying to prevent sex-education films from being shown in the classroom?" And she answers, "When a well-organized, right-wing movement is flourishing and clamoring for stricter censorship and harsher laws governing sexual conduct, it seems dangerous for feminists to work in tandem with or parallel to it."

Califia's discussion of the pornography issue is infuriating - she simply does not deal with the complexity of it. First by refusing to differentiate between erotica and pornography (again, to do so would be to judge), then by avoiding the real problems feminists face in fighting porn (like the intricacies and contradictions of the 1st Amendment), Califia flies off in different directions, asking such things as, "Will the anti-pornography movement create a climate in which children can explore their sexuality with whomever and however they choose?" Throughout the argument, she throws in off-the-wall comments and questions like this, but never once does she put them into a broader or a more relevant context. Nor does she even stop to question whether children should, or even can, make free choices about how they experience their sexuality.

There are wild gaps in Califia's reasoning - and in her defense - throughout Sapphistry. However, because so much of what Califia includes is sound, and at points even sensitive, the politics of the book remain unclear, difficult to get at. In the chapter on Disabled Lesbians, we are given information about disabling diseases, and these facts are tempered by a lot of understanding about how it feels for physically challenged lesbians to deal with body image, finding partners, and technique.

I appreciated Califia's perspective in this chapter, but the very next one on "Variations" opened up the whole can of worms, sadomasochistically speaking. I had a difficult time reading about whips and paddles, clips and clamps, watersports, and humiliation - which underlies it all anyway. Throughout, I looked for the holes in her logic, and finally arrived at the realization that the theories behind lesbian sadomasochism are based on a very wrong