hot briefs

Prove It

Secretary of Agriculture Earl  
Butz, a close friend of food pro-  
cessing corporations, denounced as  
“utter nonsense" a federal law ban-  
ning cancer-causing additives from  
food. He said that "...poison,  
properly used, is good for people.”  

- New American Movement  

Singer Sues  

Connie Francis is suing the  
Howard Johnson's Motor Lodge chain  
for $5 million, after having been  
raped in one of their motels. She  
claims that the locks on her door  
were not sufficient to keep the  
rapist out, and that the attack  
ruined her entertainment come-  
back. Howard Johnson's claims that  
a United Parcel strike had delayed  
delivery of safety locks intended  
for the motel's doors.  

Woman Fights Fire With Fire  

Lori Lakshas, a former trainee  
firefighter, has filed a sex discrim-  
ination complaint with the Seattle  
Office of Women's Rights and initia-  
ted a termination appeal through her  
union. She was terminated two months  
after beginning training with the  
Seattle Fire Department on the grou-  
nds that she was not physically cap-  
able of performing the duties of a  
firefighter. Lakshas claims that she  
and five other women who started tra-  
ining with her were pressured to res-  
ign by high-ranking officials in the  
Fire Department who intimated that  
they would never be able to fulfill  
the physical requirements necessary  
to fight fires. The five other women  
resigned shortly after training began.  

Alimony Counts  

According to a recent statement by  
the American Bankers Association, a  
provision in the Equal Credit Oppor-  
tunity Act requires creditors to con-  
sider alimony, child support, and  
maintenance payments in assessing a  
woman's creditworthiness.  

Mothers and Daughters  

Dana Naparsteck is in the process  
of developing a syllabus for the course,  
"Mothers and Daughters," which  
will be taught from the Women's Stud-  
ies College, SUNY at Buffalo in the  
fall. She needs articles, books, pam-  
phlets and related materials that would  
be relevant. Issues to be covered  
include socializations, guilt, anger,  
women's self-hatred, women's strength,  
and the mother/daughter relationship  
in literature, mythology and tradition-  
al psychology. Write her at WSC, 108  
Winspear Ave., Buffalo, NY.  

Music Festival  

A women's music festival will be  
held in Michigan on August 20 thru  
22. Among those who have already said  
they will perform are Margie Adam,  
Meg Christian, Ginni Clemens, Casse  
Culver, Kay Gardner, Holly Near, BeBe  
K'Roche, Willei Tyson and Andrea  
Weltman. Write to We Want the Music  
Collective, 1501 Lyons St., Mt. Plea-  
sant, MI 48858. The organizers are  
asking that women raise funds to en-  
able economically disadvantaged sis-  
ters in their areas to attend.  

Special Symposium  

A special two-week symposium on  
Perspectives on the Future of Femin-  
ism will be held September 2-12 at  
the Los Angeles Women's Building. The  
purpose of the symposium is to stim-  
ulate dialogue on goals, strategies,  
process and visions of the future of  
the women's movement. Participating  
will be Gloria Steinem, Judy Chicago,  
Sally Gearhart, Barbara Starrett, Na-  
omi Weisstein, Heather Booth, Arlene  
Raven, Ruth Iskin and Sheila de Bret-  
teville. The symposium will be coord-  
inated by Susan Rennie and Kirsten  
Grimstad, authors of the New Woman's  
Survival Catalog and Sourcebook. Ad-  
vance registration fee (non-refund-  
able and applied toward $250 tuition)  
is $25, payable before August 12 to  
Extension Program at the Woman's  
Building, 1727 North Spring Street,  
Los Angeles, CA 90012.  

Fetus Freed  

A pregnant woman had been released  
from jail in Camden, N.J., after her  
attorney argued that her 8-month-old  
fetus is a person who cannot be jail-  
ed without having committed a crime.  

Lesbian Writers’ Conference  

The third Annual Lesbian Writers’  
Conference will be held in Chicago  
September 17-19 at the Blue Gargoyle,  
5655 S. University Avenue. Advance  
registration for the entire confer-  
ence weekend is $5. For further in-  
formation and registration form con-  
tact Marie Kuda, Womanpress, Box  
59330, Chicago, IL 50645.  

Right-to-Lifers Convene  

An estimated 3,000 anti-abortion  
activists met in Boston late in June.  
While women from the National Organ-  
ization for Women and staff of local  
abortion clinics picketed outside,  
workshops within included one by Phyllis  
Schaffly on "What's wrong with the  
ERA." The Boston City Council wel-  
comed the conferees, hailing them as  
“life-loving Americans, striving to  
protect those who cannot protect  
themselves."  

Help Bruise Sexists  

The National Organization Against  
Sexism in Media is initiating a na-  
tional campaign against Atlantic Re-  
cords (division of Warner Bros.) be-  
cause of their advertising campaign  
for the Rolling Stones' "Black and  
Blue" album, which they say is blat-  
antly sexist and a degrading depic-  
tion of women. The ad can be found  
in the July 29 issue of Rolling Stone  
and the July 12 issue of Newsweek.  
The N.O.A.S.M. is asking feminists  
to protest to their local Atlantic  
Records representatives, and to ini-  
tiate petition drives. The group's  
address is Helen Duran/Beth Avocado-  
Blossom, 1200 W. Alabama, Houston,  
TX 77006.  

Healing Conference  

Womancraft ‘76, an all women health  
and healing conference, will take  
place on September 4, 5, and 6 in  
Woodstock, NY. The purpose of the  
conference is to recover and renew,  
for all women desiring to heal our-  
selves, the traditional approaches,  
resource persons and tools needed to  
make the vital connections to our own  
inner healing powers and to connect  
us to each other and overcome our ru-  
ral and societal isolation and dis-  
ease. For details and preregistra-  
tion material, write to Womancraft  
'76, P.O. Box 609, Woodstock, NY  
12498.  

Hold On To Your Foreign Objects  

The folks at McDonald's recently  
issued a confidential memo to workers  
regarding customers who find "foreign  
objects" in their hamburgers. The  
memo urges workers to "attempt to se-  
cure the ‘foreign object’.” Employees  
are asked to explain to the customer  
that taking the foreign object "would  
be helpful in attempting to trace  
down the means by which it could have  
been found in the food. It will sat-  
isfy the customer that there is a  
sincere concern and effort on your  
part to see that such an ‘incident’  
does not happen again." The memo  
goes on to state that seizing the  
foreign object also "removes 'evi-  

dence’ that may subsequently be exhib-  

ited to all the customer's friends  
and end up with a lawyer in order to  
seek damages."  

Women’s Center Burglarized  

Early in April, the offices of the  
Center for Women's Studies and Ser-  
vices in San Diego were systematically  
burglarized. The thief took referral  
and mailing information, mailing la-  
bels and lists, and files containing  
communications. The CWSS is trying  
to piece together its communications  
network, and is asking anyone who is  
or knows a member of CWSS or a sub-  
scriber to their Bulletin to please  
put them in touch with the Center im-  
mediately, and to pass this informa-  
tion on to their friends.  

Women’s Land  

Another Dimension is 70 acres of  
land near Tishomingo, Okla., avail-  
able for women to camp or live year-  
round. The land is 3 miles from a  
wildlife refuge and offers a river,  
horses, a community garden and a  
road-front outlet store for crafts.  
Fee is $5 monthly. Money is currently  
being raised to pay for the land. All  
donations are tax-exempt. Send to  
Sisters of Diana, Inc., P.O. Box 2863  
Norman, Oklahoma 73070.  

ERA Activities  

The National Organization for Wo-  
men has organized a national ERA  
vigil at the White House, scheduled  
to last July 5-August 28. The vigil  
will end with a "Shoulder to Shoulder  
march around the White House and a  
rally. August 26, the anniversary of  
the day women won the right to vote,  
will see ERA rallies and other activ-  
ities in several other cities, in-  
cluding Seattle, Louisville, New York,  
San Francisco, Chicago, San Diego and  
Richmond, VA. A meeting to be held on  
August 12 at 7pm, 460 Pontiac, will  
plan a similar Denver action.  

Activist Faces Jail  

Lureida Torres, a member of the  
Puerto Rican Socialist Party, was  
granted immunity and held in contempt  
for refusing to testify before a fed-  
eral grand jury investigating the  
1975 bombings of Fraunces Tavern and  
several banks and insurance companies.  
Another Puerto Rican group claimed  
responsibility for the bombings and  
PSP disclaimed any connection with  
them. Letters and telegrams of sup-  
port for Lureida Torres should be sent  
to Judge Thurgood Marshall, US Supr-  
eme Court, Washington, D.C. For fur-  
ther information write to the Grand  
Jury Project, 853 Broadway, Room 1415,  
New York, NY 10003.  

State Protects Business  

The Washington State Industrial Wel-  
fare Committee, which is supposed to  
protect workers' interests, passed  
new regulations in May which ignored  
the guarantee of an 8-hour workday  
without forced overtime, and lacked  
any provisions for rest breaks, weight-  
lifting limitations, or standards for  
a humane work environment. Adoption  
of the standards would leave workers,  
most of whom are women and minorities,  
virtually unprotected. The Coalition  
for Protective Legislation, an alli-  
ance of feminist, labor, and commun-  
ity groups, is appealing the adoption  
of the regulations.  

Who Needs Greyhound?  

The Magic Ferry (alias "Dykes Ex-  
press") is a 55-passenger school bus  
which some women in Oklahoma have  
converted into a "self-contained ama-  
zon environment," and which they in-  
tend to use to travel cross-country,  
transporting women along the way. All  
travellers will pay a $5 lifetime  
membership fee and will automatically  
become part of an “ever-evolving col-  
lective" which will share all res-  
ponsibilities on the trip, including ex-  
penses. The Magic Ferry is planning a  
trial run to the Women's Music Festi-  
val at Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, at the  
end of August to get a better idea of  
operating costs. After that, the  
Ferry will travel west, covering  
western, northwestern, and midwest-  
ern states before returning home in  
September. Write to Sisters of Diana,  
Inc., Magic Ferry, P.O. Box 2863,  
Norman, Oklahoma 73070.  

Gay Health Workers Meet  

Over 200 gay health workers, about  
half of them women, met in San Fran-  
cisco during March to discuss common  
experiences and problems in their  
field of work. The conference inclu-  
ded an evening of music and films and  
a day of workshops. Many participants  
expressed interest in continuing pro-  
jects, including the production of  
a gay health workers' newsletter and  
a series of workshops to pursue top-  
ics raised during the conference.  
Write to Gay Health Workers, P.O. Box  
42242, San Francisco, CA 94142.  

Montana Festival  

On August 27-29, a Women's Festival  
will be held near Helena, Montana.  
Sponsored by the Helena Women's Cen-  
ter and Artemis Productions, the fes-  
tival will aim to provide an oppor-  
tunity for Montana women to discuss  
needs, goals, plans, and to set up a  
communications network. Write to Ar-  
temis Productions, c/o Linda Whedbee,  
6390 Highway 12 W., #B, Helena, MT,  
59601.  

Victims Now Credible  

The Washington DC Court of Appeals  
ruled in May that a woman's testimony  
that she has been raped need not be  
supported by eyewitnesses or by medi-  
cal evidence that she was forced to  
submit to her attacker. The ruling  
is binding on all DC Superior Court  
Judges, and means that a rapist can  
be convicted on the evidence of his  
victim alone. A similar ruling by a  
Bronx Supreme Court Justice in April  
convicted a rapist entirely on the  
word of his victim.  

Women in Economy Course  

The Goddard-Cambridge Feminist  
Studies program is offering a 12-  
month course on Women in the Eco-  
nomy, granting an MA degree. Con-  
tact Goddard-Cambridge Feminist  
Studies Program, 5 Upland Rd.,  
Cambridge, MA 02140.  

New Hookers’ Group  

A Miami student majoring in  
social work has established a group  
called Health and Happiness of  
Women, after working in a parti-  
cipant-observation study with pros-  
titutes. Evelyn Young says that the  
group's major goal is the decrim-  
inalization of prostitution, but  
she also teaches classes on health  
and body care, rape awareness and  
vocational training. She aims to  
make hookers “realize that street-  
walking is a short-lived career."  

Women Attack Jaycees  

Women Who Are Women, a feminist  
group, protested at the Miss Texas  
beauty pageant in Dallas. The page-  
ant, which is sponsored by Dallas  
Jaycees, is a preliminary to the Miss  
America contest. The group distrib-  
uted leaflets entitled "Sex Sells...  
And the Jaycees Know It" and threw  
a piece of meat onto the stage, shout-  
ing that the pageant was "parading  
people as meat." The leaflet pointed  
out that women were being judged  
on nothing other than their (male-  
defined) beauty, despite the Jaycees'  
vague assurances that intelligence  
counted as well. Women Who Are Wom-  
en are selling hot pink t-shirts that  
say "Myth America 1975" for $5.75.  
Write Southern Resource Center, P.O.  
Box 5593, Dallas, TX 75202.  

Banking Bias  

A May 31 report by the Senate Ban-  
king Committee reveals that race and  
sex discrimination in money-lending  
is still "widespread" despite the  
fact that such discrimination is il-  
legal in home-mortgage loans. The re-  
port blames federal regulating agen-  
cies - the Federal Deposit Insurance  
Corp., the Federal Reserve, the con-  
troller of the currency, and the Fed-  
eral Home Loan Bank Board.  

Artists’ Publication  

The Women's History Research Center  
has published Female Artists Past and  
Present and its companion book, In-  
ternational Women's Year Element  
- an annotated directory/bibliography  
which women in the arts can use to  
communicate with each other. Write  
to the Women's History Research Cen-  
ter, 2325 Oak St., Berkeley, CA  
94708.  

Women on the Beat  

A federal judge in Montgomery, Ala-  
bama, has ruled that its Police De-  
partment is guilty of sex discrimina-  
tion, and has ordered police to open  
all job categories, including patrol  
work, to women. The Department was  
ordered to “assign, promote and com-  
pensate all female police officers  
on an equal basis with male officers."