bmr: where we're at

Bobbe, Sue, Lori, and Liz

In November, Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter collective met with Big Mama Rag. Some important criticisms we heard were that: several women from the Center couldn't support BMR as it is an all-white collective, and that the paper looks white when viewed by women of color.

The reality is that the majority of presses, publishers and newspaper collectives of the women's movement are in the hands of white women. The white ownership, power, that we have—to selectively publish, has protected and segregated us.

We have come to recognize how women of color have been excluded/overlooked/not been heard in print. It is so striking to us how easy it was for each of us to walk in, join the collective and see our articles in print. Some of us don't think of ourselves as writers, we have not honed the craft to an art, but we are in print—white privilege is certainly apparent.

We earnestly want to work with women of all colors on BMR. At the same time, we know that women of color are too angry, too suspicious of white feminist rhetoric to believe that white women want to hear their anger. And for good reason. Recently we read through the feminist press that racism was challenged at the West Coast Women's Music Festival by women of color and some white women. The common response to that from white women was anger that their holiday was spoiled.

For too long, we have defined political issues from a white, working and middle-class background, and have defined feminism by what we have gone through in our lives. We have a lot of self-educating to do to find out that our experience is only one of many.

All oppressions are intertwined and for any of us to win, we all must. Racism is an issue for feminists. BMR has a responsibility to challenge the movement to examine our racism and change it. To this end, and only a beginning, we have made a conscious effort to pull from other national and international journals and newspapers articles by women of color. We all need to recognize the connections between a Jamaican woman's experience, a Maori woman's struggle, and a New York Puerto Rican woman's battle. We know that none of us can read all the news printed, so part of our work is reprinting women's articles for wider distribution.

oops!

Last month, the Haydee Torres article (page 10) was not bylined. Susanna Smith pulled that article together.

Also, a very embarrassing problem on the book list (page 22). The graphic on this page is the cover of the book Daughters of Rachel/Women In Israel by Natalie Rein. The print was in blue, and didn't reproduce on our pages.

We must enter into struggle with women of color and with white women. We can learn from women who we work with directly, and from women whose voices we hear from other movements.

While preparing for the International Women issue last March, we repeatedly came across references to the church wherever women are organizing. From this we decided to print an issue on Organized Religion, the Church and Spirituality, which we're printing next month.

In the U.S. much of the work women are doing in radical politics directly attacks religious policies. Reproductive rights work is a good example. Our right to control our bodies is actively being fought by Catholics and Protestants alike. When we think of the Catholic church our knee-jerk response is it is conservative and anti-woman, opposed to birth control, abortion and divorce. The Evangelical Protestants led by Graham, Falwell, Bakker, et al, also preach and lobby against women's right to control our reproduction. Most people separate the Evangelicals from the rest of the Protestant churches. On BMR we have seen a tendency for feminists to view Protestants as "liberal" and "progressive" because they support birth control.

Yet how many of us have bought into or still believe that Latin America and most developing (Third World) countries' problems are caused by overpopulation? This pervasive belief in the Malthusian theory of economics—that poor people in developing countries are having too many babies to support on the existing resources—opens the way for Protestant missionaries and hospitals to carry out genocidal sterilization of women in areas of the world that are among the least populated and where there is high infant mortality due to U.S. enforced poverty. They continue to go unchallenged because somewhere women still believe that missionaries are doing the people a favor, despite our own pro-woman stand or any anti-imperialist sentiment.

The church has historically changed to appease the demands of its congregations. The Protestant church has stopped burning uppity women at the stake as witches and the Catholic church no longer tortures people to death as heretics as it did during the Inquisition. Now the Protestants allow for some reproductive rights for women and Catholic priests and nuns speak out and support nationalist revolutions. However, some of their practices are still deadly—resulting in genocide or if not back street abortion murders at least an almost complete invalidation and humiliation of many young unmarried Catholic women.

By the same token, we cannot challenge without reservation, the Catholic church's involvement in the politics of countries such as El Salvador without undermining the women's liberation movement there, which does much of its organizing on survival issues through the Catholic church.

MORE ON PAGE 13

COWWERS A graphic by Annabel reprinted from Rouge—a feminist journal out of Australia collective: Bobbe Ross, Sue Goding, Liz Lewis, Lori Bradford

Supporters:

Susanna Smith, Deb Luger, Judy Barlow, Wendy Highby, Kim Womantree

contributors:

Kay Young, Kathy Riley, Blair Northwood, Patty Abrisz

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly by Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation. Manuscripts and artwork (please!) may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord St. Denver, CO 80206. Deadline for material submission will be announced each month in "Where We're At"—it's generally the 15th of the month preceding. Please enclose a stamped self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts. No responsibility is accepted for unsolicited material. We reserve the right to edit all material for length. Subscription rates are $6/year (11 issues) for individuals in the U.S., $12 outside the U.S. or for plain brown wrapper, and $18 to all institutions. BMR is free to all women incarcerated in prisons or mental institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA, and is available on microfilm (Oct. 1972, Vol. 1 through May 1980) directly from Big Mama Rag for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P. O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone number is (303) 322-2010, we have a phone message machine.

Page 2 - Big Mama Rag, January, 1982

inside BMR:

Where We're At........200+22
Here BeLeiee soos oc cies ssw SD
Voices
Pentagon Action.......6&13
Psychiatric Assault......7
America Held Hostage.......6

Racism & ARM......:8,9,10&12
National.... -+++11614
Classies & Advertisements oe ov 5
RESOURCES +s... ce ee eee wees LO