|
|

letters home to mama

Rape and Racism

Dear BHR,

I want to make a few additional
comments on your article "A Feminist
Analysis of Rape and Racism." I have
been speaking with women who were
attacked and avoided being raped and
women who were raped (94 in all)
over the past year and a half and am
now analyzing the interviews. I asked
every third world woman whether she
thought third world men who raped or
tried to rape should not be reported
to the police because the system was
racist. They looked at me incredulously
and their sentiments ran something like
"I don't care what they do to him. They
can hang him from the nearest lamppost.
If I don't help get him off the streets
he will rape my sister or my cousin or
my aunt. I didn’t ask him to try to
rape me." Furthermore, there is little
danger that men of any color will be put in
jail for rape. For example, a study
based on case records from Seattle
and Kansas City showed that of 635
rape complaints reported (which means

out of at least 2,000 rapes) 167
suspects were identified, 45 were
charged with rape or attempted rape
and only 20 were found or pled guilty
and of these 20 only 10 of rape or

attempted rape. (Forcible Rape,
National Institute of Law Enforcement
and Criminal Justice LEAA, March
1978).

Victimization studies show that
Black women have a rate of rape 3
times as high as that of white women
(and if those figures are biased it
is probably underreported). One
Black woman in my study said that
every Black woman she knew had been
raped. In my study, admittedly a non-
representative sample, almost all
were attacked by men of color. We
must take these facts into consideration
when we speak of rape, since
Black women are triply oppressed.

While I would encourage women who
feel they have the resources to report
to the police and go through

the incredibly difficult court pro-
cedure, since, for the most part, al-
though the police have improved, the
courts have not, I would not encour-
age all women to go through the
courts. Basically, I would support
the woman in whatever decision she
makes so that she will feel validated
and empowered, in contrast to the

TASK FORCES
Culture: Constance Perenyi

Finances: Kay Young
Local News: Susan Goding

rape experience. Unless the man has
a prior conviction for felony (which
may mean that he has committed crimes
against men) or there are special
circumstances, the probability is
that it will cost the woman a great
deal of pain and her suffering will
be meaningless. There are instances
in my study where gender transcends
race - that is where the judge seems
to identify with the rapist whatever
his race or class even though the
victim is white and middle class.
While it is undoubtedly true that in

the past Black men were at high risk

of being convicted of raping white
women, it is unclear that this is
still the case if prior history of
convictions and other factors such as
age of victim are held constant. I
am not stating that the courts are
not racist. I am stating that this
racism is much more apparent when it
is a case where two men of different
races are in conflict. After all, men
generally benefit from a very narrow
definition of rape.

Sincerely and in sisterhood,

Pauline B. Bart

Bella Abzug’s Firing

Yo BHR and Readers,

We are deeply shocked at the President's
unwarranted dismissal of our
Co-Chair, Bella Abzug, who has acted
at the direction and in the interests
of the full Committee. We express our
full support for her and Co-Chair
Carmen Delgado Votaw, who has resign-
ed in solidarity.

Our Committee voted to cancel a 15
minute meeting with the President last
November and requested a full-scale,
serious session with him because we
felt this Administration had not con-
sidered women's issues as a matter of
national priority. It took the Presi-
dent until now to schedule a longer
meeting with our Committee, which he
appointed in June, and he has held
only one previous meeting, for 15
minutes, with representatives of major
women's organizations.

At the White House meeting on Janu-
ary 12 we expressed our concern over
the President's anti-inflation pro-
gram because many of his economic sav-
ings are at a cost to women and their
families, who are already at the bot-
tom of the economic ladder and suffer

greatly from continuing discrimination.

Although we have repeatedly expressed

National/International: Vicki Piotter, Susanna Smith

Distribution: Lisa Miehle
Advertising: Susan Goding

Production: Vicki Piotter, Susan Goding, Constance
Perenyi, Kathy Riley, Susan Smith

CONTRIBUTORS

Eve Newton, Sandia, Helen Lendtren, Working Women's Action
Group, Judith McDaniel, Kim Womantree, Teresinka Pereira,
Kathy Riley, Susanna Smith, Vicki Piotter, Susan Goding, Constance

Perenyi

Inside BMR

Yvonne Wanrow........pg 1
Rape Reversal pg 1

Porno Conference.....pg 3
Hot Press.............pg 4

Local news
Culture...

Big Mama Rag is a feminist periodical published monthly for women by

Big Mama Rag, Inc., a non-profit corporation.
Submissions may be submitted to 1724 Gaylord, Denver, CO 80206.
The annual will be announced each month in Where We're At.
Please enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with all manuscripts.
We accept material for unsolicited material.
Subscription rates are $6 per year for individual

material for length.

Manuscripts and artwork
Deadline for material-
Please enclose a

No responsibility
We reserve the right to edit all

subscriptions in the U.S., $10 in Canada; and $12 to institutions. BMR
is free to women in prison and in mental

institutions. This publication
is available on film at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Chicago
and is also available on microfilm through Bell and Howell.

We are indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, Maryland 21218. Office hours for March: Mon, Wed, Fri-- 9 am to 11 am; Thur--

11 am to 1 pm.

Advertising information is available from Sue 333-7656.

our appreciation for his efforts in
behalf of the Equal Rights Amend-
ment, we also urged him to take more
vigorous action to make ERA a reality.

The President's response was not to
the issues we brought to him, but rather
to use our Co-Chair, Bella Abzug,
as a scapegoat in an effort to sup-
press our independence. We are espe-
cially shocked that at our 90 minute
meeting with the President yesterday
he did not inform our Committee that
he was planning to ask our Co-Chair
to resign.

We had great hopes for this Commit-
tee, which attempted to cooperate fully
with the Carter Administration in
advancing the status of women. We
regret the necessity to resign, but
we see no alternative. We believe
that all women and men of like mind
will refuse to participate in an ad-
visory committee in which disagreement
with the President and legitimate
criticism are not acceptable.

Members of the National Advisory

Committee For Women

More Bella

Please announce,

Jean O'Leary, Co-Executive Director
of the National Gay Task Force, has
resigned from the National Advisory
Committee on Women in protest of Pres-
ident Carter's dismissal of Bella
Abzug as co-chair of the Committee.
More than half of the members of the
40 member Committee, including Carmen
Votaw, the other Co-Chair, resigned
following Ms. Abzug's dismissal on
January 12.

Ms. O'Leary, who has represented
the National Gay Task Force on the
Committee since last spring when she
was invited to serve at the invita-
tion of the President, joined Ms.
Abzug at a press conference in New
York on Sunday, January 14, to ex-
press her support for the former Co-
Chair.

"We are shocked that a President
who has given his strong support to
women's issues such as the Equal
Rights Amendment could have acted so
callously in abruptly dismissing the
Committee's very able and dedicated
Co-Chair, Bella Abzug. Bella has been
an inspiration to the women's move-
ment and one of its foremost leaders,"
Ms. O'Leary said.

O'Leary said later that she had
taken the step of resignation as a
supportive gesture to Ms. Abzug and
an expression of solidarity with the
women's groups represented by members
of the Committee who also submitted
their resignations.

O'Leary expressed confidence that
NGTF's ongoing series of meetings
with federal agencies and our dial-
ogue with the Administration on gay
issues would continue.

National Gay Task Force

Lesbian/Gay Rights '79

The Lesbian/Gay Rights March will
be held during June, 1979. We hope
the following information about the
decisions made at the February 22
planning meeting (open to all organ-
izations and individuals) will offer
some insight as to why, where, when
and how this outstanding endeavor
will happen.

As we all know, the general public
and media have always had a stereo-
typed image of Lesbians/Gays devoting
their lives to bars and bedrooms.
Unfortunately, this is not true! We
have jobs to hold down, children to
raise, and bills to pay-- not to men-
tion the political hurdles we must
overcome just to do these things. We
want to project a more realistic
image of Lesbians and Gay men to the
media and the public.

The title-- Lesbian/Gay Rights
March-- was chosen because of its
simple yet politically strong state-
ment. We are including both women and
men, and "march" was chosen over
"parade" because it denotes a sense
of purpose.

The following decisions were unani-
mously made in order to demonstrate
our seriousness in our fight for
rights.

No floats, cars, or motorcycles
will be permitted (except those cars
transporting the elderly, handicapped
and children). Please dress as you
like, but plan to walk!

Child care will be available (more
details later).

The March will begin at Cheesman
Park at 11 a.m. and will proceed to
the Civic Center precisely at noon.
We are trying to coincide our March
with the National Gay Rights activi-
ties and with our own symposium so,
be patient-- exact date, day, route.

MORE ON PAGE 14

Radio show uses BMR

Big Mama,

I have a women's news program here
in Cincinnati - I have just moved
from Colorado. I was glad to see that
WAIF gets your Rag and uses it always
on my show. Keep up the good work.

-Kate Korten
Program Director, WAIF/88.3 FM

Martha Entertainment:

Music, Magic & Mischief

Pool & Dancing Nightly

open Tues-Sat 5-2
Sun 5-midnight
38th & Chestnut