hot briefs

Compiled by Vicki Piotter

Judicial Jaundice

Laura McIntyre, 15, has been sentenced
to probation after being convicted
of manslaughter for shooting her step-
father to death after he raped her.
David Lee McIntyre was alleged to have
molested the young woman since she was
thirteen, and she testified that he
had raped her on five occasions. Last
March 21, she shot him when he attempted
to rape her a sixth time. Osceola
County Judge Russell Thacker said of
Laura, "She hasn't shown much remorse
and I don't know why." He placed her
on probation until she is nineteen.

~Gay Community News
237

Bad Girl Blues

Between 1960 and 1975, arrests of
women under the age of 18 were up 253
percent. Although many blame this dra-
matic increase on "the effects of the
women's movement," studies show the
opposite to be true. Police officers
and judges apply a double standard to
women offenders. A New York City sur-
vey shows that: "the charge of having
a boyfriend objectionable to parents
(64% of such complaints were referred
to court) is treated much more serious-
ly than larceny (only 57% referred to
court); verbal abuse (100%) is treated
much more seriously than assault (73%)
and coming home late (59%) more seri-
ously than arson and illegal entry
(50% referred to court)."

-Ms. Gazette

Lesbians Not Gay

Sally Gearhart, speaking on why she
supported a feminist candidate in San
Francisco over a male homosexual:

"Gay rights/gay liberation/gay seats/
gay officials increasingly mean to me
that my gay brothers are simply going
to become like straight men, pulling
in a bigger piece of the patriarchal
pie, becoming members-in-good-standing
of the Old Boys' Club which guarantees
rights and privileges to white men,
whatever their orientation, while wo-
men will continue to derive their pow-
er only through those men, whether
it's as wives/daughters/sweethearts or
as lesbian helpers/comrades-in-the-
battle-for-human rights.”

~Plexis

Not NOW

Black women activists and politicians
are urging black women not to
respond to overtures from the Nation-
al Organization for Women to join its
ranks. According to the San Francisco
Examiner, the women's caucus of the
Black Americans Political Association
of California unanimously approved
a resolution last month introduced by
a former NOW president Aileen Hernan-
dez urging black women not to respond
to overtures from NOW. The caucus said
it was appalled that NOW, billing it-
self as the largest feminist organi-
zation in the world, had failed to
direct its attention to the elimina-
tion of racism and failed to take even
the 'token' step of electing one minor-
ity woman running for office." The
caucus has called on NOW members to
return their membership cards and not
to rejoin until "NOW confronts the
racism within its own organization."

-New Women's Times

Big Biz Babble

Big business has found a new word
for layoffs. The chief financial of-
ficer of International Telephone and
Telegraph refers to them, according
to The Wall Street Journal, as “head-
count reductions."

-The Progressive

Pervert Control

The “Pervert Control Center” is a
group of women who have been using
telephone tactics against male ob-
scene phone callers. Their first
target was a man who falsely adver-
tised a cheap and spacious apartment
for rent, then subjected would-be
women renters to bizarre telephone
interviews about their sex lives.

The Pervert Controllers gave him a
taste of his own medicine when they
advertised in a feminist newspaper:
"Neurotic man enjoys abusive calls
from women, especially in the wee
hours of the morning" and listed his
name and phone number. The ad worked
so well that in a few days the obscene
caller had to have his number changed.
When a Pervert Controller reached him
at his new number, he answered in
tears, begging for the calls to stop.
They did.

-New Women's Times

where we're at

Well, we're still at 1724 Gaylord Street - freezing to death. It's a
mazing how women who have lived in colorful Colorado for a while (one of
us 25 years) always manage to forget that it gets cold in the winter. Es-

pecially in a space

that has no heat at all.

So, all contributions of

sweaters, mufflers, mittens, blankets, space heaters (this one's for
real!), soup, and hot beverages are more than welcome.

We had no major traumas this month - at least of the technological
sort. As a collective though, we've got a lot to work through...

Which brings us to the month of December. Ho. Ho. Ho. This will be no
holiday vacation for any of us although we will not be producing a pa-
per for January publication. What we do hope to produce though is a col-
lective Points of Unity. We also see this as time to work on our process
and to get down to the real nitty-gritty of POLITICS (horrors!). Anyway,
we are anticipating a worthwhile month that will be the beginning of many
more, increasingly thorough issues of BMR.

And that word - thorough - brings us back to the theme this month - Wo-

men and Dependencies.

Although we feel that a few topics (alcoholism,

relationships, therapy, food) were covered well, we see the holes in the
theme, as well as our human limitations of time, resources, and this month
particularly, collective stress. We wanted to cover issues of family and
religion dependencies, as well as issues of particular interest to women
of more varied backgrounds and cultural orientation. We are pleased, how-
ever, that this seems a unique beginning, and welcome comments, criti-
cisms, and submissions for future articles.

The best news this month is that we have a new collective member. Ei-
leen Bresnahan joined us at the beginning of November, and we couldn't
be more pleased. Eileen was on the BMR collective two years ago, and her
wisdom and expertise will be invaluable.

Our last benefit, a party at Judy's, was an overwhelming success in
which we earned $54, only $4 less than our October benefit. We recognize
that there has to be a better way to raise money. Any ideas? Any time and
energy to help? And speaking of time and energy, we desperately need wo-
men in the Denver area who can help us with distribution and box collec-
tions each month. Right now, we have two boxes sitting uselessly in our
office; and in December, Crystal Arp, who has been making collections,
will no longer be able to help. Both distribution and collection are po-
tentially the best ways that we have to reach readers in the Denver area,
and to earn money for the paper.

Don't forget: there will be no paper in January. Look for us in Febru-

ary, 1980!

Bit the Dust

Marilyn McCusker, one of four women
who had filed a civil rights suit
against the Pennsylvania Power and
Electric Corp., owner of the Rushton
Mine in which she won a job, became
the first woman miner in documented
US history to die in an underground
mine. McCusker was killed Oct. 2,
while working as a roof bolter's help-
er, when a piece of roof fell on her.
When her co-worker, Bernice Dombrowski,
called the mine to ask about fun-
eral arrangements, the first thing
they said to her was, "Well, are you
ready to hand it up?" The struggle
continues.

-News and Letters

BEFORE
PROFITS

-Union Art Service/LNS

Sine-Off SmithKline

The now international boycott of
SmithKline Corporation is entering
its second year. SmithKline is the
billion dollar corporation which man-
ufactures the deadly psychiatric
mind-control chemicals Thorazine and
Stelazine. The boycott seeks to halt
the manufacture of these drugs, which
cause severe side effects (including
permanent brain damage) and which are
forced upon thousands of psychiatric
inmates and other prisoners daily.
The SmithKline products being boycot-
ted are Contac Cold Capsules, Sea
and Ski products, Love Cosmetics,
Allergy Relief Medicine and Sine-Off
Nasal Spray.

-Alliance for the Liberation
of Mental Patients

Good Vibrations

The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) is going to start inspecting
mechanical sexual devices, such as
vibrators, to ensure they meet "safety
and performance" standards. The FDA
does not consider such inspections to
be a high priority. "We normally
wouldn't go out to check vibrators
unless it happens to be a slow day,"
said one FDA official, who did not
indicate just how they intend to make
the performance test.

~GPU News

Creamed Contraceptives

AVC cream, one of the most widely
prescribed drugs to women with vagin-
itis infections, should be banned
because it is ineffective, according
to two Food and Drug Administration
advisory committees. Over 100 sulfa-
nilamide preparations, some of which
have been around for 30 years, will
be recalled if the FDA listens to the
charges. "I call it the $50 million
ripoff,” said Dr. Holmes, an associ-
ate professor of medicine at the Uni-
versity of Washington. Surveys esti-
mate that manufacturers earn about
$50 million a year on the sale of
sulfa preparations, of which AVC
cream is the most widely prescribed.

-Boston Women’s Health
Packet #23

DES Decision

In a decision that could have far-
reaching consequences for the pharma-
ceutical industry, a Bronx Supreme
Court jury ruled against a drug com-
pany and awarded $500,000 to a woman
who developed vaginal cancer because
she was exposed to the drug DES,
which her mother was given to prevent
miscarriage. The first lawsuit ever
won by a DES daughter, Bichler vs.
Eli Lilly and Company, is also the
first decision holding the entire
drug industry liable for a drug. The
six-member jury gave the award even
though Joyce Bichler failed to prove
Lilly had manufactured the DES her
mother used.

-Boston Women's Health
Packet #23

Big Mama Rag Vol. 7 No. 11

Lesbians Lose

The Tennessee Court of Appeals has
issued a ruling stating that homosex-
ual parents should not be granted
custody of their children. Judge James
Parrott ruled that custody be granted
to the father because of evidence that
the mother was living in a "lesbian
environment." Parrott, presiding over
the divorce and custody proceedings,
said that the court could not agree
with courts in California, Oregon
and Washington which have held that
lesbian relationships do not have ad-
verse effects on children. “Common
sense dictates that living in a les-
bian environment is not in the best
interests of the children," Parrott
said. "Such environment can make lit-
tle or no contribution to their spir-
itual or intellectual growth and de-
velopment."

-Gay Community News

Barratry vs. Battery

Battered women have been handed a
setback in the state of Pennsylvania,
where an ancient law against "barrat-
ry" was used for the first time in
almost 100 years to convict Marilyn
Lewis, who had sued her ex-husband
for wife-beating. "Barratry" is de-
fined as “harassment of another per-
son by unjust and vexatious lawsuits.”
Speaking on the subject, two judges
in the state addressed a men's group
and suggested the barratry law is “now
the best tool men have to put women
in their place and keep them there."

-National NOW Times

Return to the Source

A bill was recently introduced in
the California legislature which
would add $5 to the established mar-
riage license fee to be deposited in
a Victims of Domestic Violence Fund
created by the bill. Money in the
fund would be continuously appropri-
ated to the Director of Social Serv-
ices for funding of battered wife
shelters.

-Spokeswoman

No Where to Run?

A Detroit man, whose wife and seven
children sought refuge at a shelter
for battered women, is now suing the
shelter for kidnapping. The suit
against S.A.F.E. House is scheduled
to go to trial in January and a long
legal battle may ensue.

-New Women's Times

“I see and am silent.” 
motto of the first school of nursing in Ontario

File Grievances

Not Letters

It was a chilly Toronto day, and
the director of the York University
bookstores felt like a coffee. He
told his secretary, Ingrid Dagis, to
go fetch. She brought him his coffee.
Then instead of filing letters, she
filed a grievance. On October 15 an
arbitration award ruled that getting
coffee for a supervisor violated a
staff agreement which says an employee
may file a grievance if required to
perform duties of a personal nature.

-Kinesis