national

national

Black Liberation Army Communique: A Message From The Underground

ON THE STRATEGIC ALLIANCE OF THE ARMED
MILITARY FORCES OF THE REVOLUTIONARY
NATIONALIST AND ANTI-IMPERIALIST
MOVEMENT

ISSUED NOVEMBER 5, 1981

On October 20, 1981, under the leader-
ship of the Black Liberation Army

Black Freedom Fighters, and North Amer-
ican Anti-Imperialists, all members of
the Revolutionary Armed Task Force, at-
tempted an act of expropriation of $1.6
million from an armored Brinks truck

armed struggle

Brother Sekou Odinga, our comrade who
was captured in Queens, was not involv-
ed in the Brinks incident. Sister Ful-
ani Sunni-Ali, Chairperson of the Peo-
ples Center Council of the Republic of
New Afrika, was not involved in the
Brinks incident in any fashion, and is
not a member of the Black Liberation Ar-
my. Eve Rosahn was not involved in the
Brinks incident, nor is she a member of
the Revolutionary Armed Task Force.

Although there have been historical
differences between Black Revolutionary
Freedom Fighters and North American An-
ti-Imperialists, there were overriding
events that called for this significant
alliance. These events were

1. The killing of Black men in Buffalo.

2. The collaboration of the Ku Klux
Klan and the Federal Bureau of In-
vestigation in North Carolina, and
the subsequent disclosure of Bill
Wilkinson as an FBI informant.

3. Fourteen unsolved murders of Black
women in Boston.

4. The ongoing murders of children
in Georgia.

5. The shooting of four Black women
in Alabama.

6. The stabbing deaths of Black men
in New York City.

7. The use of KKK, Police and the Un-
ited States Army as mercenaries in
the Dominica invasion.

8. The KKK use of the Department of
Parks for its war re-enactment of
paramilitary training. This is a
clear indication of government sup-
port for right wing fascist milit-
ary training.

9. The government assassination of
Black activist Yulanda Ward in
Washington, D.C.

10. The consistent use of mercenary
forces in putting down the Miami
Rebellion.

Based upon an evaluation of these ev-
ents, a decentralized intelligence stra-
tegy was embarked upon by the revoluti-
onary forces to determine the capability
to separate rhetoric from real military
action, especially concerning the capa-

Page 18 - Big Mama Rag, March, 1982

bility of vigilante armies, and armies
outside the United States military com-
plex, that can implement urban terror
on the Black and Third World population
and to assess the McCarthy-like period
we are in—and to devise a response.

An intensive two-year investigation
was embarked upon which had people who
were living underground for years, non-
active in the military, reactivated and
assigned to infiltrate and assess the
major fascist organizations. This in-
vestigation led them to the Klan in Con-
necticut and North Carolina to deter-
mine FBI and local police complicity. It
led them to the so-called Christian com-
munity to determine their military pre-
paredness in their drive for survival.
It led them to investigate the internat-
ional fascist network in North America
and its tentacles into the Caribbean
citing the assassination of Walter
Rodney and their complicity in toppling
the Manley government in Jamaica.

Pacts stemming from this intelligence
are:

1. That the Black population in North
America is the number one focus of
all the above organizations, e.g.,
illustrated in their fliers, and
their targets used for shooting
practice.

2. The law enforcement agencies, from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Secret Service, and Central Intel-
ligence Agency, have directly,
through their alumni or various
associations outside their own
structures, used federal money,
taken from the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration budget
to participate in said organiza-
tions, through lending their ex-
pertise and financial backing,
and use of classified information
on their enemies.

3. Members of the ruling class have
to back these organizations. John
Connally financed the mercenary
plot against Dominica. H. Ross
Perot financed the failed Iran
hostage rescue. The Hunt family
finances North Carolina Klan act-
ivity through the sale of South
African Krugerrands.

4. A mass propaganda program on white
America to build a hysteria
against communism and crime to
perpetuate vigilantism, to cover
the fascist approach to genocide
by these white people, and to
cover up the specific programs of
the above forces. To move for more
tolerance on the part of white
America to accept and participate
in this situation.

5. The government anti-terrorist
force is formulated under the
same ideology as the civilian, so
called race terror forces. Richard
M. Nixon and his staff in the FBI
and Justice Department are the
government's originators of said
program. Reaganomics is used to
force the survival of the Black
and Third World population to a
situation where the apartheid
system will be the norm in urban
communities. And to put blue and
white collar workers into law
enforcement related situations,
thereby having control over the
system as a whole.

The Revolutionary Armed Task Force
assessed that the time to respond was
NOW. It could no longer be a wait-and-
see program. The normal process of
watchdog committees, that generally
halted these conspiracies, such as the
NAACP, the Urban League, the Klan Watch
have been ineffective in exposing the
true nature of the crisis.

The fact that the Black Liberation
Army had interwoven into the fiber of
the Black community clandestinely al-
lowed the Army to have a finger on the
pulse of the Black Community as well as
the Anti-imperialist movement. The left
movement has emphasized its work against
the pro-nuclear forces and works within
the bourgeois framework. They are un-
prepared to understand the fact that
they have been targeted and are there-
fore incapable of responding. The lack
of response by progressive people to
the Moral Majority has allowed for a
right wing backlash against all women.

On the other hand, the Black Community
responded to the propaganda and condi-
tions by resisting at the basic level
of survival. The astronomical amount of
law enforcement films, the blatant
average American racist disrespect of
Black editorials, to the passive wait-
and-see attitude toward the effects of
Reaganomics on Black people and poor
people, illustrated to us that the time
to respond and to stop the flow of
fascist racist repression is now and in
this period.

One clear fact is that all the racist
organizations are well financed. Diffe-
rent from the 1960s and early 70s, when
Black people offered their money, checks
and funds to enhance the public resis-
tance to racism, cutbacks and loss of
jobs have eliminated monies available to
Black people. Black people have no
control over their communities. Jobs do
not exist, welfare lines are longer.

The money to feed the handicapped, the
aged, and the unemployed all have been
cut. The lack of respect for the elders
in the Black community and the low level
of nationalist programs have led our
youth to respond to the programs of
oppression and their insecurities as
human beings by inflicting petty vicious
crimes internally. We oppose such crimes
and since we understand the conditions
that create these situations, the
Revolutionary Armed Task Force decided
that:

1. The masses in the urban areas must
develop people's self-defense units
to defend themselves NOW!

2. Programs are needed to set positive
revolutionary examples for our
youth; and must be developed in
practice and in theory NOW!

3. The urgency to accumulate millions
of dollars under the political
control of the most advanced revo-
lutionary elements for the use of
various types of programs in the
communities, from cultural, child
care, to health care, must be se-
cured NOW!

4. There will be no BLACK HOLOCAUST.
It will be the motivation and de-
termination of the combatants in
the field to prevent such an oc-
currence. Therefore we say:

the Black community to come forward
and clearly identify this era of Black
Resistance to imperialism and colonial-
ism and interpret the current events
to the Black community.

We charge the artists to create a
clear presentation of our conditions
wherever they can.

We charge the Black and progressive
press to do the investigation of our
intelligence reports to celebrate the
factual information from our heroes.

The Comrades who are in jail are not
criminals. They are Prisoners of War
and they are HEROES. They are heroes
struggling against RACISM, FASCISM,

AND IMPERIALISM. The Black combatants
follow in the tradition of Denmark
Vesey, Nat Turner, Mark Essex, Ahmed
Evans, Harriet Tubman, Twyman Myers and
all those who have stopped the flow of
uncontested violence and repression
against the Black community. The white
combatants follow in the tradition of
John Brown, who organized masses of
white people to fight against slavery
and repression.

Even though this particular military
battle failed, the goals should always
set the example for our youth and true
revolutionaries. To set the record
straight, WE HAVE NEVER SHOT OR
KILLED ANYONE WITH THEIR HANDS IN THE
AIR SURRENDERING. We have not kicked
in doors with guns in hand to murder
sleeping people. Even though we know
where many children and families of the
law enforcement agencies live we have
never charged the wife for the crime
of the husband nor attacked innocent
children.

We charge the Black community to re-
linquish their fear of the enemy and
to stop robbing each other, and to go
to the fascist multi-national corpor-
ations where the risk is the same and
the act more political.

We charge the intellectual aspects of

Artist Unknown/Arm The Spirit

To speak to the Geneva Accords in re-
lation to our Prisoners of War.

To all conscious Black and Third
World people: remain diligent. If you
don't intend to fight, don't be afraid
to speak and resist.

To our comrades in Azania/South
Africa, who we have aided politically,
economically, and militarily, our
continued support is assured.
We send our solidarity to all members
of the Revolutionary Armed Task Force.
THE BODY AND MIND OF MTAYART
SHABAKA SUNDIATA (s/n Samuel Smith)
WILL NOT BE LAID TO REST IN VAIN. WE
WILL CONTINUE IN HIS SPIRIT AND DISCI-
PLINE TO CARRY OUT HIS RESPONSIBILITIES
IN THE INTEREST OF THE COLLECTIVE AND
HIS PEOPLE.
WE MUST HAVE A NATION!
WE MUST HAVE AN ARMY!
THERE WILL BE NO BLACK HOLOCAUST!

“Our backs are against the wall. Now
more than ever we need an army to de-
fend ourselves and fight for our
liberation."

—Assata Shakur
“Where is the Black man's Army?"
—Marcus Garvey

The Freedom Fighters want to be in con-
tact with supporters. For more direct
news contact them and the groups work-
ing on their behalf.

MORE ON PAGE 21
Big Mama Rag, March, 1982 - Page 19