struggle

Michigan Festival 83: Still Not Safe?

WWITMC Writes:

Dear Sisters,

This letter is in an attempt to clarify information surrounding the circumstances under which a woman was, against her wishes, taken off the site and to a hospital during the course of the 1982 Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. Much has been written about this in recent issues of several womyn's newspapers. Some of what has been written has been speculation on the intent of the womyn who made the decision to take this woman to the hospital. Some has been speculation combined with accusations of the intent of the entire staff of the festival, in particular myself and Kristie Vogel, and criticisms of our commitment to deal with this process in an open and self-confrontive way.

First of all I would like to make a public apology and communicate our real regret about how this situation was dealt with. I know that none of us involved with the festival have an attitude that it was dealt with well and we are seriously dealing with how to safeguard against this happening in a period of stress again.

Over the years there have been several situations where womyn who were attending the festival came into emotional crises and we have been committed to dealing with these situations amongst ourselves. That has meant that the womyn who were on the land to work, strike, and clean up were the womyn available to help and be with these individual womyn through their crises. Whether it be due to our post-festival exhaustion or our plain inexperience in dealing with these kinds of crises, we have felt inadequate in our ability to deal with a woman whose reality at the time is both unfamiliar and potentially dangerous to herself and the womyn with her. Still we have tried to see it through and have done the best we could. We have researched possible care facilities that we could trust in and have come up with no local possibilities.

We have tried to lay plans for future situations and have quite honestly only been able to realize that we would have to deal the best we could with the situation as it arose at the time.

Clearly how it was dealt with at this year's festival was not the best way it could have been dealt with. The womyn who were working in the womb who made the decision to take this woman to the hospital in all earnestness were concerned with her welfare and were acting under a stressful and immediate situation. There was also a real concern that this in some way be dealt with before the festival broke up and that the womyn working in the health area be active in whatever intervention was to happen.

Following the festival there were many long meetings about what happened and how it was dealt with including how we received the resulting criticisms. These meetings involved both festival coordinators and womyn who stayed after the festival to see this issue to a point of resolve. It was clear for us to see what should not be done in the future. The difficult part is to come to some process through which we can know what to do to be of help to a woman in crisis - whether that be at a large gathering or in our home communities. The issue cannot stop with the criticism that has been voiced in the press or with our acknowledgement of our responsibility. The criticism and acknowledgement only identifies the problem and is but the beginning of the necessary solution. It is our responsibility to come to grips with and admit our failure this year. It is all of our responsibilities to realize that the solution is in each and every one of our hands to create healthy alternatives.

We want to continue a dialogue about these alternatives that will move this into a constructive, change-producing community experience. We invite womyn to write us with their thoughts and feelings on this issue. We will continue to communicate ours.

In Sisterhood,

Lisa Vogel for

WWIMC (We Want the Music Cooperative)  
1501 Lyons St.  
Mt. Pleasant, MI 48858  

BMR Responds:

Your letter which supposedly addresses the issues of “How to safeguard against" another woman being turned over to the psychiatric system, "whose reality at the time is unfamiliar and dangerous to herself and the womyn with her" is not only classist and racist, but also embraces language and attitudes straight from the "Mental Health System". There is no hope of safety in your letter because your politics still support the "Myth of Mental Illness". Then follows the entrance of the great white psychiatrist with his "cures" of damaging and deadly drugs and shock, aversion therapies, torture and isolation "techniques", or the great god Freud “talk model" that, just for example, served as a cover-up to the reality of incest in the lives of girls and women. Incest was always an imagined, unconscious psychoanalytic event. Countless girls and women were locked up as a result of their abuse, while their attackers were exonerated.

The terminology/label "potentially dangerous to self or others" is all that needs to be "substantiated" for the forced incarceration of anyone. In some states this decision can be made by a cop on the street. The cops constitute an occupying army especially in Third World Communities, and who gets locked up and who doesn't is determined by the state, not by "health professionals". It is totally outrageous and offensive and threatening for any "feminist" to use this language about any woman/one. I am furious. The use of this talk obscures what you really might be talking about: issues like “involuntary" and “voluntary” commitments into the psychiatric system, feminist “therapies" in theory and practice, suicide in our communities, the "right" to suicide. What are we talking about when we use the language "potentially dangerous to others"? In the "feminist culture" many issues connect with this...like lesbian battery and child abuse, is this what you were talking about? Should all these women be watched--potential "patients" for the psychiatric system? Can a community like that which gathers at "Michigan" "protect themselves" from one woman without calling in the cops/reality police (shrinks)? Protect who...from what? "Potentially dangerous to others"--taking up arms against our oppressors is good, is positive--is also what gets political activists locked up for "crazy". They jail and lock up women who kill the men who have been beating them. As feminists/political women can we possibly stand beside the systems that define their actions as criminal/insane, the actions of freedom fighters as terrorist insanity? It's all connected, we can't pretend it's not. To act like the connections aren't there is dangerous politics.

Protect who...from what? Unfamiliar behavior??...What are you talking about? Carmen, a Latin woman, “different” from white U.S. women--but “psychotic, mentally ill??" Really? What about that Carmen's native language is Spanish? Why is the issue of danger raised??? Carmen writing in the Oct. '82 states: "I had never in my life been taken to a psychiatric institution for the sim-

MORE ON PAGE 19