bmr:

where we’re at

Dear women friends and supporters - Where We're At this month is a continuing saga of both financial and emotional trauma. We did finally get the ads invoiced for the last couple of months, so money from them will help us print the next issue. The Women's Eye Liberation Film Festival may raise some money for us, but political film showings are not renowned as fundraisers in Denver. It's so seldom that we get a chance to see films with revolutionary politics. These films look to be exciting and thought-provoking, and we're all looking forward to viewing them.

For those of you who read Where We're At regularly, both the October and November Where We're At talked about issues with which we have been dealing, both “internally” (among collective members and women in the local "community"), and in the pages of BMR. These issues include psychiatric assault, Zionism/Anti-Semitism/Palestine/Israel, suicide, and ageism. We are finally starting our coverage of Zionism, et al, in this issue, with a collective note (page 4) and the article written by Cypress (page 18), a Jewish feminist, about the book Sitt Marie Rose, and why she (Cypress) no longer calls herself a Zionist. We have been holding copy about the issues of Zionism/Anti-Semitism/Palestine/Israel, thinking that we needed to write our own analysis before publishing articles with which we had some disagreements.

By being silent on the issue of Zionism, et al, for so long - by not talking about the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the massacres at Sabra and Chatilla, the plight of the Palestinians, the anti-Semitism that created the state of Israel, the differences between anti-Semitism and racism - we have implicitly stated that the issues are just too touchy for us to deal with. We are finally beginning to break the silence.

We’re printing Cypress' article this month (after having held it for 6 months) because it does address some important issues around the Middle East - racism in Israel toward Arab Jews, the U.S. government's ties with the Israeli government, the expansionism of Israel, the invasion of Lebanon, self-determination for both Palestinians and Jews.

Another issue with which we have been struggling is psychiatric violence and oppression. We have been publishing articles regularly, yet dealing poorly with “mental patient" issues within the collective and in our local community. Lori, as an ex-inmate, often feels set-up and isolated, if not directly threatened, by our and other women's attitudes/politics around psychiatric issues.

An article by Lori (page 12) is included in this issue - she talks about the 11th International Conference for Human Rights and Against Psychiatric Oppression, the recent demonstration against Electroshock held in Denver and other places in North America and her feelings and analysis about these events and "mental patient" issues. She also talks about cutting herself/killing herself. What does this mean about support/trust in the collective? We are all feeling varying degrees of panic, anger, and sadness. What kinds of support can we give each other to help ease our pain and despair? What is the process/processes we can do to help each other maintain and struggle and grow in light of such oppressive conditions as those under which we live and work? We certainly welcome responses to these questions.

Bobbe, as an older woman, feels isolated from most of the political community, which is mainly under 35-40, and often under 30, around issues of ageism. Her experiences and perspectives are very different in a lot of ways than those of the rest of us on the collective because of living through different times. We live in a youth-oriented culture, which devalues and discards older people, both women and men. How are we, as political people, different in that respect? We need to be confronting and dealing with each other around issues of age.

We do have some wonderful news this month! Both Joan (our newest collective member) and Sue Goding (a former collective member and now a supporter) are pregnant. They were both “artificially inseminated" within two weeks of each other. We hope to get an article or interview from one or both of them concerning the issues around lesbians getting pregnant - why, how, and by whom - and having/raising children.

In this issue is an article written by Silvia Baraldini (page 8), a political prisoner who was recently "convicted" of racketeering conspiracy and participating in the liberation of Black Liberation Army (BLA) member Assata Shakur and an attempted expropriation in Danbury, CT. She talks about her political stance of support for the Republic of New Afrika and the right of Black people to determine their own destiny and how to achieve it by whatever means they decide is necessary, including armed struggle. We think that the voices of national liberation, of Black revolutionaries, are seldom printed in the feminist press. We generally don't print men's voices in BMR, but think that Sekou Odinga's statement in Silvia's article is important to be heard as the voice of a Black freedom fighter.

We had also solicited an article from Judy Clark about her trial (along with Kuwasi Balagoon and David Gilbert) stemming from an attempted expropriation for the BLA of a Brinks truck in Nyack, NY in Oct. 1981. As did people in Silvia’s and Sekou's trial, Judy, Kuwasi, and David also took the stand of noncollaboration - that they are freedom fighters and prisoners of war and the U.S. government has no right to try them. According to Judy's defense committee, she sent one article to us over a month ago, which we never received, and a copy a couple of weeks ago, which we didn't receive. It seems likely that the prison is censoring the article, not allowing it to be sent out, but it's also possible that there was some error on our end. Revolutionaries, be on guard.

From feeling a lack of reviews in BMR, we are soliciting book reviews, both fiction and non-fiction, especially from leftist and feminist presses. Because of the closing of Herizons (see statement next month) - the 2nd women's bookstore to open (and close) in Denver - it is even more vital that information about important books be made available.

Why do we continue? Because we have a vision of an egalitarian, better way of living/being. If we all had the "basic necessities" (food, shelter, clothing), we could be learning, growing, sharing, and loving each other in revolutionary ways - ways which are supportive, yet challenging; spontaneous and open. Because of this vision, we have no choice but to continue to fight (or die). It is in our self-interest to fight for our visions.

inside BMR:

National

Black Liberation...8-10

Lesbians of Color....11 Women in Cages......12-15

America Held Hostage...11

Resources...24

Where We're At..........2

Struggle

Collective note.......4

International

Electroshock...25

Health in Nicaragua...5

Indian Lesbian....16,17

in the US, $15 for Canada, Mexico and plain brown wrapper, $18 overseas, $22-US institutions, $24-Mexico, Canada and $26 overseas. Free to all US women incarcerated in prisons or psychiatric institutions. BMR is on file at the New Alexandria Library for Lesbian Women in Florence, MA and is available on microfilm (Vol.1/#1 Oct. '72 through July '79) directly from BMR for $75. BMR is indexed by the Alternative Press Center, P.O. Box 7229, Baltimore, MD 21218. Our phone # is 303-322-2010.