weber vs. affirmative action

Vicki Piotter

People are mistaken when they think
of affirmative action as a recent de-
velopment in US history. There has
always been affirmative action—
affirmative action for the male child-
ren of the rich and of the white.

The only time affirmative action has
been questioned by our institutions
is when it is for women and minorit-
ies, indeed a recent development, but
scarcely a reality, and step by step
getting closer to extinction.

In 1978, Allen Bakke stood before
the US Supreme Court and cried "re-
verse discrimination," claiming
affirmative action had gone too far;
the Court agreed with the young, white
male and struck down the University
of California's medical school's
special admissions policy which set
aside 16 slots for minorities and
women. The Court ordered the Univers-
ity to quit discriminating against
white men and admit Allen Bakke to
medical school; can't get too serious
about having non-white faces in the
academic world or it's called "reverse
discrimination."

This year the fight around affirma-
tive action is directly a bread and
butter issue—equality of job oppor-
tunities for those of us at the bottom
of the economic heap. The central
figure is Brian Weber, another young,
white male crying “reverse discrimin-
ation" before the US Supreme Court.

In April, the Court heard the argue-
ments of Weber vs. Kaiser Aluminum.
Weber, a 32-year-old steel worker,
sued his union, the United Steel Work-
ers, and his employer, Kaiser Alumin-
um and Chemical Corp., because of an
affirmative action agreement worked
out between the two in 1974. Weber
charges that he was refused entrance
to an on-the-job training program, in
which half the spots were reserved
for minority workers, because of his
race, and had the applicants been
accepted on the basis of seniority
only, he would have been admitted be-
cause two of the black workers accept-
ed had less seniority than himself.

Lawyers for Weber told the Supreme
Court that the union and company had
put together an affirmative action
program designed to favor blacks,
thus violating Title VII of the 1964

-Allston-Brighton Comm News/CPF/Union Wage

The whole concept of "reverse dis-
crimination" is absurd in that the
victims of past and present discrimin-
ation (women and minorities) are
labelled the oppressor and then fur-
ther victimized. This reverse discrim-
ination backlash implies that people
think white males are being victimized
by a large-scale takeover of their
privileges and jobs by minorities and
women. This backlash is being acted
out by workers and others who feel
they alone are suddenly being blamed
and penalized for generations of rac-
ism and sexism.

Civil Rights Act that says, "No em-
ployer shall discriminate against any
individual on the basis of race."

On the contrary, argued lawyers for
Kaiser and the Steelworkers. The af-
firmative action program was put to-
gether to correct extreme racial im-
balances at the Gramercy, Louisiana
plant where Weber works, thus keeping
with the intent of Title VII to stop
discrimination. In fact, they argued,
the affirmative action program at
Kaiser opened opportunities for white
production workers as well as black.
The new training program allowed

sears vs. jobs for

women and

Sears, Roebuck and Company, which
has faced over 1,500 discrimination
complaints and suits since 1965, is
now claiming that it is confused by
government affirmative action polic-
ies. It is seeking to halt the en-
forcement of anti-discrimination
measures against itself and all gen-
eral merchandise retailers (employ-
ing 15 or more workers), until these
employers are provided with clearer
priorities and procedures.

Sears, in filing suit against 10
federal agencies, charges that
government actions and inactions
have created a predominately white
male workforce, thereby denying
private employers the “right to
comply” with federal provisions bar-
ring discrimination in employment.

However, while asserting that the
government should do more, Sears
deviously argues that it and other
private employers should be requir-
ed to do less.

According to Sears’ spokesman Ed-
ward Tell, "Today's workforce, in
which white males are dominant, was
created through the G.I. Bill of
Rights, veteran's preference laws,
the Selective Service System, re-
striction on the number of blacks
and women in armed forces and the
types of military assignments avail-

minorities
able to them." In other words, pri-
vate employers had nothing to do
with it.

Sears’ novel legal theories will
undoubtedly be determined in court.
Federal court is also the likely
place to assess Sears' claims that
the company has made substantial
progress in pursuing equal employ-
ment opportunity goals. Those
claims of success are difficult to
reconcile with the EEOC, which
currently has a major suit against
Sears for numerous violations of
Title VII by discriminating
against women, blacks, and Spanish-
surnamed Americans in recruitment,
hiring, job assignment, training,
compensation, promotion and a wide
range of terms and conditions of
employment.

According to Sears' own statistics,
it employs more than 400,000
people, or "one out of every 30
adult Americans, during his or her
lifetime." If Sears wins its suit,
38,000 companies employing more
than 30 million workers will be
directly affected. It would also
effectively prevent victims of
discrimination from seeking back
pay or other damages.

-info from LNS and National
Now Times

white workers with no experience into
skilled positions, when formerly all
craft openings were filled by experi-
enced people.

Kaiser opened its plant in Gramercy
in 1958, an area where 40% of the
workforce was black. However, in 1968
whites still held 90% of the jobs at
Kaiser. In 1974, black workers held
15% of the unskilled jobs and less
than 2% of the skilled jobs at the
plant (5 out of 290); women, none.
Fearing loss of government contracts
and costly lawsuits if the blatant
discrimination was not corrected,
Kaiser agreed with the United Steel
Workers to the training program which
was adopted in Kaiser's 15 plants in
1974 (as well as other steel and alu-
minum companies with USW contracts).

Two lists of workers were drawn up,
one each for blacks and whites. As
slots opened, workers were taken on
a one-to-one basis from each list.
Had the company made a single list on
the basis of seniority, it would have
ensured the racial imbalance indefin-
itely since white workers far outnum-
bered blacks. This list was to be in
use until the proportion of black
skilled workers equalled the propor-
tion of blacks living in the surround-
ing area. The program also mandated
that 5% of the slots be reserved for
women.

When Weber applied and was rejected
he took his case to court, with the
district and appeals court ruling on
his behalf. They said that the pro-
gram was improper on the basis of
Title VII because there was no evid-
ence produced at the trials that the
black workers who were admitted to
the program were in it because they
had been victims of previous racial
discrimination at the plant.

In ruling on the Bakke case before
it reached the Supreme Court last
year, the California Supreme Court
said that the University's special
admissions program was unconstitution-
al unless the University had inten-
tionally discriminated against min-
ority students in the past. The Univ-
ersity of California never attempted
to give evidence of its own past
discrimination. Equally so, Kaiser
will not tell the Supreme Court that
the racial imbalance at its Gramercy
plant was the result of their own
discriminatory practices. (There is
documentation and court settlements
showing that Kaiser has been a dis-
criminating employer). Rather, they
told the Court that this imbalance
is the result of “societal ills."

Like many large employers, if Kais-
er acknowledged it had engaged in dis-
criminatory practices, it would face
stiff lawsuits from women and minor-
ities. But if it didn't initiate the
affirmative action program, and con-
tinued past policies, it also invited
suits. Kaiser's lawyers told the

high court, "If there must be proof
of prior discrimination, and the vic-
tims identified, this is a prohibi-
tive price to pay and it will virtu-
ally end affirmative action."

-LNS Women's Graphics

The Supreme Court is expected to
rule on the Weber case sometime this
summer. If they say "no" to Kaiser's
voluntary affirmative action pro-
gram, it will leave the door wide
open for any white male to cry
“reverse discrimination" against any
company that tries to hire or pro-
mote women and/or minorities. The
Supreme Court has to rule against
Weber and say "yes" to affirmative
action so we can hang on to what
little we have. Despite all the up-
roar over affirmative action, the
simple truth is that it has not ac-
complished very much to ensure real
equality of opportunity. The propor-
tion of women and minorities in
skilled, well-paying jobs is basic-
ally unchanged from a few years ago,
and the earning gap between men and
women is increasing, not decreasing.
However, programs which seek to end
these inequalities need to be
strengthened, not eliminated.

Equal opportunity is not an ab-
stract moral right—it is a question
of paying the rent and putting food
on the table and a crucial fact-
or in creating a system which does
not depend on wage exploitation and
race and sex oppression.

Support group talks shop

Daughters of Rosie the Riveter is
a support group for women in non-tradi-
tional, blue-collar jobs. They meet
once a month, every third Sunday at
7 p.m., at Better Jobs for Women, 1038
Bannock in Denver. (Call Better Jobs
for Women at 893-3534 for more info).

Daughters of Rosie the Riveter along
with BJW sponsored a "Rights On Work-
shop" last month, in which 30 women
from 14 trades met to discuss actions
to take concerning the discrimination
we face as women seeking good paying
jobs, seniority rights, union benefits,
and advancement opportunities offered
by non-traditional jobs.

A panel of four women talked about
their own discrimination cases, both
the legal aspects and the personal
changes one goes through when being
made a victim of discrimination.

Many women who attended the confer-
ence discovered that in their own
experiences as working women in the
trades, they had encountered illegal
discrimination, which they had previous-
ly dismissed as “personality conflicts"
or other reasons due to lack of know-
ledge about women's rights in employ-
ment.

There was also a panel of represent-
atives from the Equal Employment Oppor-
tunity Commission and the Colorado Civ-
il Rights Commission and a private

attorney's office who told the women
how to go about identifying discrimin-
ation and how to take legal action.
Although the process of filing a suit

more on page 18