10

What Can Feminists Afford

from pg. 7

4. I expect you to apologize, in the feminist press, to the WLM
for your breach of principle regarding WLM security.

5. I expect you to apologize, in the feminist press, to Jewish
women for your using our oppression to prove an unrelated point.

AFTERWORD
TO:

Bertha, Charlotte, June and Parke

I hope that you will respect the time and effort that has gone into this

needed analysis. I wish it had not been necessary.

TO: The Women's Liberation Movement

I did not enjoy having to write all this to you; I

This is a very important article that has the potential to raise con-

sciousness within the WLM for our common good. I

hope to begin to address the issues expressed in this article.

It is urgent that women

In writing, I

hopefully have initiated a dialogue which will continue around these

issues in our movement.

For this reason, the hours, money and energy

spent on this article have been worthwhile. I welcome constructive remarks—in agreement or disagreement—from

feminist readers.

FOOTNOTES

1. There is value in reformist tactics as long as they remain true to a rev-

olutionary overview.

Prison reform, for example, is desperately needed;

women who are constantly being brutalized by male guards, prison condi-
tions and in addition are deprived of basic civil liberties cannot wait

until after the revolution—action is needed now!

Because most women

wind up incarcerated as a result of society's punitive retaliation against
women, who, due to their lives' circumstances, find they cannot passively
abide by the rules of a racist, classist and misogynistic society, I be-
lieve reforms are undoubtedly necessary, but they are in no way sufficient.

2. Anti-Semitism, Israel Pocket Library, The Two Continents Publishing

Group, pp. 99-100.

3. Flender, Harold, Rescue in Denmark, McFadden Books, New York: 1964, pp.

28-29, footnote p. 215.

4. Yahil, Leni, The Rescue of Danish Jewry, Jewish Publications Society of

5. The Women's Work Project, Separated & Unequal - Discrimination Against
Women Workers After World War II (The U.A.W. 1944-1954), URPE (A Union
for Radical Political Economics - Political Education Project).

6. Leffler, Ann, Gillespie, Dair L., Ratner, Elinor Lerner, "Academic Femi-
nists and the Women's Movement," 1973, p. 10.

7. "No Compromise - An Open Letter to the Feminist Media from Daughters,

Inc." Big Mama Rag, Vol. 5 No. 9, Nov-Dec 1977.

Even though we seem to differ concerning what constitutes political
writing, I nevertheless believe that reprint rights of the books which
Daughters, Inc. publishes should not be sold or licensed to the estab-
lishment because it goes against one of the basic principles of Daughters,
Inc., which is to publish women so that men don't make profits off women's

literature.

“Burning Questions” from pg. 9

For much of the novel, Zane remains
“a cautious observer, watching and
noting, but not really actively in-
volved in the world around her. She
religiously signs petitions, but can-
not risk getting arrested at a demon-
stration because she has (by now)
three children and a husband to look
after.

For Zane, it is feminism that recon-
ciles her dilemma. The combination
of personal and political resolves
her indecision. “The personal is poli-
tical: a stunning new thought. All my
life my big conflict has been the per-
sonal or the political. Whether to
keep my mouth shut or take a stand.

Whether to act on feeling or principle.

Whether to accept the sweet security

of family or live rebellious and alone.

Zane opts for rebellion, moving full
force into feminism. She fairly bathes
in that time when women believed the
new society lurked just beyond the
next hill, before the army of lovers
slowed down.

Shulman writes with wit and preci-
sion. Zane's autobiography is radical-
ly different from those of Goldman or

Balabanoff. Zane's story is all hesita-

tion and indecision, revised theories,
new assessments. Shulman's pitch is
particularly apt when writing the
interior debates of Zane's. Her weigh-
ing of pros and cons, or politically
correct and incorrect is very familiar
to me. Political stances that I zea-
lously supported a year ago have been
altered almost beyond recognition by
time and experience.

Burning Questions has great energy
and insight. It fairly bristles with
the power of women working together
toward a transformation of society.
Shulman's writing encouraged me to
read other histories of the early
women's movement for a better per-
spective on the problems and factions
that plague the movement as a whole
today. The excitement and electricity
of those early years of the second
wave of feminism transcended any
petty quarrels.

But Shulman does not ignore the
qualities of the women's movement to-
day. Burning Questions ends with a
realistic perspective of the factions
and problems. However, the realism
does not extinguish the fire of this
novel and it remains a positive por-
trayal of a modern feminist.

Alicia’s

Mexican Restaurant

2278 Downing: 777-9904

“Good Home Made Food”

Woman to Woman: from

to share skills and knowledge that are
within the community.

After struggling with whether to
allow men to teach classes when no wo-
man could be found with that particu-
lar skill, the school decided to form
a scholarship fund. The scholarship
fund will collect money through dona-
tions and then distribute it to women
by application to help finance learn-
ing a skill to share with other women.

The school is also involved in train- 

ing teachers. Before each quarter the
school meets with the teachers to dis-
cuss their needs. After the quarter
the school and teachers again meet and
discuss what was done and what could
have been done better by both the
school and the teacher. Students are
asked to fill out critiques of their
course which is given to the teacher
and to the school work group.

The school is currently in debt to
Woman to Woman $120 for printing and
distributing catalogs. That does not
include money for rent or the phone.
In the future, the school would like to
become self-supporting within the book
center.

There will be a summer quarter at
the school and a party at the end of
the summer for all students and teach-
ers. Women can call Woman to Woman to
be put on the mailing list for the
summer catalog.

At the end of the seminar, Diane
Panara talked about the politics and
the collective process of the center.

There are now about 15 women in the

To Be A Sister from pg.

Her face clouded and she said deci-
sively, "No!"

I was hurt because I felt we had
come to respect and understand each
other. Then she launched into an
explosive description of the life
of an Indian, which consists of
cooking soup every day without meat,
of working hard soil by hand and
bringing water through ditches in
stony fields to irrigate thirsty
Eucalyptus so that grandchildren
could someday use them for firewood,
of waiting in long lines for buses
to travel the dusty road to the city
and carrying produce back from mar-
ket on your back.

When I did such tasks in Peru, I
never felt them as a burden because I was still intrigued by the romance

IWD from pg. 1

them, and especially the community
work program, which forces people to
work at crummy jobs for no pay in or-
der to receive their welfare checks.
Project suggestions were brainstormed,
and several women are going to do
research on what can be done to get
daycare. Contact Diane, 572-1440, for
more information.

In the lesbian workshop, there was
discussion around problems of lesbians,
especially lesbian mothers with male
children. The women's community is
not always sensitive to them, or
mothers' need for childcare. Ways to
confront both women and men on their
sexism was discussed, as was lesbian
separatism.

A workshop on disabled women focused
on an action against RTD which will
occur late this summer. If you want
to help with this action, call Nonda,
722-3260.

The National Liberation workshop
focused on Eritrea, where women play
a large role in the Eritrean People's

Indians who have lived with a number
of “ineffective or inappropriate par-
ental substitutes," and who had spent
time in boarding schools were inclined
to commit suicide. Over 80% of Indian
youth involved in crime have been in
foster homes or boarding schools.

Not only is the United States gover-
nment practicing genocide by steriliz-
ation, but it is also robbing Indians
of the children they do have. It is
amazing to see the gross injustices

burn out and leave.

from pg.

Vol. 6 No. 5

pg.

collective, and it is open to new mem-
bers. The current collective has a
joint history of less than one year.
In the past, collective members
would come into the center, work hard,
There was very
little interchange between old col-
lective members and new ones. Much his-
tory of Woman to Woman was lost as
each member left. In January the cur-
rent collective went on a retreat to
try and figure out how this happened
and how to prevent it in the future.
From this, a new collective process was

developed.

Woman to Woman has developed a coor-
dinator/workgroup structure. The coor-
dinator is a voluntary position that
is rotated every 2 months. The coor-
dinator serves as an information re-
source for the whole collective. She
coordinates everything going on in the
different work groups and chairs the
weekly meetings. Work groups are the
library, school, bookstore, mainte-
nance group, etc.

The collective
decided to do more skill sharing to

operate the center more efficiently so that less energy
is spent keeping the bookstore open
and the basic services operating. They
also decided to contact and learn more
about the different collectives in the
community and to try and increase com-
munication between the collectives.

Right now the collective is not
closed and there is no minimum length
of commitment. Meetings are each
Thursday night at 8 pm. Their phone
number is 320-5972.

and beauty of the countryside and by
the possibilities for revolution,

but I never knew if Mama Juana denied
that I was an Indian because she

knew I did not have to live the life
of an Indian regardless of what I

had chosen to do, or because she
didn't want me to be trapped in the
kind of life she had lived.

Like all the Peruvians I was close
to, Mama Juana's bitterness and love
toward me were always mixed in com-
plicated ways. Her sisterhood toward

me was the deepest thing we shared—

there was nothing complicated about
it. But an Indian I was not, and
Mama Juana, for all her ignorance of
the world beyond the borders of her
village, knew that not even the rev-
olution was going to change that.

Liberation Front. On alternate Satur-

days, the Eritrean Student's Associa-

tion holds a dinner (cost $3.00) to
raise money for the EPLF's radio sta-
tion. Call Andrea, 722-3210, for more
information.

A workshop on psychiatric assault
discussed feminist therapy, psychiatry
in China and Cuba, and women's experi-
ences in psychiatric institutions. A
small NAPA chapter holds meetings in
Denver, and several women expressed
interest in attending.

The film on the Nestlé's boycott,
“Bottle Babies," told of the Nestlé
company's campaign to sell formula to
mothers in third world countries,
instead of their breastfeeding their
children.

The celebration of IWD, attended by
approximately 150 women, was small but
spirited. Those who participated in
any or all of the activities were, for

the most part, interested in continu-
ing working on actions evolving out of
the event.

forced on the Indian community while
the President of the United States
smiles and speaks of human rights.

One of the most important rights of
any woman is the choice of having or
not having and raising children. The
American Indian women have lost this
right and join the ranks of third
world women around the world whose
rights have been violated by the
United States government in the name
of public aid.