Bia Mama Rag Vol. 7 No.

Answers to the Quiz on Women in U.S. History

1. a, b, c and d. The first working

women in America were Indian women,
who utilized every aspect of their
environment to sustain life. Native
American women tilled the soil, sow-
ed seed, cultivated and harvested,
wove baskets and blankets, tanned
animal hides and made clothing,
cured meats, dried vegetables, cared
for children and maintained the home
which they sometimes built.

RN,

2. In 1619, a Dutch ship dropped
anchor in Jamestown with 20 Blacks on
board, 3 of whom were women. Because
they had been baptized on board,
English law held that they could not
be sold into slavery, so the colonial
government bought their contracts as
indentured servants. This first group
of Black captives worked their pre-
scribed number of years and earned
their freedom. Within 20 years, Black
indentured servants worked longer
terms of service than white and might
even have those terms extended for
life as ‘punishment for running away.
By 1640, Virginia had established
slavery as legal, acknowledging in
law what had been a growing practice
that Black peoples and their children
could be held in lifelong bondage.

ht

3. During the colonial period, the
primary interests were of agriculture
and commerce: agriculture was in the
hands of the men, and manufacturing,
for the most part, in the hands of
women. Although some women were em-
ployed away from the home in saw
mills, as printers, tavernkeepers

and traders, the majority were emplo-
yed in the home in the manufacture
of textiles. There was rigid insist-
ence on the employment of women,
with measures sometimes taken to
punish women who (on the record)
were "idle, lazy and loitered.”

4. Sarah Winnemucca was an activist
in the late 1800s for the rights of
her Native peoples. Although she saw
repeated betrayal and treachery from
the US government, she continued
with her struggle until her death.

5. Chipita Rodriguez was the only
woman to ever be executed by the
state of Texas. Her execution occur-
red during the Gringo pacification of
the borderlands in the early part of
the century.

6. a, b, c, d. Dover, New Hampshire
was the site of the first strike of
mill women on their own. In 1828,
several hundred women shocked the
community by parading with banners
and flags, shooting off gunpowder
and protesting the company's attempt
to enforce new factory rules. Dover
millowners advertised for several
hundred "better behaved" women to
replace the strikers, while many
newspapers made fun of the women for
objecting to the ban on talking while
at work. The strike was soon over
with nothing gained, and the women
returned to the mills---minus their
leaders.

7. At the 1840 International Aboli-
tionist Convention in London, Eliza-
beth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott,
who were present, were agitated be-
yond calming when a vote was held

barring women from participating.
Stanton said, "As Mrs. Mott and I
walked home, arm in arm, commenting
on the incidents of the day, we re-
solved to hold a convention as soon
as we returned home and form a soci-
ety to advocate the rights of women.”
Eight years later, Stanton and Mott
were present at the Seneca Falls
women's rights convention, which they
organized with the help of Martha
Wright, Jan Hunt and Mary Ann Mc
Clintock.

8. Ida B. Wells, who founded the
first Black woman's suffragist asso-
ciation, also famous for her anti-
lynching campaign, was an example of
the racist sentiments in the struggle
for women's suffrage. In 1913, suffra-
gists organized a march in Washing-
ton, DC in an effort to rejuvenate
suffrage activity. Ida B. Wells was
president of a Black woman's suffrage
club in Chicago, but the National
American Woman Suffrage Association
(NAWSA) officials asked her not to
march with the Illinois delegation,
fearing that a mixture of Black and
white women would alienate southern
suffragists.

The NAWSA was not alone in promo-
ting racist sentiment in the struggle
for women's suffrage. One major argu-
ment to come from some suffrage cir-
cles was that the enfranchisement of women
would increase the white vote suffi-
ciently to counteract the influence
of Black voters. This strategy en-
larged the breach between the women's
movement and Black women.

9. At the same time racism was sep-
arating white and Black women, many
suffragists developed a new strategy
that emphasized the possible good
results of enfranchising women rather
than the simple justice of women's
right to vote. In 1900, Susan B. An-
thony told a convention why it was
important for them to help women get
the vote: "Women should vote for the
sake of the home. By working to give
your wives and daughters the ballot
you would be working to double the
representation of the home in govern-
ment; for the lowest men---the men
who make up the slum vote---these
men seldom have homes and women in
them whose vote could be added to
theirs. It is the honest hardworking
men, with homes and families, those
who have done the most to build up
this country, and who are the bone
and sinew sustaining it today, who
have the most to gain from women's
getting the ballot." The innuendoes
in Anthony's speech are not difficult
to understand---that slum dwellers---
the most recently arrived immigrants---
constitute the least able voters,
and that immigrant women would not
vote.

10. The Revolution. Founded in 1868
by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan
B. Anthony, The Revolution was open
to almost every idea and reform. It
called for economic reform, supported
the labor union movement and condemn-
ed capitalist greed. As for women's
issues, anything that concerned women
found a home in The Revolution, from
dress codes, to rape, work, divorce,
prostitution and marital relations.

11. Emma Goldman, an anarchist femin-
ist and revolutionary, was active in
this country for forty years until her
exile in 1920. She was one of the few
people in the feminist movement who
insisted that there was a difference
between women's liberation and wo-
men's rights. Also outspoken on birth
control, prostitution and homosexual-
ity, she was seen as an enemy of wo-
men's rights by some because she said
it was a waste of time to work
towards the vote. She said, "Woman's
development, her freedom, her inde-
pendence, must come from and through
herself. First, by asserting herself
as a personality, and not as a sex
commodity. Second, by refusing the

right to anyone over her body; by
refusing to bear children, unless she
wants them; by refusing to be a ser-
vant to God, the State, society, the
husband, the family, etc., by making
her life simpler, but deeper and
richer. That is, by trying to learn
the meaning and substance of life in
all its complexities, by freeing her-
self from the fear of public condem-
nation. Only that, and not the ballot
will set woman free."

AY

d. 50. One of the worst forms
of exploitation of working-class wo-
men in the nineteenth century was the
prostitution industry. Its size and
prevalence in mid-century America
was enormous. Over half the women
who turned to prostitution at that
time had previously been servants,
whose average monthly wage was $1.00.

13. "The Working Girls Suffrage
League" developed from a split with
the National Women's Suffrage League
in San Francisco in 1909. At issue
was a streetcar strike-- many women
in the NWSL insisted on riding street
cars employing scab labor, much to
the ire of walking union women. As

a result, women from such groups as
the San Francisco Waitresses Union
pulled out of the national organiza-
tion to pursue their own suffrage
goals.

14. When the typewriter was first
introduced to offices in 1870, men
operated them because they were
thought to be too complicated for
women. Later, it was rationalized,
women were ideally suited for the
work of keeping offices running be-
cause they had patience, nimble fin-
gers, and were not easily bored by
tasks. By 1910, secretarial work was
the 8th leading occupation for women
to become number one in 1950.

AYR

15. The Comstock Law. In the mid
1800s, advertisements for various
contraceptive pills and powders were
found in most American newspapers.
In 1873, however, the Vice Society,
headed by Anthony Comstock, pushed

a bill through Congress which clas-
sified birth control information as
obscene and pornographic. This law
prohibited doctors from giving birth
control information to patients un-
der any circumstance and prohibited
the sending of birth control inform-
ation through the mail. This law was
not overruled until 1937.

16. c. 1911, The "Liga Feminil Mex-
icanista" was founded in Laredo, Tex-
as, October 15, 1911 by Jovita Idar
and Soledad Peña based on the fact
that "in terms of socio-economic
status and prospects for improvement
Chicanas are at the bottom of the
social heap in this country."

17. Lucy Parsons. A working-class
woman of "dark blood origins” and a
recognized leader of Chicago's radi-
cal movement, she once said, "When
women take hold of a great and cry-
ing evil, you may expect revolution-
not necessarily a revolution of
blood and destruction, yet not neces-
sarily one of peace." Until her
death at the age of 89 in 1942, she

Aha

spent her life energy fighting for
women and minorities, the poor, the
workers and the unemployed.

18. During the 1920s, there was ex-
tensive migration of the textile
industry to the South because of
“cheaper and unorganized labor." Tex-
tile worker and songwriter Ella May
Wiggins was murdered during her or-
ganizing efforts in the mills of
Gastonia, North Carolina. Shot down
by hired company thugs on her way to
a union meeting, workers came out in
droves for her funeral, which became
an important political event.

19. Rosie the Riveter was the patri-
otic symbol used to call women into
jobs left vacant by men who were off
fighting World War II. The propor-
tion of women working increased from
25% to 36%, a rise greater than that
of the preceding four decades, and
the war gave women access to skilled
higher-paying industrial jobs for
the first time. Although employers
were skeptical about hiring women,
they had little choice. For the
Black woman worker this meant a
334% increase in industry as skilled
workers.

A

20. Samuel Rhone was one of the
twelve jurors to find Inez Garcia
guilty of murder in 1974, for the
self-defense shooting of a man who
had assisted in her rape. Besides
feeling safer about raping a woman,
when asked after the trial, "Could
a woman ever get off on the ground
of self-defense if she killed the
man during the attack?" Samuel re-
plied, "No because the guy's not —
trying to kill her. He's just trying
to screw her and give her a good
time."

21. b. Lolita Lebron. Although all
are prisoners, Lolita Lebron, 59, is
still in Federal Prison after two
and a half decades. A Puerto Rican
Patriot, she participated in an
attack with four others on the sym-
bol of US control over Puerto Rico,
the Congress. This last resort act-
ion was in response to the enactment
of the "Law 600" which declared
Puerto Rico a "commonwealth" under
jurisdiction of the United States.

22. Big Mama Rag isn't telling the
answer to this one. Instead, it's

a contest question! Send in your
guess on a postcard. The first one
we receive with the correct response
wins, not a trip to Hawaii, but a
lifetime subscription to Big Mama
Rag. Past and present collective
members and their families are pro-
hibited from entering. Postcards
must be received by the last day of
April 1979. The winner (and the an-
swer) will be published in the June
issue. Send all entries, (one entry
per person), to BMR, 1724 Gaylord,
Denver, CO 80206.

(Books which served as good sources
of material for this quiz were:
"Women in America", by Edith Hoshino
Altbach; “America's Working Women",
by Rosalyn Baxandall, Linda Gordon
and Susan Reverby; "The Chicana Fem-
inist", by Martha P. Cotera; "We
Were There: The Story of Working
Women in America", by Barbara Mayer
Wertheimer; “Women Together", by
Judith Papachristou.)

(Photo credits on page 8, top to
bottom: "We Were There: The Story of
Working Women in America"; the Neva-
da Historical Society; "Women Togeth-
er". Page 9, clockwise: Liberation
News Service (LNS); "We Were There:
The Story of Working Women in Ameri-
ca"; "Women Together"; LNS.)