Lesbianism cited in threat

Denver Woman Faced With Custody Case

Judy Barlow

Sally Hopkins, a Denver lesbian mother, was in court in Roseau, Minnesota on May 19th. In court she asked that another hearing deciding whether she will be able to retain custody of her daughter be heard in Denver. Hopkins' ex-husband, Robert Sweeney, petitioned the Court in Minnesota where he now lives asking them to grant him custody of 12-year-old Katy. His petition cited that Ms. Hopkins' lesbianism was in some way connected to potential child abuse and that she was not a fit parent because she has moved frequently during the seven years that she has had custody of her daughter.

Hopkins was granted custody of her daughter in 1973 in Denver District Court when she was divorced from Sweeney. Sweeney remarried in 1974 and saw his daughter infrequently although he continued to live in Denver. He later moved with his new wife to Warrens, Minnesota, a town of 1500 people in northern Minnesota where his wife's family owns a large window factory. Sweeney is employed by his father-in-law's window factory.

Sweeney's petition comes at the same time as Ms. Hopkins is graduating from college. She believes that her ex-husband is now using her daughter as a vehicle to hurt her. "He can't beat me anymore or really even reach me except through Katy. He is a very bitter and threatened man," said Hopkins. “He recently told me, 'I'm going to take that little girl away from you and watch you commit suicide.'" Sweeney has been aware of his ex-wife's lesbianism for four years. The Judge has not yet ruled on the petition.

-Big Mama Rag

SALLY HOPKINS'S STORY
(Edited from taped interviews)

Before I finally divorced my husband in 1973 things were really bad. He was an alcoholic and an abusive man. He had beaten me and choked me and held me under hot water. He once gave my mother a black eye when he thought that she might help get Katy (then 5) and me out of this abusive situation.

A lot of my problems in raising Katy on my own were a direct result of Bob's not paying child support as ordered by the court.

-Third World Women's Alliance

I tried to pursue it through the Denver district attorney's office, but by then he had moved to Minnesota and the D.A.'s office didn't follow up on it.

I was poor because he never took responsibility. I finally went on welfare so that I could go to school and feed us. Even during our marriage Bob took little or no responsibility for Katy. Even when we both lived in Denver he only saw her when I specifically asked him to and made the arrangements. He never seemed to want to make time for her until now.

About a year ago I decided that I had to make some changes. I was working full-time, going to school full-time, taking care of Katy full-time, I was just worn out. I had no money left and I just didn't have it in me. I asked him (Sweeney) for help—to let Katy stay with him for a year while I finished school and got things together.

We had a one-year visitation agreement drawn up. It was really a hard thing for me to do. I really needed help and Katy was interested in getting to know her father.

According to the agreement Katy was to have visited with me four times during the year. She didn't come at Thanksgiving because they told her that I didn't want her which was a lie. She was insecure about me sending her to stay with her father in the first place and they used her vulnerability to reinforce her insecurities. I saw her at my mother's in Florida at Christmas and she finally came to stay with my lover and me in Denver last Easter. When Katy was here for Easter she told me that her father had tricked her into seeing a psychologist. She was really upset about being tricked. I called up her father in Minnesota and told him that I wasn't sending her back. The next morning, real early, his sister called and pretended to be all friendly and understanding and asked if she could take Katy out for lunch. The next thing I knew was that I got a call saying Katy was put on a plane for Minnesota and nobody, not the police, nobody would do anything about it.

ORGANIZING A DEFENSE

A defense fund for Sally Hopkins which will also be available for other gay parents is being organized. The defense fund desperately needs money, organizers, and volunteers. Donations can be sent to:

Gay Parents' Custody Fund

P.O. Box 18767

Denver, CO 80218 or call 831-6268 to volunteer services. Hopkins needs to raise a minimum of $15,000 for attorney fees, postage, printing, phone calls, plane fares, travel expenses, etc. Hopkins was able to borrow money for the initial attorney retainer and travel expenses for the May hearing in Minnesota.

Having the trial in Minnesota would cost her defense many times what it would in Denver. Travel expenses for Hopkins, her mother, and one witness for the "change of venue" hearing in Minnesota have cost over $1500.

ANALYSIS OF WHY THIS CASE IS IMPORTANT

During the course of taping the interview for this article we made connections between the different ways that are used to determine child custody. We initially asked how it could happen that a man like her ex-husband who is an alcoholic and an abuser and a bitter and angry man could actually take Katy away from Sally at this point in their lives. We talked of the plight of Native American parents and children—the fact that over 35% of the children are forcibly removed from their parents and their culture (See BMR Vol. 6 No. 5, pg. 5 and Vol. 8 No. 3 pg. 3 for related information). We talked of how poor and minority women seeking abortions are coerced and tricked into signing consent forms giving the hospital or clinic the right to sterilize them. We went on and on about how the loss of the right to raise our children is used against vast numbers of us. The courts, supposedly reflecting the morals of the society at large through the enforcement of its laws, make the determination as to what constitutes a "fit" environment for a child to grow up in. No matter what the parent believes is best for her child, the courts’ opinion can (and too frequently does) supersede hers.

The societal laws and values as reflected by recent court decisions include the denial that life on a reservation and exposure to the Native American culture is a "fit" environment for a child; that poor and minority women are much less likely to be "fit" parents; that lesbians, because of their sexuality alone, are not fit parents; that political activists are "less fit" than "establishment-type parents" (See BMR Vol. 8 No. 3 pg. 3); that men with money and jobs are "more fit" than women who have no marketable job skills; etc. The list seems endless.

We must continue to fight for the rights of lesbian mothers such as Sally Hopkins. We must also actively defend the rights of all women, not only in abortion or birth control, but also in the right to have and raise their children. As long as one of us can be threatened or denied the right to raise our children, all of us are vulnerable.

Feminist Action Group
There will be a second meeting to discuss a Denver Feminist Action Group:

Saturday, June 14th, 10 a.m.
at Woman to Woman Feminist Bookcenter
2023 East Colfax Avenue, Denver

Agenda includes discussion of the points of unity and the structure of the group. All women welcome.

Big Mama Rag Talks To Lolita Lebron

Eileen Bresnahan
Constance Perenyi

On March 1, 1954, four Puerto Rican Nationalists, under the leadership of Lolita Lebron, attacked the House of Representatives in Washington, D.C. Shouting “My nation has a right to its independence," Lebron and the others unfurled the Puerto Rican flag and fired guns from the gallery of the House, where the topic on the floor at the time was "the problems of migrant workers." They wounded five Congressmen, and were immediately seized.

In her pocket, Lebron carried a note saying, “I assume all responsibility before God and the world. My blood cries out for the independence of my country. This is an outcry of VICTORY." On June 10, 1954, she went before the Grand Jury in Washington and testified that she had planned the attack; and then on July 12, she and her "companeras de Lucha" (comrades of the struggle) were convicted and each sentenced to 75 years in prison.

In September, 1979, after having served 25 years and refusing to admit her guilt to receive a presidential pardon, Lebron was released from Alderson Prison. She and three other Puerto Rican Nationalists were freed upon an agreement between the United States and Cuba in which Cuba released four men held as U.S. spies in exchange for the release of Lebron and her comrades. (See BMR, Vol. 7 No. 8). They were the longest held political prisoners in the United States and their release was received joyfully by Puerto Rican nationalists and international freedom fighters alike.

MARCH 1, 1954: PUERTO RICAN NATIONALISTS LED BY LOLITA LEBRON ATTACK CONGRESS TO CALL ATTENTION TO PUERTO RICO'S COLONIAL STATUS.

Since her release last year, Lebron has been touring in the United States to gather support for the Puerto Rican liberation movement as well as for 11 political prisoners still held in the United States (all Nationalists as well). On Saturday, May 31, Lolita Lebron was in Denver to build solidarity for the National Committee to Free Puerto Rican Prisoners of War; and following an afternoon march, Big Mama Rag was included in an interview in which Lebron discussed her revolutionary commitment, her experiences in prison, and the role of women in political movements.

The interview began with a discussion of the action for which Lebron was jailed. Lebron stated strongly that she was the leader of “that action," second in command only to the leader of the movement for the liberation of Puerto Rico, Don Pedro Albizu Campos. She expressed a brief flash of undisguised anger at her difficulties in working as a woman leader in the Puerto Rican movement. Difficulties in winning respect and having her leadership recognized, we speculate. But, she did not actually say—she said that she didn't want to talk about that.

She described some experiences in prison, saying she was constantly tortured due to the political nature of the action for which she was imprisoned. Asked for examples of this torture, she told an obviously still painful story of having no drinking water. 

MORE ON PAGE 22