Workers Sue Bay Area Women Against Rape

Nine women expelled from Bay Area  
Women Against Rape in July 1978 are  
suing that organization in Alameda  
County Superior Court in California.

The suit asks that BAWAR be legally  
dissolved and damages totaling  
$70,000 be awarded to those expelled.

Allegations against BAWAR include  
breaches of contract with volunteer  
and CETA workers, discrimination a-  
gainst Third World workers and pro-  
grams and infliction of emotional  
distress on expelled members.

Kathy Labriola, a BAWAR member for  
two years and now one of the plain-  
tiffs in the suit, sees the suit as a  
last resort to force BAWAR to account  
for its "illegal and irresponsible  
actions" towards the expelled members  
and the community BAWAR serves.

“Neither group wants to spend the  
money on a court trial - it would be  
very costly for all of us," Labriola  
stated. "We were hoping that BAWAR  
would settle out of court, but they're  
making every move like they're  
taking it to trial.“

Both sides agree that two factions  
had formed within BAWAR well before  
the final breach occurred. On one side  
(the CETA faction) were three CETA-  
paid BAWAR workers and several, most-  
ly newer, BAWAR volunteers, now the  
plaintiffs in the suit. On the other  
side (the staff faction) were BAWAR  
staff members paid out of county  
revenue-sharing funds and other,  
mostly older, BAWAR volunteers. Each  
faction had criticisms of the other  
and of BAWAR itself.

Tracy Gardner, one of the expelled  
CETA workers, feels the paid staff  
had developed a bureaucratic mentali-  
ty. "BAWAR didn't have a sense of  
overall political responsibility or  

goals - we ended up spending most of  
our time courting the county.”

She questions BAWAR's commitment  
to Third World programs. "I was  
hired to be the Third World Community  
Outreach worker, but I didn't receive  
much support to do my job. They seem-  
ed to feel that my simply being hired  
fulfilled BAWAR's responsibility to  
Third World programs. I felt I was  
being used as a token to talk up  
BAWAR to women of color when I wasn't  
feeling so hot about BAWAR myself."

Gardner experienced organizational  
dysfunction as BAWAR's biggest pro-  
blem. Access to power - information,  
money, setting of priorities - was  
severely limited. "They (the staff)  
wanted to know in advance every word  
I'd say in representing BAWAR and  
every penny I'd spend. They didn't  
trust me at all.”

Kathy Labriola agrees that the  
issue of combatting racism within  
BAWAR as well as outside it, was  
crucial. “We felt that we were expel-  
led mainly for our advocacy of a  
BAWAR-sponsored Third World anti-sex-  
ual assault conference." She said  
the staff faction "denied that racism  
was present within BAWAR. They felt  
that workshops about internal racism  
or about Third World issues, as they  
relate to anti-rape work, were un-  
necessary."

Labriola also points to a growing  
alienation between volunteers and  
paid staff. "The paid staff began to  
see their main interest as preserv-  
ing the organization itself. Volun-  
teers felt the running of the group  
was being taken out of their hands."

An opposing view of the breach  
comes from Robin Wells and Liz  
Schellberg, both presently staff  
members of BAWAR. They point to the  

lack of structure within BAWAR as a  
problem - "people were given power  
but there was no way to hold them  
accountable for what they did with  
that power." Into this environment,  
in September 1977, came the CETA  
workers, “without any clear planning  
about job descriptions, training or  
supervision... Here we bring them into  
the group, give them a brief train-  
ing and all of a sudden not only are  
they staff, but they're being called  
upon to make major administrative  
decisions and represent BAWAR. They  
were way over their heads.“

Racism was not the issue, Wells  
and Schellberg indicated. Third  
World outreach was and continues to  
be a priority. The controversy con-  
cerned how best to do the Third  
World conference, not whether or  
not it should be done. They point  
out that women of color were on  
both sides of the split, and that  
BAWAR has always served many Third  
World women in its anti-rape work.  
"If there was racism on our part,"  
Wells said, “it was around not be-  
ing able to criticize women of  
color."

The final breach between the two  
factions came as BAWAR made its  
decisions on Proposition 13 cutbacks.  
The CETA faction made a proposal at  
the June 21 general meeting to ter-  
minate three of the four staff, en-  
abling BAWAR to keep its CETA workers  
and use the saved salaries for other  
expenses. "It was definitely an  
expression of my group's dissatisfac-  
tion with the regular staff, and  
an attempt to restructure BAWAR,“  
explained Gardner. The proposal  
was voted down amidst a controversy  
over who in fact had voting rights.

After that, “everyone agreed that  
things had come to a head and we  
could not go back.” The two groups  
agreed that a negotiating committee  
would draw up and present a proposal  
to the next general meeting on how  
best to divide BAWAR's resources  
between the two factions. But that  
committee never met.

The decisive factor for the staff  
in expelling the others was the  
CETA workers' presentation of a  
grievance against BAWAR to the CETA  
administration. For the staff fac-  
tion this was the last blow in a  
series of what they felt to be the  
CETA faction's destructive attacks  
on BAWAR's funding sources. “At  

that point, we decided that we'd  
had it, and we weren't going to  
negotiate with them." The CETA  
contracts were terminated, the six  
volunteer members of the CETA fac-  
tion were sent letters informing  
them that "you are no longer active  
BAWAR members," the locks were  
changed, and the office was moved.  
It is the legality of this series  
of actions which will probably be  
most under dispute in the court  
case against BAWAR.

Kathy Labriola said of the CETA fac-  
tion, "We felt not just anger that we  
were personally trashed, but outraged  
that a community organization could  
be so unaccountable." The expelled  

MORE ON PAGE 17

WIND Ends Business

After five years of successful opera-  
tion, Women in Distribution (WIND),  
the first - and still only - women's  
wholesale distributor of books and  
records by and about women, has an-  
nounced that it will cease operations  
due to the financial effects of recent  
publishing practices of big publishers  
on small industry - women's publishing  
and distribution.

WIND explained in a July 1979 notice,  
“We have decided that Women in Disti-  
bution must be dissolved. This deci-  
sion has been extremely difficult...  
Three main factors have influenced  
our decision... the financial position  
of WIND; the activities of the small  
and women's presses; and the activi-  
ties of the major publishers.

"In many ways we were successful.  
Each year between 1975 and 1978 our  
sales doubled. Our list of titles in-  
creased from 30 in 1975 to 600 in 1979.  
The number of bookstores and libraries  
that regularly order from us rose  
steadily from 25 in 1975 to 600 in  
1979.

"Despite this apparent success, we  
continued to lose money each year. The  
time involved in processing, packing,  
recording orders, accounting to and  
corresponding with publishers, in col-  
lecting payments, in reviewing new  
titles, writing copy, designing and  

producing catalogues increased as  
WIND grew...

After extensive work sessions with  
our accountants, we had to accept the  
conclusion that none of our proposed  
alternatives would result in making  
WIND a viable, self-sufficient opera-  
tion in the foreseeable future. The  
alternatives that involved a decrease  

in expenses would involve an accompany-  
ing decrease in sales/income. The al-  
ternatives that involved expansion  
could not guarantee a breakeven point  
within the next two to three years (also  
WIND is not in a good position to be  
applying for large loans). It was  
decided that the large amounts of  
money needed would be hard to come by  
(via donations, etc.) in these times.

"The financial position of Women in  
Distribution was not the only factor  
in our deciding to dissolve. WIND's  
future looked all the more bleak be-  
cause of the difficult time small and  
women's presses are having trying to  
survive. The activities of the major  
publishers are making it more difficult  
to sell the work of the independent  
presses.

"Three years ago, many chain book-  
stores and non-counter-culture book-  
stores started to acknowledge the de-  

MORE ON PAGE 18