SOs: 7

e

editorial

Last month at a BMR community meeting the collective was asked to prepare
a statement of the paper's definition, goals, process, and politics. What
follows is that statement:

Definition

1) Big Mama Rag is a news journal committed to presenting news, coverage of
arts, and analysis of concern to women in a radical feminist context.

2) We gear our paper to women who have already developed some level of fem-
inist consciousness.

3) We are committed to contributing to the evolution of a radical feminist
analysis.

4) Big Mama Rag is intended to inspire dialogue and raise consciousness
amongst women.

5) Big Mama Rag aspires to be a catalyst for radical social change which
will bring about the end of the capitalist patriarchal system.

Goals

To keep women informed of local, national, and international news of in-
terest to them.

To develop radical feminist theory by keeping Big Mama Rag open to theo-
retical dialogue, as in the "Struggle" column, and by contributing to the
dialogue through editorials.

To make feminism relevant to women's everyday lives by reporting news in
a political context.

To inspire activism.

To pass on skills related to newspaper production within the women's
community.

To publicize local resources for women.

To foster in-movement communication.

To cover and contribute to the evolution of women's revolutionary culture.

To produce a paper of technical, journalistic, and political quality.

To become self-supporting and pay the people who work on the paper.

To make Big Mama Rag accessible to as many women as possible through dis-
tribution, coverage, and editorial accessibility.

Process

We understand a collective to mean a group whose members share a common
commitment, strategy, and political perspective; whose members share all
power and responsibility within the working situation - in this case the
paper, Big Mama Rag. From these common understandings, editorial and policy
decisions are developed. The collective, as a body, oversees the entire pro-
cess of producing the paper.

All decisions will be arrived at by consensus, except in the case of a dead-
lock which cannot be resolved, in which case, the collective will revert to
majority vote.

Each member of the collective will commit herself to clearly defined areas
of responsibility, and this commitment will be made concrete in the signing
of individual job description type contracts.

Each member of the collective will attend two mandatory meetings weekly,
one to deal with business and one to discuss politics.

Part of each member's responsibility is to develop healthy interpersonal
relationships within the collective and with other women who work with her.
Furthermore, members understand that the good of the paper outweighs personal
ego needs. To give substance to this understanding, criticism/self-criticism
will be a regular agenda item at one weekly meeting.

In case of violations of contracts, every effort will be made to work out
the problem in criticism/self-criticism sessions. If such violations become
disruptive to the workings of the paper, as a last resort expulsion will be
considered as an alternative.

Each member of the collective subscribes to the above definition of col-
lectivity as specifically applies to Big Mama Rag and is committed to working
within this concept and this framework.

Politics

1) We define ourselves as radical feminists.

By "radical" we mean that we are committed to the complete eradication
of the present social system, and the institution of another which will speak
to the needs of all people and which will not benefit any person or class of
people at the expense of any other person or class of people.

By “radical feminist" we mean that our priority in working for such a
revolution is to ensure complete freedom and power (in the sense of freedom
to act) for women.

Until a feminist economic analysis is developed, we take feminism to
imply a socialist economic analysis.

7) We are committed to the strategy of feminist separatism (the separation

bmr:
where we're at

Our call for assistance has not gone unheeded in these de-energizing times.
Deborah Taylor has come forth, answering the clarion call. We breathe a col-
lective sigh of relief. Another woman who is thinking about joining and even
came out to help with last month's production is Vicki Piotter, a long-time
friend of BMR. We have thought about taking her out to lunch to persuade her
but the BMR budget barely allows for black coffee, let alone cheese and crack-
ers.

Speaking of long-time friends of BMR, one woman has been long unsung in the
Where We're At. She has helped BMR through some very difficult times. Now,
because of her commitment to an independent women's press, she is attending
classes in the practicalities of running a press, instead of taking a more
active role in BMR's production. This woman is now doing all of our camera
work, making it possible for us finally to cut costs. This is, in case any
one hasn't caught on, a collective love letter to Clare Strawn, who has dedi-
cated so much effort to making BMR a quality work.

We keep calling for more people to come and help us, yet when people step
forward and ask what they can do, we are often at a loss to tell them - the
mountain is so high, we don't even know which peak to aim for. Well, we made
a list the other day of things that potential friends could do for and with
us. This list is as follows: people to get us advertisers, fundraisers,
filers, cleaners and librarians, staffers, mailers, distributors, photogra-
phers, graphics artists, calendar coordinators, lovers, writers, proofers,
pasters, drivers, well-wishers, readers, subscribers. Actually, the list is
pretty much endless, when we thought about it.

Once again, money is always welcome.

Big Mama Rag Vol.4 No.8

of women from men in order to define our own needs, priorities, and stra-

tegies). We see this separatism as a political means, not as a goal. We

respect other strategies that speak to the oppression of the class of women.
We will make coalition with other groups on specific issues, provided

that we feel that our priorities and our struggle are respected by the groups

with which we work, and always provided that we retain our autonomy.

We reject the practice of lesbian separatism (the separation of lesbians
from all other people), because our primary struggle is against our oppression
as women, and we identify with all women in this struggle.

3) We are committed to revolution, as opposed to reform. This doesn't mean that
we reject specific reforms, but that we recognize these as temporary stop-
gaps to relieve the immediate effects of an untenable political system. Our
priority remains the work of getting that system.

We accept Charlotte Bunch's criteria for good reforms (see Quest, vol.1,
no.1):

(a) Does this reform materially improve the lives of women, and if so,
which women and how many?
(b) Does it build an individual woman's self-respect, strength, and con-
fidence?
(c) Does it give women a sense of power, strength, and imagination as a
group and help build structures for further change?
(d) Does it educate women politically, enhancing our ability to criti-
cize and challenge the system in the future?
(e) Does it weaken patriarchal control of society's institutions and help
women gain power over them?
4) We retain the right to censor all copy (including advertisements) sub-
mitted to the paper.

As feminists in the process of developing a political analysis, we must
adopt certain values and reject others. By “censorship” we mean that we will
not print any material which, by our judgment, does not affirm our struggle.
We will not act to prevent the dissemination of such material via means other
than Big Mama Rag.

5) We encourage the development of a structure for feminist accountability.
In the meantime, we are accountable to the feminist community in the following
ways:
(a) Our critique and business meetings are open to all women.
(b) We call special community meetings in response to felt needs both within
the collective and the community.
(c) We encourage writers to attend copy meetings, and to work with editors
on any changes in their work.
6) Big Mama Rag is not a business in that it does not intend to make a pro-
fit. Any profit incidentally made will be recycled into other feminist pro-
jects or back into the paper itself. We do not include reasonable salaries
for workers in our definition of profit.

We aim to keep the cost of the paper at a minimum, given our expenses,
so that it is accessible to as many women as possible. Free subscriptions
are available to prisoners and mental patients.

7) We are committed to the structure of the paper remaining collective.

Phyllis & Linda Invite You To

Tt DELDET
BAMMER

[formerly Ms. J’s]

Opening September 1st

“BENEFITS:

Sept. 18 - Rachel Yaseen Defense
Fund

| Sept. 25 - Lesbian Task Force

| *DANCING*
2638 W. 23rd AVE,