Strike At Sanderson Farms Continues

Janis Kelly

Sanderson Farms in Laurel, Miss., is a microcosm of everything wrong in America. The predominantly black, female union there is protesting inhumane conditions, poor pay, and sexual harassment in a chicken processing plant built with tax dollars and managed by members of the Ku Klux Klan.

According to Gloria Jordan, vice president of Local 882, International Chemical Workers Union (ICWU), the strike began February 27, 1979, after owner Joe “Little Joe” Sanderson threatened to throw union president William McGee in jail for criticizing threats made to workers the day before the old contract expired.

Since 208 workers walked out, Sanderson Farms has operated by slickly avoiding labor laws, threatening essential workers to keep them on the job, importing workers from surrounding states, and giving special raises to the experienced workers who stay.

Union picketers, facing a new security gate and professional muscle hired from the Wackenhut security agency, survive on $30 per week strike pay and food stamps.

The basic issue in this strike is not pay (which, under the old contract was only 5¢ per hour above the minimum wage) but fundamental decency.

"Sanderson acts like he’s the Massa over his people," Jordan told a Washington, D.C. audience in May. "And people, mostly black women, had no other choice than to walk out, because we can no longer live with that. He would have used us until he used us up."

The conditions Sanderson gets away with show why labor-intensive industries are fleeing to Southern right-to-work states, and why Mississippi is now the nation's fifth largest producer of broiler chickens.

Work hours at Sanderson Farms are arbitrary; if few live birds are delivered, there isn't a full day's work; if too many birds are delivered, the work lasts until they are all done. The 8-hour day has no meaning at Sanderson Farms.

of a work-related disability, so it is not compensable.

"The next step," Jordan continued, "is to cut open the chicken body. The vent openers do that. They are the only ones that get gloves. The rubber gloves only last a day, sometimes less than a day, so then you don't have any protection.

"The crop pullers don't even get any gloves. They have to reach by the open neck, with the sharp bones sticking out, to pull out the crop, and the bones just tear their hands all up. The people that make the next cuts then have to cut 65 birds a minute.

"The knives and scissors they give you, you only get one in 30 days' time. The scissors are sharpened only once a day, and they turn rusty. If you are not able to cut with those scissors, and you cut yourself, they will give you only two bandages after a cut. After that, you no longer get another bandage. They say you are using too many bandages."

Disciplinary practices at Sanderson Farms show that management ignores many modern labor laws -- like the one abolishing slavery. The anti-bellum atmosphere is hardly surprising, since a main plant supervisor is Charles Noble, an avowed Ku Klux Klan member who was tried and acquitted of the murder of NAACP leader Vernon Dahmer.

Noble runs a viciously tight shop: Anyone more than six minutes late is counted absent.

"You have three absentees in 30 days," Gloria Jordan explained, "and after the three absentees, the next one leads to a lay-off. The second lay-off will lead up to termination, regardless of how long you’ve been working at Sanderson Farms, even 15 or 20 years.

“If you apply for a sick leave, when you start back to work, you start over again as a new hand, plus, you count the sick leave as two absentees, so you only have one more absentee to lead to termination."

Sanderson Farms workers start over as "new hands" so frequently that they rarely build up much seniority.

-Canolyn Mugar/ICWU/LNS-

Ellen Chin, Sanderson Farms worker

The birds arrive packed 35 to a crate. First they are hung on a moving line to be killed. "When people reach into those crates," Jordan said, "they are taking out 35 birds a minute. Those birds' claws and beaks cut you just like a razor, and the people at the start of the line leave there every day with slashes and cuts all down their arms.

"After the birds are killed, we cut their necks, and they be dripping with this blood. The company gives you one apron in two months' time to protect you from the blood. Those are plastic aprons. After the first two days of washing that apron in cold water, you no longer have anything to protect you, because it hardens and tears all to pieces."

The workers develop "chicken rash" -- like chicken pox all over the body -- from exposure to the dripping blood. The company counts "chicken rash" as a personal sickness instead of qualifying for pensions. Jordan pointed out that staying at the bottom of the pay scale forces women, especially those with children, to spend all their energy struggling to survive.

"There are things that we are left behind on knowing about," she said, "because of just trying to survive for our families, starting over and over again as a new hand. Women need to combine, to get ourselves the opportunity to know what OEO (Office of Economic Opportunity) means, what EEOC (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) means, what the Equal Rights Amendment means. We don't have time to do those things the way we have to work now."

Racism within the plant was obvious from the start. The workforce is 85% black, and until the union filed an EEOC complaint, all of the supervisors were white.

Racism within the union was more subtle, although some younger black union members blame the passage of the poor 1972 contract, which gave nearly all the power to Joe Sanderson, on the reluctance of the white male union officials in the international to vigorously support a predominantly black local. That situation has changed, however.

-Wendy Stevens/04§ Our Backs-

Gloria Jordan

Hubert Mills, the international representative at the time of the contract renewal, advised the local to accept Joe Sanderson's offer of another 5¢ raise over the minimum wage. Instead, the local drew up a list of contract changes including:

-a change in the absentee policy

-no mandatory overtime

-toilet breaks as needed, instead of only three times per week

-15 minute rest breaks twice a day

-company paid insurance

-more vacations

-a strong seniority system

-guards on saws; knives and scissors sharpened

-gloves and aprons as needed

-freedom to go to the doctor when injured

-ability to negotiate the speed of the line, which Sanderson can now raise at will

-no more sexual harassment of women workers by male supervisors

The international then threw its full support behind the local, and thus far has invested over $150,000 in the strike.

Sanderson and the striking workers negotiated until June 1979, but talks have been nonexistent since then. Sanderson first tried breaking the strike by bringing in the mentally retarded, but they wouldn't put up with being cut and scratched up by the birds each day, so they didn't work out as scabs. Sanderson was also fined for hiring a 13-year-old strikebreaker, in violation of child labor laws. Finally, Little Joe settled for trucking in people from distant parts of Mississippi and surrounding states.

Numerous unfair labor practice charges, unsafe working conditions charges, etc., have been filed against Sanderson, but the good ole union busting firm, Kuliman, Lang, Inman & Bee (New Orleans) is using every delaying tactic imaginable, so few penalties are expected any time soon.

The Sanderson Farms strike is gathering momentum as it enters its second summer and progressive groups come together to support the strikers. If this strike is won, it will help workers in all of the exploitative industries of the booming Sunbelt. If it fails, more plants will step up union-busting actions.

Workers at Sanderson Farms are trying to change their workplace into a decent place to work -- a place where workers have fair pay, decent tools, freedom from sexual and racial harassment, and reasonable work schedules.

"People ask me if I will go back to Sanderson Farms to work, knowing what it was like," Gloria Jordan said. "Yes, I will go back, when we get a fair contract that anybody, anywhere could work under. I will go back when we can be treated like we are somebody." You can do something to help the women in the Sanderson Farms strike:

-Write to them. Let them know you are

MORE ON PAGE 17

wherever possible, is at the foundation of our company's commitment to improve the quality of life."

Union activists around the world have begun to pressure Coke to rescind, or change its Guatemalan franchise. A boycott by the International Food and Allied Workers has been called linking 160 member unions in 58 countries. In Denmark, the Union of Hotel and Restaurant Workers suspended the sale of Coca-Cola until it successfully forced the Swedish subsidiary to Coke's international office, threatening to repeat the boycott if Coke didn't respond to their demands. In Norway, a major consumer boycott is being planned. In Finland, youth clubs are planning a massive consumer boycott which is to be accompanied by a three-day production boycott by the Food Workers Federation.

In Australia, workers intend to suspend the production of the plastic Coke bottles. In New Zealand, workers are discussing a production boycott of Coke products.

In Spain, the Federation of Food and Hotel Workers began a ten-day sale and consumer boycott on May 1.

In Mexico, the union of soft drink workers suspended production of Coke products for several days beginning April 24.

A Canadian union activist advocates leaving Coke with an alternative to quitting Guatemala -- selling the plant to an operator who will negotiate collective agreements. "Such a victory would help to raise the spirits of the Guatemalan labor movement which is asking people outside to exert all possible pressure on the regime."

(Information from LNS)