hot briefs...

“Eat Inflation”

State governments were informed the  
last week of February that federal  
food stamp benefits will be suspended  
June 1 unless Congress approves more  
funds by May 15th. Legislation pend-  
ing before the House would raise a  
ceiling on food stamp expenditures  
set by Congress in 1977. The ceiling  
for this fiscal year is more than  
$2 billion short to ensure full bene-  
fits for up to 20 million food stamp  
recipients. When Congress put controls  
on food stamp moneys, they estimated  
the annual food inflation rate to be  
3%, instead of the current 11% infla-  
tion rate.

Colette French

Can a Barracks Rape?

The US Army is blaming coed barracks  
for what it calls an "unprecedented  
number of rapes" at a Maryland military  
installation. Major John Joseph says  
he has launched an investigation into  
the increasing numbers of sexual  
assaults against women at the Aberdeen  
Proving Grounds, at which 340 women  
are currently assigned. The investiga-  
tion was spurred by a recent sixth  
rape, in which a woman soldier was  
abducted from a parking lot by a num-  
ber of male soldiers.

-Hersay

Bad Billy Busted

"Bad Billy rapes our young girls but  
Violet gives willingly." This violent  
little sentence is a memory aid for  
electricians which has been in use  
worldwide for at least 30 years. It is  
designed to help students remember the  
international color code for resistors.  
When Shirley Peters learned that her  
daughter was being subjected to this  
casual acceptance of rape in her 8th  
grade class in Burnaby, Canada, she  
protested to the school board, which  
agreed “the parent has a justified com-  
plaint." Reg Risdale, head of the elec-  
tronics department at the BC Institute  
of Technology, said they don't use the  
"Bad Billy" memory aid anymore, "be-  
cause you have to be so damned careful  
these days."

-Kinesis

Silenced

Fu Yuechua, a Chinese political act-  
ivist, has been sentenced to two years  
in jail after being convicted of libel  
and violating public order. The libel  
conviction stemmed from Fu's accusa-  
tion that she was raped by a Communist  
Party official in 1972, while the  
charge of violating public order re-  
sulted from her alleged participation  
in a protest march in Beijing last  
year.

-Plexus

Soviet Sisters

Three women who contributed to the  
Soviet dissident community's first un-  
derground feminist magazine have been  
detained and warned they will be arrest-  
ed if another issue appears. The women  
were taken into custody in Leningrad  
last month, but were released after in-  

_ terrogation. The three had published one  
issue of an underground called Women  
and Russia.

-Media Report to Women

Timeless Feminism

Among the books and papers found  
recently in a time capsule, sealed in  
1879, was a feminist message. In an  
official guide to the geysers of Cal-  
ifornia, inside the cover, the author  
of the pamphlet, Laura DeForce Gordon,  
had written the following inscription:  
"If this little book should see the  
light of day after its 100 years en-  
tombment, I should like the readers  
to know that the author was a lover  
of her own sex, and devoted the best  
years of her life in striving for the  
political equality and social and  
moral elevation of women."

-New Women's Times

-Kinesis

Double Whammy

A survey by the National Women's  
Health Network has revealed that most  
of the federally funded contraceptive  
research programs do not consider male  
contraceptives to be a serious issue.  
Over $90 million is being spent on  
projects researching contraceptive de-  
velopments, most of them devices or  
drugs for female use. The safety issues  
involved are ones whose weight is borne  
by women. Worse yet, the Department  
of Health, Education and Welfare was  
offering contracts to test estrogen  
hormones on college women while at the  
same time awarding grants to study the  
carcinogenic effects of those very  
substances. The developers of contra-  
ceptives are not only promoting re-  
search in which the responsibility  
rests with the women, they have also  
"changed" the definition of the word  
"safe," meaning free from harm, to  
"safe," meaning benefits that may out-  
weigh hazards.

-Upfront America

Between You  
And Your Tampon

A network of women is currently as-  
sembling information on the fibers and  
chemicals used in tampons. They are  
pressuring the Food and Drug Admini-  
stration to require manufacturers to  
list the materials used in making this  
product on the label. Women's Health  
International is urging all women who  
think this is a good idea to express  
their views to Dr. Yin, Director, FDA  
Division of OBGYN Medical Devices,  
8757 Georgia Ave., Silver Springs, MD  
20910, with a copy to WHI, 14600 Home-  
crest Road, Silver Springs, MD 20906.

-New Directions for Women

Nursing Integrity

A $2.56 million damage suit has been  
filed against Wake Medical Center in  
Raleigh, NC by two nurses who were  
fired for allegedly refusing to treat  
the wife of a utility company execu-  
tive. Hospital officials said the  
nurses refused to treat Helen Harris,  
wife of Shearon Harris, chairman of  
the board of Carolina Power and Light,  
because of their opposition to nuclear  
power. The nurses live near the Wake  
County construction site of the com-  
pany's Shearon Harris nuclear plant.  
Their suit says they were concerned  
about treating Ms. Harris because of  
their widely known opposition to the  
nuclear plant and that their dismissal  
caused their “reputation for integrity  
and patient care to be impaired,  
affecting their standing in their pro-  
fessions."

A Knockout

Danish bantamweight boxer Lis Peder-  
sen suffered a hard blow recently when  
her country's amateur boxing associa-  
tion told her she could box, but she'd  
better not fight. The national associa-  
tion ruled that Pedersen, even though  
she had "a right hard punch," would  
not be allowed in the ring because box-  
ing just wasn't for girls. Pedersen  
claims she can't find a word about ex-  
cluding women in the association's  
charter, and has taken her fight to get  
in the ring before the country's Equal  
Rights Commission. The commission is  
reported to be now investigating wheth-  
er boxing is hazardous to women's  
health.

-Hersay

Don’t Eliminate Women

Two government agencies "advised"  
companies Feb. 8 to eliminate policies  
that bar fertile women from certain  
jobs. The EEOC and the Office of Fed-  
eral Contract Compliance Programs  
said employers should be "neutral" in  
making job assignments. Many companies  
currently bar fertile women from jobs,  
frequently higher paying positions,  
involving contact with certain chemic-  
als. Labor and women's groups have  
advocated that plants be cleaned up so  
no one will be exposed to dangerous  
chemicals, however, companies continue  
this form of discrimination as it is  
cheaper than making the workplace  
safe.

ERA De-Energized

The ERA became a red hot issue in  
the Energy Department last month when  
a memo to department administrators  
was leaked to the public. It read,  
"The deputy secretary has asked that  
you avoid scheduling Department of  
Energy events in states that have not  
yet ratified the Equal Rights Amend-  
ment." The note triggered outrage from  
Senator J. Bennett Johnston, chair of  
the Senate's Energy Regulation Subcom-  
mittee, who is from Louisiana, a state  
that has yet to ratify the ERA. The  
apparent pro-ERA policy in the Energy  
Department was quickly reversed when  
President Carter told a televised  
press conference that it was not the  
policy of his administration to boy-  
cott the states which have not passed  
the ERA.

-Hersay

O% Senator

Colorado Senator Armstrong has re-  
ceived a zero rating from The Woman  
Activist, a monthly political action  
bulletin for women's rights, for his  
voting record on issues of importance  
to women. In the 1st session of the  
96th congress, Armstrong voted no to  
positive legislation in the five areas  
of abortion, the budget, child wel-  
fare, affirmative action and sex edu-  
cation, joining with six other men to  
be known as "0% senators."

-The Woman Activist

Miners Put Out

"I really had no idea what I was  
getting into," said Kathy Beverly,  
a Boone County, West Virginia, coal  
miner, who has become the family  
breadwinner since her husband was  
laid off several weeks ago. First she  
had to fight her husband before he  
agreed to let her into the mines; now  
she finds her fight has only begun.  
She filed charges of sexual harass-  
ment last month against her foreman  
who told her to "put out” or he'd  
make things hard for her. The Human  
Rights Commission, to decide soon on  
her complaint of discrimination and  
harassment, has been besieged with  
complaints among the 3,000 women work-  
ers in the nation's mines. In Kent-  
ucky, two women were awarded $2000  
each after they were stripped and  
greased by fellow workers and sent  
from the mine.

Manushi Mag

Manushi is a bi-monthly feminist  
magazine published in Delhi, India,  
by a collective of Indian women. The  
third issue, in Hindu and English ed-  
itions, contains features, interviews  
and fiction and poetry. It reports  
on women prisoners, protests women  
have organized against the dowry sys-  
tem and women's role in the peasant  
movement of the '40s. Manushi can  
be obtained from Manushi Trust, A-5  
Nizamuddin East, New Delhi, India  
1100013. Write for rates.

-Aegis

More Custody Crap

The National Law Journal recently  
reported that a University of Iowa law  
student was denied custody of her two  
children on the basis that her studies  
would not allow her enough time to  
properly care for them. Attorneys for  
Linda Lou Tresnak, a first-year law  
student, want to take her case to the  
state Supreme Court. Judge Hughes had  
commended Tresnak for her ambition but  
said that "it is not necessarily in the  
best interests and welfare of her minor  
children." He also concluded that the  
two boys would be happier with their  
father because they could engage in  
hunting, fishing, athletics and mechan-  
ical activities, even though nothing in  
the record indicated the father or the  
sons are interested in those activities.

Let It Flow

The Iowa Civil Rights Commission  
ruled in February that Iowa City fire-  
fighter Linda Eaton was a victim of  
sex discrimination when superiors de-  
nied her request to breastfeed her son  
at the fire station. Eaton, the only  
woman firefighter in Iowa City, was  
happy with the decision that includes  
back pay for the time she was suspend-  
ed for refusing Fire Chief Robert  
Keating's order not to have her new-  
born son brought to the station for  
twice-daily nursings.

Schmuckai a Schmuck

Sue Jacobs, who was fired last sum-  
mer by the D & L Contracting Co., says  
her male co-workers on a construction  
crew should have been fired instead  
for spending too much time watching  
her. The Michigan State Department of  
Civil Rights is currently investigat-  
ing her firing. Jacobs was helping to  
install a sewer line; the men on the  
crew took their shirts off because of  
the summer heat and Jacobs wore jeans  
and a bathing suit top. "She was dis-  
tracting to the men; they would stop  
work and talk to her," explained com-  
pany vice president Bob Schmuckai.

"If the men weren't working because  
they were watching me, why didn't you  
fire the men?” asked Jacobs.

In a nutshell...

You train a secretary to your ways. And then she  
goes hers. Not always punctual either, or accurate.  
Sometimes temperamental. And expensive.

We think we've got the answer. Almost in a nutshell.  
We call her SHE 2000.

A micro word-processor that can do anything that  
almost five hundred secretarial and clerical staff  
could do (or practically anything).

Of course, you could keep one or two of the leggier  
ones on for adornment. Because, after all, you're  
going to have time on your hands too.

And SHE 2000 won't be jealous. SHE'LL just mind  
her own business - and yours.

SHITACHI

HYPER-ELECTRONICS

_... =Broadsheet "