A Gun of One's Own

The Politics

Pat Hadley

I am a woman who has spent my life  
living in danger of attack from men.  
In other words, I am just like you.  
At different times in my life I have  
tried different ways of defending my-  
self: taking self-defense classes,  
carrying a knife, etc. I have always  
tried to go places with friends or  
else stayed at home a lot. Then I  
began to think about guns. I did not  
grow up around guns. While in the  
process of trying to find out about  
guns, I soon learned how difficult  
it is for a woman to get the necess-  
ary information. The same mystique  
that keeps us isolated, unconscious,  
and vulnerable also keeps us unarmed.  
This article is an attempt to clari-  
fy some of the facts about women and  
guns and to begin some sort of Gun  
Consciousness Raising among women.

to as many women as they can. While  
you defend yourself, bear in mind all  
the women you love that you are  
fighting for. You are your sister's  
keeper.

I am always a believer in weapons:  
hatpins, knives, etc. But most women  
are not as familiar with or skilled  
in fighting with such objects as  
men are, and it seems to me that the  
least effort a woman has to make to  
defend herself, the better off she  
is. It's too easy to freeze or hesi-  
tate out of fear—fear of the situa-  
tion and fear of hurting anyone—and  
weapons can be taken away. Most weapons,  
except the one that is rather  
hard to take away and that can be  
used at a distance with the least  
possible effort—a gun. After years  
of trying to figure out the most  
reasonable way to defend myself, I  
discovered that a gun makes the  

While you defend yourself,  
bear in mind all the women you love that  
you are fighting for.

Being a woman in a world run by  
men, you find that your life is in  
constant danger of one form or ano-  
ther. Going to work in the morning  
(especially if you work in the even-  
ing), going to the grocery store, or  
just taking a walk down the street  
can be a danger-filled experience.  
Women with cars are spared a lot of  
worry about protecting themselves  
when they leave their homes but they  
still must worry about the danger of  
attack in their own homes—half of  
reported rapes occur in the woman's  
own home.

The danger of attack on us all the  
time is very real, yet most women  
don’t do enough to prepare to defend  
themselves. Even when all our  
friends around us are being raped  
and mutilated—even when our very  
selves are attacked—we are still  
slow to do something to protect our-  
selves. And there are reasons why  
this is true. For men to maintain a  
successful patriarchy, women must  
be defenseless. If we feel helpless  
then we will be afraid to escape  
from ties with men and male insti-  
tutions. Because we are afraid to go  
out alone at night, or stay at home  
alone (with good reason) we have  
been programmed into a passivity and  
reliance on men that keeps us from  
growing to our own potential stren-  
gth. All men, therefore, benefit  
from male violence upon women. Have  
you ever had sex with the man you  
are living with when you really did  
not want to? I have. There are many  
reasons for this, but the major one  
is being afraid he will leave you  
and you will be alone and unprotec-  
ted; so we can be maintained by a  
rapist of our choice to protect us  
from other rapists.

When we do manage to terminate  
most of our connections with men,  
live by ourselves, with other women,  
raise our own children, support our-  
selves, we are still left with the  
well-planted electrodes of passi-  
vity in our brains. We carry doubts  
and hesitations, "I don't know if  
I could fight back." “If I had a  
knife or a gun or a black belt in  
the martial arts, I don't know if I  
could kill another human being, even  
a rapist attacking me—I don't want  
to hurt anyone." We either feel too  
weak or too magnanimous to want to  
protect ourselves. Too many women  
have submitted to rape with the idea  
that by not resisting they were pro-  
tecting their lives. They probably  
felt they were doing the best thing  
until the moment they were actually  
killed by their attackers. And wom-  
en too often are trusting of men to  
the point they endanger their lives.

The only way I've figured out to  
try and eliminate the all-nurturing  
masochist in each of us is  
to remember that the man—or men who  
attack, rape, mutilate, and try to  
kill you, have and will do the same  

most sense. (A gun is also cheaper  
to obtain than a black belt.)

Those people who tell women that  
armed self-defense is even more dan-  
gerous than passively submitting,  
since a rapist will inevitably get  
a gun away from her and use it again-  
st her—inumerable movie and tele-  
vision scripts affirm this—grow  
strangely reticent when pressed  
for concrete examples of dire re-  
sults. It is interesting that the  
same police departments which pooh-  
pooh women's armed self-defense take  
a very different track in training  
their own personnel. Police manuals  

advise that taking a gun away from  
even an untrained person is extra-  
ordinarily hazardous and should not  
be attempted unless the alternative  
appears to be an immediate and cer-  
tain death.

How many rapists have been captured,  
injured or killed by their intended  
victims? As to unarmed women the an-  
swer is obviously nil, whether they  
resist or not. But a very different  
story emerges from a study done by  
Don B. Kates, atty., in 1976, of 150  
cases of armed resistance by women  
against criminal attackers. The crim-  
inal was wounded or killed in 43%  
of the instances and captured or  
driven off without a shot being fired  
in another 50%. In the remaining  

7%, the rapist, whether wounded or  
not, escaped.

The crimes that women fear are par-  
ticularly deterrable and defendable  
with handguns. The anti-self-defense  
tracts tell us that handguns are of  
little use against burglary and  
household robbery. Handguns aren't  
much use against burglars because  
burglars take care to strike only  
when no one is at home to shoot  
them. But proportionately far more  
crimes are directed against women  
(e.g. rape, murder or beatings by  
husbands, ex-husbands, boyfriends,  
etc.) involve breaking into their  
homes or offices. Thus a woman who  
keeps a handgun for defense against  
these crimes is much more likely than  
the average householder to have it  
ready to confront the attacker—not  
to mention the fact that an ex-hus-  
band, or boyfriend, is a lot less  
likely to break in if he knows she is  
armed. But the tracts deriding self-  
defense deal with crimes against wo-  
men by just not mentioning them.

Also worth noting is the deterrent  
effect that victim possession of a  
handgun is likely to have on one  
considering attacking her. The year  
after Orlando, Florida instituted  
a highly publicized training program  
in which six thousand civilian women  
mastered handgun combat skills, rape  
dropped 90%—though it rose precipi-  
tously across the country.

Buying a gun is not all that has to  
be done. Women must go out to ranges  
and learn how to use and feel comfor-  
table handling guns. Forming Women's  
Gun Consciousness Raising groups is  
one way to do this, and they are spr-  
inging up all around the country.  
Don't wait for one in your area  
though. If there isn't one, start  
one. We must learn not to be afraid  
to use guns in our own defense. We  
must not be afraid that we will pan-  
ic, that we will use a gun at the  
wrong time. Good training will help  
us in this, coupled with women's  
instinctual respect for human life.  
I'd trust a well-trained woman with  
a gun any day over a man. Women  
are much better at manual skill than  
men, so women are inevitably better  
shots—once they get it in their  
heads to get a gun. Many marksman-  
ship championships are won by women.

The laws on self-defense are really  
hard to wade through. And even when  
they are good, they are seldom actu-  

ally applied to women. The law di-  
vides force used in self-defense in-  
to two kinds: Deadly Force, which is  
likely to produce death or serious  
injury, and force which is not like-  
ly to produce such injury. The ju-  
dicial system in all its "great" male  
wisdom and sensitivity, does not con-  
sider rape of women to be a serious  
injury. A rape of a man by another  
man would, however, be serious in-  
jury. In general, Deadly Force can  
only be used to defend against an  
attack which is likely to produce  
death or serious injury. Thus a per-  
son may reply to an ordinary punch,  
blow, or kick from another person  
only with similar force and not a  
deadly weapon. Once again, the law  
fails to recognize that a kick by  

a man on a woman could very well  

kill if not permanently injure her,  
and even if she could get up and  

kick back, in most cases, that kick  
would not be of equal force. If a  
man puts his hands around your neck,  
he doesn't have to say that he's go-  
ing to kill you. You know it. It is  
what he wants you to know. Yet, be-  
cause of the law, the doctrine of  
responsibility (male), and the judge's  
discretionary power of interpreta-  
tion, such male threats are often  
considered as not being Deadly Force.  
So self-defense, i.e. using a gun  
against such actions is often consi-  
dered by judges to be hysterical ra-  
ther than reasonable and therefore  
punishable by law. Women who have  
gone to prison for defending their  
lives under such circumstances,  
and their numbers are growing, testi-  
fy to the insensitivity and stupid-  
ity of male law and "legal" systems.

The best rule is to check the self-  
defense laws in your city and/or  
state. Another good thing to do is  
to try to check court records, or  
talk to your local D.A.'s office  
to find out what cases of this kind  
they generally choose to prosecute.  
It will vary greatly from area to  
area.

As women start using guns to  
defend themselves and then find them-  
selves convicted of murder for doing  
so, more and more of us will have to  
take on the responsibility of making  
sure that these women are freed. We  
will have to work very hard to  
see that the laws are changed, and  
in the end that this entire patriar-  
chal system of injustice is changed  
to one that fits women's, children's  
and the real world's needs.

MORE ON PAGE 18

Women Are Here To Stay