culture

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 2

E.R. & Her “Friend”: A Timid Look Back

The Life of Lorena Hickok, E.R.'s Friend

Doris Faber

William Morrow & Co., 1980

$12.95/hardbound

Kathy Riley

When news broke last fall of Eleanor Roosevelt's 30-year "intimate relationship" with another woman, I was as delighted as when I realized that my favorite aunt was probably a lesbian. Finding a connection with anyone of a different generation or historical period is exciting enough; discovering that Eleanor Roosevelt loved a woman, even more so. To me, as a teenager in the late '50s and early '60s, Mrs. Roosevelt stood for the inescapable fact that if you're born not-pretty, you can certainly achieve, but count on living without romance and intimacy.

Eleanor Roosevelt, a member of one of the country's oldest and richest families, nurtured a very long, close and complex (how could it be otherwise) relationship with Lorena Hickok, an accomplished journalist and daughter of an itinerant butter churner. “E.R.” and “Hick” met in middle age in 1932: E.R., a grandmother and soon-to-be First Lady, and Hick, a 20-year veteran of newspaper work assigned by the Associated Press to cover E.R. during her husband's campaign.

For the following 30 years, until E.R.'s death in 1962, both women communicated almost daily, through a depression, a world war and staggering personal work schedules. The Life of Lorena Hickok, E.R.'s Friend by Doris Faber, is their story, based on the more than 3,000 letters between the two women which Hick donated to the FDR Library in Hyde Park. Hick, who died in 1968, specified that the letters be kept sealed for 10 years after her death. They were opened on schedule, just about the time that Doris Faber started looking for material for a book on Eleanor Roosevelt.

Someone else should have told this fascinating story; that Doris Faber was the first (and so far only) researcher to get her hands on these letters is a crime, akin to turning over Sappho's poems to medieval Christian theologians. Had she foreseen, Hick would have cursed.

Faber, an admirer of Mrs. Roosevelt and a reporter herself during the '40s, is a good storyteller. However, she is also homophobic, so much so that after reading Hick's collection for the first time, she emerged in a "classic state of shock" and later unsuccessfully tried to convince the library to lock up the letters for at least the rest of the century. To Faber, Hick was guilty of a cheap shot at a place in history by stipulating such an embarrassingly short interval.

In view of this reaction, it's surprising to hear Faber assert throughout the book that E.R.'s relationship to Hick did not carry the “physical attachment so strongly hinted” in the letters:

From E.R.: " ...and I couldn't say je t'aime and je t'adore as I longed to but always remember I am saying it and that I go to sleep thinking of you and repeating our little saying.”

From Hick: "...My dear, if you meet me may I forget that there are other people present or must I behave? I just want to hug you to death...good night and God bless you 'Light of my life’.”

Faber seconds the belief of the library archivists who believed that "the effusively affectionate passages in numerous letters were the expression of just an intense, if unusually belated schoolgirl crush." Faber adds: "At least in regard to E.R. herself, this verdict is, I believe, essentially justified." As evidence, Faber cites the "preponderance of the evidence" and the "total context of Eleanor Roosevelt's life -- presumably, a 50-year-old grandmother couldn't be a real lesbian." Yet, the examples Faber pulls out of this “total context” are often ridiculous. For example, E.R. described Hick as a good companion, not as a lover, when she wrote to her husband F.D.R. during a three-week Canadian auto trip she and Hick took together. "I cannot believe she would have written those words guilefully," Faber comments.

As for Hick, it's clear she always did have "tendencies." (Faber is shy about using the word lesbian -- using it only once in 327 pages.) As a young reporter in World War I Minneapolis, who worked night rewrite, wore scarves and a bright slash of lipstick and smoked an occasional cigar for effect, Hick lived with her close friend and roommate Ellie for nine years. As a much older woman, Hick had a love affair with a well-known woman judge, although Eleanor Roosevelt remained the central person in her life.

Even if Faber's thesis is correct, that these two women, born in the age of Victoria, never made love to each other, this book is compromised because the whole relationship between Hick and E.R. is weighed in terms of this question. If, for example, when E.R. expressed a rather motherly concern over Hick's health, such was used as more evidence against the theory that they were lovers. Clearly, we do not get a picture of the complexity of lesbian relationships.

Faber also tends toward psychological explanations. It's easy to come away from this book with the impression that E.R. was attracted to Hick out of insecurity: "Moneyed wife and mother meets self-made woman": that Hick's great "emotional" needs often strained the relationship: (Never mind Hick's position as a closeted, self-supporting lesbian involved in a scandalous-if-known relationship with the First Lady of the Land in the middle of the Depression.) In reading this book, I didn't get much feel for the range of feelings between these two women: how companion/lover/mother feelings merge; the difficulties in dealing with class differences; the vulnerability of being closeted, with no defenses against the inevitable self-hatred. In one letter, an otherwise consoling E.R. holds forth that lack of a stable relationship with a man "does tend toward emotional instability." Apparently -- since Hick never resolved guilt/feelings in not finding the right man.

Instead of understanding, we get the impression from Faber that there is something a little unsavory about Lorena Hickok, with her emotional bouts, her need for financial bailing-out by E.R. and her frequent discouragement in finding jobs. (For Hick, who left AP in the early '30s, realizing she had gotten too close to her source, nothing quite replaced the roar of the newsroom.)

Faber does do justice to Hick in describing her competence at her work. After leaving AP, she became chief investigator for the new federal relief administration, and as such, probably had the most comprehensive knowledge of any one person of the scope of poverty and pain in mid-Depression America. Although Hick got the job through Mrs. Roosevelt's influence, she soon impressed her boss, Harry Hopkins, with her ability to go to the root of a situation. Faber also notes that Hick's reports were an important part of Eleanor Roosevelt's political education. Among other things, Hick's letters talk of a mother of eight about to die because relief did not pay hospital bills; of the large numbers of women forced into prostitution, of the high percentage of men in jail (51% in one West Virginia county) for stealing food. Schooled as an "objective" journalist, Hick soon wrote to E.R. how she could "never be complacent about anything again."

A large redeeming merit of this book comes from the gems that Faber does give us, the glimpses of humor and ease between Hick and E.R. In preparing for their Canadian auto trip, E.R. had to fight off the Secret Service, which tried to stop her from going off with just one female companion. Faber writes:

Hick chortled over the notion of anybody trying to kidnap two women, one nearly six feet tall and the other weighing nearly 200 pounds. Mrs. R. runs amused zoo. "Where would they hide us?" the First Lady demanded. "They certainly couldn't cram us into the trunk of the car."

And the price of the book is worth this described scene which took place in a small upper New York State motel -- where there was enough hot water for only one bath:

"Well, you're the First Lady, so you get the first bath," Hick remembered saying after they were ensconced in their small but spotless room. Then, according to her own account: "In reply, Mrs. Roosevelt started thrusting her long, slender fingers in my direction. I was so ticklish that all she had to do to reduce me to a quivering mass of pulp was to point her fingers at me. She finally consented to take the first bath, however, but she must have taken it cold. For when I turned on the water for mine, it was warm."

May the story of these two women be told again. As a labor of love, maybe, by some lesbian feminist researcher willing to spend the summer in a library reading difficult handwritings, who is willing to give us the letters -- maybe just the letters.