12°

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3 No. 1

Nurture

Barbara Hume

Cross-cultural studies indicate that, almost universally, mother and child are close together the first few days after delivery. The father may or may not be included in this togetherness. The degree to which the father is involved usually reflects his later role in child-rearing. Some people suggest that it is the early contact of father and child which triggers his increased participation in parenting. The system of separation of mother and child, at its extreme in high risk and premature nurseries, is unique to our society.

While studies on other animals clearly show a critical period during which separation of mother and child leads to severe problems or rejection of the child, there has been a reluctance to extend these ideas to the human animal. Now, however, evidence indicates that human beings have their own species-specific routine pattern of behavior which crosses cultural lines. Filmed observations show a routine pattern beginning with fingertip touching of the infant's extremities and proceeding to massaging and palm contact with the trunk. Mothers of premature infants follow a similar sequence if allowed to touch their infants, though at a slower rate. At least some researchers feel that eye-to-eye contact is also crucial as one innate releaser of maternal caretaking patterns. Yet other studies indicate that mothers separated for 20 days have more trouble bottle feeding than mothers who have early contact with their infants. Cuddling was diminished for these late contact mothers as was eye-to-eye contact. This is very important for the child’s subsequent development since it has been shown that “...early maternal attentiveness facilitates later exploratory behavior in infants.” (Klaus and Kennell, p. 1025)

“Observations in human mothers suggest that affectional bonds are forming before delivery, but that they are fragile and may be easily altered in the first days of life. A preliminary inspection of fragments of available data suggests that maternal behavior may be altered in some women by a period of separation, just as infant behavior is affected by isolation from the mother.” (Klaus and Kennell p. 1035)

The newborn nursery is a medical fad which became the norm despite limited evidence in its favor. Before we risk a similar mistake with respect to rooming-in, more evidence should be gathered and alternatives explored. Home delivery and maternity hospitals are successful in many countries. A local alternative is the newborn nursery at Colorado General Hospital where parents enter and leave the nursery freely at any time of day or night. Conversely, babies go out to the mother’s room any time, for any length of time. It has been found that adequate handwashing and isolation of diseased mothers and babies is all that is required to provide a safe place for mother and child.

If you are about to deliver a child, consider (1) what you feel your needs are, (2) what facilities are offered in your community, and (3) insist on using the most suitable of these facilities to its maximum. If you plan to breastfeed, a hospital which forbids breastfeeding the first 12 hours, and then brings the child every four hours only, certainly isn’t going to help you develop a good milk supply.

Minority Task Force continued from page 4

Other state corrections officers consider their decisions part of natural law.

The men’s prison has a pre-parole program that allows prisoners to live in special housing thirty days before their release. The men have a period of readjustment into community life, attend orientation groups, get their driver's license, and use real money instead of the wooden tokens of the prison.

Now, because of publicity from the Task Force, women prisoners can attend lectures. They cannot get a driver's license, use money, and of course they cannot live (read sleep) in the pre-parole facility. Certain petty rules apply only to women prisoners such as no talking in the T.V. room, no leaving until a show is over, no exchange of food in the dining room, no talking from table to table while eating.

“Say Something Nice”

After the first visit of the Task Force the women prisoners were told by their female warden to “say something nice” about their home away from home. A few rules have been changed since then. Women can now dye their hair, can choose their own seats for meals, and now women can leave the prison in pants suits. The former rule was that no woman could go outside of the prison walls in anything but a dress. Now all women must wear pants, not dresses.

Two women were punished for hugging each other when one heard of her release. Women are subjected to dehumanizing medical exams whenever they return to the facility from the outside. There is no male-female socialization because of the fear that the women might get pregnant.

Women still do not have a work-release program that men have which allows the prisoner to live and work in a city outside of prison. Women prisoners must remain in their prison and do the laundry and sewing for the prison.

KOA Boycott

From Page 3

This agreement will provide for the creation of a women’s and minority advisory council to help locate qualified and qualifiable women and minority employees and to recommend programming for the station in women's and minority affairs. KWGN also agreed to a 10 percent reduction of commercials during children’s programs, and to hire a woman or minority person as an affirmative action director and another as a minority affairs director.

Negotiations with KOA have been handled through the president and vice-president of GE Broadcasting from New York, “because we had communications problems with KOA management,” according to Virginia Woodard, chairwoman of the Media Monitoring Task Force of NOW. “GE is having similar problems all over the country. The owners haven’t been too prudent in their negotiations with the coalition. This would have been a brushfire - easy to put out - but now...”

KOA Talks Breakdown

“The biggest problem has been and is now a breakdown in communication,” continues Ms. Woodard. “The coalition presented an agreement to the station. KOA objected to some things in the agreement, the coalition agreed to change these things and the station then sent back a completely new agreement - things were in it that we had never even discussed before. Can you believe that KOA wanted to pack the proposed Advisory Council with station selected people, effectively making it a rubber stamp for the station instead of giving women and minorities the voice we demand?”

The coalition is willing to participate in further negotiations with the station but has meanwhile ordered bumper stickers. Money seems to be the ultimate negotiator.

On June 20 the vice-president and general manager, the operations manager, and the production manager, all of KOA-TV and all male and non-minority members, were fired from KOA. The coalition has had difficulty working with these station employees due to their alleged racist and sexist attitudes, according to a member of the coalition.

The new general manager seems to be “more reasonable and rational in his thinking and more aware of community needs,” says Ms. Woodard. The coalition is now waiting for negotiations to reopen with the management hopefully to create a working agreement between the two groups.