hot briefs...

Anti-Gay Clause

In another example of what brave,
principled people "serve" in the US
Congress, an anti-homosexual amend-
ment that was initially defeated in
a voice vote was recently approved by
a large margin in a roll call vote by
the House of Representatives. So
much for integrity in an election
year.

The amendment to the Legal Services
Corporation appropriations legisla-
tion prohibits Legal Services Program
funding from being used in cases "pro-
moting, defending or protecting homo-
sexuality." It was sponsored by Rep.
Larry McDonald, a Democrat from Geor-
gia, and passed by a vote of 230 to
133.

The bill has yet to be considered
in the Senate; however, it is feared
that it will pass there, too.

The amendment is an example of the
favorite new rightist tactic of tack-
ing restrictive "riders" onto approp-
riations bills, as with the Hyde Am-
endment.

Chances of a presidential veto are
considered practically nil, as to veto
the "rider" would require the killing
of the entire appropriations bill.

Clean, Don’t Screen

A new practice of "genetic screen-
ing" by major chemical companies has
particularly prejudiced job oppor-
tunities for women, according to a
four-part series published in the
New York Times. The newspaper sin-
gled out DuPont and Dow Chemicals
as conducting tests on thousands of
women employees with the aim in
mind, in the companies' words, of
"protecting workers with vulnerable
genes" from exposure to chemicals
which might harm them.

Labor unions and feminist groups
have protested the screening tests,
demanding that the companies elim-
inate the hazards of the workplace
instead. The companies have replied
that such steps would be "economic-
ally unfeasible."

Further criticism was leveled at
the screening practice by Dr. Jeanne
Stellman of the Women's Occupational
Health Resource Center: "I abso-
lutely resent the assumption that if
you look at a 14 to 45 year old wo-
man, you are looking at a woman who
is presumed pregnant unless proved
otherwise." Stellman referred in
particular to the screening practice
of barring only women of childbear-
ing age from working near lead, when
lead is known to be harmful to both
sexes.

Dear Abby

Dear Abby: I am an adult woman
with a family of my own. My prob-
lem is my mother. Last year, Dad
died. He and mother were very
close. Mother, being a strong and
intelligent woman, adjusted to her
loss very well, but her adjustment
has taken an abnormal turn.

Soon after Dad's death, Mother
developed a very close friendship
with a woman I'll call "Mary."

Mary is uneducated, comes from a
much lower socioeconomic group and
has very little in common with Mo-
ther. Nevertheless, they have be-
come inseparable, eating together,
sleeping together and spending ev-
ery minute together when Mary is
not working. The obvious affection
they have for each other (touching,
and words of endearment) has be-
come an embarrassment.

I think Mother has transferred the
feelings she had for Father to Mary.
I want Mother to be happy, but I
think her relationship with Mary is
abnormal, and I don't want my mother
to become a lesbian. She's given up
all her old friends, and the whole
thing looks sick to me. I'm afraid
people will start talking.

This is something I can't dis-
cuss with Mother, but I think she
needs help. How can I help her?
CONCERNED DAUGHTER

Dear Daughter: If you really
want your mother to be happy, don't
sit in judgment of her friend or
the relationship between them.

Your mother has the right to spend
her time with whomever she chooses,
for whatever reasons.

Army Intelligence

Here's one for all you women out
there who've always suspected that
the average fascist has an IQ
score somewhat less than that of
a zucchini.

In 1968, according to Liberation
News Service, army intelligence
agents reported that Coretta King
had said in a speech that the Poor
People's March on Washington would
help make her husband's (Martin Lu-
ther King's) "dream" come true.
Army superiors then frantically or-
dered the agents to "find out what
dream she is referring to."

In 1964, an FBI document crossed
J. Edgar Hoover's desk stating that
Jean-Paul Sartre (Nobel Prize-win-
ning French author and philosopher)
had organized a "Who Killed Kenne-
dy?" Committee in France. Hoover
wrote in the margin: "Find out who
Sartre is."

August has been vacation month for many of the collective members and
supporters. We are all back at 1724 Gaylord for this issue which is the
first of our theme issues dealing specifically with our points of unity.
Future "Points of Unity" theme issues are: "The Family” which will come
out in November (copy deadline, Oct 13) and "Collective Structure, Process
and Politics" for January 1981 (copy deadline, Dec. 15). The October and
December issues will be non-theme issues; copy deadlines are Sept. 15 and
Nov. 17, respectively.

We will be having a garage sale on September 21st at 1611 York Street
from 10 am to 6 pm. Anyone wishing to make donations should call us at
320-2010 and leave a message with the phone machine.

We have been making arrangements to purchase ten used newspaper boxes
for local distribution. Anyone who has ideas for box locations in the
Denver metropolitan area can call our office and leave her suggestion on
the phone machine. We are also considering box locations in Colorado
Springs, Fort Collins, Greeley, Pueblo, or other Colorado towns. We
would like to get women who live in these towns to take care of these
boxes in exchange for free newspapers. Give us a call or drop
us a line.

Do you know of a bookstore in your area that doesn't carry Big Mama Rag,
but should? Anyone sending us the name of a bookstore that wants to carry
BMR will get a free 6 month subscription or 6 month extension on their
subscription and a free "Demands of Women" poster.

By the time this issue hits the streets, Connie Perenyi who has worked
on the collective non-stop for the last two years will be taking 3 months
off. She will return for the January issue and continue working as a
BMR supporter during her time off. We wish Connie a healthy and produc-
tive break and eagerly await her energetic return in December.

Thank you to all of you loyal sustainers out there. We depend on your
regular monthly contributions. What we need from our readers is more
concrete criticism and comments about the paper. Send out those cards and
letters, telling us what you like or don't like about the paper. Be
specific. It's real frustrating to put so many hours into different
articles & issues and not get any feedback.

This is the last month for the subscription special advertised last
issue (2 subs for $11). Next month subs will once again be $6/year.

Hotel Workers Strike

San Francisco hotel service work-
ers, most of them women, walked out
of that city's 12 largest hotels on
July 17 after last-ditch negotiating
efforts failed to avert the strike.
The Hotel Employers Association re-
taliated by locking workers out of
the association's other 24 hotels.

Talks became deadlocked when the
HEA refused to increase their inad-
equate wage offer and pushed for 59
take-aways--including promotions
based on seniority, sick leave pay
provisions, vacation pay, and pro-
tection from unfair layoffs.

The service workers include maids,
janitors, waitresses, telephone op-
erators, and bellhops. Averaging
$4.50 an hour before the strike,
they are overwhelmingly Filipino,
Chinese, Black, and Latino women.

The strike, which affected 6,000
workers, was settled August 13,
following membership ratification of
a proposed settlement.

This is Mary...
She’s underpaid,
sexually harassed,
passed over for
promotion and
stuck in a stereo-
typed role...

She’s also
against the
ERA... why?

Clear Headed Women

On July 5, about 2,090 Iranian
women protested an order from Aya-
tollah Khomeini that all women gov-
ernment employees wear "modest Is-
lamic garb and cover their heads."
The women held a three-hour demon-
stration in front of the offices of
President Bani-Sadr. Eight women
were arrested. Although an equally
large counter-demonstration of men
jeered at the women, there was no
violence.

The women chanted, "Men and women
are both equal, for they were both
martyred" and "We have not carried
out a revolution to go backward."

The men shouted, "The shah is your
supporter; death to the heritage of
Pahlavi."

The women, insisting that they
were anti-shah, shouted back, “Our
women are awake. They detest the
United States."

The men also called the women
prostitutes and said they are taking
jobs from men.

President Bani-Sadr addressed the
women and said that he would meet
with them. He maintained that no
one would be dismissed from her job
because of her clothing and that the
order to wear veils was "temporary."

However, the government radio that
night broadcast a warning to women
to "return to the arms of the na-
tion." Only a "small minority" of
Iranian women are "still thinking
about a sinful life," the broadcast
said. "The revolutionary nation
will decide about them. And these
parasites will be taken off the body
of the nation."

It Takes One

to Know One

Feminist favorite Phyllis Schlafly
has refused to accept the "Turkey of
the Year" award from NOW, saying her
selection was simply “sour grapes.”

Schlafly turned down the frozen
turkey, a Certificate of Demerit,
stuffing, and instructions where to
put it.

Said Schlafly, "Turkey is a spec-
ialty at my house. If it was a
good turkey, I would have been happy
to take it with me, but it would
have been hard to take it back on
the airplane. The turkey is a very
fine bird. I don't know why they're
kicking the turkey around."

It seems that the earlier remark
about fascists and zucchinis may
have been unfair to the vegetables
(take your pick).

Big Mama Rag Vol. 8 No. 8

Wife Stealing

The Maryland Court of Appeals has
overturned a decision by a Circuit
Court which ordered damages paid by
Floyd Kline to Donald Ansill, in the
amount of $44,250, for stealing An-
sill's wife.

The Appeals Court reasoned that
the common law on which that deci-
sion was based--"criminal conversa-
tion"--is unconstitutional, since
it allows husbands and not wives to
sue, thereby violating Maryland's
Equal Rights Amendment.

Ansell had only to prove sexual
intercourse between his wife and
Kline to have the latter convicted
of "wife stealing."

The concept of "criminal conver-
sation" had originated in British
common law, which assumed a wife to
have the same status as a servant;
anyone sharing affections with a
wife was therefore guilty of depriv-
ing the husband of his "proprietary
interest in the servant's services."

She likes being
treated special . . .

Cultural Exploitation

The International Union of Food and
Allied Workers has called an interna-
tional boycott on tourism in Guate-
mala. The international union repre-
sents 160 organizations in 58 coun-
tries and it is joined in its call by
European solidarity committees.

After coffee and cotton exports,
tourism is Guatemala's most important
source of foreign exchange. Revenues
of $207 million from 504,000 tourists
in 1979 benefited hotel owners, bus
companies, airlines and travel agents,
but indigenous people who make up 54%
of the population profit little from
the stream of money pouring into the
tourist centers.

The native peoples charge that the
national tourism institute and the
generals who run things in rural areas
are corrupting their culture by turn-
ing their rites and traditions into
tourist attractions. One ritual
which formerly was reserved for spec-
ial occasions is now performed every
Thursday and Sunday when the tourists
come to the outdoor market--thanks to
government pay-offs to poor people.

Cause for Concern

Further news from the fascist
front, this time relating to their
fetus fetishism--two more states
have recently passed resolutions
calling for a constitutional conven-
tion for the purpose of once again
denying women the right to safe,
legal abortion (not that we all have
this right at the moment).

Alabama and Oklahoma have passed
the "con-con" resolution, bringing
to 19 the number of states that
would like to overturn the 1973 US
Supreme Court ruling on abortion.

The threat of a Constitutional
Convention being convened is doubly
insidious because there is nothing
to restrict such a convention to
considering just abortion. Once
they got together, they could just
decide to throw out the entire
"Bill of Rights," along with any-
thing else that offends their sense
of frontier "justice" and Christian
"morality."

This year action on the convention
proposal is also expected in Ari-
zona, Florida, Iowa, Michigan, New
Mexico, Ohio, and Wisconsin.

If it's occurring to you that we
all have good reason to be concern-
ed about this, you're probably
right.