Puerto Rican Women

Forced Sterilization Plan Revealed

(Editor's Note: The following is an edited version of a two-part article that appeared in the December and January issues of Puerto Rico Libre, the bulletin of the Puerto Rican Decolonization Committee. Box 1240, Peter Stuyvesant Station, New York, N.Y. 10009.)

A hitherto secret report from the Governor of Puerto Rico’s economic policy group which talks openly and directly about alternatives available for reducing the numbers of the Puerto Rican working class by means of the massive sterilization of Puerto Rican women has recently surfaced in the United States.

Entitled “Opportunities for Employment, Education, and Training” and dated November, 1973, the report cites the problem of unemployment, and discusses as its main solution the need to “reduce the growth of the working sector” of the population. Its line of attack focuses on the massive sterilization of Puerto Rican women as the principal solution.

Numerous studies place the number of Puerto Rican women of child-bearing age who have already been sterilized at 35%. According to the Puerto Rican demographer Dr. Jose Vasquez Calzada, 35.3% of Puerto Rican women between the ages of 20 to 49 years have been sterilized. This makes the incidence of sterilization in Puerto Rico the highest in the world.

The University of Puerto Rico, based on the Master Sample Survey of the Department of Health (conducted quarterly to investigate medical aspects of the island’s population) shows that it is indeed the working class which is being reduced.

The highest rate of sterilization occurred among the $4,000-$5,000 per year income bracket. Forty-three percent of women in this group had been sterilized.

The study also distinguished within the white collar bracket between “professional” and “non-professional workers,” showing the rate of sterilization to be much higher among “non-professional workers.”

The population studies also showed that almost two-thirds of the women had been sterilized between the ages of 20-29. Ninety-two percent were sterilized before the age of 35 years, making the average age for sterilization 26 years of age. Comparative studies by Harriet B. Presser show that Puerto Rican women are among the youngest women in the world to be sterilized.

The Sterilization Program Today

According to Dr. Antonio Silva, Secretary of Family Planning of the Department of Health, there are no longer any restrictions on sterilization such as a woman’s age or whether or not she has any children. In today’s “voluntary” program, sterilization is available to everyone in free clinics set up by the Department of Health.

The New York Times of November 4, 1974 reported that 19 free sterilization clinics had opened up that year in Puerto Rico outside of San Juan. The clinics were said to “have been operating at a top capacity program of about 1,000 sterilizations per month.”

The Commonwealth government makes sure that the clinics will keep operating at top capacity each month. An extensive referral system, which is centralized through the Department of Health, has been set up to feed “clients” into the free sterilization clinics.

In addition, the Family Planning Program of the Department of Health has been integrated with the Program of Mothers and Children and is now being carried out by doctors and obstetric nurses. Once the mothers have given birth, they are given appointments to return “as much to treat them medically as to make available contraceptive methods and the possibilities of sterilization,” according to the report.

Hospitals in Puerto Rico are substantially financed by the United States government. The entire medical apparatus in the island was developed by doctors who were trained in the U.S.

“Many physicians thought,” reports J.M. Stycos in “Female Sterilization in Puerto Rico,” and still think, that contraception methods are too difficult for lower class Puerto Ricans and regarded post-partum sterilization as the most feasible solution to the [population] problem.”

This racist attitude of doctors is incorporated into hospital policy. As part of her doctor’s training in Puerto Rico in the 1950s, one student was told that any pregnant woman who came into the hospital for a delivery who already had two or more children must have her tubes tied after giving birth. This was standard procedure, checked afterwards by another doctor to make sure that it was carried out.

And feeding into the Department of Health Program, just in case it misses anybody, are programs which refer people from the Department of Social Services and the Department of Housing. So people applying for housing, or welfare, or food stamps find themselves receiving “orientation, education, and motivation” towards sterilization and then being referred to the Department of Health.

The “private” Family Planning Association also serves as a recruitment and follow-up agency to the Department of Health Program. The Association is involved in a wide propaganda campaign that preaches the philosophy that over-population is at the root of all evil and especially at the root of poverty. The report stresses, “those who suffer most from a condition of excess population are the groups with the least income and smallest amount of education.”

Sterilization and Economics

Since its invasion of Puerto Rico in 1898, the U.S. has maintained virtually complete control over the island’s development. Until 1952, the Governor of Puerto Rico was appointed by the President of the United States and had veto power over a local House of Representatives. Civil services, armed forces, police, mail, citizenship, trade agreements, school, media, and economic programs were under U.S. supervision.

The establishment of the Commonwealth Government in 1952 in no way altered this arrangement. The U.S. Congress still maintains ultimate veto power over any law passed by the Puerto Rican Government, and any law passed by Congress automatically applies to Puerto Rico.

What the Commonwealth Government did do was facilitate the influx of U.S. corporations in a rapid industrialization program during the fifties in a program called FOMENTO which transformed Puerto Rico from a sugar economy to one of the most highly industrialized countries in the world. United States corporations own 85% of the industry on the island.

One third of this industry, or $1.3 billion, is made up of petroleum and petrochemical industries. Recently the biggest petroleum and petrochemical companies on the island, CORCO, Union Carbide, Gulf Oil, and Pittsburgh Plate Glass have all announced major expansions.

These industries produce basic and intermediate products for export to the United States. Satellite industries — which produce finished products — have been promised by the colonial government for years, but have never materialized. Recently reinstated plans for a petroleum superport and for strip-mining the central mountain range’s copper deposits would mean the virtual takeover of the Puerto Rican economy by heavy industry.

Heavy industry requires large amounts of capital invested in complex machinery with a relatively small workforce. Puerto Rico now has an official unemployment rate of 12.5%. (Unofficial estimates place it at 30%) with a forecast of 18.5% by 1985. This is in a country where the cost of living is 25% higher than the United States and the wages are substantially lower.

The United States, investing huge amounts of capital in heavy industry on the island, is faced with a dilemma. How will it solve the problem of increasing unemployment and instability which, with a rapidly growing movement for independence, could threaten U.S. hegemony? The solution put forth by the colonial government's report is to get rid of the excess working population.

Population Control A U.S. Theory

During the thirties in the U.S., population control research was being carried on by the Rockefeller Foundation. Theories were circulating expressing the general ideal that economic problems in underdeveloped countries were really problems of too many people. They claimed that if only the population growth could be controlled, the standard of living would rise.

The population theories, notes the North American Congress on Latin America (NACLA) newsletter entitled “Population Control in the Third World,” had, and still have strongly racist roots. They are based on the concept of safeguarding the superior white civilization from the crude and inferior “underdeveloped” world which threatens to overwhelm the globe with its “population explosion.”

The U.S., a strong international proponent of population control, carries out programs throughout the Third World. Most of these, according to NACLA, are financed by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). Some AID programs, such as the “Family Planning Insurance” in Costa Rica, offer money in return for sterilization.

In other instances, such as in the case of Puerto Rico, the U.S. simply threatens to withdraw medical aid financing unless the government involved is carrying out a population control program.

The evidence in Puerto Rico adds up to a frightening picture. Thousands of women are sterilized each month, at a young age, through a carefully planned government network. Welfare women, people receiving food stamps, and people who want housing are all receiving special “orientations” towards sterilization.