Japanese Feminists

Wives cannot have real purse strings.

We think it inexcusable that they describe this as if it were a special right of Japanese wives and use the sexist contents to rationalize the discriminative situation of Japanese women. The contents of the lesson, "The Domineering Husband," is nothing but sexual discrimination, and it is impermissible for us women.

The stereotyped concepts "men should go out to work and women should stay at home" is sexual discrimination. Both men and women should have responsibility of a household. Last December the "Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women" was adopted by the United Nations. In the preface it says: "...The upbringing of children requires a sharing of responsibility between men and women and society as a whole," "A change in the traditional role of men as well as the role of women in society and in the family is needed to achieve full equality between men and women," and in Article 10 (C) it says, "The elimination of stereotyped concepts of the roles of

From Page 3

men and women at all levels and in all forms of education, by encouraging coeducation and other types of education, in particular, by the revision of textbooks and school programs and the adaptation of new teaching methods, will help to achieve this aim.

In the International Women's Year World Plan of Action they emphasized the role of mass media in abolishing sexual discrimination.

Thus, abolishing sexual discrimination has gained worldwide acceptance and it is a responsibility of the mass media to recognize it.

If the N.H.K. refuses to carry out this responsibility and insists on telecasting discriminatory programs despite our protests, it will be going against internationally recognized human rights.

Again, we strongly protest the sexist contents of the program and demand the broadcasting of it be cancelled.

International Women's Year Action Group

Women In Russia

A: It's practically impossible to escape medical care. Anyway, why would anyone refuse? To hurt themselves? No, the "refusal of medical care" means that someone has refused to undergo medical tests. Often you get the notice to show up for tests at an old address, in another city. And it's not always possible, for a number of reasons, to make the appointment. Not only that, a woman who has a venereal disease will be treated with scorn, like a criminal and a prostitute, and it's only natural that you might try to escape this experience. Even a registered, "respectable" person has to undergo this humiliation if they have

From Page 6

Y.D. - Also, our youth (and I'm basing this on the statements and memories of the great majority of the women I know) are extraordinarily ignorant in matters of sex and sexual hygiene.

Q: And how do you live after the prison experience?

A: The ties between women often continue after they're out of prison. But the problems are always the same - find a place to live, a job - all of which is more difficult after getting out. It's certainly not an experience I'd like to repeat. Maybe the best idea is to leave the country.

Lolita Lebrón

She observed that women's liberation seems different to her than other liberation struggles because, for one thing, she sees women fighting each other rather than a common enemy. Strongly stating that "Liberation takes a lot of sacrifice," she implied that many women involved in the women's movement do not know what sacrifice means - and if they do, they are unwilling to make it. At the same time, she openly admits that men have made many mistakes, the greatest of which has been to subdue women.

Later, we asked her, "How has the consciousness of women in the Puerto Rican Independence Movement changed - from before you were incarcerated as compared to today?" She responded that women have changed positively - that many "shine" in their dedication to struggle. Furthermore, there are now good representatives of feminism in Puerto Rico, women of good ideas of whom we would be proud. She carefully pointed to them emphasizing that we would be proud; but from her tone, we speculate that she did not entirely share that pride. (Regretfully, we did not get to ask what activities these women were involved in.)

Lebrón once again criticized feminism for lacking universality: When we asked her if she is a feminist, she responded that feminism has to be defined first, that there has to be a strategy. "I can say I am a revolutionary. I know my principles and I can define my struggle. I cannot join a movement that is not defined. I cannot define myself as a feminist, now."

The interview ended with Lebrón restating her commitment to the Puerto Rican Independence Movement and retelling her prison experiences in Spanish.

Analysis

Throughout the interview, we were impressed with Lebrón's intensity and her willingness to share her experiences. She is a determined, committed and angry woman. We guessed this before the interview, knowing that after 25 years in prison, her will and her vision had not been broken. But hearing her story in person, we understand more clearly how her strength and her political convictions have carried her through these years. She is a true revolutionary who believes that people can change.

And, we understand that she has made choices. On some level, through all the anger and unspoken frustrations, she acknowledges her oppression as a woman - we sensed that throughout the interview. But, she has determined her primary struggle to be

From Page 23

that of a Puerto Rican freedom fighter. To dedicate herself to her cause, she has chosen not to deal directly with the sexism in her movement. She has decided to fight against Imperialism and Capitalism instead of Patriarchy. She says that women should "lift themselves" in order to have command positions within their movements. We do not believe that such liberation is possible unless the oppression of women is given equal attention within a movement. But we do understand that Lebrón sees herself as a self-made woman.

Furthermore, we consider many of her criticisms of the women's movement valid, similar to our own objections. We too criticize the lack of definition and strategy in the movement today. We also understand why Lebrón has perceived an unwillingness to sacrifice on the part of many feminists - we see that in the movement and are committed to identifying and working against it in ourselves as well. As far as Lebrón's observation that women fight each other - in many ways, we agree that women's in-fighting is destructive and often counter-revolutionary. But, when women struggle with each other around important issues (like classism, racism, and political/ethical differences) our movement begins to define itself and we as feminists grow. Therefore, not all conflict is bad; and in fact, much of it is positive and affirming.

At one point, Lebrón asked why women do not understand that national liberation is at the heart of the struggle. We agree with her that many women who come into feminism do not connect their oppression with the oppression of other peoples (and in fact, may be oppressors themselves). Many women are short-sighted, both in terms of their personal goals (like working just to have a piece of the cake without having to acknowledge that the whole system is wrong). But, we assert that for a revolution to truly liberate everyone, patriarchal oppression must be dealt with as well. Feminists must acknowledge and connect with the significance of national liberation movements; but we must also affirm our own struggle to free all women within the context of freeing all people.

Lebrón's choices are not ours, but we understand that she has made the most of those choices. We felt that in a way, she was challenging us as feminists to clarify and strengthen our politics. We accept that challenge as part of our revolutionary process, and we state again our commitment to the development of a feminist strategy.

Depo Provera - Risking Lives Of Women & Children

Sue Neal

In 1963, The Upjohn Corporation began studies in America on the safety and efficacy of Depo Provera as a contraceptive. Depo was then in use as a treatment for the symptoms of incurable cancer. Ten years later, in 1973, despite studies done by Upjohn finding that Depo Provera caused breast cancer in beagle dogs, Depo Provera was approved for use in New Zealand. Its use has been restricted in England, Canada, the USA, Sweden and Australia by their health authorities.

Since then Depo Provera has been actively promoted and lauded by the medical profession there as the perfect contraceptive for breastfeeding mothers. Doctors in maternity wards around New Zealand are happily jabbing vulnerable women with the assurance

Bullshit! Depo Provera has been detected in mother’s milk at the same level as is found in her bloodstream. I find this factor very disturbing. Some authorities are concerned to see whether there could be long-term effects i.e., at puberty. Remember DES!! The circumstances are not the same, as DES affected the infant in utero. But surely our experience with DES has taught us to be extremely wary of hormones. Doctors don't always inform the mother that the hormone is going through her milk supply. Once again, this is an aspect of D.P. use that should be publicized so that a woman can make an informed choice. At present we are totally reliant on our medical advisors, many of whom are influenced by their estimation of our socio-economic circumstances as much as by our physical health.

I have a lot of contact with breastfeeding mothers... I find that some women feel that D.P. has no effect on them, their milk supply or their babies. On the other hand, some women have noted an abundance of milk flow, but talk of "hyperactive" babies who cry constantly, demand to feed excessively and who, in spite of good weight gain and healthy appearance, appear to derive very little satisfaction from their mothers' milk. These babies often lose their "hyperactivity" soon after being weaned.

So what are all the side effects?

Depression and mood changes: Progestogen is a well-known and common depressive drug.

Loss of periods: Some women find this disconcerting and "unnatural" - IT IS!

Gall bladder disease: Progestogen increases the incidence of gall bladder disease among susceptible women.

Loss of libido (sex drive): This is very common and it’s about time we stopped fearing the label “frigid” and started talking about how we really feel - both to our sexual partners and our doctors.

Breastfed babies: Loss of fertility: Ovulation can be retarded for months - even years after only one injection. There is a suspicion that D.P. can cause permanent infertility in some women.

Weight gain: Progestogen may cause an increase in the appetite and permanent weight gain because of the buildup of protein in the muscular tissue. D.P. users commonly gain 28 to 42 pounds in body weight. Some women have excessive weight gains which may lead to obesity-related health problems. Cannot be withdrawn once received: You can be stuck with the effects for three months minimum and they frequently last a great deal longer.

Bleeding: The injection can disturb the menstrual cycle in many different ways causing heavy and continual bleeding, or constant or irregular spotting. This has a double contraceptive effect. If you bleed for long enough, you will lose weight, energy and sex appeal.

Some of us like breastfeeding our babies. We choose to do so because it feels good and it is very cheap and convenient as well as a nice way to get to know our babies. Many of us have had to fight incredibly archaic hospital routines to have the necessary access to our babies in order to establish breastfeeding in the first place. It is very unfair if we end up having to wean because we have been given a hormone which affects our babies through our milk.

We have the right to full information on the physical effects of contraceptive drugs as well as side effects to look for. Then we should have 24 hours grace to consider that information without pressure from doctors or nurses who think they know how many children we should be allowed to have. Many doctors demand the right to prescribe drugs as they see fit for their patients without giving explanations. The medical profession is built on the healing ethic, but the woman seeking contraceptive advice is not sick in the first place. Aristotle once said that any medicine given to a healthy person must necessarily do harm and cannot do good. That ethic still holds good.