- hot briefs

Behind Windows

"I was not playing, ever, in one moment of that film, a lesbian. Now if the lesbians choose to identify with that I would think that that is their problem. I would have thought they were a little more advanced than that." So said Elizabeth Ashley, who plays the role of a psychotic lesbian in the movie Windows, at a recent press conference in Boston. Ashley, who has not seen the film, said, “One thing I said to Gordon Willis (the director) was I have absolutely no interest in doing an exploitative lesbian movie and this film could go that way. He said to me, ‘no, no, no, this is not what we are making.'"

Don’t Take It Personally

A new law in England bans male nudity at local beaches, but the law doesn't apply to women because men have “persons” and women do not. "No person shall willfully expose his person unless he is effectively screened from view," says the law.

Manual Sounds Alarm

A manual used in the Fire Arson Investigation Training Course of the National Fire Academy has been revised following a complaint by the National Gay Task Force. The manual asserted that female arsonists and lesbianism go hand in hand. The unsubstantiated characteristics of the woman arsonist were said to be as follows: a) she usually sets her fires in or near her own house b) she sets fires in the daytime c) she sets small fires d) she is thought to be homosexual.

Legalized Crime

In keeping with their poor record on human rights legislation, Ontario's Conservative government killed a bill that would have ended sex discrimination in pay rates. The legislation, known as Bill 3, focused on equal pay for men and women doing work of equal value. According to Labor Minister Robert Elgie, the concept is good, but "its time hasn't come yet." He and other opponents of Bill 3 argued that implementing it would be difficult since it would entail evaluating all classes of jobs to determine those of equal value. After Elgie announced he would not re-introduce the bill (despite evidence that in his own backyard, the Ontario Legislature, women switchboard operators receive $136 less per month than male parking lot attendants) the Canadian Organization of Small Business commented, “to put it mildly, we're delighted."

Kellogg Settlement

The Kellogg Company, food producer and federal contractor, has agreed to pay about $575,000 in an equal opportunity settlement following an investigation. Back pay of $155,950 was awarded to 287 women at the company's Omaha plant. The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs found that women were concentrated in lower-paying jobs and had no opportunity to compete or train for male-dominated jobs. The rest of the settlement will go to affirmative action efforts - Kellogg has agreed to set a 40% goal for hiring women in laborer and mechanic positions.

Don’t Mess With MaryAnn

A Missouri bank has shelved its ads for an automatic teller called "Mary Ann" after the National Organization for Women launched a local protest. First Western Bank Corp. had plastered on 15 billboards in St. Joseph: "What you do with Mary Ann after hours is your business" and "Mary Ann will make your nights nicer." These ads also ran on the radio. The bank said that the name of the automatic teller was not meant to be sexist, but that the name was originally derived from an old Harry Belafonte song called "All Day, All Night, Mary Ann."

Tampon Gamble

Rely Tampons, manufactured by Procter and Gamble, may be causing bleeding in the vaginas of certain women who use them, Dr. Lillian Yin of the Food and Drug Administration, says. The FDA has received reports during the last six months that several women have complained of small lacerations in the walls of their vaginas, allegedly caused by the tampon's plastic inserter. One complaint came from a mother who said her daughter had what appeared to be a 14-day menstrual period. When the girl was examined by a gynecologist, the doctor said the young woman's period had lasted a normal four days. The excessive bleeding was being caused by lacerations as a result of the tampon use.

Save Our Children

A group of British mothers recently went to Parliament to appeal for a ban on a US-made morning sickness pill they claim caused deformities in their children. The 20 mothers said they may file suit in the US against the makers of the drug Debendox. "All of us here feel we do not want any more children born like this," said Valerie Alexander, whose son was born with half an arm. The drug's maker, Richardson-Merrell, says Debendox, which has been taken by 30 million women in its 27 years on the market, is safe and does not cause birth defects. However, in a recent trial in Orlando, Florida, the parents of David Mekdeci, who was born with a sunken chest and a malformed arm, were awarded $20,000 in damages because of the drug.

Pointless Power

Over the protests of some feminist groups, a women's rights group sponsored a fundraising party with male striptease dancers, attracting a sell-out crowd. The Women's Equal Rights Legal Defense Fund sponsored the affair to raise money for a fund to educate women in methods to collect support payments from former husbands without hiring a lawyer. Fund President Gloria Allred called on the Culver City, California audience to experience it as “a special experience in power” over men.

Flipper Flops

A chief administrator at the Illinois state agency that investigates complaints of sex discrimination has been suspended for sexually harassing female employees. Carl Flipper, administrative manager at the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Commission in Springfield, has been suspended for 30 days. Flipper, however, is still receiving full salary.

Winners Lose

Women are getting a working over through the Work Incentive (WIN) program, administered by the US Department of Labor. The Labor Dept has been patting itself on the back, saying it placed nearly 300,000 present and potential welfare recipients in unsubsidized jobs last fiscal year. But it seems the old stereotypes and traditions were good enough for WIN when it came to placing women in jobs. Of the WIN registrants who found jobs last year, 70% were women and two thirds were employed in clerical, sales and service occupations, receiving an average starting wage of $3.23 per hour. The 30% of men received an average $4.28 per hour wage.

Big Mama Rag “Vol.8 No.5

A Breast-in

"You can't do this here," Anna Bowman was told by the restaurant manager at Harrods cafeteria in London. Anna was breast-feeding her five-month-old baby. She registered an official complaint and contacted a local paper. As a result of her efforts, 15 women sat down for a cup of tea in the same restaurant at Harrods and proceeded to suckle their babies. The staff watched disapprovingly but did not interfere. Ms. Bowman has been told that the Public Health Inspector discourages breast-feeding and “attendant practices" in local restaurants. By "attendant practices" he means changing diapers - an understandable practice to discourage in restaurants. But breast-feeding? Harrods maintains that it is “embarrassing and offensive to many."

Firefighter Burned

Firefighter Linda Eaton, who waged a 16-month legal fight to breast-feed her son in the firehouse, quit her job last month, saying, "I could take it, and I probably still could, but it suddenly got unbearable. I was the brunt of their (co-workers') hostilities." Eaton said her decision to leave resulted "directly and indirectly” from her sex discrimination suit against Iowa City, filed in January of 1979. The city is appealing a March ruling that found Eaton a victim of sex discrimination in which she was awarded $25,000. She said she would not consider returning to work as a firefighter, citing examples of harassment in which a male firefighter "threw her to the floor" in an argument and where one of her gloves was slit, “endangering her life." Eaton may file further charges against the city.

-Kinesis

Cast Out the Court

India's Supreme Court has overturned the convictions of two police officers who were found to have raped a 16-year-old low-caste woman. The Court took into consideration allegations that the victim was not a virgin. Women's organizations across the country are demanding the Court reconsider the case.

No Forced Drugs

A Federal District Court Judge in Boston has ruled in a class-action suit that mental patients have a constitutional right not to be forcibly drugged or secluded except in "emergency" situations. The suit was originally filed on behalf of inmates on the Austin and May units of Boston State Hospital; the defendants were the Commissioner of Mental Health for the state and 14 psychiatrists at the institution. The judge did, however, reject the plaintiffs' claims for $1.2 million in damages for malpractice, assault and battery and false imprisonment under state law.