struggle

‘LS

Support Work: Feminism Or Volunteerism?

Dottie Shank and Susanna Smith

After struggling with the dilemma of trying to combine anti-racist work with anti-sexist work, and trying to clarify things for ourselves through discussions and uniting this article, we find ourselves still being somewhat vague and abstract. Is what we're doing (support work) volunteerism? What does that mean to us? Are we falling into the traditional women's role of being self-sacrificing - denying our own thoughts and feelings in hopes of getting what we want and need later on? How much of what we do is because of white guilt and how much because we see national liberation forces overthrowing imperialism, which may or may not get us closer to overthrowing male domination?

We would appreciate commentary/criticism from other women struggling with this dilemma. Write to us c/o of Big Mama Rag. If you don't want it printed, say so.

We are two white lesbian feminists (somewhat middle-class background) who have been doing support work for a national liberation group - a group that considers its people as an autonomous nation within U.S. borders - they are living in occupied territory. (For example, the Southwest rightfully belongs to Chicanos and Native Americans.)

The support work we have been doing has been under the leadership of this national liberation group. They decide the priorities and terms of their struggle and we do what they've decided will be most helpful. It's racist of us to think that we would know the “correct" way for them to struggle. (As it would be sexist for men to think that they know the best way for women to fight male domination.)

The two of us have worked as part of a small support group - half women and men - for almost a year. We have done fundraising, printing, and related artwork, silkscreening, labor on a building, and participated in a self-defense class taught by a third world group. Some of us traveled to a conference with the group. So we feel we have a fairly good personal relationship with some of the members. We also have had two or three meetings together to discuss our working relationship and our politics.

We are out as lesbians and gay men, and they are accepting of that. They do not identify the fight against sexism as part of their present strategy. We are choosing not to name this group here, because this article is not intended to be a public criticism of them.

What we will be discussing are our personal thoughts/questions on combining work against imperialism and racism under the leadership of third world groups, and work against male domination and sexism with only women. The questions we are having are around the role of white women supporting third world groups and dealing with what we see as male domination and sexism within these groups.

We are also questioning how we deal with the privileges we have as whites and the fact that we are often not aware of how that affects the third world people we work with. We need to recognize that our perceptions as whites come from our whole experience as white people in the U.S. with certain privileges because of our white skin. This doesn't mean we should feel guilty for having those privileges, but should use them the best way we know how to overthrow both male domination and imperialism. It also means that we need to be aware that we have been brought up with certain values and attitudes, which we should not accept as true without question.

As whites, we often have access to resources which third world people usually don't, i.e. money sources, education, jobs, even such things as access to a printing press. Of course, white men have much more access to these things than women do. Also, our white skin enables us to go almost anywhere unchallenged, as long as we conform to certain standards (although being a lesbian is not one of these standards).

Because of this position of acceptance, we assume less harassment towards us for our stands. A good example of this is to look at what happened to peaceful protestors on the island of Vieques, Puerto Rico, and peaceful anti-nuclear protestors at Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant. (80% of Vieques is occupied by the U.S. Navy and is used primarily for bombing and gunnery practice. This has all but destroyed the native fishing industry there.)

Protestors on Vieques were arrested and sentenced to 6 months in prison. One of those arrested for trespassing, Angel Rodriguez Cristobal, was also a leader in the Puerto Rican independence movement. He was sent to a jail in Miami and was found hanged in his cell several months ago. Some Rocky Flats protestors, mostly white and middle-class, got 3 months in jail for trespassing. Cristobal's separation and hanging were no accident, and would not happen to a white middle-class protestor.

For ourselves, we assume we can march in demonstrations without being harassed, at least physically. Whereas when black people in Gainesville, Florida demonstrated in support of Iran, they were attacked by a white mob yelling, "Nigger." Some of them were beaten and one black man was arrested while defending the African liberation flag.

The material living conditions of many whites are less violent than third world living conditions - growing up and living in neighborhoods where we do not have to fight for our lives. As women, though, we do experience violence every day - both psychological and physical - violence which is not recognized by society and often not by "left" or "progressive" organizations.

The ongoing dilemma for us is how to combine anti-racist work with anti-sexist work without selling out one or the other. We are assuming that both are also anti-imperialist; meaning against the domination of one country by another - whether culturally, economically, or by the physical taking of land. We are also assuming that the women's liberation movement and national liberation movements could be natural allies, even though our perceptions of patriarchal imperialism, and theirs, are from different places.

Their perceptions come from living all their lives in a society which is dominated by white culture and values, with their culture and values always being invalidated. Women's perceptions come from living in a society dominated by male culture and values, with women's values and autonomy always invalidated. It's obvious that non-white women's perceptions come from being dominated in both ways.

The women for whom we do support work know all too well what their situation is. They know they're oppressed as women, but they also feel that acting on that would be divisive to the movement as a whole. Since we think imperialism is part of the patriarchy, the fights seem inseparable. As Andrea Dworkin quotes Aldous Huxley in her book, Woman Hating, "Nothing short of everything will really do." We feel this strongly.

The majority of women in the world are third world. If they have any energy left after working for basic survival needs, they have usually been choosing to put their energy directly into national liberation movements, both within the U.S. and internationally, to free themselves and their people from the domination of and the exploitation by the industrialized countries. We can't talk about women's freedom without recognizing this fact and without acknowledging that national liberation movements are the forces which are probably the greatest threat to imperialism at this time.

For the aforementioned reasons, it would seem that we as white women would/should put our energy into concretely supporting these movements. The dilemma enters for us when these movements do not take on male domination and sexism as equal struggles in the fight against imperialism and racism.

We would like to feel that we could support national liberation movements through raising consciousness around these issues in women's groups in which we work. However, there seems to be a danger of isolating ourselves from the people who make up those movements, and only supporting them in the abstract.

On the other hand, we feel we're denying our understanding of women's needs when we push for women to reach out to a third world group on that group's terms, when we know that group is not confronting sexism.

There are problems in the third world group with which we are working now that we identify as sexism and the oppression of women, though we do realize that our experience with support work is limited.

One problem we see is the emphasis on the family, which is an important emphasis for them as a race facing genocide. As women, we see the nuclear family as one of the bastions of capitalism and the oppression of women. This is a discussion we have yet to have with the group we work with. We still see the women in traditional roles of nurturing - caring for the children, preparing food for political events, detail work, the behind-the-scenes organizing.

The men do the speaking; are the ones most vocal about the politics of their struggle.

We initially had contacts with the men and have since come to have more contact with the women. We feel much better about the dynamics of our own relating when we relate to the women. We are more open with personal feelings and it's easier to cross cultural differences.

When we discuss our perception of the roles we see with the group we work with, we're told by women that their priority is the liberation of their whole people, both women and men. We understand this. They also say that each task is important and necessary to the struggle and each person is doing what they do best. But we deeply feel the lack of women's perspective in most third world events we attend.

We think that male domination and sexism have in many ways been intensified by capitalism and imperialism, though by no means are they the cause. Non-white men are blamed for behaving in very sexist ways (machismo, etc.) and the blame is often not put on the real power structures that influence/control society. Since 1930, of all men executed in the U.S. for rape, 89% have been black. This is legal lynching.

We feel that our own painful knowledge of mothers, sisters, and daughters in this society is generally applicable in many ways to all mothers, sisters, and daughters. Women carry the weight of every society with their never-ending attention/work. And we feel powerless when we identify this happening to women all around the world.

Men and women in national liberation movements, and in "left" or "progressive" movements, need to attack male domination not only in the political sphere, but also in their personal lives. Socialism/communism does not automatically bring the end of male power structures unless personal changes are made within the fight for a new society.

Many third world cultures are much closer to our dreams of respectful coexistence with the earth and plants and animals, and with each other. We realize the part white male culture has played in alienating third world people and women from their culture and history. Every culture has been polluted by white male values and in order to re-create our cultures, identification of these pollutants and deep personal cleansing of them is necessary.

We realize that all of us are impatient to reach our goals immediately. We need to remember that real change is a slow process. But we can never let up on trying to hasten that change.

Our dilemma remains and the questions we are asking are:

- Can women working autonomously contribute to third world liberation movements?

- How do we/should we take leadership from third world groups and still remain autonomous? It seems that we can't; how do we deal with this personally?

- How can women working autonomously fight imperialism and racism?

- What is the most principled/strategic way to work for the liberation of all women?