voices from our lives |

Happy days are here again

Admitting All The “Born Again” Realities

Constance Perenyi

For the past two weeks, since Nov-
ember 4 at 7:50 p.m. mountain time,
to be exact, I have been experien-
cing rising bouts of panic. Like la-
bor pains, they seem to get more
regular, and more debilitating. I'd
like, just once more, to conjure up
an image of a woman giving birth to
herself - but that's too romantic to
fit into reality right now. Then,
maybe it always was ...

—

This is a dance to Reagan
and the New Right.

On November 4, the night of the
general election, I was at work, lis-
tening to results on the radio, try-
ing to stay sane as thousands of
thoughts flew through my head. Fear-
I was feeling fear with each state
that Reagan claimed. My body had
felt anxious for the restless days
and sleepless nights before the
election, but intellectually I had
not yet acknowledged the possibili-
ty, the probability that Reagan

In it we celebrate a
Return to the Good
Old Days ...

would win.

And on a lot of levels, I had con-
vinced myself that it simply did not
matter - that the system would con-
tinue to function and malfunction no
matter who filled the figurehead
presidency. But then, shortly before
election day, I decided to vote, to
tacitly endorse the system I oppose
and cast a vote not so much for
Carter, but against Reagan.

The editorial cartoons in both the
straight and alternative presses in-
dicated that a lot of U.S. citizens
were also making their choice in
this back-assward way. I was hardly
comforted to learn that 1) most of
the people who elected Reagan did
not really endorse his politics, but
were fed up with Democratic incompe-
tence, and 2) that less than half
the eligible voting population had
cast a ballot anyway. No matter

woman’s work
is never done

Lillian Hellman

I have written before that my shock and my anger came against what I thought
had been the people of my world, although in many cases, of course, I did
not know the men and women of that world except by name. I had, up to the late
1940s, believed that the educated, the intellectual, lived by what they
claimed to believe: freedom of thought and speech, the right of each man to
his own convictions, a more than implied promise, therefore, of aid to those
who might be persecuted. But only a few raised a finger when McCarthy and the
boys appeared. Almost all, either by what they did or did not do, contributed
to McCarthyism, running after a bandwagon which hadn't bothered to pick them
up.

There were many broken lives along the path the boys had bulldozed, but
not so many that people needed to feel guilty if they turned their backs
fast enough and told each other, as we were to do again after Watergate, that
American justice will always prevail no matter how careless it seems to cri-
tical outsiders.

It is not true that when the bell tolls it tolls for thee: if it were true
we could not have elected, so few years later, Richard Nixon, a man who had
been closely allied with McCarthy ... And one year after a presidential scan-
dal of a magnitude still unknown, we have almost forgotten them, too. We are
a people who do not want to keep much of the past in our heads. It is con-
sidered unhealthy in America to remember mistakes, neurotic to think about
them, psychotic to dwell upon them.

In every civilized country people have always come forward to defend
those in political trouble. (There was once even some honor in being a poli-
tical prisoner.) And there were a few here who did just that, but not many,
and when one reads them now the words seem slightly timid, or at best too
reasonable.

And it is now sad to read the anti-Communist writers and intellectuals of
those times. But sad is a fake word for me to be using; I am still angry that
their reason for disagreeing with McCarthy was too often his crude methods -
the standards of the board of governors of a country club. Such people would
have a right to say that I, and many like me, took too long to see what was
going on in the Soviet Union. But whatever our mistakes, I do not believe we
did our country any harm. And they did. They went to too many respectable
conferences that turned out not to be under respectable auspices, contributed
to and published too many CIA magazines. The steps from such capers was
straight into the Vietnam War and the days of Nixon. Many of the anti-Commun-
ists were, of course, honest men. But none of them, as far as I know, has
stepped forward to admit a mistake. It is not necessary in this country;
they too know that we are a people who do not remember much.

-from Scoundrel Time, 1976

how it happened, the end result is
the same - Reagan will take office
early next year, not so much to “lead
the country" but to head the surge of
right-wing extremism that has been
building for several years.

And on November 4, I felt confusion
about the whole electoral process,
and could not help but reflect on how
many women have been, and still are
involved in it.

A return to the
Protestant Work Ethic,
free enterprise, and
National pride.

I cut my "political" eye teeth on
the electoral system, when as an
innocent and idealistic ninth grader,
I worked on a campaign to elect a
local peace candidate to Congress. My
parents drove me to his headquarters
after school and on weekends, and
even let me miss school to work on
election day. They thought that I
would grow out of it; and today I
almost laugh when I realize how
pleased they'd be if I had stayed
put. Republican as they were, they
would have preferred me as a staunch
Democratic liberal than as a revolu-
tionary feminist. At least, I could
have been respectable.

Then, the summer after high school,
still too young to vote, I devoted
myself to the McGovern campaign. In
a few months as an office regular,

I worked myself into assisting with
press relations. I can remember the
excitement in the headquarters -

the rosy glow of fresh and hopeful
politics - and the total unreality
of the campaign. As if locked away
from the real world, we were carried
along on each other's energy. The is-
sue was the Vietnam War, and saving
all the nice, white, middle-class
young men from having to go. Human
rights, racism, economic injustice,
unemployment were all words we
batted around, but somehow took less
seriously than our own enthusiasm.

A return to God, the
church, the Family.

I didn't see how hollow the cam-
paign was at the time, but I began
to feel it. I left the campaign to
go to college (in a way an exchange
of one ivory tower for another) and
discovered that most students were
apathetic at best - my roommate
did not even know the name of her
state governor, and even in a school
of predominantly draft-aged men,
there was little understanding of
the war. A rude awakening, especial-
ly as I found out how hard it is to
speak up when surrounded by hosti-
lity and apathy. I remember that
election night, too. I sat in my room
to avoid hearing results, and
insults.

After that time, I underwent a
period of reassessment, although I
can't recall any conscious process.
All through school, I maintained a
“liberal profile"; and at some point
in a political science class, I
realized that my fire for tradition-
al politics had burnt itself out. I
was still interested, but only from

afar because I had yet to figure out
how the “American way” related to
my life as a woman.

During my last two and one half
years of school, I held down a job
to cover expenses; and now I realize
that as a turning point. I remember
feeling closer to my co-workers than
any of my roommates because we talked
about work and politics in a real,
and angry way. Gone were the "ideals"
and the naive belief in this candi-
date or that one. We weren't talk-
ing about getting out the vote, but
about getting up earlier than the
rest of the campus so that we could
squeeze eight hours of pay into a
school day.

It was not long after that I stop-
ped calling myself a girl - both
literally and symbolically. Feminism
came fast when I started making the
connections; but it did not always
come easily. As I began to under-
stand more about the oppression of
women, I got further and further
away from what I had known about pol-
itics before. I also realized that
I could no longer hold on to what
had always seemed to me to be privi-
leges, even securities. No longer
could, or would I call on male pro-
tection, which in reality is a myth,
but it is an age-old one that gives
women a certain invisibility. As
feminists, we've fought to make our-
selves seen and heard - but there
are times for all of us that the
thought of being anonymous, and yes,
even protected, is comforting.

A return to the powerful
Self-interest of the white
male elite, military madness,
rampant heterosexism,
majoritarian mania.

And this is why I am writing about
November 4th, Ronald Reagan, and
electoral politics. The other night,
someone at work suggested that I
might be "overreacting"; and another,
more sympathetic woman tried to
soothe me with, "Maybe they're right
and we're wrong. Maybe Reagan will
even do some good. At least, maybe
he won't be as bad as we think."
Well, this time I wouldn't mind
being proven wrong, but I know bet-
ter than to lull myself to sleep
with that sugar pill. And the fear
in my body keeps cresting and break-
ing: I experience images of concen-
tration camps, or I try to pretend
that this is all a bad movie that
will end when I walk out of the theater.

Either way, I have felt frightened
and powerless off and on for days.
Sometimes, I wish that I did not
know as much about how the American
system works as I do; that I could
return to the warm womb of electoral
politics; that I could believe in
the protection of some being - per-
haps a truly benevolent president or
a kind god.

My mind has done even stranger
things than that. I have even found
myself wondering if I should reject

MORE ON PAGE 13

Suddenly I don't
feel like dancing.

© addendum by 1-5-80

with respect for Joyce Jeffers' dancers