Politics of Health

Big Mama Rag Vol. 5 No. 2

The Woman Alcoholic Needs To Acknowledge Problem

Anna Slavin

a recoveree.

AA.

the AA tradition of anonymity -

Everyone who drinks is not an alco-
holic; yet, in Colorado more than
sixty-seven thousand women (approxi-
mately 8%) are alcoholic. The Alcohol-
ism Councils of Colorado estimate that
each of these alcoholics directly af-
fects the lives of at least four other
people.

-Alcoholic mothers have a marked ten-
dency to have an alcoholic offspring.

-A recent study showed alcoholic mo-
thers had a total of five babies born
premature and stillborn and two dying
shortly after birth. Of the remaining
surviving 16 children, all had indica-
tions of impaired intellectual perfor-
mance when tested at seven years of
age.

-Twenty-four percent of alcoholic
deaths are violent.

-Thirty-three percent of those who
take their own lives are alcoholics,
their suicide rate is fifty-eight times
that of non-alcoholics.

-One tenth of the nation's drivers
are alcoholic.

-Drinking drivers and pedestrians
cause more than 25,000 traffic deaths
in the U.S. each year.

There are few of us who are not af-
fected by alcoholism; as a community
we all suffer. If we want to resolve
this problem and extend the love and
understanding to the alcoholic that we
extend to other sick people, early de-
tection of the disease is necessary.

There are many medical, psychological
and sociological theories which at-
tempt to define alcoholism. The ge-
nerally accepted medical definition is
the progressive failure of the body to
metabolize the sugar in alcohol, link-
ed with the mental obsession and denial
that this process is taking place. One

of the interesting facts that is agreed on is that alcohol-
ism is not caused by alcohol alone.

Too many people can drink safely to
think otherwise. Alcoholism is a com-
plex disease which affects a person
mentally, physically and emotionally.
Therefore, recovery depends on all
three aspects being treated; mere ab-
stinence will not arrest the disease.
Psychological and sociological data

on female alcoholics often show an in-
ability of these women to accept their
feminine identity as prescribed by the
culture. As alcoholics, they use al-
cohol to escape the entire sex-role
conflict. Although we all have sex-role
adjustment problems, only the alcoholic
chooses to deal with it in this way.

The causes of alcoholism are unclear;
however, some of the symptoms can be
detected with a minimum amount of know-
ledge. Since the prime symptom of

alcoholism is its denial factor, early
detection of alcoholism is difficult.
Often those close to the alcoholic as
well as the alcoholic herself deny the
problem. There is a story that cir-
culates in AA about the woman consoling
the mother on the death of her alcohol-
ic daughter and inquiring why the daugh-
ter had never tried AA. The all too
typical response from the bereaved mo-
ther being, "Oh, she wasn't that bad."
The following symptoms were compiled
by Marty Mann, a recovered alcoholic
woman and founder of the National
Council on Alcoholism.

If you would like to speak to a recovered alcoholic you can call any of

these women. You needn't give your name.

Zoey: 333-6758
Frances: 733-4291
Karen: 832-7479
Maggie: 832-3944
Peg: 377-9895

AA Women's Groups:

Woman to Woman

St. Barnabas Church
13th and Vine

Tel: 832-3944

Tuesday 8pm

Tel:

Ladies Choice

Women's Special
1600 York St.
377-3620
Monday 8pm

Stepping Stones

AA: 322-5636 9-5

AA: 322-4440 24 hours

Al-Anon: Friends and Families of
Alcoholics 321-8785 9-5

Women Stag Group

Christ Community

Church
8085 E Hampden Ave
Tel: 755-0107

3947 Tennyson 065 Emerson
Tel: 238-6664 Tel: 831-7076
Tuesday 7pm Tuesday 8pm Wednesday
Thursday 8pm
12 Steps up for Women Wednesday Nite Ladies Let it begin with me
Call for locations 88 Pennsylvania Gethsemane Lutheran
Tel: 427-5620 Tel: 757-4795 Church
Wednesday 8pm Wednesday 8:30pm Tel: 452-4155
Thursday 8pm
Denver Area Women's Group
1317 York St.
Tel: 322-4155 Each AA Group has its own flavor-- if you
Thursday 8pm don't like the one you pick, try another.

Makes promises to herself: will do
better next time; to others: knows her
limit and intends to stick to it. Tells
lies: minimizes or conceals number of
drinks she had, and whether she was
drunk. Gulps drinks. Takes drinks be-
fore going to party or bar where there
will be drinking. Must have drinks at
certain times: before lunch, after work,
before dinner, before special events.
Must have drinks for tired feeling,
nerves, worries, depression: shattering
day at the office - frantic day at home.
Eating habits not much affected al-
though incipient alcoholic may toy with
food after too much drinking before

meals, or voracious hunger induced by

too much drinking. Blackouts can occur
at this stage: blackouts - not passing
out - are memory lapses while drinking.
This stage lasts from
months to five years.
Promises and lies come thick and fast
are necessary to hide the fact that her
drinking is different, to minimize a-
mount she drinks, to build up the myth that
she can stop if she wishes, to deflect
criticism, to prevent scenes, to save
home or job. Gulps drinks to avoid
waiting for slow ones, always insists
on making the drinks at home or out.
Prefers pre-meal drinking at bar in-
stead of home; arrives high, late or
both, sooner or later doesn't show at
all. Eating is irregular, made up by
eating at odd times, day and night. Al-
though she is always tired, nervous,
worried, depressed and must drink for
it, her ambition and energy are not al-
ways affected at this stage. Some
new symptoms are drinking times are
added to each episode, drinking alone.
Signs of drinking show at embarrassing
times; weekend bouts, Monday morning
hangovers (flu), morning drink; she
starts going on the wagon, increased
irritability during periods of non-
drinking. Hangovers are unlike the
non-alcoholic hangovers as they include
physical near collapse, mental remorse,
emotional self-disgust, terrifying self
doubt, indescribable attack on nerves.
Nausea is now frequent morning-after
experience, but still rare during
drinking. Blackouts occur with more
frequency and longevity; she hadn't
already begun mixing sedatives with
alcohol; drinking; she usually begins at this
stage.

Symptoms:

The alcoholic drinks to live and lives
to drink; rarely wants to eat; when

she does she gorges like a wolf. Drunk-
en behavior usually takes place at the
wrong time; in office or at important
function. Many alcoholics, while sod-
den with drink, can appear at these
functions and give the impression that they
are sober. Drinking bouts increase in
frequency and intensity; periods of be-
ing on the wagon occur less. Irritability and emotional response are
fairly constant. She will be fired
from her job or quit for no apparent rea-
son. Is not fundamentally dishonest,
but will now do anything to get money
for drinks. She watches the horrible ef-
fects of her drinking on her loved ones
with apparent indifference. Loses sense
of time.

An alcoholic does not necessarily
have all these symptoms or have them in
these particular stages. Diagnosis of
the problem depends more on the totality
of behavioral patterns than on any
specific symptom. My personal diagnos-
tic technique is based on the philo-
sophical attitude of the late cowboy,
Lyndon B. Johnson, who was fond of
saying, "If it looks like a duck, and
it walks like a duck, and it quacks
like a duck, then you can be damned
sure that it is a duck."

Alcoholism is a paradoxical disease:
In the earliest stage the alcoholic
isn't aware of the seriousness of her
problem on a conscious level; however,
at least on some level she becomes
aware enough to be defensive about her
drinking. While we know that alcohol-
ism is not caused by alcohol alone, re-
covery does depend on abstinence. Ul-
timately diagnosis and the decision
to do something about alcoholism lies
with the alcoholic who suffers from a
disease whose major symptom is denial
of the disease.

If you are worried about your drink-
ing you might try the following test
of your control. If you are not an
alcoholic you are bound to win. Don't
make the mistake of testing yourself
by going on the wagon. That is not
a test, because even the most advanced
alcoholic can sometimes do that for a
considerable time.

For the next six months decide that you will stick to a certain
number of drinks a day, that number
to be not less than one and not more
than three. If you are not a daily
drinker, then the test should be the
stated number of drinks from one to
three on those days when you do drink.
Whatever number you choose must not be
exceeded under any circumstances - no
exceptions whatever can be made for
happy times, sad times, or sheer bore-
dom. Absolutely no exceptions or the
test has been failed.