more-on page@
A Feminist's Battle With Cancer

JS: Either that, or macho it through and probably hit and kill a few people. That's one thing that I'm most proud of. When I pulled the bus off, I knew it would be the end of my bus driving time. But I did it because I didn't want to kill a kid.

BMR: Were you scared about money then? I mean, you did not even know what was wrong, but you knew that you could not even keep your job anymore.

JS: I don't remember, but I'm sure I was. It's now that I'm more worried about money than at that point. Luckily, my father came through and is giving me some money, and also the lesbians in Colorado Springs are faithfully sending me about $100 a month. That's an incredible amount of help. Also, a lot of people have given me presents and a lot of help. Giving little presents when someone is really ill is very meaningful.

I think recovery after a long illness is really important. It's about a year now and I'm still recovering, and it will probably be another good year before I'm fully recovered. That's if the cancer doesn't come back. And I just refuse it to come back. It doesn't have permission to be in my body. And I think that kind of will really helps.

I had a slight stroke in January which set me back and I was falling again, and at that point I didn't know if I'd have stroke after stroke and basically you can stroke yourself to death, until you're a marshmallow or something. But luckily it was just a small one, and I did recover from it. I think the last month is when I have actually felt good, but I still can't walk very well. But I'm getting better and better by the day.

There's incredible pain.

I think one thing about recovery - you've got to go past the pain. There's no easy ride on the cancer train.

There was a cancer support group at the hospital, but basically there were no other lesbians. There were men and women. They gave me a lot of support. But they were not lesbians or people that I feel free to get the kind of intimacy and support that I'm used to in the lesbian community.

If you're a political person, you want to share your experience. You want it to be used to the greatest advantage. I don't want anyone else to go through what I went through.

BMR: Do you think that the fact that we're political means that we try and dissect and analyze in great detail these aspects of ourselves and sickness, maybe more than other people would? That we are used to approaching things that way?

JS: Yeah, but you can't understand it. I have a lot of theories, but basically it's a monumental experimental thing. You can't analyze it. It's like a tidal wave that comes over you when you have cancer, and you have to bail yourself out. The metaphors are mixed, but you just have to do the best you can. Some people can do it with more finesse, with more ability to talk about it. But really with a major illness there's so many responses, and it's not all heroics. I'm more public, but there's people who can't do that.

from page 17

There is a privacy in illness that should not be broken. A kind of sacredness of your pain and suffering and being. It's very hard to talk about it. I do as much as I can, but every person has a part of this experience that's essentially private, and that's the way it should be. There is a part that, I at least find that I cannot share. It's unnamed and it should remain that way. It's more spiritual; you can't intellectualize. And it's also the most beautiful and the most painful part of this. And basically I have an ethical system, and part of that is to try and understand the nature of life, and everyone else's life. To try and make sense of why I'm here, and who I am.

BMR: What are your feelings about the future?

JS: I'm looking forward to the summer, to reflect in a warm environment. It's like being a kid. You know how kids grow during the summer vacations. Also, I just want to try and test my muscles and have some fun.

about the cover artist

Considered by many feminists to be La Patrona (patron saint) of all women artists who struggle with painful personal imagery, Mexican artist Frida Kahlo distinguished herself with personal and artistic honesty. Plagued with medical problems all of her short life (from 1910-1954), Kahlo painted many self-portraits that symbolically dealt with physical and emotional pain.

She began to paint in her youth when bedridden by a crippling accident; and although "fame" came to her through her relationship with well-known muralist Diego Rivera, her work stands on its own as a kind of chronicle of her failing health, her troubled marriage to Rivera, and a devastating miscarriage.

From childhood, Kahlo developed a strong political and social consciousness, largely through exposure to the ideas behind the Mexican Revolution.

And at the age of 13, she belonged to the Young Communist League. Unlike other young women her age, she wore pants, had short hair, and took herself seriously as an artist.

Kahlo died near Mexico City at the age of 44, finally escaping years of suffering. She left behind many graphic paintings, all of them pieces that confront pain head-on. The Broken Column (on the cover) depicts a cracked and crumbling column in place of Kahlo's own injured spine. And the orthopedic corset, as well as the nails in her body, suggest the imprisonment of her invalidism and pain.

Fighting To Live from page 11

that he wasn't infallible. What a change. He is still helping me to regain my health. And I guess that really explains a major difference between traditional medicine and a holistic approach: The patient is actively involved in understanding health problems and overcoming them instead of being a laboratory specimen, without feelings who is merely tested and poked and experimented on.

The battle for good health is one that is not won in a day, week or month. It is a life-long commitment. Although I once took it for granted, I never will again. My body still seems to fail me at times, but I understand what symptoms are signals and I'm still learning to listen to these signals and take appropriate action. I don't mean to say that everything is perfectly wonderful now.

I still get depressed and discouraged at times. I resent the inconveniences. I'm struggling to learn to get on with life and yet I have so many doubts and questions. I have spent so much time alone and often gotten so self-involved that I feel that I don't know how to be a friend or socialize anymore. My illness and related experiences have changed me in ways that I still don't understand. I still need time to sort it all out. For some time now a large part of my image has been related to illness and disability; it's a hard image to shake. It's not like you can be sick one day and totally well the next. It's a process with many highs and lows, good days and bad days, excitement, hope and depression. I'm in process. It's a difficult process, but it's certainly progress.

Big Mama Rag, June, 1981 - Page 21