Culture

Violence Against Women in Art

Recognizing the Male Artist as an Enemy

Constance Perenyi

Big Mama Rag, Vol. 6, No. 8

Peter Webb: I believe some "Women's Lib" supporters have objected to your seeming exploitation of the female as sexual object, especially in your sculptures.

Allen Jones: Yes, but I think that the cause of female emancipation is trivialized when someone gets uptight about a piece of sculpture, whilst enormous problems of inequality still exist amongst live human beings.

Two years ago, I began my undergraduate thesis in art history with the following paragraph: “The history of sexual art is a history of women. Until recently it was not the legacy of females as artists, but of women as objects. The victims and venuses of men's graphic imaginations, women have been forced into the narrowed roles created by male projection.

the exploitation of women in art."

We need not distinguish between erotic and pornographic expression to find the repeated images that represent

Today, having gained some distance from my historical background, and having experienced large doses of the real world, I want to amend my opening statement to read, "We need not distinguish between pornography and fine arts to find examples of the complete subjugation of women at the hands of the 'masters.’” Pornography is violence against women, and so is fine art in many of the contexts we have been forced to accept!

Much of the anger

I felt as I came into a feminist consciousness grew out of my studies of traditional art. Now, while I am no longer willing to devote my energy to patriarchal precedents, I still believe that we, as feminists striving to create our own contexts, must understand what has come before us in order to overcome our oppression.

And one of the problems of looking at the question of violence in art is its enormous subtlety. Probably the most damaging imagery evades us because we are so used to it. In a survey I conducted in a college human sexuality class (a women's school), several women responded to slides of highly offensive pop art by writing in "No Response."

Many of us are accustomed to being insulted. Often, when women are represented in art, humanity is absent.

Once again, I am writing about men's art, and I hope that this will

discussion of this topic is essential. In many ways, our enemy is the most articulate spokesman against himself.

ART AS A WEAPON AGAINST WOMEN

If we let men hang themselves, they inevitably will. The rope in this case is intellectual - the theories of the artists themselves. These quotes were collected by Valerie Jaudon and Joyce Kozloff for an article on “Art Hysterical Notions” for Heresies, Volume 4.

Joseph Hirsch, from "Common Cause," D.W. Larkin, 1949: The great artist has wielded his art as a magnificent weapon truly mightier than the sword...

Diego Rivera, "The Revolutionary Spirit in Modern Art," 1932: I want to use my art as a weapon.

Pablo Picasso, "Statement about the artist as a Political Being," 1945: "No, painting is not done to decorate apartments. It is an instrument of war for attack and defense against the enemy."

Manifesto of the Futurist Painters, 1910: The dead shall be buried in the earth's deepest bowels! The threshold of the future will be free of mummies! Make room for youth, for violence, for daring!

Andre Malraux, The Voices of Silence, 1953: Now a barbarian art can keep alive only in the environment of the barbarism it expresses.

While we could interpret the above quotes without inferring violence towards women, the fact remains that men - historians, artists, and warriors - have always regarded women as property to be possessed, enemies to be vanquished. In their notes on purity, Jaudon and Kozloff talk about this male compulsion in terms of reductivism and function:

Among artists as diverse as Sullivan, Ozengant, and de Kooning, we found the sexual metaphor of ‘stripping down’ art and architecture to make them 'nude' or ‘pure.’

- The assumption is that the artist can make the work of art (object) female.

Beyond that assumption is the reality that very often the male artist is a rapist!

MORE AND MORE MESSAGES

The images of women in art are increasingly disturbing as we begin to analyze different periods and styles and find similarities of expression. In an article written for Artforum in 1973, historian/critic Carol Duncan examines "Virility and Domination in Early 20th Century Vanguard Painting." Many of her remarks transcend the epoch she addresses, and become universal. In describing a painting finished in Germany in 1909, she is talking about an approach that is common to much of art history:

The artist seems to attack his subject, a naked woman, with barely controlled energy. His painterly gestures are large, spontaneous, sometimes vehement; and his colors are tense, raw, and strident. The features and the audacious manipulation of the model's body proclaim his unhesitant and uninhibited response to sexual experience. Leaning directly over his model, the artist fastens his attention mainly to her head, breasts, and buttocks, the latter twisted violently towards him.

And:

Here too, the artist reduces a woman to so much animal flesh, a headless body whose extremities trail off into ill-defined hands and feet... The artist's eye is a hyper-mate lens that ruthlessly filters out everything irrelevant to the most basic genital urge.

Ruthlessly rearranging women, male artists have claimed their space in an unquestioning culture. I am still amazed that so many have gotten away with it, and am horrified by their willingness to share their violent perceptions:

Hans Bellmer, talking about his photographs of mutilated dolls: "... I was aware of what I called the physical unconsciousness, the body's underlying awareness of itself. I tried to rearrange the sexual elements of a girl's body like a sort of plastic anagram. I remember describing it thus: the body is like a sentence that invites us to rearrange it, so that its real meaning becomes clear through a series of endless anagrams."

And: "I admire de Sade very much, especially his idea that violence towards the loved one can tell us more about the anatomy of desire than the simple act of love..."

Allen Jones, talking about his fetish paintings of women's legs: "I liked the idea of a damaged image and I can see now that the emotions had a latent attraction for me from the start. I am, of course, aware of the fetish element in my work but I think this is suggested as much by my treatment of the painted surface, detachment and repetition of a theme, as by any particular obsession of mine. Repetition has another function, it depersonalizes the image. I do not want the figures to represent an individual. I want the image to be a sign for woman, not a portrait of her."

In a book by Wayland Young entitled Exos Denied, the author devises an excuse for the traditions of art that exploit women. He says that the male artist has access to limited sexual imagery so he chooses to work with what he knows for himself, what is left when he takes himself away; therefore, Young claims that for every representation of heterosexual coupling in European art, there is one of two women making love. He continues that these images are really of "two heterosexual women, such as the artist knew, doing things he had seen them doing with him." To make his tone more tolerable, Young again retreats back to his explanation of technical necessity; but even he admits that the subject of both lesbianism and masturbation

MORE ON PAGE 10

Have you ever wondered why male artists are called masters?

The answer is simple—

To them a woman is a mistress: An object to be taken apart

lip by lip

breast by breast

~

leg by leg

A model to be posed
exposed

sodomized
victimized

raped...

Have you ever wondered why women learn self-hate?

The answer is simple—

We have been manipulated, disintegrated, and shamed,

Painted, photographed, sculpted, and filmed; We have been served as dessert at star parties Undressed as appetizers in SoHo studios

And hung in museums clearly captured

in compromise...

We stare back with vacuous eyes from billboards with seductive glances from centerfolds

with mangled self-images

from canvasses.

And we wonder where women learn self-hate.

Aesthetics? That means beauty

Beauty as defined by masters

Beauty as designed by the men who put together The Perfect Woman by pushing her and pulling her,

taking her measurements,

then taking her identity...

Violence?

That means domination—

But then, we ask for it don't we?

After all, we were made with breasts

to be enlarged

legs to be elongated

bodies to be decapitated.

And we were made to be ANGRY!

So if I have enraged you that was my intention.

Constance Perenyi