‘Firm In Stand Of Non-Collaboration’

Saxe Plea: Guilty

Feminist and war resister Susan  
Saxe will be eligible for parole in  
six years, as a result of her de-  
cision in January to reject a new  
trial in favor of pleading guilty to  
reduced charges.

In a statement to supporters, she  
stressed that the decision was not a  
"deal. I did not give them anything  
for my ‘reduced sentence’ except my  
own guilty plea. I remain absolutely  
firm in my stand of non-collabora-  
tion."

Saxe said the decision was strict-  
ly a tactical one, based on the like-  
lihood that a new trial would bring  
a state victory and multiple life  
sentences with little or no hope of  
parole.

Saxe was arrested in March, 1975,  
after 4-1/2 years of living under-  
ground, part of the time in the  
Philadelphia women's community. In  
June, 1975, she pleaded guilty to fed-  
eral charges of bank robbery and de-  
struction of government property on  
condition that the government never  
compel her to testify about anyone  
who may have helped or associated  
with her during her underground years.

In addition, the government called  
off an investigation that could have  
led to a grand jury attack on the  
women's community in Philadelphia.

Saxe received concurrent sentences  
of ten and two years, and was sent to  
Massachusetts to stand trial on  
state charges.

‘We Fought The State To A Stand-  
still, Which Is A Partial Victory...

In her statement last month she  
said: "In 1970 I did commit illegal  
armed actions aimed against property  
and wealth. These actions came from  
a sense of outrage against the in-  
justices of sexism, racism and im-  
perialism, and particularly the im-  
mediate and pressing crisis of the  
Vietnam War.

"Without getting into a complex  
discussion of the theoretical and  
tactical pros and cons of armed  
struggle, I can still say that the  
politics that led me to those actions  
have not faded, but ripened to a  
deeper commitment and understanding.

"I do not believe that the same  
criminals who perpetuate and profit  
from war, repression and exploitation  
have the right to judge and punish  
those who resist. That is the funda-  
mental principle upon which I hope  
anyone's support for me is based.”

Last September, Saxe went to trial  
in Boston on charges of armed robbery  
and felony murder, stemming from a  
1970 Massachusetts bank robbery in  
which a policeman was killed. (Saxe  
was not accused of murder; the felony  
murder law makes anyone convicted of  
any felony liable for murder if any-  
one is killed during the felony.)

The trial ended in a hung jury--  
an outcome which Saxe believes is a  
result of excellent defense committee  
organizing, legal work and a changing  
climate of increasing political sup-  
port.

But with the impending second  
trial, due to start in January, a new  
judge had been assigned--one with a  
reputation for harsh sentences and  
heavy-handed methods. In addition,  
major ground rules of the first trial  
were thrown out--particularly one  
which reduced the number of challenges  
the defense was entitled to during  
jury selection. (That was a crucial  
point; polls taken before the first  
trial showed that 86% of Boston res-  
idents believed she was "probably  
guilty.")

Meanwhile the prosecutor and the  
judge decided to offer a charge of  
manslaughter and a sentence of 12-14  
years. Originally they had stuck to  
nothing less than a second degree mur-  
der plea.

In weighing a 12-14 year sentence  
(which will be served concurrently  
with the federal sentence) against  
the substantial risks of a new trial,  
Saxe said she went through this pro-  
cess:

“Equally important to me (as the  
practical considerations) was the  
political consideration. I do not in-  
tend to defend this choice as politi-  
cally pure or exemplary. It was, I  
believe, the best of two bad alterna-  
tives. If I had gone through with  
another trial I would probably have  
been convicted. If not, then at the  
third trial or the fourth—all at  
great cost in time, energy and money.  
Once convicted and sentenced, I would  
have two legal alternatives.

More on Page 18

Prosecution Challenge  
Wanrow Retrial?

In what could mean a new delay for  
Yvonne Wanrow, the Spokane County  
Prosecutor has announced that he will  
seek a reargument of her case before  
the State Supreme Court.

Wanrow, a 29-year-old Colville  
Indian woman, was found guilty of mur-  
der by an all-white jury in 1973.

Her crime: she shot a known child-  
molester after he had barged into the  
house where she was watching over her  
sister's and a friend's children. She  
was on crutches at the time.

Her conviction was overturned in  
1975, on grounds that a tape recording  
of a phone conversation between Yvonne  
and the police after the shooting was  
inadmissible. After an unsuccessful  
challenge by the prosecutor, the State  
Supreme Court recently upheld that  
reversal. (See Jan.-Feb. 1977 BmR.)

Prosecutor Donald Prockett has now  
petitioned the judges to reconsider  
on grounds the conversation was ad-  
missible. He contends that the law  
which says a phone call is private  
does not apply to a call to the police.

Prockett also claimed that the  
national press coverage of Wanrow's  
case “exaggerated, misreported and  
misinterpreted" the facts.

If the court decides to rehear the  
arguments, there is no time limit on  
when a retrial could take place.

--LNS

struggle

a continuing forum

Susan Saxe On The Politics  
Of Supporting Political Prisoners

A year and a half ago I was arrested in Philadelphia and found myself,  
as Shoshana so aptly put it when talking about her own arrest under similar  
circumstances, “in a very hard spot.“ After four and a half years on the  
FBI's Most Wanted List, and amid a rising tide of media hysteria aimed not  
only at me as an individual but at the whole spectrum of political resist-  
ance of the sixties and early seventies, I was labelled a dangerous crimin-  
al, a violent threat to society—the whole mad-dog image that the mass  
media in this country like to throw at everyone who threatens the law 'n  
order of the real mad-dog killers, the violent class of men who rule our  
country.

The political trial has throughout history been the tool of the govern-  
ment, the stage upon which it demonstrates what it will tolerate and what it  
will crush, the blackboard on which it draws the line that it dares us to  
cross. The political trial has also, therefore, served as the crucible with-  
in which all political movements and people have had to test their strength,  
determine their directions, and come out on one side or the other. In a  
political trial, whether it is a sixteenth century witch trial or a twenti-  
eth century "criminal" trial, the government is massing its police power,  
its propaganda weaponry, and every vestige of its “legitimacy” to enforce  
its right to punish those who oppose its power, and more importantly to re-  
inforce in the minds of the people its right to do so.

Amid the pomp and circumstances of the courtroom, the government is saying  
to the people, "Look at how we are protecting you from this threat. The def-  
endant is your enemy and the legitimate target of your rage." And while it  
is saying that out loud, it is whispering in the other ear, “This is what  
will happen to you if you cross the line we have drawn. Force which side  
you're on—it's much easier just to go along with this program. You can even  
maintain the illusion of your principles, as long as you stop where we tell  
you to stop."

What makes a political trial political is the conflict between the govern-  
ment which claims the right to try and punish, and the people who claim for  
ourselves the right to decide who our friends and enemies are. There is no  
middle ground in that arena. That is the nature of a political trial; you  
are on the side of the defendant or the side of the state. A political trial  
is not like the general political forum with its many sides and many fac-  
tions, with the room and the luxury to draw the lines of your support closer  
around you, closer around those who agree more nearly with your politics. It  
is important to keep political struggle alive among our friends, to let a  
hundred flowers bloom, but we can never allow the Man to crush even one of  
our flowers, even one on the far side of the garden from us.

A political trial is a diversion. In the fifties, while Nixon and his gang  
hatched their corrupt, clandestine plots and clawed their way to power  
through theft, bribery and deceit, they held public trials of "communists"  
as a front behind which to hide the real threat which they represented. It  
was easier and safer for the average person to be taken in by the secret  
documents allegedly hidden in pumpkins and Russian agents lurking in alleys  
with cut-up Jello boxes than to stand up against a bunch of power-mad mili-  
tarists who were in fact taking over the government.

Each time it embarks on a political trial, the government brings its pro-  
paganda machinery into play. The venom it spreads about its enemies comes to  
an ugly head. Lines are drawn. Public hysteria is incited. One individual or  
group is targeted, painted in technicolor, larger than life, the personifi-  
cation of everything that threatens the status quo. The defendant is dehuman-  
ized, made easy NOT to identify with, blown up out of proportion to every-  
day life, blown up so that the details are blurred, and we cannot see our own  
faces in the dock. This is the smoke screen behind which the enemy divides  
us; sifts our courage from our dreams; separates us from our allies, from  
ourselves, from our future. We are on trial, but we do not recognize our-  
selves through the haze of propaganda.

Building support in the face of the enormous propaganda capacity of the  
government is a real struggle, and it has to be won over and over again with  
each political case. Shoshana gets out on bail and is able to reassert her  
humanity in the minds of some people, while Susan Saxe remains a larger-than-  
life monster. So, Shoshana, who is now "respectable" because a jury acquitted  
her, speaks in support of Susan Saxe. Support builds and a jury cannot con-  
vict Saxe, so now all of a sudden everyone takes a second look. But it is  
the politics, the support or lack of it, that determined the verdict. Guilt  
or innocence are technicalities set up by the Man. If the political target  
happens to have done something illegal, it's convenient.

I remember talking to Helen Sobell about how when her husband Morton and  
their friends Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were on trial, other people who were  
on defense committees for other political cases were afraid to be associated  
with them. Years later, when some of the hysteria had died down and Ethel  
and Julius were dead, and when Morton was finally pardoned, they were urged  
not to associate themselves with other political defendants who, I suppose,  
constituted a more current “threat.” The advice was not heeded. I have seen  
this same phenomenon happen in my own case with people who will support more  
“respectable” political targets but will not support me, or who didn't sup-  
port me before I became "respectable" but are having second thoughts now.  
And then there are some who seem to feel safe enough supporting me but who  
don't think I should be associated, for example, with Emily and Bill Harris  
who, it seems, are still two-headed terrorist monsters. Well, I was a two-  
headed terrorist monster once myself, and maybe I'm too close to monsterhood  
to see the logic of these arguments... All I can see is which side I'm on,  
and it sure isn't the side of the prosecutor.

The purpose of this whole long appeal is to urge you to support all polit-  
ical prisoners, to oppose the witch burners and not the witches. Yes, it's  
hard and dangerous. You may be labelled a witch yourself. You may not be a  
witch, but you have to choose, because the witch hunters are far more dan-  
gerous to you than the shadow they project to misdirect your fear. Your sup-  
port is the only thing standing between any political prisoner and the full  
power and wrath of the state. And believe me—we are the only thing standing  
between you and the same.