Women in Canada

A Punishing Way To

Maureen O'Hara

When a 45-year-old mother of three was sentenced to 10 days in jail last month for defrauding the Provincial Community and Social Services Ministry while receiving mother's allowance, the story made almost every newscast in Ottawa.

Interest in the Pauline Aubin case started building after politicians, and the judge handling the case started criticizing the welfare regulations affecting women on mother's allowance, who like Aubin, must try to raise their families on incomes far below the recognized poverty level in Canada.

Aubin was found guilty of failing to report living with a man while receiving mother's allowance. She said that she did not report it because she was afraid her mother's allowance would be reduced. In Ontario, a woman with two children receives an annual income of about $6000. That is about $3000 below the government established poverty line of $9766.

While saying he was forced to convict Aubin, Judge Rene Marin said such cases were always difficult because the people charged often need the money desperately.

"I may not agree with the legislation, but we have to follow the law," he said.

-LNS

When she is finished serving her jail sentence, Aubin, like other women convicted of defrauding the Province, will be required to repay the near $15,000 she collected over a four-year period from mother's allowance.

Aubin's case is not unusual, nor is her situation of financial desperation.

Carol Borrens of Ottawa, a mother of four, has been convicted of fraud and will be sentenced May 6. While awaiting sentencing, she and her children are staying at Interval House. Since Interval House is not a permanent address, she has been cut off of all benefits and has no income.

Borrens cashed her mother's allowance check at Christmas. It contained a Christmas bonus of $35.00. She then claimed she never received the check and was given a duplicate which she also cashed. She was caught, charged, and convicted.

"I knew in the end I'd get caught," she said. "I put it out of my mind. I knew it was wrong, but I didn't know what to do... I tried to find one (a solution) and I couldn't."

MPP Evelyn Gigantes raised the issue in the provincial legislature last November, after a 39-year-old mother of three, Pauline Hibbert of Ottawa, was sentenced to 30 days in jail after pleading guilty to defrauding the province of $6530 over three years while working full time as a cleaner.

Gigantes pointed out to Keith Norton, the Minister of Community and Social Services, that while working full time over three years, Hibbert didn't even manage to defraud the Ontario government of enough money to bring her and her family up to the poverty level.

"I don't think it is reasonable that a woman in her position, given the level of income maintenance provided for her in this province, should be put in jail when she's gone out to work full time and has failed to report it," she said.

"It makes me very angry to live in a community where a woman is sent to jail for having worked under conditions in which she has tried to raise her family and improve her ability to earn her own income and be independent and to see her put in jail by a judge who obviously thought the circumstances in the case were such that he was loath to put her in jail."

Gigantes suggested the Minister look into how many women in Ontario with families have been put in jail for perpetrating fraud under the regulations of the ministry.

"Don't you think that if you looked at those cases you might learn some very good reasons why your policies should change in this area and the amounts be increased to the poverty level?"

Norton said he didn't believe the matter was one that ought to be a preoccupation of his ministry and that it was a matter of criminal offense being committed and a matter for the administration of justice.

The government has approached the welfare fraud situation with a program to track down and persecute the offenders.

Criminal Comparison

Makers of three vaginal contraceptive suppositories must finally stop claiming that their products are as effective as pills or IUDs, according to the terms of an agreement recently hammered out by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The makers of Encare, Semicid, and S'Positive agreed to change their advertising and to state that their products are about as effective as vaginal foam. The consent agreement lets the companies off the hook without their having to correct or admit to previous misleading ads. The FTC acted against the companies after receiving over 100 complaints.

Gray Outlook

Retired women don't get a fair share when it comes to pensions is the conclusion of a "Gray Paper" published recently by the Older Women's League Educational Fund. In a report entitled "Older Women and Pensions: Catch 22," the League says older women now make up two-thirds of America's retired population; the poverty rate for these women is 60% higher than the poverty rate for retired men. As a result of sex discrimination in pension plans, the League says, only one of every six women over 65 receives a pension.

-Big Mama Rag

The publicized cases of women actually being jailed and losing custody of their children is focusing attention on the larger situation of the 427,000 single mothers in Canada, 68 percent of whom live below the poverty line. The circumstances that put them in that situation and lock them there are starting to be examined.

A recent video film produced by the Ottawa Tenants Council called "By the Skin of Our Teeth," examines the situation of single mothers struggling to keep their families going on below-poverty incomes.

The color video included interviews with women who talk about the social stigmas they must deal with and the situations that force them into a poverty existence and keep them there.

"I never considered not getting married...not having babies," Sue McDonald says, talking about the goals encouraged in young women.

"When marriage breaks down, a woman is left with broken dreams, babies, and nowhere to turn," she says.

"I had no choice but mother's allowance...working was almost impossible,” she continues. "I wasn't doing my job at work or at home ...(but) I couldn't hack the mother's allowance stigma."

McDonald says she felt forced to return to a marriage she knew wasn't going anywhere. "I tried to stick with it and had a nervous breakdown."

"Anyone who says we have enough (money) and don't want to work doesn't know what they're talking about," she adds.

Commentator Brenda Longfellow points out that when a woman is supported by a husband, it is considered respectable being a mother, but not so when the woman is a mother on her own.

"They think we're low-class people," another woman adds, "no one wants to help us."

Backbone

After spending all winter on the picket line, operators and cafeteria workers at Bell Canada have won a badly needed pay raise. Not one striker crossed the picket line in Quebec and Ontario. A Toronto operator, with 14 years of service, described the strike this way: "Backbone, that's what the strike has given us. We may have been a submissive bunch in the past, but after this strike, we'll be a force to be reckoned with."

Through the Looking Glass

Make Ends Meet

Bernice Roberts says she quit school because she wanted to help her mother who was trying to exist on mother's allowance. She was married at 17 because she thought that would free her from the hardships her mother had dealt with. She had a child when she was 18 and was separated at 19.

"I'm on my own, all by myself, with my son, and it's hard," she says. "I run out of money in the middle of the month...I'm not eating all the time...one or two meals a day."

She says she is worried about her sister who is doing well in school but wants to quit to help her mother. And about her son who she wants to have a better life than she and her mother.

A 1979 report by the National Council of Welfare called Women and Poverty points out that people are not poor because they deserve to be or because they come from a culture of poverty.

It states: "The fact that poverty in Canada is so overwhelmingly a female phenomenon challenges many popular notions... a more likely explanation for so much poverty in Canada...is that one half of the population is brought up on the assumption that it will always be financially taken care of by the other half."

"Because it is still taken for granted that women will assume the responsibility for raising the children and maintaining the home, they are improperly trained for paid jobs and are denied access to better positions with advancement opportunities. When the male provider fails to materialize, or leaves, or dies, women are suddenly told it is up to them to find ways to support themselves and their families."

The Tenants Council video also provides some statistics from another report by the National Council on Welfare on the child welfare system called "In the Best Interests of the Child."

The report found that in 1979 an Ontario single parent mother and one child together received $4860 from provincial social assistance. However, if that same child lived in a foster home, it cost the Toronto Children's Aid Society $6877—$2017 more than its family's annual welfare income—and $12,866 (two and a half times the welfare income) if it was in a group home.

"I may not be good at a lot of things, but I'm a good mother," says Sue McDonald. "Why make it hard for me to keep my children?"

Reprinted from Upstream, April 1980

Beetle Mania

Yvonne Ramsey was rather upset when her elementary school-age son brought home a reading book from his school in North Tyneside, England. Entitled "The Beetle and the Mouse," the book tells the story of a beetle who finds some money and decides she can now get a husband. She buys some jewelry and sits outside her house, waiting for a suitable husband to come along. The succession of beetles that offer to marry the beetle tell her that they will look after her but will beat her hard, with various weapons. At last, she marries a mouse because he says if he has to beat her, it will be gently, with his tail! This delightful story indicates, among other things, that beating is an essential part of marriage. When Yvonne sent a letter of protest, the headmistress agreed to remove the book.

Giving Credit

Sources of information for this month's hot briefs: New Women's Times, The Longest Revolution, Union WAGE, Off Our Backs, Gay Community News, Spare Rib, Women's Information and Referral Bulletin, the Guardian, HerSay, the Body Politic, Lesbian and Gay News, GPU News, Plexus, Ours, Harrisburg Area Women's News, New Directions for Women, The Progressive, and News and Letters.