STRUGGLE

How Therapy Is Damaging To Women

Nancy Schiff

Psychotherapy is part of a mental health system that, while claiming to cure women, is often part of their problem. The problem is this culture. It is not conducive to health for women - emotionally, physically, psychically, politically, etc. This will be true until this culture's institutions, that operate on the assumption that women are less than people, are replaced by women-identified values, i.e., a pro-life, pro-woman, holistic approach.

The purpose of any institution is to help maintain the culture that it is part of. The mental health establishment is no exception. What is defined as normal and healthy are those characteristics that help society maintain itself.

The goal of healing is to put people in touch with their personal power. Most therapy has nothing to do with healing; it has to do with maintaining social control.

The "Therapeutic" Relationship

The therapeutic model of therapist/client is a destructive one. In this society, we are used to listening to and trusting experts to tell us about ourselves and don't realize that each of us knows what is right for us. When a woman goes to a psychotherapist, she again finds herself in the powerful/powerless dynamic. The situation is one where the therapist defines what is normal and healthy.

Because this power dynamic exists, it is important for therapists to take responsibility to be aware of the political aspects that influence health, as well as physical, emotional, and psychic ones. This means seeing herself and the client as individuals in a social context. By this, I do not mean to treat or view a person merely as a composite of categories (sex, race, class, sexual preference), which would be reductionary and dehumanizing, but to acknowledge the huge significance of political and cultural factors in our lives. The therapist needs to acknowledge the power she has in that setting and be aware and responsible for the impact that she may have on the client.

People in emotional pain are in a vulnerable position. It is obvious to them that something in their lives is wrong, and they are generally open to hearing other suggestions or views about what is happening to them. This puts the therapist in a tremendous position of power, which she can choose to use well or abuse.

There is the assumption in therapy situations that the client is the one with the problem and may be labeled "crazy" or "mentally ill." The therapist is considered the healthy half of the relationship. One woman describes how her therapists used this to invalidate her perception of reality:

“The shrinks had the corner on my reality. They were after all in the business of curing mentally ill people, and I was, after all, sick... Because I was mentally ill, I had no credibility, they could believe my answers or not as they chose. If my answers were wrong, I was denying the problem. If I disagreed with them, I was hostile and/or experiencing resistance to treatment.

It was a double bind with no out. If I refused to answer their questions I was resistant; if I told them it didn't matter, I was denying. There was no way to convince them otherwise. Because they are the sane, normal healers and I was the insane, abnormal, sick patient, they got to decide what was true and real for me. And their job was to convince, persuade, seduce, or threaten me to accept that reality as my own."(1)

Being able to define one's self and one's reality is something that a person in a powerless position is not "allowed" to do by the person in the powerful position. This obviously helps maintain the power dynamic between them, since the powerful person is defining the situation. For the therapist to define the client's problem, which is generally what happens, keeps the client powerless and weak. It seems ironic that in a situation like therapy where the goal is supposedly to make the client emotionally stronger, the dynamic between therapist and client would be set up to make the client weaker. That is counter-productive and is one of the more destructive aspects of therapy.

The Myth of the Non-judgmental Therapist

A therapist needs to be upfront about what perspective she comes from, so what she says can be taken in that context and not as "the truth." A therapist who tells her clients that she doesn't make judgments is either extremely out of touch or outright lying. “Everyone makes judgments. Each of us has our perspective and belief system that we use to approach the world. Usually, the therapist's view maintains the status quo.

Many therapies stress how important it is for the therapist to be “objective” and “non-judgmental" and have no “vested interests." In reality, it is impossible for a therapist to do this. "Therapists do have ‘vested interests‘; at the very least, they want to get paid and/or have an influence." (2)

On Personal Responsibility

The big offense of therapy is that it tells the person that the problem is inside her. From the minute a woman accepts that something is wrong with her, that she is indeed "crazy" or "sick," she is in a vulnerable and dangerous position. There is the assumption that if she is sick, she can be cured. The cure will be therapy. The emphasis is on changing her. In some ways, this is a comforting idea. It makes the situation seem more easily solved. If a woman believes she needs to change herself, hard as it may seem, it is a small task compared to changing the entire society.

So the search begins, to find what inside her has gone wrong. Her past experiences are generally explored, with a special emphasis on her relationships with her parents. She is told to be more in touch with her emotions and learn to express them. The therapist's job is to find what is wrong with the woman, not to confront political issues such as sexism, racism, and classism.

Instead, she is diagnosed and often given a psychiatric label. These labels are another means the psychiatric establishment uses to keep women down. Categorizing her is dehumanizing and invalidates what she says. Because the attitude is, who listens to crazy people? The psychiatric labels, such as schizophrenic, manic-depressive, etc., are more commonly though not exclusively used by psychiatrists to fit people into their model of sickness. Then the psychiatrist can give the woman a drug for her disease. The drugs used keep the woman from seeing her situation clearly; it numbs her of her pain but does not eliminate the cause of her pain.

All women suffer from the limited definition of normality to which psychiatrists act as policemen. The feminist movement has helped loosen the definition of mental health slightly for some groups of women regarding sex roles. (3) This is only true to a point. While it is fairly acceptable to be for equal rights, a woman who is a radical feminist and/or lesbian is stepping too far out of her role to be tolerated by society. For a woman to be a radical feminist and/or lesbian by cultural standards is to be sick. This is because she is not accepting the rightness of male authority and misogyny, and institutions that uphold them, such as marriage, romantic love, and heterosexuality.

If a woman attempts to act on her beliefs, without enough visible support from other women, it is likely that she will be labeled mad and end up either in the office of a therapist or in a mental institution. Neither of these results enables her to be a powerful revolutionary. In either case, she is told that the problem is all in her head and she'd better conform. She is not given what she needs, which may be support to find other women who share her feelings and ideas to work with towards more effective political actions.

When women become more aware of how they are oppressed, they often go through a period of intense anger. No one likes an angry woman, least of all a therapist (unless, of course, she is willing to hit pillows, or use boffing sticks, or role play about being angry, or some other tactic that the therapist finds socially acceptable). If she directs the anger at society or worse at the therapist, especially when there is just cause, her perceptions are invalidated, and she is told her anger is a symptom of her problem. It's much more socially acceptable if a woman turns her anger inward and becomes depressed and/or suicidal than to express that rage in an outward manner. Being depressed, she fits her role and doesn't cause as much trouble for other people because she's under control.

Our socialization is very complete. I have known several lesbian feminists who have committed suicide. It seems as though we all have internalized society's values to such a large degree that when we step too far out of line, we punish/destroy ourselves. It is only possible to be “different” without much support for a certain amount of time. Then the tension becomes too much to handle and the woman compromises or becomes self-destructive.

These are excerpts from Saralinda's diary. Saralinda is a friend who committed suicide in July 1976. It was printed in Madness Network News. She was a member of Wimmin Against Psychiatric Assault.

"I can't see how I can live my life without compromising. I don’t want to live my life that way. If I try to live my life without compromising, then I know I will be defeated. Straight male money values are very powerful. I feel defeated before I begin.

I want to fight, but I feel so pessimistic. I feel I can't win. I feel alone because I'm not in touch with any women who are committed, who are willing to put their lives on the line. I feel being alone will hurt me more than if I didn't continue to live another day. It would be more comforting to be with a group of women who feel as I do, but I think we would still end up dead. Eventually, what we're fighting against is so powerful.

I am very down and not seeing some things. My feelings are very strong and real and it's going to kill me sooner or later. I am so bitter, angry, and frustrated. It is not all in my head; my feelings are due to this society.

Some people expect me to fight this society instead of killing myself. (Let the man destroy me.) But why do these people demand it of me when they aren't even fighting? They are compromising. That's not for me. My feelings are too strong."(4)

Like I said earlier, when lesbians and feminists do go to therapists, their

CONTINUED ON PAGES 8 & 9

7