Yvonne Wanrow Faces the Courts Again in April

Yvonne Wanrow, a Coleville Indian
woman being prosecuted for murder for
defending herself and her children
against a known child rapist (see
the March issue of Big Mama Rag for
a detailed account), will be retried
this spring after exhausting appeals
and over six years of court harass-
ment. Spokane, Washington Prosecutor
Brockett still has the option to drop
the charges; however, he has insisted
on retrial. Yvonne Wanrow's pre-trial
date has been set in Spokane court
for April 16th.

Yvonne Wanrow's fight is part of
the struggle against a system which
not only tolerates, but perpetuates
emotional, legal and physical vio-
lence against women. Yvonne is also
part of the struggle of Native Ameri-
can peoples for national sovereignty
and survival.

Yvonne's Defense Committee asks
you to show your support. Money is
urgently needed as legal and defense
costs are overwhelming. Tax-deduct-
ible donations can be sent to:

Yvonne Wanrow Defense, Center for
Constitutional Rights, 853 Broadway,
14th Floor, New York, NY 10003 or
Spokane Peace and Justice Center,
East 224 Sharp, Spokane, WA 99202.

It is also suggested you write
letters to Prosecutor Brockett de-
manding that he drop the charges
against Yvonne and to send him a
telegram on April 16, showing you
support her.

Call the press, TV, radio and news-
papers demanding coverage of Yvonne
Wanrow's trial and other related
events.

Printed on this page is a sample
letter which can be used to send to
the Spokane County Prosecutor.

Donald C. Brockett
Spokane County Prosecutor
Public Safety Building
Spokane, WA 99201

Prosecutor Brockett:

This is a letter demanding that you drop all charges against Yvonne Wanrow
and discontinue proceedings to retry her.

Yvonne Wanrow is a Coleville Indian woman whom you brought to trial in 1973
for the shooting of William Wesler, a child molester well-known to the police
and community. At the time of the shooting, Yvonne Wanrow was at the house
of her babysitter, Shirley Hooper, whose 4-year-old daughter had been raped
by Wesler. These two women had requested police protection from Wesler the
day before; the police refused to respond to the pleas of the women, telling
them to call back later in the week. This neglect forced Yvonne Wanrow into
a position of having to defend herself and her children that night when Wes-
ler entered the house at 5 a.m.

The Spokane police department and William
Wesler are the parties responsible for Wesler's death, not Yvonne Wanrow.

You, as the prosecutor of Spokane County, have primary responsibility for the
continued legal harassment of Yvonne Wanrow that has been drawn out over the
last six years; you have the option to drop the charges against her.

As the Washington Supreme Court pointed out when it overturned Yvonne's orig-
inal conviction, there has been a long tradition of sexism which has in the
past, and continues now, to plague women and the legal system. Racism was
also a major factor in Yvonne Wanrow's initial conviction by an all-white
jury. To retry Yvonne Wanrow now would only further subject her to the sex-
ism and racism already evident in her case.

It is particularly outrageous
during the “International Year of the Child" that a mother protecting her
children would be considered criminal.

Yvonne Wanrow has been subject to prejudice against poor women, Indians, and
single mothers.

Imagine if she were affluent, white, and married; imagine
she were your own wife defending your children from a man known by you to
have raped your babysitter's child-- would she have ever been charged, much
less tried, convicted and harassed for six years for her actions? NO.

I urge that you reconsider your position on the case of Yvonne Wanrow and
drop all charges brought against her.

Sincerely,

Your Name

hot briefs

Worked to Death

In Bangkok, 56 girls ages 8 to 15,
were freed by police from a factory
in which they had been confined,
working 12-17 hours a day wrapping
toffees for $50 to $90 a year. The
raid came only after the death of
two of the child workers at the fact-
ory. Twenty of the girls still remain
"unclaimed" by relatives.

-Sojourner

Fund

Rosaura "Rosie" Jimenez was the
first known case of a woman who died
from an illegal abortion because medi-
caid funding restrictions prevented
her from having a legal one.

A special fund in her memory has
been set up to primarily provide
money for abortions for women who no
longer are applicable under the very
strict guidelines. Contributions
may be sent to: The Rosie Jimenez
Fund, 8686 Village Dr., San Antonio,
TX 78217.

Memorial

-Harrisburg Area
Women's News

More Hyde

Illinois Representative Henry Hyde,
author of the Hyde Amendment, which
bans most federally-funded abortions
for the poor, says he is still not
satisfied with the decrease in abor-
tions since the Hyde Amendment was
passed. HEW statistics show that
as a result of the Hyde Amendment,
a projected 250,000 federally-funded
abortions dropped to only 2,421 actual
abortions last year.

Hyde, however, says the “real pro-
blem" lies with state governments
that continue to fund the abortions
for poor women. Hyde said he may take
more legal steps to strengthen the
Hyde Amendment.

-Her Say

Marjory a Menace

The Carter Administration is hiring
anti-abortion fanatic Marjory Mecklen-
burg to head the newly formed federal
program on teenage pregnancy.

Mecklenburg is president of the
American Citizens Concerned for Life,
a group campaigning for a constitu-
tional amendment to outlaw abortion
and she says that legalized abortion
is equivalent to the Nazi Holocaust.

An estimated 1 million women be-
tween the ages of 12 and 19 become
pregnant each year. Two-thirds of
these pregnancies are unwanted; about
40% of these women choose abortion.

What alternative will Mecklenburg
offer these young women? Forced
motherhood?

-The Militant

Tampon Danger

Chronic use of tampons can cause
vaginal or cervical ulceration. Mod-
ern Medicine reported that vaginal
or cervical ulcers occurred in women
who used tampons continuously to re-
lieve symptoms of persistent vaginal
drainage. The women reported changing
the tampons daily or at frequent in-
tervals. When tampon use was discon-
tinued, the ulcers healed spontane-
ously.

-Women's Health Packet

Whose Right?

Moral consistency among politicians
hit a new low as six Michigan legis-
lators who claim to be "Right to Life"
supporters were caught secretly pay-
ing for abortions for women relatives
and friends. A Detroit group called
Women Against Inhumane Legislation
says it will release the names of the
two-faced lawmakers as soon as formal
affidavits are drawn up.

-Majority Report

Our Future?

New Zealand has passed a law where
abortion is defined as murder of a
"child that has not become a human
being." It is now a crime, punishable
by up to fourteen years'
imprisonment, for anyone to carry out an abortion.

One can be jailed for seven years
if one “supplies the means for pro-
curement of an abortion (including
a plane ticket to Australia, where
abortion is legal).

Rape is no longer grounds for abor-
tion, nor are genetic defects of the
fetus and the IUD has been outlawed as
a weapon of murder.

-Reproductive Rights
Newsletter

YOU'VE BEEN FOUND GUILTY
OF PREGNANCY. YOU'RE SENTENCED
TO USE IMPRISONMENT IN UNHAPPY MARRIAGE,
OR DEATH BY COAT HANGER.

Mother Hitting

TV producer Ralph Andres finds many
game shows disgusting. To “bring some
taste" to the format, he's piloting a
new show, “Hit That Mother." Each
week, three well-known mothers-in-law
will “be roasted, insulted and one-
to get gifts and honors."

-Majority Report

-photo of Yvonne Wanrow from the
Yvonne Wanrow Defense Committee,
1206 Smith Tower, Seattle, WA 98104

Serena Wins A
Partial Victory

Norma Jean Serena's case against
hospital and welfare officials (see
BMR March '79), which came to trial
almost eight years after she charged
that Welfare Department social work-
ers placed her children in foster
homes and had her sterilized against
her will, ended in a partial victory.

An all-white jury of six men and
two women in Pittsburgh declared that
the two social workers were guilty of
the arbitrary and racist removal of
Serena's children from their Native
American home, but acquitted hospital
officials of any wrongdoing for her

More On Page 14

Vet’s Preference

The US Supreme Court is set to rule
within the next few months on a Mass-
achusetts law which gives veterans
preference in civil service jobs.

The law is being challenged by
women's groups who assert that the
law systematically discriminates
against women. 98% of people with a
military service background are men.
~-Gay Community News

Victim Interrogation

The Women's Justice Center in
Detroit has filed a class action suit
against the Detroit Police Department
on behalf of three rape victims who
were given polygraph tests after
being raped.

In Detroit, polygraph tests are
given by the sex crimes unit of the
Police Department to rape victims
selectively. If the victim was
acquainted with the man who raped her,
she is given a polygraph test; if the
victim is underage, she is given a
polygraph test. If a woman refuses
to take the polygraph test, her case
will not be prosecuted, and if she
takes the test and “fails” it, her
case will not be prosecuted.

~Aegis

Did You Know...

“Females constitute 27.7% of the
US population. Half of them are teen-
agers or in their 20's. They wear
revealing outfits, jiggle a lot, but
don't do much else. More than a third
are unemployed or without any ident-
ifiable pursuit or purpose. Most of
the others are students, household work-
ers, secretaries, homemakers or
nurses." That's the composite por-
trait television drama paints of the
American woman, according to a study
released by the US Commission on
Civil Rights.

-National NOW cites