---

VICTIM

I had just moved into a house. A friend of mine was coming to Colorado and we were going to share the house. I was talking on the phone to her when all of a sudden the line went dead. I thought that we were disconnected but then I realized that the phone was completely dead - I couldn't get the operator or anything. I followed the cord into the hallway where I found it in two pieces. I thought that my cats had chewed it and got some tape to fix it. Then I saw a shadow out of the corner of my eye.

I knew that someone was there so I said “Who is it?” A young, scruffy hippie walked into the living room. He had on an army jacket and blue jeans and wore shoulder-length hair. He stood there with both hands in his pockets. I asked him what he wanted and then I went cold. I thought: don’t mess around with this guy - see what he wants.

I remembered going to a rape conference of Radical Feminists in Philadelphia, where rape victims talked to other women about their assaults and the thing that these women said over and over was that they kept talking to their assailant at first while they tried to piece things together and decide what to do.

All this time my body was cold. I was so scared with fear. He didn’t match my image of a rapist. He looked like an ordinary guy. I pleaded with him not to hurt me - not to kill me. I thought he had a knife in one of his hands. He said “I don’t want to hurt you. I want to love you. Relax, baby, you'll love it, baby.” I thought of escape but realized that I had locked myself into my house by all the safety precautions I had installed. If I screamed, I thought, no one will hear me since it’s so late and maybe it will make him mad and then he will hurt me. The whole time I didn’t know if he was going to kill me or beat me up.

He pulled me into the bedroom and raped me. While he was raping me he grabbed my hand. This was the first time I felt that he wasn’t going to kill me. We were both victims.

He left. I called some friends of mine who came right over. I was very calm but I was hysterical. I wanted to go to the hospital for the examination before I talked to the police. I didn’t want to go to Denver General. I called Rose Memorial but they refused to take care of me in their emergency room. Then I called a private gynecologist to see me. (He is the head of OB-GYN at a big Denver hospital), my friends took me there. All the doctor said while he was there was “disgusting.” Nothing else except when a nurse gave me some DES and I questioned the side effects, he yelled from an adjoining room “that only happens in 1% of all cases.”

+ Sex Detail Strikes -

The police had arrived at the hospital and gave my friends a hard time for being there. I told the officer in charge quite clearly that I wanted to talk to a policewoman. He said that I couldn't because there were no policewomen on the detail. Women have recently been put on the detail to placate everybody although the women they have on it are not supportive and are out to prove that we're lying.

I told them that I didn’t want to talk at the hospital and that I would meet them at my house. I was told that my friends couldn't come when they talked to me. “We prefer to do interviews alone. We don’t want you to be influenced.” The police always seem to prefer not to have any other people there when they talk to you. And make you believe it is “law” or “preference.” The attitude of the

More on Page 6

RAPE

by Carol Lease

Photo by Babs Nash

LEGISLATION

The second rape that takes place in the courtroom has finally been recognized as possibly the biggest detriment to a woman's reporting her assault. Feminism is creating a consciousness in women that can no longer accept the existence of the rapist whether he be of the body or of the mind. But criminal codes that define rape and traditional courtroom proceedings that determine the treatment of the alleged rapist and his victim have been created by and for a patriarchal society that is blatantly sexist and anti-woman. And it is the confluent conflict of these socio-political forces that have provided adequate motivation for the District Attorney’s office to present proposals on rape and victim compensation that are to be given top priority for legislative action.

Richard Wood, a chief deputy district attorney who represents the office in legislative matters, says that the D.A.'s office is “very open to any input into this legislation.” He has already met with representatives of almost all of the organizations in the Denver area that are concerned with rape.

Although some of the proposals are controversial, he expects to see some legislative action and would like to see the Colorado District Attorney’s Association sponsor the bill but “if they won't then the D.A.’s office will.” According to Wood, the former chief deputy of Public Defenders of the State supports the bill. The Denver Post and the Rocky Mountain News have come out editorially in favor of the legislation. “I haven't seen any broad opposition to this legislation,” says Wood.

Abolish “Lord Hale”

The first proposal deals with the “Lord Hale” instruction that most judges in Colorado give the jury at the beginning of a rape trial warning them that the charge of rape “is one easily made and once made, difficult to defend against.”

This instruction unnecessarily singles out rape cases for special treatment, for special “comment” on the victim’s testimony and allegation, and in doing so, tends to prejudice the victim's case. The proposal is that this instruction is not to be given in any rape or sexual assault trial.

The second proposal is one which will prohibit admission into evidence in rape or sexual assault cases testimony relating to the victim's previous sexual conduct on the issue of consent or submission except as it may relate to the victim’s prior sexual conduct with the defendant.

“We think that anyone can be raped. A prostitute can be raped. A jury holds it against a woman if she doesn’t have a sexual life they feel she should,” says Wood. “The testimony that a woman can be forced to give concerning her previous sexual life is often highly irrelevant and can go back several years. Some judges won't allow this kind of fishing expedition of a defense attorney but it is still up to the individual judge and it is generally admitted into evidence.

“Half of the victims reported that if they had to do it again they wouldn't report their rape because of the cross-examination that occurs at the preliminary hearing and at the trial.

“The prohibition of such testimony would hopefully have the effect of encouraging victims to report and prosecute rapes and sexual assaults without fear of public humiliation.”

A proposal similar to this was defeated in Iowa but a substitute was passed that stated that if the defense counsel wanted to inquire into the victim's past sexual history he or she would have to do so in court chambers. If the judge felt that the testimony was relevant then that and only that would be brought out in the trial. This idea has been incorporated into the Colorado proposal.

More on Page 18

HELP

The Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault was organized in March of this year for the purposes of education, rape prevention, encouraging women to report rapes, and providing advocacy services for women.

An ACTION grant that was to be used to recruit volunteers for the coalition was initially approved and then delayed due to alleged budget error on the part of Congress.

The coalition was initially formed to meet the increasing demand for a city-wide agency to deal with victimization. When the Southeast Denver Neighborhood Services Bureau opened it was deluged with calls from all over the city concerning rape victimization programs. It didn't have the money, space, or people to work in the entire city. “We were racing all over...trying to do everything...there just weren't enough of us...so the coalition was formed,” says Dr. Katherine Saltzman, victimization coordinator for SEDNSB.

The coalition sponsored four conferences in May and had a city-wide conference in March. There are task forces to deal with specific areas of concern such as counseling, legislation, victim rap, speakers bureau, health care, minority member, and mass media.

“The coalition needs people power,” says Ms. Saltzman. The summer months have a greater incidence of rape compared to other seasons. The general public that composes juries in rape trials and who are traditionally unsympathetic to rape victims need to gain understanding of the entire issue of rape and the victim. The coalition does not take any particular political approach to the rape issue. Screaming and ranting turns people off. We require some kind of political sophistication.

“The coalition has both men and women, some of whom are victims working with it who need periodic rests.”

Almost any organization or institution in Denver that deals with rape (with the exceptions of the Denver Police Department and their Sex Offense Detail) is represented in the Denver Coalition on Sexual Assault. Both the professional from the District Attorney's office and the woman who works all day at home work together on a common concern - rape.

A Child Advocacy Task Force is being formed in the coalition with the intent of making the child the primary concern in any courtroom proceedings. Often parents won't prosecute their child's molester because of fear of the treatment that the child may get in an open courtroom.

The Counseling Task Force is currently working on a pamphlet for preventive counseling, on counseling immediately after the rape and on long-range counseling through professional and victim-rap groups.

In the past the Victim Rap Task Force has taken part in guided fantasy which is a non-threatening way to get in touch with your feelings. Each rap session will have a specific topic or area of discussion.

The Speakers Task Force has people available to speak to any group that requests it.

The Health Care Task Force is investigating the indiscriminate use of DES (diethyl-stilbestrol), the morning-after pill that is given by emergency room doctors to women who have been raped and were using no form of birth control at the time. The objection is that women are usually not told, or are told after they have taken DES, that it may be harmful to them, cause cancer, affect future children. Often OB-GYN residents are

More on Page 18