hot briefs

New Olivia Record

BeBe K'Roche, a women's dance band operating out of Berkeley, California, has just finished recording its first album with Olivia Records. The record is scheduled for release this month. Those who have heard the band and Olivia's previous releases are anticipating a treat. The album will be available locally from Woman to Woman Bookcenter, 2023 E. Colfax, or through Womanchief Productions, 449-8049.

Children Kidnapped

As a gesture of retribution toward a wife who said she no longer loved him, an angry and confused father has kidnapped two preschool children. The three have been roaming the country since March 6. If you have any information about their whereabouts, please help a sister, their grieving mother, by calling collect to (207) 363-2807. Elias Howell, age 4, is short, slim and very fair, with a haystack of pinky-blend hair. Aaron Howell, age 5, is slim and darker-skinned, with straight brown hair. He has had a below-the-elbow amputation of his right arm. Their father is A.E. (Erv or Ervin) Howell, 6'1", with thinning/greying sandy hair and rimless glasses. Formerly an orthopedic surgeon, he may try to practice medicine again. They have been traveling by car (Vermont license GU929) and staying in motels. Please do not confront the father, as he is sometimes irrational and very suspicious. An immediate telephone call may help rescue these children.

Crimes Against Women

In Norway, a lesbian was forced to have sex with her husband regularly for six months while in a mental institution because she no longer wanted marital relations—a "therapy" introduced from the U.S.; in Mozambique, prostitutes and lesbians are sent to "re-education camps."

-Lesbian Connection, E. Lansing, MI

With God on Our Side

A group of Orthodox Jews in Tel Aviv, Israel, has threatened to blockade some suburbs and run its own bus services if Israel's largest bus company agrees to hire women drivers. The Committee for the Sanctity of Israel argues that "under Jewish tradition women are not permitted to be in charge of vehicles carrying men." -Pandora, Seattle

Custody Rights

The National Gay Task Force has prepared a packet of informational statements by leading psychologists, psychiatrists and human sexuality experts to support the efforts of gay parents to obtain custody and visitation rights for their children. It's available for $1 from NGTF, Rm. 506, 80 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10011.

-Lesbian Connection

Piggy Bank

When Dianne Phillips went to the Colorado State Bank to open an account in her maiden name, she met so much opposition that she asked to talk to the supervisor. She was ushered into the Vice-President's office, where that eminent dignitary asked her why in the world she wanted to do such a thing. She replied that it was none of his business, and reminded him that the ERA is effective in Colorado and that she might just sue. At this point the Vice-President agreed to open her account, but not before the final insult: in the course of a conversation between the official, Dianne and her husband, who was with her, she ventured an answer to a question, whereupon the Vice-President turned on her and said, "I'm talking to your husband—not to you."

Women’s Film Festival

The Second International Festival of Women's Films will be held September 13-26 at the Cinema Studio, Broadway at 66th St., New York City. The Festival will include shorts, feature films, panel discussions and a women's film conference. Contact the organizers at 36 W. 62nd St., N.Y., N.Y. 10023, or by calling (212) 247-1260.

Mammography May Cause Cancer

A group of cancer experts strongly recommended that routine X-ray screening for breast cancer in women under 50 be stopped. The recommendation was made at a meeting called by the National Cancer Institute in July. Dr. Lester Breslow, of the University of California in Los Angeles, said that although there is no direct evidence, theoretical studies strongly suggest that such screenings may cause cancer in symptom-free women.

International Network Forming

A group of women in New York City is working on coordinating an International Feminist Network. Ideas include an International Feminist Newsletter for the exchange of news, organizational and tactical issues, and theoretical discussion among feminists around the world, and possibly an international telephone hotline, for emergency organizing around specific issues. In order to validly represent U.S. feminists in this enterprise, the organizers need feedback from women across the country, as well as ideas on international organizing and funding, and contacts, both nationally and internationally. Write to Dena Rollo, 35-22 146th St., Flushing, NY 11354.

Motherhood Conference

New Women's Times, a Rochester, NY newspaper, is sponsoring a conference on motherhood, to be held November 19-21. The conference will explore motherhood on three levels: who mothers are (lesbians, single, divorced, etc.); what they are feeling (religion, identity, body work, etc.); and new directions for mothers (the movement, daycare, non-sexist childraising, etc.). Preregistration is $12.00. The organizers are asking for help putting the conference together. Write to New Women's Times, 1357 Monroe Ave., Rochester, NY 14618.

Loiter-In Succeeds

Coyote, a national civil rights organization for prostitutes, and Majority Report, a New York women's newspaper, joined to protest the Ohrenstein Anti-Loitering Law, a piece of legislation aimed at removing prostitutes from the streets of New York City during the Democratic National Convention, July 12-16. Hundreds of women took to the streets, asking passers-by to sign petitions protesting the law. According to one officer, New York City police were afraid to make any arrests under the new law during the loiter-in.

Majority Report

Alpert Cited

Jane Alpert, former underground fugitive who is currently serving a 27-month sentence for a 1970 bomb conspiracy, has been indicted for having refused to testify against her fellow fugitive Patricia Swinton. Swinton was acquitted, but Alpert was accused by many leftists and feminists of having informed on her. If convicted of criminal contempt, Alpert may be sentenced to several more years in jail. Write to the Circle of Support for Jane Alpert, c/o Menrof, 157 Prince St., New York, NY 10012.

-Lesbian Tide, L.A.

Rapist Strikes Twice

A New Brunswick, N.J. man has been charged with a second rape after he was released on his own recognizance for another rape a month earlier. Frank T. Bergen was arrested in June at the scene of the rape but was released because there was no room in the county jail. Following his second arrest he was lodged in the Middlesex County Jail in lieu of $10,000 bail.

Dentist Nailed

A New York dentist has been arrested for putting his women patients to sleep and then sexually abusing them. A policewoman arrived for a dental appointment with a tiny TV camera, which was hooked up to a monitor in the basement. There, police watched as Dr. Marvin Teicher gave the decoy patient an injection, and then unbuttoned her blouse and fondled her when she lost consciousness. Dr. Teicher has a wife and two children in New Rochelle.

Saxe Trial Rescheduled

The trial of Susan Saxe for armed robbery and first-degree murder stemming from a 1970 bank robbery has been moved to September 15. A Massachusetts judge turned down a motion from the defense that the case be dismissed because vast amounts of negative publicity have made a fair trial impossible. An expert witness for the defense testified that 91% of people surveyed in the Boston area recognized the name of Susan Saxe, and that 76% felt she was probably guilty of all charges against her. -Lesbian Tide

Film Co-op’s New Address

The Women's Film Co-op's new address is c/o W.I.T., Inc., P.O. Box 745, Northampton, Mass. 01060, phone (413) 584-9485. The Co-op has distributed lesbian and women's films since 1971 and hopes to expand its video training and production during the coming year.

Profits Come First

There are literally tens of thousands of agents that cause cancer, birth defects, chromosomal abnormalities, and irreversible kidney, lung and/or brain disease that millions of women are exposed to daily on the job. A conference on Women and the Workplace, sponsored by the Society for Occupational and Environmental Health dealt with about ten of these agents over a three-day period and basically concluded that the agents could stay but the women would have to go. For an in-depth report on the conference, see Off Our Backs, V.6 No.5, July-August 1976, 1724 20th St. NW, Washington DC 20009. (45¢ a copy)

-OF*? Our Backs

SISTER Suspends Publication

Sister, the Los Angeles feminist newspaper, has temporarily suspended publication while its staff reexamines the paper's function, methods and goals. Radical changes in format and content are being considered. The women of Sister ask that their subscribers maintain their subscriptions during this period, which they hope will last no longer than three months. Subscribers who do so will be credited with the number of months lost after the paper resumes publication. Women who have ideas, energy or money are encouraged to contact the paper's staff by writing them at Box 597, Venice, CA 90291 or calling (213) 395-4571 days or 994-6729 evenings.

Creative Women Unite

The Creative Women's Collective is a non-profit group of women artists committed to feminism and social change. It includes graphic artists, painters, sculptors, writers, video artists and more. Information on the Collective's feminist graphics is available from 236 W. 27th St., N.Y., N.Y. 10001, (212) 924-0665. New members who share the above commitments are welcomed.

Color Her Pissed

Janet C. Elliot of Los Angeles has sued Clairol for $5 million because she claims that since using the firm's "Love Care Color Foam-In Hair Color" in 1972, her urine has turned black and she has suffered back and abdominal pains and injuries to her vascular and nervous system that eventually landed her in the hospital. Clairol claims that although “urine discoloration is noted in very rare instances," the product couldn't have caused any of the other symptoms.

But The Last Is Still To Come

According to research compiled by the University of Pennsylvania, both men and women find jokes funnier when a woman is the subject of ridicule than when the laugh is on a man. The study concludes that “anti-female bias in humor still is in force. It is still funnier to see a woman than a man disparaged.

MOTHER JONES Chauvinist

A group of women have called for a boycott of the California-based magazine, Mother Jones. They claim that the editors, while insisting that they speak for feminists as well as other alienated groups, have proved otherwise, both in their hiring policies and in their content. The only reference to feminism in the magazine has been backlash, including one article entitled "What's Come Over the Women's Movement: The New Denial of Sexuality.” Although the editorial board assured the feminist community that feminist editors would be hired, the only one who ever was finally resigned after it became clear that she was ideologically and literally on her own. Feminist writers are asked not to submit material to Mother Jones, and women are asked not to subscribe and to cancel subscriptions. Letters of protest should be written to the editorial board; Adam Hochschild, Richard Parker, Jeffery Klein, Paul Jacobs, Louise Kollenbaum, 607 Market St., San Francisco, CA 94105.

Tranquilizers Suspect

The Food and Drug Administration has warned doctors that tranquilizers such as Valium, Librium, Miltown, and Equanil may cause birth defects if taken during early pregnancy. It ordered the drugs’ manufacturers to start printing warnings on packages. Valium is the single most widely prescribed drug in the country. It is sold at the rate of 5 million new and renewed prescriptions every month.

Church Okays Abortion

The Lutheran Church in America, at its eighth biennial convention in Boston last month, voted to retain its policy accepting abortion “as an ethical decision when all factors are taken into consideration." Members rejected a proposal by the Northeastern Pennsylvania Synod that they reconsider their stand on abortion in the light of a contemporary "social and historical context."

High School Women’s Pamphlet

"High School Women's Liberation" is a new 80-page pamphlet published by FPS: A Magazine of Young People's Liberation. Articles include "The Case of the Missing Sex: Women in History"; “Sexism in School Sports"; "The Myth of Sexual Delinquency" and women's music. The pamphlet also offers book reviews, a list of resources, and graphics. Write to FPS at 2007 Washtenaw Ave., Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104.

Rape Victims Protected

The Justice Department told Congress last month that it supports a proposal which would bar evidence of victims' past sexual behavior in rape cases. The proposal is a bill, introduced by Rep. Elizabeth Holtzman, D-NY, which would allow evidence about sexual behavior with anyone other than the accused only to show that someone else was responsible for pregnancy, disease, semen, or injury.

KATHY PRITCHETT (303) 572-4906

723 E. 17th AVE. DENVER, COLO. 80203