* ‘ we ss 6

Eugenics laws have been on books 53 years  
Mental Patients Being Sterilized  

Since a 1927 decision by the U.S.  
Supreme Court, mental hospitals have  
been sterilizing patients in an effort  
to rid the world of degenerates. Most  
of these people have been sterilized  
without their knowledge or consent.  

Fifty-three years ago Dr. A.S. Priddy,  
the superintendent of the Virginia  
State Colony for Epileptics and  
Feeble-Minded chose to legitimize in  
the courts his pioneering in eugenics.  
Eugenics (the improvement of the  
human race through breeding) is based  
on the assumption that people are  
poor or rich because of heredity.  
Economic and social conditions have no  
concrete effect on our lives, they  
say, because if a person is genetically  
superior, she will transcend her  
background to become an educated and  
contributing member of society.  

Priddy, who in the course of litigation,  
was succeeded as superintendent by D. J. H. Bell brought this suit because he had been threatened  
by lawsuits for earlier sterilizations.  

Named in the suit were Emma Buck,  
her daughters Carrie and Doris and  
Carrie's daughter Vivian.  

Files show that at the age of 17,  
when she was living in a foster home,  
Carrie was committed to the hospital  
for sterilization for bearing a child  
conceived as a result of rape. Doris  
was sterilized because she had run  
away from her foster home several  
times. The Virginia authorities also  
admitted into evidence that Vivian  
was "slow," despite the fact that  
Vivian, who died at the age of 7 of  
measles, had been considered a “bright  
child" by her second grade teachers.  

Doris Buck, now 67, had never  
known that she had been sterilized.  
She had believed that the scar on  
her abdomen was a result of “an  
appendectomy and rupture," the explanation  
she was given for her surgery  
at age 16.  

In his decision on the case Buck v.  
Bell, U.S. Supreme Court Justice  
Oliver Wendell Holmes said, "It is  
better for all the world if, instead  

Rita D.  

Rita D. Brown has been locked up  
in the federal women's prison in  
Alderson, West Virginia for the past  
two years after conviction on charges  
stemming from her work with the George  
Jackson Brigade. She is now being  
held in Administrative Segregation in  
Davis Hall for an indefinite length  
of time because she was friends with  
Assata Shakur, the Black Liberation  
Army leader who recently escaped from  
Clinton prison in New Jersey. (see  
BMR Vol.7 No.11, December 1979).  

Early last year, the Maximum Security  
Unit in Alderson, a special unit  
where particularly "dangerous" (political)  
prisoners were kept segregated  
from the general population, was  
closed down after strong protests from  
outside groups. Both Rita and Assata  
had been locked up in the unit; Rita  
was put back in the general population  
and Assata was transferred to Clinton,  
a maximum security state prison. Then,  
on November 2, Assata made her daring  
escape from Clinton--and the Alderson  
officials immediately responded by  
throwing Rita Brown in Administrative  
Segregation.  

Rita is confined to her room for  
22-23 hours a day and is not allowed  
to go to her job. She was an apprentice  
mechanic at the prison garage  
where she earned $10 a day, her sole  
source of income. She also has been  
forced to give up her copper enamel  
art class, and most of her exercise  
time--she is allowed only a half  
hour of outside exercise a week.  

Prison administrators at Alderson  
claim that because Rita and Assata  
were friends and had some of the  
same visitors, Rita might now try to  
escape. They are keeping her locked up  
in the interest of "prison security"  
--the guidelines concerning special  
punishment require only that administrators  
must have a "rational basis  
for prison security." In other words,  
they can punish whoever they want  
whenever they want.  

of waiting to execute degenerate offspring for crime, or to let them  
starve for their imbecility, society  
can prevent those who are manifestly  
unfit from continuing their kind.  
Three generations of imbeciles are  
enough."  

-Liberation News Service-  

This not only opened the way for  
sterilization of people who were institutionalized if another relative  
had been institutionalized, but allowed  
any orphan to be sterilized because  
of course they have no genetic history  
at all.  

Since the Buck v. Bell decision  
as many as 70,000 people have been  
involuntarily sterilized. Figures  
collected from the Social Welfare  
History Archives at the University  
of Minnesota and other sources show  
almost 64,000 sterilizations had been  
performed on patients at state mental  
hospitals in 30 states by 1964.  
8,300 sterilizations had been performed  
in Virginia institutions. National totals  
apparently were not kept after that year.  
These totals do not include sterilizations  
performed on people in the name of eugenics  
at private hospitals or on persons  
who were never institutionalized.  
We will never know the number of  
people coerced by doctors who had  
the government's support for their  
individual beliefs in class and racial  
superiority. The government's decision  
was very broad, included criminals  
and degenerates. How many women who  
refused the roles women were allowed  
to have in the 1930s, 40s, 50s,  
60s and 70s were sterilized? The eugenicists  
want to breed people to fit  
the system, rather than have a system  
that fit people's needs.  

WARN Finds  

The Bell v. Buck decision by the  
U.S. Supreme Court has never been  
reversed and 23 states still have  
laws that allow involuntary sterilization  
on “social grounds."  

The American Civil Liberties Union  
is considering filing legal action  
against the state of Virginia to  
force the state to notify those who  
were sterilized, but the organization  
has made no decision for a national  
effort.  

Reservation  

Water Is Contaminated  

A study released in March by the  
Women of All Red Nations (WARN) has  
found dangerous levels of water contamination  
of the Pine Ridge Indian  
Reservation and an alarming increase  
in spontaneous abortions and cancer  
mortality. WARN is calling for a  
State of Emergency and immediate delivery  
of safe, clean water to the  
residents of Pine Ridge and outlying  
areas.  

The WARN study showed that in one  
month alone during 1979, 38% of the  
pregnancies reported to the Public  
Health Service Hospital in Pine Ridge  
resulted in spontaneous abortions,  
miscarriages before the fifth month  
of pregnancy and excessive hemorrhaging.  
Of the children who were born,  
60 to 70% suffer breathing complications  
as a result of undeveloped lungs  
and/or jaundice. Children have  
also been born with such birth defects  
as cleft palate and club foot, diseases  
uncommon to the Lakota people.  

A representative survey of twelve  
families showed that in ten of the  
twelve families an elder has died  
of cancer since 1962. In Chadron,  
Nebraska off the reservation, similar  
statistics show spontaneous abortions  
occurring without any medical explanation.  
On ranches within and around  
the Pine Ridge Reservation, the rate  
of stillborn and deformed cattle has  
skyrocketed.  

"We don't need to look at paper  
anymore," said Lorelai Means, a  
founder of WARN, "we have real physical  
documentation; unborn children,  
deformed babies, youths suffering and  
dying from leukemia, and ever-increasing  
cancer victims. Already 25% of  
our women have been sterilized. We  
are still under attack. This is genocide."  

Late in March in Geneva, Switzerland,  
WARN, with the International Indian  
Treaty Council (IITC), presented the  
health and water study to the  
United Nations Commission on Human  
Rights, charging mass murder and the  
calculated genocide of an entire  
people. WARN and IITC are demanding  
an immediate investigation of the  
U.S. government's policies against  
American Indian people.  

The Women of All Red Nations charged  
President Carter and his administration  
with planned genocide of the Lakota  
people and a willingness to sacrifice  
rural America under the guise of  
energy development, to benefit the  
multi-national corporations. WARN  
demanded that the Department of  
Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs  
together with the Oglala Sioux Tribe  
declare Pine Ridge Indian Reservation  
a disaster area.  

Brown In Segregation  

Rita's lawyer, Judy Holmes, filed a  
petition for a writ of habeas corpus  
(a legal way of challenging the  
conditions of Rita's confinement).  
Following the hearing on that Petition,  
Judge Knapp issued a decision on  
December 10. That decision managed to  
avoid a precise ruling one way or the  
other. The Court stated: "Due process  
and essential fairness demand that the  
respondent (the Warden) have credible  
evidence upon which to base a reasonable  
belief that the petitioner or, in this  
instance, someone else, intends to effect  
her escape." However, the Court also ruled that  

"the present placement of the petitioner  
is constitutionally reasonable only  
with certain limitations.” Those  
limitations were: (1) continue to  
monitor the information regarding John  
Sherman and Assata Shakur; (2) allow  
Rita to return to educational and  
vocational classes; (3) credit Rita  
with all good time she was receiving  
prior to lockdown; (4) continue to  
reconsider Rita's position on a weekly  
basis and give Rita a written rationale  
for any decisions, one way or the  
other; (5) continue all medical treatment;  
(6) treat Rita no differently  
than any other prisoner in administrative  
detention with regard to visitors  
and access to attorney. The Judge  

also retained jurisdiction of the case  
for sixty days in order to “insure  
compliance on the part of the Warden.”  
That has since been extended to March  
30, 1980.  

On January 4, 1980, the Warden filed  
an application for an order authorizing  
transfer of Rita to another federal  
facility, presumably Pleasanton,  
California, although no one has confirmed  
that. There was a hearing on  
this Motion and the Judge took it  
under advisement.  

On January 30, 1980, Rita's lawyer  
filed a Motion to cite the Warden in  
contempt for failure to comply with  
the Judge's December 10 ruling. The  

harassment of Rita. Specifically:  
special rules regarding visitors  
(Rita has a two-hour limit of visits,  
all visits must be conducted in Davis  
Hall with a guard present); failure  

-No More Cages-  

to continue with physical therapy  
of Rita's arthritis; failure to allow  
Rita to register for educational  
courses; failure of the Warden to  
issue his weekly rationale; failure  
of the Warden to come up with the  
requisite “credible evidence." That  
Motion is pending a hearing the end  
of March (probably March 25, 1980).  
In the meantime, Rita remains in Davis  
Hall.  

Many people are wondering what, if  
anything, they can do to help Rita.  
They have already received copies of  
many letters sent to the Warden protesting  
Rita's continued detention,  

which certainly helps. People may also  
want to send letters to Attorney General  
Civiletti. There is no way of  
knowing how much he may know about  
Rita or her situation. One of the  
things that Judge Knapp did do in his  
December 10 Order was to dismiss the  
Regional Director of the Bureau of  
Prisons and the United States Attorney  
for that region as named defendants.  
Some people are trying to make contact  
with Civiletti but more attempts  
certainly won't hurt.  

Also, if anyone is anywhere on the  
East Coast and has time to make a trip  
to Alderson, Rita would appreciate  
visits. Lee Adler, co-counsel in Beckley,  
WV, and Judy Holmes, Rita's lawyer,  
have had some discussions about  
the hearing on the Contempt Motion. If  
anything changes and they do go forward  
with that hearing they suspect  
that the government will put on a big  
show for the Judge. It may well be a  
two-day hearing. If anyone has time  
to help the lawyers prepare for the  
hearing, it would be greatly appreciated.  

Judy Holmes has recently received  
over $450 in donations. The contributions  
covered more than travel expenses for  
the initial hearing. The remainder is  
being used to defray out-of-pocket  
expenses for xerox, postage,  
and long-distance calls. If anyone  
would like copies of all the pleadings  

so far, she would be glad to send them  
along. A donation of $4 to cover costs  
of xerox and mail would be appreciated.  
Rita's lawyer, Judy Holmes, can  
be reached at 1329 F Street, N.W.  
Suite 1004, Washington DC 20004.  
Letters demanding Rita's release into  
the general population may be sent  
to: Judge Dennis Knapp, U.S. District  
Court, Charleston, WVA 25301, and to  
the warden at Alderson: FCI, Box A,  
Alderson, WVA 24910.  

(Some information reprinted from  
No More Cages)