Support needed at N.C.C.C.W.

Five Women File Prison Discrimination Suit:

Karen Batton

On February 25, 1980, five women
inmates at the North Carolina Cor-
rectional Center for Women (NCCCW)
filed a discrimination suit in Fed-
eral Court against the State of North
Carolina, Department of Corrections.

The women, Karen Batton, Kathy
Stokes, Linda Stokes, Terry Harm and
Kathy Jones, have asked for equal
rights and opportunities as that of
the male prisoners of North Carolina.

The North Carolina Correctional
Center for Women, located in Raleigh,
NC, houses an average of 600 inmates.
However, the prison was designed to
house only 250 to 300 inmates.

Of 82 prison units in the state of
North Carolina, only two of these
units house female inmates. One of
these units, Cameron Morrison Youth
Center (CMYC), is for youthful
offenders and also houses male in-
mates. NCCCW is the only prison unit
in N.C. that houses females only.

Male inmates in N.C. are housed
according to custody grade, crime
status, and age. The female inmates,
with the exception of youthful of-
fenders, are housed together at NCCCW
without regard to custody grade,
crime status, or age.

Male prisoners, spread all over
N.C., have greater access to work
release opportunities, employment,
parole and access to their own fam-
ilies and legal counsel. The women at
NCCCW may only seek work release in
the Raleigh area. Therefore, the
women have limited access to employ-
ment, parole, legal counsel and their
families as a result of their place-
ment in NCCCW.

Male prisoners who apply for work
release are screened by professional
staff. The women at NCCCW were
screened by a Roman Catholic nun
until recently, who was not qualified
by education, training or experience
to supervise a prisoner's work re-
lease application.

Since 1972, Central Prison, a male-
only maximum security unit in N.C.,
has provided an in-patient medical
and psychiatric hospital for male in-
mates. This facility is fully staffed
by physicians, psychologists, regist-
ered and licensed practical nurses,
and other professional staff on a
full-time basis.

The women at NCCCW have no in-
patient medical and psychiatric hos-
pital unit supervised full-time by
professional staff.

Around January 1, 1980, an in-
patient facility for the treatment of
psychiatric patients was completed.
However, due to being under-staffed,
no one is allowed to become an in-
patient. When the mental patients of
NCCCW become a nuisance, they are
housed in Dorm C, a segregation
building at the women's prison.

Male prisoners have a broad range
of training programs to use upon
their release. The North Carolina
Correctional Center for Women are
encouraged to do female role stereotype
jobs. Only three marketable skills
are available: cosmetology, upholst-
ery and secretarial science. In order
to enroll in cosmetology or upholst-
ery, you have to be a year away from
parole and you need to know basic
typing to enroll in secretarial
science. What about the long-termers
or the ambitious woman?

The discrimination suit was also
filed to eliminate the denial of
civil rights and to improve the
treatment and conditions at NCCCW.

Kenneth Harris, Superintendent and
Correctional Administrator of NCCCW,
lacks the educational background,
training, experience, or demeanor to
manage the women's prison or to pro-
tect and respect the rights, privi-
leges and immunities of the women
prisoners.

Because of the pressing population
at NCCCW, reception for the new
arrivals is often full and forces the
newcomers to be housed in Dorm C,
the segregation unit. This is espec-
ially true from November to February
of each year.

The dining hall at NCCCW is infest-
ed with rats and roaches; therefore,
maintaining an unsanitary facility
for the preparation and storage of
food.

The matrons and guards at the North
Carolina Correctional Center for
Women are inadequately trained. Many
new staff members receive on-the-job
training on the 3rd shift while the
population of inmates are sleeping. When
their shift is transferred they are
considered “trained” to handle the
management of the inmate population,
to recognize health or psychiatric
problems and to cope with the emo-
tional needs of the incarcerated.

The five women plaintiffs have
asked for relief in: (1) an immediate
preliminary hearing; (2) a protective
order prohibiting defendants from
continuing to harass and intimidate
plaintiffs and denying them adequate
access to counsel during the pendency
of this suit; (3) to institute equal
practices and programs for female
prisoners with those of the male
prisoners; (4) an injunction prohib-
iting defendant Harris from serving
in the capacity of Correctional Ad-
ministrator; (5) an award to Plaint-
iffs and their class of reasonable
attorney fees and costs and such ad-
ditional and alternative relief as
may be just and proper.

Plaintiffs Kathy Stokes and Karen
Batton are housed in the segregation.

-Kathy Pryor/Through the Looké

Male Guards In Women’s Prisons:

Women Free Women in Prison

The spirit of backlash is evident
all over the country, and the prisons
have not escaped its oppressive re-
turn. Bakke, Weber and their likes
based their racist suits on the ideo-
logical grounds of reverse discrimin-
ation. Similarly, the case of the
Bedford Hills Prison male guards
seeking employment within a female
facility is one that takes the prin-
ciple which women have been strug-
gling for, the principle of equal
rights between women and men, and
turns it against women.

In a country that hasn't been able
as yet to ratify the Equal Rights
Amendment, within a state that has
voted it down twice, the women of
Bedford Hills Correctional Facility,
50 miles north of New York City, have
to hear how their right to privacy
must be respected only to the extent
that it doesn't create "gender-based"
discrimination against male guards.

Three years ago, in the spring of
1977, male guards were first intro-
duced in the Bedford Hills campus,
on the basis of Title VII of the 1964
Civil Rights Act (non-discrimination
in employment due to sex). As it im-
mediately became clear that the real
reason was to harass the women and
achieve tighter control, ten women
prisoners brought a class action suit
against the administration on behalf
of all the women at Bedford, claiming
that their right to privacy was being
violated.

The women complained that the men
could look in through a tiny window
in their cell doors at any time, and
look at them while they dressed/un-
dressed/slept (unaware of coverings)
and use the toilet (in the cell).
They also complained the men often
watched them while they showered.

The trial took place in December
1977 and January 1978, and in the
spring of 1978 Judge R. Owen ruled
that no male guards would be allowed
in the housing and hospital units
during night-time. They were allowed,
however, to remain there in the day-
time since the women were permitted
to block their door peepholes for in-
tervals up to 15 minutes, for the
purpose of carrying out "private
functions." He also ruled that trans-
lucent screens be placed in the show-
er areas and that this structural
change would take care of the matter.

This decision, though distinctly
a compromise favoring the State, was
appealed. Two years later, in May of
1980, the US Court of Appeals ordered
the guards back into the women's
housing units, at night, because it
was obvious to the Court that the
rights of the guards were being "vio-
lated" and that there had to be a
solution to this problem that would
"protect" both the rights of the
guards and the rights of the women.

The "solution" had already been
suggested two years ago during the
trial by the defendants (the State)
the use of Dr. Denton one-piece pa-
jamas which would cover the women's
bodies from the eyes of peeping male
guards. This solution had been
rejected by Judge Owen who said: "I
do not think it appropriate to say to
a woman...you have got to be ensconced
in a two-legged bag over the night
to give up the right of privacy...I
don't see that a person has to sleep
in a Dr. Denton, if the temperature
hits 90 or 95...in order that a man
may have the privilege of walking up
and down the corridor and looking
in on her..."

When overturning the decision on
this point, Judge Newman patronizing-
ly said that surely women prisoners
wouldn't want the rights of the
guards violated because of sleepwear
fashion or "occasional discomfort"
due to "warm" temperatures.

The reversal of the male guards
decision once again clearly demon-
strates how the State can coldly and
cleverly manipulate a legal ruling
meant to protect an oppressed group
so that it can continue to reap the
benefits.

While showing “concern” for equal
rights, they choose to protect the
rights of male guards to equal job
opportunities, while totally ignor-
ing, for instance, the rights to
equal vocational training and job
opportunities for women prisoners.
The women at Bedford, as well as
those in other state prisons, have
long demanded that they be allowed
to train in non-traditional jobs, so
that while in prison they can make
more money, and after prison they'd
have a better chance for survival—
just like male prisoners. Over and
over again they've been told that
this is "unlady-like." Equal rights
indeed.

The issue is further obscured be-
cause the appeal invoked the rights
of the female guards themselves as
being violated by this decision. The
state claims that if the male guards
lose this suit, equal job opportunity
for men and women alike will be en-
dangered in all of New York state.
Furthermore, they say, female guards
at Bedford would lose out since they
would end up with inferior night
shifts while newly arrived male
guards would occupy the prime time
shifts.

This way, the State has artfully
managed to (a) pit one class of
women (guards) against another (pris-
oners) and reinforce an already
acute division between a predomi-
nantly black female guards force and
a predominantly black female popula-
tion and to (b) totally obscure and
deemphasize the fact that there is
no way you can talk of equality when
you are "balancing" the rights, on
the one hand, of the State, in the
form of its guards, and, on the oth-
er, poor powerless prisoners. It's
fair to say that the scales of just
ice in this case are already tipped
on the side of the State.

The real reason for bringing male
guards wasn't concern for equal job
opportunities but security and has
carefully been camouflaged by the
State: the original defendants in
this case were both the State and
the Guard's Union. This way, it
appears (as the Court of Appeals in-
dicated) that the State has no prob-
lem whatsoever with the Owen deci-
sion insofar as security is concern-
ed—the appeal is strictly a job
problem.

Yet the scene at Bedford within
the last couple of months clearly
belies the emphasis on what the pro-
blem really is.

Suddenly all sorts of new rules
have popped up which without a doubt
are highly restrictive of women's
movements, confine them in their
cells at all hours in the daytime
when not on an assignment, and out
of their cells and into public super-
vised places in the evenings.
Places like the yard are of limited
access and highly supervised. The
gym has totally been closed off (men
from the Taconic male facility
across the road are welcome to use
it, however!)

This effectively cuts down on the
time the women have to privately get
together and plan action or even
just to discuss their problems. The
rules are also specifically anti-
lesbian in that they forbid any
"hand holding," “touching,” or “kis-
sing."

What's more crucial, all these new
rules seem to be coming from the
new male officers. These new officers
(in contrast to the female guards)
are mostly white, and a good number
of them are from Attica and other
male maximum security upstate prisons
where it seems they were heavily in-
volved during the various rebellions
of the last decade.

(The following article is reprint-
ed, with changes, from Sourceline,
Alaska’s feminist newspaper.)

Karen Carlisle

“Corrections"—what a joke! The
American Heritage Dictionary defines
"correction" as that which is offer-
ed or substituted for a mistake,
fault or abnormality; an improve-
ment." This implies that methods,
means and ways will be taught per-
sons so they can change their “mis-
taken” or "abnormal" behaviors so
they can re-enter society and func-
tion there. But such has not been
the case in the past.

Previously the women from Ridge-
view (Alaska) told us they had no
counseling, no educational courses,
a library with almost no books, and
no recreational equipment. The
men's facility at Eagle River has
all of these, including many educat-
ional courses. The women were told
by Corrections there were no state
funds allocated from Juneau.

The Director's Sub-Committee board
is a board from downtown consisting
of five members. This board is sup-
plied with recommendations from Sup-
erintendent Harris for each woman
scheduled to be seen by them.

Kathy has been in segregation for
thirteen months. Neither Kathy nor
Karen have been given any opportunit-
ies to prove they are not escape
risks.

Kathy and Karen are allowed one
hour of exercise daily in a small
fenced-in area. The remaining hours
are spent in their 9 x 12 ft. cells.

Terry Harm, also a plaintiff in the
suit, was suddenly transferred to
Cameron Morrison Youth Center on May
12, 1980, after the February filing
of the suit.

Terry was shipped away from her
family, who live in Raleigh, to a
strange institution. Was Terry re-
moved from NCCCW in an attempt to
get her to withdraw from the discrim-
ination suit against the Department
of Corrections?

Superintendents Harris and McDade
had threatened to take punitive
measures against the plaintiffs for
violating orders not to discuss
prison conditions with their counsel.
Were these punitive measures?

Women, being the minority of the
prison system, still have a great de-
sire for their rights as prisoners.
In the construction of prisons, women
were and are seemingly an after-
thought left neglected until someone
speaks out in their behalf.

The discrimination suit, filed in
February 1980, was initiated for the
women of the North Carolina Correc-
tional Center for Women. The plain-
tiffs are demanding their rights.

Many of the women at NCCCW fear
the change the suit demands and the
action the authorities will take once
they participate.

In spite of the fears, the women
are coming together, gathering
strength and fighting back for better
conditions, treatment and opportun-
ities.

Most of the influence applied by
the authorities is mental pressure.
It is continuously suggested NCCCW
will turn maximum security and mili-
tary in staff as a result of the
suit. Those women who are aware of
their environment know NCCCW is prac-
tically maximum security and military
in staff now.

The authorities already have plans
to get rid of the honor-grade women,
the committed youthful offenders (CYO),
to put up razor wire and, in short,
turn the North Carolina Correctional
Center for Women maximum security.

Their other means of mental pres-
sure is to ship the women to and from
Cameron Morrison Youth Center, away
from their families and forcing them
to adjust to new environments and
pressures.

Plaintiff Terry Harm, a long-term
er, was shipped to CMYC in spite of
the fact/policy that Cameron Morrison
Youth Center is for CYO's. Most in-
mates sent to CMYC are inmates with
less than twenty-five years or serving
a CYO sentence.

The women find they are often har-
assed, interrogated, threatened and
left confused, frustrated and angry.

Defendant McDade suggested to Karen
Batton it was “dangerous to play with
the system."

Defendant Harris, like McDade,
suggested to Karen that "without co-
operation she could spend a lot longer
than necessary in segregation."
Karen was following orders from her
attorneys not to discuss legal
matters with Defendant Harris.

While most inmates escaping from
NCCCW spend 15–105 days in segrega-
tion without meeting the Director's
Sub-Committee Board, Kathy and Karen
have spent way beyond 105 days with
no guarantee of when they will be
released.

Letters of support for the Plain-
tiffs and the women at NCCCW can be
sent to: Mayer Hassle, Paralegal,
PO Box 2596, Raleigh, NC 27602. Or
to: Karen Batton, 1034 Bragg St.,
Raleigh, NC 27610.

Mounts At Bedford Hills

This new restrictive atmosphere
coincides with another recent court
decision following a class action
suit by the women on segregation and
other punitive procedures. The State
lost that suit, and has been ordered
to comply with the court order, but
is not doing so, which is causing a
lot of tension between the women and
the administration.

It also coincides with acute over-
crowding at Bedford (capacity 250,
present population 400), and a NYC
decision not to lease the Rikers
Island Facility to the State Correc-
tions Department.

Bedford was hoping to unload a lot
of women on