RAPE

I have never been free of the fear  
of rape. From a very early age, like  
most women, I have thought of rape as  
part of my natural environment—  
something to be feared and prayed  
against like fire or lightning. I never  
asked why men raped; I simply  
thought it one of the many mysteries  
of human nature.

I was, however, curious enough  
about the violent side of humanity to  
read every crime magazine I was able  
to ferret away from my grandfather.  
Each issue featured at least one “sex  
crime,” with pictures of a victim,  
usually in a pearl necklace, and of the  
ditch or the orchard where her body  
was found. I was never certain why the  
victims were always women, nor what  
the motives of the murderer were, but I  
did guess that the world was not a  
safe place for women. I observed that  
my grandmother was meticulous  
about locks, and quick to draw the  
shades before anyone removed so  
much as a shoe. I sensed that danger  
lurked outside.

At the age of eight, my  
suspicions were confirmed. My  
grandmother took me to the back of  
the house where the men wouldn't  
hear and told me that strange men  
wanted to do harm to little girls. I  
learned not to walk on dark streets,  
not to talk to strangers, or get into  
strange cars, to lock doors, and to be  
modest. She never explained why a  
man would want to harm a little girl  
and I never asked.

If I thought for a while that my  
grandmother's fears were imaginary,  
the illusion was brief. That year, on  
the way home from school, a school-  
mate a few years older than I tried to  
rape me. Later, in an obscure aisle of  
the local library (while I was reading  
Freddy the Pig) I turned to discover a  
man exposing himself. Then, the  
friendly man around the corner was  
arrested for child molesting.

An Uncle, A Father

My initiation to sexuality was  
typical. Every woman has similar  
stories to tell—the first man who  
attacked her may have been a  
neighbor, a family friend, an uncle,  
her doctor, or perhaps her own father.  
And women who grow up in New York  
City always have tales about the  
subway.

But though rape and the fear of  
rape are a daily part of every woman’s  
consciousness, the subject is so  
rarely discussed by that unofficial  
staff of male intellectuals (who write  
the books which study seemingly  
every other form of male activity) that  
one begins to suspect a conspiracy of  
silence. And indeed, the obscurity of  
rape in print exists in marked contrast  
to the frequency of rape in reality, for  
forcible rape is the most frequently  
committed violent crime in America  
today. The Federal Bureau of  
Investigation classes three crimes as  
violent: murder, aggravated assault  
and forcible rape. In 1968, 31,060  
rapes were reported. According to the  
FBI and independent criminologists,  
however, to approach accuracy this  
figure must be multiplied by at least a  
factor of ten to compensate for the  
fact that most rapes are not reported;  
when these compensatory mathematics  
are used, there are more rapes  
committed than aggravated assaults  
and homicides.

When I asked Berkeley, Cali-  
fornia's Police Inspector in charge of  

rape investigation if he knew why men  

rape women he replied that he had not  
spoken with “these people and delved  
into what really makes them tick,  
because that really isn’t my job...”  
However, when I asked him how a  

RAPE.

The All-American Crime

Susan Griffith

This article was reprinted from  
“Ramparts,” September 1971 with the  
permission of Susan Griffith. A very  
small part has been edited.

woman might prevent being raped, he  
was not so reticent, “I wouldn’t advise  
any female to go walking around alone  
at night ...she should lock her car at  
all times.” The Inspector illustrated  
his warning with a grisly story about a  
man who lay in wait for women in the  
back seats of their cars, while they  
were shopping in a local supermarket.  
This man eventually murdered one of  
his rape victims. “Always lock your  
car,” the Inspector repeated, and then  
added, without a hint of irony, “Of  
course, you don’t have to be paranoid  
about this type of thing.”

The Inspector wondered why I  
wanted to write about rape. Like most  
men he did not understand the  
urgency of the topic, for, after all, men  
are not raped. But like most women I  
had spent considerable time speculating  
on the true nature of the rapist.  
When I was very young, my image of  
the sexual offender was a nightmarish  
amalgamation of the bogeyman and  
Captain Hook: He wore a black cape,  
and he cackled. As I matured, so did  
my image of the rapist. Rape, I came  
to believe, was only one of the many  
unfortunate evils produced by sexual  
repression. Reasoning by tautology, I  
concluded that any man who would  
rape a woman must be out of his  
mind.

Rapists as Insane

Though the theory that rapists  
are insane is a popular one, this belief  
has no basis in fact. According to  
Professor Menachem Amir's study of  
646 rape cases in Philadelphia,  
Patterns in Forcible Rape, men who  
rape are not abnormal. Amir writes,  
“Studies indicate that sex offenders  
do not constitute a unique or  
psychopathological type; nor are they  
as a group invariably more disturbed  
than the control groups to which they  
are compared.” Alan Taylor, a parole  
officer who has worked with rapists in  
the prison facilities at San Luis  
Obispo, California, stated the ques-  
tion in plainer language, “Those men  
were the most normal men there. They  

had a lot of hang-ups, but they were  
the same hang-ups as men walking  
out on the streets.”

Another canon in apologetics of  
rape is that, if it were not for learned  
social controls, all men would rape.  
Rape is held to be natural behavior,  
and not to rape must be learned. But  
in truth rape is not universal to the  
human species. Moreover studies of  
rape in our culture reveal that, far from  
being impulsive behavior, most rape is  
planned. Professor Amir’s study  
reveals that in cases of group rape (the  
“gangbang” of masculine slang) 90  
percent of the rapes were planned; in  
pair rapes, 83 percent of the rapes  
were planned; and in single rapes, 58  
percent were planned. These figures  
should significantly discredit the  
image of the rapist as a man who  
suddenly is overcome by sexual needs  
society does not allow him to fulfill.

Far from the social control of  
rape being learned, comparisons with  
other cultures lead one to suspect  
that, in our society, it is rape itself  
that is learned. (The fact that rape is  
against the law should not be  

considered proof that rape is not in  

fact encouraged as part of our  
culture.)

This culture’s concept of rape as  
an illegal, but still understandable,  
form of behavior is not a universal  
one. In her study “Sex and  
Temperament,” Margaret Mead de-  
scribes a society that does not share  
our views. The Arapesh do not “...have  
any conception of the male nature that  
might make rape understandable to  
them.” Indeed our interpretation of  
rape is a product of our conception of  
the nature of male sexuality. A  
common retort to the question, why  
don’t women rape men, is the myth  
that men have greater sexual needs,  
that their sexuality is more urgent than  
women’s. And it is the nature of  
human beings to want to live up to  
what is expected of them.

And this same culture which  
expects aggression from the male  

expects passivity from the female.  
Conveniently, the companion myth  
about the nature of female sexuality is  
that all women secretly want to be  
raped. Lurking beneath her modest  
female exterior is a subconscious  
desire to be ravished. The following  
description of a stag movie, written by  
Brenda Starr in Los Angeles’ under-  
ground paper, “Everywoman,” typifies  
this male fantasy. The movie “showed  
a woman in her underclothes reading  
on her bed. She is interrupted by a  
rapist with a knife. He immediately  
wins her over with his charm and they  
get busy sucking and fucking.” An  
advertisement in the “Berkley Barb”  
reads, “Now as all women know from  
their daydreams, rape has a lot of  
advantages. Best of all it's so simple.  
No preparation necessary, no plan-  
ning ahead of time, no wondering if  
you should or shouldn't; just whang!  
bang!” Thanks to Masters and  
Johnson even the scientific canon  
recognizes that for the female,  
“whang! bang!” can scarcely be  
described as pleasurable.  
You Loved It!

Still, the male psyche persists  
in believing that, protestations and  
struggles to the contrary, deep inside  
her mysterious feminine soul, the  
female victim has wished for her own  
fate. A young woman who was raped  
by the husband of a friend said that  
days after the incident the man  
returned to her home, pounded on the  
door and screamed to her, “Jane, Jane.  
You loved it. You know you loved it.”

The theory that women like  
being raped extends itself by  
deduction into the proposition that  
most or much of rape is provoked by  
the victim. But this too is only myth.  
Though provocation, considered a  
mitigating factor in a court of law, may  
consist of only “a gesture,” according  
to the Federal Commission on Crimes  
of Violence, only 4 percent of reported  
rapes involved any precipitative  
behavior by the woman.

The notion that rape is enjoyed  
by the victim is also convenient for the  
man who, though he would not  
commit forcible rape, enjoys the idea  
of its existence, as if rape confirms  
that enormous sexual potency which  
he secretly knows to be his own. It is  
for the pleasure of the armchair rapist  
that detailed accounts of violent rapes  
exist in the media. Indeed, many men  
appear to take sexual pleasure from  
nearly all forms of violence. Whatever  
the motivation, male sexuality and  
violence in our culture seem to be  
inseparable. James Bond alternately  
whips out his revolver and his cock and  
though there is no known connection  
between the skills of gun-fighting and  
love-making, pacifism seems suspi-  
ciously effeminate.

In a recent fictional treatment of  
the Manson case, Frank Conroy writes  
of his vicarious titillation when  
describing the murders to his wife:

“Every single person there  
was killed.” She didn’t move.

“It sounds like there was  
torture,” I said. As the words  
left my mouth I knew there was  
no need to say them to frighten  
her into believing that she  
needed me for protection.”

The pleasure he feels as his  
wife’s protector is inextricably mixed  
with pleasure in the violence itself.  
Conroy writes, “I was excited by the  
killings, as one is excited by  

catastrophe on a grand scale, as one is  
alert to pre-echoes of unknown  
changes, hints of unrevealed secrets,  
rumblings of chaos…”  
More on Page 7