IMPORTANT: Process the ENTIRE text from beginning to end. Do not stop early or truncate.

“How We Are” from pg. 18

bodies, to lift boulders and how to
kill a hog; what to do for colic, how
to break a fever and how to make a
poultice, patchwork quilts, plait
hair and how to hum and sing. They
taught their daughters to take care,
to take charge and to take responsi-
bility. They would not tolerate a
"lazy heifer" or a "gal with her head
in the clouds." Their daughters had
to learn how to get their lessons, how
to survive, how to be strong. The wo-
men of my grandmother's generation
were the glue that held family and the
community together. They were the
backbone of the church. And of the
school. They regarded outside insti-
tutions with dislike and distrust.
They were determined that their child-
ren should survive and they were com-
mitted to a better future.

I think about my sisters in the
movement. I remember the days when,
draped in African garb, we rejected
our foremothers and ourselves as cas-
trators. We did penance for robbing
the brother of his manhood, as if we
were the oppressor. I remember the
days of the Panther Party when we were
“moderately liberated." When we were
allowed to wear pants and expected to
pick up the gun. The days when we gave
doe-eyed looks to our leaders. The
days when we worked like dogs and
struggled desperately for the respect
which they struggled desperately not
to give us. I remember the black his-
tory classes that did mention women
and the posters of our "leaders" where
women were conspicuously absent. We
visited our sisters who bore the com-
plete responsibility of the children
while the Brotha was doing his thing.
Or had moved on to bigger and better
things.

Lesbian Feminists
from pg. 5

a chapter of a young, growing and
exciting organization calling itself
the National Lesbian Feminist Organi-
zation. Its bi-monthly newsletter
is appropriately called It’s
About Time. Perhaps it should be
lengthened to It's About Time We
Started Looking Out For Ourselves.
Because it is.

I've attended the last two meet-
ings and was impressed, excited,
and scared. Frustrated and excited
to see good organization, realistic
analysis and planned strategy.
Scared by the report on right-wing
activities. Linda Fowler relayed
information on activities such as
reproductive freedom and demograph-
ics in which the government could
encourage or discourage growth of
the population in a certain area.
She also covered the area of discri-
mination through police departments
in Philadelphia, Houston and Denver.
One interesting fact was that in
this city, just one person decides
who will be given a permit to
carry concealed weapons. That per-
son is, of course, Art Dill, chief
of Police.

Another development which was
discussed at one of the meetings
was a statement published in the
Rocky Mountain News written and paid
for by the Gethsemane Baptist Church
and the First Baptist Church of
Northglenn. The fine Christian
folks of these churches were dis-
turbed by another article previously
published which called Denver
"Gay Haven of the West." They don't
like the word "gay" either, but for
slightly different reasons than I
have. One excerpt from the state-
ment reads, "we refuse to call you
people “gay” since there is certain-
ly nothing gay about the sin of
perverted homosexuality.”

A national lesbian feminist group
has been the topic for discussion
for a number of years; the current
right-wing backlash seems to have
been the thing that really got it
kicked off. The whole idea is to
form a strong national grass-roots
organization to specifically deal
with lesbian issues.

Most of us rejected the white women's
movement. Miss Ann was still Miss Ann
to us whether she burned her bras or
not. We could not muster sympathy for
the fact that she was trapped in her
mansion and oppressed by her husband.
We were, and still are, in a much more
terrible jail. We knew that our exper-
iences as black women were completely
different from those of our sisters in
the white women's movement. And we had
no desire to sit in some consciousness
raising group with white women and
bare our souls.

Women can never be free in a country
that is not free. We can never be lib-
erated in a country where the institu-
tions that control our lives are oppre-
ssive. We can never be free while our
men are oppressed. Or while the ameri-
kan government and amerikan capitalism
remain intact.

But it is imperative to our struggle
that we build a strong black women's
movement. It is imperative that we, as
black women, talk about the experiences
that shaped us; that we assess our
strengths and weaknesses and define our
own history. It is imperative that we
discuss positive ways to teach and
socialize our children.

The poison and pollution of capital-
ist cities is choking us. We need the
strong medicine of our foremothers to
make us well again. We need their med-
icines to give us strength to fight and
the drive to win. Under the guidance of
Harriet Tubman and Fannie Lou Hamer and
all of our foremothers, let us rebuild
a sense of community. Let us rebuild
the culture of giving and carry on the
tradition of fierce determination to
move on closer to freedom.

The NLFO is particularly concerned
with racism and classism both within
the women's movement.

At the founding convention an important
policy was resolved, undoubtedly the first of its
kind, which states that a minimum
of 50% of the women involved in
the level of planning and decision-
making will be women of color of
various class backgrounds. "Women
of Color" was officially defined
by WOC Delegation as: “Women
of obvious color, women of the
Third World and women of racial
minority groups here in the United
States."

Mapp from pg. 8

with her in 1970 and framed her on a
narcotics charge. The arresting
officers told her that she "had to pay
for making it so hard for them to
‘perform their duties'." They ransacked
her apartment and left with car-
loads of her belongings. In actuality,
they were covering up their own part-
icipation in drug traffic and were
later dismissed from the force for
graft and corruption. Her trial, in
1972, was a classic example of sys-
tematic injustice; the police brought
in testimony of unidentified inform-
ants and falsified evidence. She was
not informed of her right to separate
counsel and was tried with a man who,
indeed was involved with drugs. She
ended up being sentenced with him for
a crime of which she was innocent.
After five long years of her 20-to-
life at Bedford Hills, she was grant-
ed a hearing in January 1978, but
Judge Duffy threw out her case by
pronouncing her too intelligent and
educated not to have known her rights.
He made this claim without even asking
her if she had finished high school
and he refused to hear anything re-
garding police corruption.

For more information contact the
Dokknee Mapp Defense Comm. c/o
Women Free Women In Prison, Box 283,
W. Nyack, N.Y. 10994. or the D. Mapp
Defense Committee c/o P.A.R.C., Box
545, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11215.

Trudy Sauter from pg. 14

you know what it's a drawing of, but
there's very little in it and you get
a feeling of space and emptiness.

I have a belief that to draw things
in an abstract form, you have to be
able to do it realistically. I want to
be able to do things realistically
first and then I'll try abstraction.
I like the power you have as a real-
istic artist. You can do anything you
want with nature. You can go and look
at a scene and say well, I don't like
this here, I'll move it over here.
People say yes, that's real. But I
have changed it. I have some control
over the environment that I'm painting
and I enjoy that.

I like realism. I like to look at
something which I can identify right
away and I don't have to be troubled
by it--like a Jackson Pollock paint-
ing: What is it? It confuses me and I
don't like it and I should.

BMR: What are your ambitions for the
future?

Trudy: I'd sort of like to make it and
not have to bus tables at Elrond's,
not even have to go to the library.
In a lot of ways, it'd be real nice to
be successful, to do the thing that I
do best and that I enjoy the most and
to make my living at it would be won-
derful. That means having to hassle,
too, going around to art galleries and
saying wouldn't you like to show my
drawings and that takes a lot of en-
ergy and a lot of nerve for me. It's
hard to do. It's hard to say: This is
real good and you should put it up
here. But eventually I will do it be-
cause I would love to be a self-sup-
porting artist.

BMR: It's difficult to get over that
block that you can't live off your art
or that politically maybe you shouldn't
live off your art. That art is
‘fun and you shouldn't be making your
living only by that.

Trudy: I understand that but I cannot
state it because it's not fun,
it's a pleasure to do but it's hard
work and it's expressive. Anyone who
draws is putting their feelings into
it. No matter how realistic the draw-
ing is, there is something about you
in it and you're taking yourself and
hanging yourself up on a wall and
that's hard to do. You're opening
yourself up for a lot of criticism and
that's hard.

I think that women should be artists.
I think that art is more natural for
women than for men. Maybe that's my
bias but I think that women see and
appreciate things and have a feel for
things that is not known because wo-
men haven't been artists. They haven't
been working artists making their liv-
ing from art. Their art has been ig-
nored and now we don't know what wo-
men's vision of, say, sixteenth cen-
tury Europe was.

There's been a tendency to classify
women's art as craft: traditional
women's art, quiltmaking, functional
art. (Art historians) don't talk about
that at all. They talk about the women
who did what the boys were doing.

BMR: How do you see the relationship
between what you are doing and tradi-
tional women's art-- like quiltmaking
and fabric work?

Gay Rights
from pg. 5

against gays for Dr. Ted Volsky, one
of C.U.'s vice-presidents, who is
responsible for the affirmative ac-
tion and equal opportunity plan for
C.U. He would be drawing up the
non-discrimination policy for gays.

Tobin is interested in getting in
touch with other gays or interested
persons who want to work with him
toward getting a non-discrimination
policy for C.U. Call him at 442-
5967 or at the Gay Liberation Office
492-8567.

Trudy: I'm intimidated by quiltmakers.
I think it's an incredible art form.
Beautiful designs, geometric designs,
perfect things. And the best part of
it is that many quilts were made by a
group of women. It was women sharing
in an artistic experience.

BMR: How does your lesbianism enter
into your art?

Trudy: I used to draw nudes of my
friends and I was really into it and
then I realized that I couldn't sell
these on the market, I couldn't hang
them up at Elrond's because what if
some boy bought a picture of my lover?
That's one way that being a lesbian
has affected what I draw. I will not
draw nudes for sale. I'll do them and
give them to friends, and
I think that (being a lesbian) helps
you to overcome that stigma of women
artists as opposed to real artists--
male artists. I think it's easier. You
don't have the pressure. If I had mar-
ried in high school-- as I'd once thought
of doing-- I don't think I
would be drawing today because I
wouldn't have as positive a feeling
about myself. I think that that's the
most important thing about being a les-
bian artist. It makes you realize that
you're a woman, you can do anything.

I just can't imagine what I'd be doing
if I were straight now. I'd like to
find out what a straight woman says
about how she deals with art and men in
art. I don't have anything to do with
men who are artists. I don't talk to
them, I don't see them, I very rarely
look at their art.

Another thing-- I don't know if it's
feminism or lesbianism or what-- the
idea that I would love to always be
able to sell things for under fifty
dollars. Everyone should have access to
art. I don't think it should be some-
thing only for people who go to gall-
eries and pay hundreds of dollars for
a drawing. I don't think art should be
something for the elite.

BMR: But you have to sell things at a
certain price to make it; to get paid
back for that time and labor.

Trudy: It's really hard because I'd
love to make money on it but I'd also
like people like me to be able to buy
it.

I think that art should be something
which leads to pleasant fantasies or
makes you think-- takes you out of
what you're doing, out of your life and
puts you someplace else. You look at a
picture and you go into it, you get —
into this fantasy. And that's the pur-
pose of art. That's what should be
hanging on people's walls because we
need fantasies.

Salvation Army
from pg. 8

a customer may write.

4.) There is no sick pay for the
first day out.

5.) Evaluations of a worker by an-
other worker can be re-evaluated
by the supervisor, who may not know
the worker.

Management refused to discuss these
grievances, and instead retained a
lawyer.

Two women have been fired for union
organizing activities. They have also
retained a lawyer, though they can't
afford to pay him. Because of these
firings, and management's threat to
shut down the stores if union organ-
izing continues, workers are very a-
fraid of any organizing activities.

Ms. Ortega, one of the women fired,
asks that all donations and all sales
to the Salvation Army be boycotted
until things are settled satisfactorily.