The United Nations, in declaring 1975 International Women’s Year  
(IWY), has established three goals: to promote equality between men  
and women, to ensure the full integration of women in economic and  
cultural development, and to recognize the importance of women’s con-  
tributions to world peace. It has called upon member nations to make  
significant progress in establishing women’s rights during the year. So  
far the lip service the UN and the U.S. are paying women has been less  
than impressive.  

If money talks, only a whisper of IWY can be heard in the general  
assembly. The UN has appropriated a grand total of $250,000 for the In-  
ternational Women’s Conference to be held June 22-July 4 in Mexico  
City. Compare this with the $700,000 allotted by the UN for the 1972 En-  
vironmental Conference in Stockholm, or the $750,000 appropriated  
for the International Food Conference held this past November in Rome.  

Support by individual member nations is even more disheartening.  
Saudi Arabia, in true chauvinist fashion, has vowed to withhold all  
financial and political support from either the conference or the UN's  
stated goals, mumbling something about American men being slaves to  
their wives.  

In the United States, the Ford administration has taken a low-profile,  
non-political position around the entire project. Only $40,000 has been  
appropriated for all activities in this country for International Women’s  
Year. This amount pays for an office with the name on the door and one  
woman to staff it. It's hardly a threat to the entrenched political system  
of male supremacy.  

Nor is the UN breaking records in attempting to realize its stated  
goals. One-third of the nations in the UN International Labor Organiza-  
tion have not adopted the resolution on “Equal Remuneration for Men  
and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value.” More than one-half of  
the members of UNESCO have yet to ratify that organization's stand  
“Against Discrimination in Education.”  

Mexico City Put-On  

In this light, it is unlikely the official Mexico City conference will speak  
to issues relevant to the reality that women face in this country and in  
the world. We cannot expect the conference to establish viable goals for  
women, to devise methods of reaching these goals, or to attempt to set  
any priorities for women’s action. If the conference even deals with  
equal rights it will be surprising.  

Women's concerns, however, extend beyond equal education and  
equitable salaries. Worldwide problems exist involving day care,  
protective labor legislation, suffrage (there are still five countries in  
the world that do not allow women the vote), wages for women who  
work in the home, research into human reproduction, abortion (illegal  
in countries too numerous to mention), and Lesbianism and its legal, or  
illegal, status. Most of these issues will probably be too hot for the of-  
ficial delegates to handle.  

And, of course, the men who are setting up this stage play for us are  
not about to discuss political repression and torture of women in Chile,  
Spain, or South Vietnam. Nor will they address the forced mass steriliza-  
tion of women in Puerto Rico.  

Meeting Our Needs  

Neither the official conference of IWY nor the official acts surroun-  
ding the year’s observance will do much to meet the needs of women.  
But the conference itself, by its mere existence, gives a basis from which  
to work. The conference will occur; women from many countries will  
attend in ‘unofficial’ capacities. We can set up our own outside con-  
ferences and workshops if we need to. We can talk to each other and set  
up lines for future communication. We can also become aware that  
women in Iran or Denver share common problems. We can confront the  
official organization and tell them what women want for International  
Women’s Year.  

Womanchief Productions presents:  

Berkeley Women’s  
Collective  

Music  

In Concert  

March 26th  
8 p.m.  
1st Unitarian Church  
14th & Lafayette  
$2.00  

Tickets in advance - 449-8049  

Information  

The CIA is collecting valuable  
information on women in Third  
World nations through an  
“educational affiliate” of the  
League of Women Voters of the  
United States.  

The first indication of CIA in-  
volvement in the Overseas  
Education Fund (OEF) was the  
discovery by OEF employee Ann  
Roberts that the organization  
receives money from the Asian  
Foundation, a known conduit for  
the CIA. Roberts also saw OEF  
reports containing large  
amounts of biographical data on  
women in South America and  
Asia which eventually ended up  
at CIA headquarters in Langley,  
Virginia.  

Later she discovered that 70  
per cent of the OEF budget com-  
es from the State Department  
and the Agency for International  
Development. The remainder of  
OEF funds come from Caltex, Ex-  
xon, and Mobil Oil corporations,  
United Brand Foundation, ITT,  
the Rockefeller Brothers’ Foun-  
dation, the Lilly Endowment  
Fund, the W.R. Grace Founda-  
tion, and the Ivy Foundation.  

The OEF is an ‘educational af-  
filiate’ of the League of Women  
Voters established in 1947. Ac-  
cording to its own description,  
OEF is to ‘Educate others in the  
democratic concepts as well as  
to bring U.S. citizens to the  
realization of the problems of  
emerging nations.’ Beginning  
in 1957, the OEF’s major  
emphasis has been leadership  
training for Latin American  
women.  

OEF field representatives act  
as advisors to women’s groups  
working in the areas of family  
planning and education. They  
describe their basic goals as im-  
proving the “efficiency” of  
volunteer women’s  
organizations, broadening the  
membership of these  
organizations, and increasing  
their influence.  

Seminars are held by the OEF  
in both the U.S. and the host  
countries. Participants in these  
seminars are carefully screened.  
The women chosen are those  
considered to have potential as  
political leaders.  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 2  

World Women  

Information on Third World Women  
League of Women Voters  
International Women’s Year: Poverty Row Aids CIA  

Five-week seminars held in  
the U.S. usually bring together  
15 to 20 women to discuss such  
topics as “Co-ordination of  
Resources for Community Ac-  
tion.” During these seminars  
women discuss conditions in  
their respective countries, at-  
titudes prevalent with regard to  
family planning and education,  
the work structures of women’s  
groups, and the bureaucracies  
that they deal with.  

While these areas might seem  
trivial, knowledge of growth  
rates and educational levels are  
significant factors in evaluating  
the basic strengths and  
weaknesses of a country.  

Also, as a result of the  
workshops and personal  
meetings, OEF representatives  
can collect large amounts of per-  
sonal information on the women  
involved. It was this original data  
collection which first caught the  
eye of Ann Roberts.  

Roberts says that the  
biographical data is routinely  
sent from OEF to the State  
Department. According to  
former State Department In-  
telligence Officer, John Marks,  
incoming information of this  
nature is forwarded to the In-  
telligence and Research Bureau  
there, from which it is sent to  
CIA headquarters as a matter of  
routine.  

Activity in  
Latin America  

The largest OEF operation is in  
Latin America where a staff of  
six field representatives — five  
Latino women and one North  
American — operate. The six are  
supervised by Louise  
Montgomery, the Washington-  
based OEF Latin American  
Program Director.  

Montgomery closely super-  
vises the work of field represen-  
tatives and frequently travels to  
OEF work sites to consult with  
her staff. She also maintains a  
close relationship through visits  
and correspondence with Alex-  
ander Firfer, a CIA case officer  
stationed in Panama.  

Firfer is currently U.S. Agency  
for International Development  
director for Panama and appears  
to be Montgomery’s chief con-  
tact with the CIA. Firfer’s career  
can be traced to such incidents  
as the U.S. invasion of the  
Dominican Republic, when he  
and other CIA agents were sent  
there within days of the April 28,  
1965 landing of U.S. Marines.  

After the Dominican Republic,  
Firfer was sent to Vietnam  
where he was a Deputy to  
current CIA Director William  
Colby. Firfer’s official title was  
Deputy Director of Civil  
Operations and Rural Develop-  
ment Support. This was the  
“pacification” effort that served  
as a cover for the CIA Phoenix  
program which killed and im-  
prisoned tens of thousands of  
South Vietnamese suspected of  
being National Liberation Front  
members.  

OEF documents obtained from  
inside sources show that both  
Louise Montgomery and her  
predecessor, Joyce Holt, have  
provided Firfer with extensive  
information concerning OEF  

work and contacts in Latin  
America. From samples of cor-  

respondence between Firfer and  
Holt, and Firfer and  
Montgomery, it can be shown  
that OEF officials provided Firfer  
with biographical information on  
OEF contacts and seminar par-  
ticipants, photographs of these  
women, background informa-  
tion on a woman highly placed in  
the government of Colombia and  
similar material.  

Firfer also received reports on  
Panamanian organizations in-  
volved in family planning and  
education efforts. After receiv-  
ing a report on one such  
organization from an OEF field  
representative, Firfer and  
Montgomery signed an AID fun-  
ding “contract” for an in-depth  
study of that group. The study  
was carried out by Jean Updike,  
the only North American field  
representative working for OEF  
in Latin America.  

OEF’s outreach in Latin  
America is a wide one. Since  
1961, over 400 women leaders  
have participated in Mul-  
tinational Seminars in the U.S.  

More on Page 13  

future by firmly stating that you  
will go to hell if you sin, and the  
great fad in astrology in which  
papers these days have columns  
PREDICTING the day's events for  
people of a particular sign.  

Her lawyer has said, “We are  
going to have a constitutional  
test case here. Witchcraft is a  
religion and Z was arrested for  
practicing a portion of her  
religion. Freedom of religion  
must include all people, not only  
Christians.” Among the millions  
of psychics in the Los Angeles  
area, it is believed that Z was  
singled out for her political ac-  
tivities as a feminist organizer of  
women as witches. Her trial as a  
WITCH will be the first in Califor-  
nia to test if women are entitled  
to their own religion, GODDESS  
worship, according to the an-  
cient laws adopted long before  
Christianity and for which over  
nine million people were killed in  
the so-called HOLY WARS and  
purging of heathens throughout  
the world. The Feminist Wicca  
has started incorporating as a  
Church under the name of  
“Sisterhood of the Wicca” (Wic-  
ca meaning Wise Women).  

For more information, and all  
inquiries are welcomed, please  
call the Feminist Wicca — (213)  
399-3919.