Women &  
Histor  

— oF ————_____  

Dr. Florence Rena Sabin  

Glenna Booth  

In 1959, a statue was placed in Statuary Hall in the National Capitol  
designating the Colorado Woman of the Century. The woman so  
honored was Dr. Florence Rena Sabin; the plaque describes her as ‘a  
woman, a teacher, a scientific investigator and a great humanitarian.’  

Dr. Sabin was born in Central City, Colorado in 1871, the daughter of  
a miner and a schoolteacher. She graduated from Smith College in  
1893. After teaching for three years, she entered Johns Hopkins  
Medical School in 1897, just after it had been opened to women.  

1901 was the year in which she finished her internship and was ap-  
pointed to an assistantship in the Anatomy Department. In 1917, she  
was in line for the position of head of the Anatomy Department, but a  
man was appointed instead, while she was moved to a minor position of  
professor of Histology (microscopic anatomy). Nonetheless this was the  
first appointment of a woman to a full-time position at Hopkins, and she  
continued there until 1925.  

While at Hopkins, Dr. Sabin began to study the lymphatic system, one  
of the most vital and complex in the human body. Between the years  
1902 and 1911, she published seven papers illuminating knowledge of  
this system and brought them all together in 1913 in the monograph,  
The Method and Growth of the Lymphatic System, which many con-  
sider to be her most important contribution to science.  

In 1925, she was invited to become the first woman to hold full  
membership in the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New  
York. Here she set up the new Department of Cellular Studies to  
research problems of blood cells and their relation to diseases.  

During her years at the institute, she delved deeply into the cause and  
mechanism of tuberculosis infection, working on eleven different  
scientific investigations. When she retired in 1938, at the age of 67, she  
was made a ‘Member Emeritus of the Institute.’  

Dr. Sabin returned to her home state to set up housekeeping with her  
sister Mary in Denver. As an honorary gesture, the governor appointed  
the 73-year-old woman the chairperson of the state Post-War Sub-  
committee on Health. To his surprise, she began a whirlwind campaign  
which resulted in model health legislation for Denver and all of  
Colorado.  

She actively campaigned for her health bills — lecturing ‘Milk peo-  
ple’ on pasteurization, sanitary engineers on sewage disposal, and  
speaking to PTA service clubs and to anyone who would listen. Then  
she would sit through each legislative session when her bills were dis-  
cussed.  

After Colorado had model health legislation, she turned to Denver,  
where she was appointed Manager of Health and Charities. She worked  
for sewage disposal, rat riddance, garbage collection, and restaurant  
sanitation. She led an active drive to combat tuberculosis. In 1948, at  
age 76, she was photographed with the mayor waiting to be x-rayed,  
kicking off a mass x-ray campaign in Denver. Within two years,  
Denver's death rate from tuberculosis was cut in half.  

In 1951, nearing her eightieth birthday, she retired to care for her  
sister. The salary she had accumulated as Manager of Health and  
Charities went to Colorado University for Medical Research.  

Today the Sabin Building for Research in Cellular Biology of the Un-  
iversity of Colorado School of Medicine bears her name as a memorial  
to her work. A replica of her statue in the U.S. Capitol stands in the lobby  
of the Colorado State Department of Health building, a lasting reminder  
of a great woman.  

Letters  

From Page 8  

8MAR readers to know that this is  
the Capitol Hill Police Storefront  
and that the money for the  
programs comes from the LEAA,  
the Law Enforcement  
Assistance Agency, a mammoth  
federal organization funding  
community anti-crime programs  
and emergency anti-  
demonstration tactics used in  
Miami, Boston, Washington,  
and Chicago. The Capitol Hill  
Police are also running a rape  
awareness class through the  
Denver Free University. Fifty per  
cent of the class will be lecture  
and discussion, which is not all  
that useful for survival on  
Denver streets.  

I have talked to friends about  
this, and been told that I was let-  
ting my paranoia run away with  
my mind. The cops, they said, are  
just trying to make a few friends  
in the Denver women’s com-  
munity. What possible, evil nasty  
purpose could they have? If we  
cooperate with them, perhaps  
their attitudes towards rape vic-  
tims will change, and ex-  
aminations and questioning  
won't be quite so humiliating.  

I was also told that it is all a  
CIA plot to get the names and  
pictures of known feminists for  
“future reference.”  

I think that the truth lies  
somewhere in between. There is  
a familiar word associated with  
the break-ups and break-downs  
of revolutionary groups. That  
word, sisters, is ‘co-opting.’ It  
means that people with money  
and power are saying, ‘Let’s get  
this feminist thing under control.  
They're getting a little bit too un-  
ified, and all we need in these  
times is a strong, broadly-based  
revolutionary group. So... let's  
invite them over for coffee. Let's  
smile and discuss politely all the  
wonderful reforms we're going  
to make in this Great White Male  
System of ours... Women’s  
Revolution? What an interesting,  
abstract concept! Would you care  
to be re-parented, my dear?’  

Sisters: Do we need the LEAA  
to bring us together? Do we have  
to have our women’s groups  
handed to us on a silver platter  
by Big Brother — even a smiling,  
benevolent Big Brother? Can we  
form our own support groups?  
Can we cooperate with each  
other? I think that the women’s  
movement has too much poten-  
tial to be co-opted now. I think we  
should boycott the Storefront  
women’s activities. I know we've  
all got to be very careful and  
aware these next few months;  
who is trying and who is  
succeeding in making divisions  
in the feminist movement?  
Along lines of gay/straight?  
Rich/poor? Black/white? Where  
are they coming from? How  
much truth and feeling is in their  
words? And, dear women of Sig  
Mama Rag — I understand that  
you have an obligation to report  
any and all women’s activities in  
Denver.  

And I wish you would do more  
investigative reporting and/or  
print more of who and what is  
behind these groups. Also, if you  
print this letter, please withhold  
my name. This paranoid woman  
is on enough lists.  

Ed. note: The activities for  
women at the Storefront have  
not been instituted by policemen  
or policewomen but by two  
women who work at the  
Storefront. The space is donated  
for a woman's coffeehouse at  
night when the storefront itself  
is closed. As you pointed out, we  
at BMRA do have an “obligation to  
report any and all women’s ac-  
tivities in Denver,” and we try.  
The storefront donated space for  
a woman's coffeehouse when  
no other group or concerned in-  
dividual could.  

More on Page 20  

Big Mama Rag Vol. 3-A, No. 1  

Women’s  

Publications  
A new publishing firm called Les Femmes Publishing is starting in  
Millbrae, California. Ruth Dramer will be publisher and director. This  
new venture will publish books for the English-speaking market. The  
program includes English-language editions of books first published  
abroad, and original works developed by Ms. Dramer and her staff.  
Please send all catalogs, manuscripts and other materials directly to:  

Ruth Dramer, Les Femmes Publishing, 231 Adrian Road, Millbrae,  
California 94030.  

Women’s Studies Journal in Australia — Hecate, a women’s inter-  
disciplinary journal for the humanities and social sciences, has been  
formed in Brisbane, Australia. Contributions, including reviews of  
films, plays, original poems and stories, graphics and photographs are  
welcome. A small payment will be made to contributions. The first issue  
will be January, 1975 and thereafter twice yearly. Subscription rates  
are $2.50 per year; single copies $1.50. Send subscriptions/con-  
tributions/articles to Carole Terrier, English Dept., University of  
Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane 4067, QLD.  

The following list may be purchased from Catholics for a Free Choice,  
515 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. (202) 531-7939.  
Equal Names for Equal Sexes, A proposal for Male and Female Sur-  
names by Lucia Lane, $1.00, Lucia Lane & Associates, Box A-1, Carmel,  
CA 93921. Political Woman by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick. Recommended by  
Bella Abzug and Sissy Farenthold. $10.00 Basic Books, Inc., 10 East 53  
St. New York, N.Y. 10022. The Federal Civil Rights Enforcement Effort  
— 1974, Volume I, to regulate in the Public Interest. U.S. Commission  
on Civil Rights, Washington, D.C. 20425. Women Workers Today, U.S.  
Department of Labor, Employment Standards Administration.  
Women’s Bureau, Washington, D.C. 20210. Papers in Women’s  
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2, June 1974, University of Michigan, $2.25. Write  
UM Papers in Women’s Studies, 1058 LSA, University of Michigan,  
Ann Arbor, Mich., 48104. Minorities and Women in the Retail Industry,  
Economic Priorities Report, Published by Council on Economic  
Priorities, Volume 5, Number 3, 250 Columbus Ave., San Francisco, CA.  
For Our Welfare, Welfare Reform Information Service Community,  
1420 N Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005 to build chapters and link  
groups for raising issues of welfare reform. Dollars & Sense, A Monthly  
Bulletin of Economic Affairs, 324 Somerville Avenue, Somerville,  
Massachusetts 02143. Project sponsored by the Union for Radical  
Political Economics. Public Service Employment Action Bulletin, 140  
Park Place, NY, NY 10007.  

“I Am Woman: I Am Artist” portfolio of women’s art. Seventeen artists,  
53 drawings and prints, 11" x 14”, black & white — all of this unbound,  
in a box, so you can hang the separate drawings. If you're interested in  
obtaining one of these portfolios send $5.50 to Women’s Portfolio, P.O.  
Box 40596, San Francisco CA 94140.  

The Santa Cruz Women’s Prison Project has compiled a book of poetry  
written by incarcerated women in the liberation workshop. No Title or  
All is Better Than a Title Like That sells for $2 (includes postage and  
donation of a copy to a prisoner). Send money with name and address to  
Debbi Miller, c/o SCWPP, 120 Dela Costa, Santa Cruz, CA 95060.  

The Growing Room Collective of Vancouver, British Columbia, is pleas-  
ed to announce the forthcoming publication of Room Of One's Own, a  
Feminist Journal of Literature and Criticism. The planned publication  
date is March, 1975 and the magazine will be published quarterly. The  
Growing Room Collective urges women writers who have as yet been  
unpublished to submit manuscripts. Room Of One's Own will contain  
mainly short stories, poetry, drama, and essays of literary criticism and  
theory. Manuscripts dealing with feminist critiques of the arts in  
general and the problems confronted by women artists will also be con-  
sidered for publication. In addition, visual artists are invited to submit  
their work. Subscriptions to Room Of One's Own are $5.00 per year,  
$1.50 per issue. Please send manuscripts and/or subscriptions to: The  
Growing Room Collective, #9 - 2520 Prince Albert Street, Vancouver,  
B.C., Canada V5T 3XI.  

Source Catalogs are organizers’ manuals, tools for those working for  
radical change. They list and describe projects, strategies, tactics, sup-  
port groups, resource books, films and periodicals. Source is a collec-  
tive of six people supporting themselves at a subsistence level through  
catalog sales, outside work, grants and donations. Source I. Com-  
munications, 116 pp, $1.75; Source II, Communities/Housing, 264  
pp, $2.95; Source III, Organizing for Health Care, 265 pp. $5.95. These  
paperbacks are available from Source, P.O. Box 21066, Washington,  
D.C. 20009. Also available from the same address are Demand for Day  
Care, 48 pp, $1.50, published by Resources for Community Change, an  
information clearinghouse for radical social and political change; and a  
general brochure covering tenant organizing, Resources for Women’s  
Organizing, published by Organizers’ Book Center.  

An International Directory of Women’s Organizations in Developing  
Countries is being put together by Fran P. Hosken, coordinator of the  
new Women’s International Network (WIN). The directory, funded by  
the U.S. Agency for International Development, is due for completion by  
summer 1975 in time for the International Women’s Year (IWY) Con-  
ference in Mexico City. While gathering material for the directory, Ms.  
Hosken will publish WIN News, a publication designed to reach a world-  
wide audience concerned with the advancement of women and to es-  
tablish an international network of persons who are working on similar  
problems and issues. If you would like to subscribe to WIN News or to  
submit items for inclusion, contact Fran P. Hosken at 187 Grant Street,  
Lexington, MA 02173.  

Women and Orders by Robert J. Heyer. “For anyone interested in  
women and/or priesthood, this book should be a basic resource.  
Several of the essays include notes and bibliography for further study.  
The book would serve as an excellent resource and starting point for  
group discussion. Its chief virtue is that it’s all here in contemporary  
terms and in readable style and format.” New York: Paulist Press, 1974.